

From PW: For Dr. Howard Leonard and Dr. Peter Shalit, life historians, and to
the great Robert Berner, Yale University
 
From JK: To the memories of Dr. Eugene M. Shoemaker, Dr. Heinz A.
Lowenstam, and Dr. Clair C. Patterson of Caltech. They and many others left
fingerprints all over my brain.

Contents
Introduction
 
CHAPTER I
Telling Time
 
CHAPTER II
Becoming an Earthlike Planet: 4.6–4.5 GA
 
CHAPTER III
Life, Death, and the Newly Discovered Place In Between
CHAPTER IV
Forming Life: 4.2(?)–3.5 GA
 
CHAPTER V
From Origin to Oxygenation: 3.5–2.0 GA
 
CHAPTER VI
The Long Road to Animals: 2.0–1.0 GA
 
CHAPTER VII
The Cryogenian and the Evolution of Animals: 850–635 MA
CHAPTER VIII
The Cambrian Explosion: 600–500 MA
 
CHAPTER IX
The Ordovician-Devonian Expansion of Animals: 500–360 MA
CHAPTER X
Tiktaalik and the Invasion of the Land: 475–300 MA
 
CHAPTER XI
The Age of Arthropods: 350–300 MA
 
CHAPTER XII
The Great Dying—Anoxia and Global Stagnation: 252–250 MA
CHAPTER XIII

The Triassic Explosion: 252–200 MA
 
CHAPTER XIV
Dinosaur Hegemony in a Low-Oxygen World: 230–180 MA
CHAPTER XV
The Greenhouse Oceans: 200–65 MA
 
CHAPTER XVI
Death of the Dinosaurs: 65 MA
 
CHAPTER XVII
The Long-Delayed Third Age of Mammals: 65–50 MA
CHAPTER XVIII
The Age of Birds: 50–2.5 MA
 
CHAPTER XIX
Humanity and the Tenth Extinction: 2.5 MA to present
CHAPTER XX
The Knowable Futures of Earth Life
 
Notes
A Note on the Authors

Introduction
History in almost any form is the academic subject perhaps most hated by school
kids. One of the most thoughtful examinations was by James Loewen, in Lies
My Teacher Told Me.1 His conclusion can be summarized in one word:
“irrelevance.” Loewen wrote, “The stories that history textbooks tell are
predictable; every problem has already been solved or is about to be solved …
Authors almost never use the present to illuminate the past—the present is not a
source of information for writers of history texts.”
Loewen’s message is quite clear. As American history is now taught in high
schools, the past and present are disconnected, such that history has no effect on,
or relevance to, our day-to-day lives. Yet that conclusion is so untrue, especially
for the history of life, so ancient it is written in rocks, molecules, models, and on
the DNA strands found within our every cell. Its relevance is that it gives us
place and context. The history of life also just might save us from near-term
extinction, if we take note of it and heed its warnings.
In the early 1960s the great American writer James Baldwin wrote: “People
are trapped in history, and history is trapped in them.”2 He was speaking to race
when he penned those words. But the statement is equally true if the word
“people” is replaced with “all of life on Earth, present and past,” for each strand
of DNA, in each of our cells, is an ancient record of biological history, written in
simple code and passed down from generation to generation. One could say that
DNA is nothing but history, one with a physical manifestation that was slowly
melded and accumulated over countless eons by the most pitiless of all
phenomena—natural selection. DNA is a history that is inside us—and yet one
that is our master as well, the blueprint for our bodies, and dictator of what we
will pass on to our children, gifts that can be blessings—or deadly time bombs.
We are indeed trapped in this particular vehicle of history as much as it is
trapped in us.
The history of life gives us the answers to so many of the perplexing questions
confronting us all: How did we humans come to inhabit this thin, late-occurring,
and very marginal twig on the giant tree of life? What wars did our species have
to pass through? What calamities mark the human branch of life’s 4-billion-year-
old tree? The past can help us understand our place among the twenty or more

million species now living—and the untold billions now extinct. When a species
is no longer extant, what is also destroyed is the as yet unrealized future
evolution of untold species.
In the pages to come we will look at the long road to our present and the
distant trials our long-ago ancestors had to pass through: fire, ice, hammer blows
from space, poison gas, the fangs of predators, pitiless competition, lethal
radiation, starvation, enormous changes of habitat, and episodes of war and
conquest amid a relentless colonization of every habitable corner of this planet—
each an episode that left its mark in the total sum of DNA now extant. Each
crisis and conquest was a forge that changed genomes by adding or subtracting
all manner of genes, each of us the descendant of survivors tempered by
catastrophe and quenched by time.
There is a second and perhaps even greater reason to pay attention to the
history of life encapsulated in this quote from Norman Cousins: “History is a
vast Early Warning System.”3 This wisdom dates back to near the end of the
Cold War. Newer generations of humans have little sense of what it was like to
grow up in the 1950s and 1960s, when weekly noontime siren tests told us
children of that dark time that Armageddon was but one terrifying siren scream
away, and that every faint sound of a late-night jet might be the start of the end.
Human warfare has repeatedly, and seemingly incessantly, exacted a hideous
toll on humanity—physically, economically, and emotionally. In many ways the
history of life has undeniable similarities to human conflict and warfare. The
coevolutionary development of offensive weapons by predators (better claws,
teeth, gas attack, even poison-tipped barbs to catch and kill food species) caused
equally rapid countermeasures in the predators’ prey, including better body
armor, speed, hiding ability, and sometimes defensive weapons as well—all of
which is technically called the biological arms race. Many of the great events of
evolution cannot be repeated; evolution has had a long period to fill the
biosphere with highly competitive and efficient organisms, making it unlikely to
repeat, for instance, the Cambrian explosion when all of the basic body plans of
animals came into being. But what can be repeated are things antipodal to living
and diversifying, such as extinction, or extinction writ larger—the dreadful past
catastrophes of deep time, the mass extinctions.
With every molecule of carbon dioxide we pump into the atmosphere we are
ignoring the early warning sirens that rapid rises in carbon dioxide are the
commonality between more than ten mass extinctions of the deep past and what
is happening today. Those extinctions were caused not by asteroid impact, but

from rapid increases in volcanically produced atmospheric greenhouse gases and
the global warming they produced. A terrifying new paradigm of mass extinction
has arisen this century: “greenhouse mass extinctions,” a name overtly chosen to
describe the cause of the vast majority of species killed off by mass extinctions
in the past.4
Evidence of when, where, and how these greenhouse extinctions took place
now blares at us from a wide variety of data. To those hearing these siren calls,
the danger seems real enough. Yet too many have ignored or missed vast
moralities from the past, and what is a possible future. The history of life
provides an early warning system that tells us we must reduce human-caused
greenhouse gas emissions, but it is human history that tells us that we probably
will not heed the warnings and reverse the damage until a succession of climate-
induced mass human mortalities gives us no choice.
Scientific information from so-called deep time is the single most ignored
aspect of the climate change debate. George Santayana wrote the most oft-
repeated aphorism about history, one so commonly used that it is trite: “Those
who ignore history are condemned to repeat it.”5 With regard to a clear history
of mass extinction brought about by atmospheric carbon dioxide levels rapidly
approaching in the near future, however, we should especially take heed of the
most important word in Santayana’s prophecy: the word “condemned.”
WHAT IS NEW IN THIS “NEW HISTORY OF LIFE”
No single book could ever do justice to the history of life. Choices had to be
made, and those choices were largely dictated by our directive around the word
“new.” The last “complete” single-volume history of life was written in the mid-
1990s: the exquisite and bestselling Life: A Natural History of the First Four
Billion Years of Life on Earth,6 by the British paleontologist and science writer
Richard Fortey. His “takes” were marvelous and the book remains a joy to read,
or in our case, to reread nearly two decades after its publication. But because
science advances so quickly, there is much that was not known then compared to
now. There are even two new scientific disciplines that barely existed in the mid-
1990s: astrobiology and geobiology. The advances in instrumentation have led to
entirely new understanding, while outcrops of strata containing fossils from
times or taxa previously unknown have come to light. Even the sociology of how

science is done has changed, for now the most important scientific
breakthroughs are acknowledged to take place between the boundaries of the
previously august and familiar disciplines of geology, astronomy, paleontology,
chemistry, genetics, physics, zoology, and botany—each symbolically separated
into their own buildings on most university campuses, each with not only a
faculty with its own rules and boundaries, but entire fields with their own
vocabularies and favored methods of disseminating information coming from
research.
We have used three themes in the pages to come as lodestones for the history
we have chosen to feature. First, we posit that the history of life has been more
affected by catastrophe than the sum of all other forces, including the slow,
gradual evolution first recognized by Charles Darwin—based on his training by
the dominant teachers of uniformitarianism. The guiding principle of geology for
more than two centuries—the Principle of Uniformitarianism—was first
developed by James Hutton and Charles Lyell in the late 1700s.7 It was taught to
and ultimately became the prime scientific influence on generations of young
naturalists, including Charles Darwin.8 The discovery of the dinosaur-killing
asteroid that hit our planet 65 million years ago was the start of this paradigm
shift toward one that has been sometimes called neocatastrophism,9 a take on
catastrophism, the paradigm that preceded uniformitarianism.
As we will show in this book, uniformitarianism, as it applies to ancient
worlds as well as the mode and tempo of evolution, is outmoded and largely
refuted. The modern world is not the best tool for explaining many times and
events in the deep past that indeed were sudden—not gradual. For example,
there are no modern examples that can explain the “snowball Earths,” or the
“great oxygenation event,” or the sulfur-rich “Canfield oceans” that lasted for
more than a billion years and in all that time impeded the first evolution of the
animal grade of complexity. Even the dinosaur killing K-T Cretaceous Period–
Tertiary Period mass extinction (now termed the K-Pg, or Cretaceous-Paleogene
Period, but we hope our colleagues forgive us if we stick to the better sounding
and better known K-T) has no parallel today; nor the type of atmosphere and
ocean that allowed life to form on Earth; or an atmosphere with carbon dioxide
levels so high that there is not a scrap of ice anywhere on the planet. The present
is not a key to most of the past; in fact, it is barely a key to the Pleistocene.
Making it so has limited us in our vision and understanding.
Second, while we may be carbon-based life, composed of “long-chain” carbon
molecules (carbon atoms strung together to form proteins), it is the influence of

three different kinds of molecules, simple molecules that exist as simple gases,
that have had the greatest influence on the history of life: oxygen, carbon
dioxide, and hydrogen sulfide. Sulfur, in fact, may have been the single most
important of all elements in dictating the nature and history of life on this planet.
Finally, while the history of life may be populated by species, it has been the
evolution of ecosystems that has been the most influential factor in arriving at
the modern-day assemblage of life. Coral reefs, tropical forests, deep-sea “vent”
faunas, and many more—each can be viewed as a play with differing actors but
the same script over eons of time. Yet we know that on occasion in the deep past
entirely new ecosystems appear, populated by new kinds of life. The appearance
of life that can fly, for instance, or life that can swim or walk—each was a major
shift in evolutionary innovation that changed the world, and in each case helped
create a new kind of ecosystem.
WHAT WE BRING
An author’s background affects the biases inherent in any written history. Peter
Ward has been a paleobiologist since 1973, and has published extensively on
modern and ancient cephalopods as well as on mass extinctions of vertebrates
and invertebrates. Joseph Kirschvink is a geophysical biologist who began his
work on the Precambrian-Cambrian transition, but then expanded to looking at
older times (the great oxidation event) as well as being the discoverer of the
snowball Earths—major parts of life’s history. Together we have subsequently
worked on the Devonian, Permian, Triassic-Jurassic, and Cretaceous-Tertiary
(this time interval recently renamed the Paleogene Period) mass extinctions.
We have worked together in the field since the mid-1990s. These trips
included study of the Permian mass extinction in South Africa, from 1997 to
2001; the study of Upper Cretaceous ammonites in Baja California, California,
and the Vancouver Island region; the study of the Triassic-Jurassic mass
extinction in the Queen Charlotte Islands; the study of the K-T mass extinction
in Tunisia, Vancouver Island, California, Mexico, and Antarctica; and the study
of the Devonian mass extinction in Western Australia.
The voice we bring to this book is meant to be a seamless duet, but there are
passages where one or the other of us self-identifies because of the nearness of
the topics to some particular interest we have, or because we were integral in the

history of some aspect of the science being reported.
NAMES AND TERMS
Earlier we noted that the number of species on Earth is in the millions. Most who
study life will acknowledge that the current number of formally defined species
(which requires a name for both genus and species) is probably less than 10
percent of the actual number of currently living species.10 But how many have
there been in the past? Billions, certainly. That makes the writing of a history of
them a daunting process. Paleontology, biology, and geology all have entire
vocabularies of highly specific jargon, and it is our job to use the English
language in an understandable way to make sense of so much of the
multisyllabic jargon—or, in the case of NASA, decipher their endless acronyms.
Perhaps even more daunting, by necessity we will have to introduce many of the
Latin names for the many creatures great and small that produced and daily
continue life’s history on Earth.
Finally, a full acknowledgment of the large number of people helping us in
our journey to write this book will come at the end of the text. But Ward would
like to specifically shout out to two scientist-writers who have profoundly
influenced him: Robert Berner, whose work on oxygen and carbon dioxide is
absolutely integral to the work written here, and Nick Lane, a prolific scientist
and writer whose books are pinnacles of clarity and insight, whose work
profoundly influenced at least one of the coauthors, and whose books remain
groundbreaking and current.11

CHAPTER I
Telling Time
Until recently, the history of life had an arcane time scale, measured not in years,
but in the relative positions of rocks scattered about the Earth’s crust. In this
chapter we will look at the geological time scale, the tool used in discovering the
relative sequence of life’s history on Earth.
The geological time scale is a rickety old contraption, held together by
nineteenth-century rules and current European formality. The newer generations
of geologists do not love the hoary and very stuffy series of conventions
involved with the time scale, and still required by an increasingly aged set of
geologists who were trained in the old tradition. To this day, any change has to
be approved by committees;1 all time units have to be associated with a “type
section”—a real stack of sedimentary rocks chosen to best represent a given time
interval. The type section is supposed to be readily accessible and must be
undisturbed by tectonism, heating, and “structure” complexity (such as faults,
folds, and other tricky mashing of the originally horizontal sedimentary beds).
The section should not be upside down (which happened more often than one
would think), should have lots of fossils (both macro and micro), and should also
have beds, fossils, or minerals that can be dated with “absolute” ages (a date in
actual years) through some combination of radiometric age dating,
magnetostratigraphy, or some form of isotope age dating (such as carbon or
strontium isotope stratigraphy).
The time scale is complicated and often useless in the sense that when
someone says a rock is Jurassic in age, they are in reality saying the rock in
question is of the same age as the designated type section for the Jurassic, which
was in the Jura Mountains in Europe. But it is what we Earth and life historians
have to work with to discover the age of rocks by their fossils, as well as to
communicate their actual age to others. Although more modern tools than dating
events and species based on their relative position in piles of sedimentary rock
are sometimes available2—including the determination of a fossil’s actual age
through the use of isotopic dating, such as the well-known use of carbon 14 or
other kinds of “radiometric” dating using the known rates of decay of various
elements contained in the rock—in fact very few fossils are found in beds or are

made up of materials allowing this kind of absolute age dating. Usually it is
fossil content only that is available, yet from this the rock must be dated.
The geological time scale remains not only the major tool in dating all rocks
on Earth (categorized by their age, rather than on their lithological
characteristics), but also the means by which events in the history of life are
dated. Using intricate names and seemingly random and dissimilar intervals of
time, the time scale remains a thoroughly nineteenth-century tool, and more
often than not is an impediment not so much because of the manner in which it
was developed, but by the rigid and bureaucratic fashion in which it was
formalized and codified into what we have today. Only in the last decade have
new geological “periods” been put in place. The formation and common usage
of these two new periods are central to our new understanding of the history of
life: the Cryogenian period, from 850 to 635 million years ago, followed
immediately by the Ediacaran period, from 635 to 542 million years ago.
ARRIVING AT A 2015 TIME SCALE
The first half of the eighteenth century was both the time when the field of
geology was born and the time when the geological time scale as we know it
now was put in place. During this time, the various eras, epochs, and periods
were defined and in so doing replaced a more ancient system.3 Prior to 1800,
each kind of rock observed on the Earth was thought to be of one specific age.
The hard igneous and metamorphic rocks, the core of all mountains and
volcanoes, were presumed to be the oldest rocks on Earth. The sedimentary
rocks were younger, the result of a series of world-covering floods. This
principle—called neptunism—held sway, and even developed to the point that
specific kinds of sedimentary rocks themselves were thought to have specific
ages. The omnipresent white chalks that stake out the northern limits of the
European subcontinent and then continue into Asia were considered of a single
age, different from the sandstones, and different again from finer mudstones and
shale. But in 1805 a discovery was made that changed everything. William
“Strata” Smith4 was the first to recognize that it was not the order of lithological
types that determined their age, but the order of fossils within the rocks
themselves that could be used to date and then correlate strata to distant locales.
He showed that various rock types could have many different ages—and that the

same succession of fossil types could be found in far separated regions.
The principle of faunal succession opened the door to the formation of the
time scale in its modern sense.5 Life was the key, life preserved in fossils, and
the relative difference of fossil content could be used to distinguish a succession
of rocks on the surface of the Earth. The largest division was of older rocks
without fossils, beneath rocks where fossils were commonly present. The oldest
fossil-bearing unit of time was named the Cambrian, after a tribe from Wales,
and thus all the rocks older than this came to be known as the Precambrian.
From the Cambrian onward, the fossil-bearing rocks came to be known as the
Phanerozoic or “time of invisible life.” The Proterozoic era, the last before
animals evolved, succeeds the older Archean and Hadean eras.
Very quickly the periods of the Phanerozoic were defined, all based on fossil
content. Within decades of true scientific collection, curation, and
“bookkeeping” of fossils (a compilation of the first and last occurrences of
particular fossil groups in the record), it was seen that the Phanerozoic was
divisible into three major intervals of time and accumulations of rock. The oldest
was named Paleozoic (or old life) era, the middle the Mesozoic era, and the most
recent the Cenozoic era.
Even before these eras were put in place, most of the period names still used
today were in place. In successive order, the Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian,
Devonian, Carboniferous (this is the European usage; the Carboniferous is
subdivided into the Mississippian and Pennsylvanian periods in North America),
and Permian comprised the Paleozoic era; the Triassic, Jurassic, and Cretaceous
comprised the Mesozoic; and the Paleogene and Neogene (formerly Tertiary),
and Quaternary periods comprised the Cenozoic.
 

The current version of the Geological Time Scale. (Updated from Felix M. Gradstein et al., “A New
Geologic Time Scale, with Special Reference to Precambrian and Neogene,” Episodes 27, no. 2 (2004): 83–
100)
 
By 1850 the periods were in place and new ones were rarely accepted
(although many late nineteenth-century geologists tried to get the glory of
defining a whole new period, which by then could only take place by
cannibalizing already existing units). Only one such attempt actually succeeded,
and this was by an Englishman named Charles Lapworth,6 who carved out an
Ordovician period by successfully claiming that some underlying Cambrian and
overlying Silurian rocks deserved to be their own geological period, and he
managed to persuade enough of the rest of geology to make it so in 1879. By
that time the two English bulldogs who had pioneered the naming of periods—
Adam Sedgwick for the Cambrian and Roderick Murchison for the Silurian and
Permian periods—had died, leaving an ownership vacuum that Lapworth
exploited. All of these men had gigantic egos, and fought ferociously for “their”

time periods.
The most important real change to the geological time scale in terms of the
history of life came with the addition of the Cryogenian and Ediacaran periods,
during the Proterozoic era, and the time when life was readying the advent of
animals. But long before the evolution not only of animals, but life itself, the
Earth had to undergo significant changes to support life. The Cryogenian period
(from Greek “cold” and “birth”) lasted from 850 to 635 million years ago, and it
was ratified by the ruling body on geological names, the International
Commission on Stratigraphy and the International Union of Geological Sciences
(IUGS), in 1990.7 It forms the second geologic period of the Neoproterozoic era,
and is followed by the Ediacaran period, also new compared to the other periods.
Both of these time intervals are seminal times in the history of life, as we will
see in greater detail in chapters to come. The Ediacaran period was named after
the Ediacara Hills of South Australia—the last geological period of the
Neoproterozoic era and of the Proterozoic eon, immediately preceding the
Cambrian period, the first period of the Paleozoic era and of the Phanerozoic
eon. The Ediacaran period’s status as an official geological period was ratified in
2004 by the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS).8
The geological time scale as constructed is a mishmash of nineteenth-through
twenty-first-century science. It is analogous in this to the biological sciences
dealing with the classification of organisms, as both are based on historical
claims, observations, and precedence of terms and definitions, which often
collide with new means of definitions—of both time and species, in the latter’s
case. Just as DNA analyses have radically changed our view of evolution, so
have new methods of dating rocks collided with the old “relative” time scale
based on the superpositional relationships of rocks and their fossils. Quite often
the collisions are monumental. We wonder what the geological time scale will
look like a century from now, especially since modern universities no longer
train and produce specialists capable of the high standard of fossil identification
necessary to really define geological time. This would not matter if some new
Star Trek kind of tool allowed all rocks to be dated with the flip of a switch or
scan. Sadly, that will probably never be the case. We are encased in history in
both the rocks and their historical dating methods and definitions. This
geological time scale has even been extended to other planets and moons, based
on the number of impact craters per unit area, and each body has its unique set of
geological terms that we must also learn.
 


CHAPTER II
Becoming an Earthlike Planet: 4.6–4.5 GA
We no longer believe, as even the most enlightened of Renaissance thinkers did,
that the Earth is the center of the universe, center of the solar system, sole place
where life exists in the universe, inhabited by intelligent creatures who are the
image of a vast, creating god. We know now that the Earth is but one planet of
many—and that its life might be similarly quite unremarkable. The most recent
example of this is our search for Earthlike planets, or ELPs. More and more are
being found each year,1 a set of discoveries that is changing the conversation
about the frequency of life in the cosmos. But does being “Earthlike” mean
having life? Let us look at what our planet went through in its early evolution to
the point that it became habitable and eventually inhabited by life.
Between the 1990s and the present, two very specific and paradigm-changing
transformations swept the studies that together provide us with a history of life
on our planet. Prior to about this time, very little attention was paid by Earth
historians to our Earth as a planet that is just one among many. And in like
fashion, little attention was paid to its life as being only one kind of life that
should be present in the vastness of the cosmos. Yet the discovery of planets
orbiting other stars utterly changed the status quo, both scientifically and
societally.2 These findings were a great jolt that transcended the primary fields
interested in planets beyond Earth—astronomy and certain specialized branches
of geology concerned with what are now called exoplanets—to biological fields,
and even into religion. Geoff Marcy, one of the first of the exoplanet discoverers,
recounts that one of the first phone calls he received after the momentous
discovery of exoplanets came from the Vatican. The Catholic Church, wise in the
ways of astronomy, wanted to know if this planet could support life, with all of
the religious implications that entailed.
The very first exoplanet was found in 1992 (a planet orbiting a pulsar),3
followed by the 1995 discovery of a planet orbiting a “main sequence” star, the
kind that would be far kinder for the evolution of life than pulsars, which have
the nasty habit of emitting great bursts of life-sterilizing energy periodically onto
any orbiting planet.
Only a year after this second exoplanet find, another and quite different

astronomical discovery further electrified the scientific, political, and public
worlds—the report of a meteorite from Mars4 that was inferred by NASA
scientists to contain possible fingerprints of life (and perhaps even fossil
microbes). Together, these findings helped launch the new field called
astrobiology.
Huge sums of money were targeted at history of life subjects and problems
that prior to this had been poorly funded and little investigated, such as the
origin and nature of the first life on Earth. This great change began in the last
half of the 1990s, and by the new century it was one of the most stimulating
fields of science. It transformed science and continues to transform the topic of
this book: a history of life on Earth, and our understanding of the potential for
life on other planets and the histories of “other” life.
 
While the phrase “Earthlike planet” (or ELP) is now commonly used, we should consider just which Earth
we are talking about: the Earth of early in its history—upper left, a complete “waterworld”—or that of the
far lower right, some billions of years from now when the oceans have been lost to space.
 
That our planet is one of many potentially habitable planets, and that our life
is but one of many possible chemical recipes, are now givens to many
astrobiologists. But the many needs of complex organisms equivalent to our

Earth’s current animals and higher plants are not trivial. Our kind of life is
probably not unique (at least in terms of complexity). But one of us (Ward) has
argued that the word “rare” is appropriate, and hence his Rare Earth
Hypothesis5: that while microbial life may be common in the universe, the
systems and especially time of planetary environmental stability allowing
evolution to eventually produce animal equivalents might be rare indeed.
WHAT IS AN “EARTHLIKE PLANET”?
Perhaps it is terrestrial chauvinism, or perhaps it is true that only life such as our
own is possible in the universe. But the search for exoplanets has, at its core, the
central goal of finding other “Earths.” The question becomes to define just what
an Earthlike planet really is. We all have a conception of our planet in the
present day: dominated by oceans, a green and blue place, and our place. But as
we go back in time and forward in time, we find that the Earth was and
absolutely will be a place very different from the planet we now call home.
Earthlike is really a time as well as a “place” definition, it turns out.
There are various definitions that are current in astronomy and astrobiology,
the two fields most concerned with defining just what kind of planet we live on.
At its most inclusive, an Earthlike planet has a rocky surface and higher-density
core. In its most restricted sense, it should share important necessities of “life as
we know it,” including moderate temperatures and an atmosphere that allows
liquid water to form on the surface. “Earthlike planet” is often used to indicate a
planet resembling modern Earth, but we know that the Earth has changed greatly
during the past 4.567 billion years since it formed. During parts of its history,
our own Earthlike planet could not have supported life at all, and for over half of
its history complex life such as animals and higher plants was impossible. The
Earth was wet for virtually all of its history. Within 100 million years of the
moon-forming event, where a Mars-sized protoplanet slammed into a still-
accreting Earth-sized body, there was liquid water. Coincidence? Or simply a
result of the great rain of water-heavy comets smashing onto the Earth’s surface
and creating an extraterrestrial deluge?
The evidence is found in tiny sand grains of the mineral zircon6
radiometrically dated to as old as 4.4 billion years ago. They have the isotopic
fingerprint of ocean water being sucked down into the mantle via a plate-

tectonic-style subduction process. Even though our sun was far less energetic in
earliest Earth history, there were enough greenhouse gases in the atmosphere to
keep our planet warm. But even more important than heat from the sun, the
volcanic activity on early Earth may have been ten times what it is now—and
consequently a great deal of heat was streaming out of the Earth and warming its
oceans and land. Some astrobiologists now think that life on Earth could not start
until planetary heat cooled far lower than it was in the first billion years of Earth
history, which is one of many reasons to think that Earth life could possibly have
started on another planet, such as Mars. But there was another Earthlike planet
early in our solar system history: Venus.
Early in its history7 Venus should have been in the sun’s habitable zone,
although it now has a surface temperature of nearly 900°F (500°C) due to a
runaway greenhouse effect that surely sterilized its surface (although some think
there may be microbial life in its atmosphere, this seems to us to be a pretty slim
chance). In contrast, the geological record of Mars shows clearly that it once had
flowing water, even in major rivers and streams that could round pebbles and
form alluvial fans.8 Now the water is lost, frozen, or just a faint vapor in the near
vacuum of its atmosphere. Presumably its lower mass prohibited the plate
tectonic processes essential for crustal recycling, which lowered the thermal
gradients in its metallic core that are needed to generate an atmosphere-
protecting magnetic field, and the greater distance from the sun allowed it to slip
more easily into a permanent “snowball Earth” condition. If life ever existed on
Mars, it might still exist in the subsurface, powered by the slight geochemical
energy of radioactive decay.
Prior to about 4.6 billion years ago9 (from this point on, GA refers to billion
years ago) the proto-Earth formed from the coalescence of variously sized
“planetesimals,” or small bodies of rock and frozen gases that condensed in the
plane of the ecliptic, the flat region of space in which all our planets orbit. At
4.567 GA (rather precisely dated, and numerically easy to remember), a Mars-
sized object appears to have slammed into this body, causing the nickel-iron
cores of the planets to merge and the moon to condense from a silicon-vapor
“atmosphere” that existed briefly afterward. For the first several hundred million
years of its existence, a heavy bombardment of meteors continuously pelted the
new planet with lashing violence.
Both the lava-like temperatures of the Earth’s forming surface and the energy
released by the barrage of incoming meteors during this heavy bombardment
phase would surely have created conditions inhospitable to life.10 The energy

alone produced by this constant rain of gigantic comets and asteroids prior to
about 4.4 billion years ago would have kept the Earth’s surface regions at
temperatures sufficient to melt all surface rock, and keep it in a molten state.
There would have been no chance for water to form as a liquid on the surface.
The new planet began to change rapidly soon after its initial coalescence.
About 4.56 billion years ago the Earth began to segregate into different layers.
The innermost region, a core composed largely of iron and nickel, became
surrounded by a lower-density region called the mantle. A thin, rapidly
hardening crust of still lesser-density rock formed over the mantle, while a thick
roiling atmosphere of steam and carbon dioxide filled the skies. In spite of being
waterless on its surface, great volumes of water would have been locked up in
the interior of the Earth and would have been present in the atmosphere as
steam. As lighter elements bubbled upward and heavier ones sank, water and
other volatile compounds were expelled from within the Earth and added to the
atmosphere.11
The early solar system was a place with new planets and a lot of junk that had
not been included in planet formation, all orbiting the sun. But not all those
orbits were the stable, low-eccentricity ellipses that the current planets show
today. Many of them were highly skewed, and many more crossed between the
orbiting planets and the sun. All solar system real estate was thus subjected to a
cosmic barrage, and no more so than between 4.2 and 3.8 GA. Some of these
objects—the comets in particular—may have contributed to the planetary budget
of water, but this is a subject of rather intense debate. We simply don’t know
how much water was delivered by cosmic impacts to the early Earth. The recent
discovery that the trace amounts of water present in samples returned from the
moon match those of the bulk on Earth argues that most of our hydrosphere and
atmosphere was dissolved in the global magma ocean formed in the aftermath of
the giant impact of the Mars-sized protoplanet, Thaea.
But any life then existing surely would have paid a price. NASA scientists
have completed mathematical models of such impact events. The collision of a
500 km diameter body with the Earth results in a cataclysm almost
unimaginable. Huge regions of the Earth’s rocky surface would have been
vaporized, creating a cloud of superheated “rock-gas,” or vapors several
thousand degrees in temperature. It is this vapor, in the atmosphere, which
causes the entire ocean to evaporate into steam, boiling away to leave a scum of
molten salt on the seafloor. Cooling by radiation into space would take place, but
a new ocean would not rain out for at least several thousand years after the

event. Such large, Texas-sized asteroids or comets could evaporate a ten-
thousand-foot-deep ocean, sterilizing the surface of the Earth in the process.12
About 3.8 billion years ago, even though the worst barrage of meteor impacts
would have passed, there still would have been a much higher frequency of these
violent collisions than in more recent times. The length of the day was also
different, being less than ten hours long, because the Earth’s spin was faster then.
The sun would have appeared to be much dimmer, perhaps a red orb of little
heat, for it not only was burning with far less energy than today, but it had to
shine through a poisonous, riled atmosphere composed of billowing carbon
dioxide, hydrogen sulfide, steam, and methane—and no atmospheric or oceanic
oxygen was present. The sky itself would probably have been orange to brick red
in color, and the seas, which surely covered virtually all of the Earth’s surface,
would have been a muddy brown in color. But it was real estate with gas, liquid
water, and a rocky crust with myriad minerals, rocks, and environments—
including those now thought to be necessary for the two-part process of evolving
life: producing the many “parts” and then bringing them all together on a factory
floor.
 
Carbon dioxide through time (in billions of years ago), with estimates of values into the future. Zero
represents the present.

NECESSARY LIFE SUPPORT SYSTEMS AND THEIR HISTORY
One of the most critical prerequisites for the origin of life on Earth was to have
had atmospheric gases “reducing” enough to permit the formation of prebiotic
molecules, the building blocks of Earth life. The chemical processes known as
oxidation-reduction can be remembered as “oil-rig.” This speaks to whether a
compound is giving up electrons (OIL: oxidation is loss) or getting electrons
(RIG: reduction is gain). Electrons are like money that can be swapped for
energy: in oxidation, an electron loss pays for gain in energy. In reduction, the
gain of an electron is money in the bank—and this money is in the form of
energy. For example, oil and coal are “reduced.” That is, they have a lot of
energy in the bank that can be freed when they are oxidized as we burn these
fuels. In other words, we oxidize them, which produces energy.
The composition of the Earth’s atmosphere early in its history is a
controversial and heavily researched topic. While the amount of nitrogen may
have been similar to that of today, there are abundant and diverse lines of
evidence indicating that there was little or no oxygen available. Carbon dioxide,
however, would have been present in much higher volumes than today, and this
CO2-rich atmosphere would have created hothouse-like conditions through a
super greenhouse effect, with CO2 pressures ten thousand times higher than
today.13
Today our atmosphere is made up of 78 percent nitrogen, 21 percent oxygen,
and less than 1 percent carbon dioxide and methane—and this composition
seems to be relatively new. As is becoming all too apparent, our atmosphere can
change its composition relatively rapidly, especially in that deceptively small 1
percent that includes carbon dioxide and methane, two of the so-called
greenhouse gases (along with water vapor) that are of importance far out of
proportion to their atmospheric abundance.
ELEMENT CYCLES AND GLOBAL TEMPERATURE
Our human body requires an immense number of complicated processes to foster
the strange state we call life. Many of these systems involve the movement of
the element carbon. In analogous fashion, the movement of carbon, oxygen, and
sulfur are key aspects in maintaining environments suitable for life on Earth. Of

these, carbon is most important.
Carbon undergoes an active cycling in and out of solid, liquid, and gas phases.
The transfer of carbon between the oceans, atmosphere, and life is referred to as
the carbon cycle, and it is this movement that has the most critical effect on a
changing planetary temperature brought about by varying concentrations of
greenhouse gases. What we refer to as the carbon cycle is really composed of
two different (but intersecting) cycles—the short-term and long-term carbon
cycles.14 The short-term carbon cycle is dominated by plant life. Carbon dioxide
is taken up during photosynthesis, and some of this carbon becomes locked up as
living plant tissue—which is a reduced compound, thus rich in energy that can
be liberated. When plants die or leaves fall, this carbon is transferred to soil, and
can be again transformed into other carbon compounds in the bodies of soil
microbes, other plants, or animals—where the reduced carbon compounds are
oxidized with a gain of energy to the organism doing the oxidizing.
At the same time, organisms also convert other carbon molecules to a reduced
state, where it can be used for energy. As it passes through a food chain of
animals, this same carbon, now in reduced state, can be oxidized and then
respired out of the animal or microbe as carbon dioxide gas, and thus the cycle
can renew. Other times, however, still locked within plant or animal tissue, the
energy-rich reduced carbon might be buried without being consumed by other
organisms, to become part of a large organic carbon reservoir within the Earth’s
crust. In so doing, this carbon is no longer part of the short-term carbon cycle.
The second, or long-term, carbon cycle involved very different kinds of
transformations. The most important is that the long-term cycle involves the
transfer of carbon from the rock record into the ocean or atmosphere and back
again. The time scale of this transfer is generally measured in millions of years.
The transfer of carbon to and from rocks can cause changes in the Earth’s
atmosphere larger than those that can be attained by the short-term carbon cycle,
because there is more carbon locked up in rocks than in the ocean, the biosphere
(the sum total of living organisms), and the atmosphere combined. This may
seem surprising, because the amount of living matter alone is huge. But Bob
Berner of Yale University has calculated that if every plant on our planet were
suddenly burned, with all their carbon molecules then entering the atmosphere,
this short-term carbon cycling would increase atmospheric carbon dioxide by
about 25 percent. In contrast, long-term changes in the past have accounted in
swings both up and down of carbon dioxide of more than 1,000 percent.
A crucial aspect of the Earth’s carbon cycle concerns calcium carbonate, or

limestone. This common Earth material makes up the skeletons of most
skeletonized invertebrates. It is also found in tiny planktonic plants, called
coccolithophorids, whose skeletons accumulate to form the sedimentary rock
known as chalk. Coccolith skeletons make up a vital part of Earth’s habitability,
because they help control long-term temperature at stable levels. Because of the
plate tectonic process known as subduction, eventually some of this chalk is
carried by the plate tectonic conveyer belt to subduction zones, long depressions
in the Earth’s crust where oceanic crust sinks downward into the Earth’s interior
at these depressions. Miles down into the Earth, now well below the surface of
the sea bottom, sufficient heat and pressure cause the calcareous and siliceous
skeletons to change into new minerals, such as silicates, as well as carbon
dioxide gas. These minerals and hot carbon dioxide gas then make their way
back to the surface of the Earth as upward-rising magma, rich in gas, where the
minerals are extruded as lava, and the gas is liberated into the atmosphere.
This, then, is the key process of the carbon cycle. Carbon dioxide is
transformed into living tissue, which eventually decays and helps form the
skeletons of other kinds of animals and plants, which eventually fuse into lava
and gas deep in the Earth, which is then brought back into the surface to renew
the cycle. The long-term carbon cycle thus has a huge effect on atmospheric gas
compositions, which itself largely controls global temperature. And since
processes of sediment burial and erosion as well as chemical weathering are key
components determining how much and how fast carbonate and silicate
organism skeletons are produced in the sea, ultimately the amount of minerals
going down the hungry maw of the subduction zones will dictate how much
carbon dioxide and methane is pumped back into the atmosphere through
volcanoes. This entire process is therefore both largely controlled by life and
ultimately allows life to exist on Earth. More than just dictating atmospheric
concentrations, it produced what might be called a planetary thermostat, for
there is a feedback aspect to the cycle that regulates the long-term temperature
on Earth.
The thermostat works like this. Let’s say the amount of carbon dioxide
spewing from earthly volcanoes increases, causing more carbon dioxide and
methane to enter the atmosphere. Making their way into the upper atmosphere,
many of these molecules cause heat energy rising up from the surface of the
Earth (after getting there first as sunlight) to be reflected back toward the Earth.
This is the greenhouse effect. With more heat energy trapped in the atmosphere,
the temperature of the entire planet rises, in the short term causing more liquid

water to evaporate in the atmosphere as water vapor, which itself is also a
greenhouse gas. This warming, however, has interesting consequences. With
warmer temperatures, the rates of chemical weathering increase. This is most
important with regard to weathering of silicate minerals. As we have seen, this
weathering process eventually leads to the formation of carbonate or other new
kinds of silicate minerals, but the weathering process itself strips carbon dioxide
out of the atmosphere.
As weathering rates increase, more and more carbon dioxide is pulled out of
the atmosphere to form other chemical compounds that have no first-order effect
on global temperature. As atmospheric CO2 levels begin to drop, so too does
global temperature by a less effective greenhouse caused by fewer greenhouse
gas molecules in the atmosphere. At the same time, weathering rates decrease as
it gets colder, and fewer skeletons are precipitated because there are fewer
bicarbonate and silica ions to choose from. Eventually, this results in less
skeletal material being subducted, and a lower volume of volcanic carbon
dioxide. Now the Earth is cooling rapidly. But as it does so, many ecosystems
such as coral reefs or surface plankton regions reduce in size, and thus less
atmospheric carbon dioxide is called for. In this world, the volcanoes begin to
emit more carbon dioxide than can be used by organisms, and the cycle renews.
The crucial weathering rates are not just affected by temperature. The rapid
rise of a mountain chain can cause an uptick in silicate mineral erosion, no
matter what the temperature. Rising mountains thus cause a more rapid
weathering of these minerals and the removal of more atmospheric CO2. The
Earth rapidly cools. Many geologists believe that the rapid uplift of the massive
and rugged Himalaya mountain chain caused a sudden drop in atmospheric CO2
levels, and thus brought on (or at least contributed to) the cooling that eventually
produced the Pleistocene ice age that began some 2.5 million years ago.15
A third factor affecting chemical erosion rates is the kind and abundance of
plant life. “Higher” (multicellular) plants are highly efficient at causing physical
erosion of rock material, thus creating more surface area for chemical
weathering to act on. A sudden rise in plant abundance—or the evolution of a
new kind of plant with deeper roots, such as found in most trees—has the same
effect as the short-term rise of a new mountain chain: weathering rates increase,
causing global temperature to decrease. The opposite—the removal of plants
either through mass extinction or human-caused deforestation—causes rapid
atmospheric heating.
Even the movement of continents can affect worldwide weathering rates, and

hence global climate. Since weathering proceeds faster in higher temperatures,
even a world in the midst of a very cold interval will get even colder if
continental drift moves large continents to equatorial from higher latitudes.
Chemical weathering is quite slow in the Arctic and Antarctic, but high at the
equator. Moving continents to equatorial regions will have an effect on global
temperature. Another effect of continental position comes from the relative
positions of the continents. No amount of chemical weathering can change
global temperature if the crucial solutes and mineral species to be used to build
skeletons cannot make their way to the sea. Moving water does this, but if all the
continents coalesce, as they did in the formation of Pangaea some 300 million
years ago, huge areas of the supercontinent interior would have been bereft of
rainfall and rivers to the sea. While untold tons of bicarbonate, dissolved
calcium, and silica ions would have been produced in the center of this giant
continent, much of it never made it to the world ocean.
Eventually, with reduced rainfall, weathering rates would have lowered even
in the higher temperatures, and the feedback system may not have worked quite
as well as it does with separated continents. The far lower length of continental
coastlines produced by the continental amalgamation would have severely
affected world climate, as so much of formerly maritime-influenced and wetland
areas would have been transformed into regions far from the sea and its water.
Deserts and Arctic alike show low rates of weathering, and hence help make the
world warmer by lower rate of atmospheric carbon dioxide uptake by mineral
by-products of weathering.
THE PHANEROZOIC CARBON DIOXIDE AND OXYGEN CURVES
Perhaps the most influential physical factors other than temperature that most
importantly influenced life’s history on Earth were the changing volumes
(manifested as atmospheric gas pressures) of life-giving carbon dioxide (for
plants) and oxygen (for animals). The relative amounts of both CO2 and oxygen
in our planet’s atmosphere over time have been (and continue to be) determined
by a wide range of physical and biological processes, and it comes as a surprise
to most people that the level of both have fluctuated significantly until relatively
recently in geological time. But why do the levels of these two gases change at
all? The major determinants are a series of chemical reactions involving many of

the abundant elements on and in the Earth’s crust, including carbon, sulfur, and
iron. The chemical reactions involve both oxidation and reduction. In each case,
free oxygen (O2) combines with molecules containing carbon, sulfur, or iron, to
form new chemical compounds, and in so doing oxygen is removed from the
atmosphere and stored in the newly formed compounds. Oxygen is liberated
back into the atmosphere by other reactions involving reduction of compounds.
This is what happens during photosynthesis in plants, as they liberate free
oxygen as a by-product of the reduction of carbon dioxide through a complex
series of intermediate reactions.
There have been a number of models specifically derived to deduce past O2
and CO2 levels through time, with the set of equations referred to as GEOCARB
being the oldest and most elaborate.16 This model, used for calculating levels of
carbon, was devised by Robert Berner of Yale University. In addition to
GEOCARB, separate models have been developed by Berner and his students
for calculating O2. Together, the models show the major trends in O2 and CO2
through time. This work represents one of the great triumphs of the scientific
method. The importance of the rise and fall of oxygen and carbon dioxide over
time is really one of the newest and most fundamental of understandings about
life’s history on Earth.
Some believe that by 4 billion years ago, conditions and materials on Earth
were correct for life to form. But the fact that a planet is habitable does not
automatically mean that it will ever be inhabited. The formation of life from
nonlife, the subject of the next chapter, appears to have been the most complex
chemical experiment of all time. While astrobiologists seem to constantly refer
to how “easy” it must have been to start life on Earth, a more nuanced look
implies anything but.
Almost more than any other aspect, it has become clear that the interplay and
concentrations of the various components of the Earth’s atmosphere have been
dominant determinants of not only what kind of life (or there being any life at
all) on our Earth, but the history of that life. The increasing acceptance of the
dominant roles of oxygen and carbon dioxide levels in understanding not only
large-scale patterns but nuances of life’s progression on our planet is in many
respects a twenty-first-century innovation in interpreting Earth history. As is the
understanding that two other important gases have played dominant roles in the
story of life, and in the pages to come: hydrogen sulfide, or H2S, and methane
(CH4). Their stories are written in rock, life, and death as well.

CHAPTER III
Life, Death, and the Newly Discovered Place In Between
In 2006, word began to leak out into scientific circles of a most curious set of
experiments dealing with life, death, and what appeared to be a strange and
unsettling mixture of the two. First germinating as rumors among colleagues,
then slowly maturing at successive talks at various scientific conferences, these
findings came into full flower in a series of brilliant papers written by an until-
then-unremarkable biologist. Mark Roth was not to remain unremarkable for
long, especially after the MacArthur Foundation awarded him a so-called genius
grant in 2010 for this work. He is a pioneer, entering a far country, one that could
tell us a great deal not only about what “life” is, but what “living” is, and if there
could be one without the other not only now, but during the long-ago time when
life on Earth first came alive.
Roth had discovered that sublethal doses of hydrogen sulfide put mammals
into a state that can only be described as suspended animation.1 While there is a
great deal of popular-culture baggage attached to this appellation (mainly from
the science fiction world), in fact these two words quite nicely describe what
took place in these gassed animals. Animation, or movement, stopped not only
in the observable aspects of the study animals—they no longer moved, had a
greatly slowed down respiration rate and heart rate—but also at even more
fundamental levels. Normal tissue and cellular functions were greatly reduced in
rate. And then even something more surprising occurred: the mammals lost their
ability to thermoregulate. They stopped being endothermic, or warm-blooded,
and reverted to the more primitive chordate state: ectothermy, or cold-
bloodedness. But they were neither dead nor truly alive, for in one of the most
basic of mammalian characteristics, they were as if dead. But that death was
temporary. It was suspended for a finite amount of time, for when the application
of the gas ceased, all normal functions returned. Beyond the obvious medical
applications, this new understanding says much about what life is—and is not.
Roth’s hunch was simple—that there exists a state between life and death that
is both unexplored and of potential medical interest—and it also provided clues
to why certain organisms survived mass extinctions. Perhaps death is not so final
as generally assumed.2 His hope was to be able to take organisms to this place

and then bring them back. In fact there is no English word that accurately
captures the essence of this place. Moviemakers call it zombie land or some
such, and maybe stiff-necked science will eventually adopt that term. But we
doubt it.
Here was one of his critical experiments. He took flatworms, simple animals,
but animals nonetheless. Yet compared to any microbe, no animal can be called
simple. He lowered the oxygen content that the flatworms were respiring. Like
all animals, flatworms need oxygen, and lots of it. So down went the oxygen
content in the closed vessel with the confined worms, and gradually they slowed
and then ceased motion. No poking or prodding could get any sort of reaction.
But Roth did not conclude the experiment there. In fact, he kept dropping the
oxygen content of the worm’s water, and they came back to life.3 The flatworms
had entered the state of “dormancy” that is neither alive nor dead. Life and death
seem to be far more complicated states than most of us currently believe.
LIFE AND DEATH IN THE SIMPLEST ORGANISMS
Mammals are among the most complex of all animals. Even in these
experiments, interesting as they are, the test subjects were obviously alive: their
hearts still beat, blood continued to flow in veins and arteries, nerves fired, and
the ion transport necessary for life continued to function, if at slower rates. But
questions remain about the workings of life in much less complicated and
smaller organisms, such as bacteria and viruses, especially when they are put
into environments without gas, or in very cold environments. These are not
theoretical questions, because every day microbes are flung skyward into the
highest reaches of the Earth’s atmosphere by violent storms, and find themselves
so high that the Earth’s protective ozone layer—our major defense against
ultraviolet radiation coming from space—can no longer screen them. This is the
second frontier in the study of life and death: the study of the Earth’s highest life.
After spending days or weeks in the upper atmosphere, these members of the
most newly discovered ecosystem on Earth, one not so subtly named “high life”
by the scientists who now study this tropospheric biota, come back to Earth.4 But
when they are in space, are they alive?
While it has been known since the dawn of the space age that bacterial and
fungal spores could be found at some of the highest altitudes achievable by

aircraft, there was very little appreciation of just how many different species can
be found in this largest of Earth’s habitats, a volume of space utterly dwarfing
the volume of the second-largest habitat, the top to bottom of the oceans. But
work begun in 2010 demonstrated that at any given time there might be
thousands of species of bacteria, fungi, and untold viral taxa. It was also
discovered by a University of Washington team, sniffing air high atop a
mountain in the Cascades of Oregon, that Chinese dust storms routinely drop
fungi, bacteria, and viruses onto the West Coast of North America.5
Yet beyond an intrinsic biological interest that microbes can be found so high
in the atmosphere (or that the atmosphere could be a transport system sending us
intercontinental, weaponized viruses), there is a new fundamental understanding
that is part of the story of this book: atmospheric transport of life may be how
the first life on Earth dispersed away from its site of origin. Why slowly float in
an ocean, captive of capricious waves and current, when one can jump from
continent to continent through the air in less than a day. Later we will return to
the implications of high life for the history of life on Earth; here the issue is
whether they are constantly alive during their atmospheric, intercontinental
travel, or if they are in dormancy. Here, at the fundamentally basic kind of life,
we are finding that the categories of life and death are rather incomplete, if not
disingenuous concepts.
High life is collected in three ways: from retired U.S. military high-altitude
spy planes, from high-altitude balloons, and when great storms lift off Asia and
pass over the Pacific Ocean, and sufficiently “dent” the atmosphere so that air
“sniffers” on high mountains can catch a whiff of a descended troposphere. In
that air is a zoo full of microbial life. When collected from the immense
atmospheric altitudes where cells and viruses are now known to commonly
occur, the bacteria are dead. But when brought back to Earth and given some
time to react to the altitude they presumably evolved at, they come back to life.
Most of us would agree that for mammals, and perhaps all animals, dead is
dead. But in simpler life, such is not the case. It turns out that there is a vast new
place to be explored between our traditional understanding of what is alive and
what is not. And this newly discovered region has important implications about
the first chapter in the history of life on Earth, telling us whether “dead”
chemicals, when correctly combined and energized, could become alive. Life,
simple life at least, is not always alive. But now science seeks to find out if there
is a place in between. It could be that the first life on Earth came from the place
we call death, or from someplace closer to being alive.

DEFINITIONS OF LIFE
The question “What is life?” is the title of several books, the most famous by the
early twentieth-century physicist Erwin Schrödinger.6 This short book was a
landmark, not just for what was written, but also because of the scientific
discipline of its author. Schrödinger was a physicist, and before and during his
life, the study of biology had been scorned by physical scientists as not worthy
of study. Schrödinger began to think of organisms as a physicist would, in
physical terms: “The arrangement of the atoms in the most vital parts of an
organism and the interplay of these arrangements differ in a fundamental way
from all those arrangements of atoms which physicists and chemists have
hitherto made the object of their experimental and theoretical research.” While
much of the book dealt with the nature of heredity and mutation (for this book
was written twenty years before the discovery of DNA, when the nature of
inheritance was still a perplexing mystery), it is late in the book that Schrödinger
considered the physics of “living,” when he wrote: “Living matter evades the
decay to equilibrium,” and life “feeds on negative entropy.”
Life does this through metabolism, overtly by eating, drinking, breathing, or
the exchange of material, which forms the root of the word from its original
Greek definition. Is this the key to life? Perhaps, to a biologist, at least. But
Schrödinger, the physicist, saw something much more profound: “That the
exchange of material should be the essential thing is absurd. Any atom of
nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, etc. is as good as any other of its kind; what could be
gained in exchanging them?” What then is that precious “something” that we
call life, contained in our food, which keeps us from death? To Schrödinger, that
is easily answered. “Every process, event, happening that is going on in nature
means an increase of the entropy of the part of the world where it is going on.
Thus a living organism continually increases its entropy.” This, then, was his
secret of life: life was matter that created an increase in entropy, and in this, a
new way of comparing living to nonliving was made.
To Schrödinger, then, life is maintained by extracting “order” from the
environment, something that he called (with the self-avowed awkward
expression) “negative entropy.” Life was thus the device by which large numbers
of molecules maintain themselves at fairly high levels of order by continually
sucking this orderliness from their environment. Schrödinger suggested that
organisms not only created order from disorder but order from order.
Is that all that life is—a machine that changes the nature of disorder and

order? From the physics point of view, life could be understood as a series of
chemical machines, all packed together and somehow integrated, maintaining
order by expending energy to do so. For decades this view was the most
influential of all concerning the definition of life. But a half century later, others
began to question and amend these views. Some were, like Schrödinger,
physicists, such as Paul Davies and Freeman Dyson. But others were trained
biologists.
Paul Davies, in his book The Fifth Miracle,7 approached the question “What is
life?” by using a different question: what does life do? It is actions that define
life, according to his argument. These main actions are as follows:
 
Life metabolizes. All organisms process chemicals, and in so doing bring energy
into their bodies. But of what use is this energy? The processing and liberation of
energy by an organism are what we call metabolism, and they are the way that
life harvests the negative entropy that is necessary to maintain internal order.
Another way of thinking about this is in terms of chemical reactions. If the
organism moves from this state of performing chemical reactions on their own
(not in the body of the organism) to a state where the reactions stop, the
organism has ceased to be alive. Not only does life maintain this unnatural state,
but it also seeks out environments where the energy necessary to stay in this
state can be found and harvested. Some environments on Earth are more
amenable to life’s chemistry than others (such as a warm, sunlit ocean surface of
a coral reef or a hot spring in Yellowstone National Park), and in such places we
find life in abundance.
 
Life has complexity and organization. There is no really simple life, composed of
but a handful of (or even a few million) atoms. All life is composed of a great
number of atoms arranged in intricate ways. It is organization of this complexity
that is a hallmark of life. Complexity is not a machine. It is a property.
 
Life reproduces. Davies makes the point that life must make a copy not only of
itself but of the mechanism that allows further copying; as Davies puts it, life
must include a copy of the replication apparatus too.
 
Life develops. Once a copy is made, life continues to change; this can be called

development. This process is quite un-machinelike. Machines do not grow or
change in shape and even in function with that growth.
 
Life evolves. This is one of the most fundamental properties of life, and one that
is integral to its existence. Davies describes this characteristic as the paradox of
permanence and change. Genes must replicate, and if they cannot do so with
great regularity, the organism will die. Yet, on the other hand, if the replication is
perfect, there will be no variability, no way that evolution through natural
selection can take place. Evolution is the key to adaptation, and without
adaptation there can be no life.
 
Life is autonomous. This one might be the toughest to define, yet is central to
being alive. An organism is autonomous, has self-determination; it can live
without constant input from other organisms. But how “autonomy” is derived
from the many parts and workings of an organism is still a mystery.
 
Action and constitution are one and the same thing for the living system. The
system consists of the continuous generation (and regeneration: a protein exists
for only about two days) of all the processes and components that put it together
as an operational unit. In this view, it is the constant reproduction and renewal of
the life form that defines life itself.
This last, the temporary life-span of molecules crucial to living, and thus life,
has been underappreciated as a major clue in understanding where life may first
have formed. The NASA definition of life is simpler, and is from a definition
favored by Carl Sagan: life is a chemical system capable of Darwinian
evolution.8 There are three key concepts to this. First, we are dealing with
chemicals, and not just energy or even electronic computing systems. Second,
not just chemicals, but also chemical systems are involved. Thus, there is an
interaction among the chemicals, not just chemicals themselves. Finally, it is the
chemical systems that must undergo Darwinian evolution—meaning that if there
are more individuals present in the environment than there is energy available,
some will die. Those that survive do so because they carry advantageous
heritable traits that they pass on to their descendants, thus lending the offspring
greater ability to survive. The Sagan-NASA definition has the advantage of not
confusing life with being alive.
What was the “driver” that caused dead chemicals to combine in such a way

to be alive? Was the main driver leading to life a system of metabolism, one that
only later added the ability to replicate, or the opposite of this? If it’s the first
case, primitive metabolic systems—necessarily enclosed in some cell-like space
—later gained the ability to replicate and incorporate some sort of information-
carrying molecule. In the latter, replication molecules (such as RNA or some
variant) gained the ability to use energy systems to aid in their replication, and
only later became enclosed in cell. So we see a very stark contrast that this
metabolism vs. replication problem poses at the chemical-molecular level: Was it
proteins first, or nucleic acids first? Is either alive, and at what point does each
pass from chemical reaction to chemical reactions powering life? Yet if the
essential characteristic of a living cell is homeostasis—the ability to maintain a
steady and more or less constant chemical balance in a changing environment—
it follows that metabolism had to come first. Eating before breeding seems to be
the accepted view at the present time, but as in so much dealing with the origin
of life, disquieting questions remain.
ENERGY AND THE DEFINITION OF LIFE
The role of energy in maintaining life can now be added to our definition of life.
We have already defined life as metabolizing, replicating, and evolving. But let
us not consider life from an energy flow and order-disorder continuum. Just
having energy is clearly not sufficient as a basis of life; there must be an
interaction with the energy, and that interaction at a very basic level is needed to
maintain a state of nonequilibrium order. Without energy, life goes to nonlife, so
life must be something whose very definition is coupled with energy acquisition
and energy dumping. Life maintains itself by having states that allow it to
become progressively more orderly through the input of energy flow. Our kind
of life does this by maintaining a relatively small number of combinations of
carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogen (and some other elements in smaller
volumes). Eventually, a degree of complexity and integration is reached, and
maintained, that we call life. The inflow of energy must be sufficient to
overcome the tendency of the chemistry within the body that we call life to
revert back to its equilibrium condition—nonlife.
One of the universally accepted definitions of life is that it metabolizes. For
Earth life, the primary sources of energy are from the heat of the Earth or from

the sun, itself the energy arising from the sun’s thermonuclear fusion reactions.
By far the most common way that life taps into solar energy is through
photosynthesis. In this process, sunlight provides the energy to convert carbon
dioxide and water into complex carbon compounds with many chemical bonds
that store energy. By breaking these bonds, energy is released.
Life on Earth uses a variety of biochemical reactions, and they all involve the
transfer of electrons. But this system works only if there is what might be called
an electrochemical gradient: the steeper the gradient, the more energy that can be
realized. This means that some types of metabolism yield far more energy than
others, just as some kinds of environments have more energy to harvest than
others. The organic (carbon-containing) compounds containing the greatest
amount of stored energy are fats and lipids—long chain carbons that have much
energy tied up in their chemical bonds.
Metabolism is the sum of all the chemical reactions occurring within an
organism. A virus is very small; typical viruses are from 50 to 100 nm in
diameter, where nm stands for nanometer, or 10-9 meter. They come in two
general types: one group is enclosed in a shell of protein, the second by both a
protein shell and an additional membrane-like envelope. Within this covering is
the most important part of the virus, its genome, made up of a nucleic acid
component. In some there is DNA, in others only RNA. The number of genes
also varies widely, with some having as few as three genes and others (such as
smallpox) having more than 250 individual genes. In fact, there is a huge variety
of viruses, and if they were considered alive, they would be classified across a
great taxonomic spread. But common wisdom treats them as nonliving. The
viruses that contain only RNA show that RNA by itself, in the absence of DNA,
is capable of storing information, and serving as a de facto DNA molecule.9 This
finding is strong evidence that there may have been an “RNA world”10 before
DNA and life as we know it originated. And there is an even more striking
implication of the presence of RNA viruses.
Viruses are parasites. They are technically termed obligatory intracellular
parasites, as they are unable to reproduce without a host cell. In most cases,
viruses infiltrate cells of living organisms and hijack the protein-forming
organelles and start making more of themselves, turning the invaded cells into
virus-producing factories. Viruses have a huge effect on the biology of their
hosts.
 

Our revised version of the tree of life, which includes viruses and now-extinct RNA life. This requires a
new taxonomic category, one that is higher than domains (which are above kingdoms). RNA life is
currently not definable on the accepted tree of life. (From Peter Ward, Life As We Do Not Know It, 2006)
 
The greatest argument against including viruses as alive is the fact that they
are unable to replicate on their own—and thus seemingly fail this major test of
whether or not an object is living. But it must be remembered that viruses are
obligate parasites, and parasites tend to undergo substantial morphological and
genetic changes in adapting to their hosts.
We can also ask if other parasites are alive. Parasitism, which is essentially a
highly evolved form of predation, is generally the result of a long evolutionary
history. Parasites are not primitive creatures. But like our viruses, they have
stages that do not seem fully alive. Cryptosporidium and Giardia, both parasites
on humans and other mammals, have resting stages that are as dead as any virus
outside of its host. Without the hosts, these two organisms (and thousands of
other species as well) will not live, perhaps cannot be classified as living. Yet

when in their hosts, they show all the hallmarks of life as we know it: they
metabolize, they reproduce, and they undergo Darwinian selection. But if we
accept that viruses are alive, and this is increasingly accepted, we must radically
reassess the tree of life as it is currently accepted.
In studying life on Earth, two questions can be posed: What is the simplest
assemblage of atoms that is alive? And what is the simplest life form on Earth,
and what does it need to stay alive? To answer these questions we must look at
what current Earth life needs to attain and maintain the state of life described
above. To do this we must briefly digress into chemistry of the materials that all
Earth life uses to attain and then maintain life.
THE NONLIVING BUILDING BLOCKS OF EARTH LIFE
Of all the molecules making up Earth life, perhaps none is more important than
water, and water in a single phase: it has to be liquid water, and not ice or water
vapor (a gas). Earth life is composed of molecules bathed in liquid, and while the
number of molecules that can be found in life is staggeringly large, in fact there
are only four main kinds of molecules used by Earth life: lipids, carbohydrates,
nucleic acids, and proteins. All of these are either bathed in liquid, in this case
water with salt in it, or serve as an outer wall to contain the other molecules and
water.
Lipids—what we call fat—are key ingredients in the cell membranes of Earth
life. They are water resistant due to an abundance of hydrogen atoms, but they
contain few oxygen and nitrogen atoms. Lipids are the major components of the
cell boundary or wall that separates the outside environment from the fluid-filled
interior of what we call life. These membranes, although delicate, provide
control of substances in and out of cell.
Carbohydrates are the second major class of structures that Earth life is made
of, and they are what we informally call sugars. By linking together a number of
them, we can form a polysaccharide, which means “many sugars.” Sugars, be
they linked or single, are important building blocks in that they can be combined
with themselves or with other organic and inorganic molecules to form larger
molecules.
Sugars are also important in forming the next category of building block,
nucleic acids. This group contains the stored genetic information of any cell.

They are giant molecules that combine sugars to nitrogen-containing compounds
called nucleotides, themselves formed from subunits called bases, phosphorus,
and more sugars. In this arrangement the bases are crucial, for they become the
“letters” in the genetic code.
DNA and RNA are sugars that are among the most important of all molecules
of life. DNA, composed of two backbones (the famous double helix described by
its discoverers, James Watson and Francis Crick), is the information storage
system of life itself. These two spirals are bound together by a series of
projections, like steps on ladder, made up of the distinctive DNA bases, or base
pairs: adenine, cytosine, guanine, and thymine. The term “base pair” comes from
the fact that the bases always join up: cytosine always pairs with guanine, and
thymine always joins with adenine. The order of base pairs supplies the language
of life: these are the genes that code for all information about a particular life
form.
If DNA is the information carrier, a single-stranded variant called RNA is its
slave, a molecule that translates information into action—or in life’s case, into
the actual production of proteins. RNA molecules are similar to DNA in having a
helix and bases. But they differ in usually (but not always) having but a single
strand, or helix, rather than the double helix of DNA.
Why the enormous complexity of DNA and RNA? The answer lies in the need
for information to first build (blueprints) and then maintain the many tasks that
staying alive requires. DNA is the blueprint, instruction manual, repair manual,
and directions for building copies of itself and all that it codes for. In computer
terms, DNA is the software, in that it carries information but cannot itself act on
the information. Proteins can be thought of as the computer’s hardware, needing
the DNA software to provide information of when and where specific chemical
changes should occur in time and space, and to produce material necessary for
life. RNA has the interesting characteristic of being either hardware or software,
and in some cases both at the same time.
Proteins, the last building blocks, perform four functions in Earth life:
building other large molecules, repairing other molecules, transporting material
about, and securing energy supplies. Proteins also modify both large and small
molecules for a variety of purposes and are involved in cell signaling. There are
a huge number of different proteins, and we are only now learning how these
work and what they do. A new insight is that their topology, or folding pattern, is
as important to their function as their chemical makeup.
All proteins used in Earth life are formed from the assembly of the same

twenty amino acids. A new twenty-first-century area of research is asking an old
problem: are these same twenty used because they are the best building blocks
out there—or because they were common where life was first forming and then
became permanently “coded” into life? In fact it looks like it is the former; they
work the best, at least according to research in 2010.11 This group is specific to
Earth, and perhaps diagnostic of Earth life.
Proteins are constructed in the cell by stringing together the various amino
acids in a long, linear chain that folds into its final shape only when all its amino
acids have been joined together. Sometimes they fold as they are still being
synthesized. Because the assembly of amino acids into a protein is done one at a
time in linear and specific order, that protein is often analogized to a written
sentence, each amino acid being a word. Within its cell walls, a living cell is
packed with molecules, arranged in rods, balls, and sheets, all floating in a salty
gel. There are about a thousand nucleic acids and over three thousand different
proteins. All of these are going about some sort of chemistry that combined
makes up the process we call life. Many chemical processes can go on
simultaneously in this one-room house.
There are about also about ten thousand individual spheres within the cell,
known as ribosomes, which are distributed rather evenly throughout. Ribosomes
are composed of three distinct types of RNA, and about fifty kinds of proteins.
Also present are chromosomes, which are long chains of DNA connected to
specific proteins. The DNA in bacteria is usually localized in one part of the cell,
but is not separated from the other interior material by a plasma membrane, as is
the case in higher forms of life known as eukaryotes, which have an interior
nucleus. It can be asked just what in this cell is “alive.”
A bacterium is composed of inanimate molecules. A DNA molecule is
certainly not alive, in any sense that any rational person would accept. The cell
itself is composed of myriad chemical workings, each, taken alone, being but an
inanimate reaction of chemistry. Perhaps nothing is alive but the whole of the
cell itself. If we are to understand how life first arose, we need to find the
minimum cell that can accomplish this with the fewest molecules and reactions.
One of the pressing problems in looking at this simple cell is that when
examined in detail, it is in no way simple. Freeman Dyson has explicitly looked
at this aspect of modern life, asking, “Why is life (at least life today) so
complicated?”12 If homeostasis is a necessary attribute of life, and if all known
bacteria contain a few thousand molecular species (coded by a few million base
pairs in the DNA), it looks as if this might be the minimum-sized genome. Yet

all bacteria come to us today at the end of more than 3 (and perhaps more than 4)
billion years of evolution. Perhaps the simplest Earth life is among the most
complicated of life forms in the cosmos.13
 
The eventual tree of life as it is now viewed. The shaded areas are those organisms that thrive in high heat.
What is missing are the presumably many kinds of organisms and “pre-organisms” that evolved from
inorganic chemistry step-by-step to produce the first living cell.

CHAPTER IV
Forming Life: 4.2(?)–3.5 GA
On July 28, 1976, a robotic claw extended from a huge one-ton machine that
only days before had completed the long, silent flight from the Earth to Mars and
then had successfully landed there. The claw scooped Martian soil into the
Viking spacecraft. This sample collection was the first time such an engineering
achievement had ever been accomplished off the Earth. With this sediment now
contained in its complicated interior, NASA’s Viking performed four basic
experiments, all designed to look for chemical evidence of life or its processes.
That was the entire reason for Viking coming to Mars: to search for life.
The initial experiments1 raised hopes that Mars indeed harbored extant life in
its soil, for it was soon found that the soil contained more oxygen than was
expected, and furthermore that chemical activity of the soil at least hinted at a
microbial presence in the Martian regolith. These first-blush experiments created
such a wave of optimism in the Viking scientific team that one of the mission’s
chief scientists, Dr. Carl Sagan, was optimistic enough to tell the New York Times
that he thought that life on Mars, even large forms of life, was not out of the
question. By large life, he meant really large, for in the same interview he went
on to posit the existence of Martian polar bears!
But the onboard spectrograph, after carefully analyzing the Martian soil, could
find no evidence of organic chemicals in the soil. Mars, as viewed from this first
Viking lander, not only seemed dead, but inimical to life, leading to speculation
that any life that might be there would soon be killed by the toxic chemicals in
the soil. Sagan, ever the optimist, could now only hope that the second Viking
lander, on that same day already orbiting Mars, would yield telltale evidence for
life.
On September 3, 1976, the second lander safely parachuted onto the Martian
surface at a place named Utopia Planitia. Like the first, this huge machine
functioned perfectly.2 And also like the first, no evidence of life was found in
any of the separate and crucial life-detection experiments. Viking had been
conceived as a multi-investigative program. But while its study of the chemistry
and geology of the soil and atmosphere was important, its primary mission, and
most of the instrumentation crammed into the crowded spacecraft, as noted

above, was dedicated to the search for extraterrestrial life.
The Viking results suggested that Mars was sterile,3 and NASA began to lose
interest in Mars, because NASA was and is driven by the search for life beyond
Earth. NASA’s lack of interest began to benefit another branch of science, one
that also was bent on studying alien worlds, and perhaps alien life: the
oceanographers.
In the immediate post-Viking years, huge new sums went into the technology
necessary for deep-ocean exploration, and soon another kind of spacecraft made
its own successful descent onto an alien surface. In this case, however, life was
found, but of a kind that was totally unexpected. First in the Atlantic Ocean, and
then in rapid succession in the deep sea off the Galápagos Islands followed by
dives in the Gulf of California, the small yellow submarine Alvin photographed
and sampled a kind of life using a radically different source of energy than
sunlight.
This discovery of deep-sea “vent” faunas would radically change our
understanding of where and how life on Earth came into being, if in fact it
originated on Earth at all, for there is a possibility that life formed elsewhere and
then was transported to Earth. If life on Earth formed soon after our Earth
coalesced into a large and ultimately habitable planet, it suggests that life is not
all that hard to make. But how old really is the oldest Earth life—and where was
this first life formed?
Usually when historians try to find the “first” of anything, they look into
records of ever-older time units, and so it has been with the Earth historians.
Their problem has been the paucity of rocks of sufficient age, and the near
impossibility of a bacterium-like early cell to actually fossilize.
For more than two decades it has been axiomatic that the oldest sign of life on
Earth came from a frozen corner of Greenland, at a place named Isua.4 No
fossils were found. Instead, small minerals called apatite were reported to
contain microscopic amounts of two different isotopes of carbon that showed a
ratio quite similar to one that is characteristic of life today. The Isua, Greenland,
rocks were well dated at about 3.7 billion years in age, and later, new dating
suggested that they were even older, about 3.85 billion years, in fact, and this is
the date that has long been codified into textbooks.
The date of 3.7 to 3.8 billion years old made a lot of sense to those looking for
the oldest life on Earth. As we saw earlier, asteroids bombarded the Earth along
with every body in the then-young solar system and other junk left over after
planet formation from about 4.2 to 3.8 billion years ago. We mentioned earlier

that life, while it may have formed (or have been even older that this), would
have been wiped out by the process of “impact frustration.”5 Thus the age of the
Isua rocks was perfect; the heavy bombardment would have been just over, and
life could start. Unfortunately for this tidy package, new instruments developed
in the twenty-first century discovered that the small bits of carbon in the Isua,
Greenland, samples were not formed by life at all.6
The next-oldest life was 3.5 billion years in age, and in this case, the claim
was based on fossils, not just chemical signals. Filamentous forms in an agate-
like rock dated to be around 3.5 billion years in age7 were discovered by
American paleontologist William Schopf. The fossils came from a previously
obscure and ancient assemblage of rocks located in one of the least habitable
places on current Earth, a highly deformed rock assemblage called the Apex
Chert in Western Australia. The exact geographic position of these fossils, in the
dust-dry enormity of Western Australia, was the “North Pole,” a whimsical name
given some years earlier because the locality is, in fact, one of the hottest places
anywhere on Earth, and about as removed both geographically and especially
climatically from the Arctic as a place could be.
Schopf’s discovery galvanized science, for it showed that life on this planet
began very early in Earth history indeed. For almost twenty years these ancient
Australian fossils were accepted as the planet’s oldest fossil life. Then these too
were cast into doubt by Oxford’s Martin Brasier, who claimed that the so-called
oldest fossils on Earth were only tiny crystal traces, not life relicts at all.8
What came next was a scientific donnybrook. Scientists on both sides
unleashed attacks and counterattacks, most polite (but some less so). Back and
forth it went for some years, with Schopf gradually losing ground, not only from
attacks from the Oxford crew about the interpretation of the small traces in the
Apex Cherts, but also soon after about the age of Apex Chert itself.
Around 2005, Roger Buick of the University of Washington claimed that even
if the tiny objects in the Apex Chert are fossils at all, the rocks themselves are
far younger than Bill Schopf has claimed, more than a billion years younger, in
fact, which would still make them old (any fossil with billions attached to its
birthday qualifies for old-age discounts), but nowhere near the oldest life on
Earth. With these one-two punches, the Apex fossils were knocked out of the
ring.
So matters rested until the summer of 2012, when the same Martin Brasier
coauthored a paper9 demonstrating the presence of life that is at least 3.4 million
years old—which, according to the authors, makes it the oldest fossil life ever

discovered. What makes the discovery even more important is the identity of the
fossils themselves, all microscopic, of the size and shape of a specific kind of
bacteria living on Earth today. The oldest life on Earth lived in the sea, appeared
to need sulfur to live, and quickly died if exposed to even a small number of
oxygen molecules. While this life is still what we might call a carbon-based life
form, it brings the element sulfur front and center in our assessment of how life
came about.10
The fossils described in the Brasier paper appear to be related to minute
bacteria still living on our planet—bacteria that need the element sulfur to live,
and that die quickly if exposed to the thinnest whiff of oxygen. If this discovery
holds, it will confirm that life on our planet began in a place utterly alien to most
of the Earth today, and depended on sulfur, not oxygen.
Earth life is usually associated with the forests, seas, lakes, and skies of our
present-day Earth—with the creatures living in clear air, clean blue water, on
grass-covered hills. Yet the tiny fossils found by Brasier came from an
environment of temperatures far higher than those of today, with air composed of
the toxic gases methane, carbon dioxide, ammonia, and not a little of the
poisonous gas hydrogen sulfide.11 It lived on a planet certainly without
continents, or virtually any land of any consequence at all, beyond strings of
ephemeral, volcanic isles. In this setting, life began (or arrived, a major
possibility to be explored in the pages to come) and then thrived for billions of
years. The majority view is that we are all descendants of this Hades on Earth
cradle, bearing the scars and genes of a sulfur-rich origin of life.
Soon after this description of Earth’s earliest life originating in an anoxic,
sulfur-rich environment appeared, NASA’s Curiosity rover12 landed on the
surface of Mars. Soon after his own discovery about earliest life on Earth,
Martin Brasier was asked if the sulfur microbes whose fossils he had just found
could have lived on Mars, or might still live there. His answer, after a brief
rumination, was yes.13
If the 3.4-billion-year-old life turns out to be the oldest on Earth, it puts into
question many of the currently favored “crèches” where life might have first
begun on Earth. Our planet at that time was already ancient in its own right—for
our Earth coalesced, as we have seen, 4.567 billion years ago. If this was indeed
the first life, it suggests to some that life must have been relatively easy to form
in the first place.
But how easy? And in what order? Let us look at what it took to get life on
Earth. In order for life to come into being there had to be four steps:

 
  1.   The synthesis and accumulation of small organic molecules, such as amino acids and molecules
called nucleotides. The accumulation of chemicals called phosphates (one of the common
ingredients in plant fertilizer) would have been an important requirement, since these are the
backbone of DNA and RNA.
  2.   The joining of these small molecules into larger molecules such as proteins and nucleic acids.
  3.   The aggregation of the proteins and nucleic acids into droplets, which take on chemical
characteristics different from their surrounding environment: the formation of cells.
  4.   The ability to replicate the larger complex molecules and establish heredity.
 
While some of the steps leading to the synthesis of RNA—and the even more
difficult feat of producing DNA—can be duplicated in the laboratory, others
could not. There is no problem in creating amino acids—life’s most basic
building block—in test tubes, as shown by the Miller-Urey experiment of the
1950s. But it has turned out that making amino acids in the lab is trivial
compared to the far more difficult proposition of creating DNA artificially. The
problem is that complex molecules such as DNA (or RNA) cannot simply be
assembled in a glass jar by combining various chemicals. Such organic
molecules also tend to break down when heated, which suggests that their first
formation must have taken place in an environment with cold to moderate rather
than hot temperatures. Life on Earth has the nucleic acids RNA and DNA. Once
RNA has been synthesized, the path toward life is open—because RNA can
eventually produce DNA. But how the first RNA came into existence—under
what conditions and in what environments—became the central problem facing
those trying to work out the where and how of life’s origin. There is no shortage
of hypothesized sites where life may have begun.
 

DARWIN’S POND
The first, most famous, and longest-accepted model for life’s first appearance on
Earth was proposed by Charles Darwin, who in a letter to a friend suggested that
life began in some sort of “shallow, sun-warmed pond.” To this day, this type of
environment, be it of freshwater or perhaps in a tide pool at the edge of the sea,
still remains a viable candidate in some circles and in textbooks. Other scientists
early in the twentieth century, such as J. Haldane and A. Oparin, agreed with
Darwin and expanded on this idea.14 They independently hypothesized that the
early Earth had a “reducing” atmosphere (one that produces chemical reactions
the opposite of oxidation; in such an environment iron would never rust). The
atmosphere at that time may have been filled with methane and ammonia,
forming an ideal “primordial soup,” from which the first life appeared in some
shallow body of water.
Until the 1950s and into the 1960s, it was thus believed that the early Earth’s
atmosphere, thought to have consisted of methane and ammonia, would have
allowed commonplace inorganic synthesis of the organic building blocks called
amino acids by the simple addition of water and energy.15 All that was needed
was a convenient place to accumulate all the various chemicals. Seemingly the
best place to do this was in a shallow, fetid pond, or a wave-washed tide pool at
the edge of a shallow, warm sea. And, the idea goes, in such a place some kind
of primordial soup filled with organic molecules sat around just waiting for Dr.
Frankenstein.
Many scientists now looking at environments on the early Earth doubt this
scenario. The organic compounds necessary to form life are complex and easily
fall apart in heated solutions. Furthermore, an enormous amount of energy would
be required to keep this soup out of equilibrium, which is necessary. What
Darwin could not appreciate in his time was that the mechanisms leading to
accretion of the Earth (and other terrestrial planets) produced a world that early
in its history was harsh and poisonous, a place very far removed from the idyllic
tide pool or pond envisioned in the nineteenth and early twentieth century.
Yet the Alvin dives to the deep, oceanic volcanic rifts described earlier in this
chapter offered a new possibility in the early 1980s, championed by John Baross,
now at the University of Washington: life on Earth began in the newly
discovered deep-sea vents.16 Soon new molecular techniques used to classify the
vent microbes added confirmatory information to this idea. DNA tells us either
that life spent its first eons in hot water, in fact very hot water, or that after

forming in a cool place it was somehow scalded nearly to death in some ancient,
highly energetic process.
Most of the microbes from the vents were eventually found to belong to the
domain Archaea. The archaeans belong to the most ancient lineage of organisms
known on Earth, and the oldest are thermophilic, or heat loving, to the point that
they thrive in near-boiling water, something not found in ponds. This discovery
suggested that the microbes from the vents were of a great antiquity.17
During the period of heavy impact, between 4.4 and 3.8 billion years ago, the
time of the heavy bombardment described in the last chapter, each successive
impact event (caused by comets as large as 500 km in diameter) would have
partially or even completely vaporized the oceans. Huge regions of the Earth’s
rocky surface also vaporized, creating a cloud of superheated rock-gas, or
vapors, several thousand degrees in temperature. It is this vapor, in the
atmosphere, which caused the entire ocean to evaporate into steam, and thus
could sterilize the surface, killing all nascent life. Cooling by radiation into space
would follow, but a new ocean would not rain out for at least several thousand
years after the event, and it is difficult to conceive that life would survive
anywhere on the planet’s surface.
Large-body impact on the Earth had never previously entered into ideas about
life’s origin. But now we know that during the period when life must have been
first coming into existence on Earth, the only places that would have been
insulated from the titanic energies of the heavy bombardment impacts would
have been either in the deep oceans and/or in the Earth’s crust itself. Perhaps
only depth in the sea or in rock provided the bomb shelters necessary for earliest
life’s survival.
Even around 4 billion years ago there was little land area. Volcanism and the
eruption of lava from the interior of the Earth were far more common and
energetic than they are today. Thus the deep-sea ridges and vent systems being
explored by the few small submarines of the mid-1970s were, in that long-ago
time, much longer and more active than they are today. All of this translates to a
very energy-rich volcanic world, with huge amounts of deep-earth chemicals and
compounds spewing forth into the oceanic environment. Seawater chemistry
would have been enormously different than it is than now. The ocean was what
we would call reducing (as opposed to the present-day oxidizing oceans), since
there was no free oxygen dissolved in the seawater. The temperatures of the
oceans would have been scalding.
There may have been a hundred to a thousand times as much carbon dioxide

in the atmosphere as there is today. There was also a constant bath of lethal
levels of ultraviolet radiation on the surface. You need land to have a pond, and
when life first formed on Earth, there may not have been any land at all. Perhaps
there was only a hot, toxic ocean from pole to pole.
MINERAL SURFACES IN HYDROTHERMAL VENTS
The hydrothermal vents and their biota of extremophilic microbes, including
abundant and heat-loving archaeans, are still a favored site for the origin of life,
and unlike the oceans and atmosphere of the early Earth, it is an environment
that is indeed strongly reducing. The vents emit chemicals that are appropriate
for the evolution of life, such as hydrogen sulfide, methane, and ammonia amid
lots of hot water. The vent chemistry would be largely decoupled from the
atmosphere, and thus the evolution of life could have taken place independent of
the atmosphere. This removed the problem that the Earth’s atmosphere at the
time was not chemically correct to form life. But the so-called vent origin had its
own problems. How could RNA, that highly unstable molecule, have formed in
the vents, with their high temperatures and pressures?18
Early life may have formed on the surface of iron sulfide minerals, at least
according to respected early-life theorist Günter Wächtershäuser. He named this
idea the “iron-sulfur world theory.”19 The hypothesis is that the earliest life,
which Wächtershäuser termed the “pioneer organism,” was assembled within the
high-pressure, high-temperature confines of an underwater hydrothermal vent,
one created by undersea volcanism causing hot, mineral-rich fluids to bubble
upward through the rock-lined vents along the many thousands of miles of these
deep sea fissures. Life would have begun in temperatures that at the surface
would boil water (100°C). Under pressure, however, water does not boil as it
does on the surface, and the water coming out of the vents was a veritable
chemistry set of elements and compounds. But for any sort of organic buildup to
occur, the fluids coming from the vents had to have sufficient volumes of carbon
monoxide, carbon dioxide, and hydrogen sulfide dissolved in them to provide
the carbon and sulfur needed for the construction of amino acids and, eventually,
nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids.
Eventually there were buildups of minerals containing iron, sulfur, and nickel
as the hot, mineral-rich fluids jetted out of the volcanically heated vents. This

allowed the formation of small regions that could capture carbon-carrying
molecules, and then chemically change them to first free up carbon atoms and
then to link these newly isolated carbon atoms together into ever more complex,
carbon-rich molecules. When the poisonous gas hydrogen sulfide came in
contact with iron atoms found in various minerals in the same region, the
mineral pyrite (fool’s gold) was produced. This reaction produces energy-
containing molecules, thus uniting two important aspects of life— the correct
elements to produce life and sources of energy to fuel the necessary chemistry.
But the energy produced by reactions with pyrite is very small and not enough
on its own to fuel any sort of primitive life form. Wächtershäuser realized that it
would take the reaction of a second gas, carbon monoxide, to serve as a fuel.
This energy was the all-important driver for all that followed: the slow
accumulation of Lego-like molecules, piecing slowly together to form a final
product completely different from the sum of the various chemical parts.
The idea that mineral surfaces could act as templates for life’s formation is not
new. The faces of these flat minerals such as clay and crystals of silicate
minerals or pyrite could have been microscopic regions where early organic
molecules could have accumulated. As envisioned by geologist A. G. Cairns-
Smith some decades ago, the earliest life would have had several characteristics:
it could evolve, it was “low -tech,” with few genes (sites on the DNA molecule
that code for the formation of specific proteins) and little specialization, and it
was made of geochemicals, arising from condensation reaction on solid surfaces,
either from pyrite or iron sulfide membranes. Yet many students of early life
remain skeptical of this scenario, particularly as the organic takeover lacks a
process involving natural selection through which it might evolve.
Carbon monoxide and hydrogen sulfide are animal killers, with the former
having taken untold numbers of human lives in poisonings both intentional and
not. Yet if this idea is correct, the combination of two killer gases and fool’s gold
was the pathway to life. This view was stated by Nick Lane: “The Last Common
Ancestor of life … was not a free living cell, but a rocky labyrinth of mineral
cells, lined with catalytic walls composed of iron, sulfur and nickel and
energized by a natural proton gradients. The first life was (thus) porous rock that
generated molecules and energy, right up to the formation of proteins and DNA
itself.”20 William Martin and Michael Russell published a variant on this idea in
2003 and again in 2007.21 They took the idea of hydrothermal vent origin a step
further, arguing that such an environment could provide not only all raw
materials and energy necessary, but one of the key aspects of life: a cell. Their

view is that life began in highly organized minerals called iron monosulfide. The
place where life would have formed would have been between the devil (too hot)
and the deep blue sea (too cold)—in this case, somewhere geographically
between a sulfide-rich (and hot!) fluid jetting out of the hydrothermal
(volcanically produced) vents or seeps and an ancient seawater that would have
been full of iron. But this is more than theoretical. There are indeed three-
dimensional frameworks near fossil vents and seeps observable today—and
these could have been the precursors to cell walls. The “prebiotic synthesis” of
organic molecules would have occurred on the inner surfaces of the microscopic
compartments in the minerals forming near the vents or seeps. The chemistry of
the ensuing “RNA-World” would have taken place within these mineralized cell
walls.
By the turn of our new century, many clues were present, and many potential
places for life’s first origin had been mooted. The oldest surviving life on Earth
was certainly heat loving, of a type found still in the hydrothermal vents. All
chemicals and energy necessary for life were found in the vents, although it did
not necessarily evolve there. And finally, the vents offered a refuge from the
rigors of the early Earth’s surface, most important as a bomb shelter from the
murderous asteroid barrage of the Earth’s first billion years. But there was one
great obstacle to uniform acceptance of this theory: RNA, and to a lesser extent
DNA, are highly unstable at high temperatures such as those found in
hydrothermal vents. Once RNA was created, the leap from RNA to DNA would
have been more straightforward. RNA serves as a template for DNA. But getting
from small molecules to something as complex as RNA, which even in its
simplest forms is composed of many atoms in very precise positions, is still a
mystery. Yet while a mystery, it is not an impossibility by any means, and rapid
progress in the artificial formation in what are essentially test tubes shows us the
overall pathway if not yet every detail.
Biologist Carl Woese theorized22 yet another possible origin of life pathway,
with life starting even before the Earth was fully formed and differentiated into
the core, mantle, and crust components that we see today. Thus, in these early
times, there would have been large amounts of metallic iron present on the
surface of the Earth in contact with steam and some liquid water, amid an
atmosphere filled with carbon dioxide and hydrogen. It is the latter that is so
interesting, since hydrogen is a potent driver of chemical reactions. But because
of hydrogen’s light weight, it is easily lost to space on small-mass planets like
the Earth, Mars, and Venus (the gas giants are so massive that they can hang on

to their hydrogen). At this time the Earth was being barraged by space debris
large and small, causing the planet to be encircled by a haze of dust particles and
water vapor. High clouds of water vapor would form, and these tiny droplets
would have served as protocells—tiny cell-like objects. With sunlight serving as
an energy source, and the dust thrown up from the surface carrying organic
molecules among the many other molecules and elements blasted into the sky by
the asteroid bombardment, there would have been plenty of raw materials to
make life from. With lots of hydrogen present as well, the first primitive
organisms to evolve could have produced methane after using carbon dioxide as
a carbon source. Microbes using this pathway today—hydrogen for energy and
CO2 for carbon—are called methanogens. As the Earth cooled, oceans formed,
and life would have fallen from the sky to populate the oceans.
IMPACT CRATERS IN DESERTS
One of the newest suggestions comes from the University of Florida’s Steve
Benner23 and a coauthor of this book, Joe Kirschvink. As mentioned earlier, the
hardest step of all is making RNA. This is because RNA is a very fragile
molecule, large and complicated, and thus very easily destroyed. Water attacks
and breaks up the nucleic acid polymers (strings of smaller molecules) that make
up RNA. In fact, it appears that there are many steps required in making RNA,
and each step would require different conditions, or a different chemical
environment. Biochemist Antonio Lazcano has described this problem as
follows: “The RNA-world model confronts several serious challenges, including
the lack of plausible primitive abiotic mechanisms to account for the formation
and accumulation of ribose.”24 A possible way out is the hypothesis that ribose
can be made under current temperatures from common desert minerals.
Benner noted that the major problem was not making carbohydrates
(including ribose), the problem was preventing the reactions that created them
from continuing madly, producing a sticky brown coal tar that gummed
everything up. By looking at the synthesis pattern carefully, and after staring at a
table of ionic radii, he realized that the pathway to coal tar could be blocked
specifically by reaction with calcium (Ca+2) and borate (BO3-3) ions. These
calcium-borate minerals (e.g., colemanite, ulexite) are often used in soap, and
they form by evaporation of salty brines in dry, hot environments. One additional

step, a subtle rearrangement catalyzed with oxidized molybdenum, is all that is
needed to produce biologically active ribose.
Benner also looked to extant life for clues. He analyzed the stability of various
bacteria and found that the most ancient lineage may have formed at 65°C. This
is hotter than any “warm little pond,” but much cooler than a hydrothermal vent,
which typically has temperatures in the many hundreds of degrees. In fact, there
are very few places on the surface of the Earth now, or even 3.7 billion years
ago, that would have such temperatures—except for deserts.
Desert-like conditions, where the overall environment is alkaline and has
calcium borate in abundance, is the only environment where the formation of
ribose from borate minerals might be favored. Clay minerals of various kinds are
also common in such settings, and increasingly it looks as if templates formed
from clay would help bring about the synthesis of the complex organic
compounds necessary for life.
To form the borate minerals needed to stabilize RNA, there has to be a liquid
system that repeatedly decants and distills the liquids in a series of
interconnected steps. Kirschvink, in collaboration with MIT professor Dr. Ben
Weiss, has hypothesized a natural setting that could lead to the formation of
RNA from borate in the rough fashion that Steve Benner has suggested. A good
example is in California, where boron leached from the igneous rocks in the
Sierra Nevada mountain ranges passes through a chain of transient lakes,
including Mono Lake, Owens Lake, China Lake, Searles Lake, Panamint Lake,
and finally into the bottom of Death Valley. Massive borate deposits form in the
last few of these reservoirs. The most obvious candidate for such a system, at
least on the early Earth, and especially between 4.2 and 3.8 billion years ago, the
time during which life may have first formed, would be a series of impact craters
linked in a desert setting, with communicating water systems among craters of
higher to lower elevation. In this way the same series of distillations and
decanting could be accomplished. But such a site would have been unlikely on
Earth 4 billion years ago, when all of this early chemistry was taking place.
Earth was also strongly reducing then, precluding the presence of the oxidized
molybdenum for the final rearrangement of ribose synthesis.
All of the earliest Earth rocks appear to have been produced in a water setting.
In fact, there is no good evidence of extensive, subaerial continents on Earth
until less than 3 billion years ago—on a planet 4.6 billion years in age—and the
oldest detrital zircons suggest oceans going back at least to 4.4 GA. Our best
evidence is that the Earth, at the time when life would have first formed, had

nearly global oceans, with at most strings of islands. But Earth was not the only
inner terrestrial planet. Venus is the same approximate size as our Earth, but is so
close to the sun that it is highly unlikely that life could have ever formed there.
Yet we know that there is another possibility, one beloved by science fiction:
Mars.
There has been great progress in understanding the ancient geological history
of Mars during our new century. Mars never had planet-covering oceans; we are
quite sure because the older rocks are still there, exposed at the surface. But the
immense amount of new data from the various Mars rovers has told us that the
so-called Red Planet had large lakes, maybe small seas, and possibly an ancient
ocean in the north polar basin. There is also evidence that Mars had larger
oxidation-reduction gradients than Earth, which are the important means used by
life to gain energy. The deep mantle of Mars is so reducing that methane, H2, and
the other gases needed for prebiotic syntheses of the carbon-rich chemicals
needed for life should have been present, thus providing needed raw materials.
There are some, coauthor Joe Kirschvink among the truest believers, who
support the radical notion that life not only formed on Mars more than 4 billion
years ago, but that it came to Earth on meteorites—and it is us. The question is if
early Mars life could get to Earth at all.
PANSPERMIA AND THE CASE FOR MARS
Today, the surface of Earth is divided roughly into the larger ocean basins, which
cover about 75 percent of the surface, and continental masses, which stand up
above the mean sea level. We know from the simple age dating of the continents
and a variety of other geochemical proxies that the continents have been slowly
growing through time. New granitic basement rocks are added along the margins
of the continents at subduction zones, where moist, sediment-laden rocks are
carried down several hundred kilometers and are melted partially to form
granites. Thus, as we go back deeper into geological time there is a good
expectation that we would have less land area versus ocean area.
But there are even more constraints. We know from geophysical models that
immediately after the moon-forming giant impact event at 4.5 billion years ago
that the entire Earth was molten. A gigantic magma ocean existed, the result of
the intense heat of the collision as well as the segregation of nickel-iron metal

down into the Earth’s core. The first half billion years or more after this event
was a time of intense heat flow coupled with the gradual solidification of the
surface crust in the uppermost layers of Earth’s lithosphere. This increased heat
flow limits the elevation that any landmass can reach above mean sea level. A
continent stands high above the seafloor simply because it is underlain by less
dense material that causes it to “float” upward. If the heat flow is high, the root
underneath the continent will melt. That prevents high mountain ranges from
forming.
Finally, geochemists suspect that the volume of Earth’s oceans may be slowly
decreasing with time. After the giant Earth-forming event, it is likely that a lot of
the water vapor present in the system condensed out as steam on the surface of
the young Earth, and has been gradually worked back into the mantle through
the process of plate tectonics. This reworking is certainly seen in the chemical
fingerprint of the 4.4-billion-year-old zircons mentioned earlier. Estimates on the
size of this initial ocean vary from a minimum of about equal to what we have
today to three or four times more than presently exist. Given all of these
constraints, it is extraordinarily unlikely that anything other than the tippy-top
peak of some volcano ever stuck itself above sea level before about 3.5 billion
years ago.
A water world is not a very good place to form ribose. It is also a terrible place
to form large molecules like proteins and nucleic acids, which release a little bit
of water each time they add a new subunit. For these reasons, Earth was
probably not a very good place anywhere for the origin of life until about 3.5
billion years ago. And even then it was unlikely to have had a series of lakes like
those in Death Valley capable of enriching calcium borate minerals to the levels
needed to stabilize ribose and other carbohydrates that early life absolutely
needed until much later. It certainly did not have large chemical characteristics
producing enough energy to have fueled sloppy, early metabolism.
Extensive experiments conducted during the past decade have unequivocally
showed that meteorites can go from the surface of Mars to the surface of Earth
without being heat sterilized—and thus they could carry life from Mars to
Earth.25 Over 1 billion tons of Martian rock has made this transition to Earth
over the last 4.5 billion years. It is therefore important for the origin of life to
consider the possibility that it arose first on Mars and was carried here by
meteorites.
Mars is only about half the diameter of Earth, and about 10 percent of our
mass. As a smaller planet, it has a smaller gravitational field. It is therefore

easier for something like a meteorite or a molecule of gas to escape completely.
For this reason when a small asteroid impacts into the Martian surface (traveling
at 15 to 20 km/second) it can eject a lot of surface material into orbit around the
sun, and the Mars rocks thrown off their planet would not suffer sufficient
heating or “shock” to sterilize them. On Earth, the stronger gravity means that a
lot more energy is required to launch material into deep space, making it very
probable that material launched in this fashion will be melted. There is no record
of unsterilized materials ever having been launched from Earth by natural
processes.
Life, if it ever evolved on Mars, would thus escape easily. On the other hand,
the stronger gravitational field of Earth means that it is much better than Mars at
keeping its hydrosphere and atmosphere intact over geological time. The
atmospheric pressure on Mars is so low that liquid water will simply boil away
at room temperature. Data from the most recent Mars rover, the 2012-landed
Curiosity, make it clear that there were bubbling streams merrily percolating
down alluvial flans toward a large lake or perhaps an ocean at Gale crater, where
Curiosity landed. A world with volcanic rocks, replete with bubbling streams
and oceans and an active hydrological cycle, ought to have had life. Or it
certainly could have had life. We argue that it was possibly the place where life,
the life now of Earth, in fact first evolved.
If we go further back to the Hadean record on Earth it is clear that oceans did
exist as far back as 4.4 billion years ago. A Martian setting for life’s first
formation, using the borate pathway hypothesized by Benner, but then passing
through linked craters in a desert setting, is this new possibility advocated by
Kirschvink and Weiss26 earlier in this century. A number of experiments now
confirm that complex organic molecules, and even the resting stages of
microbes, could be transported from Mars to Earth through a process known as
interplanetary panspermia—where a large impact on the Martian surface, say 3.6
billion years ago, hurls a great number of Mars meteorites onto the Earth—and
in so doing seeded our planet with Mars life.
There is one more bit of evidence to support a Martian origin, based on new
research by David Deamer of the University of California at Santa Cruz.27 One
of the great problems in arriving at an RNA strand long enough to do anything is
getting it to link to other of the component pieces of RNA to form a “polymer,” a
long strand of RNA made up of many of the subunits, called RNA nucleotides.
Deamer showed that freezing a dilute solution of single nucleotides forces many
together along the edges of ice crystals. There was no ice on Earth back then.

But Mars would have had plenty of polar ice, especially early in its history when
the sun was dimmer, just as it does now.
FORMING LIFE—A 2014 SUMMARY
Advancing our understanding of how life first formed from nonlife on early
Earth to some extent has depended on how close are we to producing life in a
test tube. Even five years ago the answer would have been not very close at all.
But thanks to a group at Harvard, led by biochemist and 2012 Nobel laureate
Jack Szostak, we are closer than is perceived by most of the public.28 Szostak
and his colleagues have for nearly two decades been experimenting with the
chemistry of RNA. The earliest information molecule was either RNA or
something much like it that later evolved into RNA as we know it. And it is in
the study of RNA that the Szostak group has made great strides in this century.
The trick has been trying to get nucleotides in solution to link one to another
into short lengths of RNA. Getting them to link into a chain is easier than getting
them to reproduce, once formed. Yet they will do this if around thirty of the
nucleotides are linked, because with such a length and longer, the RNA molecule
attains an entirely new property: it becomes a chemical known as a catalyst,
which is a molecule that helps speed up chemical reactions. In this case the
reaction to be sped up is nothing less than the reproduction of the RNA molecule
into two identical copies.
Getting RNA strands at least thirty nucleotides long somewhere on (or in) the
early Earth perhaps required clay to serve as a template. The clay mineral
montmorillonite seems the most favorable. According to this hypothesis, single
nucleotides, floating in liquid, bumped into the clay. They became weakly
bonded to the clay and held in place. On some parts of the clay mineral, chains
of thirty nucleotides or more were produced. As they were only weakly bonded,
they were easily detached, and if there were some sort of concentration of these
strands that then became engulfed in a small bubble of lipid-rich liquid, much
like a soap bubble, there would have been the makings of a first protocell.
The two major components necessary for life are a cell that can reproduce
itself and some sort of molecule that can carry information, as well as
performing chemical catalysis (changing conditions so that a chemical reaction
that would not otherwise occur does take place because of the action of the

catalyst being present). If enough new components of RNA can be brought into
the cell, the catalyzing action of the RNA will make more RNA as appropriate
new chemicals are brought into the cell itself. The old idea was that cells and the
small information-carrying molecules formed separately somewhere and then
later merged. Now it seems that they evolved in tandem.
Many biologists have argued that the first life was just that: a “naked” RNA
molecule, floating around in a soup of nucleotides and reproducing itself, over
and over. But a more favored view is that cells and RNA evolved as a single unit
—double-walled cells of fat with small RNA nucleotides within them grew by
obtaining more fat and more nucleotides, which could have passed through gaps
in the fat of the cell wall, whereas the larger linked nucleotides of the interior
would be too large to pass out of the walls. The material available on the early
Earth necessary to make the protocells were chemicals that would have
combined to form fatty (lipid) molecules, which themselves would readily link
together to form sheets and then spheres.
 

The newly discovered Lost City mid-ocean ridge vents in the north central Atlantic Ocean, discovered by
University of Washington oceanographers, are composed of lime-rich rocks and hence are whiter in color
than the more common black smokers of the Pacific Ocean. These sites are considered prime possible
places where life was first assembled on Earth. (Image from University of Washington, with permission)
 
Because of its chemical properties, accumulations of sufficient fatty molecules
will easily form hollow spheres when agitated, just as water will form tiny drops
on its surface for a short period. As these spheres form, they will be filled with
the molecules that can form RNA if these molecules (the nucleotides) are present
in the liquid. Again, this is where concentration is crucial, and why the analogy
of a “prebiotic soup” is used so incessantly. There would have to be a great
number of nucleotides caught up in a suddenly forming protocell sphere if there
were to be any chance for RNA to form within. Unless, of course, some property
of the new protocell either actively or passively moves nucleotides that are
outside of the cell through its walls into the interior.
The cell wall would not only be “feeding” on nucleotides. It would also be

accumulating more of the fatty molecules, and in so doing elongating into a
sausage shape. Eventually it would split and two spheres would be present, with
each now carrying around half of the RNA—and a lot more than just RNA, of
course. To function for any length of time, the cell would then have to obtain
energy, and that requires chemical machinery—made of proteins. So the interior
would have to have a lot of chemicals within it, functioning in some orderly
fashion so that needed chemicals can be brought in, unneeded chemicals tossed
out, and there would have to be plenty of spare parts (molecules of various
kinds) readily available.
This is the stage where evolution begins. Some of the cells might reproduce
faster based on the nature of the molecules within the new cell. Natural selection
thus kicks in, and the engine of life as we know it has been turned on, cells that
are autonomous, metabolize, reproduce, and evolve. The rest, as the great
Francis Crick so famously said, long ago, was history.
THE DARWINIAN THRESHOLD
Early Earth-life cells might have been like modular homes, with each part
installed as a separate component in a different place and then transported to a
single place. The transport system could have been through water or air. The
latter case is receiving strong support from new work, begun in 2010, looking at
the amount of life and life material found in the upper atmosphere.
The earliest life might have been composed of cells with very porous cell
walls, allowing the swapping of whole genomes, a process known as horizontal
gene transfer. But there came a time when the cell systems went from ephemeral
to permanent. This is the point that biologist Carl Woese called the “Darwinian
threshold.” It is the point where species, in something approaching the modern
sense, can be recognized, and when natural selection—evolution in other words
—takes over. Natural selection favored more functionally complex, integrated
cells than simpler precursors, and they flourished at the expense of the simpler
modular varieties.
Modern Earth life was born when the radical changing of genes stopped.
Some who study the evolution of the first life, such as Carl Woese, believe that
arriving at this grade of organization is the most important event in all of
evolutionary history. Yet those first cells were surely not alone, for there were

probably ecosystems packed with all manners of complex chemical assemblages
that had at least some life aspects. We can think of a giant zoo of the living, the
near living, and the evolving toward living. What would that zoo contain? Lots
of nucleic acid creatures of many kinds, things no longer existing and having no
name because of this. We can imagine complicated chemical amalgamations that
have been roughly defined as RNA-protein organisms, RNA-DNA organisms,
DNA-RNA-protein creatures, RNA viruses, DNA viruses, lipid protocells,
protein protocells. And all these huge menageries of the living and near living
would have existed in one thriving, messy, competing ecosystem—the time of
life’s greatest diversity on Earth, perhaps 3.9 to 4.0 GA (billion years ago), but
with our new view being that it was later rather than sooner. Natural selection
whittled what might have been a thousand really different kinds of life down to
one.
Nobel laureate Christian de Duve stated that once the ingredients were in
place with the right amount of energy present in the early Earth stove, life would
have emerged from nonlife very quickly. Perhaps in minutes.

CHAPTER V
From Origin to Oxygenation: 3.5–2.0 GA
One of the least visited (and populated) corners of the Earth is the northern half
of Western Australia. Covering a land area close to that of the western United
States from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific Coast, this gigantic region is
arid, mainly red in color—and contains some of the most important sites for
understanding the history of life on Earth. The most important of these are the
sites where the earliest known life on Earth (to date) has been found. In a
desolate region known as the Pilbara, ancient hills rich in oxidized iron lend a
burnt umber canvas to the remains of life’s first chapters—on our planet, at least.
The red hills of the Pilbara are created by massive amounts of iron ore—and
because of this, the region is the site of massive open-pit mining of its ancient
iron-bearing strata, most of it being shipped to China as fast as it can be loaded
onto the endless succession of freighters.
Yet there is more than iron ore to be found in the Pilbara’s ancient hills. In the
treeless landscape are rocky outcrops that have long been thought to contain the
Earth’s oldest fossils—including the Apex shale described in a previous chapter,
as well as the newest entrant in the “oldest life on Earth” derby, the Strelley Pool
site, less than twenty miles from the Apex Chert locality in the Pilbara.
The Apex Chert and Strelley Pool sites do not trumpet that they bear fossils
(or not, in the case of the Apex Chert). Yet in the surrounding countryside there
is unmistakable evidence of early life, for the landscape is rich in stromatolites,
the layered, humped deposits created by shallow water and intertidal bacterial
slicks that proclaim the presence of life—and indeed were the most common
kind of life on Earth from some time after its origin until about a half billion
years ago. It is ironic, and entirely coincidental, that Western Australia, at the
end of a long estuary known as Shark Bay, is also the place where one of the last
oceanic remnants of a far more ancient world, one without any atmospheric or
dissolved oxygen at all, still lives today.
The presence of both the oldest fossil life known and the coincidental
existence of the best examples of what that oldest life may have looked like have
left an indelible impression of Western Australia as the world’s most important
“museum” of early Earth life. From the first time life arose, until the first

snowball Earth episode essentially ended the Archean era, the fossil record of
this long time interval, more than 1 billion years, is known mainly from the
presence of stromatolites, as well as rare, exceptional fossils found within agate-
like rocks called chert. The stromatolites present in the two regions that yielded
the most information about the nature of the oldest life on Earth—the North Pole
region of Western Australia, and an area in South Africa called the Barberton
Greenstone Belt, located near the famous Kruger National Park in South Africa
—both show the presence of very ancient forms of stromatolites.
Through most of the 1900s, we all thought that these structures were formed
as a by-product of algal mats, which can induce carbonate precipitation as a
result of photosynthesis. But over the past two decades, many Earth scientists
have concluded that some (but not all!) of the finely laminated structures can
also form from direct chemical precipitation from salty brines. To distinguish
those that did come from the processes of life, it is necessary to study the
modern representatives, which, in fact, are few indeed.
The best place to observe living stromatolites today is in the World Heritage
site, again in Western Australia, called Shark Bay, mentioned above. There,
large, sometimes meter-wide mounds of interbedded sediment (mainly sand and
mud) are found atop and below communities of photosynthetic bacteria. If one
of these stromatolites is sectioned in half with a rock saw, the two halves show
finely layered intervals—layers that show some very characteristic undulations.
Stromatolites are generally round at the top, but the cuts show a wonderful
diversity of shapes and structures.
The stromatolites of Shark Bay have been long lauded as one of the best ways
to understand the Archean. Once again, we see uniformitarianism at work in this:
the structure, chemistry, and biology of these structures living in the broiling
corner of Australia are unquestioned as windows into the deep past, and their
presence there is of inestimable value in interpreting the fossil stromatolites. But
there are things about Shark Bay not mentioned or described in the endless
television specials and written and photographic treatments of this site that are
decidedly not a model for Archean oceans. Principal among these is the identity
of other organisms inhabiting the most important of stromatolite-bearing regions
in Shark Bay (the bay is huge, and covered more than 2.2 million square acres).
They are also reminders of what life on Earth would have been like for at least
the first billion years of its existence.
 

The famous images of the supposedly oldest record of fossil life, as published by Bill Schopf of UCLA in
the 1980s and 1990s. These fossils were then dated at over 3.5 billion years in age. Subsequently both that
age date (now thought to be a billion years younger) and even their identification as fossils is under attack.
ARCHEAN LIFE AND THE PATH TO OXYGEN
Major changes affected the Earth and the history of life around 2.5 billion years
ago—changes so consequential that it marks a new era on the hierarchical
geological time scale. The oldest era is the Hadean, which began with the Earth’s
formation (4.567 billion years ago) and ended with the appearance of the first
rock record, at about 4.2 billion years ago. The Archean era succeeded it, a
violent time in Earth history, which began with the start of the heavy
bombardment and ended ~2.5 million years ago, with the succeeding era named
the Proterozoic. The changeover from the Archean to the Proterozoic coincided
roughly with the rise in oxygen—and that oxygen was created by photosynthetic
life.

Photosynthesis is the process that life uses to turn inert carbon dioxide into
living cell matter (and thus changes inorganic carbon to what we call organic
carbon). There is evidence that some kind of photosynthetic organism was
present during the Archean, the time 4.2 to 2.5 billion years ago when life first
evolved. It also seems clear that the evolution of photosynthesis postdated the
oldest life. The first life probably used hydrogen in a compound in which the
hydrogen is chemically merged with a sulfur atom, producing the very important
(to the history of life) compound called hydrogen sulfide for its energy needs.1
Hydrogen is energy rich, which is why human technology is trying to harness it
for everything from cars to power plants. We also do know that the Archean
organisms appear to have used the major life-required elements still used by life
today: carbon, sulfur, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen.
We have some information on the nature of the oceans and atmosphere at 3.5
billion years ago. Carbon dioxide was probably at much higher concentration
than we see today. There was probably a great deal of water vapor in the
atmosphere, as well as the gas methane, the kind of atmosphere that holds in
heat, thus warming the planet at a time when the sun was far less energetic.
Without those Archean greenhouse gases—water vapor, methane, and carbon
dioxide—there would have been no liquid water on the planet. Greenhouse gases
create a warming mechanism that the planet otherwise would not have, an
atmosphere that could trap heat. But it was also an atmosphere without oxygen.
Much of our understanding of life during this long Archean chapter comes
from studying modern-day environments that appear to be useful analogues.
Low-oxygen environments are relatively rare in our oceans today, but they’re
much more common in smaller lakes. In fact, many modern-day lakes are
essentially stratified, with a thin layer of oxygen (absorbed out of air), underlain
by water that has no oxygen at all. The study of the microbial communities
living in these types of environments has provided insights into what life must
have been like in the deep past. One of the important groups of organisms that
are necessary for carbon cycling in the modern-day lakes, and most likely in the
ancient waters of the Archean ocean, is associated with the chemical methane.
As noted earlier, methane gas helps trap heat reflected off the Earth by sunlight
from escaping into space.2 Some bacteria can break down methane and use it for
food. Much of the Earth’s early life used methane in this way, telling us that soon
after life evolved on Earth, it quickly diversified in the ways that it acquired
energy, just as the evolution of the car evolved along lines in which cars get
energy—first from steam, then diesel fuel, then gasoline (both diesel and

gasoline are carbon compounds that contain energy, just as methane is), and soon
hydrogen fuel. While our civilization comes last to this fuel source, life came to
it first.
Much of the evidence telling us about the history of early life on Earth comes
from the sedimentary rock record. For instance, one of the characteristics of
Archean sedimentary deposits is the frequent appearance of brightly colored red
layers within some Archean-aged sedimentary rocks. These are called banded
iron formations, or BIFs, and these interesting sedimentary rocks have not been
produced on the Earth’s surface in any sort of significant accumulation for the
past 1.85 billion years, except during one or two snowball Earth intervals at the
end of Precambrian time, which we will describe in far greater detail in the next
chapter.
There is a long-standing puzzle associated with these BIF sediments—in order
to be distributed so widely and gently, the iron has to have been dissolved in
water—and that means it should have been in the greenish reducing form called
ferrous iron. On the other hand, for it to have been precipitated out means that it
was rusted into the red ferric form, which is not soluble in water at all: it simply
falls out of water as particles, rather than dissolving in water, as a cube of sugar
would. The problem is oxygen: ferrous iron reacts instantly with free molecular
O2 to form the red ferric state. Any iron or iron mineral that is bright red in color
tells us that the iron has undergone this chemical change, which we commonly
call rust, and that almost always requires molecular O2. How could oxygen
levels in the ocean waters be low enough to allow the iron to stay in the green
soluble form, and yet then be available to make it rust? This was a long and
perplexing scientific mystery.
Over fifty years ago, one of the important figures in Precambrian
paleobiology, Preston Cloud of the University of California at Santa Barbara,
hypothesized that the oxygen needed to turn dissolved ferrous iron into the
rusted, particular ferric iron in the oceans came from a group of primitive
photosynthetic microbes known as the blue-green algae, which are now called
the cyanobacteria.3 This is the only organism on Earth that ever learned how to
perform the life-giving process of oxygenic photosynthesis, which is literally the
ability to cleave a water molecule and liberate its oxygen atom. Some of their
descendants were enslaved by other organisms, and now serve us all as the green
light-gathering organelles in plants and other algae. Every plant on Earth now
has tiny “capsules” that evolved from those first cyanobacteria, but are now
“endosymbiosis” slaves doing the bidding of the multicellular plant. Preston

Cloud envisioned a floating “oxygen oasis” of these first tiny photosynthesizers,
the cyanobacteria, each excreting tiny amounts of oxygen, and over hundreds of
millions of years radically changing the nature of not only life on Earth, but the
chemistry of our planet’s oceans, atmosphere, and even rock cover. With each
tiny trace of new oxygen liberated into the ancient Archean sea, tiny flakes of
rust would then settle to the ocean bottom, slowly but inexorably accumulating
to make the banded iron formations.
Molecular oxygen is one of the most toxic compounds around. Anyone who
takes antioxidants along with their vitamin supplements knows that they fight
cancer—and cancer is usually caused by oxygen wrecking delicate cell
chemistry at the wrong time, in the wrong place, and changing it into a new
zombie-like killer cell as a result. Antioxidants are not just an advertising slogan.
Oxygen is a cell wrecker, cell changer, and often cell killer because of its
chemical ferociousness. So how could the organisms producing this poison
survive as soon as the oxygen molecules were liberated?
This now leads to a classic “chicken and the egg” problem: any early life form
that evolved a system to release O2 without having protective antioxidant
enzymes would have killed itself, so the systems to control oxygen would have
had to evolve first. But all of the oxygen in our atmosphere is produced by
oxygenic photosynthesis, so there should not have been any oxygen before this
to drive the evolution of the protective enzymes! Thus, there must have been
some nonbiological source that produced trace amounts of molecular oxygen and
then exposed primitive cells to it in an environment where they could gradually
evolve enzyme systems to protect them from this poison, in a way analogous to
how we protect ourselves from killer diseases by exposing ourselves to tiny
amounts of the disease when we are very young, letting our body gradually build
up defenses.
But where did this early oxygen “vaccine” come from if not from
photosynthesis? It is very difficult to produce oxygen in nonbiological ways, but
one way that works is through photochemical reactions involving ultraviolet
radiation, the same UV that causes sunburns on unprotected skin. UV radiation
hitting water and CO2 molecules in the atmosphere will generate trace levels of
O2 and other chemicals. Today, solar UV radiation is mostly blocked by a layer
of ozone high in the atmosphere, far above the layers with water vapor (that
freezes out). But early in Earth history there was no oxygen and thus no ozone,
and hence no UV screen. Thus very strong ultraviolent radiation from the sun
blasted the Earth, creating a tiny number of oxygen molecules. Unfortunately,

reactions similar to those that generate the oxygen quickly snuff it out, making it
unlikely to survive long enough to generate a biological effect, particularly as
this is all happening in a UV radiation bath that is very good at scrambling DNA
and sterilizing anything it hits. What is needed is a mechanism that allows the
oxygen to be separated from the other products (hydrogen and CO in particular)
before it is snuffed out.
Two processes are known that can do this. First, if water gets high up in the
atmosphere, a significant fraction of the hydrogen atoms liberated from the UV
light will be traveling faster than Earth’s escape velocity and can be lost to
space. That will leave a small trickle of oxygen, ozone, and hydrogen peroxide
diffusing down from above (which are too heavy to escape), but it is really only
a trickle. Reducing gases produced by biological activity and from volcanic
eruption will easily squelch these oxic compounds long before they could reach
the biosphere. The second process occurs on the Earth’s surface—but on the
surface of a glacier! In Antarctica today the “ozone hole” permits a wider
spectrum of UV radiation to reach the surface, where it can blast water
molecules apart, eventually generating H2 gas and H2O2 (hydrogen peroxide).
That peroxide gets locked in the ice, separated from the H2 gas. Working with a
graduate student at Caltech, Danny Liang, we calculated that up to 0.1 percent of
the ice during a Precambrian glaciation could be made of H2O2, which, when the
glacier melts, would be converted into O2 and water.4 Although this is not
enough to breathe, it is enough to cause life with its powerful tool kit we call
evolution to react. As noted below, we think the first oxygen-releasing
cyanobacterium evolved during one of these Precambrian glacial intervals, and it
certainly must have had evolved protection from oxygen.
In a 2008 paper, one of the most experienced researchers about life and the
early Earth, Roger Buick of the University of Washington, broke down the
alternatives to the “when” of oxygenation as follows: First, oxygenic
photosynthesis (such as is common today in all green plants) evolved hundreds
of millions of years before the atmosphere became significantly oxygenated,
because it took eons to oxidize the continued production of reduced volcanic
gases, hydrothermal fluids, and crustal minerals. Second, it arose at ~2.4 billion
years ago in what we refer to in these pages as the great oxidation event, causing
immediate environmental change. Third, oxygen production from photosynthesis
or any other means began very early in Earth’s history, before the start of the
geological record, leading to an Archean (greater than 2.5GA) atmosphere that
was highly oxygenated. To choose between these alternatives, let’s look at the

record as we now know it, because this is so critical to a good understanding of
the history of life, and indeed there is a great deal that is “new” about this history
in terms of our knowledge.
GEOLOGICAL CONSTRAINTS ON THE GREAT OXYGENATION EVENT
Despite the widespread agreement that the evolution of the cyanobacteria was
the most profound biological event on this planet (even more so than the
evolution of the eukaryotic cell, and then multicellular life), there is a surprising
disagreement about exactly when this seminal biological innovation happened.
Over fifty years ago, geologists realized that some of the oldest stream-deposited
sedimentary rocks on Earth contained rounded grains of the common mineral
called pyrite (fool’s gold) as well as another mineral containing tiny amounts of
uranium (the mineral named uraninite). These minerals are extremely unstable in
the presence of oxygen (like iron, they quickly rust), and are never found in our
open, oxygenated oceans and land areas unless completely cut off from contact
with our normal, oxygenated atmosphere. That led to the initial concept that the
atmosphere contained very little oxygen until some time near the end of Archean
time, perhaps as late as 2.5 billion years ago or even later. Most of the geological
community agrees that even at these dates, oxygen concentrations in the
atmosphere were so low that both pyrite and uraninite grains could exist on land
and in the sea without rusting, and in fact in rocks created as late as 2.5 billion
years ago we find both pyrite and uraninite in abundance, telling us that at those
dates the amount of oxygen in air and sea would have been nil. Yet by 2.4 billion
years ago both kinds of minerals disappear from rocks created underwater or on
land. Does this mean that cyanobacteria thus evolved only after 2.5 to 2.4 billion
years ago? This has spurred a profound debate of great importance to
understanding the history of life.
How to solve this quite important question was to take years of research. The
disagreement centered on whether the cyanobacteria evolved around 2.5 billion
years ago, or perhaps 1 billion years earlier, nearer 3.4 billion years ago, and
hence around almost as soon as life on Earth appeared in the first place. In the
late 1990s the then-novel use of chemical fossils, also known as biomarkers,
seemingly solved the problem: Australian geologists found what they concluded
to be clear biomarker evidence that there had to be something creating oxygen in

shallow oceans during the Late Archean (before 2.5 GA) time interval. They
reported trace levels of biomarkers in Archean rocks that—at least in the modern
biosphere—require molecular oxygen in the biosynthetic pathways; a class of
organic molecules called sterols are a prime example.
This discovery was singular enough that we will paraphrase the abstract from
the paper itself: Molecular fossils (biomarkers) from 2,700-million-year-old
sedimentary strata found from cores taken from an ancient part of the deep and
old Australian sedimentary rock record indicate that when these ancient strata
were actually deposited, they were in an environment shared by
photosynthesizing bacteria called cyanobacteria, putting far back in time the
oldest-known occurrence of these tiny, oxygen-producing microbial plants. But
even more surprisingly, a second kind of biomarker called steranes found in the
sampled strata provided persuasive evidence that not only the prokaryotic life
forms were present, but that eukaryotes were there too—a group whose first
fossils come from strata as much as a billion years younger than the age of the
rock cores of this study.
This paper, printed in the prestigious journal Science, hurled a revolutionary
new finding at the scientific world for two reasons—the presence not only of
photosynthesis producing oxygen at a very early date, but also the even more
surprising discovery of one of the three great groups, or domains, of life, the
Eukarya (the other being Bacteria and Archaea, both microbial and dominantly
single celled) in the old rocks too. All this evidence came from cores extracted
from deep in the Earth. The take-home point: both photosynthetic bacteria and
eukaryotes existed far earlier than previously thought, all the way back to 2,700
million years ago. This electrifying paper in one fell swoop rewrote scientific
history, and the history of life as well.
But science is about doubting and questioning. Let us jump almost ten years,
to 2008, and look at another paper on this subject, with one of the coauthors
being the same J. Brocks who was senior author of the 1999 Science paper
mentioned above. Here are the salient two sentences here: “The oldest fossil
evidence for eukaryotes and cyanobacteria therefore reverts to 1.78–1.68 billion
years ago and around 2.15 billion years ago, respectively. Our results eliminate
the evidence for oxygenic photosynthesis at about 2.7 billion years ago and
exclude previous biomarker evidence for the long delay (circa 300 million years)
between the appearance of oxygen producing cyanobacteria and the rise in
atmospheric oxygen 2.45–2.32 billion years ago.”
Quite a difference! So what happened between 1999 and 2008 causing this

abrupt scientific volte-face?
The original biomarker studies from the late 1990s were criticized on several
fronts, including the fact that many ancient biochemical pathways that do not use
oxygen are known to have been “updated” after the great oxygenation event to
incorporate enzymes that do. However, the real problem with the biomarker
studies was the methodology used to get the samples, not the analyses of what
was in the samples. The investigators were finding the precious biomarkers, all
right. But when, exactly, did the biomarkers get into the cores? Rocks are not the
impermeable, hard, and durable objects we usually take them for, but actually
exist often in environments where chemical changes—and later contamination—
occur. In the late 1990s there was not yet sufficient appreciation of the intense
need for testing for—and eliminating—the chance of younger contamination in
these ancient samples, particularly when the putative biomarkers are present in
concentrations less than that of the surrounding air.
Thus it was to the horror of the mainstream biomarker community that one of
their rising stars—Jochen Brocks of the Australian National University—
suddenly changed his tune in 2005 (ultimately leading to the 2008 article we
have cited from above), arguing that his own thesis work documenting the
presence of Archean biomarkers was confounded by contamination! That, in
turn, led one of the major geobiology funding agencies (the Agouron Institute) to
support a critical repeat of the biomarker scientific drilling projects, with new
means of testing for contamination. The result (as of this writing in mid-2014) is
that no biomarkers were found. In fact, at a meeting late in 2013 the source of
the contamination was revealed to be a stainless steel saw blade that had been
made “stainless” (by the manufacturer) by high-pressure impregnation with
petroleum products! As of this writing, the biomarker community has not
developed intellectually rigorous tests to prove that the organic biomarkers in
Archean rocks—any of them—date back from the time the sediments
accumulated.
Another big picture in the great debate about the origin of molecular oxygen
in Earth’s atmosphere was framed using a new kind of Earth history tool:
comparing the concentrations of sulfur isotopes. We have already seen (and will
see again, in the sections on mass extinction) that comparing the compositions of
the isotopes of carbon is useful for studying life, and was even used to try to
decide when the first life appeared on Earth, since living cells favor specific
isotopes of the same kinds of atoms (such as carbon or oxygen, and as we show
here, sulfur) over the others of that same element. In normal chemical reactions,

light isotopes move through reaction series slightly faster than heavy isotopes
because the lighter elements have slightly weaker chemical bonds that can be
made and broken faster, producing higher reaction rates, and because of this,
plants prefer the lightest isotopes of carbon and oxygen over their slightly
heavier, more massive sister isotopes. James Farquhar, Mark Thiemens, and
colleagues at the University of California in San Diego came up with a new
method in 2000 to use the relative numbers of sulfur isotopes found in rocks of
known age to tell us when particular kinds of life might have arisen.
Farquhar and Thiemens analyzed the pattern of sulfur isotopes in sedimentary
rocks from Archean to Paleozoic time, finding large variations in sulfur isotopes
prior to about 2.4 billion years ago. But in rocks younger than these the
fluctuations disappear, and the best interpretation is that this change was caused
by a lack of ultraviolet radiation hitting molecules of SO2 in Earth’s atmosphere.
This could have happened only through the formation—the first formation at
that—of the ozone layer that exists to this day. If there is no oxygen, there is no
ozone screen, and we now have evidence that there was no ozone layer before
about 2.4 billion years ago. After this, many other sedimentary indicators start to
suggest the presence of atmospheric oxygen.
So there was no oxygen before 2.4 billion years ago, at least not enough
oxygen to create an ozone layer. But were there any cyanobacteria anywhere at
all? Probably not. When it became clear that the major scientific drilling
program in South Africa (funded by the Agouron Institute mentioned above) had
missed the great oxygenation event, they allowed the team to drill two more
holes through slightly younger sediments in South Africa, which certainly did
cross this event. This is the time interval between ~2.4 and 2.2 GA, the earliest
part of what is called the Paleoproterozoic. And they found something rather
peculiar. As noted above, the minerals pyrite and uraninite, and the sulfur
isotopes, are very strong indicators of the lack of oxygen. At the other end of this
spectrum is the element manganese, which is usually an equally powerful
indicator for the presence of free molecular oxygen. The new data show copious
levels of sedimentary manganese oxide, but in the same rock that has the other
indicators of the lack of oxygen!
But it was more complex. Our junior colleague at Caltech, Woodward Fischer,
working with graduate student Jena Johnson and Caltech alumnus Sam Webb (in
charge of one of the microanalytical beam lines at the Stanford linear
accelerator), decided to look further.5 It turns out that the same sediments that
have this slug of sedimentary manganese also have silt-sized grains of detrital

pyrite and uraninite, and the isotopic sulfur signature that demands no free
oxygen (well, less than 1 ppm). This was completely unexpected, but it gets
worse. Working with another Young Turk colleague at Caltech, Mike Lamb—an
expert in the geophysics of mineral transport during sedimentation—they
extended this no oxygen constraint to the entire depositional system. The silt at
the edge of the delta where we sampled it had to have originally been eroded
from a continent somewhere, then transported through a river system, through
meandering streams, coastal estuaries, near-shore sedimentary environments,
and out to the distal toe of the delta. None of these environments could have had
even 1 ppm of free molecular oxygen6 (and so were obviously not affected by
glacial meltwater, which might have had a little bit). Oxygenic cyanobacteria
have well-known nutrient requirements—principally iron and phosphorous7—
that would have been provided in many places along this depositional pathway.
They produce copious quantities of oxygen—bubbles—when they grow. If any
of these “islands of oxygenic photosynthesis” had actually existed, then where
were they? The worst place for them to grow would be far out at sea, away from
these nutrient sources. That was the vision of Preston Cloud mentioned above,
but it frankly does not make sense in this context. The survival of those
sedimentary indicators of anoxia is totally incompatible with the presence of
oxygen—and cyanobacteria—anywhere in the environments those grains
traveled through.
 
Overlap interval of contradictory geochemical signals for the rise of oxygen. Silt-sized rounded grains of
pyrite and uraninite, which are quickly destroyed by the faintest whiff of oxygen, are associated with the
first pulses of sedimentary manganese, which normally requires molecular oxygen. This overlap interval

(inside the magnifying glass) may be the hint of a manganese-precipitating photosynthetic bacterium, which
would be an important evolutionary stepping-stone on the path to oxygenic photosynthesis. (Diagram
courtesy of Woodward Fischer, Caltech)
 
So what could the resolution of this paradox be? We think that the oxygen-
emitting system of cyanobacteria had not evolved at this time (2.4 billion years
ago), but that many of the evolutionary steps needed to get there had already
been taken. It turns out that the actual biochemical complex in oxygen-releasing
photosynthesis that collects the energy to split water, releasing oxygen, relies on
a cluster of four manganese atoms, with a calcium atom thrown in for good luck.
When this protein is made from scratch in living plants, the manganese atoms
are sucked into the complex, one at a time, with the aid of photons that oxidize
them. We suggested that these unique bursts of manganese in the sediments (not
timid whiffs) might be the product of an evolutionary ancestor of the
cyanobacteria that fed on reduced manganese dissolved in the water, using it as a
source of the electrons needed to do photosynthesis.8 Many primitive
photosynthetic bacteria are known to do this with H2S, organic carbon, and
ferrous iron, but none have yet been found that can use manganese.
Photosynthesis of this sort would leave copious amounts of a waste product—
manganese oxide—behind in the sediment, but would not release the molecular
O2 that would destroy the sedimentary pyrite or uraninite, or create an ozone
screen to change sulfur chemistry. This overlap interval where sedimentary
manganese exists with rounded, detrital grains of the minerals pyrite and
uraninite are present happens in one—and only one—brief interval of geological
time, between ~2.4 and ~2.35 billion years ago.9 If that is indeed the time that
this protein evolved, all of the other indirect suggestions for earlier oxygenic
photosynthesis must be wrong. This is a new and controversial interpretation we
are posing here. But we are confident it is the correct one.
In our model, this manganese-oxidizing microbe, then new to the world
through some random new mutation in all probability, dominated the ecosystem
for a few million years until it managed to deplete the surface waters of soluble
manganese. Through some biochemical rearrangement, this tiny new kind of
microbe became capable of grabbing electrons directly from water molecules,
releasing copious quantities of O2 in the process. That would have been the first
true cyanobacterium. Because water is basically everywhere, its growth would
no longer be limited by the supply of electron donors in the environment. Only
trace levels of iron and phosphate are needed for it to grow. But during this

interval of time, there are clear records of glacial deposits, and those deposits
contain plenty of iron, phosphate, and other nutrients for these new
cyanobacteria to grow on. In fact, this glacially fertilized growth would be
capable of destroying the planetary greenhouse in less than a million years by
removing two important gases—CO2 and methane—too rapidly for the system
to recover.10 The result of the sudden destruction of the greenhouse would be a
global glaciation, termed a “snowball Earth” event.
We apologize for the complex chemistry necessary in the preceding section.
But to get this story right requires complexity. As we see now, the world was
unalterably changed from this point onward.
A SNOWBALL FROM HELL
In all of Earth history, we have rarely seen ocean stratification (where the ocean
has a thin upper layer that is oxygenated, but a much thicker layer underneath
that is not) when the Earth’s high latitude poles are glaciated. Cold water sinks at
the poles, driving circulation. On top of that, the glaciers themselves are very
good at grinding up continental rocks into powder and throwing them back into
the oceans, where the tiny particles of rusted iron and phosphorus are two of the
same key ingredients of fertilizer we use on our lawns and gardens today.
Satellite images of melting icebergs show a plume of photosynthetic activity in
their wake, confirming the powerful effect on oceanic productivity that a little
ground-up rock can have. And a great debate is raging even today about the
effect of an illegal iron-dumping experiment in the Pacific Northwest in 2012,
commissioned by Haida Gwaii (formerly the Queen Charlotte Islands), which
was followed only two years later by a massive increase in salmon.
During Archean and Early Proterozoic time there were several major glacial
intervals before the great oxidation event, including three minor episodes from
~2.9 to 2.7 billion years ago, and several more between 2.45 and 2.35 GA. A
simple calculation suggests that the amount of iron and phosphate dumped into
the oceans during any of those glacial advances would have been more than
enough for cyanobacteria—if they had evolved by then—to completely
overwhelm the anoxic surface environment, and flip the planetary atmosphere
and surface ocean into a stable oxygen-rich situation like today; it would have
taken less than 1 million years to do so.11 The fact that it did not happen then is

another strong line of reasoning that oxygenic photosynthesis had not yet
evolved.
The youngest, and firmest, constraint on the presence of copious oxygen in the
atmosphere comes from the presence of a vast deposit of the mineral manganese,
known as the Kalahari manganese field in South Africa, dated at 2.22 GA, in the
same basin where the Agouron drilling project sampled. This deposit is
enormous, a blanket fifty meters thick that covers nearly five hundred square
kilometers, deposited on a continental shelf. There is no trace of detrital pyrites,
uraninite, or weird sulfur isotopes. It could only have formed in an oxygen-rich
atmosphere, and thus this gives us the oldest date at which we are sure that the
world of cyanobacteria, the ozone shield, and oxygen in both the sea and air
existed.
Between this deposit and the underlying manganese overlap interval is another
peculiar beast—a glaciation so severe that it marched into the tropics12 and most
likely froze the entire ocean surface, producing the first of the snowball Earth
episodes.13
This first snowball Earth episode, actually named by coauthor Kirschvink,
may have lasted nearly 100 million years.14 So what is a snowball Earth? In fact
they were first discovered in younger rocks.
We now know that glacial deposits were produced between 717 and 635
million years ago, and can now be found on virtually all the continents. Two
geologists working in the first half of the twentieth century, Brian Harland of the
UK and Douglas Mawson of Australia, recognized early on that there was a
great infra-Cambrian ice age that seems to have had an unusually large, global
extent. Although they recognized clear features of unambiguous glacial origin—
like drop stones, tillites, and glacially striated pavements at the bottom of the
units—there were several features of these deposits that were puzzling. Many of
the clasts were composed of shallow-water limestone, much as if the glaciers
had marched out over the carbonate platforms like those in the Bahamas (which
today form only in the tropics), ripping up pieces and carrying them away. They
were also associated with an unusual occurrence of banded ironstones, similar to
those that had disappeared from Earth nearly a billion years earlier, and the
glacial sediments were usually covered by layers of limestone (again, a
“fingerprint” of low-latitude formation). In a 1964 review article published in
Scientific American, Harland argued that the glaciers must have reached the
equator because some of the deposits would have been at low latitudes no matter
where Earth’s rotation axis had wandered. Harland also specifically rejected the

idea that the oceans might have frozen over, as it would invoke the “ice
catastrophe” from which climate modelers assured him the planet could never
have escaped.
Measuring the latitude of continents in the past is a specialty of a branch of
geophysics called paleomagnetism, which studies the fossil record of Earth’s
magnetic field. Earth’s field is vertical at the poles, but horizontal at the equator.
Hence, measuring the angle of the magnetic field at the time a rock formed with
respect to the (horizontal) bedding planes provides an estimate of the latitude at
the time the rocks formed. Unfortunately, it is necessary to actually prove that
the magnetism one measures is as ancient as the rock, and was not acquired
during recent weathering or some metamorphic event. (To be meaningful, we
must study things that really and truly date to the time that the rocks formed.
This is the flaw with the Precambrian biomarker studies noted earlier.)
The possibility of testing this low-latitude glaciation hypothesis attracted
many early attempts at paleomagnetic analysis. However, in 1966 a new
paradigm for the geological sciences was proposed—that of plate tectonics. If
the continents could move relative to each other, it was then possible that all of
the infra-Cambrian glacial sediments actually formed at the poles, and plate
tectonics could have moved them down to their present position in low latitudes.
The idea of low-latitude Precambrian glaciation basically dropped off the
geophysical radar screen. It just seemed too far-fetched to the scientists studying
the early Earth.
 

Example of a striated cobble from the first “snowball Earth” event in earth history, the Makganyene
glaciation of South Africa. This rock has several sets of parallel striations, in different orientations, carved
on all surfaces. Patterns like these are known to form only on cobbles that are dragged along the basement
rock at the bottom of actively moving glaciers. The sets of differently aligned groves form each time the
rock acquires a different orientation at the bottom of the ice. Most such stones are ground down into glacial
dust; this one was lucky enough to survive.
 
That was the situation until 1987, when detailed analysis of new samples
directly from glacial rocks in Australia proved the low-latitude magnetic
direction had been there before the sediments turned from mud to rock. This was
the first bulletproof result demonstrating an equatorial position for a sea level,
widespread glaciation. And if Earth was frozen on the equator, it must have been
even colder toward the poles. With this impetus, a change of scientific view took
place. Once there was acceptance that perhaps it was possible to have world-
covering ice in the deep past, the available information from fossil distributions,
rock types, and even the paleomagnetic data made more sense, but it kept putting
the major continental masses on the equator. The commonly accepted model of
glaciers creeping along the continents (and never covering the oceans) from high
latitude till they reached the equator simply did not agree with the data.
As the various possibilities of how the world had produced glacial deposits at
the equator were reexamined, it became clear to at least some of the scientists
studying this time that the Earth actually had frozen over. Once that great leap of

faith was made, the rest fell in line. Floating pack ice would seal off the ocean
surface, curtailing photosynthesis, stifling gas exchange with the entombed
ocean beneath it, and causing the sea bottoms to go anoxic. Hydrothermal vents
at the seafloor would then gradually build up concentrations of iron and
manganese in solution, which would supply the metals needed for deposition of
the banded iron stones mentioned above. Without access to sunlight,
photosynthesis would be restricted to a few hydrothermal areas that would
manage to break through the ice, as is done today in Antarctica and Iceland.
Photosynthetic life could survive there. In a short seven-paragraph chapter in a
1,400-page book published by a project at UCLA in 1992 (four years after it was
written), coauthor Joe Kirschvink marshaled this data for the first time, and gave
it a new name: snowball Earth. At the same time, he took an additional step, by
hypothesizing that the aftermath of one or more of the snowball Earth episodes
of the Proterozoic era might have produced environmental conditions that would
have resulted in rapid evolution—what we now accept as the evolutionary drive
for the radiation of animal phyla.
So what was wrong with the climate models, all of which gave solutions
suggesting that once in this kind of global glaciation, the Earth would never
escape from global ice? The problem was that they had not incorporated the
increase of carbon dioxide over geological time that would gradually increase
the greenhouse effect. Climate scientists, particularly James Walker and Jim
Kasting, had noted ten years earlier that CO2 could eventually cause an escape
from the ice catastrophe because of a pressure broadening of its infrared
absorption spectrum. However, their suggestion was only one paragraph in a
long paper and it had never been included in global climate models, simply
because no one ever suspected that this has actually happened!
In the two decades that have followed publication of this idea, numerous
geologists, geochemists, and climate scientists have conducted intense debates
on, and tests of, this hypothesis, expanding the concept and clarifying
predictions of models. Paul Hoffman and colleagues at Harvard, for example,
contributed an enormous amount of stable isotope data showing that the elevated
carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere most likely wound up being
converted into the limestone and carbonates that smother the glacial deposits.
Geochronologists using high-resolution uranium-lead dates were able to show
that both of the major low-latitude glacial intervals in the Neoproterozoic ended
synchronously, a clear prediction of the model.
Here, again, we see a major refutation to the principle of uniformitarianism. A

snowball Earth would inevitably cause a severe decline in marine organic
production because the sea ice would block out sunlight. A succession of
snowball glaciations and their ultragreenhouse terminations must have imposed
a severe environmental filter on the evolution of life. The pre-Ediacaran fossil
record provides few clues, but the diversity of microfossils in the sea known as
acritarchs (planktonic organisms of small size, but definitely eukaryotes) waxed
and waned dramatically. Many living organisms are known to respond to
environmental stress by wholesale reorganization of their genomes. The
developmental and evolutionary significance of such genomic changes are hot
topics of research in molecular biology. The fact that diverse Ediacaran fossils
first appear in the immediate aftermath of the snowball glaciations supports the
hypothesis of an ecological “trigger” for their abrupt appearance. However,
molecular sequence comparisons of extant organisms imply that the major
metazoan clades evolved prior to some or all of the snowball events, but such
“molecular clocks” assume uniform rates of genetic change. If the climatic
shocks associated with snowball events caused greatly accelerated rates of gene
substitution in most ancestral metazoan lineages, then the molecular and fossil
evidence may be reconciled.
A frozen ocean, however, is a bad place for surface-dwelling organisms, and
thus it was that the great oxygenation event could not have started, ironically,
until the signal event that would allow it to melt away. During this snowball
Earth, the cyanobacteria survived, probably in local hot springs. Earth was lucky
that it was close enough to the sun and had enough volcanic activity releasing
greenhouse gases to let it eventually escape the snowball state or else we might
be frozen still, and not get liquid oceans until some time in the future when our
ever-heating sun finally melts through the ice. If it had been slightly farther from
the sun, CO2 could have frozen at the poles as dry ice, robbing Earth of the
snowball escape and making it more like Mars. Surface life might have died
completely.
The Earth with its new oxygen atmosphere was a bizarre place, at least in
terms of what was happening, or not happening, to life. It is clear that aerobic
respiration, our biochemistry that allows us to breathe oxygen, could only have
evolved after oxygen was present. There had to have been a time gap between
the presence of oxygen and the first organisms capable of breathing it. In fact,
evolution would have immensely favored any organism that could use oxygen,
since no other molecule lets the chemical reactions we call life take place faster,
with more precision, and liberate as much energy as those where oxygen is used.

The time gap between the evolution of oxygen release and the presence of
organisms in the biosphere that could breathe it is identifiable in the geological
record. The cyanobacteria that suddenly found themselves in a world no longer
covered in ice would quickly have invaded the new and warm surface waters of
every ocean, and because the amount of land area more than 2.2 billion years
ago was vastly less than now, and the planetary ocean would have had millions
of years to load up on raw nutrients from hydrothermal vents, they would have
multiplied to numbers almost incomprehensible, rapidly increasing the amount
of oxygen. They would have been floating in the marine ecosystem on shallow
subsurface horizons where light could reach, and even on what little land area
was present. While these organisms would be madly excreting this molecular
oxygen, they would also be rapidly depleting the carbon dioxide that had built up
in the air during the snowball Earth event they caused, producing a wealth of
hydrocarbons in the ocean environment. For every molecule of O2 released by
photosynthesis, one atom of carbon is incorporated into the stuff of life. Today,
light hydrocarbons of that sort are eaten by oxygen-breathing organisms and
converted back into carbon dioxide. But if organisms had not yet evolved the
ability to breathe oxygen, the question arose as to where all of this floating
organic material would have gone. There would have been so much of it that
there would have been major changes to the surface of the Earth’s chemistry and
its oceans and air.
Oil and oxygen when mixed together in the air form an explosive cocktail; a
single spark of lightning would cause a reaction to go without stopping. But oil
dispersed in water, as little particulates, can only be degraded by the action of
microbes. Without efficient recycling, Earth should have experienced a huge
imbalance in the carbon cycle. In particular, a large amount of oil should’ve been
produced, and an equal amount of oxygen should’ve been pumped into the
atmosphere. At this time, we do have evidence for a massive oxidation event at
2.1 GA; it formed one of the world’s largest deposits of pure hematite (Fe2O3)
iron ore—the Sishen mine in South Africa.15 Earth’s atmosphere must have been
supercharged with oxygen at that time, to levels not encountered since, and
probably impossible to reach without some deviant biosphere driving it there. If
planets orbiting other stars went through the same process, the hyperbaric
oxygen in their atmospheres would be waving a spectral flag proclaiming, “We
are here, and we solved the photosynthesis problem!”
In fact, the record of carbon isotopes for the period of time between 2.2 and
2.0 billion years ago is so wildly out of balance that geochemists have given it its

own name, with the jaw-breaking name “Lomagundi-Jatuli excursion,” and it is
the biggest and longest such event yet found in the entire history of our planet.
Most of the carbon being emitted from volcanoes was being sequestered as
organic material, releasing oxygen to the air; today this ratio is only about 20
percent. This is the evidence of an Earth with oxygen but without organisms
capable of breathing it: wild swings in the carbon cycle caused by cyanobacteria
excreted lots of carbon compounds as waste, but with no organisms using these
chemicals as food. In fact, the remnants of this sludge appear to exist in the
Russian province of Karelia, as a weird rock type called shungite. Today, most of
these oil-like compounds would have been quickly biodegraded by
microorganisms that breathe oxygen, like the fate of most of the Deepwater
Horizon spill. This is direct evidence that the environment choked on
hydrocarbons, rather than recycling them directly. As a result oxygen kept rising
in content until it was so abundant that it produced an atmosphere supersaturated
in oxygen, existing at pressures much higher than today. Had there been any
forests, the first spark from lightning would have caused a global forest fire of
heat and scope beyond anything that has ever occurred on Earth in the time of
forests.
This weird episode in the history of life ended abruptly when evolution
produced the first organisms that could breathe oxygen efficiently. Special
copper-based enzymes evolved to do this, but copper deposits themselves require
oxygen-rich environments to form. An entirely new kind of intracellular body
came into existence, and it exists still, the organelle called the mitochondria, the
major source of energy for eukaryotic cells, which are cells that are larger than
their prokaryotic (bacterial) ancestors, as well as being cells that contain walled-
off interior “rooms” in the giant (compared to all that came before) cells. The
mitochondria has its own little piece of DNA, left over from when it was once a
free-living bacterium, a microbe that learned to breathe oxygen efficiently. As a
result, it has been enslaved for the past 2 billion years.
It is intriguing to note that the best estimate for the age of the last common
ancestor of all eukaryotes is about 1.9 billion years, and that may mark the time
that eukaryotes finally evolved to restore balance to the global carbon cycle. It
would seem that the biosphere required over 200 million years of evolution to
come up with an adequate response to the presence of the intrinsically poisonous
oxygen.

CHAPTER VI
The Long Road to Animals: 2.0–1.0 GA
The time between the great oxygenation event (culminating at ~2.3 GA) and the
first appearance of common multicellular life has been called the boring billion.
The reason is that (supposedly) virtually nothing happened in terms of major
biological change. It is as if the history of life took a snooze. A billion years is a
long time for almost nothing to happen. But like so much else, the boring billion
has recently been shown to be not so boring. New discoveries are showing us
that life was not resting at all. But at the same time, in spite of repeated
suggestions to the contrary, there are no animals a billion years in age. Instead,
this long interval begins with the first significant oxygen in the atmosphere, and
by 2 billion years ago a major revolution in life had occurred—the common
occurrence of eukaryotic life, our kind of life, large cells with a nucleus. And
while the greatest diversity of these new creatures during this period of time
were protozoa, familiar to us as the still-living amoeba, paramecia, euglena, and
their cohorts, there appeared some strange larger fossils as well, including one of
the most bizarre fossils ever recovered.
The various experts agree that there was probably not enough oxygen between
2.2 and 1.0 billion years ago to support animal life.1 (This is a good time to
quickly summarize the difference between animals, (metazoans) and protozoans.
All three are eukaryotes—organisms with large cells that contain a nucleus as
well as other smaller organelles, such as mitochondria. Animals and
“metazoans” are the same thing. All are composed of more than a single cell
during their lives except at fertilization. Protozoans can seem animal-like, in that
many are capable of movement and relatively complex behavior. But all of them
are composed of only a single cell. Nevertheless, they are far larger and far more
complex than bacteria.) Yet if that was agreed on, the reason for this was not.
Life was capable of oxygenic photosynthesis, but there should have been far
more life than all evidence suggests. Animals need a good 10 percent of the
atmosphere to have oxygen (we are at 21 percent today) and the
“photosynthesizers” were not doing their job. The answer, when it finally came,
was once again the element that runs through the history of these pages in an
ever-repeating pattern: sulfur, usually in the guise of its most toxic and at the

same time life-giving form—hydrogen sulfide, molecule of life and death. In a
2009 paper published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,2
Harvard paleobiologist Andy Knoll and his colleagues showed that oxygen
levels should have been higher during the boring billion, but were not.
Something was holding them back. The long interval devoid of any kind of real
intermediary between the single-celled organisms of the 2.3-billion-year-old
great oxidation event and the appearance of larger, multicellular creatures of far,
far later in time was real.
There were no life forms that we might call complex in this long interval of
time (although we hope it is clear from preceding chapters that even the simplest
life forms on Earth are unbelievably complex when viewed at the molecular and
chemical scale!). And the reason was an overabundance of single-celled sulfur-
using bacteria that were competing with the oxygen-releasing forms. Thus it was
that two very different life forms competed for resources coveted by all life—
space and nutrients. The sulfur-requiring microbes, called green and purple
sulfur bacteria, are still alive today, but only in the most toxic of places—
shallow-water lakes and some seaways that have no oxygen but are shallow
enough so that sunlight can penetrate to the levels of the bacteria, allowing
photosynthesis. But the problem is that this kind of photosynthesis does not split
water apart, and thus does not produce oxygen as a by-product.
 
Our new model for the rise of atmospheric oxygen and some of the related events.

 
Fundamentally, it seems that life was lazy. Splitting water is actually a
difficult task, which generates all sorts of nasty, toxic compounds. Using H2S for
photosynthesis instead of H2O results in less toxic sulfur compounds, and even
many strains of cyanobacteria—if given the choice—will shut down their
oxygen-generating machinery and use H2S rather than water.
For most of the boring billion the oceans were stratified, with a thin top layer
of oxygenated, clean surface water where single-celled green algae took
sunshine and used that energy for cell growth, all the while releasing oxygen.
But beneath them, perhaps only ten or twenty feet below, was a totally different
layer of seawater, and this layer would have extended all the way to the deepest
ocean bottom. It would have been purple in color in its uppermost, shallowest
regions, stained this color by the untold numbers of the purple sulfur microbes.
The water they lived in would have been a fatal poison for most ocean life of our
world, as it was filled with toxic hydrogen sulfide all brewed in a near-boiling
miasma of liquid brimstone. Even in death they would have helped rob the world
of oxygen (unconsciously, of course, although some microbial specialists
actually seem convinced that the microbes have always been some kind of
sneaky smart). After death, their tiny bodies would have sunk to the bottom, or
even stayed in place in water salty or sediment filled enough, and in rotting
would have taken even more of the precious few oxygen molecules being
produced by the thin layer of oxygen-producing microbes in the surface layer
above them. Precious oxygen molecules, destined for the atmosphere and clear
oceans, were used up instead in the rotting of a purple demon.
While rare on Earth now, this same stratified system still exists in a few
places. One of the most famous is in the Micronesian island of Palau, in the
famous “jellyfish” lakes. Here, large freshwater lakes are filled to bursting with
enormous, abundant jellyfish, swimming gracefully through aquamarine and
well-oxygenated water. Yet some tens of feet below this crystal lens of clean,
oxygen-life-filled water rests a second and deeper stratum, which is dark, and to
us creatures of light and oxygen, vile to the extreme. It has little or no oxygen,
but is saturated with hydrogen sulfide. And it is dark purple in color, stained by
untold numbers of the same purple sulfur bacteria that kept the world unsafe and
unavailable for anything needing abundant oxygen for what was to them
probably not boring at all.
 

Our revised model for oxygen in the air and sea.
 
The purple sulfur bacteria and their world needs were finally sent to dank,
poisonous back rooms of our world. But they were always there, always ready to
take back the world they lost when oxygen finally broke through to higher
levels, some 600 million years ago. They can be thought of as the evil empire.
And in the Devonian, Permian, Triassic, Jurassic, and middle Cretaceous, this
empire struck back, as we will see in subsequent chapters.
Eventually, the balance of sulfur photosynthesizers to oxygen producers
changed in oxygen’s favor, possibly triggered by a gradual increase in the area of
subaerially exposed continents. Iron eroding from the continents and washing
down into the ocean would react rapidly with the sulfur, precipitating it into a
heavy, sinking solid mass of pyrite, keeping it out of the system. This loss would
have starved the sulfur bacteria of the one element they could not do without. In
addition, continental weathering and erosion generates clay minerals, which bind
strongly to organic molecules and bury them in the sediments. If an atom of
organic carbon is buried before something can eat it, the molecule of oxygen that
was produced when it formed hangs around in the environment, raising the
oxygen level and destroying H2S. Prompted by two snowball Earth events, each
of which seemed to jack up oxygen levels by the postsnowball algal bloom, the
environment reached a tipping point of some kind. After the last event, 635
million years ago, the first traces of big animals appeared. It did not take so long
to evolve them after all, once hell on Earth was banished.
THE BIZARRE, FIRST MULTICELLULAR CREATURES

Most life during the now not-so-boring billion was composed of the long-
running champions of life on Earth, the longest-running show of all—
stromatolites. Microbes still held sway, just as they had from their first
appearance on Earth. But appearing about 2.2 billion years ago a strange new
kind of life form appeared. It looks like a thin black spiral, but is certainly not
microscopic. Its name is Grypania, and its appearance demonstrates that life had
made an important advance: the ability to live as “colonies” of cells, held
together and bound by membranes. These were the first multicellular organisms.
Grypania has long been known. But in 2010 a strange series of fossils from
Gabon, Africa, changed our view of things.3 While Grypania might be a colony
of prokaryotes (in this case probably bacteria), the new fossils, still unnamed,
look too large and too complicated. Whatever they were, we know what they
were not. They certainly were not the first animals.
The first true animals are much younger than Grypania and its ilk. Animals
are less than a billion years old, and while the exact age of the first animal keeps
getting put back into older-aged rocks, based on ever more sophisticated means
of detecting their presence, there is still no known fossil evidence of animals
much older than that last snowball event. But in a way this is an argument over
rather small chunks of time, compared to the vast interval that life has been on
this planet. There are, of course, many types of multicellular organisms,
including a considerable diversity of prokaryotic forms, and there is no doubt
that the evolutionary invention of life with more than a single cell goes back to
more than 2 billion years ago. But in most cases these multicellular prokaryotes
are composed of only two cell types, and none would be mistaken for an animal.
Cellular slime molds are multicellular, as are some cyanobacteria and one
group of magnetotactic bacteria. In a way, however, these are evolutionary dead
ends (unless, of course, you are a slime mold; however, this group ultimately
gave rise to little else but slime molds). They have existed on Earth for more
than several billion years, and are highly conservative in an evolutionary sense.
More complex are the multicellular plants that appeared more than a billion
years ago, species probably looking very much like the green and red algae
found on any seashore, from the intertidal zone down to the levels that light can
penetrate. Animals, however, are younger yet.
The size of organisms seems to show some relationship to the appearance of
oxygen in the atmosphere. Oxygen has allowed larger size than times prior to
oxygen, and biological adaptations increasing the rate and/or volume of oxygen
acquisition have often lead to gigantism.4 The best example of this will be

described in a later chapter, showing how the gigantism in dinosaurs was caused
by a new kind of highly efficient lung and respiratory system design.
Fossils of true animals first appear in abundance about 600 million years ago.
About this time the rock record shows the first evidence of “trace fossils,” the
trackways or feeding records of ancient animals preserved not as body fossils in
sediment, but as activity fossils—the record of ancient behavior. By that time
oxygen levels were approaching (but not yet reaching) modern levels. Not only
free oxygen but ozone levels had also reached relatively high concentrations, and
thus much of the hard ultraviolet and other radiation reaching the Earth’s surface
in earlier times was muted.
 
Geobiologist Andy Knoll of Harvard University on Neoproterozoic rocks exposed in East Greenland on an
anomalously sunny day. (Copyright Andy Knoll, used with permission)
THE CURIOUS ORGANISMS KNOWN AS ACRITARCHS
In any discussion of Precambrian life, acritarchs actually make up a fair bit of
the conversation. They appeared early on Earth: some of the oldest seem to
appear around 3.2 billion years ago, and they then continue all the way into the

time of animals. Yet the fact that they are a “garbage can” taxon, meaning that
any number of not only different species but even different kingdoms and
domains of organisms get placed in this catchall name, is just one more
indication of how poorly we know the history of life before fossils became
common in the time of animals and higher plants.
While being among the oldest-known multicellular fossils, first appearing at
the almost unfathomable time period of 2 billion years ago, they remained
relatively rare. But halfway through the Proterozoic era, or about a billion years
ago, they started to increase in diversity, size, abundance, and morphological
complexity in shape. The increase in complexity was generally marked by an
increase in the number of spines extending from their small, spherical bodies.
From 1 billion to 850 million years ago they remained common, and then the
Cryogenian period began, with the enormous global changes that gave this time
interval its name, the onset of the Greek word “cryo,” all right: a great freeze.
The result of the Proterozoic snowball Earth episodes was that there must have
been a great mass extinction in the oceans, and perhaps on land as well. Their
populations crashed during the snowball Earth episodes—when all or very
nearly all of the Earth’s surface was covered by ice or snow—but they
proliferated in the Cambrian explosion and reached their highest diversity in the
Paleozoic.
It is a given that any young aspiring paleontologist will gravitate to dinosaurs
above all fossils. Since professional paleontologists always start as fossil-mad
kids, in fact the supposedly less exciting fossil groups attract far less attention,
even among the eventual professionals. Few indeed are the young scientists
wanting to study tiny microfossils. And yet some of the most important of all
scientific questions can be answered with them. So it is with larger questions
about the history of life, as the acritarchs and other microfossils of a billion years
ago are rich in question-answering information, and only recently have provided
whole new insights into what was, in fact, a hugely important time period in the
history of life, beginning at a billion years ago.
From 2 to 1 billion years ago, the microfossils of Earth were simple and long
ranging through the rock record. They must have been formed by both
prokaryotic and small (compared to later) eukaryotes of the single-celled variety,
such as the still-living protozoans. But about a billion years ago a strange thing
happened. The formerly unornamented microfossils began to acquire
ornamentation.
The increased spinosity of acritarchs, starting about 1 billion years ago but

then continuing through the Cambrian period, could have several causes. First,
spines on a small sphere would increase surface area to volume relationships,
and thus slow the rate of settling of these tiny spheres in the ocean. Many
planktonic species extant today use this method of staying high in the water
column rather than sinking onto a deep bottom and sure burial under the constant
snowfall of sediments that typifies most ocean bottoms. But a second use of
spines is defense against predators. Perhaps the oceans of a billion years ago
began to harbor an ever-greater rogues’ gallery of carnivores (or for acritarchs,
these might technically be considered herbivores). In any event, eaten is eaten,
no matter what one calls the eater. Yet the new work of Knoll and his group now
show that spiny microfossils became ever more diverse and abundant soon after
the end of the last snowball Earth, some 635 million years ago, but then utterly
disappeared about 560 million years ago, a time when the evolution of animals
was well under way. In the next chapter we will see how an understanding of
what we might call the Ediacaran revolution is importantly fleshed out by the
record of spiny microfossils, as well as by their disappearance. We will return to
the story of these spiny microfossils in the next chapter.
 
Changes in the morphology of acritarchs, enigmatic microfossils that were composed of a number of
distinct kinds of small, marine, floating organisms. Notice the change from Proterozoic (A), which are
smooth, to the very spiky forms of the late Neoproterozoic (B) and Cambrian (C).
THE END OF THE BORING BILLION
Here is a view of a shallow sea bottom, some 1 billion years ago: Kelp-like
plants and green algae wave in the currents, as do shimmering mats of rainbow-
hued microbial life, multicolored sheaths of the softest chiffon covering all of the
sunlit portions of the bottom.5 Stromatolites peak out from the bottom sheaths,

large to small domes and hummocks punching upward out of the microbial
sheaths. The water is thick with life, single celled to multicellular. There is nary
an animal anywhere on the planet. But a genetic and atmospheric clock is ticking
down toward catastrophe and icy crèche.
In the oceans a revolution was brewing a billion years ago, while on land there
may already have been a vast biomass of life: the ever-resourceful microbes,
invading first ponds and swamps, but ultimately covering wetlands, bogs, and
anywhere that was exposed to sun, had a least a modicum of water, and might
get windblown dust with enough phosphates and nitrates to allow these tiny,
single-celled plantlike microbes to grow their land-covering tarps of green snot.
Life, colonizing the land in exuberance. And in so doing ultimately nearly
extinguishing itself from the Earth.

CHAPTER VII
The Cryogenian and the Evolution of Animals: 850–635 MA
The Australian city of Adelaide is a well-kept secret. Isolated on this island
continent from the rest of the world, and even isolated from the rest of Australia,
this coastal city has evolved its own culture artistically and scientifically. The
latter has been importantly influenced by an enormous paleontological
discovery, made right after the end of World War II—the discovery in the arid
hills inland from Adelaide of the first acknowledged larger animal fossils, the
Ediacarans. Adelaide pays homage to this fossil record in many ways, including
the naming of buildings and institutes for two of the scientific giants who
brought clarity to the time period of a billion to 600 million years ago: Douglas
Mawson, a hardy Australian who survived harrowing Antarctic expeditions and
the killing fields of World War I France, a man who also went on to discover
proof of late Precambrian glaciations in Australia, a concept highly doubted at
the time, and Reg Sprigg, who discovered the fossils,1 as we will recount below,
followed, like Mawson, by another geology professor at the University of
Adelaide, where coauthor Ward now lives and works—Martin Glaessner.2 But
new generations of workers have kept this tradition of the study of the origin of
animals alive, and one of the most important is Jim Gehling of the South
Australian Museum, which sits next door to the University of Adelaide. Gehling
has overseen a new exhibit of Ediacaran fossils in a newly refurbished, large,
and modern room of the museum, and there, unlike so many new museums
where actual fossils are kept away from the public, substituting plaster casts or
other reproductions instead, the Ediacaran exhibit that Jim Gehling3 oversaw has
real fossils, real Ediacarans on display. The surprise is how large and complex
they are. But another surprise is how they are interpreted. Until recently the
party line has long been that these were sedentary, strange, and mainly flat
creatures, like stuffed pillows sitting on the seafloor (and some as large as a
large, if flat, pillow). But overhead, on television screens, the animated
reconstructions are anything but sedentary. Some even swim; others move
robustly. Herein lies the controversy. This view is new. But is it correct?
The time interval of this chapter is the long period beginning about a billion
years ago and ending with the start of the Cambrian period around 540 million

years ago (MA). In that interval, far more than great changes in life’s history
took place. Just as it had in the period of around 2.5 to 2.4 billion years ago, at
around 717 million years ago the Earth cooled. It cooled so much that—as it had
near the end of the Archean era—the oceans began to freeze, starting at high
latitudes, but continuing toward lower and lower latitudes until the entire ocean
from pole to equator was ice-covered. Once again the Earth had become a
snowball. The first time that singular event caused a great revolution in the
history of life by leading to an oxygen-rich atmosphere. This second time, the
Proterozoic snowball Earth also produced momentous if very different effects.
This time the snowballs led to animals—but not without danger to all life on
Earth. Once again life was in the balance. The overriding question is whether the
snowball Earth episodes of this time interval were the key reasons for the sudden
rise of animals, a case we will make.
LIFE AND SNOWBALL EARTH EVENTS
As we saw in an earlier chapter, the first snowball Earth episode (beginning at
about 2.35 billion years ago) seems to have been caused by life: the explosive
rise of cyanobacteria caused a reduction in the greenhouse effect of the
atmosphere’s methane and carbon dioxide content. The start of this second and
final series of snowball Earth events of Earth’s long history to date occurs within
the Cryogenian time period described in chapter 1. Due to recent work on
calibrating the Cryogenian, we know now that there were most likely two major
events beginning 717 million years ago and ending 635 million years ago. The
start of this second and final series of snowball Earth events is essentially in the
middle of what is now formally defined as the Cryogenian period in the
geological time scale (it begins prior to a pair of sharp isotope shifts slightly
older than 800 million years ago, which are the result of a true polar wander
oscillation).
Both of the differing snowball Earth episodes (each made up of ocean freezing
and then thawing events) caused a severe decline in marine organic production,
because the sea ice would block out sunlight. Thus, the amount of life on Earth,
as measured by its overall mass (known as biomass), shrunk to tiny values
compared to both before and after the events themselves. The succession of
snowball glaciations and their ultragreenhouse terminations during both the

periods from 2.35–2.22 billion years ago and from 717–635 million years ago
must have imposed a severe environmental filter on the evolution of life. The
fossil record provides few clues, but the acritarchs first described in the last
chapter (planktonic organisms of small size) waxed and waned in both diversity
and abundance.
Many living organisms are known to respond to environmental stress by
wholesale reorganization of their genomes, and any snowball Earth event would
have been stressful, to say the least. The developmental and evolutionary
significance of such genomic changes are hot topics of research in molecular
biology. The fact that diverse fossils of more complicated organisms than were
there before the onset appear in the immediate aftermath of the snowball
glaciations supports the notion that the snowball events created some sort of an
ecological trigger for vast changes in the complexity of life and its diversity.
 
Diagram showing the rate of temperature increase and decrease over time in the Snowball Earth episodes.
 
One of the most profound of all questions relating to the snowball Earth
events relates to their cause. Earlier we noted that the first snowball Earth
episode might have been triggered by life itself: the invention of oxygenic

photosynthesis, which would have caused a rapid depletion of greenhouse gases.
But there may have been a quite different reason for the onset of the second
episodes, occurring well more than a billion years after the first. The second
snowballs may have been triggered by the movement and tectonic activity of
continents of the time.4
The so-called Neoproterozoic snowball events, the most recent of the two
grand snowball Earth episodes, occurred around 40 million years after the great
continental amalgamation—called the supercontinent Rodinia (an amalgamation
of every continent into one continuous landmass)—began to disintegrate.
Supercontinents tend to have arid climates because most of their land area is far
from the ocean. Conversely, when continents and especially supercontinents
separate, maritime climates displace formerly arid regions, creating the potential
for increased chemical weathering. Chemical weathering of silicate rock
minerals causes a rapid reduction of carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere. As
CO2 drops, so too does temperature. This second time it may not have been life
so much as inorganic chemical reactions. Interestingly enough, the onset of the
second snowball event (called the Sturtian after exposures in Australia)
coincides rather precisely with the eruption of a massive volcanic province in
Canada, at 716.5 million years ago.5 Although some CO2 is emitted from
eruption of these large igneous provinces, when they erupt on land the
drawdown of gases far exceeds the volcanic input, bringing the system closer to
a planet getting so white that most sunlight is reflected back into space. And that
produces ever more cold.
But perhaps this is not the whole story. If it could be shown that some new
kind of plant life suddenly and radically increased in numbers across the globe,
once again the possibility arises that the sudden reduction of carbon dioxide by
photosynthesis, rather than chemical weathering, was involved. In fact this may
have been the case. Some of the newest of all understandings about the history
of life is that land plants, still only single celled but nevertheless potentially
extending over vast areas of land, appeared around 750 million years ago. This
would have done the trick.
A SNOWBALL MASS EXTINCTION—AND SNOWBALL-PRODUCED
STIMULUS FOR THE ORIGIN OF SO MANY KINDS OF ANIMALS?

What would have happened to the life on Earth of about 750 to somewhat more
than 600 million years ago by the change from a world of ocean and land to one
of snow, ice, and bare rock? A simple thought experiment suggests that both the
abundance and the diversity of life on Earth found just before these Proterozoic-
era snowball Earth events would have diminished. The life then was largely of
the single-celled variety, although by this time multicellular plants such as the
common kelp and alga (green and red) that adorn so many seashores of our
world would have been present too. But much of life was composed either of
single-celled protozoa, all eukaryotes, or vast sheets of bacterial slicks and
growths both as near-shore stromatolites and other masses of cyanobacteria, and
also huge biomasses of single-celled, photosynthetic microbes in the seas. On
land, we speculate that single-celled, perhaps even more complex assemblages
of photosynthetic organisms, including great sheets of microbes, would have
inhabited freshwater, and would perhaps appear liberally on damper land
surfaces. Soils as we know them would not have yet existed, but certainly the
chemical weathering of rock surfaces, incorporating the dead and rotting bodies
of what plants there were would have added organics to the clays and sand of the
surface of the land. And then onto both the surface of the sea and that of the land
came ice for the former, and for a while ice and certainly cold to the latter.
The extinction potential in terms of biomass is easy to imagine and fathom.
Kilometer-thick ice covering the sea surface would have greatly reduced
sunlight. While there is microbial life in ice, and in fact some sun does filter
through sea ice, surely the biomass of plant life would have plummeted. The loss
of sunlight was one part, but perhaps as significant would have been the loss of
important nutrients, the all-important iron, nitrates, and phosphates of our world.
As the land surface cooled and in many parts came to be covered in snow and
ice, chemical weathering slowed, as did the vigor and abundance of land
“plants” of whatever kind there were (this is, of course, hundreds of millions of
years before true, complex land plants with stems and leaves). But the land
would have produced far less fertilizer getting to the sea. Ocean productivity
plummeted, and as it did so, surely mass extinction not only of individuals but
also of whole species followed.
Yet from this scenario comes a model that perhaps answers the question of
why there are so many kinds of animals. Although the entire ocean surface
would have frozen with pack ice, in fact the world then had far more volcanic
activity than it does now. There would have been many hot springs, geysers, and
especially active volcanoes blasting heat into oceans, and in so doing producing

small warm bodies of open water, free of ice. Surrounded by icebergs and finally
frozen sea, these small “aquaria” would have been isolated, and being scattered
around the world, subject to many kinds of different environmental conditions.
Evolution works best on small, isolated populations. Thousands of these small
marine and even freshwater refuges would have been evolutionary incubators,
using the principle of “genetic bottlenecks” (where tiny populations, when
isolated, can quickly evolve because of their small number of genes). In this
way, protozoa, those small single-celled eukaryotes, may have evolved into
many different kinds of metazoans—animals. With the release of the snowball
conditions, caused by the eventual buildup of greenhouse gases from all of those
active volcanoes, there would have been rapid melting of the ice, as well as a
rapid release of these thousands of new evolutionary experiments.
Earth came out of its last snowball 635 million years ago, a place very
different from the planet we know today. But forces—both evolutionary and
physical—were under way that would make our Late Proterozoic Earth much
more Earthlike, in the sense that we know it. The oceans were teeming with life:
most were single celled, but largely composed of the complex Protozoa, such as
amoeba, paramecia, and the enigmatic half plant half animals such as
multicellular Volvox and single-celled Euglena. The shores and sea bottoms
were festooned with various kinds of kelp, more formerly the large, multicellular
red and green algae so common on Earth, still so common on Earth. The stage
was set for the evolution of the first animals. Around 635 million years ago that
process began. We think. The newly named Ediacaran period began at the end of
the last snowball and ended with the appearance of creatures that were
unquestionably animals. It also is the last formal time interval immediately
before the start of the Paleozoic Era. The time is named after its most important
denizens, then the most complex organisms to have ever evolved. We call them
Ediacarans.6
These iconic fossils of this latest Precambrian time—the last part of the
Proterozoic era—reveal a wide variety of peculiar body types unlike anything
alive today. Once known only from the Ediacaran Hills of South Australia, there
are now numerous places on Earth where these enigmatic fossils are known to be
found. But the best remains the low hills north of Adelaide.
 

 
The Ediacaran Hills are part of the largest mountain range in the southern part
of Australia, the Flinders Ranges. Like so much of Australia away from the more
verdant coast, much of the Flinders Ranges is composed of sand, rocky outcrops,
and scattered vegetation adapted to a semiarid environment. Here and there
larger trees dot the landscape, including sugar gum, cypress pine, and black oak.
Year-round water holes are scarce, but when found, a rich assemblage of the
iconic Australian fauna is abundant; red and western gray kangaroos have
flourished in the area since the eradication of the carnivorous dingoes, their most
dangerous predator at one time. Even the once-endangered yellow-footed rock
wallabies can now be seen with regularity. But it is not the kangaroos and the
other smaller marsupials that make this place special; it is the ancient fossil
fauna.
Along with the Burgess Shale of Canada, Solnhofen Limestone of Germany,
and the Hell Creek Formation of North America, the Ediacaran Hills is arguably
one of the four most famous fossil sites in the world. Ranging between 560 and
540 million years in age, these hills contain the record of what most
paleontologists agree are the first-known body fossils of animals.
 

Late Precambrian imprint of a segmented wormlike animal, called Spriggina, an Ediacarian fossil from
South Australia. This is thought to be a primitive annelid and possibly an ancestor of the trilobites.
 
The discovery was made when geologist Reginald Sprigg was examining old
mines in the Ediacaran Hills region of South Australia. Sprigg was a government
geologist for the state of South Australia. He was walking through a desolate
area countryside of eroded hills as part of his state’s reassessment of the mineral
resources. His job was to decide whether this particular area should have been a
focus for new mining activity. However, Sprigg had been an ardent amateur
fossil collector during his student days and was able to recognize that the strange
markings he encountered by chance within the slabs of coarse sandstones
scattered across the rolling Ediacaran Hills had to have been produced by some
life. But what kind?
Sprigg was confronted with what looked like the casts and impressions of
jellyfish. But he knew jellyfish are rarely if ever fossilized, with “rarely” a
euphemism at best. The strata that Sprigg was looking through were extremely
old, and in fact he correctly surmised that the strange fossils he collected had to
have been among the oldest direct records of animal life in the world: which was
his statement when he first announced the discovery a year after first finding

them. Sprigg noted that the fossils appeared to represent animals of varied
affinities.7
Soon after this first announcement, Sprigg collected more bizarre fossils, this
time accompanied by Professor Douglas Mawson of the University of Adelaide
and his students. In 1949, Sprigg released a full account of the discovery from a
very much larger collection at the same locality, as well as the first detailed
description of these curious fossils.8 They all came from the Pound Quartzite, a
geological formation that had never had a satisfactory age determination. If
Cambrian, they would be nothing of great interest. But if Proterozoic, the strange
fossils would indeed be the oldest-known animal remains ever found on Earth.
Subsequent work indeed showed that they were older than the classical
Cambrian fossils (the trilobites) that were then used to define the Cambrian (a
definition that has since been revised).
When examined in detail these fossils are indeed different from any known
living animal, and according to some scientists in the late twentieth century, in
fact came from animals with body plans no longer living, with no known
descendants, a view first espoused by the great and sadly late Dolf Seilacher.9
But it was their nature as fossils that was perhaps the oddest aspect of their
mystery. First of all, organisms without hard parts rarely produce fossils. When
they do, it is generally only in very fine-grained rocks, such as mudstones or
shale, sedimentary rocks that have been deposited on the bottoms of quiet,
stagnant bodies of water. But Sprigg’s clearly skeletonless creatures were
preserved in sandstone, rather than in a finer-grained kind of rock.
To determine whether Sprigg’s fossils indeed came from the closest-living
match, jellyfish, sea anemone, and soft colonies of anemone-like creatures called
sea pens, experiments and tests were conducted to see whether such fossilization
could happen at all. One such test was conducted by Martin Glaessner,
Australian geologist and author of The Dawn of Animal Life: A Biohistorical
Study.10 He describes a series of experiments using newly captured, very large
jellyfish, placed on thin beds of sand. He noted that the jellyfish indeed left
impressions within the sand. But there’s still the problem of the sand itself.
Sprigg’s fossils should never have been preserved.
Sand grains are deposited in places with relatively high energy. Sandstones
today are found near shore localities, in rivers, in sand dunes, all places where
moving water can carry these fairly heavy grains. In such environments the finer
mud and clay particles are never deposited; they are just too light to settle and
not be picked up again by currents, waves, or wind and carried to some other

locality. Yet the Ediacaran fossils are both large and numerous, and are found in
such sandstone settings.
To further test this dilemma, in the summer of 1987 coauthor Peter Ward
invited students enrolled in an advanced paleontology class at the University of
Washington’s Friday Harbor Marine Labs on San Juan Island in Washington
State to attempt to re-create the conditions that led to the formation of the
Ediacaran fossils. Several kinds of experiments were conducted. The rich inland
sea around the San Juan Islands contains a large diversity and abundance of
cnidarians, the phylum seemingly most similar to the apparent Ediacaran body
plan. To mimic a 600-million-year-old shallow water bottom, large buckets filled
with sand of various screen sizes were then covered with seawater. These
experiments were similar to those earlier conducted by Martin Glaessner, but in
this case the bodies used were larger, and body types other than jellyfish were
studied as well.
 
Species in Ediacaran zones.
 
Bodies of newly dead sea pens, anemones, and some of the world’s largest
jellyfish were placed on the sand. More sand was then put over the top to the
bodies, and then the experiments were left for a time, and after some days the
top layer of sand was removed. In fact, none of these experiments left any sort of

mark in the sand; the cnidarians would rot away, leaving nothing.
Finally, one student had a quite different idea. A square piece of very fine
mesh nylon, from a nylon stocking, was placed over the top of the sandstone,
and then a very large jellyfish was gently placed on top of the nylon. More fine
sand was then added over the top of it all, with the entire jellyfish. Sea pen and
anemone sandwiches were then covered with seawater. After several weeks,
when the top layer of sand and the nylon sheet were removed (the soft parts of
the animal put there had already rotted away), it was discovered that just
underneath the nylon stocking there was a beautiful impression of the animal
that was put there, including extremely detailed morphology that matched the
underside of the animals used in these experiments.
Perhaps these experiments mean nothing. But what if the world of that time
were covered with something of similar thickness and material properties to
nylon stockings, properties that allowed sand grains that would otherwise be
picked up by the slightest current to be held in place. We can envision a world
where the shallow marine environments became covered with a thin sheet or
multiple sheets of microbial life. Although fragile and easily destroyed by
storms, these sheets would stabilize sediments and also leave soft-part
impressions in the sand below when animals would die, fall onto the bottom, and
then be covered by more sand, which would allow for the sanitation of new beds
of sand.
We no longer have such marine environments today, ones that can preserve
the outlines and impressions of tissue-rich but skeleton-free organisms. The
evolution of mobile animals, which both tore and ate the resource-rich microbial
sheets, would destroy these. Just as the stromatolites all disappeared with the
evolution of animal herbivores, so too would many of the microbial mats and
sheets of perhaps all of the world’s shallow-water environments have been eaten
out of existence.
THE WORLDWIDE EDIACARAN FAUNA
Today, the “Ediacaran biota” is known from about thirty localities on six
continents, and its fauna is classified into seventy different species, all restricted
in age to the latest Neoproterozoic11 (although there might be a few of the
species that do survive into the earliest Cambrian). The Ediacaran organisms

seem to have evolved toward their full diversity in an evolutionary event called
the Avalon diversification of 575 million years ago, which would have been as
much as 50 million years following the cessation of the last of the Proterozoic
snowballs.
From that time they seem to have thrived, whole communities of them in fact.
Then, at about 550 to 540 million years ago, when the first evidence of animal
locomotion appears in the fossil record of this age as trace fossils (activity fossils
of animals, including locomotion and feeding marks preserved in sediment), the
Ediacarans rather suddenly disappeared. A large, diverse group of organisms
disappeared just as the first animals rapidly appeared on Earth, in an event
known as the Cambrian explosion.12 This disappearance is really the first major
mass extinction marked in the fossil record (although certainly not the first mass
extinction). While first thought to have been isolated on the Australian continent,
it is now clear that the Ediacarans had a worldwide range.
There has been no end of suggestions about how energy flowed through the
Ediacaran’s ecological communities.13 In modern ecosystems, photosynthetic
plants make up the base of the food chain, and these are then grazed upon by
several levels of consumers, which in turn are the prey of several levels of
predators. The biomass of each of these steps is only about 10 percent of the
“trophic” level below it. The Ediacarans, to some, showed a very different type
of community structure. No jaws have ever been found, and no indication of
predation at all, yet the most common assignment of most of the Ediacarans is to
the phylum Cnidaria—which are all predators! There have been suggestions that
the 
Ediacarans 
might 
have 
contained 
microscopic 
symbiotic 
algae
(dinoflagellates) in large numbers, just as modern corals do. But no proof of this
exists. Because of the seeming lack of predators, one of the most memorable
descriptions of this long-ago time was that it was the garden of Ediacara, the last
time larger life lived in a predator-free world. By 540 million years ago this
garden was gone, its serpents being a wide diversity of crawling, swimming,
predaceous (and herbivorous) animals.
Why did it take so long for these first mobile animals to evolve on Earth?
External environmental factors such as low atmospheric oxygen may have been
at fault, or very high temperatures of air and sea. What we do know is that in the
time between about 635 and 550 million years ago, a whole new category of
organisms had evolved, ones with internal water-filled spaces that could act as
an internal or hydrostatic skeleton, as well as creatures with muscles, nerves,
specialized sensory cells, germ cells, connective tissue cells, and the ability to

secrete precipitated skeletal hard parts. Animals or not, the Ediacarans were the
first on Earth to evolve skeletons, albeit nonmineralized. Skeletons allow for the
attachment of muscles, and muscles allow locomotion. Locomotion then creates
other needs that continue to drive the evolution of ever more complexity. Once
moving, an animal needs sensory information to find food and mates, as well as
to avoid predators. Sensory information needs a brain to process it. All of these
developments were intertwined, and were triumphs of the eukaryotic metazoan
revolution, which is really what happened near the end of the Proterozoic.
We can now hypothesize about the appearance of what we might call the
“stem metazoan,” the single ancestor of all the complex organisms now on
Earth. It would have been small, composed of relatively few cells. Internally
there would be no cell walls. It would have an epithelium sealed highly against
the external environment, but here would be internal cavities filled with
collagen, giving stiffness to the organism. It would also have a “genetic toolbox”
allowing it to increase in size and complexity. Large, ecologically specialized,
sexually reproducing, multicellular eukaryotes: these were the organisms
producing life’s greatest adaptive radiation, resulting in the crawling, writhing,
swimming, walking, and sessile animal biodiversity marking today’s Earth.
Numerically dominant among today’s animal kingdom are animals, like us, with
bilateral symmetry. In the Early Cambrian, however, these were few in number
but aligned to take over the Earth.
PALEOECOLOGY OF THE LARGER EDIACARANS
Generally, science resolves interesting problems easily. But the nature of the
Ediacarans seems to have resisted a great deal of vigorous effort. They remain
mysterious. However, new work in the past few years has begun to chip away at
the biggest mysteries, and some of the most important have utilized a field of
paleontology that has fallen into a bit of disrespect over the past few decades—a
field known as paleoecology. While a brilliant driver of paleontological research
from the 1960s on, it failed to yield major new generalizations and was cogently
dismissed by Stephen Jay Gould in one of his State of Paleontology addresses
published in the last (twentieth) century. But this old-fashioned kind of sleuthing
was used in this century by Mary Droser of the University of California,
Riverside, and Jim Gehling of the South Australian Museum to arrive at perhaps

the best understanding yet about the larger Ediacarans and their world.
The crux of the Gehling and Droser’s (and vice versa) work is that we need to
look at the Ediacarans in the context of their association with what must have
been pervasive microbial mats lining the sea bottom. The profusion of microbial
mats would have been the dominating control on the ecology and especially the
sedimentology of these communities. Because there were few or no burrowing
organisms compared to the sea bottoms of today where burrowing is pervasive,
the ecology of these communities would have been nothing like we know.
Four kinds of animal lifestyles that associate with the microbial mats could
have been present: mat encrusters, forms that sat upon the mats and perhaps
secreted digestive enzymes sufficient to dissolve the mats upon which they
rested for food; mat scratchers, forms actually and actively grazing on the mats;
mat stickers, partly emerged in the mats and growing upward as the mat level
changed (because the mats would have grown upward toward the sun, as
stromatolites do); and undermat miners, tunneling beneath the mat. Several of
these strategies also seem to have persisted into the earliest Cambrian, but by
then the world was rapidly changing because of the profusion of burrowing and
larger organisms as well as active carnivores and herbivores with skeletal or hard
jaw apparatuses.
This very strange and weird world of organisms can also be understood only
in the context of how they were preserved. One of the interesting generalizations
made by specialists who study Ediacaran organisms is that the fossils are
analogous to the plaster “death masks” of previous centuries, used by dead and
dying royalty and nobility of European and other civilizations. Soon after death,
the face of some (then) famous person would have an impression made. The
fossils we see of Ediacarans may be the same thing. Not an actual fossil from the
animal, but a reproduction of the top and bottom surfaces of the creature.
Making a death mask required rapid hardening of whatever material the mask
was being made of, and so it is thought that the Ediacaran fossils were made of
materials that hardened quickly on top of their dead bodies.
THE SPINY MICROFOSSILS OF THE EDIACARAN WORLD
In the last chapter we mentioned the work of Andy Knoll and his group at
Harvard, concerning their study not of the bigger fossils of Ediacaran age, but of

the microfossils. For a billion years, single-celled life dominated the world, and
what fossils they left were mainly tiny, smooth-walled globes. But as the world
came out of the last of the Neoproterozoic snowball Earth episodes, the fossil
record becomes filled with spiny, ornamented microfossils. This somewhat
short-lived episode in the fossil record may tell us important things about the
nature of the overall rise of animals to complexity (these microfossils appear no
more than 600 million years ago, and then are gone about 560 million years ago,
and were thus survived by another twenty million years by the larger Ediacaran
macrofossils). Prior to this point microfossils came exclusively from single-
celled organisms, but these “spiny” microfossils may in fact be from
multicellular animals. In these cases, we are seeing tiny resting stages, like cysts.
There have been several important studies of these tiny fossils, including by
paleontologists/developmental biologists Nick Butterfield and Kevin Peterson,14
who suggested that the appearance of the heavily ornamented microfossils early
in the Ediacaran period was in response to small early animal carnivores, such as
the earliest tiny nematodes and roundworms. The spines of the microfossils were
thus defensive adaptations, serving to buttress the skeletons of these fossils,
interpreted to have been single celled. But the Knoll group suggests that the
complexly ornamented microfossils are resting stages of early animals
themselves. This suggests both a complex and early evolution for animals well
before the larger Ediacaran fossils appeared at all. It also suggests that the early
environments of animals were anything but like the Eden-like garden of
Ediacara supposed by paleontologists in the late 1900s. Needing a resting cyst
suggests a challenging environment of varying oxygen, including times when the
water column had no oxygen at all, and possibly occasional doses of hydrogen
sulfide. This view of life poses a world faced by early animal evolution that was
challenging, extreme, and often poisonous.
The spiny microfossils disappear around 560 million years ago, and are then
replaced by what was the flowering of the large, classical Ediacaran fossils,
which themselves lived as the largest creatures on Earth until overthrown by a
different set of animals at the base of the Cambrian period, slightly more than
540 million years ago.
THE SEARCH FOR “BILATERIANS”

If the spiny microfossils are small animal resting stages, rather than large protists
(single-celled organisms) of some kind, what kind of animals were they? About
the same time that the ornamented microfossils appear in the geological record,
it is supposed that another great evolutionary event took place: the first animals
with bilateral symmetry, something that greatly improved locomotion. The
advent of a bilaterally symmetrical body plan was another great evolutionary
milestone. A bilaterally symmetrical animal has a distinct “front” and “back,”
with internal organs roughly symmetrical on either side of this front to back,
tubelike body. It was the kind of ancestor we would expect the diversifying
animal phyla to have sprung from. But the age of these enigmatic fossils was
long debated.
Genetic work suggests that this ancestor should have been alive well between
570 million and 660 million years ago.15 But the fossil record has been opaque
to what must surely have been a tiny (perhaps a millimeter in length), wormlike
creature without a skeleton. While this is a case deserving not a little of the scorn
heaped on it ever since Darwin, the fossil record should be cut some slack: the
chance of a tiny, soft, wormlike creature without hard parts leaving any fossil
record of itself is low indeed.
Fossils from China came to the rescue.16 Rocks of an age considered to be the
best guess of when the first bilaterian may have lived were found in China early
in the twenty-first century. These rocks were then slowly and laboriously dated
with higher precision, so that a very specific time interval, when it is thought that
bilaterians must have first appeared, was identified. When this was completed,
the search for the theorized fossils began. None of it was easy.
It took three years and the completion of more than ten thousand individual
“thin sections” (in which a hunk of rock is sliced to a very narrow width and
then polished, so that light can be transmitted through it while on a microscope
stage), and just such an animal was found. And it was much smaller than an
eighth of an inch: tiny fossils that were as long as a human hair is wide were
found, examined, and studied. The age of these tiny wonders, named
Vernanimalcula, was nearly 600 million years old.
Here again is a missing link no longer missing. Small, unassuming, and true
revolutionaries, these early bilaterians paved the way for what was to come. And
there was more from these strata. In addition to the bilaterian fossils, the
Doushantuo Formation of southwest China yielded both eggs and embryos of
earliest animals. It has also given us a new window into the world of 600 million
years ago, and how animals changed the very nature of the sedimentological

record.
Prior to animals, there was no “bioturbation,” the disruption of newly
accumulated sedimentary layers by the action of organisms. This is so pervasive
today that it is hard to envision a time before it was the rule rather than the
exception. Only strange environments today have this preanimal mode of
sedimentological preservation, such as the bottom of the Black Sea. There the
bottom is firm, and the sediments for the first meter below this surface show
both lamination (layering) and a very low water content. Contrast this with any
modern oxygenated sea bottom: the few centimeters above the bottom’s
substrate is filled with organic goo—mucus, feces, pseudofeces, dissolved
organic material, etc. Going deeper you find a lack of lamination; all has been
burrowed and consumed, over and over. The slow-moving invertebrates are
either feeding while moving (sediment in, sediment-rich feces out) or escaping
and leaving locomotion burrows. A significant thickness of the bottom sediment
has a high water content because of all the business of all the locomotor animals.
As changes go, this one was huge. In the late twentieth century it was dubbed
the “agronomic revolution,” and it is the main characteristic feature of the
Proterozoic and Phanerozoic sea bottoms—and the stratigraphic records they left
behind.17 The new bilaterians were moving, and not just atop the sediment-water
interface they were increasingly colonizing. A vertical component to burrowing
also began. Our own take on this is that could not have taken place without high
levels of oxygen in the sea: oxygenation is difficult at best when burrowing
through sediment, and surely would have been impossible at global oxygen
levels less than, let’s say, 10 percent. The old view is that the newly evolved
animals increasingly ate the stromatolites and microbial mats out of existence
near the Proterozoic-Cambrian boundary. The new view is that the tiny
bilaterians were not just eating the nutrient-rich microbial mats: they were also
making the firm substrates required for the mats to change from ubiquitous to
virtually nonexistent.
By the latest Proterozoic time, the world was primed for animals. The genetic
“toolboxes” necessary for the evolution of larger sizes, skeletons, and the many
kinds of tissues necessary for activity were in place. Only one thing was lacking:
oxygen. After the last snowball 635 million years ago, animals were poised, but
oxygen levels were too low. Yet by (approximately) 550 million years ago, that
had changed: oxygen levels had risen.
Making oxygen levels rise permanently requires increasing the fraction of
organic carbon buried in the sediments, rather than buried as limestone. Most

organic carbon is sequestered by clays eroding from the continents, so any
factors that increase the clay flux— particularly in the tropical oceans where
productivity is highest—will notch up the atmospheric oxygen level. One
suggestion is that the rise of a terrestrial biosphere of some sort may have
increased the production of clays through weathering,18 which is certainly true
after vascular land plants evolved the ability to make deeply penetrating roots.
However, shifts in the position of continents relative to the equator also have a
big effect, as physiochemical weathering is much higher in the warm tropics than
at the cold poles. Near the beginning of Cryogenian time (but before the
snowballs, at about 800 million years ago) there was a stepwise change in the
carbon cycle that lasted about 15 million years, during which time the fraction of
organic carbon being buried dropped precipitously. This Bitter Springs event was
first discovered in Central Australia, and has since been found at many other
sites around the globe. It presumably caused a transient drop in surface oxygen.
The cause of this event was a mystery until a group led by Adam Maloof at
Princeton University discovered that the onset and termination of this event
coincided with a pair of very rapid ~60° oscillatory shifts in Earth’s rotation axis
(from an unpronounceable package of rock in Svalbard called the
Akademikerbreen Group).19 This type of shift is termed a “true polar wander
event” (discussed at length below), and involves the geologically rapid motion of
the entire solid Earth, right down to the liquid metal at the core-mantle boundary.
These particular shifts, however, moved a large chunk of the supercontinent of
Rodinia off of the equator into the mid-latitudes, and then back again, fluctuating
carbon burial and oxygen production in sync. When paleomagnetic and
geochemical data from vastly different parts of the globe show the same shifts, at
the same time, and in sync, we might learn something about how the planet
works. In this case it is oxygen. We now think that there might be as many as
thirty of these TPW events during the past 3 billion years,20 many of which
coincide with interesting events like the Cambrian explosion.

CHAPTER VIII
The Cambrian Explosion: 600–500 MA
Photographs of Charles Darwin when he had reached seventy years old seem to
show a man weathered well beyond this chronological age. This seems a man
perhaps eighty or older. Yet at seventy, Darwin was in his last years, and perhaps
this physical antiquity was a product of stress as well as the diseases he may
have contracted in the tropics when, as a young man on HMS Beagle, he slowly
circumnavigated the globe. Perhaps it was being so vexed by his many critics, as
well as his own distress at his inability to understand how organisms inherited
traits—genetics was not accepted until the early twentieth century when the
work of Gregor Mendel was “rediscovered”—and especially the nature of the
Cambrian explosion must have taken their emotional as well as physical toll.
Darwin hated the fossil record in general and the Cambrian in particular. A
vexation with the Cambrian fossil record followed him to his grave. It was this,
and his inability to know how genetics worked, that surely were among his
greatest regrets.
Since well before the time of Darwin it was known that fossils of animal life
seemed to appear suddenly in the fossil record: the great English geologist Adam
Sedgwick, the author and definer of the Cambrian period itself, mapped its base
as the strata containing the first trilobites. While we now first think of the
various geological periods as time, in fact they came into existence as a
succession of strata, with a bottom bed defined by some fossil first appearing,
and its top defined either by the extinction of some fossil, or better yet, a
different species first appearing. In this case this was the Cambrian System,
based on piles of strata in Wales. The Cambrian period is the time during which
these Cambrian strata accumulated—no more, no less.
Sedgwick found that over short stratal intervals, sedimentary rocks seemingly
bereft of fossils were found to be overlain by rocks with a profusion of highly
visible fossils, the most common being trilobites. Trilobites are fossil arthropods,
and thus their fossils are the remains of highly evolved and complex animals.
This observation was vexing to Darwin (and hugely comforting to his critics), as
it seemed to fly in the face of the then newly proposed theory of evolution.1
Charles Darwin thus went to his grave cursing the fossil record. His genius

was such that he knew he was right, yet till the end of his life, he was bedeviled
by critics who pointed out that the “first” life on Earth was of such complexity
that it was inconceivable that the evolutionary processes so eloquently argued by
Darwin in the many editions of his great work On the Origin of Species could
have produced such complications as—a trilobite. Yet the great irony is that
trilobites did not appear until the Cambrian was at least half over.2
One of the iconic fossils, trilobites were arthropods that dominated oceanic
habitats relatively early in the history of animals on Earth. But how early? In
Darwin’s time, trilobites were thought to be the earliest of all animals. Yet they
are undoubtedly complicated, with three body sections, complex eyes and limbs
—and large size. Some of the earliest could be up to two feet long. This was not
what the earliest animals ought to have looked like—small and generalized, not
large, complicated kinds of animals. We now know that trilobites were not—not
even close, in fact, to being—the first animals.3
The history of the origin of animals on Earth is one of life’s most fascinating
chapters, and also one of the most controversial. There is also a great deal of
new information that has been gleaned even in the last ten years. There are two
distinct lines of evidence giving quite different views on the timing of the first
diversification of animal phyla. One of these lines comes from the pattern of
appearance of animal fossils in rocks, the second from molecular clock studies
on extant animals. They give important clues to one of the greatest of all
paleontological mysteries: the rapid diversification of animals.
 

Illustration of trilobites from the nineteenth century. At that time, these were thought to be the oldest fossils
on Earth. Trilobites were used to “mark” the start of the Cambrian Period.
 
The first major line of evidence about the Cambrian explosion comes from
fossils. The appearance of animals leaving evidence of themselves in the rock
record came in four successive waves. The first began around 575 million years
ago and has been called the Avalon explosion, a name coming from the part of
eastern Canada where the oldest of this group were found. The second wave is
coincident with the almost complete disappearance of the Ediacarans, and is
characterized not by actual fossils but with accurate traces of their locomotion.
These numerous “trace fossils” could only have been formed by active
locomotion of multicellular organisms—animals. These are as old as 560 million

years, but most are about 550 million years in age. The sea bottoms would have
been alive with actively moving, small wormlike forms.4
The third breakthrough was the appearance of skeletons, great numbers of tiny
skeletal elements, in strata less than 550 million years in age. They are very
small spines and scales of calcium carbonate that would have covered the
animals with a coating of these small skeletons, almost like tiles. Finally, the
larger fossilized animals appeared, including trilobites, the clam-like
brachiopods, spiny echinoderms, and many kinds of snail-like mollusks, all in
strata younger than 530 million years in age. In Darwin’s day, none of the earlier
three were known, and the Cambrian was marked by the first appearance of
trilobites in sedimentary strata. The reasons for this sequence might be
deceptively simple: oxygen levels, which rose to their highest levels of the world
up until then.
Today we know that this succession of animal life originations appeared
comparatively rapidly in the fossil record, and new dating techniques now puts
the time of the first complex fossils (the small skeletal fossils, which are 20 to 10
million years younger than the first trace fossils) at slightly older than 540
million years ago, with the first trilobites appearing in the record some 20
million years after that.
The appearance of animals in the fossil record recorded a significant event,
which has been called the Cambrian explosion. To paleontologists the Cambrian
explosion marked the first appearance of most major animal phyla large enough
to leave remains in the rock record. To molecular geneticists, the Cambrian
marked the first evolution of animals. The controversy raged through the 1990s,
to be solved in the early years of this century when new molecular studies5 using
more sophisticated analyses essentially confirmed the younger date for the origin
of animals that had been championed by paleontologists. There is now
agreement that animal life on Earth did not predate 635 million years ago,6 and
might be closer to 550 million years in age.
 

Left, the cone shape represents the traditional model for increasing disparity. Right, the inverted cone
represents diversification and decimation.
 
The Cambrian period is now dated from 542 to about 495 million years ago
(although the latter date, for the base of the Ordovician, might be slightly older).
However, the vast majority of animal phyla first appeared in a small portion of
this interval, between 530 and 520 MA. All specialists agree that this is the third
or fourth most important event in the entire history of life, superseded in
importance only by the first appearance of life on Earth, the adaptation to
molecular oxygen, and the origin of the eukaryotic cell.7
According to our best new information, the oxygen level soon after the start of
the Cambrian explosion was about 13 percent (compared to 21 percent today),8
but then fluctuated. During this time carbon dioxide levels were far higher than
they are in the world today—hundreds of times higher, in fact, and such high
levels would have produced an intense greenhouse effect, sufficiently high to
overcome the fact that the sun at this time was ~5 percent less intense than it is
today. Even with the drop in CO2 levels at the end of this interval, temperatures
of this time would have been perhaps the highest of any period in the history of
animal life on Earth. Since less oxygen is dissolved in seawater with higher
temperatures, the already anoxic conditions of the oceans would have been
exacerbated.
The panoply of fossils that have been preserved showing both hard and their
soft-parts fossils from the fantastic and newly discovered deposits in the
Chengjiang region of China has given us a new window into the origin of the
animal phyla on Earth, and the nature of life on the Cambrian planet prior to the

most famous of all fossil deposits, the Burgess Shale of British Columbia. The
Chengjiang beds are now known to have been deposited between 520 and 515
million years ago, whereas the Burgess Shale is now thought to be no older than
505 million years in age. The approximately 10 million years separating the age
of these two deposits thus gives us a new view of how animals diversified.
Because both Chengjiang and the Burgess preserve soft parts as well as
skeletonized animals,9 we have a good picture of what was there, in what
relative abundance. Without this added view yielded by the preservation of soft
parts, we would never be sure about the relative abundance of various kinds of
animals, for perhaps there was a huge abundance of creatures like soft worms
and jellyfish, forms that did not have skeletons. Thus our surprise at what
appears to be a clear view of the nature of the fauna at both sites. There have
now been over fifty thousand fossils collected from the Burgess Shale (and a
lesser number of from Chengjiang). In their masterful summary of the Burgess
fauna, Derek Briggs, Doug Erwin, and Fred Collier (in their 1994 book The
Fossils of the Burgess Shale10) list a total of 150 species of animals. Almost half
are arthropods or arthropod-like. But an even more interesting number relates to
the number of individuals. Well over 90 percent of all fossils are from
arthropods, followed by sponges and brachiopods. Like the earlier Chengjiang,
the Burgess sea bottom was dominated both in kinds and numbers of animals by
the arthropods.
Arthropods are among the most complex of all invertebrates, and yet, in these
almost earliest of fossil deposits in the time of animals, they are diversified and
common. It speaks to a long evolution prior to their first appearance in the
record—perhaps seabeds crawling with millimeter-long (or less) arthropods,
with many more species swimming or floating in the open sea itself.
One of the great surprises of a visit to the Burgess Shale (which both of the
authors of this book have been fortunate enough to do) is the realization that the
most common fossils come not from the exotic taxa, the many exquisite, soft-
bodied creatures that fill the pages of the many books devoted to the Burgess
Shale fauna and flora, but the fact that most of the fossils come from trilobites.
They, and the less numerous but highly diverse arthropods of the Burgess
dominate the assemblage,11 in sheer numbers of individuals and species, and in
sheer numbers of different kinds of body plans, which is described by a measure
called disparity (and compared to diversity, which refers to the number of
different kinds of taxa). The arthropods seem to have been the most successful of
Cambrian animals. How much of this success was due to their principal body

plan characteristic: segmentation?
Segmented animals are the most diverse of all animals on the planet, and most
are arthropods. All arthropods, including the highly diverse insects, show
repeated body units and body regions based on groupings of individual segments
that have specific functions for the animal. The feature uniting the group is the
presence of a jointed exoskeleton that encloses the entire body. This exoskeleton
even extends into the gut. The exoskeleton cannot grow, so it must be
periodically molted and replaced by another slightly larger one. The body has a
well-differentiated head, trunk, and posterior regions in varying proportions.
Appendages are commonly specialized. On terrestrial arthropods the appendages
are usually single (enormous), but the marine forms generally have two branches
or parts per appendage, an inner leg branch and an outer gill branch, and are thus
termed biramous. The exoskeleton encloses the soft parts like a suit of armor,
and that may be its major function: protection. But the consequences of this kind
of skeleton are huge: there can be no passive diffusion of oxygen across any part
of the body. To obtain oxygen the first arthropods, all marine, had to evolve
specialized respiratory structures or gills. Segmented animals are the most
diverse of all animals on the planet. Arthropods are not alone in this trait: all
annelids are segmented, and some members of generally nonsegmented groups,
such as the monoplacophoran mollusks, show at least some segmentation. It
appeared early in the history of animals, and indeed in the Cambrian trilobites
we see that the most common of these early preserved animal fossils show this
trait.
In his 2004 book, On the Origin of Phyla,12 James Valentine also reflects on
what is a major evolutionary puzzle: why are there so many, and so many kinds
of arthropods in the Cambrian? It is worthwhile to look at what he has written on
this subject:
 
Although many early arthropods had non-mineralized cuticles, a marvelous diversity of early arthropod
body types has come to light, so many and so distinctive as to pose important problems in applying the
principles of systematics. These disparate arthropod types are phylogenetically puzzling … This
evidently sudden burst of evolution of arthropod-like body types is outstanding even among the
Cambrian Explosion taxa.
 
What we call arthropods are composed of what appear to be perhaps many
independently evolved groups that have, through convergent evolution, produced

body plans of great diversity save for one aspect: all have limbs on each segment
that are biramous—each appendage carries a leg of some sort, and a second
appendage, a long gill.
Why would basal animal groups opt for segmentation? Perhaps this is the
wrong word, for Valentine and others note that the arthropods are not so much
segmented—which at least in annelids is composed of largely separated
chambers for each segment of the body—but repeated. Valentine proposes that
this striking body plan arose in response to locomotor needs, stating, “Cleary, the
segmented nature of the arthropod’s body is related to the mechanics of body
movement, particularly to locomotion, with nerve and blood supplies in
support.” There is no doubt that this type of body plan is an adaptation aiding
locomotion. But a consequence of this kind of body plan is to allow repeated gill
segments, each small enough to be held in optimal orientation beneath the
segments. In these positions, flows of water can be actively pumped over and
through the feather-shaped gills, thereby increasing the availability of oxygen
molecules hitting the gills each second, a position suggested by Ward in 2006.13
Another animal found in abundance in the oldest of the Cambrian-aged
deposits are sponges. Like the cnidarians, sponges show no respiratory
structures, nor would we expect any. With a body plan built around a series of
sacs (like the cnidarians, but with even less organization: there are no true tissues
in a sponge), all sponges show a very high surface area to volume. In fact,
sponges are like agglomerations of numerous single-celled organisms, with each
cell essentially in contact with seawater. But even with this advantage, sponges
show an even more efficient way of gaining oxygen. Their main feeding cell,
called a choanocyte, causes large volumes of water to pass through the structure.
Some sponge specialists have suggested that a sponge passes as much as ten
thousand times its volume in seawater through its body each day. Consequently,
sponges are capable of living in extremely low oxygen conditions because they
so efficiently move large volumes of water through their body, getting enough
oxygen even from water that has little.
The major groups of animals with hard parts in the Cambrian are obviously
the huge tribe of arthropods, followed in numerical importance (in most
Cambrian marine strata) by brachiopods, and then smaller numbers of
echinoderms and mollusks. Brachiopods are a still-living group related to
bryozoans that are routinely mistaken for bivalve mollusks. Yet while the shells
of bivalves and brachiopods show a superficial similarity, the internal anatomy
of the two groups are radically different. The major feature of a brachiopod is a

feeding organ known as a lophophore, composed of a large loop with numerous
long, thin fingers producing a delicate fanlike shape within the shell. This organ
filters seawater for food—and as it is filled with a body fluid, and is very thin, it
serves also as an exquisite respiratory organ. For some of us, the brachiopods are
a tragic group. Perhaps the most common inhabitants of Paleozoic sea bottoms,
they were nearly wiped out by the Permian extinction ~250 million year ago, and
never regained dominance.
Cambrian echinoderms make up a weird assemblage of small boxlike animals.
Among the earliest echinoderms were peculiar, pinecone-shaped helioplacoids,
with some primitive stalked eocrinoids and edrioasteroids found in some
deposits as well. More common than echinoderms were mollusks. Most during
the Cambrian were small in size, and each of the major classes (gastropods,
bivalves, and cephalopods) is found in Cambrian strata. The most common
mollusks, however, were monoplacophorans, a minor class today, but common
in the Cambrian. They had a limpet-like shell and a snail-like body with a broad,
creeping foot. Most interestingly, alone among mollusks of the time they showed
a body organization that suggests segmentation. From looking at muscle scars on
the fossil shells and comparing anatomy from the still-living forms, we think the
Cambrian monoplacophorans had multiple gills. Modern-day gastropods have a
single pair of gills, or even just a single gill. But the Cambrian
monoplacophorans, which lived a very snail-like existence in all likelihood,
found it necessary to have multiple gills. They are celebrated as the ancestral
mollusk that would give rise to all the rest: the gastropods, cephalopods,
bivalves, chitons, and more minor molluscan classes.
Long thought to have gone extinct at the end of the Permian, the discovery of
living monoplacophorans in deep-sea settings in the 1950s led to a much greater
understanding of the life of the early mollusks. The living forms confirmed what
muscle scars found on the interior of the earliest monoplacophoran fossils
asserted—that there was more than a single pair of gills. In fact, multiple pairs of
muscles line the entire length of the interior of the shell, leading to the
conclusion that these early forms showed an evident segmentation or at least
repeat of the gill–blood vessel system. Since it is only the gills (and supporting
blood and filtering systems) that show this repeated pattern, it can be surmised
that as in arthropods, this repeated pattern was an adaptation for increased
respiratory surface area of the gills. A somewhat similar pattern of repetition,
extending even to the shell, is found in the chitons, today commonly found on
intertidal beaches.

Like the body of an echinoderm, the interior of a brachiopod shell is almost all
water. There is very little flesh, and what is there stays in contact with a steady
flow of seawater. The brachiopod lophophore creates several currents of
seawater that pass into the sides of the shell, move across the lophophore, and
are then sent out the front of the shell. This constant stream of new water
entering a brachiopod has the same effect as the current passing through a
sponge. The small volume of flesh to the great surface area of the lophophore,
coupled with the steady flow of water (many times the volume of the interior of
the shell), makes the brachiopod consummately adapted for a world of low
oxygen.
PHYSICAL AND CHEMICAL EVENTS CAUSING THE CAMBRIAN
EXPLOSION
Earlier in this book we noted the advance of entirely new disciplines of science,
most notably astrobiology and its allied field, geobiology. But another field, this
one a traditional mainstay of the biological sciences, mainly evolutionary
development, has undergone a renaissance so important that it can almost be
considered a new field as well. Its practitioners now call it evo-devo, and
breakthroughs in this field have had a lot to say about the Cambrian explosion in
the last decade. One of the greatest of evo-devo practitioners, Sean Carroll, has
given us an exquisite tour of this newly revivified area of science in his 2005
book Endless Forms Most Beautiful.14 If there is any single theme in this work,
it is that science can now understand far better one of the previously intractable
problems in evolutionary biology: the origin of novelty. How evolutionary
innovation took place over relatively short periods of time just could not be
explained by traditional Darwinian concepts of evolution. The radical
breakthroughs—be it the appearance of wings, legs for land, segmentation in
arthropods, or even large size, the hallmark of the Cambrian explosion—could
not stand up to stories about many and sudden mutations all working in concert
to somehow radically change an organism. Evo-devo now seems to have solved
this, and in his book, Carroll lists four aspects that combined can explain sudden
evolutionary innovation that nicely encapsulates the new way of explaining how
radical changes did take place.
The first “secret to innovation,” as Carroll puts it, is to “work with what is

already present.” The concept that “nature works as a tinkerer” is central to this.
Innovation does not always need a new set of equipment to build, or even a new
set of tools. What is already present is the easiest route. Second and third are two
aspects understood by Darwin himself: multifunctionality and redundancy.
Multifunctionality first is using an already present morphology or physiology
to take over some second function in addition to that for which it was first
evolved. Redundancy, on the other hand, is when some structure is composed of
several parts that complete some function. If one of these can be then co-opted
for some new kind of job, while the remaining parts are still able to function as
before, there is in place a clear path for innovation that is far easier to use than
the total de novo formation of some entirely novel morphology from scratch.
Cephalopod swimming and respiration are like this. Cephalopods routinely
pump huge quantities of water over their gills, and like many invertebrates used
separated “tubes” or designated channels for water coming in and water being
expelled, to ensure that oxygen-rich water is not rebreathed. But with minor
morphological “tinkering” with this excurrent tube, a powerful new means of
locomotion came about. Breathing and moving could now take place using the
same amount of energy by utilizing the same volume of water for respiration and
movement.
The final secret is modularity. Animals built of segments, such as the
arthropods, and to a lesser extent we vertebrates, are already composed of
modules. The limbs branching off arthropod segments have been amazingly
modified into feeding, mating, and locomotion, as well as many other functions.
Arthropods are like a Swiss army knife, with each segment bearing limbs
evolved to do a very specific function. The same is true in vertebrates with our
digits, which have been modified to tasks as varied as walking on land to
swimming to flying in the air. Not bad for some primitive fingers and toes!
Where does the evo-devo come into play? It turns out that these morphologies
are the soft putty for morphological change because they are underlain by
systems of genetic “switches,” geographically located on the developing embryo
in the same positions as the various limbs are found in the arthropod—or
vertebrate.
Switches are the key here; they tell various parts of the body when and where
to grow. One of the great discoveries is that the exact sequence of different body
regions on an arthropod from its head to midregion to abdomen are lined up first
on chromosomes in the same geographic pattern, and then on the developing
embryo itself. Much of this is done by the crown jewels of the evo-devo

kingdom: the Hox genes, and their differently named but equivalents in other
taxonomic groups.
The many new discoveries of evo-devo have certainly been brought to bear on
the many questions to be solved about that central mystery in the history of life,
the Cambrian explosion, and the most important understandings of all: the
timing of when and how the various animal phyla and thus separate body plans
that we see today originated.
There have long been two schools of thought. The first is that the fossil record
gives us a true picture of when the great differentiation of animals actually took
place—phyletic divergence somewhere about 550 to perhaps 600 million years
ago. But the second line of evidence comes from comparing genes of extant
members of the ancient phyla, and using the concept of the “molecular clock,”
mentioned earlier. At issue is when the most fundamental divisions in the animal
kingdom take place—the split between an aggregate of phyla called protostomes
and those called deuterostomes. These two groups are separated by fundamental
anatomical and developmental differences in embryos.
The protostomes are composed of the arthropods, mollusks, and annelids
among others, and they are characterized by embryos that as they develop and
grow following fertilization form a mouth out of a central opening in the
growing larva called the blastopore. In deuterostomes (echinoderms, us
vertebrates, and a number of minor phyla), the mouth and the blastopore remain
separate. There is a third group, the very primitive phyla that split off from the
main stem of animal evolution prior to the great protostome-deuterostomes split:
these include the Cnidaria, sponges, and other jellyfish-like minor phyla.
The first to appear were the simplest forms, the cnidarians and sponges, which
appear to be represented, as we have seen, in the Ediacaran assemblages of as
much as 570 million years ago, the time interval before the Cambrian period
(which began at 542 million years ago). But recognizable protostomes and
deuterostomes are not seen until a short interval into the Cambrian period itself.
If the protostomes and deuterostomes split, what was the last animal before
that split like? Many lines of evidence indicate that this creature was bilaterally
symmetrical and was capable of locomotion. Many who ponder this time and its
animals imagine this last common ancestor of both the protostomes and
deuterostomes as a small featureless worm, perhaps like the modern-day
Planaria, or the tiny and extant nematodes. But one of the great new discoveries
is that this last member of the as yet undivided stock already had a genetic tool
kit allowing it to begin some radical new engineering—and had such a tool kit

for at least 50 million years before it was put into use! This worm would have
had a mouth at front, anus at the rear, and a long tubelike digestive system in
between. It may have had stubby projections sticking out of its side, perhaps for
sensory information (touch and chemical sensing?). But the point is that all of
this was set up in such a way that rapid transformation could—and did—take
place. This is new. All the tools and features necessary for the Cambrian
explosion sat around for 50 million years.
As noted above, the base of the Cambrian is dated now at 542 million years
ago. The base of the period has been defined as the place in rock where the first
identifiable locomotion marks are found in strata—a certain kind of trace fossil
showing that animals, moving animals, were present and could make vertical
burrows in the mud. Yet for the next 15 million years, there seems to have been
little formation of new body plans at all—or at least that we can find evidence of
in the fossil record. The first real indication that a great diversification was
taking place comes from the spectacular fossil beds only recently discovered in
Chengjiang, China,15 dated as 520 to 525 million years in age and mentioned
above. It is an older version of the Burgess Shale in having common
preservation of soft parts.
Both the Chengjiang and Burgess Shale faunas are dominated by arthropods—
lots and lots of different kinds of arthropods. They soon became the most diverse
animals on Earth—and have stayed that way ever since. There are some
estimates that in our modern day, there may be as many as 30 million separate
species of beetles alone!
Evo-devo tells us why. Of all the body plans, none can be so easily, quickly,
and radically changed as arthropods. The reasons are just those listed above by
Carroll: arthropods have modular parts, they have redundant morphologies that
can be co-opted for new functions, and they have a series of Hox genes that
allow ready transformation of specific regions in the overall body plan of
segments throughout.
The old view has been that new animals mean that there must have been new
genes coming into existence. There is sound logic in this. Surely a primitive
sponge or jellyfish would have fewer genes than the more complex arthropods: it
was argued that the common ancestor of all arthropod groups somehow added
new genes—new Hox genes, as these are those that are the “switches” that tell
the various parts of a body how to form and when. But such is not the case.
Carroll and others showed that the last common ancestor of the arthropods did
not evolve new genes; it already had them, and that the subsequent and amazing

diversification of so many kinds of arthropods was done with existing genes. As
Carroll put it: “The evolution of forms is not so much about what genes you
have, but about how you used them.”
Ten different Hox genes were all that were necessary to utterly change and
diversify the arthropods. Their secret was discovered by comparing the
distribution of the product of Hox genes—proteins that are specific to a
particular Hox gene—and where these proteins can be found on a developing
embryo. The old idea that some gene or genes of an arthropod coded for the
construction of a leg is false. The Hox genes make proteins. These proteins then
become the means of starting and stopping the growth of particular regions of a
developing embryo. Some of these proteins are concerned with making specific
kinds of appendages. If those Hox gene proteins are somehow moved to different
geographic regions on the developing embryo, the product that is produced will
move as well. In this way a leg that was formerly in one part of the body might
suddenly be found in a totally new place—if, however, the Hox gene protein was
somehow moved to the corresponding place on the embryo long before the leg
was formed. Innovation came from shifting the geographic places or “zones” on
an embryo that a specific Hox gene protein could be found in.
Shifting the Hox gene zones in arthropod embryos resulted in the many
different kinds of arthropods that we see. There are thousands, perhaps millions
of different kinds of arthropod morphologies—and all of this was evolved using
the same tool kit of ten genes. Arthropods are nothing if not body plans with
repetitive parts. The specialization of these parts requires that each falls into a
separate Hox gene zone.
STEPHEN GOULD VS. SIMON CONWAY MORRIS: THE SHAPE OF
DISPARITY
There has been no end of ideas about why there was a Cambrian explosion at all.
Sometimes events of the past seem as if they could not have been otherwise. Yet
why not a long slow formation of the many animal phyla, instead of the
seemingly compressed duration that we do see? And just how diverse were the
major animal players in the Cambrian explosion? All of the current animal phyla
(variably listed as about thirty-two) first appeared in the Cambrian explosion.
Surprisingly, there has not been a single animal phylum added to the world since,

even after the devastating Permian extinction of 252 MA. But were there many
more phyla in the Cambrian than now? Were there strange, fundamentally
different kinds of animals in the Cambrian than now? That has been a very
contentious issue, culminated in a late 1990s feud16 of memorable bile between
the late great evolutionist Stephen Jay Gould and Cambridge University’s Simon
Conway Morris, who remains, essentially, Britain’s paleontologist laureate.
In his Wonderful Life, Gould asserted that the Cambrian was full of “weird
wonders,” which he defined as body plans now longer present on the Earth. His
view is that the Cambrian explosion was just that—an explosion of new body
types, body plans, numbers of species. But to slightly mix metaphors, most
explosions are deadly. In fact many of the new kinds of body plans—in Gould’s
view, new kinds of phyla—did not make it out of the Cambrian. Killed by the
explosion, but not in the original sense. The effects of the vast increase in kinds
of animals killed them by competition. With so many body plans, only some
would stand the test of natural selection. Gould’s view is that the diversification
of body plans can be modeled by a pyramidal shape; the great diversification of
body plans was fast, creating a fat base of the pyramid of numbers of body plans
—also known as disparity (the diversity of body plans, not species). But as the
Cambrian progressed, that base diminished, until there were far fewer phyla at
the end of the Cambrian than soon after its start.
Many others disagreed that disparity has, in fact, increased since the
Cambrian. Simon Conway Morris is the leading proponent of this point of view,
one that is in direct contradiction to that of Stephen Gould. In Morris’s view, the
weird wonders were not separate phyla at all, just early and not yet recognizable
members of well-known and still-living phyla. The consensus since this late-
twentieth-century argument, one that was heated to unseemly levels between
scientists, seems to be that Gould was wrong, and we can add little to this
argument. But if this once-boiling scientific dispute has cooled to a low simmer,
other aspects of the Cambrian explosion remain frontline science, the best
science—controversial science.
NEW DATING OF THE CAMBRIAN EXPLOSION
The Cambrian explosion was obviously one of the most important and until
recently least understood of major events in life’s history as well. Much of the

uncertainty came from dating—or lack thereof, at least in any sort of precision—
and the older the rock, the greater the uncertainty. When he first defined the base
of the Cambrian as the beds with the first trilobites within them, the early
eighteenth century’s Adam Sedgwick had no idea that actual age dating in years
—rather than the relative appearance of fossils—would ever become available to
his brethren (but we are sure he must have dreamed of the possibility). For
almost two hundred years, in fact, an accurate date for the base of the Cambrian
was a case in point. A major problem was that it had never really been defined
either in biological terms or with respect to the actual rock record, and
numerically dated calibration points were few and far between. Unlike a mass
extinction event or other biological innovations, the Cambrian radiation did not
have a specific obvious well-defined starting point. The global definition of the
terms was chosen instead by a special committee of international specialists
organized by UNESCO, under the auspices of the International Geological
Correlation Program (coauthor Kirschvink was a voting member of this
committee).
At issue was the actual position of whatever boundary was to be chosen, and
how to date it. By the 1960s and 1970s, age guesses (for they were nearly that)
for when the Cambrian explosion happened varied from over 600 million years
ago to as young as 500 million years ago. It took the development of incredibly
sensitive—and precise—radiometric dating techniques before progress could be
made. The problem with dating was that in order to obtain a radiometric age
date, volcanic rocks had to be interbedded with the sedimentary beds as ashes,
for it is only the volcanic ashes—and only some of them—that contain the
mineral zircon (which locks in uranium and lead ratios to form beautiful
geological clocks). And almost none of these kinds of beds within beds were
known from any Cambrian-aged rocks around the globe.
In an attempt to try something else, a prominent Australian geochronologist
named William Compston (at the Australian National University in Canberra)
developed a technique in the mid-1900s using rubidium-strontium isotopes in
shale (a sedimentary, not volcanic rock) that gave age estimates of 610 million
years for the first trilobites in China. We now know that his technique was totally
wrong, and that techniques based on dating the mineral zircon with the uranium-
lead are the way to go. Nevertheless, until the 1980s the “official” date for the
base of the Cambrian was listed as 570 million years ago, and that date is
occasionally still found in many compilations of the geological time scale online
and in books.

But the second problem, not “when” so much as “what”—what first or last
fossil occurrence should mark the base of the Cambrian—was more intransigent.
As noted above, by the 1960s, paleontologists had improved their collecting
methods and instrumentation, and it became increasingly clear that in fact a great
deal of animal evolution, including animals with hard parts that could and did
fossilize, predated the trilobites by great periods of time. The oldest hard-part
fossils in strata beneath those with trilobites were tiny but recognizable parts of
shells (the “small shelly fossils”). Some looked like tiny spines, some like small
snail shells, some simply chunks of what looked like armor from some archaic
mollusk or echinoderm. But at question were their actual ages of formation and
existence.
International agreement was finally reached17 in the early 1990s. Of the four-
part appearance of animals known from the fossil record, the first, the
Ediacarans, were kicked out of the Cambrian period altogether. Their time
received its own name: the newly defined Ediacaran period of the Proterozoic
era. The base of the Cambrian System was defined as strata containing the
lowest, vertically burrowing trace fossils, thus predating the successive strata
with small shelly fossils, which in turn underlay the strata with trilobites. The
ability to burrow vertically through sediments is thought to imply the existence
of a hydrostatic skeleton and the neuromuscular connections to control it, but
this horizon was nearly 20 million years older than the actual Cambrian
explosion (as recorded by the fossil record itself). Yet if finally sorted out, the
dates when these strata were deposited was still unknown.
Without reliable radiometric dating, the extent of this interval—between the
oldest recoverable animal fossils and the first appearance of trilobites—could (in
some regions) be measured in tens of thousands of meters of strata between the
Ediacarans and trilobites. This suggested that tens of millions of years separated
them—but the 1980-era mass spectrometers (the instruments that can determine
ages from rocks) needed large numbers of zircons to do the analyses properly.
However, technology advanced, and by the late 1980s, new, better instruments
began to be used on the rare but crucial volcanic horizons that occasionally
could be found in the sedimentary beds thought to be Cambrian in age. One such
locality, discovered long after Sedgwick and all his contemporaries went to the
great fossil record in the sky (or wherever paleontologists go), was located in the
Anti-Atlas Mountains of Morocco. Here was the potential Rosetta stone for
determining the age of the four acts of the Cambrian explosion.

AGE BREAKTHROUGH—AND AGE SURPRISE
It was in the late 1980s that coauthor Kirschvink collected samples of a volcanic
ash from the Anti-Atlas Mountains of Morocco. This ash layer was
stratigraphically located about fifty meters below the first occurrence of
Cambrian trilobites in this great pile of sedimentary strata. But how long did it
take for those critical fifty meters of underwater-derived strata to form?
Unfortunately this volcanic ash produced only a tiny number of zircon grains, far
too little to be dated using techniques that were conventional at that time.
However, by that time Compston had developed an incredible instrument known
as the super-high-resolution ion microprobe (SHRIMP), which was able to focus
a collimated beam of cesium ions onto a small spot on a mineral grain. The
plasma generated by this process was fed into a mass spectrometer, and with a
few subtle manipulations they were able to produce an extremely high resolution
uranium-lead date.
The result was stunning. The dates emerging for these Morocco samples were
about 520 million years, rather than being older than 600 million years in age!18
Compston did everything he could to try and make the age older, but it did not
work. There was at least an 80-million-year error in the age of the base of the
Cambrian. This meant that the Cambrian explosion—at least the massive
diversification of the animal phyla that is seen when the first shelly fossils
appear—was more like a nuclear explosion, at least twenty-five times faster than
supposed. Other groups at MIT (Sam Bowring) and elsewhere have since
replicated these findings with additional volcanic ashes from Morocco, as well
as others from exotic places like Namibia and the northern part of the Anabar
Uplift in Siberia.19 There was now a date for the appearance of the trilobites, and
it was far younger than previously supposed. The paleontologists charged with
selecting the formal base panicked when they thought the entire Cambrian would
be only 10 million years long, so they abandoned the first trilobites as their guide
and chose an older event—the first burrowing trace fossil—that ultimately was
calibrated at about 542 MA.
It turns out that this unusual interval of the evolutionary activity and
innovation has some other rather unusual features as well. Studies of the carbon
isotopes across the Proterozoic-Cambrian boundary show that something rather
strange was happening, with huge oscillations that lasted for hundreds of
thousands to millions of years (these are now known as the Cambrian carbon
cycles).20 The magnitude of these is wild—the equivalent of grinding up and

burning all of the existing biomass on Earth every few million years. Either that
or something was causing extremely light carbon (which occurs in methane) to
erupt into the atmosphere on a massive scale, with all of the associated
greenhouse effects. Did the Earth go through a succession of short-term heating
events? Mild heating can actually increase biological diversity by shortening
generation times—an effect observed in the modern biota. Too much, of course,
can be lethal!
Another oddity is that the Cambrian has long been known as having some
extremely large apparent plate motion (plates are the enormous sheets of crust
that compose the Earth’s surface, and that move, diverge, or collide with other of
these Earth tectonic plates). These motions can be tracked using the technique
known as paleomagnetism, which can determine ancient latitudes of rocks as
well as the directions of plate motions. It was using this tool that coauthor
Kirschvink first proved the snowball Earth episodes of previous chapters. New
paleomagnetic analyses coming out of multiple paleomagnetism laboratories
were showing something seemingly impossible: that the continents were
scooting across the surface of the global at great speed—or that the entire globe
was rapidly moving under its poles of rotation. The north and south poles were
staying where they always were: it was the globe beneath them that was moving.
This information came from samples taken from Australia, for example,
indicating that while it straddled the equator, it underwent a nearly seventy-
degree clockwise rotation between Early Cambrian and Late Cambrian time—in
less than 10 million years, and perhaps much less time than this. However,
because Australia was a part of the supercontinent of Gondwana, which included
Antarctica, Greater India, Madagascar, Africa, and South America, this rotation
must have involved well over half of the continental landmass at the time. Now
data from virtually all over Gondwana tell a similar story—it was spinning
counterclockwise precisely during the Cambrian explosion interval, 530 to 520
million years ago. Similar results from the large North American continent
called Laurentia indicated that it moved from the chilly South Pole all the way
up to the equator at essentially the same time.
At this point, the god of simplicity appeared; perhaps it was not a bunch of
little tectonic plates moving around, but everything on the sphere moving
together, relative to the spin axis. However, this would work only if Laurentia
and Australia were roughly ninety degrees away from each other at the time
(which—duh—had to be true if Australia was on the equator and Laurentia on
the pole!). In fact, this single-rotation hypothesis makes very specific predictions

about the relative orientation and configuration of all continental landmasses, an
“absolute paleogeography.” With apologies to Tolkien, “One motion to move
them all, one rotation to spin them, one translation from the pole, and on the
globe we’ll find them!” One simple rotation of the entire solid Earth around the
spin axis brought ~90 percent of the previously scattered paleomagnetic results
into a clear focus.
Everything was happening at once. A big pulse of evolution, both in the
number of species and in the body plans, a huge increase in biomineralization
(the number and different kinds of outer skeletons evolved by many different
phyla), the first predator-prey interactions among animals, huge swings in the
organic carbon budgets, and wild oscillations in the positions of the continents,
leaving scientists including Kirschvink and his students to ponder whether this
was coincidence or cause and effect.
As more and more paleomagnetic evidence began to accrue, not only
surprising but also downright impossible motions of the ancient plates (with
their 
entombed 
continents 
fixed 
in 
oceanic 
crust) 
were 
detected.
Uniformitarianism tells us to use the modern to understand the past, and today
we can readily measure how fast plates are currently moving. In the Atlantic,
where new oceanic crust is being created along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, the rate
at which the two plates bisecting the North and South Atlantic Oceans are slowly
moving away from the axial origin line is only about one inch per year. These
enormous plates, while created at the oceanic spreading centers, hold the
continents in their stony embrace—so as (and where) the plates go, the
continents go as well. The rates are varied. For instance, today there are much
faster rates seen in the plates being created in the Pacific Ocean area, with
speeds of three to five inches per year. The fastest possible rate is close to ten
inches per year, but even this is theoretical and controversial. Yet paleomagnetic
data were yielding speeds that measured multiple feet per year: This is
impossible if only plate tectonics was involved. Yet the data are repeatable and
stark. Something revolutionary took place, or at least something so different
from modern processes as to cause enormous surprise in science. So much for
the Principle of Uniformitarianism!
The first reaction to encountering this data suggesting such fast motion of the
surface of the Earth was to doubt the reality of the data. Fair enough. As Carl
Sagan once said, extraordinary (scientific) claims required extraordinary proof.
Continental motions were so fast that normal plate tectonic motions noted above,
typically at most a few inches per year, could not explain them. The new data,

slowly but inexorably being produced by Kirschvink and a few others, were
showing that the plates were moving too fast for the conventional theory of plate
tectonics. To top it all: most of this motion was happening precisely coincident
with the explosive increase in diversity from the animal phyla. If it was not plate
tectonics, what could it have been? And how could this affect the evolution of
animals?
The answer was a surprise—but should not have been, because a similar
process is known to have occurred on Mars, the moon, and many satellites and
minor planets for billions of years. Such bodies are capable of astounding
changes in orientation. On Earth, the consequences for life may have been
inestimable, and yet our dawning comprehension of this possibility is one of the
great new revolutions brewing in our understanding of the history of life.
For over a century, geophysicists have known that the solid parts of a planet
can move rather rapidly relative to the spin axis. The fundamental principle is
that a spinning object would like to rotate around something called its maximum
moment of inertia. A Frisbee is a good example: When thrown properly, it spins
about the center point, and most of the mass at the edge of the disc keeps it
rotating stably. But now put a small hunk of lead somewhere on the disk—but
not at its center. The spin of the Frisbee will change as it tries to reorient itself to
take this new mass situation into account, and the Frisbee will try to spin with
the new heavy mass as far away from the rotational axis as possible: it wants to
go to the equator. On a spinning planet, centrifugal and gravitational forces
similarly tug on any anomalous mass. But on a spinning sphere, a much more
orderly change takes place—the position of the spin axis will reorient so that the
“weight,” which may have been located, perhaps, two thirds of the way from the
equator to the pole, will not be at the equator. The spinning ball has had its axis
of rotation change position—because of the strange new weight that was added.
It is very well known that the moon and Mars have both realigned themselves
in this way during their geological history. Both had new masses added to their
surface that originally were not on their equators, but then somehow ended up on
the equator. For example, the gigantic Tharsis province (a geological region on
the Martian surface) is composed of an enormous quantity of heavy lava. In
terms of geological time it was just like the weight we added to a Frisbee or a
spinning ball; it was added after the formation of the planet. In fact, it is the
largest positive gravity anomaly in the solar system and lies precisely on the
Martian equator—now, that is. On the moon, the pre-Apollo surveys detected
mass concentrations associated with the lunar mare basalts, also on the equator.

These processes are fairly simple to understand on the moon and on Mars,
because neither of these objects have plate tectonics. This realignment process is
been termed true polar wander, or TPW. Prior to the discovery of plate tectonics
back in 1966, all evidence for the poles being at different positions at earlier
geological time was thought to have been a result of TPW.
A geologically rapid change of mass on a planet can happen in a number of
ways, including the impact of a big asteroid or comet, or even internally through
the eruption of magma from the deep interior of Earth to its surface. Similarly,
big mass shifts can happen when one of the parts of the plate tectonic features,
which are composed of spreading centers and, separately, subduction sites
(where a plate dives down back into the deep Earth), either appear or disappear.
Both of these are large enough to excite TPW as far as the Earth is concerned, as
long as the masses involved are being maintained actively, not just floating
buoyantly. But if they disappear, it will affect the orientation of the planet. Both
subduction zones and spreading centers can disappear when one continent
undergoing continental drift runs into another. Any offshore spreading centers or
subduction zones between the converging continents are destroyed in the
collision; only in this case it is the disappearance of a surface mass that causes
reorientation, not the addition of a mass.
As it is rather unlikely that the observed biological changes associated with
the Cambrian explosion were forcing the continents to move, a more plausible
explanation was that the unusual burst of motion was somehow accelerating the
pace of biological evolution. Several mechanisms have been discovered that
might explain and connect some of these observations. First, when continents are
at high latitudes they tend to build up large reservoirs of frozen methane known
as clathrates, or gas hydrates, on the seafloor and in permafrost. As these areas
move toward the equator, they will warm gradually and can episodically cause
pulses of greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere, periodically warming
the environment. Evolution and species diversification in particular tend to
proceed faster in warmer environments, through a mechanism of accelerated
metabolism.
At the time this was proposed in the literature, it was nicknamed the “methane
fuse for the Cambrian explosion,” and argued that thermal cycling of biological
diversity may have been one of the major factors in promoting the proliferation
of species. It is also a possible cause for the crazy oscillation in the carbon
isotopes. It also turns out that geographically higher diversities exist naturally in
the equatorial zone. When Ross Mitchell, a colleague of ours at Yale University,

looked at the paleogeographic motions during this true polar wander event, he
noticed that almost all of the newly evolving animal groups seemed to originate
on the leading edges of the continents as they moved into the equatorial zone,
with few to none originating as other areas moved in the high latitudes. This
increase of diversity with latitude provides a stunningly simple explanation for
the diversity increase, particularly if this happened when nature was
experimenting with body plans via the Hox genes. It also implies that the
paleontological record of this Cambrian explosion might be partially an artifact
—because a side effect of true polar wander is to produce relative marine
transgressions in areas moving onto the equator, and sea-level regressions in
areas moving off. Sediments are preserved best during transgressions and
removed during regressions. Hence, the rock record is biased during TPW events
to preserve rocks that are recording a diversity increase.
Invoking true polar wander as a cause of events in the history of life is
definitely a new field of research, unheard of in the twentieth century. Just as this
mechanism is being used here as a new hypothesis for the Cambrian explosion,
so too can TPW be used to try to explain the killing mechanisms in mass
extinctions, one of which ended the Cambrian period and Cambrian explosion,
killing off almost all the weird wonders described by Stephen Gould and Simon
Conway Morris from the Burgess Shale. This mass extinction was given the
unlikely name of SPICE.
ENDING THE CAMBRIAN—THE SPICE EVENT AND THE FIRST
PHANEROZOIC MASS EXTINCTION
Any history recounting the Cambrian explosion can be overwhelmed by the
sheer power and importance of animal body plan evolution—the radical change
of the world’s biota from the immobile, floating, and simple larger animals of the
latest Precambrian world to the diverse exuberance of the animal cargo
inhabiting the world’s oceans at the end of the Cambrian. But why is there an
“end of the Cambrian” at all? Here is a topic where a long-held understanding
has been toppled.
Mass extinctions, the short-term periods of great mortality among both
individuals and species, were variable in their severity. While the largest are
included in the “big five” mass extinctions, when at least 50 percent of species

died out, there were many more extinction events not as catastrophic (unless one
was one of the victims, that is). One of the most celebrated of these occurred at
the end of the Cambrian period.
The Late Cambrian mass extinction was actually three or four separate,
smaller extinction events, mainly affecting trilobites and other marine
invertebrates, especially brachiopods. It has long been accepted that these were
caused by increases in warm, low-oxygen water masses affecting marine
communities. Some of the earliest occurring of all trilobites, the olenellids,
underwent total extinction, and in fact the entire nature of the trilobite faunas
changed: trilobites of the Cambrian had many segments, primitive eyes, and no
obvious defensive adaptations on the body (such as antipredatory spines), and
were unable to do what modern-day pill bugs do when threatened—roll up into a
tight ball. After the extinctions, and thus in the earliest times of the Ordovician
period, newly evolving waves of trilobites had changed their entire body plan:
now virtually all reduced the number of segments (many segments are easier for
predators to break through during a predatory attack than fewer, thicker body
segments) and had better eyes, defensive armor, and especially the ability to roll
up into pill bug–like balls.
Warmth, low oxygen, and faunal change: that was the view of these late
Cambrian extinctions. But then an entirely new series of data were recovered
suggesting quite the opposite: evidence for cold water, not warmer; and evidence
as well of a major burial of organic matter into the oceans—a process that
caused oxygen levels to skyrocket. These changes are now named the SPICE
event (after the Steptoean positive carbon isotope excursion). But there is a huge
contradiction with this new finding. It was first identified in the rock record not
only because of a sudden extinction of species, but also as a major perturbation
of the carbon isotope record, and hence carbon nutrient cycling. There is quite
good evidence that a large percentage of trilobites died out in a succession of
short-lived extinctions near the end of the Cambrian period.
One of the most interesting aspects of the SPICE event is that unlike most
other mass extinctions, this one might have been accompanied not by a drop but
by a short-term rise in oxygen. It is intriguing to speculate that a known volcanic
eruption at about this time might have caused one of the short-term rapid
continental movements mentioned above—a TPW, or True Polar Wander event.
In this case more land area was moved into the tropics for a few million years,
increasing carbon burial and spiking the atmospheric oxygen up to previously
unheard-of levels. Something like that might have paved the way for the next

major radiation of life following the Cambrian Explosion. One kind of
ecosystem needs a great deal of oxygen. The coral reefs appeared soon after the
SPICE event, starting in the next geological period, the Ordovician.
 
Biological turnover and genetic diversity during the Cambrian explosion. The classical Cambrian explosion
interval spans the Tommotian, Atdabanian, and Botomian stages of the Siberian platform. The turnover
shows the number of genera that either arose or disappeared during the particular stage. (From Bambach et
al., “Origination, Extinction, and Mass Depletions of Marine Diversity,” Paleobiology 30 (2004): 522–42)

CHAPTER IX
The Ordovician-Devonian Expansion of Animals: 500–360 MA
Modern coral reefs have been called the “rainforests of the oceans” because they
share with rainforests the trait of high species diversity and abundance in small
areas, and that is often the shared first impression—that there is so much life.
But from there the comparisons largely cease. In a rainforest, or any forest, most
of the life to be found is plant life. Reefs, on the other hand, are composed
almost exclusively of animals. On any reef there are indeed large numbers of
leafy, bush-shaped forms that are plantlike. Yet virtually all are formed by
animals, from soft corals to sponges to lacy bryozoans. One could argue that the
verdant green of photosynthesizing plants covering great swaths of our planet’s
continents are the most obvious evidence, if seen from space, that our planet is a
world of life. But there is an entirely different kind of biological signal that can
be seen from space—this one in the seas. It is the presence of tropical marine
coral reefs, best illustrated by the Great Barrier Reef, which lines more than a
thousand miles of eastern Australia’s coastline. But there are many more reefs
than the Great Barrier Reef, magnificent as it is. The equatorial seas are filled
with numerous coral atolls, fringing reefs, and the vast pale-green lagoons that
these wholly biological structures enclose. These reef systems are parts of a very
ancient kind of ecosystem, one that predates forests and even land animal life of
any kind. They remain one of the most diverse of all ecosystems, and are
essentially long-lived superorganisms that pop up again after every mass
extinction and planetary die-off of the last 540 million years.
A hallmark of the coral reef environment is the abundance of movement
virtually everywhere, for the flitting and schooling of fish, to the never-ceasing
wave action on the reef, to the waving and billowing soft corals, pulsing and
undulating in the active water movement that characterizes the reef environment.
Every coral reef is home to fish—many fish, of many sizes, shapes, and
behaviors. Some school, some lurk, some swim in solitary splendor, and some—
the omnipresent sharks—simply patrol. And it is not just the vertebrate members
of these diverse communities that are seemingly always on the move. Closer
inspections show that an amazing diversity of invertebrates is seemingly in
constant motion as well—if usually slower than the fish. Smaller reef shrimp

dance from coral to coral, while crabs large and small can be seen in their
constant foraging. Snails, slower yet, perambulate according to some plan
known only to them, and the gastropods to be found on any reef are diverse as
well: there are large carnivorous species, such as the beautiful tritons, as well as
equally large but herbivorous conch shells. Under the coral rubble, at least
during the day, a cornucopia of the beautiful cowries huddle or slowly feed on
tiny bits of algae, while the ferocious cone shells move among them, searching
for most of their kind’s normal prey—small worms. Some, however, such as the
textile cones, are fish eaters, and use a highly modified tooth, shaped like a
harpoon and dipped in poison, to spear fish and then consume them whole.
Turgid sea cucumbers move on the sediment—or just beneath it, constantly
ingesting massive amounts of sand at one end and constantly expelling large
sandy pellets from the other. There they share the upper foot of white coral sand
with heart urchins. Other echinoderms are there as well, from a variety of
predatory starfish to the placidly perched—but also swimming—comatulid
crinoids. Color—and especially motion by a great and diverse assemblage of
species. The coral reef ecosystems of today are filled with motion and color and
there is every reason to suspect they have always been so.
Reefs, in fact, are very ancient evolutionary inventions,1 and their rise to
prominence mirrors the rise to high diversity that followed the Cambrian
explosion. In a way a hydrogen bomb is a good analogy. Thermonuclear fusion
and the enormous explosion that ensues only take place in the immense heat of
an atomic explosion. That is how a hydrogen bomb works: an atomic (fission)
bomb with plutonium is ignited, which in turn creates sufficient heat and
pressure to start the fusion reaction—and fusion explosion. In similar fashion the
Cambrian explosion of diversity was the heat and fuel that led to the far greater
Ordovician diversification, and one of the most important of the products of this
huge run-up in species numbers was the invention of the coral reef.
The first reefs—and by reef, we mean a wave-resistant, three-dimensional
structure built by organisms—date all the way back to the earliest Cambrian
period. They were not coral reefs, but composed of archaic, now long-extinct
sponges called Archeocyathids.2 Coral reefs are slightly younger; the first of
these are found in the Ordovician period, and they really increase in distribution,
size, and diversity by the Devonian period. They remained a rather constant and
ecologically recognizable ecosystem until the end of the Permian—when the
reefs and so much else were decimated by the Permian mass extinction.
Let us imagine that we were capable of going back into time and take a dive

on a Paleozoic coral reef, one that is 400 million years in age. At first glance
there is a surprising similarity to the reefs of today. Corals dominate the reefs;
they are the bricks of the 3-D structures that are reefs, and like a brick house, are
held together by many kinds of biological mortar, mostly encrusting species that
serve to cement and bind the many heads and coral fronds into enormous and
complex ramparts and foundations of limestone. But on closer view, the 400-
million-year-old corals can be seen to be entirely different in basic appearance,
and certainly in taxonomic composition. The massive coral heads are composed
of a family that while building overall shapes similar to the corals of today are
actually very different in their finer morphology: these are the tabulate corals,
and these filled the same niches as are held today by scleractinian corals, the
common corals of our modern reefs. Between these broadly branching and
hemispherical tabulate coral colonies are other “framework builders,” other
bricks in the wall. Many of these are stromatoporoids, a strange, carbonate-
producing sponge still living today, but never in the sizes or diversity of the
Paleozoic era. Scattered among these two massive inhabitants are a second kind
of coral, solitary in nature, called rugose corals, solitary species that look like the
horns of a bull, but in this case the pointed end of the “horn,” the calcium
carbonate skeleton of these rugose corals, are cemented to the substrate, and the
widest end, facing up, is the seat for a single broad sea-anemone-looking animal.
Like our modern scleractinian corals, no matter how large, and composed of
how many of the small, tentacled bodies that are the basic body plan of a coral,
the tabulates were a single “individual”—at least genetically. But in fact all
corals, surely then as well as now, are vast colonies of tiny sea-anemone-like
polyps, each a ring of poison-tipped tentacles surrounding a small central mouth.
But unlike a seashore rock covered with a smattering of the small, common sea
anemones (which are solitary polyps) found the world over, each of these tiny
polyps linked to others around it by a thin sheet of tissue. Every part of these
sometimes-vast colonies is genetically identical. But this is not just one animal.
In fact, any coral supports a vast and diverse assemblage of plants within its
tissues. Throughout both the coral’s polyp-to-polyp connecting tissue, as well as
in the polyp itself, are untold numbers of tiny plants—single-celled
dinoflagellates that live in symbiotic bliss with the corals. It is a great deal for
both: the tiny plants get the four things they most want: light, carbon dioxide,
nutrients (phosphates and nitrates), and protection within the coral flesh,
protection from the many organisms that would love to dine on a tasty if tiny
plant.

ORDOVICIAN DIVERSIFICATION: BUILDING ON THE CAMBRIAN
EXPLOSION
The Cambrian period came to an end because of a mass extinction, one that
affected many of the more successful members of what has come to be known as
the Cambrian fauna—sea life composed of such early animal entrants in the
overall history of animal life as trilobites, brachiopods, and many of the very
exotic arthropods of the Burgess Shale, such as Anomalocaris (although in 2010
a new fossil deposit of Ordovician age has yielded the youngest Anomalocaris of
all, and thus perhaps the Late Cambrian mass extinction was kinder to some of
the odd Burgess Shale fauna than previously considered). This particular
extinction has long been known, but it is not listed as “major,” in that less than
50 percent of marine forms died out. This acted like gasoline on the open fire of
diversification, perhaps, in that those forms that were less adaptive died out,
opening the way for new innovation and new species in the same manner that
ridding a garden of weeds leads to a rapid proliferation of new growth from the
nonweeded.
It was also as if the biological world discovered entirely new ways for animals
and plants to make a living, as well as finding entirely new places to live: areas
that were poorly populated in the Cambrian, such as brackish water and
freshwater, as well as both deeper and shallower areas in the sea, right into the
surf zones themselves, became ripe for colonization by animals. Many of these
were still sedentary, spending their entire lives sitting in one place, filtering the
ever-richer and more nutritious marine plankton. But species numbers and
biomass numbers alike climbed.3
Many kinds of animals were present in the Ordovician that had not yet
evolved in the Cambrian, and many of these appeared soon after the end of the
Cambrian mass extinction. The result was an assemblage of animals that is
markedly different than most of the Cambrian faunas. Trilobites are still there,
but compared to the Cambrian oceans, when they may have been the most
commonly encountered animal at most depths, they were overwhelmed in
numbers as well as numbers of species of animals with shells—the brachiopods
and more than a few mollusks as well. The biggest winners were animals that
had evolved an entirely novel way of living—animals that were colonial. While
colony formation was something that had been used by other biology far simpler
in body plan, including many kinds of plants, microbes, and protozoa, in the
Ordovician the leitmotif of colonial life dominated and drove the relentless

diversification that is the hallmark of the Ordovician: corals, bryozoans, and new
kinds of sponges among many others.
The reasons for this great diversification go back to oxygen.4 Our view is that
the true effects of oxygenation in the sea can be seen from this point. Here, then,
we will make an interpretation that historians do, one that is as yet still new
enough in science that it cannot be considered as hard truth, but one that has
enormous explanatory power. It also lets us look, quite appropriately at this point
in the book, at an overview of animal diversification. We will argue that it was
oxygen levels more than any other factor that has left us with the diversity curve
of animals through time, results that are hard science and accepted.
The Ordovician period can be regarded as the second part of the two-part
initiation of animal diversity on Earth, with the first being the Cambrian
explosion,5 and in both cases, rising oxygen was the driver. Like the Cambrian, it
was a time when new species as well as new kinds of body plans appeared at a
faster rate than was characteristic of more recent times. This high rate of
evolution and innovation was partly in response to filling up the world with
animals for the first time. The history of life in the Cambrian was a filling of the
seas with many experiments. The post-Cambrian history was one where many of
these early and clearly primitive and inefficient evolutionary designs were
replaced in what became a rocketing increase in biodiversity as competition
ruthlessly killed off the less fit. Evolution became a means of exploring the
engineering excellence of body plans.
THE HISTORY OF THE HISTORY OF BIODIVERSITY
The history of biodiversity, which can be thought of as the assembly and
numbers of the various categories of organisms (especially animals, because they
leave the most abundant and recognizable fossils), was first presented by the
English geologist John Phillips, who is also credited with subdividing the
geological time scale through the introduction of the concepts of Paleozoic,
Mesozoic, and Cenozoic eras. Phillips, who published his monumental work in
1860 both defining these new eras and discerning the largest-scale pattern of
evolutionary change that can be found in the fossil record, recognized that major
mass extinctions in the past could be used to subdivide geological time, since the
aftermath of each such event resulted in the appearance of a new fauna as

recognized in the fossil record. But Phillips did far more than recognize the
importance of past mass extinctions and define new geological time terms: he
proposed that diversity in the past was far lower than in the modern day, and that
the rise of biodiversity has been one of wholesale increases in the number of
species, except during and immediately after the mass extinctions. His scheme
recognized that mass extinctions slowed down diversity, but only temporarily.
Phillips’s view of the history of diversity was completely novel. Yet a century
passed before the topic was again given scientific attention.
In the late 1960s, paleontologists Norman Newell and James Valentine again
considered the problem of exactly when and at what rate the world became
populated with species of animals and plants.6 Both wondered if the real pattern
of diversification was of a rapid increase in species following the so-called
Cambrian explosion of about 530 to 520 million years ago (using the revised
dates, not those favored in the 1960s), followed by an approximate steady state.
Their arguments rested on the importance of preservation biases in older rocks.
Perhaps the pattern of increasing diversification through time seen by Phillips
was in reality the record of preservation through time, rather than the real
evolutionary pattern of diversification. According to this argument, the change
of species is reduced in ever-older rocks, so that sampling bias is the real agent
producing the so-called diversification he saw. This view was soon after echoed
by paleontologist David Raup in a series of papers7 that forcefully argued that
there are strong biases against older species being discovered and named by
scientists, since older rocks experience more alteration through recrystallization,
burial, and metamorphism; entire regions or biogeographic provinces have been
lost through time (therefore reducing the record for older rocks); and there is
simply more rock of younger age to be searched.
The argument as to whether diversity has shown a rapid increase through time
or achieved a high level early on and has stayed approximately steady ever since
dominated paleontological research for much of the latter part of the twentieth
century. In the 1970s, massive data sets derived from library records began to be
assembled by Raup and the late Jack Sepkoski8 of the University of Chicago
along with his colleagues and students. These data, compiling the record of
marine invertebrates in the sea, as well as other data sets for both terrestrial
plants and for vertebrate animals, seemed to vindicate Phillips’s early view. In
particular the curves discovered by Sepkoski showed a quite striking record,
with three main pulses of diversification carried out by different assemblages of
organisms.

The first was seen in the Cambrian (the so-called Cambrian fauna, composed
of trilobites, brachiopods, and other archaic invertebrates), followed by a second
in the Ordovician that led to an approximate steady state through the rest of the
Paleozoic era (the Paleozoic fauna, composed of reef-building corals, articulate
brachiopods, cephalopods, and archaic echinoderms), culminated by a rapid
increase beginning in the Mesozoic and accelerating in the Cenozoic to produce
the high levels of diversity seen in the world today through the evolution of the
modern fauna, composed of gastropod and bivalve mollusk, most vertebrates,
echinoids, and other groups.
The net view of biodiversity over the last 500 million years was thus about the
same as that of John Phillips in 1860: there are more species on the planet now
than at any time in the past. Even more comforting, the trajectory of biodiversity
seemed to show that the engine of diversification—the processes producing new
species—was in high gear, suggesting that in the future the planet would
continue to have ever more species. While not at the time viewed in any sort of
astrobiological context, these findings certainly do not suggest that planet Earth
is in any sort of planetary old age. All in all, the 130-year belief, from the time
and work of John Phillips to that of John Sepkoski—that there are more species
now than any time in the past—remained a comforting view. This long-held
scientific belief suggested to many that we are in the best of biological times (at
least in terms of global biodiversity), and there is every reason to believe that
better times, an even more diverse and productive world, still lie ahead, even
without weird contributions from biotechnology.
 

Competing hypotheses about disparity and the Cambrian Explosion. Diversity refers to the number of
species, whereas disparity refers to the number of different kinds of anatomies, or body plans. Stephen Jay
Gould thought that there were many more body plans (high disparity) during the Cambrian Explosion than
now. He referred to many of the strange fossils from the Burgess Shale as “weird wonders” and thought that
they were phyla now entirely extinct. The opposite view was held by Simon Conway Morris, who
advocated that disparity has slowly increased through time.
 
While the Sepkoski work seemed to show a world where runaway
diversification is a hallmark of the Late Mesozoic into the modern day, worries
about the very real sampling biases described by earlier workers persists, and a
series of independent tests of diversity were conducted. Of most concern was a
phenomenon dubbed the “pull of the recent”—that the methodology used by
Sepkoski would undercount diversity in the deep past, making it look like there
were ever more species in more recent times. Because of this very real concern,
new tests were devised to examine biological diversity through time. In the early
part of the new millennium the issue was reexamined9 by a large team headed by
Charles Marshall of Harvard (now at Berkeley) and John Alroy, then at the
University of California at Santa Barbara. This team assembled a more
comprehensive database, based on actual museum collections rather than using
Sepkoski’s method of simply tabulating the number of species recorded in the
scientific literature for given intervals of past geologic time. To virtually

everyone’s surprise, the first results of this effort were radically different from
the long-accepted view.
The analyses of the Marshall-Alroy group found that diversity in the
Paleozoic was about the same as in the mid-Cenozoic. The dramatic run-up of
species that had so long been postulated for diversity through time was not
evident in this new study. The implications are stark: we may have reached a
steady state of diversity hundreds of millions of years ago. It may be that
diversity peaked early in the history of animals, and in contrast to all views since
the time of Phillips, it has remained in an approximate steady state since, or
perhaps may already be in decline. While many new innovations, such as the
adaptation allowing the evolution of land plants and animals, surely caused there
to be many new species added to the planet’s biodiversity total, it may be that by
late in Paleozoic time the number of species on the planet has been
approximately constant.
Thus, following an initial burst of diversification in the lower Cambrian,
animal diversity increased exponentially to reach equilibrium during the
Paleozoic and then crashed at the end of the Permian, followed by an overall
trend of increasing diversity, but importantly interrupted by short intervals of
diversity decreases—the mass extinctions—of which five were particularly
consequential. While these mass extinctions each led to substantial loss of taxa,
all were followed by increased rates of species formation that led to levels not
only equaling but in each case exceeding the original diversity prior to the
extinction event.
This history suggests that a complex array of factors causing both
diversification and extinction are responsible for the observed pattern of
Phanerozoic diversity. Among the many potential factors that have been invoked
to explain the observed increases in diversity are evolutionary innovation, the
colonization of previously empty or unobtainable habitats, and the occurrences
of new resources, while the major factors cited for diversity drops are changes in
climate, reduction of resources or habitat area, new biological competition or
predation, or external events such as asteroid impact.
Geochemists have long known that CO2 levels and atmospheric oxygen levels
show trends that are inversely related to one another: when oxygen levels rise,
CO2 is usually dropping. While it is difficult to understand how changing levels
of CO2 at concentrations that have little or no direct biological effect on
individual organisms could somehow promote or inhibit diversification, it is
quite plausible to suggest that it was not the changing CO2 but in fact a

combination of changing oxygen levels, with that change being affected by
global temperature rates.
 

Top graph: The trajectory of marine invertebrate animal diversity from the Cambrian Period onward, as
discovered by Jack Sepkoski. His findings, based on long and prodigious library research, indicated that the
numbers of genera rose quickly in the Paleozoic and then plateaued, only to be cut down by the Permian
Mass Extinction. Afterward, he saw a great rise in generic numbers to the present day. Bottom graph: Here
we show the levels of oxygen, as modeled by Robert Berner, with newer (than Sepkoski) estimates of
animal generic numbers published by John Alroy and others. Notice the strong correlation between peak
oxygen levels (both high and low) and the trajectory of animal numbers. (From Peter Ward, unpublished
results.)
 
Cold water holds more oxygen than warm. In a cold world, with already high
oxygen levels, life in the sea would rarely be compromised by too little oxygen.
On the other hand, in a warm world where there was already relatively little
oxygen, most bodies of nonflowing water would quickly go stagnant. And not
just ponds to lakes—large oceans would succumb to this as well in a warm
world, which is what a high CO2 world is.
The data to date suggests that (at least for marine animals) overall, global
taxonomic diversity is related to oxygen content, which might be expected, since
all animals have a poor tolerance for anoxic conditions. What was unexpected
was the finding that origination rates (measured either in species or genera,

which are groups of related species all with the same common ancestor) appear
to be inversely correlated to oxygen levels. The high levels of origination
characterizing the period from 545 to roughly 500 MA (the Cambrian explosion)
occurred during a protracted period of oxygen levels of between 14 and 16
percent, compared to 21 percent today. The dramatic rise in oxygen in the
Silurian and again in the Carboniferous corresponds with the lowest levels of
generic origination. The drop of oxygen in the Permian is correlated to a rise in
origination rates but a drop in the total number of species. There seems to be a
clear signal.
Times of high oxygen are like the boom times in a country’s economy. There
is little unemployment and businesses succeed and stay open—but not many
new ones start up. Start-ups, it seems, are related to bad times. New ideas play
out and new risks are taken in times of desperation. Yet while there are many
new start-ups, few of them succeed, and at the same time many of the businesses
that were succeeding during good times begin to fail at an ever-higher rate in the
bad times.
Thus we see a dichotomy: more new businesses appear, but most of them
quickly go bankrupt and disappear along with many of the previously successful.
There is also less money circulating. The total number of businesses plummets.
The same seems to be true of species. High oxygen means good times: large
numbers of species, and nothing much new comes along. But when oxygen is
low, species die out at a faster rate than they are replaced, even though the actual
number of emerging species is higher than in the high-oxygen times.
There are many examples. One of the best: the long-term rise in oxygen
beginning in the Jurassic and continuing to the modern day is accompanied by
both a long-term drop in origination rates and a huge run-up in diversity. But
what radical new designs appear? Birds, mammals, reptiles, amphibians—all of
the Cenozoic forms are slight changes of body plans that originated in either
Paleozoic or Mesozoic bad times, the low-oxygen times. There are no dinosaurs
(the best examples of a radical innovation spawned directly from low oxygen)
appearing in the Cenozoic.
The recognition that a combination of low oxygen and elevated carbon
dioxide has stimulated species formation in the past by the formation of
evolutionary novelty, while at the same time vastly increasing extinction rates,
has a firm biological basis. The net effect is the reduction of species during the
low-oxygen periods. Dropping oxygen levels with concomitant rising
temperatures is the worst kind of one-two punch, as adapting to hotter, lower-

oxygen environments is never a quick fix. More hair, more feathers, and more
body fat can fix increasing cold. But staying cool is far more difficult and
involves much more profound evolutionary change. This is even more true in
animals trying to deal with staying alive in ever-lowering oxygen, since
adaptation to lower oxygen levels is necessarily profound and must occur in
multiple organ systems, ranging from blood pigments to more efficient
circulatory systems, to better lungs or gills.
The most striking aspect of oxygen and its relationship to diversity was
pointed out to us in 2009 by Bob Berner (of Yale), who alerted us to what he saw
as a profound similarity between his latest oxygen-through-Phanerozoic time
curve with the then-latest diversity curve of the John Alroy group. We show
those two curves in the figure on page 158. While there is a slight direct
correlation between oxygen levels and diversity when both are broken down into
10-million-year time bins, an absolutely amazing correlation is present between
the change in atmospheric oxygen when plotted against the change in diversity
for these same 10-million-year bins. For example, the correlation between the
change of atmospheric oxygen as a percentage of total atmospheric gas content
from 230 to 220 million years ago, plotted against the change in generic
diversity during that same time interval, is highly significant—in other words,
not by chance. The results are very strong indeed, from a statistical point of
view.
A most interesting aspect of this is that since both were introduced, the model
results from the Berner group (and others as well) estimating past oxygen and
carbon dioxide levels have been controversial. Equally controversial are the
various Alroy curves. Each set of results (one yielding oxygen and CO2 values,
the other the estimated number of animal genera through time) comes from
models that have completely different inputs. None of the many values inputted
into the GEOCARB and GEOCARBSULF models have anything to do with
how many species there were at any given time. In similar fashion, the Alroy
model is completely independent of the values used to model carbon dioxide and
oxygen. Yet the near unbelievable correlation, while theoretically possible from
chance, is hard to explain that way. There is no chance at work. It appears that
oxygen and carbon dioxide levels (particularly oxygen) are the most important
of all factors dictating animal diversity. The two independent curves in this
fashion support each other in terms of that most important of scientific values:
credibility.

INSECTS AND PLANT GROUPS
It is clear that the invasion of land unleashed the floodgates of both diversity and
disparity. Our understanding of the overall diversification of life through time is
that there are more kinds of life on Earth now—more kinds of species or any
other way of tabulating diversity—than at any time in the past. But is this really
true? What might the biases be?
All good science has a null hypothesis, and in this, it is that marine animal life
on Earth reached present-day levels at the end of the Cambrian. This was the
view of Stephen Jay Gould in the 1970s, and whether he really believed this is
irrelevant: his take on this issue resulted in much stronger science.
The answer to this question, whether diversity rose rapidly or only slowly rose
to present levels, relates to the relative preservation potential of modern-day
organisms compared to those of the Cambrian. Today, about one out of three
marine animals has hard parts that produce ready fossilization—anatomy such as
shells, bones, and hard carapaces. But what if that number were one out of ten
during the Cambrian? In such a case, there might be approximately equal
numbers of animals during the Cambrian, compared to modern oceans. Support
for this idea also came from the post-Sepkoski work of Marshall and Alroy, as
their model results, while showing post-Cambrian increases in diversity, did not
see the explosive runaway of post-Permian animal taxa found by Sepkoski.10
The Alroy work has since gone through several iterations with new data.11
There are other sources of bias as well as perhaps dubious assumptions that
have been made to arrive at models of diversity through time. For instance, what
about the unequal sample sizes being studied? Critics of the entire diversity-
through-time enterprises have noted that there is far more rock to sample of late
Cenozoic or Pleistocene age than there is of Cambrian age. Furthermore, there
are many more paleontologists studying late Cenozoic and Pleistocene fossils
than there are professionals studying Cambrian-aged rocks and fossils. Andrew
Smith of the British Museum12 and independently Mike Benton13 of the
University of Bristol and Shanan Peters14 of Wisconsin have all done remarkable
work on this aspect.
It turned out that a quite simple test demonstrated that there has been an
increase in marine animal taxa (be they species, genera, or families) since the
Cambrian explosion. The test came from studying the number of trace fossils
through time. Trace fossils are the results of animal activity, as we saw in the
chapter on the Cambrian explosion, and each different trace found in strata had

to come from a slightly different body plan. Their pattern of diversity mirrors the
record from body fossils. It is now agreed that the overall pattern of diversity
long recognized by invertebrate paleontologists has indeed given us a fairly
accurate view of how life diversified on Earth.
By the end of the Devonian period, the major marine environments from the
shallows to the deepest oceans were colonized. But this marine diversification
was about to be overshadowed by a diversification that would ultimately prove
far greater, creating the greatest pool of animal and plant species on Earth: the
diversity of life on land.
THE ORDOVICIAN MASS EXTINCTION
The Ordovician period was also the time of the first of the so-called big five
mass extinctions. All five involved animals and plants. There surely were mass
extinctions before the Ordovician event, such as during the great oxygenation
event and the various snowball Earth episodes. But animals were in the midst of
differentiating at a rapid rate when something brought this increase in diversity
to a halt. The best bet is that it happened when the Earth underwent a “little ice
age” that turned the early coral reefs to dead piles of rubble because of sudden
temperature drop. However, this is still a puzzle, as the extinction has two
discrete steps, at either end of the last stage of Ordovician time, called the
Hirnantian glaciation.
There are other more fanciful suggestions about the cause of the Ordovician
mass extinction. The most interesting is that the Earth was hit by a giant blast of
hard radiation coming from interstellar space, called a gamma-ray burst, during
the Ordovician.15 This is a most dramatic potential cause, but there is also not a
single shred of evidence to support it, much as journalists have publicized it.
Prior to 2011, the accepted cause for this mass extinction was that there was no
accepted cause.16 Most explanations opted for some kind of rapid cooling event.
One prevalent idea is that perhaps volcanic outpourings caused the atmosphere
to become obscured by sulfur aerosols17 in a manner similar to that following the
Krakatoa volcanic explosion of the 1800s, when Europe went through a “year
without summer.” Recently, however, geologists and geochemists at Caltech18
attacked this late Ordovician glaciation problem from a superbly preserved
sequence of rock on Anticosti Island, a remote Canadian island in the Gulf of St.

Lawrence that was once located in the tropics. Using a new type of geochemical
thermometer, they were able to measure both the relative ice volume and
temperature, with unprecedented resolution. Lo and behold, they found that
while ice volume changed only slowly before and after Hirnantian time, and the
tropical temperature remained at a very hot but possible 32° to 37°C, there was a
sharp shift at either end of it that was associated with the two steps of mass
extinction. Tropical temperatures fell by ~5° to 10°C, the global ice volume
peaked up to levels that equaled or topped those of the last (Pleistocene) glacial
maximum, and carbon isotopes had a positive spike, suggesting a large
perturbation of the global carbon cycle—in this case, presumably more organic
carbon burial.
These new data narrow the actual kill mechanisms of these two extinction
pulses to two possibilities, either a fast change in climate or a fast change in the
level of the oceans all over the globe. In a follow-up paper, members of the same
team19 mined two enormous digital databases for North America, one showing
the fossil distributions and another the volume of rock available for fossils to be
found in (a necessary correction for the fossil discoveries!). Both processes were
found to account for the extinctions—habitat loss from sea level drop and a
sudden drop in temperature were both flagged as major elements of the die-offs.
However, it is not clear if this is the entire story; the timing of the climatic
perturbations, including the positive spike in carbon isotopes, is surprisingly
similar to some of the events induced by the true polar wander mentioned in
previous chapters. A short, sharp TPW (True Polar Wander) excursion could
have triggered a short period of global cooling, producing, perhaps, a short-lived
period of glaciation. This remains an enigmatic and still-to-be-researched topic.
It is certainly not the traditional explanation. It is, in fact, new—the promise of
our title.

CHAPTER X
Tiktaalik and the Invasion of the Land: 475–300 MA
A long point of contention between “evolutionists” and those opposed
(creationists) to the knowledge that species evolve one from another has been the
supposed dissimilarity between the first amphibian and its last-known fish
ancestor: the fish fossils seemed too “fishy,” and the first amphibians too “un-
fish-like” to appease doubters. There indeed was merit to one aspect of this
dispute: until recently, the oldest agreed-upon amphibian fossil, a Devonian-aged
creature1 named Ichthyostega (which means fish-amphibian), had a fish-like
body (including a quite normal fish tail) and four legs. Its immediate ancestor
appeared to be a creature with a similar-looking body—but without legs. This
fish, which paleontologists have deemed as the true ancestor to Ichthyostega and
the other early land vertebrates (or at least living some of their life on land),
belongs to a group known as the sarcopterygians, which had fins with fleshy
lobes around them.2 These were the predecessors of limbs. The living fossil
Latimeria (a coelacanth fish) is thought to be at least somewhat similar to the
immediate ancestor of the eventual first amphibians including Ichthyostega. The
critics asked: “Where are the missing links?” But a twenty-first-century fossil
discovery changed all that—a fossil found in the frigid Devonian-aged strata of
the high Arctic. It was named Tiktaalik, and is so transitional that its discoverers3
dubbed it a “fishopod.” This discovery is one of the most consequential of all
revisions to what we call the history of life not only for filling in a large hole in
our understanding (of the fossil record from water-to land-living vertebrates) but
in helping solidify the entire theory of evolution.
This large fossil proved to be the perfect antidote to creationist doubters. It
was unearthed in Arctic Canada by a team of international researchers led by
Neil Shubin of the University of Chicago, and when finally (and painstakingly)
removed from the sarcophagus-like coating of sedimentary rock holding its
bones, the first Tiktaalik fossil was deemed to be a fish, complete with scales and
gills. It also showed a flattened head and fins that had thin ray bones, the most
familiar kind of fish fin. However, in this new fish’s case, there were also the
kind of sturdy interior bones necessary for an animal as large as this specimen
(which would have been near three feet in length) to prop itself up in shallow

water using its limb-like fins for support, just as four-legged animals do. With
these strange fins and an amphibian (even crocodile-like) head, Tiktaalik has the
combination of features that shows a perfect, step-by-step evolutionary transition
between the fish and tetrapod body plans.4
The first appearance of vertebrates on land is the most dramatic event of what
was nothing less than a succession of invasions of land by aquatic animals—and
plants. Yet while most relevant to us, in fact we vertebrates were among the very
last to climb out of the pool and join the roster of animals making the water to
land transition. To tell the story in order, we begin with the first—plants.
THE INVASION OF LAND BY PLANTS
It can be argued that the greatest single event in all of life’s history, save for the
first formation of life itself, was life’s invention of oxygen-releasing
photosynthesis. It was this that allowed life to move from its dark and dank
habitats as low standing biomass and fill the shallower waters of seas and
freshwater bodies alike with the living by tapping the greatest energy source that
our solar system has to offer, the sun. And in so doing, as an unintended by-
product, our planet radically changed its atmosphere to one with such a high
concentration of oxygen that a second unintended consequence became the
greatest of all dangers to living plants—grazing animals. Yet as consequential as
these changes were to life on Earth by aquatic plants, even more radical changes
transformed the planet when plants evolved the means to break free of their
watery shackles and colonize dry land. In a relative blink of an eye in terms of
Earth history to date, in a period of less than 1 percent of the total age of life
itself, this great invasion of land by plants changed all the rules—as well as the
history of life on our planet.
As we saw in an earlier chapter, there is now abundant evidence that some
kind of primitive photosynthesizing organisms found a way to grow on land
surfaces hundreds of millions of years before the first animal, and in fact may
have been a major cause of the last of the snowball Earth episodes between 700
and 600 million years ago. We have no idea what they were. Perhaps they were
simply cyanobacteria, or perhaps they had real adaptions to land life, such as the
ability to stay in place, obtain nutrients, reproduce, and get and then keep water.
Candidates for this seem to be the still-extant single-celled green algae.

But even these plants from 700 million years ago may not have been first to
get out of the sea, because an increasing number of geobiologists are concluding
that there was land life far earlier: single-celled photosynthetic bacteria, making
the water-to-land transition as much as 2.6 billion years ago. If so, these early
colonists would have been long, long established when “higher” plants and
animals finally climbed onto land as well.
What is known is that in less than 100 million years after the appearance of
animals in the sea, some species of green algae, probably still living in
freshwater, shed the shackles of a wholly aquatic lifestyle and migrated to the
land, rapidly evolving from simple leafless twiglike plants not dissimilar to
many moss species of today to true giants, thanks to one of evolution’s great
innovations: the leaf.
From about 475 million years ago, when the aquatic green algae began the
numerous evolutionary changes that would allow them to attain nutrients—and
most critically reproduce—in the combination of air and soil rather than entirely
in water, to about 425 million years ago, when the fossil record shows the
beautiful unmistakable remains of the first true vascular plants (those with roots
and stems), the necessary changes were slow, step-by-step, and largely invisible
to the fossil record. The evolution of these first small spiky and leafless plants to
the first plant with true leaves took another 40 million years. But once the first
leaves appeared, a great revolution of rapid change was unleashed. By around
370 to 360 million years ago, trees were up to twenty-five feet tall.
It took almost a hundred million years for the invading multicellular plants to
change from small marine forms to the world-covering forests that were present
by the end of the Devonian period. In one respect these plants had a far more
significant effect on the land than the long-reigning microbes did, for the
multicellular land-plant invasion utterly changed the nature of landforms and
soil. It also changed the transparency of the atmosphere, for as more and more
plants spread across the land, the restless sand dunes and dust bowls that had
been the unceasing landforms of the Earth until that time were transformed.
Roots began to hold the grit and dust of the land in place to a far greater extent
than did the land-dwelling bacteria, which, as single cells or even thin sheets
would have had little strength; as the primitive plants died and rotted in place,
thicker and thicker soil began to form, and the ragged, rocky landscape that had
always been Earth began to soften. From space the very air itself would have
cleared; for the first time the edges of continents and seas, of large lakes and
rivers would have become visible from short and great distances alike.

By the Late Devonian, forests had almost completely covered the land,
changing the very way rivers moved across the landscape. And in so doing,
plants ultimately caused atmospheric oxygen to climb far above the 21 percent
found today, to levels as high as 30 to 35 percent—levels that allowed limbed
lungless fish to crawl from the sea and survive the hundreds of thousands of
years it would take to evolve an efficient, air-breathing lung. All of this conquest
and change caused by land plants depended on a single great anatomical
innovation—the evolution of the leaf.
LAND VS. SEA
Animal life emerged from the sea in a series of successive invasions, much like a
succession of uncoordinated, ragtag, and poorly equipped and adapted armies
might do—a few solders at a time, and most dying in the process. The standard
explanation for this particular history is that these invasions took place because
animals had finally evolved to a point where conquest of land was possible, with
the driver being the presence of unexploited resources, less competition, and less
predation (for a while, anyway). In other words, the evolutionary advances in
arthropods, mollusks, annelids, and eventually vertebrates—the major animal
phyla involved in the conquest of land—had finally and coincidentally arrived at
levels of organization allowing them to climb out of the water and conquer the
land. But our view is that the first conquest of land by animals took place as
soon as atmospheric oxygen rose to levels allowing it.
Let us first look at what was required of both plants and animals to allow
terrestrialization, the adaptations allowing life on land. Let us begin with plants,
for without a food source on land, no animals would have made the effort to gain
a terrestrial foothold.
By 600 million years ago, plant evolution had resulted in the diversification of
many lineages of multicellular plants, some familiar to us still: the green, brown,
and red algae that are familiar members of any seashore in our world.5 But these
were plants that had evolved in seawater. The needs of life—carbon dioxide and
nutrients—were easily and readily available to them in the surrounding seawater.
Reproduction was also mediated by the liquid environment. The move to land
required substantial evolutionary change in the areas of carbon dioxide
acquisition, nutrient acquisition, body support, and reproduction. Each required

extensive modification to the existing body plans of the fully aquatic taxa. Much
of this history is still disputed, especially with the understanding of how
abundant and diverse various groups were in the Proterozoic era, even before the
Proterozoic snowball Earth.6 While the press loves anything that includes
“oldest,” “largest,” or some other absolute, there is a disconnect between the
rapid rate of discovery of the antiquity of land plants, their biological affiliations,
and the need to more accurately date them. For instance, in 2010 the discovery
of the “oldest” land plants was trumpeted based on new fossil discoveries from
Argentina.7 These fossils appear to be related to the common liverwort, and were
dated at 472 million years in age. But the error on any such dating from such
ancient rock is substantial. And besides, while these are indeed quite ancient
“vascular” plants, kinds with complex internal transportation systems, in this
case definitions of just what a plant is complicate the story. There were a lot of
both body plans and species diversity of photosynthesizing organisms we can
call plants well before 472 million years ago. Many paleobiologists suspect that
a wide diversity of fungi as well as green photosynthesizing microbes to
multicellular plants may have been on land earlier than is now considered, and
that even a billion years ago there may have been a surprisingly vigorous and
numerous assemblage of what collectively could be called plants, if we throw in
lichens, fungi, and sheets of green microbes draping wetter landscapes and
swamps.8
It was the green algal group, the Charophyceae, that ultimately gave rise to
photosynthetic multicellular land plants that all can agree are true “plants,” the
kind of organism being described in most stories about oldest plants. Many
obstacles had to be overcome; perhaps first among these was the problem of
desiccation. A green alga washing ashore from its underwater habitat quickly
degenerates and dies, as it rapidly desiccates in air, for there is no protective
coating. But these green algae produce reproductive zygotes that have a resistant
cuticle, and this same cuticle may have been used to coat the entire plant in the
move onto land. But the evolution of this cuticle, which protected the liquid-
filled plant cells inside, created a new problem: it cut off ready access to carbon
dioxide. In the ocean, carbon in dissolved carbon dioxide was simply absorbed
across the cell wall. So to accomplish this, in the newly evolved land plant,
many small holes, called stomata, evolved as tiny portals for the entry of gaseous
carbon dioxide.
The plant body must be anchored in place, and early land plants were
probably anchored by fungal symbionts because there doesn’t appear to be any

differentiation in the higher forms. Additionally, this symbiotic relationship
would provide for a means through which water could be recovered from the
soil.
Moving onto land also created the problem of support. Plants need large
surface areas facing sunlight. One solution is to simply lay flat on the ground,
and the very first land plants probably did this. This kind of solution is still used
by mosses, which grow as flat-lying carpets over soil. A visit to the Ordovician
land probably would have been a visit to a moss world, where the world’s tallest
“tree” was all of a quarter inch tall. But this is a very limiting solution. Growing
upright enables acquisition of much more light, especially in an ecosystem
where there is competition between numerous low-growing plants, and various
harder materials were incorporated by early plants to allow first stems and
finally tree trunks. Concomitant would have been the evolution of a transport
system from the newly evolved roots up to the newly evolved leaves. Finally,
reproductive bodies that could withstand periods of desiccation evolved,
ensuring reproduction in the terrestrial environment.
With these innovations, the colonization of land by plants was ensured, and
with the formation of vast new amounts of organic carbon on land for the first
time, animals were quick to follow. New resources spur new evolution. If the
first terrestrial plants evolved from a small group of predominantly freshwater
green algae, as is the most accepted opinion, they certainly did so without a lot
of paleontological fanfare or evidence in the fossil record. They left behind a
very fragmentary fossil record. Unearthing this fossil record (in both the literal
and philosophical sense) required detective-like sleuthing of the first order.
The recovery of the fossil record of the earliest complex land plants began
with a seminal 1937 paper, and for much of the discussion here, as well as the
scientific history, we are indebted to our acerbic but brilliant colleague and
friend, David Beerling of the University of Sheffield, who in his revolutionary
book The Emerald Planet rather unapologetically complains that his field of
Earth history, paleobotany, “gets no respect” in an almost comically Rodney
Dangerfield way. But he is totally correct, in the sense that while dinosaurs and
dinosaur hunters garner the lions’ (raptors’?) share of scientific interest and
glory, in fact, plants remain by far the most important group of organisms on
Earth in terms of their effect on the history of life. A book about how our planet
changed as a result of the “history” of life should have one chapter about animals
and all the rest about plants. In any event, much of our take on the role of plants
overtly comes from David’s work, and especially his book.

The history of how land plants took over the terrestrial ecosystems, and in so
doing changed the nature of life on Earth because of their effects on global
temperature, ocean chemistry, and atmospheric inventory, can start with
paleobotanist William Lander. Lander is the scientist who made these first
discoveries and found the then-oldest-known land-plant fossil remains in 417-
million-year-old rocks in Wales. (At the time these dates were completely
unknown. In fact, the absolute age dates that we now use are a fairly new
discovery.) While the 417-million-year-old fossils from Wales were thought to
be the oldest record of land plants, soon other fossils began to appear in even
older rocks, later dated as being 425 million years in age, also found in Wales.
This oldest plant was named as Cooksonia. From these early beginnings, land
plants underwent a curiously long and much-delayed evolutionary radiation.
Between 425 and 360 million years ago plants underwent their own version of
the Cambrian explosion in animals; only this time it was an explosion of plants
on land. But the newest view is that for at least 30 million years following the
first appearance of land plants, not one of them had leaves. It now looks as if
leafy plants were not firmly established until 360 million years ago.
There is indeed a mystery as to why leaves took so long. Even after the first
appearance of leaves, it then took another 10 million years until they became
widespread and distributed both in diversity and abundance throughout the
planet. This extremely long period of time between the appearance of a land
plant and that of a land plant with leaves can be compared with the much faster
appearance of large and diverse mammals following the extinction of the
dinosaurs, 65 million years ago. For the latter, it took no more than 10 million
years for the major stocks of land mammals to appear, and appear not only in
diversity but also in abundance and large size.
Once again we must look at the role of evo-devo and genes to understand this
particular evolutionary history. Plants had to first evolve the genetic tool kit
required to assemble leaves, but then they had to be able to use it, and the use
seems to have been delayed. The best evidence to date indicates that plants with
leaves had the genes necessary to build leaves, but then had to await changes
within the environment in which they lived. In this particular case it was not a
wait for the rise in oxygen—as it was for animals—but something entirely
different: a wait for a drop in atmospheric carbon dioxide, as least according to
the latest paleobotanical interpretations of the twenty-first century.
Here again is an example where the modern day can inform past history—our
history of life. Experiments on living plants show that they are extremely

susceptible to the level of carbon dioxide in which they live. All plants need
carbon dioxide to undergo photosynthesis, but to do this, the plant has to absorb
carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere around it. If there is a leaf, carbon dioxide
has to enter through the otherwise impenetrable outer wall of the leaf. This is
done through tiny holes called stomata. But there is a two-way street here. While
carbon dioxide can enter through the stomata, water within the plant can also
exit through the same holes. A theme that recurs over and over in the evolution
of land animals and land plants is that desiccation remains one of the major
obstacles to life. In high carbon dioxide settings, there are very few stomata. But
when carbon dioxide is reduced, the number of stomata increases.
One would think that high levels of carbon dioxide would be the most optimal
condition for any land plant. In terms of this physiology, in fact this is true.
However, we know that carbon dioxide is one of the principal greenhouse gases.
Times of high carbon dioxide are times of high heat on the surface of the Earth.
Plants have an exquisite signaling system, allowing fully grown and mature
leaves to communicate with leaves just undergoing first growth and
development. The larger leaves inform the smaller about the optimal number of
stomata to produce for the environmental conditions they are all living in. If we
go back in time to observe the levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere when
land plants first began their evolutionary rise, over 400 million years ago, we see
a period of extremely high carbon dioxide levels—and thus an extremely warm
planet. So warm, in fact, that heat itself may have been a major brake on plant
evolution and ecological success. The same stomata that let carbon dioxide in
also allow the removal of water from the inside of the plant—and it is this
process that actually cools the plant.
A little desiccation cools a plant, but a lot kills it, and as in so much, success
comes from balance. In a very hot climate, a lot of cooling is needed. But in a
high-CO2 atmosphere, a plant needs very few stomata to handle its carbon
dioxide needs. Yet the same number of stomata necessary for “ingestion” or
carbon dioxide into the body of the plant might be too few to allow cooling—
especially if the stomata are located on a large, flat surface—like a leaf. In such a
case, a large leaf with few stomata will cause overheating to the point of death.
This is the newest view of why it took so long for leaves to evolve. The genetic
tool kit necessary to make them was in place. But the atmosphere had so much
CO2 in it that plants did not dare build leaves.
The new early twenty-first-century work of David Beerling and others
suggests that it took a drop in carbon dioxide before leaves could be viable at all.

Before this time any leaf would be a death sentence for the plant. Thus it was
that it was only after 40 million years following the first appearance of
Cooksonia that leaves as well as better internal plumbing systems within the
plant (including new and deeper boring roots) first appeared. This latter, the
ability to send roots to ever-greater depths, had two advantages for plants. First,
deeper roots provided more stability. Second, deeper rooting gave greater access
to both soil nutrients and water. The first plants have extremely shallow rooting
systems. But once leaves evolved, roots also began to change and evolve to go
ever deeper into the soil.
By the Devonian period, we see the evidence of roots that extended downward
for as much as three feet. The new, deeper roots vastly increased the weathering
of rocks beneath these early plants. As more plants lived in the soil, more and
more of them died, adding organic material to the soil. At the same time, ever-
deeper penetration by roots vastly increased both mechanical and chemical
weathering of rocks beneath. This had important consequences for the makeup
of the atmosphere as well as the temperature of the Earth.
We have seen that perhaps the most important driver removing carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere is the weathering of silicate rocks, the granites, and
sedimentary and metamorphic rocks with a granite-like chemical composition, a
rock type rich in the element silicon. The reaction of chemically weathered
silicate rocks on land is such that molecules of carbon dioxide are removed from
the atmosphere. This is called the biotic enhancement of weathering, and it
would have been taking place as soon as tree-rich forests began covering the
land, about 380 to 360 million years ago. As roots went deeper into silicate rocks
beneath, the granite and compositionally granite-like rocks of the continents
began to weather much more quickly than the time before forests, and this
caused carbon dioxide levels to plunge, and plunge quickly.
The lowering carbon dioxide levels allowed ice to appear on the continents,
first only at the highest latitudes, but eventually at ever-lower latitudes. But the
juggernaut of evolution favored taller trees, and with taller trees came deeper
roots. Plants became taller, roots went deeper, and the planet became ever colder.
The evolution of land plants with their ever-deeper rooting in fact plunged the
planet into one of the longest-running ice ages ever in Earth history, one that
began in the Carboniferous period. But before this happened, the world would
have been warm, lush, and rich in plant-friendly levels of carbon dioxide. In
short, the continents, newly green with vascular plants, would have been like a
gigantic, stocked, but customer-free grocery store. Free food, if only you can get

into the store. Or in this case, out of the sea and onto land—to stay.
THE FIRST LAND ANIMALS
The major problem facing any would-be terrestrial animal colonist was water
loss. All living cells require liquid within them, and living in water does not
provide any sort of desiccation problem. But living on land requires a tough coat
to hold water in. The problem is that solutions that allow a reduction in surface
desiccation are antagonistic to the needs of a respiratory membrane. So here we
are twixt the devil and the deep blue sea: build an external coating that resists
desiccation, an advantage, but at the same time risk death from suffocation. The
alternative was to evolve a surface respiratory structure that allowed the
diffusion of oxygen into the body, but caused increased risk of desiccation
through this same structure. This dilemma had to be overcome by any land
conqueror, and it was apparently so difficult that only a very small number of
animal, plant, and protozoan phyla ever accomplished the move from water to
land. Some of the largest and most important of current marine phyla certainly
never made it: there are no terrestrial sponges, cnidarians, brachiopods,
bryozoans, or echinoderms among many others, for instance.
The oldest fossil land animals all appear to have been small arthropods
resembling modern-day spiders, scorpions, mites, isopods, and very primitive
insects. It is unclear which of these quite different arthropod groups was first, but
being first did not last long, as all of these groups are found in the fossil record
in ancient deposits. Identifying these first land animals has necessarily relied on
a fossil record that is notoriously inaccurate when it comes to small terrestrial
arthropods. All of these groups have very weakly calcified exoskeletons, and
thus are rarely preserved as fossils. By the Late Silurian or Early Devonian time
intervals, however, or around 400 million years ago, the rise of land plants also
brought ashore the vanguards of the animal invasion, and it is clear that multiple
lines of arthropods independently evolved respiratory systems capable of dealing
with air.
The respiratory systems in today’s scorpions and spiders provide a key to
understanding their successful transition from marine animals to successful
terrestrial animals. Of all structures required to make this crucial jump, none was
more important than respiratory structures. It also seems apparent that the

earliest lungs used by the pioneering arthropods would have been transitional
structures nowhere near as efficient as in later species. But in a very high oxygen
atmosphere, air can diffuse across the body wall of very small land animals—
and the first land animals all seemed to be small, as well as taking in oxygen by
even their primitive lung structures.
Of the phyla that made it onto land, which included many kinds of arthropods,
as well as mollusks, annelids, and chordates (along with some very small
animals such as nematodes), the arthropods were preevolved to succeed, for their
all-encompassing skeletal box was already fashioned to provide protection from
desiccation. But they still had to overcome the problem of respiration. As we
have seen, the outer skeleton of arthropods required the evolution of extensive
and large gills on most segments to ensure survival in the low-oxygen Cambrian
world where most arthropod higher taxa are first seen in the fossil record. But
such external gills will not work in air. The solution among the first terrestrial
arthropods, spiders, and scorpions was to produce a new kind of respiratory
structure called a book lung, named after the resemblance of the inner parts of
this lung to the pages of a book.
A series of flat plates within the body have blood flowing between the leaves.
Air enters the book lungs through a series of openings in the carapace. This is a
passive lung in that there is no current of air “inhaled” into these lungs. And
because of this, they are dependent on some minimum oxygen content.
It is well known that some very small spiders are blown by winds at high
altitudes and have been dubbed “aerial plankton.” This would seemingly argue
that the book lung system in spiders is capable of extracting sufficient oxygen in
low-O2 environments. But these spiders are invariably very small in size, so
small that an appreciable fraction of their respiratory needs may be satisfied by
passive diffusion across the body. Larger-bodied spiders are dependent on the
book lungs.
Book gills may be more efficient at garnering oxygen than the insect
respiratory system, which is composed of tubelike trachea. Like spiders and
scorpions, the insect system is passive in that there is little or no pumping,
although recent studies on insects suggest that some slight pumping may indeed
be occurring, but at very low pressures. The book lung system of the arachnids
has a much higher surface area than does the insect system, and thus should
work at lower atmospheric oxygen concentrations.
The “when” of this first colonization of land is hampered by the small size and
poorly fossilizable nature of the earliest scorpions and spiders. Present-day

scorpions are more mineralized than spiders, and not surprisingly have a better
fossil record. The earliest evidence of animal fragments is from late Silurian
rocks in Wales, about 420 million years in age, near the end of the Silurian
period—and a time when oxygen had already reached very high levels, the
highest that had up to that time ever been evolved on Earth. These early fossils
are rare and of low diversity, but identifications have been made: most of the
material seems to have come from fossil millipedes.
A far richer assemblage is known from the famous Rhynie Chert of Scotland,
which has been dated at 410 million years in age. This deposit has furnished
fossils of very early plants, as well as the fossils of small arthropods. Most of
these arthropods appear to be related to modern-day mites and springtails, which
both eat plant debris and refuse, and thus would have been well adapted to living
in the new land communities composed mainly of small, primitive plants. Mites
are related to spiders. Springtails, however, are insects, presumably the most
ancient of this largest of animal groups now on Earth today. It might be expected
that once evolved, insects diversified into the most abundant and diverse of
terrestrial animal life in our time. However, this was not the case, and in fact just
the opposite appears to be true.
According to paleoentomologists, insects remained rare and marginal
members of the land fauna until nearly the end of the Mississippian period, some
330 million years ago—when oxygen levels had reached modern-day levels, and
in fact were on their way up to record levels, which climaxed in the Late
Pennsylvanian period of some 310 million years ago. Insect flight also occurred
well after the first appearance of the group, with undoubted flying insects
occurring commonly in the record some 330 million years ago. Soon after this
first development the insects undertook a fantastic evolutionary surge of new
species, mainly flying forms. This was a classic adaptive radiation, where a new
morphological breakthrough allows colonization of new ecological niches. But
that radiation also took place at the oxygen high, and was surely in no small way
aided and abetted by the high levels of atmospheric oxygen.
Insects were also not the first animals on land. That accolade may go to
scorpions. In mid-Silurian time, some 430 million years ago, a lineage of proto-
scorpions with water gills crawled out of the freshwater swamps and lakes that
they were adapted to and moved onto and then about on land, perhaps
scavenging on dead animals such as fish washed up onto beaches. Their gill
regions remained wet, and the very high surface area of these gills may have
allowed respiration of sorts. They certainly did not have functional lungs, only

semi-serviceable gills.
Here is the timetable as we now know it: scorpions onto land about 430
million years ago (MA), but of a kind that may have been still tied to water for
reproduction and perhaps even respiration; followed by millipedes at 420 MA,
and insects at 410 MA. But common insects did not appear until 330 MA. How
does this history relate to the atmospheric oxygen curve?
The newest estimates of atmospheric oxygen levels at this time indicate that a
high oxygen peak occurred at about 410 million years ago, followed by a rapid
fall, with a rise again from very low levels (12 percent) at the end of the
Devonian to the highest levels in Earth history by somewhere in the Permian
when it exceeded 30 percent (compared to 21 percent today). The Rhynie Chert,
which yielded the first abundant insect-arachnid fauna, is right at the oxygen
maximum in the Devonian. Insects are then rare in the record (according to
paleontologists who study insect diversity) until the rise to near 20 percent in the
Mississippian-Pennsylvanian, the time interval from 330 to 310 million years
ago—the time of the diversification of winged insects.
The conquest of land by various vertebrate groups was seemingly enabled by
a rise in atmospheric oxygen levels during the Ordovician-Silurian time interval.
Had that not happened, it is possible that the history and kind of animals that did
colonize land might have been much different—or it might never have happened
at all; animals might never have colonized land. We also know that following
this colonization, animals became seemingly rare, during the subsequent time of
low oxygen.
There are three possibilities for this observed pattern of fossil abundances and
diversity. First, this seeming pause in the colonization of land is not real at all; it
is simply an artifact of a very poor fossil record for the time interval from 400 to
about 370 million years ago. Second, the “pause” is real; because of very low
oxygen there were indeed very few arthropods and especially insects on land.
But the few that survived were able to diversify into a wave of new forms when
oxygen again rose, some 30 million years later. Third, the first waves of
attackers coming from the sea as part of the invasion of land were wiped out in
the oxygen fall. Yes, here and there a few survivors held out. But the second
wave was just that—coming from new stocks of invaders, again swarming onto
the land under a curtain of oxygen. The colonization of land by animals
(arthropods, and as we shall see, vertebrates as well) thus took place in two
distinct waves: one from 430 to 410 million years ago, the other from 370
onward.

Arthropods are not the only colonists making a new life on land of course.
Gastropod mollusks also made the evolutionary leap onto land, but did not make
this transition until the Pennsylvanian (thus they were part of the second wave),
when oxygen levels were even higher than at any time during the first wave.
Another group that made shore were horseshoe crabs, at about the same time that
the mollusks landed. But these are minor colonists compared to the group that
most concerns this history of life—our group, the vertebrates. But amphibians
did not just burst out of the sea. They were the culmination of a long
evolutionary history, and before they emerge onto land in our narrative, let us
look at the Devonian period, a time long called the Age of Fish. To do this we
want to feature one of our favorite field areas, the Devonian-aged Canning Basin
of Western Australia, where we two coauthors spent multiple field seasons in
one of the most extraordinarily beautiful (if hot!) places on the planet. The
Canning Basin preserves the world’s best fossilized barrier reef system. It is as if
the Great Barrier Reef were suddenly turned to stone and the water removed.
While much of the work to date has been in studying that giant Devonian reef, in
fact the rocks deposited in deeper water nearby during the Devonian Period have
yielded some of the most extraordinary of all fossil studies that certainly need to
be featured in any self-styled “new” history of life.
JOHN LONG AND THE GOGO FORMATION FISH
While common in salt water to freshwater and all salinities in between, in fact
fish fossilize all too rarely. It usually takes a low oxygen sea bottom where a
dead fish is rapidly buried for an entire fish to be preserved. Scavengers are all
too efficient at tearing fish corpses apart. But here and there beautiful fish fossils
can be preserved. Sometimes they appear in two-dimensional form, as from the
Eocene-aged Green River shale of Colorado, perhaps the place where more fish
fossils have been found than in any other locality. But other fish parts, especially
big fish skulls, are sometimes preserved in large round balls of rock called
concretions. These cannonball-like objects are often found in sedimentary rocks,
and they can contain the most beautifully preserved of fossils. Such preservation
is found in strata from northern Ohio of Devonian age, where gigantic fish skulls
have been found for a century, including the skull of one of the iconic monsters,
an ancient fish called Dunkleosteas, lately featured in the usually cheesy

Discovery Channel programs about ancient predators. But such preservation is
also found in a curiously named rock formation called the Gogo Formation, the
same age rocks (but deeper water equivalents) of our own Devonian Age
research. Among these cannonball concretions are some of the most important
fossils ever found. They give us a window of the platform from which our
amphibian ancestors ultimately emerged. To understand the conquest of land we
first have to know the Devonian world of fish in all its diversity and complexity.
In recent years Australian paleontologist John Long, a professor at Flinders
University in Adelaide, Australia (but also with a long professional stint at the
Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History), has taken new high-
resolution-scanning technology to make breakthrough discoveries about the
ancestry of all modern fish, as well as the lineages in deep time that are in our
own DNA.
Long is a rarity in Australian academics in having a successful and thriving
career in science outreach, and is the author of numerous books. But Long’s
“day job” has shown us that the evolution, morphology, diversity, and ecology of
Devonian age fish was far more complex than is now portrayed in textbooks. By
pioneering the use of imaging technology such as CT scanning, which bombards
fossils with energy sufficient to produce 3-D slices of the fossils, Long has
literally looked into the heads of the various fish groups.
The four “traditional” fish groups—today represented by lampreys and
hagfish; sharks; the most diverse, the “bony” fish; and an entirely extinct group,
the placoderms (the first jawed fish)—are far more complicated in all aspects
than they have been long portrayed. Long’s major discoveries from his field
expeditions to the Gogo fossil sites included the first complete skull of one of the
first bony fish, named Gogonasus, which showed that this species had large
spiracles, or holes, previously unknown in fish on top of its head. But the most
surprising discovery—beyond demonstrating a hitherto unknown diversity of
other kinds of early fish, including new types of lungfish (closely related to the
fish that ultimately crawled onto land) as well as strange fish called arthrodires
—was the discovery of the first Devonian fishes showing embryos inside them.
This latter discovery was the first time that reproduction by internal fertilization
was demonstrated, as well as the oldest evidence for vertebrate viviparity yet
discovered. One of his specimens was the only known fossil to show a
mineralized umbilical structure linked to the unborn embryo. Long used his new
high-tech methods to remarkably preserve 3-D muscle tissues, nerve cells, and
microcapillaries, all new kinds of detail from fossil fish. But most important for

understanding the move onto land, his soft tissue discoveries gave entirely new
insight into how a fish could evolve ancestors that could walk—even upright on
two legs.
THE EVOLUTION OF TERRESTRIAL VERTEBRATES
The transition of our own group from purely aquatic organisms to true terrestrial
inhabitants began with the evolution of the first amphibians. The fossil record
has given us a fair understanding of both the species involved in this transition
and the time it happened. A group of Devonian period bony fish known as
rhipidistians appears to have been the ancestors of the first amphibians. These
fish were dominant predators, and most or all appear to have been freshwater
animals. This in itself is interesting, and suggests that the bridge to land was first
through freshwater. The same may have been true for the arthropods as well.
The rhipidistians were seemingly preadapted to evolving limbs capable of
providing locomotion on land by having fleshy lobes on their fins. The still-
living coelacanth provides a glorious example of both a living fossil and a model
for envisioning the kind of animal that did give rise to the amphibians. But
another group of lobe-finned fish, the lungfish, also are useful in understanding
the transition, not in terms of locomotion, but in the all-important transition from
gill to lung. The best limbs in the world are of no use if the amphibian-in-waiting
could not breathe. There were thus two lineages of lobe-finned fishes, the
crossopterygians (of which the coelacanth is a member) and the lungfish.
The split of the amphibian stocks from their ray-finned ancestors (in this case,
the lobe fins) is dated at 450 million years ago, or at about the transition from the
Ordovician period to the Silurian period. But this may have simply been the
evolution of the stock of fish from which the amphibians ultimately came, not
the amphibians themselves. Paleontologist Robert Carroll, whose specialty is in
this transition, considers a fish genus known as Osteolepis the best candidate for
the last fish ancestor of the first amphibian, and this fish genus did not appear
until the early to middle part of the Devonian, or before about 400 million years
ago.
The first land-dwelling amphibians may have evolved at this time, based on
tantalizing evidence from footprints found in Ireland. A set of footprints from
Valentia has been interpreted as being the oldest record of limbed animals

leaving footprints, dated at about 400 million years in age. But there are no
skeletons associated with this trackway, which is composed of about 150
individual footprints of an animal walking across ancient mud dragging a thick
tail. This find has set off debate, since it predates the first undoubted tetrapod
bones by 32 million years. Interestingly, however, the trackway dates to a time
interval when oxygen levels either approached or exceeded current levels, and it
is at this same time that the fossil record of insects, recounted above, yielded the
first specimens of terrestrial insects and arachnids. Thus, just as the high oxygen
aided the transition from water to land in insects, so too might it have allowed
evolution of a first vertebrate land dweller.
The uncertainty about the age of the first vertebrate footprints on land was
slightly alleviated by a discovery made in 2010, of a second set of tracks that
was discovered to be 395 million years in age. They were preserved in marine
sediments of the southern coast of (now) Poland. They were made during the
Middle Devonian period. The tracks, some of which show digits, are thus 18
million years older than the oldest-known tetrapod body fossils. Additionally, the
tracks show that the animal was capable of a type of arm and leg motion that
would have been impossible in the more fish-like tetrapods and near tetrapods,
such as the aforementioned Tiktaalik and its probable descendant, Acanthostega.
The animal that produced the tracks was large for the time: some estimates
peg it at more than eight feet long. Perhaps this creature and its ilk were
scavengers on the tidal flats, feeding on washed-up marine animals stranded by
the tide, or the numerous land arthropods, including scorpions and spiders.
The first tetrapod bone fossils are not known until rocks about 360 million
years in age, so the transition was in this interval between 400 and 360 MA. A
rapid drop in oxygen characterizes this interval, and the first tetrapod fossils
come from a time that shows minimal oxygen on the Berner curve. It is likely,
however, that the actual transition from fish to amphibian must have happened
much earlier, nearer the time of the Devonian high-oxygen peak but still in a
period of dropping oxygen.
Most of our understanding about these crucial events comes from only a few
localities, with the outcrops in Greenland being the most prolific in tetrapod
remains. Although the genus Ichthyostega is given pride of place in most texts as
being first, actually a different genus named Ventastega was first, at about 363
million years ago, followed in several million years by a modest radiation that
included Ichthyostega, Acanthostega, and Hynerpeton.
Of these, Ichthyostega was the most renowned—until Tiktaalik, that is. Yet the

new notoriety of Tiktaalik is a bit misplaced. It was a fish. Ichthyostega was
something else. An amphibian, its bones were first recovered in the 1930s, but
they were fragmentary, and it was not until the 1950s that detailed examination
led to a reconstruction of the entire skeleton. The animal had well-developed
legs, but it also had a fish-like tail. Later that further study showed that this
inhabitant from 363 million years ago was probably incapable of walking on
land. Newer studies of its foot and ankle seemed to suggest that it could not have
supported its body without the flotation aid of being immersed in water.
The strata enclosing Ichthyostega and the other primitive tetrapods from
Greenland came from a time interval that was soon after the devastating Late
Devonian mass extinction, whose cause was most certainly a drop in
atmospheric oxygen that created widespread anoxia in the seas. The appearance
of Ichthyostega and its brethren may have been instigated by this extinction,
since evolutionary novelty often follows mass extinction in response to filling
empty ecological niches. But the success of Ichthyostega and its brethren was
short-lived: the fossil record shows that within a few million years after its first
appearance, it and the other pioneering tetrapods disappeared.
The appearance of Ichthyostega and its late Devonian brethren poses crucial
questions. If these were indeed the first terrestrial vertebrates, why wasn’t there a
succeeding “adaptive radiation” of their descendants? But this did not happen.
Instead there is a long gap before more amphibians appear. This gap has
perplexed generations of paleontologists. In fact it came to be known as Romer’s
gap, after the early twentieth-century paleontologist Alfred Romer, who first
brought attention to the mysterious gap between the first wave of vertebrates
invading the land and the second. In fact, the expected evolutionary radiation of
amphibians did not take place until about 340 to 330 million years ago, making
Romer’s gap at least 30 million years in length.
A 2004 summary by John Long and Malcolm Gordon similarly interpreted the
tetrapods living in the 370-to 355-million-year-old interval, the time of a great
oxygen drop, as entirely aquatic, essentially fish with legs, even though some of
them had lost gills. Respiration was by gulping air in the manner of many
current fish, and oxygen absorption through the skin. They were not amphibians
as we know them today—species that can live for their entire adult lives on land.
And it appears that none of the Devonian tetrapods had any sort of tadpole stage.
The long interval supposedly without amphibians was “plugged” in 2003 by
Jenny Clack. While looking through old museum collections she came upon a
fossil misinterpreted as a fully aquatic fish, but which she showed to be a

tetrapod with five toes and the skeletal architecture that would have allowed land
life. This fossil was given a new name, Pederpes, and it lived long after
Tiktaalik. It indeed may have been the first true amphibian, and it did come from
the time interval between 354 and 344 million years ago known as Romer’s gap.
But like so much about the past, sometimes fossils raise more questions than
answers. It does tell us that somewhere in the middle of Romer’s gap, a tetrapod
did evolve the legs necessary for land life. However, it is still not known if it
could breathe air or whether it could even emerge from the water for even for a
few minutes.
Alfred Romer thought that the evolution of the first amphibians came about
because of the effect of oxygen. Romer considered that lungfish or their
Devonian equivalents were trapped in small pools that would seasonally
desiccate. He thought that the lack of oxygen brought about by natural processes
in these pools, as well as the drying, was the evolutionary impetus for the
evolution of lungs—the amphibians-in-waiting were forced out of the pools and
into the air. Gradually, those animals that could survive the times of emersion
from water had an advantage. These fish still had gills, but the gills themselves
allowed some adsorption of oxygen. It may be that the transitional forms had
both gills and primitive lungs.
The transition from aquatic tetrapods such as Ichthyostega or, more probably,
Pederpes, passed through the Tiktaalik grade of fish organization and involved
changes in the wrists, ankle, backbone, and other portions of the axial skeleton
that facilitate breathing and locomotion. Rib cages are important to house lungs,
while the demands of supporting a heavy body in air, as compared to the near
flotation of the same body in water, required extensive changes to the shoulder
girdle, pelvic region, and the soft tissues that integrated them. The first forms
that had made all of these changes can be thought of as the first terrestrial
amphibians. Yet a great radiation of new amphibian species, which would be
expected soon after the evolution of a respiratory system that could breathe air,
not water, and limbs that could move a heavy body across land, did not occur
until 340 to 330 million years ago. But when it did finally take off, it did so in
spectacular fashion, and by the end of the Mississippian period (some 318
million years ago) there were numerous amphibians from localities all over the
world.
The evidence at hand suggests that the evolution of the amphibian grade of
organization, essentially a fish that came on land, may have taken place twice, or
even three times, the first being some 400 million years ago as evidenced by the

Valentia footprints as well as the Tiktaalik fossil discovery, and the second some
360 million years ago, and the last some 350 million years ago. Ichthyostega,
long thought to mark the appearance of the first land vertebrate, may have been
far more fish-like than first thought, and the fact that it lost its gills is not
evidence of a fully terrestrial habitat. In fact, we now know that over a hundred
different kinds of modern fish use air breathing (as well as gills) of some sort.
Air breathing has evolved independently in as many as sixty-eight of these
extant fish, showing how readily this adaptation can take place. Ichthyostega
may not even have been on the line leading to the rest of tetrapod lineages, but
one that was evolving back into a fully aquatic lifestyle, forced off the land by its
primitive lungs and the dropping oxygen levels of the Late Devonian.
 
Artist rendition of Tiktaalik, created for the Animal Planet program Animal Armageddon. (Art by Alfonse
de la Torre in conjunction with Peter Ward, used with permission from Digital Ranch Productions, Rob
Kirk)
 
It has long been assumed that the first amphibians were freshwater forms, and
indeed this has been a major question in the history of life: was the route to land
through freshwater first, or did some organisms evolve directly from salt water
to air? However, new research has shown that early lobe-finned fish and lungfish
—the immediate ancestors of the first tetrapods—were most often marine forms.
Similarly, 
paleontologist 
Michel 
Laurin 
has 
noted 
several 
classical
Carboniferous-aged localities that have yielded early amphibians and that have
long been considered to represent freshwater deposits may in fact have been
either marine or near marine deposits, such as intertidal or lagoonal
environments. However, it seems equally sure that the famous Tiktaalik and

some early amphibians such as Ichthyostega and Acanthostega have been
interpreted as freshwater forms. It is thus likely that these first amphibians and
near amphibians inhabited a wide variety of environments: salt water,
freshwater, and terrestrial environments in the Late Paleozoic. This brings up an
interesting point. Modern amphibians are intolerant of salt water; their skin,
which takes in oxygen when immersed in water, cannot deal with the salt. This
must be a trait evolved much later in their history.
In summary, colonization of the land came in two steps, each corresponding
with a time of high oxygen. The time in between, the time of the Devonian mass
extinction through the so-called Romer’s gap, had little animal life on land. Thus
Romer’s gap should be expanded in concept to include arthropods as well as
chordates.9 It finally ended in the Carboniferous period (split in two in America,
where we call it the Mississippian and Pennsylvanian periods), when oxygen
levels rose in spectacular fashion, and in the last intervals of Carboniferous and
then continuing into the successive Permian period, when the oxygen levels
finally topped out at nearly 32 to 35 percent, creating a unique interval in Earth
history. A time of giants.

CHAPTER XI
The Age of Arthropods: 350–300 MA
A staple of Hollywood in the immediate post–World War II interval, the dawn of
the nuclear age, was the “giant-creature-produced-by-A-bomb-radiation” movie.
Sometimes these monsters were examples of some kind of giant extinct life,
often thawed out of some 70-million-year-old glacier. More often they were a
familiar insect, scorpion, or spider of giant size. While easy to dismiss as
“unscientific,” these movie monsters do let us pose a legitimate question about
the maximum size that can be obtained by any given animal body plan. Since
large size is often a protection against predation, it seems that most animals grow
as large as they can. What ultimately limits the size of animals? In the case of
terrestrial arthropods (spiders, scorpions, millipedes, centipedes, and insects
among a few other more minor groups) it is clear that two aspects of the
arthropod body plan limited and still limit them from attaining large mammal-
like size.
One of these is the exoskeleton. Because of scaling properties and strength of
the material called chitin, the hard-part material that makes up most of the
arthropod exoskeleton, a giant ant, spider, scorpion, or mantis of even human
size would collapse, its walking legs snapping. The second aspect of arthropod
design that limits size is respiration. Insects, spiders, and scorpions appear to be
limited in size by the degree to which oxygen can diffuse into the innermost
regions of their body. Today, no insect is bigger than about six inches in body
length. In the past, however, much larger forms than this did exist, during the
interval of the highest oxygen in Earth history.
THE CARBONIFEROUS-PERMIAN OXYGEN HIGH
While the various specialists modeling past atmospheric composition differ in
values, their respective models suggest for past time intervals that there is
unanimous agreement that oxygen reached extraordinarily high values in the
time interval from about 320 to 260 million years ago, with maximal values
occurring near the end of this interval. The Carboniferous period (again in North

America subdivided into the Mississippian and Pennsylvanian periods) and the
first half of the subsequent Permian period were the times of high oxygen, and
the biota of the world at that time has left clear evidence of the high oxygen.
Insects from the time present the best evidence.
The Carboniferous oxygen high (and much else as well) was well described
by Nick Lane in his 2002 book Oxygen.1 In a chapter titled “The Bolsover
Dragonfly,” Lane wrote about a fossil dragonfly discovered in 1979 that had a
wingspan of some twenty inches. An even larger form, with a thirty-inch
wingspan, is also known from fossils of this Carboniferous time, a beast aptly
named Meganeura, yet another dragonfly. It was not only the wings that were
large. The bodies of these giants were also proportionally larger, with a width of
as much as an inch and a length of nearly a foot. This is about seagull size, and
while seagulls are never linked in any sentence with the word “giant,” an insect
with a twenty-inch wingspan was indeed a veritable giant. In comparison,
today’s dragonflies may reach four inches in wingspan, but more commonly are
smaller. Other giants of the time included mayflies with nineteen-inch
wingspans, a spider with eighteen-inch legs, and two-yard-long (or longer)
millipedes and scorpions. A three-foot-long scorpion could weigh fifty pounds,
and would be a formidable predator of all land animals, including the
amphibians. But, as we will see, the amphibians also evolved some giant species
of their own.
In the case of insects, it is the nature and efficiency of the insect respiratory
system in extracting oxygen and getting it into the most interior recesses of its
body that dictates maximum size. All insects use a system of fine tubes, called
trachea. Air actively ventilated into the tubes where it then diffused into the
tissues. Air is pulled into the canals either by rhythmically expanding and
contracting the abdominal region or by using the flapping of wings to create air
currents around the tracheal opening. The tracheal system is thus made more
efficient in either case. Flying insects achieve the highest metabolic rates of any
animal, and experimental evidence shows that increasing oxygen to higher levels
enables dragonflies to produce even higher metabolic rates. These studies
showed that dragonflies are both metabolically and probably size limited as well
by our current 21 percent oxygen levels.
Whether or not oxygen levels control arthropod size has been contentious. The
best evidence that it does comes from studies of amphipods, small marine
arthropods that are widely distributed in our world’s oceans and lakes. Gauthier
Chapelle and Lloyd Peck examined two thousand specimens from a wide variety

of habitats and discovered that bodies of water with higher dissolved oxygen
content had larger amphipods. More direct experiments were conducted by
Robert Dudley of Arizona State University, who grew fruit flies in elevated
oxygen conditions and discovered that each successive generation was larger
than the preceding when raised at 23 percent oxygen. In insects, at least, higher
oxygen very quickly promotes larger size.2
It was not only higher oxygen that allowed the existence of giant dragonflies.
The actual air pressure is presumed to have been higher as well. Oxygen partial
pressures rose, but not at the expense of other gases. The total gas pressure was
higher than today, and the larger number of gas molecules in the atmosphere
would have given more lift to the giants. There was clearly more oxygen in the
air than now. The question is why.
Earlier we saw that oxygen levels are affected mainly by burial rates of
reduced carbon and sulfur-bearing minerals like fool’s gold (pyrite). When a
great deal of organic matter is buried, oxygen levels go up. If this is true, it must
mean that the Carboniferous period, the time of the Earth’s highest oxygen
content, must have been a time of rapid burial of large volumes of carbon and
pyrite, and the evidence from the stratigraphic record confirms that this indeed
happened—through the formation of coal deposits.
We are looking at a long interval of time: 70 million years, longer than the
time between the last dinosaurs and the present day, in the 330–260-million-
years-old time of high oxygen. It turns out that 90 percent of the Earth’s coal
deposits are found in rocks of that interval. The rate of coal burial was much
higher than any other time in Earth history—six hundred times higher, in fact,
according to Nick Lane in his book Oxygen. But the term “coal burial” is pretty
inaccurate. Coal is the remains of ancient wood, and thus we see a time when
enormous quantities of fallen wood were rapidly buried and only later through
heat and pressure turned to coal. The Carboniferous period was the time of forest
burial on a spectacular scale.
The burial of organic material during the Carboniferous was not restricted to
land plants. There is much carbon in the oceans tied up in phyto-and
zooplankton, the oceanic equivalents of the terrestrial forests, and here too large
amounts of organic-rich sediments accumulated on sea bottoms. The ultimate
cause of this unique buildup of carbon, leading to the unique maximum of
oxygen levels, was the coincidence of several geological and biological events
that culminated in the vast carbon deposit accumulations. First, the continents of
the time coalesced into one single large continent by the closing of an ancient

Atlantic Ocean. As Europe collided with North America and South America
with Africa, a gigantic linear mountain chain arose along the suturing of these
continental blocks.
On either side of this mountain chain great floodplains arose, and the
configuration of the mountains also produced a wet climate over much of the
Earth. Newly evolved trees colonized the vast swamps and their adjoining drying
land areas that came into being. Many of these trees would appear fantastic to us
in their strangeness, and one of their strangest traits was a very shallow root
system. They grew tall and fell over quite easily. And there are lots of falling
trees in our world, but nowhere near the accumulation of carbon. More was at
work than a swampy world ideal for plant growth.
The forests that came into being some 375 million years ago were composed
of the first true trees that used lignin and cellulose for skeletal support. Lignin is
a very tough substance, and today it is broken down by a variety of bacteria. But
even after nearly 400 million years, the bacteria that do this job take their own
sweet time.3 A fallen tree takes many years to “rot,” and some of the harder
woods, those with more lignin than the so-called soft woods like cedar and pine,
take longer yet.
Decomposition of trees is accomplished by oxidation of much of the tree’s
carbon, so even if the end product is eventually buried, very little reduced carbon
makes it into the geological record. Back in the Carboniferous, many or perhaps
all of the bacteria that decompose wood were not yet present,4 with the key to
this the seeming inability of microbes to break down the main structural
component of wood, the material lignin. Trees would fall and not decompose
back then. Eventually sediment would cover the undecomposed trees, and
reduced carbon was buried in the process. With all of these trees (and the
plankton in the seas) producing oxygen through photosynthesis, and very little of
this new oxygen being used to decompose the rapidly growing and falling
forests, oxygen levels began to rise.
OXYGEN AND FOREST FIRES
The Carboniferous oxygen peak would have had consequences in addition to
gigantism. Oxygen is combustible, and the more there is the bigger the fire; it
facilitates fuel ignition, and the fuel in question was the huge and global forest of

the coal age.
The Carboniferous period may have witnessed the largest forest fires ever to
occur on Earth (at least until the dinosaur-killing and forest-igniting Chicxulub
asteroid of 65 million years ago, that is). Like so much dealing with the change
of oxygen over time, studies on the possibility of megafires provoked by high
atmospheric oxygen have been controversial, but are becoming much less so as
more and more evidence accumulates. Indeed, the forest fire controversy has
been a major criticism of the entire theory that oxygen values have been different
in the past (including higher). It was suggested that ancient forests would not
have been able to survive the catastrophic fires, and since we have a long fossil
record of the forest, the catastrophic fires did not take place.
Conditions of elevated oxygen at least theoretically should generate more
rapid rates of flame spread, as well as lead to higher-intensity fires, and indeed
large deposits of fossil charcoal in sedimentary rocks of Mississippian and
Pennsylvanian age in North America5 are evidence that there were forest fires
back then: forest fires that were larger, more frequent, and more intense than
those of today, although direct comparison suffers from the very different
biological makeup of forests then and now.
If there were more and more intense forest fires, we would expect to see
morphological adaptations to fire resistance over time. Plants evolved a well-
known series of adaptations collectively known as fire-resistance traits, which
include thicker bark, deeply embedded vascular tissue (Cambria), and sheathes
of fibrous roots surrounding the stem.
One can also question why such high oxygen did not cause all Carboniferous
forests to burn to the ground. While fires then do seem to have been more
frequent, the presence of fire-resistant plants and the high moisture content both
in the plants themselves and in the swampy terrain of large portions of the
Earth’s surface in the numerous coal swamps limited damage. Also important is
the temperature of the “match” that started the forest fires. In recent studies6
looking at oxygen levels and whether wood would burn, the investigators
reported that plants will not burn at oxygen levels below about 11–12 percent.
Yet they tried to start these fires with a lit match, rather than the far higher
temperature than any lightning strike brings.
THE EFFECT OF HIGH OXYGEN ON PLANTS

Like animals, plants need oxygen for life. Oxygen is taken up within the cells
during photorespiration. But the levels are far lower than those needed by
animals for the most part. A second difference is that various parts of terrestrial
plants, for instance, have different oxygen needs. Most plants live in two very
different media—part in air, part in solid (the roots in soil). The very different
environments of underground roots, surrounded by water, solids, and gas,
required very different evolutionary needs. Leaves sit in air. They worry about
losing water and getting enough light, not drowning in too much water (if they
could worry, that is). But mostly the roots have a requirement that the leaves do
not—the right level of oxygen. It is the root system that is most susceptible to
damage or cell death from low oxygen, and this is all too familiar to those
gardeners or house plant owners who water their plants too much. Roots live in
the underground environment where low-oxygen conditions can occur, even at
times of well-oxygenated air, especially if there is too much water in the soil.
Roots can be smothered by groundwater with low oxygen values, for instance.
What about plants and high oxygen levels? Here there is far less data, but
what is known suggests that elevated levels of O2 are deleterious to plants.
Higher levels of oxygen in air lead to increased rates of photorespiration, but a
more serious consequence is that in higher oxygen levels there are more toxic
chemicals called “OH radicals” that are dangerous to living cells. To further test
these possibilities, David Beerling, a former student of Yale’s Bob Berner, grew
various plants in higher than current oxygen within closed tanks.7 When oxygen
levels were raised to 35 percent (thought to have been the highest levels of all
time, occurring in the late Carboniferous or early Permian), the net primary
productivity (a measure of plant growth) dropped by a fifth. It may be that the
higher oxygen of the Carboniferous through early Permian caused a reduction in
plant life to some degree, although this is not observable in the fossil record by
any dramatic change or mass extinction during this interval.
OXYGEN AND LAND ANIMALS
The conquest of the land by the chordates, our lineage, required many major
adaptations. Most pressing was a way of reproducing that allowed development
of the embryo in an egg out of water. The amphibians of the Pennsylvanian and
Permian presumably still laid eggs in water, and thus could not exploit the

resources of land regions that were without lakes or rivers. The evolution of
what is termed the amniotic egg solved this. Presumably, it was this egg that
ensured the existence of a stock of vertebrates now known as reptiles. The
evolution of the amniotic egg differentiates the reptiles, birds, and mammals
from their ancestral group, the amphibians.
The fossil record suggests that the amniotes are monophyletic: that is, they
have but one common ancestor, rather than this condition arising more than
once. That ancestor, an amphibian, lived some time in the Mississippian, and
thus this crucial transition took place as oxygen levels were rising. The first
amniotic eggs were probably produced at oxygen levels equal or even higher
than that of today.
Reptiles are also considered to be monophyletic, a single species stock that
diverged from amphibian ancestors perhaps some time in the Mississippian
period of more than 320 million years ago. As we have seen, this was a time of
rising oxygen, and a time as well of a major diversification of land-and water-
dwelling amphibians. But while genetic evidence of this divergence can be dated
back to as long ago as 340 million years, fossils that are ascribed to the first
reptiles (instead of terrestrial amphibians) have been recovered from several
localities globally. Fossils of small reptiles named Hylonomus and Paleothyris
have been found interred in fossilized tree stumps of early Pennsylvanian age,
and it may be that the fossil record of this later appearance is more valid than the
assumption of a Mississippian evolution of the group. In either case, these first
reptiles were very small, usually only about four to six inches long.
The skulls of these first reptiles had no tympanum (eardrum) and thus they
could not hear well, or at all, and unlike the labyrinthodont amphibians, they
lacked the large pair of fangs that was found in most of the larger carnivorous
amphibians. Compared to these huge amphibians, the first true reptiles had a
postcranial skeleton adapted to provide better and surely faster locomotion. They
had very long tails relative to their body.
That these forms laid the first amniotic eggs is still speculation. There are no
fossil eggs in the stratigraphic record until the lower Permian, and this single
find remains controversial. But the pathway to the amniotic condition probably
passed through an amphibian-like egg (without a membrane that would reduce
desiccation), but lay in a moist place on land. It would have been the evolution
of a series of membranes surrounding the embryo (the chorion and amnion)
covered by either a leathery or calcareous but porous egg that was required for
fully terrestrial reproduction. One possibility seemingly never mentioned is that

these first tetrapods evolved live birth, so that the embryos were not born until
substantial development within the female had taken place.
Eggs capable of successfully producing viable offspring eventually were
produced on land, and it was to these new amniotic eggs that the level of oxygen
and heat must have played a part. There is a huge trade-off in reproduction for
any land animal using an egg-laying strategy. Moisture must be conserved, so
the openings of the egg must be few and small. But reducing permeability of the
egg to water moving from inside to outside also reduces the movement of
oxygen into the egg by diffusion.8
Without oxygen the egg cannot develop. It may be no accident that the
evolution of the first amniotes occurred during a time of high oxygen. It seems
inescapable that this reproductive strategy was and remains in those animals
living at varying altitude, affected by atmospheric oxygen content, with higher
oxygen contents producing more rapid embryonic development. High oxygen
may have allowed live birth. Some biologists have suggested that live birth
could not take place because, at least in mammals, the placenta delivers lower
levels of oxygen than is present even in arterial blood in the same mother. But
this generalization is for mammals only, where so much development takes place
within an environment that can be regulated for its oxyen levels, temperature,
and amount of liquid. Reptiles have a very different reproductive anatomy. It
may be that low oxygen even favors live birth. Evidence to support this comes
from three lines of evidence. First, it is well known that birds (egg layers) living
in high-altitude habitats routinely feed at higher altitude than the maximum
altitude where they can reproduce.
The maximum altitudes of birds’ nests of many mountainous species
repeatedly show this pattern. The highest nests are at eighteen thousand feet, and
higher than this the embryos will not successfully develop.9 While at least three
factors may be involved in this limit (lowered oxygen content with altitude,
desiccation because of air dryness at altitude, and relatively low temperatures), it
may be oxygen content that is most important.
Second, recent experiments by John VandenBrooks from Yale University have
shown that alligator eggs taken from natural clutches and then raised in
artificially higher oxygen levels showed dramatically faster than normal
development rates. The embryos grew some 25 percent faster than the controls
held at normal atmosphere oxygen levels. Increased oxygen clearly influences
growth rates, at least in American alligators. Finally, Ray Huey of the University
of Washington maintains that a higher proportion of reptiles at high altitude use

live birth than do those at lower altitude.
As four-legged vertebrates emerged from their piscine ancestors, many new
anatomical challenges had to be overcome. No longer was there water to support
the animal’s body; in air, both support and locomotion had to be accomplished
by the four legs. An entirely new shoulder and pelvic girdle design had to
evolve, along with the muscles necessary to allow locomotion. Equally daunting
was the problem of acquiring sufficient oxygen to allow sustained exercise.
Early tetrapods apparently used the same set of muscles for motion and taking a
breath, and they could not do both at the same time. Fish seem to have no
problem with sustained exercise or with respiring during activity, suggesting that
oxygen is not a limiting factor in daily activity. For land tetrapods, this is not the
case. The body plan of the earliest land tetrapods provided for a sprawling
posture with legs splayed out to the sides of the body trunk. In walking or
running with such a body plan, the trunk is twisted first to one side and then to
the other in a sinuous fashion. As the left leg moves forward, the right side of the
chest and the lungs within are compressed. This is reversed with the next step.
The distortion of the chest during this kind of locomotion makes “normal”
breathing impossible; each breath must be taken between steps. But this process
makes it impossible for the animal to take a breath when running. Thus, modern
amphibians and reptiles cannot run and breathe at the same time, and it is a good
bet that their Paleozoic ancestors were similarly impaired. Because of this there
are no reptilian sprinters. This is why reptiles and amphibians are ambush
predators. They do not run their prey down. The best of the modern reptiles in
terms of running is the Komodo dragon, which will sprint for no more than thirty
feet while attacking prey. This is called Carrier’s constraint, after its discoverer,
physiologist David Carrier.
The dilemma of not being able to breathe and rapidly move at the same time
was a huge obstacle to colonizing land. The first land tetrapods would have been
at a huge disadvantage to even the land arthropods, such as the scorpions, for the
vertebrates would have been slow and would have needed to constantly stop to
take a breath. This is why we contend that oxygen levels would have been
critical: only under high oxygen conditions would the first land vertebrates have
had any chance of making a successful living on land.
One consequence of this problem was that the early amphibians and reptiles
evolved a three-chambered heart. This kind of heart is found in most modern
amphibians and reptiles, and is adaptive for creatures that have the problem of
inferior respiration while moving. While a lizard is chasing prey it is not

breathing, and thus the fourth chamber of the heart, which would be pumping
blood to the lungs, is superfluous. The three chambers are used to pump blood
throughout the body, but the price that must be paid is that it takes the lizard
longer to reoxygenate the blood when activity ceases.
OXYGEN AND TEMPERATURE, REPRODUCTION AND
THERMOREGULATION
At this point we can summarize and discuss the variables in land animal
reproduction and try to relate these to generalizations about both oxygen levels
and temperature. There are two possible strategies, as we have seen: egg laying
or live birth. In the egg case, the eggs are either covered with a calcareous shell
cover or a softer, more leathery shell cover. Today, all birds utilize calcareous
eggs, while all living reptiles that lay eggs use the leathery covering.
Unfortunately, there is little information about the relative oxygen diffusion rates
for leathery—or parchment—eggs compared to calcareous eggs.
The utilization of egg laying or live birth has important consequences for land
animals. The embryos developed by the live-birth method are not endangered by
temperature change, desiccation, or oxygen deprivation. But the cost is the added
volume of the parent, which must invariably make her more vulnerable to
predation in addition to needing more food than would be necessary for the adult
alone. Egg layers are not burdened with this problem, but have the trade-off of a
less safe environment—the interior of an egg outside of the body—that leads to
enhanced embryonic death rate through predation or lethal conditions of the
external environment.
Before the end of the Mississippian period three great stocks of reptiles had
diverged from one another to become independent groups: one that gave rise to
mammals, a second to turtles, and a third to the other reptilian groups—and to
the birds. The fossil record shows that there are many individual species making
up these three. A relatively rich fossil record has delineated the evolutionary
pathway of these groups. It has also required a reevaluation of just what a
“reptile” is. As customarily defined, the class Reptilia includes the living turtles,
lizards, and crocodiles. Technically, reptiles can now be defined by what they are
not: they are amniotes that lack the specialized characters of birds and mammals.
Less appreciated is that all three of these lineages originated in a world with

extensive glaciation and very high oxygen. It is the assumption here that coming
from a cold but high-oxygen world would have affected many aspects of the
biology of these animals. Let us look at some of these characteristics.
One of the enduring questions about the history of life concerns the history of
thermoregulation in animals. There are three distinct kinds: endothermy (warm-
blooded), ectothermy (cold-blooded), and a third category (homeothermic) that
is essentially neither of the others, and is associated with very large size. The
evolution of each of these has long attracted scientific scrutiny, with
thermoregulation pathways—most important, the question of whether or not
dinosaurs were warm-blooded—being the most discussed and controversial of
all. The fact that each of these characteristics is primarily either physiological or
involved body parts that only rarely leave any fossil record (such as fur) is in
large part responsible for the controversies.
We know that all living mammals and birds are warm-blooded, with the
former having hair and the latter feathers, just as we know that all living reptiles
are cold-blooded, with neither hair nor feathers. The status of extinct forms
remains controversial. Of interest here is whether or not oxygen concentration
and/or characteristic global temperatures affected thermoregulation or
characteristic body covering in the various stocks in the past.
REPTILE DIFFERENTIATION
The number of openings in the skull is a convenient way of differentiating the
three major stocks of “reptiles.”10 Anapsids (ancestors of the turtles) had no
major openings or fenestra in their skulls; synapsids (ancestors of the mammals)
had one; and diapsids (dinosaurs, crocodiles, lizards, and snakes) had two. The
fossil record suggests that all three arose at a time of high atmospheric oxygen.11
The earliest member of the latter group, the diapsids, is known from latest
Pennsylvanian rocks, and it was small in size, about twenty centimeters in total
length. From the time of their origin until the beginning of the fall of oxygen,
which probably began in earnest some 260 million years ago, in the middle and
late part of the Permian period, this group did little in the way of diversification
or specialization. They remained small in size, and while the split to the various
diapsid groups may have happened in the latest Pennsylvanian through early
Permian (the time of highest oxygen), the animals themselves remained small

and lizard-like. They gave no indication that they would be the ancestors of the
largest land animals ever to appear on Earth, in the form of the Mesozoic
dinosaurs. If the time of highest oxygen stimulated insects to their greatest size,
the same cannot be said of the diapsids.
The most pressing questions are whether or not this group was warm-blooded
and how it reproduced. No unequivocal Permian eggs are known at all from any
group, so we cannot know how they bred. It is presumed that they laid primitive
amniotic eggs with a leathery covering on land, but we cannot rule out the
possibility of live birth. It was not until the latest Permian—well into the oxygen
crisis that was to culminate in the greatest of all mass extinctions—that the
diapsids were stimulated into the diversifications they would become famous for.
After all, they gave rise to dinosaurs.
The diapsids evolved shapes allowing movement. They were fleet carnivores.
One of the other reptile groups, the anapsids, took another direction. No one
would accuse a turtle of being fleet afoot, and that is what the anapsids became:
turtles, and before that, huge slow-lumbering monsters known as pareiasaurs,
one of the largest of all skeletonized reptiles known from the late Permian world.
Based on their earliest members, however, it would have been hard to predict
that the anapsids would become so slow and lumbering and hiding inside armor.
They were initially smaller, faster, and very successful during the Late
Pennsylvanian, but less so into the Permian. As the glaciers receded from the
long ice age spanning the first half of the Permian period, they evolved into giant
forms, including cotylosaurs and the even larger pareiasaurs. These were
armored giants, surely slow moving, and herbivores that lived right until the end
of the Permian. It is very likely that the gigantic size of the earlier Permian
anapsids was allowed by high oxygen.
The last major reptilian group was the synapsids, and these were our own
ancestors. If diapsids did little during the Pennsylvanian through the early
Permian oxygen high, the same cannot be said of the third group of amniotes
from this time, the synapsids, or mammal-like reptiles. Like the diapsids, the
most primitive are known from Pennsylvanian rocks, and also like the diapsids
of this time, these ancestors of the mammals had a small, lizard-like shape and
mode of life in all probability. It is assumed that like the diapsids (and the
amphibians that they came from), these early synapsids were cold-blooded.
They, in turn, gave rise to two great stocks: the pelycosaurs, like early Permian
Dimetrodon, and their successors, the therapsids, the lineage giving rise to the
mammals. It is this latter group that is also called the mammal-like reptiles.

Unlike the diapsids, the synapsids diversified during the oxygen high and at
the peak of oxygen became the largest of all land vertebrates. In the latter part of
the Pennsylvanian, the pelycosaurs probably looked and acted like large monitor
lizards, or even the iguanas of today, with splayed limbs. By the end of the
Pennsylvanian some attained the size of the Komodo dragon of today, and they
may have been fearsome predators. By the beginning of the Permian period,
some 300 million years ago, they made up at least 70 percent of the land
vertebrate fauna. And they diversified in terms of feeding as well. Three groups
were found: fish eaters, meat eaters, and the first large herbivores.
Both predators and prey could attain a size of close to fifteen feet in length,
and some, such as Dimetrodon, had a large sail on the back that would have
made them appear even larger. They also either partially or totally solved the
reptilian problem of not being able to breathe while running by changing their
stance. The synapsids show an evolutionary trend of moving their legs into a
position so that they were increasingly under the trunk of the body, rather than
splayed out to the side, as in modern lizards. This created a more upright
posture, and removed or at least greatly decreased the lung compression that
accompanies the sinuous gait of lizards and salamanders. While there was still
some splay of the limbs to the sides of the trunk, it was certainly less than in the
first tetrapods. With the evolution of the therapsids in the Middle Permian, the
stance became even more upright.
The sail present on both carnivores and herbivores of the Late Pennsylvanian
and early Permian is a vital clue to the metabolism of the pelycosaurs; it was a
device used to rapidly heat up the animal in the morning hours. By positioning
the sail so as to catch the morning sun, both predators and prey could rapidly
warm their large bodies, allowing rapid movement. The animal first attaining
warm internal temperature would have been the winner in the game of predation
or escape, and hence natural selection would have worked on this. But the larger
clue from this is that during the oxygen high, the ancestors of the mammals had
not yet evolved endothermia, or “warm-bloodedness.” So when did this trait first
appear? That revolutionary breakthrough must have happened among the
successors to the pelycosaurs, the therapsids. We must note as well that this
period, while a time of oxygen high, was a period of low temperatures. There
was a great glaciation known from this interval, and a sizable portion of the
polar regions of both hemispheres would have been covered in ice, both
continental and sea ice.
While much of our understanding of pelycosaurs’ evolution comes from

fossils found in North America, younger beds in this region have few vertebrate
fossils. The transition to the therapsids is best seen in Europe and Russia, but
even here the transition is poorly known because of few fossiliferous deposits of
the critical age. This gap in our knowledge of the synapsid fossil record extends
from perhaps 285 million years ago to around 270 million years ago. Two main
regions tell us about the history of this group: the Russian area around the Ural
Mountains, and the Karoo region of South Africa. The record in the Karoo
begins with glacial deposits perhaps as much as 270 million years in age, and
then there is a continuous record right into the Jurassic, giving an unparalleled
understanding of this lineage of animals.
The therapsids split into two groups: a predominantly carnivorous group and
an herbivorous group. By about 260 million years ago the ice was gone in South
Africa, but we can assume that the relatively high latitude of this part of the
supercontinent Pangaea (about 60 degrees south latitude) remained cool. It was
still a time of high oxygen, certainly higher than now, but that was changing. As
the Permian period progressed, oxygen levels were dropping. Seemingly two
great radiations of forms occurred, among both carnivores and herbivores. From
perhaps 270 to 260 million years ago the dominant land animals were the
dinocephalians, and these great bulky beasts reached astounding size: not
dinosaur sized, but certainly approaching any land mammal today save, perhaps,
elephants, and some of the largest of the dinocephalians certainly must have
weighed as much as elephants. Moschops, for instance, a common and well-
known genus from South Africa, was five meters high, with an enormous head
and front legs longer than the back. It was hunted by a group of similarly sized
carnivores.
The dinocephalians and their carnivores were hit by a great extinction, still
very poorly understood, that occurred some 260 million years ago. There is still
little range data for both the dinocephalians and their immediate successors in
terrestrial dominance, the earliest dicynodonts and their predators. Until new
fossils from South Africa and Russia are obtained, this uncertainty will remain.
Sadly, there are few fossils of this age and fewer paleontologists studying them,
so we may not know for generations, assuming that future generations continue
to hunt fossils.
 

Gorgonopsian skull from Late Permian deposits, South Africa. (Photo by Peter Ward.)
 
The dicynodonts were the dominant herbivores of the time from 260 to 250
million years ago. They were almost eliminated from the planet in the Permian
extinction, which we will describe in more detail in the next chapter. They were
hunted by three groups of carnivores: the gorgonopsians, which died out at the
end of the Permian, the slightly more diverse therocephalians, and the
cynodonts, which ultimately evolved into mammals during the Triassic.
ANIMAL SIZE AND OXYGEN LEVELS
The rise of atmospheric oxygen to unprecedented values of over 30 percent was
accompanied by the evolution of insects of unprecedented size. The giant
dragonflies and others of the late Carboniferous through the early Permian were
the largest insects in Earth history. Perhaps it is just coincidence, but most
specialists agree that the high oxygen would have enabled insects to grow larger,
since the insect respiratory system requires diffusion of oxygen through tubes
into the interior of the body, and in times of higher oxygen, more of this vital gas
could penetrate into ever larger-bodied insects. So if insects got larger as oxygen

rose, what about vertebrates? New data indicates that this is true as well.
In 2006, paleontologist Michel Laurin measured fossil skull lengths and body
lengths of various reptiles ranging from the Carboniferous through the Permian,
from about 320 million years ago until about 250 million years ago. Both of the
size descriptors closely tracked oxygen levels. As O2 levels rose in the Late
Carboniferous, so too did the size of the reptiles increase, and, as O2 began to
drop in the mid Permian, size began to trend downward. As we will return to in
the chapter on Cenozoic mammals, study on (much) later mammals, by Paul
Falkowski and his colleagues, demonstrated a very similar phenomenon during
the Early Cenozoic, when oxygen levels have been modeled to have risen
significantly, while at the same time, the mean size of mammal species also
increased.
This trend of changing size also occurred among the mammal-like reptiles as
the Permian Period came to a close. The largest therapsids of all time, the
dinocephalians of the Middle Permian, evolved at the peak of oxygen
abundance. As oxygen began to drop in the mid-Permian, successive taxa
assigned to various therapsid groups, and most important the dicynodonts,
showed a trend toward smaller skull sizes. While some relatively large forms
still lived in the latest Permian—the genus Dicynodon and even the carnivorous
gorgonopsians come to mind—by this time many of the dicynodonts were
smaller. The latest Permian taxa Cistecephalus, Diictodon, and a few others were
very small. Research in 2007 showed that the Late Permian through Early
Triassic genus Lystrosaurus was smaller in the Triassic than it was in the
Permian, and the various cynodonts of the late Permian and early Triassic, as
oxygen levels were precipitously falling, were all small in size. There are
exceptions—a few giants in the Triassic named Kannemeyeria and Tritylodon
are examples—but in general the therapsids of the Triassic are much smaller
than those of the Permian. A recent paper by our colleague (and now at the
University of Washington) Christian Sidor has confirmed the drop in size. Thus
there is a strong correlation between terrestrial animal size and oxygen levels
from the latest Permian into the Triassic. In high oxygen, tetrapods grew large,
and then they grew smaller as oxygen levels diminished.
 

Antonio Lazcano, origin of life specialist and humanist, in Galapagos Islands contemplating a “lower” life
form. (Photo by Peter Ward.)
THE FIRST AGE OF MAMMALS
Yale University’s great Peabody Museum is home to one of the largest
collections of fossils in the world. It also is home to the greatest paleontological
paintings ever done.
There are two gigantic murals gracing an immense wall in the Peabody
Museum of Natural History on the Yale University campus. For generations of
Americans these two murals—The Age of Reptiles, painted over three years
(1943–1947), and The Age of Mammals, painted over six years (1961–1967)—

have been the iconic views of land life’s journey through time.
The first, The Age of Reptiles, begins in dark swamps and ends with exploding
volcanoes towering over T. rex. The second also begins in the jungle, but one
with very different and very familiar vegetation. Combined, they tell us that
amphibians begat reptiles, which begat mammals. But our view would now
require two very different murals to correctly show the vertebrate assemblages in
these deep time periods pictorially represented. In fact, we advocate here that
there were three separate “ages” of mammals (knowing, of course, that an “age”
is nothing more than informal labeling and categorizing, without scientific
validity).
The first age of mammals was in the Permian period, the heyday of the
therapsids and their ancestral synapsids. Technically they are not yet mammals.
But they were close. It was a species-rich as well as numerically abundant
assemblage. In South Africa, there were as many as fifty genera at a time (and
since a normal genus normally contains several [to many] species, the actual
diversity at the species level was higher yet; perhaps 150 species is a
conservative estimate).
South Africa today is not so different latitudinally and perhaps even
climatically from the South Africa of southern Gondwanaland, some 255 million
years ago. Today there are 299 species; we can imagine the African veldt of
today, but stocked with Dicynodon instead of the large herbivores, and many
kinds of carnivores from the lion-sized gorgonopsians to the weasel-sized
theriodonts. Vast herds grazing not on grass but the low, bushy Glossopteris and
ferns. Africa of the first age of mammals.
The second age of mammals can be thought of as the time between the late
Triassic and the end of the Cretaceous: mammals chained. Held in check by the
dinosaur overlords. Living in the ecological cracks: at night, in burrows, in trees.
Never bigger than a house cat, and usually far smaller.
Finally, the third age of mammals. Zallinger’s age of mammals. The post-K-T
mass extinction outpouring of species filling the families so well known to us
today. This is the story most obvious to us: from ratlike survivors of the
Chicxulub asteroid’s wrath to the early giants such as titanotheres and
uintatheres (rhino-like beasts) to the mammalian panoply we know so familiarly
today.
Until about 2000 we knew the first age of mammals largely from the South
African Karoo desert. But in the twenty-first century vast new collections have
been made from north central Africa by Christian Sidor, and in Russia another

gigantic assemblage is now known, thanks to paleontologist Michael Benton’s
work. In this second age, the mammals remained very small. It would not be
until the Paleogene that mammals would finally gain ascendancy, and like some
long-denied heir, would finally get an “age” named after them.
One could almost believe that the whole age of dinosaurs was a big mistake.
That but for one huge flood of basalt there might have been a quite different
history. Human intelligence 250 million years ago? It did not take long to go
from apes to something more advanced not so long ago.

CHAPTER XII
The Great Dying—Anoxia and Global Stagnation: 252–250 MA
The Karoo desert of central South Africa can be a bit of a disappointment to its
first-time visitors. When the two words “Africa” and “desert” are found in the
same phrase, there is often an image of the Sahara desert, Africa’s most famous
dry place, or the Kalahari, another vast wasteland with little life because of its
shifting sands and harsh conditions of blazing heat by day and freezing
temperatures each night. With animals and plants having such a hard time, and
existing at such low standing diversity and abundance, it is no wonder that the
human populations in the Sahara and Kalahari are limited in size as well. Very
little in the way of plant or animal crops can be farmed there.
Unlike these two African deserts, the Great Karoo desert has no shifting sand
dunes; it is mainly rock that is often well vegetated, and there seems no place in
its vastness where one cannot find sheep dung, evidence for the ubiquity of this
introduced species. There are no elephants or giraffes, no hippos or crocodiles or
water buffaloes or rhinos; it has animal life, and in places lots of it, but its
species are not ones redolent in the memory of Africa. There are also quite a few
people, on large ranches. Thus the Karoo is not the place for desert-seeking
tourists. What it does have, however, is a hundred-million-year-long
accumulation of sedimentary rocks deposited in a time interval from about 270
million years ago to perhaps 175 million years ago.
In the middle of this vast rock heap is the world’s best record of large
terrestrial animal life living both before and after that most consequential of all
mass extinctions, the Permian-Triassic mass extinction. Generations of
paleontologists going back to the middle 1800s have searched the ancient
riverbeds and river-valley floors that the Karoo strata were created by and in.
Animals often are carried into rivers after death, or are in waterholes where they
may have been attacked long ago, leaving bones to fall into mud and become
preserved there. This region was the prime record for this period until very
recently, with new work in both eastern Russia by our colleague Mike Benton of
Bristol and the north central part of Africa, in the country of Niger, where
another of our colleagues, Christian Sidor of the University of Washington, have
unearthed important new records.1 Yet even these new regions cannot compare

the richness and temporal resolution that the Karoo rocks have given us—if
“given” should be used at all. In fact, the Karoo has given up its vast store of
information about one of the most critical times in life’s history on Earth very
grudgingly. It has to be taken, and while the work to do this seems glamorous
(who does not dream of being a paleontologist finding a giant leering skull of
some ancient predator, such as T. rex), it is at best difficult on the humans who
pursue this passion.
A drive from Cape Town into the center of the Karoo is an all-day affair. But
because the rocks are slightly tilted, while the landscape inexorably rises in
altitude as one travels north and east into the Karoo, the entire book of strata that
the Karoo holds can be read from its ancient mid-Permian-period cover to its
Jurassic, dinosaur-bearing last chapter. It is not only time that changes as one
goes upward through the many thousands of aggregate feet that is the Karoo
sedimentary record. One starts in a time of ice and icebergs and ends in what
may have been one of the hottest times in Earth history, as well as passing
through an interval tens of millions of years in length when atmospheric oxygen
receded to its lowest level since animals first occurred at all, nearly 600 million
years ago. Yet if much can be understood by reading this entire record, there is
one interval of rock, representing time, that has been more studied than any
other.
These are the several hundreds of meters of strata deposited between 252 and
248 million years ago—rocks deposited in the last millennia of the Permian
period (and thus the Paleozoic era, which ends with the end of the Permian) and
first few millions of years following the vast mass extinction of 252 million
years ago.
For decades now, geoscientists have been asking several principal questions of
these rocks, and their rare but often exquisitely preserved skulls and body
skeletons: First is the question of how long the mass extinction took, from the
start of extinction rates first exceeding the normal “background” extinction rate,
which has been calculated to have been about one extinction each five years.
Second, we want to know if the catastrophic extinction on land took place
simultaneously with the Permian marine mass extinction. Third, and perhaps
most interesting, is the question of what caused the mass extinction. Finally, it is
important to discover how quickly terrestrial ecosystems recovered, because
these latter clues might give us useful information for surviving any future
Permian-like mass extinction, a prospect far more probable than our species
seems to realize.

To paraphrase one of the great twentieth-century paleontologists, David Raup
of the University of Chicago: Were the surviving species gifted with good genes
—or simply good luck?
RESULTS OF THE PERMIAN EXTINCTION
If intense controversy still exists about the cause or causes of the Permian
extinction, on one aspect of that time interval are all in agreement: in the
aftermath of the extinction ecosystems were profoundly affected, and extinction
recovery was long delayed. It is this latter evidence that readily distinguishes the
Permian extinction from the later Cretaceous-Tertiary event. While both caused
more than half of the species on Earth to disappear, the world recovered
relatively quickly after the “K-T” event. This may have been due to different
causes for the two. Asteroid impact on the Earth and the environmental
destruction accruing from the impact have for more than a decade been accepted
as the cause of the K-T event. But the killing conditions following the impact
soon dissipated. This was not the case after the Permian event. As we have seen
above, while some Earth scientists believe that the Permian as well as the K-T
events were caused by large-body impacts on the Earth, it seems as if the
environmental conditions causing the Permian extinction persisted for millions
of years after the onset of the extinction. It is not until the Middle Triassic, some
245 million years ago, that some semblance of recovery seemed to be under way.
These results would be expected if some part of the Permian mass extinction
were directly or indirectly caused by the reduction in oxygen at the end of the
Permian. The newest Berner curves show that oxygen stayed low into the
Triassic, and there is even some indication that the oxygen levels did not bottom
out and begin rising until near the end of the lower Triassic, which might
account for the long delay in the recovery. This evidence suggests that the
environmental events producing extinction just kept persisting. If so, and if
animals were capable of any sort of adaptation in the face of these deleterious
conditions, we would predict that the Triassic would show a host of new species
not only in response to the many empty ecological niches brought about by the
mass extinction, but might also show new species arising in response to the
longer-term environmental effects of the prolonged extinction event itself. This
is the pattern that is observed during the Triassic; the world was refilled with

many species looking and acting like some of those going extinct (therefore an
ecological replacement), but a host of novel creatures also appeared, especially
on land. In the next chapter we will postulate that many of the latter new species
evolved to counter the continued low oxygen that had begun near the end of the
Triassic, but that continued right into the Jurassic, a period of more than 50
million years. The Triassic was truly the crossroads of animals adapted to two
different worlds, one of higher oxygen and one of low.
THE CONTROVERSY: IMPACT VS. GREENHOUSE
With the end of the twentieth century and the arrival of the twenty-first, ever
more attention was indeed being paid to the Permian extinction, largely because
it was the most devastating of all, with the now oft-repeated estimate that as
many as 90 percent of all species disappeared. But how fast, which is a clue to
how, began to be best appreciated with the work of paleontologists from China
and the United States in extensive studies of a thick Permian and Triassic
limestone cropping out near Meishan, China.2 Geologists worked to plot the
thickness and identity relative to each other of every sedimentary layer. Then
fossils were collected from the beds that had been so meticulously measured.
Each fossil was carefully identified, and its collection level in the piles of strata
noted. The paleontologists made use of Charles Marshall’s new statistical
method, called confidence interval methodology,3 which allowed estimates of
the ultimate time range a given fossil might have had. The geologists in China
had a great advantage going for them. In China there were scattered ash layers
that could be dated using sensitive machines to measure uranium/lead isotope
ratios, and this was done most recently on samples by MIT’s Sam Bowring.4 The
newest work by this group now puts the extinction as lasting no more than sixty
thousand years, which is amazing resolution in rocks a quarter billion years in
age.
The Chinese effort combined results from five different stratigraphic sections
in the Meishan locality, with sampling intervals made every thirty to fifty
centimeters. A total of 333 species of marine life were ultimately found in these
rocks, belonging to such varied sea creatures as corals, bivalve and brachiopod
shellfish, snails, cephalopods, and trilobites among others. Nowhere at any
stratigraphic horizon at any time has so thorough a collecting effort, or so rich a

fauna, been documented with such precision.
The various environmental conditions in the seas at the end of the Permian
included widespread evidence of oceanic anoxia, or low oxygenation in both the
shallow and the deep sea. This was worked out beautifully in 1996 by Yukio
Isozaki of Tokyo University, who located the boundary in deep-sea bedded
cherts that had been thrust onto the Japanese mainland. Precisely around the
mass extinction event, the normally red charts turned a deep black, just as
everything died. The anoxia was apparently of such magnitude that many marine
organisms were rather suddenly killed off, just as they are today in modern red
tides. There is also evidence of global warming at the time of the extinction, and
the coincidence of the Siberian lava eruptions at the same time as the mass
extinction.
There have been various suspects as to the cause of this extinction. First is the
possibility that the Siberian flood basalts introduced large volumes of gas into
the atmosphere, triggering large-scale climate change and acid rain, as suggested
by Berkeley geolochronologist Paul Renne and others. With new information
from disparate sources, a sudden methane release into the atmosphere became a
viable candidate for the killer. But in spite of no evidence to support impact, the
understanding that impact could cause extinction was still on everyone’s mind.
The new evidence from China argued for some sort of “quick strike.” Among
potential causes of mass extinction, only asteroid impact was thought to be
capable of such mass death in so short a time.
At the turn of the century, Earth historians were enamored with large-body
extraterrestrial impact as the cause of most, if not all, mass extinctions. In 2000,
the Permian extinction looked like nothing known: it was still suspected to be
some sort of impact extinction by the geological fraternity, but one seemingly
different from the dinosaur-killing K-T event that had made sensational news in
1980. Perhaps the Permian extinction was many impacts, or a single large impact
superimposed on some other kind of extinction mechanism. The most puzzling
thing was that search as they might, none of the investigators looking at the
Chinese rocks in the late twentieth and early twenty-first century could find the
well-known clues associated with the impact extinction ending the Cretaceous
already by then so well studied at the many K-T boundary sites, such as iridium,
glassy spherules, and shocked quartz grains.
In 2001, and then over the next several years, a team led by geochemist Luann
Becker reported5 the discovery of high levels of complex carbon molecules
given the ridiculous name Buckminsterfullerenes, mercifully shortened to

Buckyballs. They used this evidence to argue that like the mass extinction of the
end of the Cretaceous, the Permian extinction was also the result of the collision
of a large asteroid with the Earth. Only this one hit 251 million years ago.
The Buckyballs described by this team are large molecules that contain at
least sixty carbon atoms, and because they have a structure resembling a soccer
ball or a geodesic dome, they were named for architect Buckminster Fuller, the
inventor of the geodesic dome. The hypothesis is that geodesic-dome-like carbon
molecules trapped the gases helium and argon inside their cage structures, and
that these new indicators of impact exist in strata of latest Permian age at three
different geographic sites scattered around the world. The Becker et al. team
interpreted these particular Buckyballs as extraterrestrial in origin, and therefore
like iridium (which, pointedly, was not found), because the noble gases trapped
inside have an unusual ratio of isotopes. For instance, terrestrial helium is mostly
helium-4 and contains only a small amount of helium-3, while extraterrestrial
helium, the kind found in these fullerenes, is mostly helium-3. According to the
authors, all this star stuff could have been brought to Earth only by a comet
impacting the Earth at the end of the Permian (more correctly, it ended the
Permian).
The researchers announced that the comet or asteroid was six to twelve
kilometers across, or about the size of the K-T asteroid that left the huge
Chicxulub crater near what is now the town of Progreso on Mexico’s Yucatán
Peninsula 65 million years ago. But such a large Permian impactor would be
expected to have left a monstrous crater, just as the later Chicxulub impact did,
and so the Becker team began an earnest search of potentially overlooked or
buried impact craters.
Two years later, in 2003, they announced that they had found a giant buried
crater in the seabeds off Australia.6 The case for an impact cause for the Permian
extinction seemed made. But then problems arose, in both the interpretations of
the Buckyballs and the probability that the large underwater structure named the
Bedout crater was an impact crater at all.
Science is about replication and prediction (among other things), and on both
points the Permian extinction Buckyball hypothesis ultimately collapsed
(although, curiously enough, impact and Buckyballs were, in 2012, still the first
response spit out by Googling “Permian extinction”). But we workers searching
for the causes of this mass extinction had our doubts early, and a certainty that
the hypothesis could not be correct.
The original Becket et al. study was based on samples taken in China, Japan,

and elsewhere. Later work could not replicate the results from China, and our
friend Yukio Isozaki had shown several years earlier that the critical boundary
interval that Becker had sampled near Osaka in Japan had actually been removed
by low-angle faulting right at the boundary interval—three entire conodont
zones on either side of the boundary were missing. Yet they reported that the
helium-3 anomaly was there, just where they had been told (erroneously) the
boundary should be. Something was fishy. Eventually our colleagues at Caltech
demonstrated that helium-3 leaks out of a Fullerene cage in fewer than one
million years, so none should have been left after 252 million years.
Furthermore, the deep structure interpreted to be the crater that gave rise to all
the Buckyballs, helium-3, and death to the world’s biota turned out to be a great
emplacement of volcanic rocks unrelated to any sort of asteroid or comet impact.
A group of geologists and organic chemists teamed together and used a fairly
new tool to look at latest Permian and early Triassic marine strata. Rather than
looking for body fossils, they extracted organic residues from the strata7 in
search of chemical fossils, which, if found, are known as biomarkers. The
biomarker recovered can come only from a photosynthesizing purple bacteria
species that can exist only in shallow water devoid of oxygen and saturated with
toxic hydrogen sulfide. Apparently a great biomass of H2S-producing microbes
filled the oceans—not just a small area like the Black Sea of today, but most or
even all of the world’s oceans—based on newer studies by teams from MIT, who
by 2009 had discovered the same biomarker in more than a dozen localities of
latest Permian age scattered across the globe.8
A possible solution to the enigma of the cause of the largest of all mass
extinctions came from a team of geochemists from Penn State in 2005. Led by
Lee Kump of Penn State, one of the world’s foremost experts on the chemistry
of the oceans and especially its carbon cycle, along with his longtime colleague
Mike Arthur (also of Penn State), their paper suggested the H2S present at the
end of the Permian, produced in the sea by microbes (a different species from the
purple sulfur bacteria, to be accurate), was directly involved in the extinctions
both on land and in the sea.9
THE KUMP HYPOTHESIS—AND THE DAWN OF THE GREENHOUSE
EXTINCTION THEORY

The Kump et al. scenario is as follows. If deepwater H2S concentrations
increased beyond a critical threshold during oceanic anoxic intervals (times
when the ocean bottom and perhaps even its surface regions lose oxygen), then
the oceanic conditions (such as those in the modern Black Sea) separating sulfur-
rich deep waters from oxygenated surface waters could have risen abruptly to the
ocean surface. The horrific result would be great bubbles of highly poisonous
H2S gas rising into the atmosphere. This new entry into planetary killing
provides a link from the marine to the terrestrial extinctions, because H2S
accumulates in the troposphere to lethal levels for plants and animals under
relatively modest fluxes of H2S from the ocean. This proposal relates not only to
the end of the Permian, but may have occurred at other times in Earth history,
and thus was perhaps a dominant perturbation causing mass extinctions.10
Kump and his team did some rough calculations and were astounded to
conclude that the amount of H2S gas entering the late Permian atmosphere
would be more than two thousand times greater than the small modern flux (this
is the toxic killer coming from volcanoes). Enough would have entered the
atmosphere to most likely lead to toxic levels.
Moreover, the ozone shield, a layer that protects life from dangerous levels of
ultraviolet rays, would also have been destroyed. Indeed, there is evidence that
this happened at the end of the Permian, for fossil spores from the extinction
interval in Greenland sediments show evidence of the mutation expected from
extended exposure to high UV fluxes attendant on the loss of the ozone layer.
Today we see an ozone hole in the atmosphere over Antarctica, under which
the biomass of phytoplankton rapidly decreases. If the base of the food chain is
destroyed, it is not long until the organisms higher up are perturbed as well. The
complete loss of our ozone layer has even been invoked as a way to cause a
major mass extinction if the Earth was hit by particles from a nearby supernova,
which would also destroy the ozone layer. Finally, an abrupt increase in methane
concentrations significantly amplifies greenhouse warming from an associated
CO2 buildup and methane levels that would have risen to >100 ppm. As the H2S
goes into the atmosphere, at the same time destroying the ozone layer,
greenhouse gases also do their work in making the planet hotter. It turns out that
the lethality of H2S increases with temperature. Thus a new and plausible
alternative to impact was put forth. The extinctions would have been drawn out,
or in pulses—a succession of short-term events, killing each time.
Up until now we have looked at evidence from the rocks themselves. But

there is a second way to unravel past events, and that is to use some of this data
to model what past atmospheres have been like. There are many kinds of such
models, and many are relevant to trying to predict what our Earth’s future
atmosphere and heat level may be like. For the Permian, levels of oxygen and
carbon dioxide, as well as potential global temperatures, have been modeled.
First, changes in atmospheric CO2 and O2 have been calculated by Yale’s Bob
Berner. He and others have found that there must have been a pronounced spike
in CO2 levels accompanied by plunging oxygen levels at the end of the Permian.
Second, Lee Kump’s group undertook the difficult job of looking at the potential
distribution of H2S emission around the globe. For this they used a global
circulation model, or GCM.
These models were originally developed to understand modern-day weather
and climate patterns. But because the positions of the continents are known for
the critical period at the end of the Permian and into the Triassic, as well as
temperatures and levels of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere and
oceans, the method could be applied to the Permian. Kump and his team
reasoned that the critical element to track would be phosphorus. This is a prime
component of fertilizer, and if oceanic phosphorus levels were observed to
rapidly rise at the end of the Permian, the amount of hydrogen sulfide gas could
be calculated as well due to the beneficiaries of the raised phophorus levels—the
sulfur microbes.
The emergence of H2S did not happen once; it occurred over and over, as
succession of burps clustered around the time that the Permian-Triassic boundary
strata were being deposited around the world. Kump finished with the most
ominous note. Not only did the model show where the H2S would emerge from
the sea into the air, but he also showed new calculations that completely
corroborated his earlier 2005 estimates of how much H2S would have eventually
gone into the atmosphere. The results: there would have been more than enough
to kill off most land life, and as the nasty stuff also dissolves in seawater, it
would have been greatly lethal in shallow marine settings as well, especially
among shallow-water organisms that secreted calcium carbonate skeletons, such
as corals, clams, brachiopods, and bryozoans—all invertebrate victims of the
greatest extinction.
Since the introduction of the Kump et al. interpretation, others including Tom
Algeo of the University of Cincinnati have greatly increased our understanding
of the chemical aspects of this particular mass extinction, through numerous

references.11
ALTITUDINAL COMPRESSION
The study of past mass extinctions is not new; in fact it is one of the very first
kinds of research that could actually be called “science” when geology was first
stirring as a discipline, in the first years of the nineteenth century. What is new
about it is our understanding of the role of microbes in causing one or more of
the so-called big five mass extinctions of the Phanerozoic.
Yet if extinctions themselves are not a new topic, the opposite side of the coin
—the aftermath to mass extinction—has emerged in the past decade as a major
new subdiscipline of evolutionary biology and paleobiology alike. We have
learned that the more devastating the mass extinction, the more different the
world coming after, not only in the immediate aftermath—the first few hundred
thousand to million years later—but for subsequent tens of millions of years, and
for some biological lineages, for all time.
A previously unrecognized aspect of the changing oxygen levels would be
their effect on species migration and gene flow. Mountain ranges in our world
are often barriers to gene exchange, producing different biota on either side of
the range. At the end of the Permian, just living at sea level would have been
equivalent to breathing at five thousand meters, a height that is greater than that
found atop Mount Rainier in Washington State. Thus even low altitudes during
the Permian would have exacerbated this, so that even a modest set of hills
would have isolated all but the most altitude-or low-oxygen-tolerant animals.
The result would be a world composed of numerous endemic centers hugging
the sea level coastlines.
 

Ranges of vertebrate fossils from the Karoo of South Africa, from approximately 260 to 250 million years
ago. Each vertical line represents a genus of vertebrate animal (based on fossils recovered from the strata).
While most extinctions took place over a fairly narrow interval, this pattern is nothing like that seen at the
end of the Cretaceous. The “smeared” appearance of extinctions shown here is characteristic of “greenhouse
mass extinctions”—not a single level of extinction, but successive extinctions.
 
The high plateaus of many continents may have been without animal life save
for the most altitude tolerant. This goes against expectation based on continental
position: because the continents at this 250-million-year-old time were all
merged into one gigantic supercontinent (named Pangaea), we would expect a
world where there were very few terrestrial biotic provinces, since animals
would be able to walk from one side of the continent to the other without an
Atlantic Ocean in the way. But altitude became the new barrier to migration, and
new studies of various vertebrate faunas appear to show a world of many
separate biotic provinces, at least on land.
The late twentieth-and early twenty-first-century work of Roger Smith,
Jennifer Botha, and coauthor Ward in the Karoo desert, Mike Benton in Russia,
and Christian Sidor in Niger12 showed that each of these separate localities in
Africa had distinct and largely nonoverlapping faunas. Thus, during times of low
oxygen, altitude would have created significant barriers to migration and gene

flow.13 Low-oxygen times therefore should have had many separate biotic
provinces, at least on land. The opposite occurred during high-oxygen times:
there would be relatively few biotic provinces and a worldwide fauna.
The drop in oxygen did more than make mountain ranges barriers to
migration. It made most areas higher than a thousand meters uninhabitable
during the late Permian through Triassic time interval. This effect, called
altitudinal compression, could have had a major impact on Triassic land life in
the time of lowest oxygen. The removal of habitat because of altitudinal
compression would have caused species from the highlands to migrate toward
sea level or die out. Doing so would have increased competition for space and
resources, and perhaps would have introduced new predators, parasites, or
diseases in the previously populated lowlands, causing some number of species
to go extinct. We calculated that by the end of the Permian more than 50 percent
of the Earth’s land surface would no longer have been habitable because of
altitudinal compression. There may even have been extinction caused by the
effects modeled long ago by Robert MacArthur and E. O. Wilson in The Theory
of Island Biogeography. Those two scientists noted that diversity is related to
habitat area, and that when islands or reserves of some sort became smaller,
species died out. Altitudinal compression would accomplish the same by making
the continental landmasses functionally lower in usable area.
PERMIAN EXTINCTION REDUX
A final aspect of the Permian extinction comes from research not yet published,
but because it comes from coauthor Ward it will be reported here, as it is most
pertinent to the topic of the Permian mass extinction. One of Ward’s graduate
students, Frederick Dooley, combined with Lee Kump to produce an unexpected
discovery. Dooley studies the effect of hydrogen sulfide on plants and some
animals; Kump has been modeling ocean conditions at the end of the Permian,
including estimated amounts of hydrogen sulfide in the global oceans’ surfaces.
Kump arrived at a value that Dooley then used in actual experiments on single-
celled oceanic phytoplankton, as well as the most important oceanic
zooplankton, the tiny shrimp-like creatures called copepods. The levels were not
sufficient to kill the algae, and surprisingly actually made them grow faster. The
copepods, on the other hand, died almost instantly. Without copepods to feed on

phytoplankton and keep it in check, these tiny plants sink to the sea bottom and
rot, removing any last vestige of oxygen. This would produce a great oscillation
in the carbon isotope pattern, as well as kill off every marine animal species that
has an early life history in the upper water column as temporary plankton. The
result would be a planet choked in rotting plants but nearly without animals. This
is exactly what happened at the end of the Permian—in the oceans, anyway. On
land it would have been very much like some combination of World War I and II
combined. Roger Smith of South Africa now has very credible evidence of an
extraordinary period of drying and sudden heat in the South Africa of 252
million years ago, while our own work on the vertebrates in the Karoo,
published in 2005, remains the best record of land animal extinction across that
boundary.14 Roger Smith thinks that the drought and heat alone can account for
the extinction of most vertebrates. We maintain that the world war analogy is
apt: great armies dying in the desert, and in World War I, killed by poisonous
chlorine gas. Long ago it was death in the desert from poisonous hydrogen
sulfide in the air and sea.

CHAPTER XIII
The Triassic Explosion: 252–200 MA
One of the great joys of academics is the sense of community among the faculty,
be it a community college or the most high-powered research institution in the
land. Much of this comes from the very nature of the American university
system, which requires a six-or seven-year trial period, followed by tenure.
Permanence. Perhaps more than in any other profession, university faculties
have a high stability, and compared to most other professions, a relatively low
rate of turnover. The result is that relationships can literally last for appreciable
parts of one’s lifetime. In this the university faculty systems are indeed much
like the system they were spawned from, the cloistered seminaries where monks
would start as young men and then pass through life with others of their kind.
And as was true in the old abbeys, with age and wisdom one learns to respect
those with even greater experience—and listen to them.
In the year 2000 or thereabouts, the authors of this book were at lunch with
several of the eldest of the science faculty of the California Institute of
Technology. One of these elder statesmen was the great Sam Epstein, one of the
most distinguished professors of geochemistry, perhaps of all time. Sam was
present in the halcyon days at the University of Chicago, when Nobel laureate
chemist Harold Urey discovered a way to measure the temperature at which
ancient carbonate rocks were formed by comparing the isotopes of oxygen found
in the precipitated carbonate rock. The ratio of the isotope O16 varied with the
much more rare isotope O18 in proportion to the temperature of formation.
Sam eventually moved to Caltech and spent his career making high-precision
measurements of many kinds of samples, using many different methodologies.
But his first love seemed to be ancient temperatures. After a wonderful lunch, he
took Kirschvink and Ward to his downstairs lab, which was in the process of
being dismantled. The geochemical equipment of the 1950s and 1960s, Sam’s
heyday, was mainly composed of handmade and hand-blown glassware, walls of
thin tubes spiraling, crisscrossing, making spider webs of glass interrupted by
strange flask-like shapes, rubber tubing coming and going, greased glass
stopcocks of exquisite manufacture—everything custom made by the artisans
who kept science in those days going, the skilled technicians now banished by

budget cuts and the new generations of solid-state technology.
We walked through the lab, and conversation moved on to a topic then of our
keen interest: the Permian mass extinction and its possible causes. At that
moment the impact hypothesis was still viewed as the probable cause. Sam,
however, would have none of it. He turned to us with a smile and told us the
following short story. In his younger days he had taken samples of marine
limestone that dated to the earliest Triassic, samples that had probably been
formed in a very shallow seaway somewhere near the Permian equator in what is
now Iran. On a whim, or because that is what he loved most, Sam began
analyzing these samples for their ancient temperatures. He was stunned, he said,
to find that all had been formed in temperatures above 40°C, with some of the
temperatures exceeding 50°C—from 104°F to over 120°F! The samples had
come from ancient corals, creatures that need water of normal salinity.
Such temperatures can be found in the stagnant pools and lagoons. But
brachiopods do not live in such places. The temperatures found by Sam Epstein
could not have been formed anywhere on our Earth. They spoke of a
postextinction world of unreal water temperature in the main ocean.
Sam, then in his eighties and with only another year ultimately to live, smiled
a sad smile. He told us that he never had the guts to publish these data. Any
paleotemperature analysis requires really pristine samples to be accurate, and
quite often samples looking as if they had not been reheated or exposed to
groundwater or chemically changed in any obvious way had, in fact, had their
oxygen isotope temperatures “reset,” and such resets were normally to produce
what looked like abnormally high temperatures. This process becomes ever more
common the older the sample. But Sam was quite convinced that he had proof of
ocean water temperatures above 100°F in the first million years after the
Permian extinction—in the first million years of the Triassic.
Several years later, in analyzing paleotemperatures from a different, lower
Triassic site, we too found what looked like one-hundred-degree-plus water. This
time the depth was even greater than the estimated ancient water depths where
Sam Epstein’s Triassic brachiopods had grown so long ago. Like Sam Epstein,
we did not publish these results.
The prize never goes to the faint of heart. In 2012 a joint Chinese-American
research team, trying to understand why it took so long for life to recover in the
seas after the Permian extinction, published an amazing paper.1 Their findings:
water temperature of 104°F in the sea, and a blistering 140°F on land! Unlike the
work of Epstein, this study involved the analysis of over fifteen thousand

samples, making it the most detailed and painstaking look yet at the
environmental conditions in the aftermath of the Permian extinction.
The scientists completing this study allowed themselves to speculate about
what that ancient hot world would have been like. Most marine organisms die
above the plus-100°F level found by the investigators; in fact photosynthesis
essentially stops at temperatures much above this. In that world, the entire zone
of the topics would have been devoid of animals, and complex life would have
hung on only at high latitudes. Land animals would have been rare even in the
mid-latitudes. In such heat there would have been enormous volumes of
moisture in the air, and the topics would have been wet year-round. But it might
have been a wet desert, with no plant life at all.
Ever better geochronology now shows that this time of high temperature
extended at least for the first 3 million years of the Triassic, and indeed may
have been climbing ever higher during that time, with a maximum temperature
occurring during a time interval known as the Smithian stage (a million-year
time interval of around 247 million years ago) having the highest of all known
temperatures since the time when animals first occurred. Sam Epstein was right.
Our data from Opal Creek2 were right. We were wrong in not publishing those
data.
The Permian extinction was clearly one of the most fundamentally
catastrophic of all events—if, that is, one was a multicellular plant or animal.
From a microbe’s point of view—especially one of the sulfur-loving, oxygen-
hating microbes that made up the majority of all life on Earth from its very
inception right up to the first evolution of animals—that event was like a return
to paradise. Seen from our vantage point so long after, the Permian extinction
was a repeat of what happened at the end of the Devonian, itself the first of what
we now call greenhouse extinctions. Many more were destined to come at the
end of the Triassic, multiple times in the Jurassic and Cretaceous, and ending
with the last-known greenhouse extinction at the end of the Paleocene epoch,
some 60 million years ago. But none were ever to be so great as the Permian
event, or to unleash a more diverse assemblage of animals in the aftermath of
extinction.
The Permian extinction gave the world many new creatures, but for us, two
entirely new lineages, both thriving and evolving by the end Triassic period. In
no small way the Permian extinction brought to life mammals, and brought
about the means that would create our long-term nemesis, the dinosaurs. Yet
while being among the most important of all land animals (few animal groups

are awarded an “age of …” before their names), the Triassic dinosaurs and
mammals were late arrivals in the Triassic explosion, and remained both
relatively small of stature (especially the mammals, which rarely exceed rat size)
and small in both absolute abundance and species diversity. The age of dinosaurs
was not to start until the successive Jurassic period, while the still-running age of
mammals had to await the Cenozoic era.
Long before the late (Triassic) arrival on the evolutionary stage of dinosaurs
and mammals, the other animals and plants of the Triassic period make up a
most interesting assemblage of organismal characters, cast with new versions of
already long-running taxa mixed with entirely new entrants, new designs arising
yet radically different from the actual survivors of the Paleozoic era. It is this
mix that makes the Triassic appear to be a veritable crossroads in time. In some
ways it was not unlike the Cambrian explosion—a slew of newly invented body
plans filling up an empty world, just as the first animals rapidly evolved into the
cornucopia of body plans that filled the seas after the extinction of the first
animals, the Ediacarans. And like the great Cambrian explosion, many of the
body plans of novelty turned out to be but short-term experiments, to be pushed
into extinction by the competition and/or predation of better-designed organisms.
There is no time period other than the Cambrian and Triassic in which such a
diversity of new forms appeared. Two reasons seem paramount: The Permian
extinction emptied the world to such a degree that virtually any new design
would work, for a while at least. But there is a second, new view of the Triassic
that may be just as (or more) important than this.
Just coming out of the most devastating of all mass extinctions, this early
Triassic world was very, very empty of life. At the same time, all modeling
suggests that a long interval of the Triassic was a time of oxygen levels lower
than those today. Earlier we suggested that times of low oxygen, especially
following mass extinction, foster disparity: the diversity of new body plans.
These two factors combined to create the largest number of new body plans seen
since the Cambrian, and here we propose that it is to that seminal Cambrian time
that we most accurately compare the Triassic. We call this time and its biotic
consequences the Triassic explosion.
The Triassic was a time of amazing disparity on land and in the sea. In the
latter, new stocks of bivalve mollusks took the place of the many extinct
brachiopods, while a great diversification of ammonoids and nautiloids refilled
the oceans with active predators. Fully a quarter of all the ammonites that ever
lived have been found in Triassic rocks, a time interval that is only 10 percent of

their total time existence on Earth. The oceans filled with their kind, in shapes
and patterns completely new compared to their Paleozoic ancestors, and why
not, for, as shown above, this kind of animal was the preeminent, low-oxygen
adaptation among all invertebrates. A new kind of coral, the scleractinians,
began to build reefs,3 and many land reptiles returned to the sea. But it is on land
that the most sweeping changes in terms of body plan replacements and body
plan experimentation took place. Never before and never since has the world
seen such a diverse group of different anatomies on land. Some were familiar
Permian types: the therapsids that survived the Permian extinction diversified
and competed with archosaurs for dominance of the land early in the Triassic,
but this ascendance was short lived. The many kinds of reptiles were locked in a
competitive struggle with them, and with each other, for land dominance. From
mammal-like reptiles to lizards, earliest mammals to true, the Triassic was a
huge experiment in animal design.
On the face of it, the mammals should have come out competitively “ahead”
of the pure reptiles. After all, most of the mammal-like reptiles by this time were
warm-blooded, probably capable (as now) of far more parental care than the
presumably egg-laying dinosaurs; the mammalian teeth, one of the main reasons
that mammals eventually did dominate the world, in their endlessly malleable
tooth morphologies allowed all kinds of food acquisition, from small seeds to
grass to meat of many kinds. Yet they did not win. Their extinction closed out
the first age of mammals and gave rise to the second—composed of a very
different group of mammals.
One of the major changes that has and continues to allow entirely new kinds
of study of all groups of extinct animals is the great revolution in
communication, morphological characterization and image analyses, and
profound literature search skills that the computer revolution has allowed. Now
large databases can be produced and then searched and analyzed in lightning
blazes of microprocessor skill.
No longer does each fossil have to be laboriously measured by hand with
micrometers, and no longer is it a single investigator traveling from museum to
museum to do the work. Almost every new study that brings change to our
history of life comes from large teams of investigators, ultimately inputting huge
numbers of numbers to be crunched. Now the machines do much of this for us.
And the results can produce new insights.
One such study by paleontologists Roland Sookias and Ludwig Maximilian,
of the University of Munich, looked at the sizes of Triassic vertebrates that lived

on land.
In this and subsequent work by this group it was found that only two major
body plans emerged in the Early Triassic amid the emptiness left behind by the
Permian mass extinction: those with four legs (quadrupeds), and those that used
only two (bipeds). As the nearly 50-million-year-long Triassic period progressed
into the Jurassic, with its own 50-million-year-long time interval, they found that
the saurians diversified into a far larger number of species and shapes (and
absolutely bigger in size, one measure of disparity) than did the mammal-like
reptiles. While paleontologists long intuited this by perusing collections, here
were numbers for the first time to substantiate this.
Their study also confirmed that the saurian grew faster, reaching adulthood
and large size faster than did the other group. This “time to breeding” difference
might be the most important metric of all. Faster growth and breeding meant that
the saurians quickly adapted to the ecological roles of large herbivores and big
predators before the smaller, slower-growing therapsids had a chance to evolve
into these anatomical forms and ecological niches.
Questions remain. During the Late Triassic, when dinosaurs were well
established, it would be expected that they would have immediately grown large,
Jurassic large, and would have been common as well. According to Chicago
paleontologist Paul Sereno, who has done more than any other to bring the
earliest times of the dinosaur hegemony to light, neither was true. For almost 20
million years, from their first appearance some 221 million years ago until the
end of the Triassic, about 201 million years ago, dinosaurs and therapsids alike
remained both relatively rare and small in size.4 There may have been more of
them than the therapsids during this time, but the overall picture is that neither
group was doing very well. Our own take on this is that nothing on land was
doing very well at all, and that, in fact, it was perhaps far more advantageous for
the four-legged land animals to return to the sea, which they did in higher
numbers during the Triassic than at any other time in Earth history.
The conventional answer for the reason for the Triassic explosion is that the
Permian extinction removed so many of the dominant land animals that it
opened the way for more innovation than any nonextinction time, or perhaps any
other mass extinction time as well. Perhaps, as well, it was simply that many
terrestrial animal body plans finally came to an evolutionary point of really
working efficiently. Even as late as the end of the Permian and into the Triassic,
groups as evolutionarily mature as the mammal-like reptiles (the groups
dicynodonts and cynodonts, by this time) were still trying to attain the most

efficient kind of upright posture, rather than the less efficient, splayed-leg
orientation of the land reptiles, with all of the ramifications and penalties that
this entailed.
Body plans were being evolutionarily modified by intense selective pressures,
and dominant among these was the need to access sufficient oxygen to feed,
breed, and compete in a low-oxygen world. There is an old adage about nothing
sharpening the mind faster than imminent death. The same might be said about
evolutionary forces when faced with the most pressing of all selective pressures,
which was attaining the oxygen necessary for the high levels of animal activity
that had been evolutionarily attained in the high-oxygen world of the Permian,
when nothing was easier to extract from the atmosphere. The two-thirds drop in
atmospheric oxygen certainly lit the fuse to an evolutionary bomb, which
exploded in the Triassic. Thus the diversity of Triassic animal plans is analogous
to the diversity of marine body plans that resulted from the Cambrian explosion.
As we have earlier recounted, the Cambrian explosion followed a mass
extinction (of the Ediacaran fauna), and it was a time of lower oxygen than
today. The latter stimulated much new design.
TRIASSIC REBOUND
The officially designated early Triassic time interval was from 250 to about 245
million years ago, and during this time there is little in the way of recovery from
the mass extinction. The oxygen story for the Triassic is stunning. Oxygen
dropped to minimal levels of between 10 and 15 percent, and then stayed there
for at least 5 million years, from 245 to 240 million years ago. There is also a
very curious record of large-scale oscillation in carbon isotopes from this time,
indicating that the very carbon cycle was being perturbed in what looks like
either a succession of methane gas entering the oceans and atmosphere or a
succession of small-scale extinctions taking place. Again, the similarity to the
early Cambrian is striking.
All evidence certainly paints a picture of a stark and environmentally
challenging world for animal life. Microbes may have thrived, especially those
that fixed sulfur, but animals had a long period of difficult times. However,
difficult times are what best drive the engines of evolution and innovation, and
from this trough in oxygen on planet Earth emerged new kinds of animals, most

sporting respiratory systems better able to cope with the extended oxygen crisis.
On land two new groups were to emerge from the wreckage: mammals and
dinosaurs. The former would become understudies while the latter would take
over the world.
As we saw in the last chapter, the Permian extinction annihilated almost all
land life. The therapsids were hard hit. Much less is known about the
archosauromorphs (reptiles with a somewhat crocodile-like anatomy), for at the
end of the Permian they are a rare and little-seen group in areas such as the
Karoo or Russia that have yielded rich deposits with abundant dicynodont
(mammal-like reptile) faunas. In the Karoo desert, at least, very few well-
preserved archosauromorphs have come from uppermost Permian study sections
worked on by coauthors Ward and Kirschvink in the company of South Africa’s
Roger Smith.
If we are still poorly informed about their Permian ancestry, there is no
ambiguity about the success of the earliest Triassic archosauromorphs. In the
Karoo, in only a few meters of the strata that seem to mark the transition from
Permian to Triassic there are relatively common remains of a fairly large reptile
known as Proterosuchus (also known as Chasmatosaurus). This was definitely a
land animal with a very impressive set of sharply pointed teeth. It was also
definitely a predator, but like those of a crocodile, its legs were splayed to the
sides (if somewhat more upright than the crocodilian condition). But this
condition was to rapidly change in the archosauromorphs to a more upright
orientation as the Triassic progressed, and more gracile and rapid predators soon
replaced the early archosauromorphs such as Proterosuchus.
While the need for speed was surely a driver toward this better locomotor
posture, just as important may have been the need to be able to breathe while
walking. Like a lizard, Proterosuchus may still have had a back and forth sway
to its body as it walked, and as we have seen previously, this sort of locomotion
causes compression on the lung area due to what is known as Carrier’s
constraint,5 the concept that quadrupeds with splayed-out legs cannot breathe
while they run, because their sinuous side-to-side swaying of the body impinges
on the lungs and rib cage, inhibiting inspiration. For this reason lizards and
salamanders cannot breathe while walking, and Proterosuchus may have had
something of this effect, although not as pronounced as in modern-day
salamanders or lizards.
A solution is to put the legs beneath, but this is only a partial solution.6 To
truly be free of the constraint that breathing put on posture, extensive

modification to the respiratory system as well as the locomotor system had to be
made. The lineage that led to dinosaurs and birds found an effective and novel
adaptation to overcome this breathing problem: bipedalism. By removing the
quadruped stance, they were freed of the constraints of motion and lung
function. The ancestors of the mammals also made new innovations, including a
secondary palate (which allows simultaneous eating and breathing) as well as a
complete upright (but still quadruped) stance. But this was still not satisfactory,
and a new kind of breathing system evolved. A powerful set of muscles known
as the diaphragm allowed a much more forceful system for inspiring and then
exhaling air.
There are other clues than dinosaur bones to the nature of life on Earth, and
the challenges it faced during the low-oxygen times of the Triassic. Part of the
Triassic explosion was a diversification of reptiles returning to the sea. Many
separate lineages did this, and the reasons why this happened may be tied up in
the problems posed by the hot, low-oxygen Triassic world.
Oxygen is necessary to run metabolic reactions in animals; it enables the
chemical reactions that are life itself. But as in a chemistry experiment, several
factors control the reactions themselves. One of the most important is
temperature. Metabolic rate is the pace at which energy is used by an organism.
It is far higher in endotherms than in ectoderms. But even in the same organism,
the metabolic rate is directly and importantly influenced by temperature to a
surprising degree. Recent studies have shown that as much as one third to one
half of all energy expenditure by an animal is used for simply staying alive
through activities such as protein turnover, ion pumping, blood circulation, and
breathing. Other required activities, such as movement, reproduction, feeding,
and other behavior come on top of this, and the rate that “fuel” is used goes up
with rising temperature.7 But as metabolic rate goes up, so too does the need for
oxygen, for the chemical reactions of life are oxygen dependent. The key finding
is that metabolic rates double to triple with each ten-degree rise in temperature.
The consequences of this in a world that has less oxygen availability than now,
but warmer average temperatures, would be major.
There is no direct link between oxygen levels in the atmosphere and
temperature. But there is a direct link between temperature and CO2, the well-
known greenhouse effect. And as we saw in chapter 3, levels of oxygen and
atmospheric CO2 are roughly inverse: when oxygen is high, CO2 is low, and the
converse. Many periods in the past with low oxygen had high CO2, and thus
were hot. In a low-O2 world that is hot, the animal loses. We have already seen

many solutions to dealing with low oxygen. One of them is obviously the simple
solution of staying cool. Some solutions to staying cool—or cool enough—are
physiological; some are behavioral.
One of these is all at once morphological, physiological, and behavioral. It is
to return to the sea, the cool sea, for even in the hottest world of the past, the
ocean would be essentially cooler in terms of physiology. And for this reason,
perhaps, many Mesozoic land animals traded feet for flippers or fins and
returned to the sea at a prodigious rate.
As noted earlier in this chapter, in this time of higher global temperature
(perhaps 30°F warmer, in fact, on a global average) and only half the
atmospheric oxygen found today, an increasing proportion of tetrapod diversity
was composed of animals that re-evolved a marine lifestyle. Never before and
never since have so many lineages given up the land for the sea. Today we
celebrate the many kinds of whale, seal, and penguin families, the three groups
coming from land dwellers that now show the greatest marine adaptations. Yet
whales and seals combined make up only 2 percent of all mammal genera, and
penguins but 1 percent of birds. But the Triassic oceans had many more kinds of
such changed creatures, animals adapted to land that had revolved a body plan
for life in the sea. In the Triassic there were giant ichthyosaurs, as well as
seagoing tetrapods such as placodonts (the latter were like large seals, but unlike
seals, had blunt teeth expressly evolved to crack shellfish); in the Jurassic the
ichthyosaurs remained and were joined by a host of long-or short-necked
plesiosaurs; and in the Cretaceous the ichthyosaurs disappeared to be replaced
by large Mosasaurs. But all had a common theme: back to the ocean.
The existence of so many marine tetrapods was confirmed with the important
research of marine reptile expert Nathalie Bardet, who in 1994 published a
review8 of all known marine reptile families of the Mesozoic. The surprise was
that proportionately there were so many in the Triassic period. But why would so
many animals evolve a marine lifestyle?
The two dominant environmental factors of those days would have been the
low oxygen and the high global temperature of our planet. Ray Huey, a reptile
specialist at the University of Washington, suggested too that the high heat of the
Early Triassic through Jurassic would have been an evolutionary incentive for
some number of reptiles to go back into the sea. In fact, in 2006, coauthor Ward
showed that there was a very interesting and inverse correlation between
Mesozoic oxygen levels and the number of marine reptiles. When oxygen was
low, the percentage of marine reptiles was high. But as oxygen rose, the

proportion of tetrapod families fully aquatic markedly dropped. This may not be
that the absolute number of marine forms decreased as much as it was that the
number of terrestrial dinosaurs markedly increased. Yet it marks an unusual and
new view of the greenhouse planet that was Mesozoic Earth.
TRIASSIC-JURASSIC MASS EXTINCTION
One of the striking new findings of the oxygen-through-time results has been the
level of Triassic oxygen. Only several years ago, the minimum oxygen levels of
the past 300 million years was rather universally pegged at the Permian-Triassic
boundary of 252 million years ago. But that time of oxygen low has been
substantially moved, and now may correspond much more closely to the
Triassic-Jurassic (T-J) boundary of 200 million years ago than previously
thought. Thus, rather than the Triassic being a time of oxygen rise, or even a
time with two downturns—one at the end of the Permian, one at the end of the
Triassic—we are confronted with the possibility that oxygen was lower in the
Late Triassic than in the early part of the period, perhaps as low as 10 percent of
the atmosphere at sea level, or about half the modern-day levels. This time
corresponds to one of the major changes of the Triassic, the winnowing out of
most land vertebrates, with the exception of the first dinosaurs.
The cause of this mass extinction, like the others, has been long debated. What
is clear is that, like the Permian mass extinction, the Triassic-Jurassic mass
extinction occurred in a dead heat (literally and figuratively) with the
emplacement of one of the largest flood basalt episodes in the history of Earth,
one second only to the Siberian Traps event of the Late Permian. Back-to-back
mass extinctions, 50 million years apart, both temporally linked to large flood
basalts, events well known to rapidly increase carbon dioxide levels in both air
and sea to many times the starting values. Some estimates place the peak CO2
levels in the atmosphere as from 2,000 to 3,000 ppm, compared to our own 400
(2014) ppm (but rising fast!).
The utter destruction of plant life makes a dent in the carbon cycle and
changes the relative proportion of carbon 12 to carbon 13. The use of this
comparison, the carbon isotope analyses discussed at many other points in this
book, seems to be a fixture of the mass extinctions. But it was not until a report
by Ward and others in 2001, from T-J interval strata nestled along a shoreline

fronting an old-growth, cold-temperature rainforest located on one of British
Columbia’s Queen Charlotte Islands,9 that this carbon isotope perturbation was
found. Just as with the Devonian and Permian greenhouse extinction before it,
the newly found signal is characterized by oscillating changes in the ratio of C13
to C12, brought about by changes in the abundance, kind, and burial history of
diverse kinds of life on the planet.
As for the Devonian and Permian events, this signal seemed to indicate that
this extinction as well as the others were caused by something other than impact.
The conclusion that the T-J was yet another in the “family” of greenhouse
extinctions was briefly challenged by another kind of discovery soon after the
first carbon isotope shift was reported on. Paul Olsen of Columbia University
and colleagues announced to great press effect that the T-J was caused, in fact,
by large-body impact with the Earth. This seemed to provide a nice symmetry—
an asteroid ending the age of dinosaurs, and another, 135 million years earlier,
seemingly started that same age of dinosaurs. Or so it seemed. Olsen’s evidence
of impact had been found at a site in the Newark, New Jersey, region, home to
the most diverse assemblage of late Triassic and early Jurassic dinosaur
footprints on the planet. It was the association of dinosaurs and mass death that
whetted the journalist’s appetite for extensive press coverage.
Olsen and his colleagues reported an iridium anomaly from continental T-J
boundary beds in New Jersey. It was just such an anomaly that had first alerted
the Alvarez team (in 1980) to the possibility of impact at the end of the
Cretaceous; iridium had become the gold standard of impact evidence. But here
the two studies wildly diverged. Where the Alvarez group followed the physical
and geochemical evidence from their Italian boundary section with data
confirming mass extinction of small ocean life at the same time as the impact,
the Olsen paper for the Triassic event followed their physical and geochemical
evidence with just the opposite: they found that rather than eliminating most life
in their section, instead the impact seemed to have acted like a biotic fertilizer,
leading to both more and bigger life!
The Olsen group was sampling strata deposited on land (or more correctly, in
streams and shallow lakes on land), and the “fossils” they studied were
footprints, not the remains of body parts. But in spite of these rather startling
differences, the Olsen et al. conclusion was the same: that a great asteroid had
hit the Earth (this time about 200 million years ago, the age of the Triassic-
Jurassic boundary), and that like the K-T event, the dinosaurs were affected. But
the argument was that the impact killed off competitors of the dinosaurs, leading

to a rise in diversity and animal size. And unlike the secrecy surrounding Luann
Becker’s work and methods dealing with the Permian extinction, Paul Olsen
brought all who cared to look to his urban outcrops. Plenty of the many
specialists working on mass extinctions at the time made the trip.
Olsen’s samples had yielded iridium, and unlike the Becker work, various labs
confirmed his findings. But a finding of iridium alone may not have propelled
this work into Science, the prestigious flagship of scientific publishing. Olsen
and his colleagues had pulled another and totally different array of evidence out
of their New Jersey rocks. At numerous outcrops equal in age to that yielding the
iridium, Olsen and crew had noticed that a significant change was observable
among the footprints. The beautiful three-toed footprints, known to residents of
this area for more than two centuries, increased in number, size, and diversity of
shape.
One would think that the footprints found in strata deposited after the T-J mass
extinction would be fewer in number (number of animals around), fewer in kind
(a lesser species diversity), and smaller in size, since one lesson that we do know
from the asteroid-caused K-T extinction is that it was disproportionably lethal to
larger-sized animals. While no dinosaur or any of the many kinds of reptiles and
mammal-like reptiles matched size with the biggest dinosaurs going extinct at
the end of the Cretaceous, many were equal in size to dinosaurs that did go
extinct as a result of the K-T asteroid. Thus, fewer, fewer kinds of, and smaller-
sized footprints would be expected in earliest Jurassic rocks, if the Triassic’s end
was caused by an impact. Yet just the opposite was observed in all three of these
evidence lines: there were more footprints, of more different kinds, and many
were larger, much larger, than the largest of the Triassic footprints. It was this
evidence as much as the iridium finding that convinced Science that this research
article was important enough to publish in their journal.
Just as in the case of Luann Becker’s work of a year prior to Olsen’s
publication, the Science paper by Olsen et al.10 was scrutinized in painstaking
detail. Two experts on interpreting impact deposits, Frank Kyte of UCLA and
David Kring of Arizona, were both of the opinion that the iridium finding was
certainly indicative of an impact about that time; both also pointed out that the
amount of iridium reported from the various sites of the Olsen group was at least
an order of magnitude less than that found at virtually every K-T boundary site.
Something fell to Earth, all right, but it was small—probably too small to cause
the amount of extinction at the end of the Triassic. Thus, while evidence for
impact at the end of the Triassic was much more believable than at the end of the

Permian, it was still hard to believe based on this new evidence that the Triassic
extinction was a K-T-like impact extinction.
There is indeed a large crater in Quebec. It is one of the biggest craters visible
on the planet, named Manicouagan Crater—with a diameter of about 100 km (in
comparison, the Chicxulub crater is 180–200 km in diameter). It had long been
thought to be of the right age, too—somewhere near 210 million years in age,
which was about the age of the Triassic-Jurassic boundary. The radioactive
decay measures indicated that the Triassic came to an end about 199 million
years ago. In 2005 this date was slightly changed to 201 million years ago. And
not only did the T-J get younger, but the age of the Manicouagan crater got older.
Better dating placed its age at 214 million years ago.
Our own work on the Queen Charlotte Islands was designed to look at the T-J
extinction, but also to search for any possible fossil die-off prior to it—in rocks
we could age as being around 214 million years in age. The “kill curve”
estimates of the late twentieth century predicted that any impact event leaving a
crater the size of Manicouagan would easily kill off between a quarter and third
of all species on Earth—and we found nothing! Perhaps we have overestimated
the lethality of asteroid impacts?
TRIASSIC BLACKNESS
By the early years of the new century, geochemist Robert Berner of Yale
University had greatly increased the resolution of his complicated computer
models that estimated the amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide for any 10-
million-year interval of the past 560 million years. His results showed a startling
match between the times of lowest oxygen levels or the most rapidly dropping
oxygen levels and mass extinction events.
All three of the mass extinction events with problematical causes showed
strata indicating deposition in low-oxygen conditions.11 Under such
circumstances, strata usually turn black (because they contain the mineral pyrite
and other sulfur compounds that are said to be reduced in that they were
produced by chemical reactions that can occur only in the absence of oxygen). A
second clue came from the fact that the rocks of these ages were thinly bedded
or even laminated, often showing delicate sedimentary structures with the strata.
Because so many animals burrow, most strata deposited in the sea since the

Cambrian are what is called bioturbated by the vast number of invertebrates that
ingest sediment at the bottom of a body of water in order to strain out any
organic material. The presence of the fine bedding could occur only in
environments with no or only rare animals. Through these three avenues—
modeling, rock mineralogy (dictating color), and sedimentary bedding—it was
clear that the Permian, Triassic, and Paleocene extinctions took place in a low-
oxygen world.
Other evidence discovered in the late 1990s and early part of the new century
showed that while oxygen may have been low, another constituent of the Earth’s
atmosphere was at the same time high: carbon dioxide. Like the evidence for low
oxygen, the CO2 evidence came from Berner’s models as well as from evidence
preserved in the rock record, or more accurately in this case, in the fossil record.
Unfortunately, there is no way of actually measuring the exact volume of CO2
that was present at any time in the past. Carbon dioxide does not color rocks or
affect bedding. But some very clever work on fossil leaves resulted in an
important breakthrough that allowed a relative measure of CO2. Using this
method, for instance, a paleobotanist could determine whether carbon dioxide
levels were rising, falling, or staying the same over million-year intervals, and
furthermore the method allowed estimates on how many times higher or lower
the levels were from some base-level observation.
The CO2 measure turns out to be both clever and simple, as so often it turns
out with wonderful breakthroughs. Botanists looking at modern-day plant leaves
had done experiments in which they grew plant species in closed systems where
the amount of CO2 could be raised or lowered relative to the level found in our
atmosphere (about 360 ppm when these experiments were first conducted).
Plants, it turns out, are highly sensitive to carbon dioxide levels, since even the
small amounts of CO2 in the atmosphere must serve as the source for their
carbon, the major building block of life. They acquire this mainly in their leaves
through tiny portals to the outside world called stomata. When grown in high
levels of CO2, the plants produced a small number of stomata, as even just a few
sufficed in high CO2 levels. The investigator then eagerly turned to the fossil
record; leaf stomata are readily observable in leaf fossils. The results confirmed
Bob Berner’s model results.
At the end of the Permian and during the early Triassic, the fossil leaves
showed only a few stomata. Carbon dioxide was spectacularly high at all three
times. Moreover, not only was it high, but the rise in CO2 happened quickly, on

the order of thousands, not millions of years.
These two results give an entirely new view of mass extinctions. Each
occurred in a world quickly warmed by the short-term rise in carbon dioxide
(and perhaps methane as well, based on yet another line of evidence). And in
addition to being hot, it was a place also low in oxygen. High-temperature, low-
oxygen conditions coincided with major mass extinction. While modern-day
greenhouses are not places of low oxygen (just the opposite by photosynthesis),
they are places that heat very quickly due to the greenhouse properties of the
glass panes covering the whole structure. Sunlight comes through the
windowpanes, but when sunlight is radiated back in the form of light waves and
heat, the glass panes trap the energy, which then warms the air, much like carbon
dioxide, methane, and water vapor molecules do.
Heat is dangerous to any animal. The highest temperature that any animal can
withstand is not even halfway to the temperature that boils water. At 40°C most
animals die off, and the last holdouts die at 45°C. As is all too tragically known
from the many sad cases of kids left in cars on a sunny day, rapid heating can be
lethal. And the two aspects of this physiological system—the amount of oxygen
available and the amount of heat energy—combine to make things even more
lethal: animals need more oxygen as heat increases.
Of the three extinctions, the data for the Triassic-Jurassic CO2 rise is
particularly stunning. University of Chicago paleobotanist Jenny McElwain,
collecting rocks in the dangerous and frigid outcrops amid the ice of Greenland
in the last years of the twentieth century, showed without doubt that the end of
the Triassic was ushered in by a sudden rise in CO2 in an already low-oxygen
world.
Increasingly, the Triassic began to look like an event similar to that at the end
of the Permian. What it did not look like was the K-T extinction event, in which
the extinctions were sudden and spread across every animal and plant group. But
it was as if none of them “saw” it coming from an ecological or evolutionary
sense. At the end of the Triassic, on the other hand, every group except the
saurischian dinosaurs were undergoing size reduction (or at best, maintaining
roughly equal diversity) in the time intervals leading up to and after the Triassic-
Jurassic mass extinction, as if they knew bad times were coming, and small size
would be more adaptive.
The groups with the simplest lungs (amphibians and the early-evolved
reptiles) fared the worst, and many groups that had been very successful early in
the Triassic, such as the phytosaurs, underwent complete extinction. Both

amphibians and archosauromorphs probably had very simple lungs inflated by
rib musculature only. Mammals and advanced therapsids of this time, probably
both having diaphragm-inflated lungs, did better, but crocodiles, presumably
with abdominal pumps, did poorly. The success of the saurischians may have
been due to a multitude of factors (food acquisition, temperature tolerance,
avoidance of predators, reproductive success), but our conclusion is that this
group was unique in possessing a highly septate lung (one with many tiny flaps
to increase surface area) that was more efficient than the lungs of any other
lineage, and that in the very low oxygen world that occurred both before and
after the Triassic-Jurassic mass extinction, this respiratory system conveyed
great competitive advantages. Under this scenario, the saurischian dinosaurs
took over the Earth at the end of the Triassic and maintained that dominance well
into the Jurassic because of superior activity levels.
We now know that alone among the many kinds of reptilian body plans of the
mid to late Triassic, the saurischian dinosaurs diversified in the face of either
static or, more commonly, falling numbers in the other groups. We also know
that oxygen reached its lowest levels of the past 500 million years in the Late
Triassic. Something about saurischians enhanced their survival in a low-oxygen
world. The ground truth suggests that a long and slow drop in oxygen
culminated in the Triassic mass extinction, but that this extinction was really a
double event, separated by a range of 3 to 7 million years.
There are few places on land where this time interval with abundant vertebrate
fossils can be found. We really do not know the pattern of vertebrate extinction
as well as we do the extinction in the sea. We do not know how rapidly the
prominent victims of the mass extinction—the phytosaurs, aetosaurs, primitive
archosauromorphs, tritylodont therapsids, and other large animals—disappeared.
But by the time the gaudy Jurassic ammonites appeared in the seas in abundance,
leaving behind an exuberant record of renewal in early Jurassic rocks, the
dinosaurs had won the world. What kind of lungs did they have? There is no
certainty but one: they had lungs and a respiratory system that could deal with
the greatest oxygen crisis the world was to know in the time of animals on Earth.
A new view of things is that saurischian dinosaurs had a lower extinction rate
than any other terrestrial vertebrate group because of a competitively superior
respiration system—the first air-sac system. The fact that saurischians were
actually expanding in number across this mass extinction boundary is the most
striking aspect of all.

CHAPTER XIV
Dinosaur Hegemony in a Low-Oxygen World: 230–180 MA
The word “Jurassic” is now irrevocably linked to dinosaurs and dinosaur parks,
thanks to the Jurassic Park franchise of movies. In fact the real Jurassic was a
world looking nothing like the cinematic view seen in those three progressively
idiotic movies. Those movies were filled with plants that had not yet evolved in
the Jurassic: the angiosperms, or our familiar flowering plants. In fact, it is
impossible to even characterize a “Jurassic” world, because it was a world that
was utterly changed from its earliest Jurassic appearance (201 million years ago
to its latest iteration, of about 135 million years ago). At the beginning, it was a
shattered world: a world again coming out of mass extinction; a world without
coral reefs; a world where the dinosaurs were still few in number, species, and
size; a world of such low oxygen that insects could barely fly, but to no matter,
as no vertebrate flier could have caught them anyway. But things were to change
in the relatively short time interval (in terms of geological periods, anyway).
By the end of the Jurassic the largest land animals of all time were common:
dinosaurs were lords of all creation; tiny primitive birds and tinier primitive
mammals hid in the lowest-rent districts in town. At the beginning the seas were
so bare that stromatolites had made a comeback, and the larger fish and
predators were few indeed.
By its end there was a veritable cornucopia of the most spectacular marine
denizens to have ever populated the sea: long-necked reptilian plesiosaurs,
dolphin-like ichthyosaurs, and splendid primitive fish—similar to the modern-
day gar and sturgeon (both with strange body armor)—schooled among vast
coral reefs and an ocean filled to exuberance with all manner of ammonites and
their more squid-like relatives, the belemnites. The ammonites came in all
varieties, from smooth to ribbed, and varied in shape from planispiral to, at the
end of the period, peculiar, gently arcuate cones. The largest of all ammonites
came from Jurassic rocks, the giant from Fernie, British Columbia, that in life
was close to eight feet in diameter and surely would have weighed a half ton. Yet
an odd thing has happened to the scientists studying this most iconic of
prehistoric periods: most are dying off and not being replaced.
It is fair to say that geology as a modern discipline came into being because of

the Jurassic. It was Jurassic beds that were first mapped by William “Strata”
Smith, in the earliest 1800s, and it was Jurassic strata that demonstrated that
fossils could be used to correlate beds in far-off lands. It was ammonites from
Jurassic strata that provided Darwin with the then-best-known examples of
evolutionary change. (References to this period are found in chapter 1, and as
always, the historical works by the British historian of science Martin S.
Rudwick are recommended.)
The Jurassic period showed the same pattern of short-term evolutionary
explosion common to all of the post-extinction time intervals. They are called
recovery periods. Each began with a low diversity of survivors of the mass
extinction, but ended only after a 5-to 10-million-year time interval. Yet after
this post-extinction hangover, diversity would always then again rise. The new
animals and plants were always composed of a largely different assemblage of
species. In most cases these species are newly evolved during the recovery
interval, but in some cases they are taxa that lived a precarious, low-abundance
existence prior to the extinction, but then exploded in numbers and ecological
success in the new world. The early Jurassic was no different, and from the seeds
of recovery a great new assemblage of marine creatures evolved into existence,
composed in large measure of new kinds of mollusks, marine reptiles, and many
new kinds of bony fish. But it is not the marine fauna that the Jurassic (or the
succeeding Cretaceous period) is known for. No one has made three blockbuster
movies featuring marine life with the name Jurassic in the title. The public
wanted, and still wants, but one thing.
DINOSAURS
It is impossible to write a history of life without dwelling at length on dinosaurs.
Yet at the outset it seems a losing prospect given the warrant of this book: that
the histories narrated here have an element of the “new.” So much is written
about these antediluvian saurians (the Victorians’ view of them) that bringing
anything fresh to the table seemed impossible at the outset of this book’s writing.
It was thus a very welcome surprise to find that in fact new findings clutter the
record of twenty-first-century science. Any nonspecialist summary of dinosaurs
normally dwells on three issues: whether they were warm-blooded, how they
reproduced and what is known of their behavior of nesting, and how they

ultimately died out. But there are other interesting questions as well, including
perhaps the most interesting of all: why were there dinosaurs at all, or at least the
dinosaurs’ body plan? This, in turn, is related to the question of how they
respired. A second question we will look at here is also related to respiration in
its own way: what is new about the dinosaur-to-bird story? A great deal, it turns
out, most coming from new Chinese discoveries (but new Antarctic discoveries
as well, which the authors of this book were witness to). Finally, our new century
has given information about two of the most fundamental aspects of dinosaur
physiology, a definitive answer to the long-running mystery of whether
dinosaurs were warm-blooded, as well as new discoveries about the
characteristic growth rate of dinosaurs. And here too one of the fascinating
directions coming from these new data bring us right back to the differences
between dinosaurs and “true” birds, not just avian dinosaurs, but species with all
the traits we now associate with being a bird.
WHY WERE THERE DINOSAURS?
To tell the new history of dinosaurs, we have to dip back in time to a few million
years prior to the Triassic-Jurassic mass extinction, the topic ending the last
chapter. Dinosaurs were really Jurassic and Cretaceous dominants. During the
Triassic they were just another rare small low-diversity and low-abundance
vertebrate trying to survive in a low-oxygen world. Over and over, however, it
really looks like a dominant theme in the history of life is that times of crisis
promote new innovation. Diversity stays low, but disparity—the measure of the
number of different, and in the dinosaur’s case, radically different body plans
and anatomies—skyrockets. An analogy comes from Tom Wolfe’s wonderful
book The Right Stuff. In it he describes the often short and violent ends of test
pilots in the late 1950s, when giant new jet planes were being developed. Sooner
or later any test pilot would find himself in a death dive. But Wolfe describes the
reaction of the pilots: very coolly going through the progressions—trying
method A, no, try B, try C, try … In the latest Triassic world, so many organisms
were those crashing jets, with evolution as the pilot, trying this morphology, then
another, then another. To use this analogy, it was dinosaurs that pulled out of the
death spiral that the low-oxygen, late Triassic biosphere had become by evolving
the most sophisticated and efficient set of lungs that the world has ever seen.

Some 200 million years ago, only 50 million after the great paroxysm of the
Permian extinction, the Triassic period came to an end in another bloodletting.
As we saw in the last chapter, of the many lineages of land life that suffered
through this extinction, it was only the saurischian dinosaurs that came through
unscathed. The mass extinction ending the Triassic period was not just a
phenomenon on land: it also wiped out most stocks of chambered cephalopods,
but in the lower Jurassic they diversified in three great lineages: nautiloids,
ammonites, and coleoids. Scleractinian reefs flourished once again, and large
numbers of flat clams colonized the seafloor. Marine reptiles belonging to the
ichthyosaur and the new plesiosaur stocks again were top carnivores.
On land the dinosaurs flourished, and mammals retreated in size and numbers
to become a minor aspect of the land fauna, but showed a significant radiation
into the many modern orders near the end of the Cretaceous. Birds evolved from
dinosaurs in the latter parts of the Jurassic. This is all known, and not the topic of
the sort of revisionist history that is the goal of this book. Instead, let us look at
the record of oxygen during the Jurassic, and compare that to the numbers and
kinds of dinosaurs in the ancient Jurassic Park.
Because of its general interest and rather sensational aspects, perhaps the most
commonly asked question about dinosaurs is the manner of their extinction. The
1980 hypotheses by the Alvarez group that the Earth was hit 65 million years
ago by an asteroid, and that the environmental effects of that asteroid rather
suddenly caused the Cretaceous-Tertiary mass extinction, in which the dinosaurs
were the most prominent victims, keeps this question paramount in people’s
minds. This controversy is rekindled every several years by some new finding
that brings it to the surface once again. Thus its preeminence, even superseding
the question as to whether or not the dinosaurs were warm-blooded. Way down
on the list of questions about dinosaurs is the inverse of the dinosaur extinction
question, not why did they die out, but why did they evolve in the first place?
We certainly know when they first appeared in the second third of the Triassic
period (some 235 million years ago), and we certainly know what these earliest
dinosaurs looked like: most were like smaller versions of the later and iconic T.
rex and Allosaurus. Bipedal forms that quickly became large. What has not been
largely known or even considered among those who do know about it is the new
understanding that 230 million years ago was the time when oxygen may have
been nearing its lowest level since the Cambrian period.
Why were there dinosaurs? This question can now be answered in multiple
ways. There were dinosaurs because there had been a Permian mass extinction,

opening the way for new forms. There were dinosaurs because they had a body
plan that was highly successful for the Earth during its Triassic period. But
perhaps these generalizations do not cut to the heart of the matter. Chicago
paleontologist Paul Sereno, who has unearthed some of the oldest dinosaurs and
has made their ascendancy a major part of his study, looks at the appearance of
dinosaurs in another way. In his 1999 review “The Evolution of Dinosaurs,” he
noted: “The ascendancy of dinosaurs on land near the close of the Triassic now
appears to have been as accidental and opportunistic as their demise and
replacement by therian mammals at the end of the Cretaceous.” Sereno goes on
to suggest that the evolutionary radiation following the evolution of the first
dinosaurs was slow and took place at very low diversity. This is quite unlike the
usual pattern seen in evolution when a new and obviously successful kind of
body plan first appears: usually there is some kind of explosive appearance of
many new species utilizing the new morphology of evolutionary invention in a
short period of time. Not so with the dinosaurs. Sereno further noted: “The
dinosaurian radiation, launched by 1-meter-long bipeds, was slower in tempo
and more restricted in adaptive scope than that of therian mammals.”
For millions of years, then, dinosaurs as well as other land vertebrates
remained at a relatively low diversity, a finding that Sereno and others continue
to find perplexing. But now this question can be answered. The history of animal
life on Earth repeatedly showed a correlation between atmospheric oxygen and
animal diversity as well as body size: times of low oxygen saw, on average,
lower diversity and smaller body sizes than times with higher oxygen. It appears
that these same relationships held for dinosaurs. The 2006 work by Ward, Out of
Thin Air, was the first source explicitly relating dinosaur body plan and later
giantism: the oxygen levels.
If dinosaur diversity was indeed dependent on atmospheric oxygen levels, the
extremely low atmospheric oxygen content of the Late Triassic readily explains
the long period of low dinosaur diversity after their first appearance in the
Triassic.
Low-oxygen times killed off species (while at the same time stimulating
experimentation with new body plans to deal with the bad times). Support for
this thesis can found by comparing the latest atmospheric oxygen estimates for
the Triassic through the Cretaceous with the most complete compilation of
dinosaur diversity through the same sampling period. The latter, published in
2005 by paleontologist and sedimentologist David Fastovsky and colleagues,
showed that dinosaur genera stayed roughly constant from the time of the first

dinosaurs in the latter half of the Triassic and the first half of the Jurassic. It is
not until the Late Jurassic that dinosaur numbers started to rise significantly, and
this trend then continued right up to the end of the Cretaceous, with the only
(and slight) pause in this rise coming in the early part of the late Cretaceous. By
the end of the Cretaceous (in the Campanian age, 84 to 72 million years ago)
there are hundreds of times more dinosaurs than during the Triassic to late
Jurassic. So what was the cause of this great increase? The relationship suggests
that oxygen levels played a role in dictating dinosaur diversity. Through the late
Triassic and first half of Jurassic, dinosaur numbers were both stable and low, as
was atmospheric oxygen when compared to today’s values. Gradually, oxygen
rose in the Jurassic, hitting 15 to 20 percent in the latter part of the period. It is
only then that the numbers of dinosaurs really began to increase. Oxygen levels
steadily climbed through the Cretaceous, and so too did dinosaur numbers, with
a great rise in dinosaur numbers found in the late Cretaceous, the true dinosaur
heyday. The dramatic rise in oxygen at the end of the Jurassic was also the time
that the sizes of dinosaurs increased, culminating in the largest-known dinosaurs
appearing from the late Jurassic through the Cretaceous.
There were surely many other reasons for this Cretaceous rise. For instance, in
mid-Cretaceous times the appearance of angiosperms caused a floral revolution,
and by the end of the Cretaceous period the flowering plants had largely
displaced the conifers that had been the Jurassic dominants. The rise of
angiosperms created more plants and sparked an insect diversification. More
resources were available in all ecosystems, and this may have been a trigger for
diversity as well. Yet the relationship between oxygen and diversity and between
oxygen and body size has played out over and over in many different groups of
animals, from insects to fish to reptiles to mammals. Why not in dinosaurs as
well?
Dinosaurs evolved during or immediately before the late Triassic oxygen low
(between 10 and 12 percent, equivalent to an altitude of fifteen thousand feet
today), a time when oxygen was at its lowest value of the last 500 million years.
We have already seen that many other animals changed body plans in response
to extremes of oxygen, and so too with the dinosaurs. The dinosaur body plan is
radically different from earlier reptilian body plans, and appeared in virtually a
dead heat (and in great global heat) with the oxygen minimum. Perhaps this is a
coincidence. But because many of the aspects of “dinosaurness” can be
explained in terms of adaptations for life in low oxygen, that seems unlikely. The
initial dinosaur body plan (evolved by the first saurischian dinosaurs such as

Staurikosaurus and the somewhat younger, dinosaur-looking beast named
Herrerasaurus) was in some part in response to the low-oxygen conditions of
the time, and from that it can be concluded that the initial dinosaur body plan of
bipedalism evolved as a response to low oxygen in the Middle Triassic. With a
bipedal stance, the first dinosaurs overcame the respiratory limitations imposed
by Carrier’s constraint. The Triassic oxygen low thus triggered the origin of
dinosaurs through formation of this new body plan.
It is totally misunderstood what it means to inhabit a world where there is only
10 percent oxygen at sea level, as it would have been for the last 20 million
years of the Triassic period. That is the level of oxygen found atop Mount
Rainier, in Washington State. It is the amount of air atop the highest Hawaiian
volcanoes, where the giant Keck Observatory peers out into space, a place where
astronomers learn very quickly about the loss of energy and mental acuity that
comes from such low oxygen levels. The principle of uniformitarianism fails us
in this, because the use of high altitude to better understand low oxygen levels
fails on so many levels, because at altitude, it is not just the oxygen that is lower
in concentration, but all gases. One of these gases is water vapor, and this has a
real effect on bird eggs at altitude. There had to have been major adaptations to
such low oxygen, however, as the most important constraint on land animal
evolution at this time. And indeed there were. One such we have named
“dinosaur,” for the first dinosaurs, all bipedal with new kind of lungs and
respiration, became the most efficient land animals of all time in low-oxygen
settings. Those that have survived, the creatures we call birds, maintain this
excellence.
The fossil record shows that the earliest true dinosaurs were bipedal and came
from more primitive bipedal archosauromorphs slightly earlier in the Triassic.
These archosauromorphs were the ancestors of the lineage giving rise to the
crocodiles as well, and may have been either warm-blooded or heading in that
way. We see bipedalism as a recurring body plan in this group, and there were
even bipedal crocodiles early on. Why bipedalism, and how could it have been
an adaptation to low oxygen?
Even modern-day lizards cannot breathe while they run (and they have had
hundreds of millions of years to potentially get this right). This is due to their
sprawling gait. Modern-day mammals show a distinct rhythm by synchronizing
breath taking with limb movement. Horses, jackrabbits, and cheetahs (among
many other mammals) take one breath per stride. Their limbs are located directly
beneath the mass of the body, and to allow this, the backbone in these quadruped

mammals has been enormously stiffened compared to the backbones of the
sprawling reptiles. The mammalian backbone slightly bows downward and then
straightens out with running, and this slight up-and-down bowing is coordinated
with air inspiration and exhalation. But this system did not appear until true
mammals appeared, in the Triassic. Even the most advanced cynodonts of the
Triassic were not yet fully upright, and thus would have suffered somewhat
when trying to run and breathe.
 
 
If a creature runs on two legs instead of four, the lungs and rib cage are not
affected. Breathing can be disassociated from locomotion; the bipeds can take as
many breaths as they need to in a high-speed chase. At a time of low oxygen but
high predation, any slight advantage either in chasing down prey or running
from predators—even in the amount of time looking for food and how food is
looked for—would have surely increased survival. The sprawling predators of
the Late Permian, such as the fearsome gorgonopsians, were, like most predators
during and before their time, ambush predators, as all lizards are today. Predators
that actively seek out prey require high speed and endurance. So what must it
have been like for the animals of the Triassic when they found that for the first
time the predators were out searching for them, rather than hiding and waiting?
In the Triassic, the crocodile lineage and the dinosaur lineage shared a
quadrupedal common ancestor. This beast may have been a reptile from South
Africa named Euparkeria. This group is technically called the Ornithodira, and

from its earliest members this group began to evolve toward bipedalism. This is
shown by their anklebones, which simplified into a simple hinge joint from the
more complex system found in quadrupeds. This, accompanied by a lengthening
of the hind limbs relative to the forelimbs, is also evidence of this, as is the neck,
which elongates and forms a slight S shape. These early Ornithodira themselves
split into two distinct lineages. One took to the air. These were the pterosaurs,
and the late Triassic Ornithodira named Scleromochlus might be the very first of
its kind; a still-terrestrial form looks like a fast runner that perhaps began gliding
between long steps using arms with skin flaps. The oldest undoubted flying
pterosaur was Eudimorphodon, also of the Late Triassic.
While these ornithodires edge toward flight, their terrestrial sister group
headed toward the first dinosaur morphology. The Triassic Lagosuchus was a
transitional form, being between a bipedal runner and a quadruped. It probably
moved slowly on all fours, but reared up on its hind legs for bursts of speed—the
bursts necessary to bring down prey, for this was a predator. But it still had
forelimbs and hands that had not yet attained the dinosaur type of morphology,
so it is not classified as a dinosaur. Its successor, the Triassic Herrerasaurus,
meets all the requirements and is classified as a dinosaur—the first. But, as we
shall see below, it may have lacked one attribute that its immediate descendants
would rectify: a new kind of respiratory system that could handle the still-
lowering oxygen content of Earth’s atmosphere.
This first dinosaur was fully bipedal,1 and it could grasp objects with its
hands, having a thumb like we do. This five-fingered hand was distinct from the
functionally three-toed foot (there were five actual toes, but two were so
vestigial that only three toes touched the ground while running or walking).
Because it was not totally bipedal, evolution no longer had to worry about
maintaining a hand that had to touch the ground for locomotion. So with a free
appendage no longer necessary for locomotion, what to do with it? The much
later and more famous T. rex reduced the size of the forearm to the point that
some have suggested it was nonfunctional. Not so for these first dinosaurs,
however. While their posture was that of the later carnivorous dinosaurs so
familiar to us, their hands were obviously used—probably for catching and
holding prey while on the run.
So this is the body plan of the first dinosaurs, from which all the rest evolved;
bipedal, elongated neck, grasping hands with a functional thumb, and a large and
distinctive pelvis for the massive muscles and necessary large surface area for
these muscles used in walking and running. These early bipeds were relatively

small, and before the end of the Triassic they again split into two groups, which
remained the most fundamental split of the entire dinosaur clan. A species of
these bipedal, Triassic dinosaurs modified its hipbones to incorporate a back-
turned pubis, compared to the forward-facing pubis of the first dinosaurs. As any
schoolboy knows, this change in pelvic structure marks the division of the
dinosaurs into the two great divisions: the ancestral saurischians, and their
derived descendants, with whom they would share the world for about the next
170 million years: the ornithischians.
Of interest here, of course, is how dinosaurs breathed.2 It has been discovered
that their respiratory system was quite different from the cold-blooded reptiles
we find today, but very similar to that of the warm-blooded birds. The lungs of
modern-day amniotes (reptiles, birds, and mammals) are of two basic types
(although we will see that there are more than two respiratory systems, which
include lungs, circulatory system, and blood pigment type). Both kinds of lungs
can be reasonably derived from some single kind of Carboniferous reptilian
ancestor that had simple saclike lungs. Extant mammals all have alveolar lungs,
while extant turtles, lizards, birds, and crocodiles—all the rest—have septate
lungs. Alveolar lungs consist of millions of highly vascularized, spherical sacs
called alveoli. Air flows in and out of the sacs. It is therefore bidirectional.
We mammals use this system, and our familiar breathing—in, out, in, out—is
quite typical. Our air has to be pulled into these sacs, and then expelled again as
oxygen switches place with carbon dioxide. We do this by a combination of rib
cage expansion (powered by muscles, of course) and contraction of the large
suite of muscles collectively called the diaphragm. Somewhat paradoxically,
contraction of the diaphragm causes the volume of the lungs to increase. These
two activities—the interacting rib expansion/diaphragm contraction—create a
reduction in air pressure within the lung volume, and air flows in. Exhaling is
partially accomplished by elastic rebound of the individual alveoli: when they
inflate they enlarge, and soon after they naturally contract due to the elastic
properties of their tissue. The many alveoli used in this kind of lung allow for a
very efficient oxygen acquisition system, which we warm-blooded mammals
very much need in order to maintain our active, movement-rich lifestyles. But
the fact that air goes in and out of the same tube is very inefficient and reduces
oxygen uptake relative to the amount of energy expended to get it.3
In contrast to the mammalian lung, the septate lung found in reptiles and birds
is like one giant alveolus. To break it into smaller pockets that increases surface
area for respiratory exchange, a large number of blade-like sheets of tissue

extend into the sac. These partitioning elements are the septa, which give these
kinds of lungs their name. There are many variations on this basic lung design
among the many different kinds of animals that use it. Some kinds of septate
lungs are partitioned into small chambers; others have secondary sacs that rest
outside the lung, but are connected to it by tubes. As in the alveolar lung, airflow
is bidirectional in most—but, as recently discovered, not all, and the exceptions
to this rule, recently found, have profoundly changed our understanding of not
only the paleobiology of early reptiles but their fate during the Permian mass
extinction.
Septate lungs are not elastic and thus do not naturally contract in size
following inhalation. Lung ventilation also varies across groups with the septate
lung. Lizards and snakes use rib movement to draw air in, but as we have seen,
locomotion in lizards inhibits complete expansion of the lung cavity, and thus
lizards do not breathe while moving.
The variety of modifications of the septate lung makes this system more
diverse than the alveolar system. For instance, crocodiles have both a septate
lung and a diaphragm—an organ not found in the snakes, lizards, or birds. But
the crocodile diaphragm is also somewhat different from that in mammals: it is
not muscular, but is attached to the liver, and movement of this liver-diaphragm
acts like a piston to inflate the lungs, with muscles attaching to the pelvis. The
mammalian (including human) diaphragm pulls the liver in just the same way a
crocodilian one does, creating a visceral piston, but the way this is accomplished
differs in crocs and mammals.
Until recently, the septate lungs of crocodile and alligator lungs were
considered relatively primitive and therefore inefficient. But a radical new
finding not only makes us reassess the respiratory ability of the extant forms, but
also puts an entirely new view on the reptilian success across the Permian
extinction and in the Triassic.
The most inefficient way to breathe is the mammalian way: inhalation and
exhalation through the same tube into the lungs. The inefficiency comes from the
disorder of the gas molecules as one exhalation finishes and one inhalation
starts. In any sort of more rapid breathing, there is a chaotic collision of exhaled
air trying to get out before inhalation begins—and quite often the same gas
molecules, including volumes of air with more CO2 and less O2, are sucked back
in. It has long been thought that the crocs have this problem as well. But a study
in 2010 showed that in fact the crocodilians use a separate one-way path that is
similar to that in birds and dinosaurs. The revelation is that the ancient Permian-

and Triassic-aged stem reptiles, the groups ultimately giving rise to the modern
crocodiles and birds, and to the extinct dinosaurs, were also more efficient in
their breathing than their therapsid (protomammal) contemporaries. They went
through the filter of the Permian extinction with two great competitive
advantages; they were cold-blooded, and they could extract more oxygen out of
the air than a mammal or mammal-like reptile. The deck was stacked against us
mammals. We never really had a chance in this most consequential competition
for not only survivability but for eventual dominance amid the crisis and chaos
of mass extinction. The mammals of the Mesozoic eventually would rarely be
larger than rats. Probably highly fearful as rats are as well, surrounded by
dinosaurs.
THE AVIAN AIR-SAC SYSTEM
The last kind of lung found in terrestrial vertebrates is a variant on the septate
lung. The best example of this kind of lung and its associated respiratory system
is found in all birds. The lungs themselves in this system are small and
somewhat rigid. Thus bird lungs do not greatly expand and contract as ours do
on each breath. But the rib cage is very much involved in respiration, and
especially those ribs closest to the pelvic region are very mobile in their
connection to the bottom of the sternum, and this mobility is quite important in
allowing respiration. But these are not the biggest differences. Very much unlike
extant reptiles and mammals, these lungs have appendages added to them known
as air sacs, and the resultant system of respiration is highly efficient. Here is
why. We mammals (and all other nonavians as well) bring air into our dead-end
lungs and then exhale it. Birds have a very different system.
 

 
When a bird inspires air, the air goes first into the series of air sacs. It then
passes into the lung tissue proper, but in so doing the air passes but one way over
the lung, since it is not coming down a trachea but from the attached air sacs.
Exhaled air then passes out of the lungs. The one-way flow of air across the lung
membranes allows a countercurrent system to be set up: the air passes one
direction, and blood in the blood vessels within the lungs passes in the opposite
direction. This countercurrent exchange allows for more efficient oxygen
extraction and carbon dioxide venting than are possible in dead-end lungs.
Anatomists have been dissecting and describing birds for centuries. It thus
seems odd that an accurate understanding of bird air-sac anatomy did not occur
until 2005. Two bird anatomists, Patrick O’Connor and Leon Claessens, injected
substantial quantities of fast-jelling plastic into the respiratory systems of many
different birds and then carefully dissected the corpses and described the
anatomy of the filled cavities, the now plastic-filled air sacs.4 To their surprise,
they found that avian air sacs are much more voluminous and complicated than
anyone had suspected. For the first time, the real relationship of air sac to bone
in pneumatized bone—bones with large cavities in them—could be observed. In
the same paper the two authors then compared the anatomy of pneumatized bird
bones to pneumatized dinosaur bones. The similarity was remarkable, for there
were the same shapes of holes in the same (or homologous) bones.
Those arguing that there was no air-sac system in dinosaurs have not denied
that the dinosaur bones had holes in them. They said that the holes were there,
all right, but that they were adaptations simply for lightening the bones. But
there comes a point when arguing that the similarity is simply coincidence in
shape collapses under the weight of too great a coincidence.
In the diagram on page 258, the various air sacs are shown with their

communication to the lungs. It is clear that the volume of air sacs far exceeds the
volume of the lungs themselves. The air sacs are not involved in removing
oxygen; they are an adaptation that allows the countercurrent system to work.
There is no question that the greater efficiency of this system compared to all
other lungs in vertebrates is related to the two-cycle, countercurrent system
produced by the air-sac lung anatomy in birds.
By 2005, the evidence that many dinosaurs had air sacs was overwhelming.
Until then, one group of anatomists had vigorously argued that dinosaur lungs
were no different than modern crocodile lungs, just large, and that the avian
lung,5 with its many auxiliary air sacs as well as a one-way airflow, did not
appear until the Cretaceous, some 100 million years ago—and then was found
only in birds! That view no longer became tenable. But in 2005 there was still no
appreciation of the degree to which atmospheric oxygen levels had changed in
the Early Mesozoic, or that such changes might have had any influence at all on
the evolution of these various respiratory systems.
The air-sac system is better than the mammalian system. It has been estimated
that a bird is 33 percent more efficient in extracting oxygen from air than a
mammal at sea level. But at higher altitude this differential increases: a bird at
five thousand feet in altitude may be 200 percent more efficient at extracting
oxygen than a mammal. This gives the birds a huge advantage over mammals
and reptiles living at altitude. And if such a system were present deep in the past,
when oxygen even at sea level was lower than we find today at five thousand
feet, surely such a design would have been advantageous, perhaps enormously
so, to the group that had it in competing or preying on groups that did not.
We know that birds evolved from small bipedal dinosaurs that were of the
same lineage as the earliest dinosaurs, a group called saurischians. The first bird
skeletons come from the Jurassic (although there is now some controversy about
just how “birdlike” the earliest species, such as the famous Archaeopteryx, really
were, and we will return to this). But the air sacs attached to bird lungs are soft
tissue, and would fossilize only under the most unusual circumstances of
preservation. Thus we do not have direct evidence for when the air-sac system
came about. But we do have indirect evidence, enough to have stimulated the
air-sac-in-dinosaurs group to posit that all saurischian dinosaurs had the same
air-sac system, as do modern birds. And like birds they were also warm-blooded.
The evidence comes from holes in bones, places where these air sacs may have
rested.
All credit for the first to make the audacious suggestion that dinosaurs had a

bird launch system goes to Robert Bakker. It had been known since the late
1800s that some dinosaur bones had curious hollows in them, just as bird bones
do. For decades this discovery was either forgotten or attributed to an adaptation
for lightening the massive bones, for many of these bones with holes, later called
pneumatic bones, came from the largest land animals of all time, the giant
sauropods of the Jurassic and Cretaceous. The pneumatic bones were found
mainly in vertebrae. Birds have similar pneumatic vertebrae, and while it can be
said that some of the bird bones were light to enhance flying, it was also clear
that some of the air sacs attached to bird lungs rested in hollows in bones. Thus,
in birds, bone pneumaticity was an adaptation for stashing away the otherwise
space-taking air sacs. The bodies of animals are filled with necessary organs, and
putting the air sacs in hollowed-out bones make a lot of evolutionary sense. But
Bakker made the leap and suggested that the pneumatic bones in his beloved
fossil sauropods had evolved for a similar purpose, and were direct evidence that
sauropods had and used the air-sac system.
Bakker’s larger purpose was to try to add further evidence that dinosaurs were
warm-blooded rather than make any claim about this being an adaptation to low
oxygen. Birds, with their enormous energy and oxygen demands related to
flying, were thought to have evolved the air-sac system as a way of satisfying the
metabolic demands of their endothermy.
Following Bakker, other dinosaur workers took up the call, and the specific
case of air sacs being present in sauropods was made by paleontologist and
dinosaur specialist Matt Wedel in 2003, while similar arguments for bipedal
species were made at about the same time by dinosaur specialist Greg Paul. In
2002 he suggested that the first of the so-called archosaurs, the primitive late
Permian through early Triassic reptilian group (that we have called
archosauromorphs), which would eventually give rise to crocodiles, dinosaurs,
and birds, had air sacs. Examples of this group, which included the quadruped
form Proterosuchus (described above as one of the earliest Triassic archosaurs),
would have had a reptilian septate lung. Inspiration may have been aided by a
primitive abdominal pump-diaphragm system (more primitive, perhaps, than this
system as found today in modern crocodiles). What was unknown at the time,
however, was that the crocodiles and their ilk back then had a far better
respiratory system than was then agreed upon, thanks to their innovation of
making air move one way through the respiratory system.
This discovery did not take place until 2010, and certainly affects our view of
the relative evolutionary fitness of crocodiles, dinosaurs, and mammals. In fact,

all of the Triassic reptiles seemed to have been better “breathers” than we
mammals.
Successively, however, the evolution of the air-sac system may have fairly
rapidly progressed in the lineage leading to dinosaurs at least. Alas (for them,
anyway), the crocodiles ceased major innovation to their respiratory system with
the newly evolved flow-through anatomy; they never experimented with
pneumaticity in bones, and air sacs.
By the time the first true dinosaur is seen in the Middle Triassic, there may
have been part of the air-sac system in place. The most primitive theropods from
this time (the first dinosaurs) do not show bone pneumatization; the lung itself
may have become inflexible and relatively smaller, both characteristics of extant
bird lungs. With the Jurassic forms such as Allosaurus, the air-sac system may
have been essentially complete but still much different from the bird system,
modified as it has been for flying (for even the modern-day flightless birds came
from fliers in the deep past) with large thoracic and abdominal air sacs.
By the time Archaeopteryx had evolved in the middle part of the Jurassic,
there may have been a great diversity of respiratory types among the dinosaurs,
some with pneumatized bones and some without. There also may have been a
great deal of convergent evolution going on. For instance, the extensive
pneumatization in the large sauropods studied with such care by Wedel may have
arisen somewhat independently from the system found in the bipedal
saurischians.
A final note about air sacs: While universal in saurischian dinosaurs, there is
still no evidence of air sacs in the other giant dinosaur group, the ornithischian
dinosaurs, including the well-known duckbills, iguanodons, and horned
ceratopsian dinosaurs—not coincidentally (for three groups) all from the
Cretaceous, not the Jurassic. The lack of an air-sac system in this group meshes
well with their distribution in time. During the Jurassic times of very low oxygen
they were minor elements of the fauna. It was not until the great oxygen rise of
the Late Jurassic through the Cretaceous that this second great group of
dinosaurs became common.
Perhaps the earliest dinosaurs were something like lions: sleeping twenty
hours a day to conserve energy as dictated by the low oxygen, but when hunting,
doing so actively, more actively than any of their competitors, which would have
included the nondinosaur archosaurs (such as the early crocodiles), the
cynodonts, and the first true mammals. All they needed to be was better than the
rest. All evidence suggests that they were.

Metabolic complexes may have been far more diverse than our simple
subdivision into endothermy and ectothermy. While modern birds, reptiles, and
mammals are put into one of these two categories, there are, in fact, many kinds
of organisms that can generate heat in their bodies without external heat sources.
These include large flying insects, some fish, large snakes, and large lizards.
Such animals are endotherms, but not in the mammalian or avian sense. There
may have been many kinds of metabolism in the great variety of dinosaurs that
existed.
Dinosaurs were not alone on the Jurassic stage, for our own ancestors were
present, at very small size, as were other land animals and sea animals, including
turtles on land and in the sea, as well as long-necked plesiosaurs and crocodiles.
But the dinosaurs were certainly dominant on land. While at first it seems that
there were many, many kinds of dinosaur body shapes, in fact there were really
but three. All three shared a common characteristic with birds and mammals: a
fully upright posture. The three kinds of dinosaurs were bipeds, short-necked
quadrupeds, and long-necked quadrupeds. Each had a different time of origin
and time of maximum abundance. Five distinct and successive assemblages of
dinosaurian “morphotypes” (body plans) seem apparent to us. They are as
follows:
 
  1.   Late Triassic. The earliest dinosaurs appeared in the last third of the Triassic but remained for their
first 15 million years at low diversity. The majority of forms were bipedal, carnivorous
saurischians. Toward the end of the period, quadrupedal saurischians (sauropods) evolved.
Ornithischians diverged from the saurischians before the end of the Triassic but made up a very
small percentage of dinosaur species and individuals. For much of the Triassic, dinosaur size is
small, from one to three meters, and the earliest ornithischians (such as Pisanosaurus) were meter-
long bipeds that had a new jaw system specialized for slicing plants. In the latest Triassic the first
substantial radiation of dinosaurs occurs. It takes place among saurischians, with the evolution of
both more and larger bipedal carnivores, and the first gigantism among early sauropods (such as
Plateosaurus of the Late Triassic).
  2.   Early to mid Jurassic. Saurischian bipeds and long-necked quadrupeds dominated faunas. During
this time, however, the ornithischians, while remaining small in size and few in number, diversify
into the major stocks that will ultimately dominate dinosaur diversity in the Cretaceous. These
stocks include the appearance of heavily armored forms (such as the thyreophorans). These are
quadrupeds, and include the first stegosaurs of the middle part of the Jurassic. A second group is
the unarmored neornischians (which include ornithopods—hypsilophodontids, iguanodons, and
duckbills—and marginocephalians—the ceratopsians, which do not appear until the Cretaceous—

and bone-headed pachycephalans). But it is the sauropods that are most evident in numbers. They
split into two groups in the latest Triassic, the prosauropods and true sauropods, and in the early
and middle Jurassic the prosauropods were far more diverse than sauropods, but went extinct in
middle Jurassic time, leading to a vast radiation of sauropods into the Late Jurassic.
    The bipedal saurischians also showed diversity and success in the early and middle Jurassic. In
latest Triassic time they had split into two groups (the ceratosaurs and tetanurans). The ceratosaurs
dominated the early Jurassic, but by middle Jurassic time the tetanurans increased in number at the
expense of the ceratosaurs. They too split in two, the two groups being the ceratosauroids and the
coelophysids. The latter group eventually produced the most famous dinosaur of all: the late
Cretaceous Tyrannosaurus rex, although its middle Jurassic members were considerably smaller.
Their most important development in the Jurassic was the evolution of the stock that gave rise to
birds.
  3.   Late Jurassic. This was the time of the giants. The largest sauropods come from late Jurassic
rocks, and their dominance continues into the early part of the Cretaceous. Keeping pace with this
large size were the saurischian carnivores, with giants such as Allosaurus typical. Thus the most
notable aspect of this interval was the appearance of sizes far larger than in the early and middle
Jurassic. And this was not only among the saurischians. During the late Jurassic the armored
ornithischians also increased in size, most notably among the heavily armored stegosaurs. The
diversification of ornithischians at this time with the appearance of stegosaurs, ankylosaurs,
nodosaurs, camptosaurs, and hypsilophontids radically changes the complexion of the dinosaur
assemblages.
  4.   Early to middle Cretaceous. While the dominants for the early part of this interval remained large
sauropods, as the Cretaceous progressed a major shift occurred: ornithischians increased in
diversity and abundance until they outnumbered saurischians. Sauropods become increasingly rare
as many sauropod genera go extinct at the end of the Jurassic.
  5.   Late Cretaceous time. Dinosaur diversity skyrocketed. Most of this diversification came through
large numbers of new ornithischians: ceratopsians, hadrosaurs, and ankylosaurs among others.
Only a small number of sauropods were present.
 
No evolutionary history can ever be pinned on one factor. Dinosaur
morphology changed from predator-prey interactions, competition among
themselves and others of their world, perhaps even climate change driven in
large part by the incredible rises and falls of sea level during the Jurassic and
Cretaceous—at one point a sea level rise so large that North America became
two separate minicontinents, separated by a large if shallow north-south-running
sea. Nevertheless, oxygen levels must have played a part.
The time of the first dinosaur grouping, the late Triassic assemblage, was a

time of low oxygen levels, and this coupled with very high carbon dioxide levels
—not asteroid impact—was the major cause of the Triassic-Jurassic mass
extinction. The combination of low oxygen and high global temperatures was the
killing mechanism. Yet studies of the number of land vertebrate taxa before and
after the T-J mass extinction clearly show that saurischian dinosaurs survived
this mass extinction event better than any group of vertebrates, and one
important reason may have been because of their superior respiration system,
because of their air-sac lungs, which gave them competitive superiority over
other terrestrial animals with different lungs.
Ornithischian dinosaurs, on the other hand, did not possess as effective a
respiratory system as did saurischians. However, they were competitively
superior to herbivorous saurischians with regard to food acquisition, larger
heads, stronger jaws, and better teeth. With the rise of oxygen to near present-
day levels in the Cretaceous, ornithischians became the principal herbivores
because of this superiority, leading to the extinction of many saurischian
herbivores through competitive exclusion.
While the Jurassic to Cretaceous interval marked a relatively rapid and
significant rise in atmospheric oxygen, other events were taking place. One of
these was the breakup of the once-global continent of Pangaea into smaller
continents. Another, and perhaps more significant for the distribution and
taxonomic makeup of the later Mesozoic dinosaur faunas, was the radical change
in flora. Dinosaurs evolved in a gymnosperm-dominated world—with conifers,
but ferns, cycads, and ginkgos as well. But in the early part of the Cretaceous a
new kind of plant appeared, a flowering plant.
With this new kind of reproduction and other adaptations, these plants, the
angiosperms, underwent a rapid adaptive radiation. They outcompeted the earlier
flora nearly everywhere on Earth, to the extent that by the end of the Cretaceous,
some 65 million years ago, the angiosperms made up as much as 90 percent of
vegetation. This transition in available food types would have affected the
herbivores, and the kind of herbivores available as food would have directly
affected carnivore body plans. Killing a late Jurassic sauropod would have been
very different from killing a late Cretaceous hadrosaur.
Herbivory is dependent on the correct kind of teeth for the available plants.
The sauropods may have lived on pine needles, their huge barrel bodies being,
essentially, giant fermenting tanks for digestion of a relatively indigestible food
source. The appearance of broad-leafed plants, the angiosperms, would have
required different teeth and biting surfaces than those optimal for slicing pine

needles off trees. Thus the transition from the sauropod-dominated faunas of the
Jurassic to the ornithischian-dominated faunas of the Cretaceous was surely
related in some part to the change in plant life. But respiration may have played
a part as well, and perhaps if oxygen had not risen above 15 percent, the
ornithischian takeover would not have taken place.
JURASSIC-TRIASSIC DINOSAUR LUNGS AND THE EVOLUTION OF
BIRDS
Here it is proposed that the first dinosaurs were of a kind of animal never before
seen or alive today: through upright posture and an evolving air-sac system they
developed respiratory efficiency (the amount of oxygen extracted from air per
unit time, or per unit energy expended in breathing) superior to any other then-
extant animal. But these early forms may have lost endothermy, replacing it with
a more passive homeothermy. That was their trick, using homeothermy to reduce
oxygen consumption while at rest, and a superior lung system to allow extended
movement without going into rapid anaerobic (and thus poisonous) states when
active. We know that birds, a group of dinosaurs first appearing in the Jurassic,
eventually had both endothermy and a very different kind of lung than in any
extant reptile.
THE AVIAN DINOSAURS—AND DINOSAURIAN AVIANS
With perhaps the exception of the always-fascinating tyrannosaurids, no group
of dinosaurs has received more attention in recent times than the basal birds.
Vigorous debate centers on their body covering, but most important, on when
flight first evolved, and why.
The first birds appeared about 150 million years ago, and the famous first bird
remains Archaeopteryx. That is just before the start of the Jurassic. Oxygen had
been rising for 50 million years at that time. Gigantism in dinosaurs was
common. The immediate ancestors of the birds were fast, ground-running
dinosaurs that may have used their forelimbs for a type of predation, a motion
that was preadapted for a wing stroke in a flier, according to Berkeley
paleontologist Kevin Padian. The fossil record suggests that the ancestors of the

first bird were the bipedal carnivorous saurischians known as troodontids or
perhaps the dromaeosaurids, forms that appear to have been already feathered.
Could Archaeopteryx fly? Most specialists now think so. But there is debate
about when true flight took place. Could the late Jurassic “birds” really fly, at a
time when their competition in the air would have been the diverse and
successful pterodactyls? The fossil record does show that by the lower
Cretaceous there is a bird fossil (Eoluolavis) that had evolved a “thumb wing,”
an adaptation that allows flight at slower speeds with greater maneuverability.
Thus, within a few million years after Archaeopteryx, fairly advanced flight was
present. New discoveries from China have revealed an unexpectedly high
diversity of birds already in place by the early part of the Cretaceous. Flight was
an adaptation that stimulated a rapid evolution of new forms. We will return to
the evolutionary history of birds in a subsequent chapter, as much of their story
happened after the Jurassic.
 

 
Flight in birds is highly energetic. They use a great deal of energy to fly, and
that, added to their relatively small size and endothermy, makes them great users
of oxygen. So their air-sac system serves them well.
DINOSAUR REPRODUCTION AND OXYGEN LEVELS
One of the great discoveries of twentieth-century paleontology was the finding
of dinosaur eggs.6 In the latter half of that century, complex patterns found in
associated fossil eggs hinted at behavioral complexity in dinosaur reproduction,

or at least the egg-laying parts of it. In this century, ready access to new
machines—small desktop CT scanners—has led to a third revolution in
understanding dinosaur reproduction. Now eggs can be examined without
mechanical damage to reveal delicate embryos within, and there is increasing
understanding not only of the growth of these embryos, but of the construction
of the eggs themselves—the how and why of a dinosaur egg.
Birds show little variation in at least one aspect of their reproduction. Extant
birds, our best window to the dinosaurs, all lay eggs with a porous, calcareous
shell. There is no live birth in birds, in contrast to extant reptiles, which have
many lineages using live birth. There is also great variation in egg morphology
between birds and some reptiles. While the eggshell in birds and reptiles consists
of two layers, an inner organic membrane overlain by an outer crystalline layer,
that amount of crystalline material varies greatly, from a thick calcium carbonate
layer like that in birds to almost no crystalline material at all, so that the outer
layer is a leathery and flexible membrane. Even the mineralogy of the crystalline
layer varies, from calcite in birds, crocodiles, and lizards, to aragonite (a
different crystal form of calcium carbonate) in turtles. Eggs are thus divided into
two main types: hard or crystalline, and soft or parchment eggs. Some workers
further subdivide the parchment eggs into flexible (used by some turtles and
lizards) and soft (used by most snakes and lizards). Not surprisingly, the
fossilization potential of these different hardness categories of eggs differs
markedly. There are numerous fossil hard eggs known (many from dinosaurs), a
few flexible eggs, and no undisputed soft eggs preserved.
Because of the great interest in dinosaurs there has been much speculation
about their reproductive habits (the thought of two gigantic Seismosaurus mating
rather boggles the imagination), and there are still many mysteries. One of the
seminal discoveries about dinosaurs was that they laid large, calcareous eggs
with calcite crystals making up the mineral layer, a find from the first expedition
to the Gobi desert by the American Museum of Natural History expedition of the
1920s. Since then thousands of Cretaceous dinosaur eggs have been found, and
the nesting patterns discovered and publicized by Jack Horner in Montana have
opened a window into dinosaur reproduction. But are these Cretaceous finds
characteristic of dinosaurs as a whole? This question remains unresolved and
controversial. While most workers assume that all dinosaurs laid hard-shelled
eggs, this is far from proven, and as we shall see below, there is indirect
evidence that some early dinosaurs may have utilized parchment eggs or even
live birth.

Almost all dinosaur eggs come from the Cretaceous. There is great variability
in the nature of their crystal form and size, number, and the pattern of pores in
them. But it is not the variety that is the most interesting scientific question.
There are far fewer Jurassic dinosaur eggs, and almost none known from the
Triassic. Why would that be? Has it to do with different kinds of preservation
characteristics of the Cretaceous world and how things on land fossilized or did
not? Or was it because of the far lower oxygen levels of the Triassic and Jurassic
compared to the Cretaceous (and especially the late Cretaceous, where the vast
majority of dinosaur eggs are recovered)?
There are several possibilities for this: perhaps there is indeed some
preservation bias, with pre-Cretaceous eggs as common as those of the
Cretaceous, but the lesser extent of Triassic and Jurassic dinosaur beds compared
to the vast expanse of Cretaceous-aged beds has caused this difference. Thus the
difference simply comes from sample size. Another (and different) possibility is
that pre-Cretaceous eggs fossilized much less readily than those from the
Cretaceous. This would certainly be the case if pre-Cretaceous eggs were
leathery like those of extant reptiles, rather than calcified like birds. And if, like
the marine ichthyosaurs, some dinosaurs utilized live birth rather than egg
laying, there would certainly be fewer eggs to find. As in so many other aspects
of the history of life, the level of atmospheric oxygen may have played a major
role in dictating mode of reproduction.
Fossil eggs from Cretaceous deposits attributed to dinosaurs have a calcium
carbonate covering like a chicken egg (but thicker), but unlike chicken eggs,
which are smooth, the dinosaur eggs were usually ornamented with either
longitudinal ridges or nodular ornamentation. Presumably ornamentation
allowed the eggs to be buried after emerging from the female, with the ornament
allowing airflow between the eggs and the burial material. The ability to bury
eggs may have aided their fossil preservation potential, and perhaps helps
explain why there are so many Cretaceous eggs, and so few other kinds. The
heavy calcification would also help the eggs withstand the overpressure of burial
in soil or sand.
Also now known is the complex behavior in nest making and orienting the
eggs in burial mounds in the late Cretaceous, but not before. The Late
Cretaceous bipedal dinosaur Troödon arranged its eggs tightly together in pairs,
or vertically, while Jack Horner has shown complex burial patterns in late
Cretaceous hadrosaurs from Montana.
The advantages of calcareous eggs is that they are strong, harder for predators

to break into, and also aid in development: as the embryo grows inside the egg,
some of the calcium carbonate is dissolved from the eggshell itself to be used in
bone growth. They also might shield the egg from bacterial infections. But this
comes at a price. Calcium carbonate, even an eggshell-thin layer of it, will not
allow the passage of air or water into or out of the shell. But developing embryos
need both water and oxygen. All calcareous eggs thus have pores so that oxygen-
laden air can enter, but not so many pores that water quickly leaves by
desiccation. To ensure sufficient water, the interior of the egg has a large amount
of a compound known as albumin (familiar to us as the “white” of a chicken
egg), which provides water to the embryo. This kind of egg is found in all birds
and crocodiles.
The second kind of reptilian egg, the parchment egg, is found in turtles and
most lizards. This kind of egg can take up water and actually expand in size with
water uptake. But water permeability is a two-way street: parchment eggs can
easily lose water as well. Burying these kinds of eggs in nests, the habit of many
turtles and alligator-crocodiles, reduces water loss as well as hiding them from
predators.
Burying an egg presents some danger: all developing embryos require oxygen,
and thus the embryo requires an egg that can allow the passage of oxygen from
the atmosphere into the egg. If the egg is buried too deeply or in impermeable
sediment, the embryo will suffocate. And if the egg is laid at high altitude, it
runs the risk of the same fate, even being smothered by parental care. So far,
biologists have concentrated on temperature as the major variable affecting
development rates in reptiles and birds. But the clues given by high-altitude
lizards suggest that oxygen levels certainly play a part as well.
Modern lizards living at altitude often show viviparity, or live birth. They also
hold the eggs in the birth canal for long periods of time. In both cases the
explanation has been that they do this to maintain relatively high temperatures in
an environment where there can be very cold temperatures that could slow
development. But both of these adaptations would lessen or completely remove
the time that the embryo is enclosed in a capsule that itself reduces the rate of
oxygen acquisition. Calcareous eggs cannot be held in the mother because they
do not allow oxygen to enter the egg until they emerge from the mother.
So we have a mystery. Reptiles show four different kinds of reproduction: live
birth, parchment eggs that are held within the mother for extended periods of
time, parchment eggs that are laid soon after formation within the mother, and
calcareous eggs. And following birth there is also a series of possibilities: the

eggs are buried or not, and when not buried, the eggs can be cared for by the
parent or not. The advantages of each of these and the time they first appeared
are still unknown.
And we have a second mystery. Most known dinosaur eggs are of Cretaceous,
and as noted above, mainly late Cretaceous eggs, and are calcified; also, the
appearance of burial behavior in dinosaurs is also characteristic of the Late
Cretaceous. But what of the pre-Cretaceous dinosaurs? While there are eggs
from sauropods and bipedal saurischians from the Late Jurassic—most
spectacularly from deposits in Portugal, where the eggs contain the bones of
embryos—earlier rocks are nearly barren of dinosaur eggs and/or nests. Only a
few confirmed eggs are known from the Triassic.
Just when these various kinds of eggs first evolved thus remains a mystery. In
2005 it was proposed that calcareous eggs first appeared at the end of the
Permian as an adaptation to avoid desiccation in the increasingly dry late
Permian through Triassic global climates. Unfortunately, there is no fossil
evidence to support this: there are no accepted Permian eggs in spite of the
existence at that time of anapsids (the group that would give rise to turtles),
diapsids (the group that would give rise to crocodiles and dinosaurs), and
synapsids (the group that would give rise to us). Furthermore, only a small
number of late Triassic eggs are known that may be from dinosaurs. But this
poses a great dilemma: dinosaur eggs preserved commonly in Cretaceous
sediments are not found in the same kinds of depositional environments of
Permian and Triassic-aged strata. In all likelihood, if archosaurs had used hard
eggs in the Permian or Triassic—if any group of reptiles had used hard eggs then
—we would have already found them.
The absence of evidence is always a dangerous tool, but eventually numbers
must be accepted. All evidence suggests that hard eggs were not commonly
produced by pre-Cretaceous terrestrial egg-laying organisms. Even the 2012
discovery of hard dinosaur eggs in South Africa became but a single exception
to the rule. It is hard to see how future collecting, no matter how intense, can
now overcome this trend.
Only two shapes of dinosaur eggs are known: rounded and elongate. But
seven different patterns of crystal arrangements making up the eggshells are now
recognized. This diversity of egg wall morphology would be surprising if all
dinosaurs had evolved from a single egg-laying ancestor. But it would be what
we would predict if hard-shelled egg laying evolved numerous times by separate
lineages of dinosaurs. If we add the additional (and different) eggshell

morphologies found in extant reptiles and birds, there are a combined twelve
separate eggshell microstructures that have evolved during the now-long history
of reptile, nonavian dinosaurs, and the real avian dinosaurs: birds.
Perhaps each of these is an adaptation to a different kind of stress an egg
belonging to a particular group or species is normally subjected to: a turtle egg in
a deep burrow, for instance, has a very different series of challenges facing it
than does a robin egg in a nest high in a tree. But another possibility is that the
various calcareous eggs are evidence of an independent evolutionary history, in
which hard eggs separately evolved in multiple lineages, including dinosaur
lineages.
THE “IDEAL” OXYGEN LEVEL
One of the most interesting of new discoveries about the evolution of many of
the modern stocks of land animals is that so many came from a fairly narrow
time interval—during a time in the late Paleozoic when oxygen was higher than
now. This is true for many groups of extant vertebrates, including the first
members of families that would go on to be lizards, turtles, crocodiles, and
mammals. But it is not just land vertebrates that suggest this trend: many of the
terrestrial invertebrates, including the basal stocks of many insects, arachnids,
and land snails, also began during the Carboniferous period of more than 300
million years ago. New experiments of the last five years are indicating that
there is a “magic” level of oxygen for the fastest rate of embryonic development
within both land vertebrate eggs and insect eggs, and that number is 27 percent.
Today we are at 21 percent atmospheric oxygen. But studies on alligators and
insects shows that optimal development takes place at 27 percent. Eggs
incubated in either higher or lower values of oxygen take longer to develop and
hatch. In lower levels of oxygen—not coincidentally, perhaps, the 10–12 percent
that occurred in the latest Triassic—many or most eggs never hatch at all, or do
so only after such a long time that their probability of not being eaten by egg-
eating predators becomes low indeed. Adding heat to the equation makes
survivability even lower, because the eggs need holes to let oxygen in. But water
escapes from these and causes a higher chance of death of the embryo. The
worst combination would have been an atmospheric oxygen level of 10–12
percent in a world both hotter and drier than now. We know of such a time. It

was the late Triassic. Those creatures laying eggs in the late Triassic period were
in for trouble.
The problem is that reptiles were first evolved in a relatively high oxygen
world: the Carboniferous, when oxygen was above 27 percent. These early
reptiles pioneered the amniotic egg. But as oxygen levels dropped and
temperature levels increased globally, the original reptilian eggs may have
become death traps: not enough oxygen could diffuse in from outside the egg,
while too much water was diffusing out. Seemingly a better response to heat and
low oxygen (which is further magnified by the heat) would be live birth. The
evolution of live birth thus may have come about in response to lowering global
oxygen values in the late Permian. In spite of the enormous number of therapsid
bones found in South Africa, Russia, and South America, there has never been
an egg or nest found from these rocks. Therapsids may have already evolved live
birth by this time, a trait carried on by their descendants, the true mammals that
are first found at about the same time as the first dinosaurs appeared on the
scene.
It may be that many lineages of dinosaurs evolved the calcareous egg in the
Late Jurassic as a response to rising oxygen, and that the formation of calcareous
eggs that are then buried was not viable in the late Permian through middle
Jurassic environments of lower atmospheric oxygen.
The low oxygen–high heat conditions of the late Permian into the Triassic
perhaps stimulated the evolution of live birth and of soft eggs that would have
been effective at allowing oxygen movement into eggs and carbon dioxide out.
On the other hand, the higher oxygen levels (and continued high temperatures)
of the late Jurassic–Cretaceous interval stimulated the evolution of rigid dinosaur
eggs and egg burial in complex nests.
Like characteristic metabolism, the contrasting patterns of live birth vs. egg
laying is one of the most fundamentally important of all biological traits—and
one that has received surprisingly scant attention by evolutionary biologists.
Solving this problem by learning the time of origin and the distribution of one
kind of birth strategy or the other should be a major research topic of the near
future, but sadly may prove to be intractable because of the nonpreservation of
parchment eggs.

CHAPTER XV
The Greenhouse Oceans: 200–65 MA
Most discussion about the Mesozoic world (Triassic, Jurassic, and Cretaceous)
concentrates on its land animals, especially the dinosaurs. But great changes
were taking place in the marine world as well. The Mesozoic oceans
progressively became more and more modern as the Mesozoic wore on in the
shallow waters, but the mid-water to deepwater faunas remained very different
from those of today. A transect going from shallow to deep water illustrates this,
even near the very end of the Mesozoic era, in this case in the Late Cretaceous.
Here is what such a dive might look like, a trip that can summarize a great deal
about our current understanding of what we can call Mesozoic “greenhouse”
oceans.1
The atmosphere that the greenhouse ocean sits under and interacts with
importantly affects the chemistry and physical environment of any ocean.2 The
temperature of the atmosphere, the differences in temperatures from pole to
equator, and the chemistry of seawater—including how much dissolved oxygen
it contained—all dictated ocean conditions and the creatures the oceans
contained. A crucial physical fact is that warm water holds less oxygen than cold
water. During all of the Mesozoic, except the last 5 million years of the
Cretaceous period, the global atmosphere from pole to equator was hot and
humid. But the heat alone caused a lower overall oxygen content than we find in
the ocean today. Coupling that with less oxygen in the air leads us to understand
how different and less amicable to life the Mesozoic oceans would have been.
The life that was there was, not surprisingly, evolved in many ways to deal with
this low-oxygen world ocean.
While the Mesozoic world was different from now, in one way it might have
seemed familiar. Just as the lower altitudes of our world’s atmosphere are quite
populated with a wide diversity and abundance of flying creatures, from insects
to birds to bats, so too was the Mesozoic sky a place of movement and life. The
air would have been filled with an assortment of flying organisms, including
insects, but also with two very different groups than found today: the enormous
pterosaurs (reptiles) as well as smaller reptilian pterodactyls, and many kinds of
birds, with the latter composed of forms quite different from most birds of today,

with and without teeth, and others with or without wings.
A wide lagoon of some sort would have fronted most Cretaceous oceans.
Lagoons are formed when some kind of reef walls off an inner water body.
Usually such lagoons are both hotter and of lower oxygen than the open ocean
itself. The shallows of these lagoons would have been inhabited by clams and
snails that were quite similar and in many cases of the same taxonomic group
(such as genus) as those found in tropical lagoons and near shore environments
of modern oceans.
Already present, for example, were burrowing clams, tusk shells, oysters,
scallops, mussels, cowries, cone shells, tritons, conchs, whelks, sea urchins (both
the globular surface dwellers, the “regular” urchins, and the burrowing or
“irregular” urchins such as the sand dollars and “sea biscuits” of today). There
would also have been spiny lobsters and crabs. All in all, the “modern” fauna
was already well established in the shallows of the Late Cretaceous oceans, and
in fact would be relatively little affected by the gigantic era-ending mass
extinction that by the Late Cretaceous (from about 90 to 65 million years ago)
was coming ever nearer in time.
In deeper water, the kinds of life would change, just as it does in our ocean, to
forms adapted for the finer sediments found in deeper water rather than for
species that live in the coarser sand environments of shallower water. There
would have been many animals that were buried, including many clams still
around today, as well as many other kinds of burrow dwellers. Hiding in the
sediment was a major survival tactic, because by the Late Cretaceous many
kinds of predators adapted either to break open or to drill into mollusk shells that
were present. Also present in the shallow waters of the lagoon would have been
hunks of hard limestone formed by reef-forming organisms, such as corals in our
modern day. These patches are tiny reefs that then, as now, formed into
horseshoe shapes, with the front or arch of the horseshoe growing into the
prevailing wind.
Farther from shore would have been the large barrier reef, which would have
grown right up to the sea surface. These enormous walls of limestone would
have been hundreds to thousands of miles long, growing right at the edge of
large islands or continents at the point where the continental shelf gives way to
the continental slope and deep water. Both sides of the barrier reef rampart
would have been home to many fish species, including the bony fish and
cartilaginous sharks, skates, and rays.
This inner edge of the barrier reef—in fact its entire overall shape—would

have been a direct look-alike of what many of today’s barrier reefs, such as the
Great Barrier Reef of Australia, look like. Yet a major difference is that while
there are coral species living on reefs today, their main framework builders were
not corals at all.
The three-dimensional wave-resistant structures that we call reefs have been a
key community of life since the Ordovician period. All have been and continue
to be composed of builders and binders; they are akin to brick houses made of
coral “bricks,” encrusting algae, flat coral, and carbonate-particle mortar. But
perhaps a much better analogy is that they are like some ancient city, where
centuries of buildings have been erected, existed for some time, and then have
tumbled down or disintegrated but were only partially cleared away before new
construction rose atop the older rubble. Over time, the great weight of ever-
larger stone buildings often caused the very crust of the Earth beneath the
ancient city to slowly but measurably subside.
Such is the nature of a coral reef: over centuries, the larger and blockier corals
attach to an already-existing reef surface and build up, growing upward toward
sunshine, in a true life-or-death race to grow faster than one’s neighbors. Corals
compete to avoid being grown over or shielded from life-giving sun and open
water, as the sun is necessary for the millions of single-celled plants growing in
each coral polyp, and open water gives the carnivorous coral polyps their own
sustenance. The tiny plants allow the coral animals to build their gigantic
skeletons, and in turn the plants, called dinoflagellates, receive nutrients and
protection from predators. In this fashion, tiny coral larvae fall out of the
plankton to settle onto any nonliving and hard substrate they can find, and then
grow up toward the seas’ surface. These microscopic larvae with luck can grow
from one polyp into hundreds of thousands in a single gigantic colony and can
live for centuries or more, with a vast calcareous skeleton weighing thousands of
tons. Although there are single colonies now thousands of years in age or even
older, huge colonies eventually die. After death the coral skeleton becomes
fragmented and grown upon in turn.
The reefs of the Cretaceous greenhouse oceans were no different in this
process and in the shapes eventually built, but their building materials were not
coral reefs at all but clam reefs—created by quite large clams that looked
nothing like any clam alive today. They were bizarrely shaped bivalve mollusks
called rudists, and most looked like some kind of upright garbage can, complete
with a lid that could open or close on the cylindrically shaped shell of the clam.
Some approached the size of the modern-day Tridacna, the “giant clam” of

today’s tropics. But unlike Tridacna, which are solitary, the rudists grew side by
side in gregarious fashion, much as modern-day mussels do, crowding to cover
every square inch of substrate, even growing over one another.
Each large cylinder that is the bottom shell of a single rudist clam is jammed
vertically next to others of its kind, all packed into a solid pavement of one-to
two-foot-long, sometimes foot-wide cones, each topped with gorgeously colored
flesh reaching up toward the light. Like corals, they had tiny symbionts, single-
celled plants that need light for photosynthesis and in turn provide the clam with
bountiful oxygen, as well as carbon dioxide and waste removal from its tissues.
But unlike modern corals, which can take centuries to reach large size, the clams
grew very quickly. Within a year after sinking down from the floating plankton
onto shallow ocean bottoms (they probably needed light to survive because their
flesh contained tiny plants), the small clams grew thick carbonate outer shells to
mature size in a year or less. They were born, grew quickly, and more often than
not soon died, as others of their kind descended on their hard shells and grew,
smothering the immobile yet living real estate they squatted on. A coral skeleton
would have needed a century to grow from one individual to a colony several
feet high and wide, whereas the rudists could have done the same in five years at
most.
Like all reefs, the rudist reefs grew right to the very surface. On their outer
seaward side, water depth dropped off quickly. Outside of the reef lay the vast
open oceans of the Mesozoic, and both above and on the bottoms of these oceans
there existed other now-extinct creatures.
The surface of these oceans would have been patrolled by both large sharks
and giant seagoing reptiles. These latter included long-and short-necked
plesiosaurs, as well as the lizard-like mosasaurs. They probably lived much as
modern-day seals do, diving for food but needing to surface for air. But they
were far larger than any seal, larger than any other creature that needs to come
out of the water on occasion to rest or breed.
The deeper bottoms of the greenhouse oceans were also different from those
of most oceans. Only the present-day Black Sea is similar to the conditions of
the deeper bottoms and even mid-water regions of the greenhouse oceans—
warm environments with so little dissolved oxygen that even most fish cannot
live there. The bottoms were made up of black mud, as are the bottoms of the
Black Sea. The mud trapped great quantities of fine, particulate organic matter
that is black in color. There was little oxygen in the seawater at these depths—so
little, in fact, that normal decomposition of organic material cannot take place, or

does so only at a rate far lower than that on an oxygenated sea bottom. An
entirely different community of microbes lived within the first few inches of this
muddy bottom sediment, one that lived on sulfur, and a by-product of their
particular form of respiration are the compounds hydrogen sulfide and methane.
Only in a few places on the the Mesozoic ocean bottoms would there have
been enough oxygen to support animals that require normal amounts of oxygen.3
But in the greenhouse oceans, two different kinds of mollusks evolved
specifically for the characteristic low-oxygen conditions. One, a bivalve
mollusk, lived on the bottoms. The other, composed of a vast diversity of
cephalopod mollusks, the ammonites, lived in the water column, but fed off the
bottom.
The ammonites of the Cretaceous ocean we are profiling here belonged to a
group that first appeared in the earliest Jurassic, and their sudden appearance in
rocks of that age suggest that the devastating Triassic-Jurassic mass extinctinon,
which took place almost 130 million years prior to the late Cretaceous, opened
the door to new kinds of animals, including new designs of ammonites. Finding
them is one of the delights of fossil hunting, and because we two coauthors have
spent so much time doing research in strata with ammonites over the past two
decades, this has been rather a constraint on our great friendship. Coauthor Ward
will become totally mesmerized by the least trace of an ammonite fossil.
Coauthor Kirschvink would just as soon drill a paleomagnetic core out of even a
museum-quality specimen. And has.
The final group of ammonites, which began in the oldest Jurassic strata and
continued to the very greenhouse ocean of this chapter, are of great importance
not only to the history of life, but to the very science of geology and using fossils
to tell time. There are many places in the world where marine strata of latest
Triassic age are overlain by Jurassic strata. At such outcrops one can walk
through time, and if the strata are continuous, the dramatic events of the late
Triassic and early Jurassic are present for all to see. This interval of time and
rock preserves evidence of the great Triassic mass extinction, one of the so-
called big five mass extinctions, a dubious honor of species death. As you walk
through upper Triassic beds you are first in strata packed with the fossils of the
flat clam Halobia, and then you move into younger rocks with the even more
abundant Monotis. But then the clams disappear, over only several meters of
strata, leaving a long barren interval of rock and time—the last stage of the
Triassic, an interval perhaps 3 million years in length known as the Rhaetian
stage.

Finally, after this thickness virtually without fossils, a new group suddenly
appears—ammonites. While there were ammonites in the upper Triassic rocks,
they are never abundant. But most famously at the beach of Lyme Regis of
England, as well as in southern Germany and at many other localities worldwide,
the earliest Jurassic ammonites appear in huge numbers, and over only a few
short meters of strata they diversify as well. These are not like the Triassic flat
clams, where one species is all you get. These ammonites of the first part of the
Jurassic are diverse and abundant, which tells us that the great drop of oxygen
was finally over and a slow rise was in place. But the ammonites are not telling
us that oxygen levels similar to today were suddenly in place. The ammonites
appear because the surface of the early Jurassic seas began to have a modicum of
oxygen, and the ammonites took full advantage. They did so because they may
have been among the best animals on Earth for low oxygen and could and did
seize ecological advantage in the greenhouse oceans of the Jurassic and
Cretaceous.
Because of the overall similarity of the chambered shells in both nautiloids
and ammonoids, we presume that they may have had somewhat similar modes of
life. Nautiluses today live in highly oxygenated water over most of its range. But
here and there they also live in hypoxic bottoms. This was a great curiosity,
because conventional wisdom was always that the cephalopods in general need
high-oxygen conditions, but not so the one remaining stock of externally shelled,
chambered cephalopods, the Nautilus. These latter are very tough and resistant
when taken out of the water. They can sit out for ten or fifteen minutes with no
ill effects. And when they are in water they gain oxygen through one of the
relatively largest and highest-powered pump gills ever evolved, streaming great
volumes of oxygen over the gills, thus allowing for sufficient oxygen molecules
even in low-oxygen water. If ever an animal was adapted for low oxygen, this is
it. British zoologist Martin Wells, who measured oxygen consumption of various
captive nautiluses in New Guinea, finally proved this. When a nautilus is
confronted with low oxygen, it does two things. First, metabolism slows way
down. Second, with its strong swimming ability it can travel vast distances in
search of not only food but higher-oxygen water areas.
The mass appearance of ammonite fossils in lower Jurassic strata suggests that
the ammonites were superbly designed to extract maximum oxygen from
minimal dissolved volumes of the oh-so-precious gas. Jurassic-through-
Cretaceous ammonite body plans thus may have evolved near the Triassic-
Jurassic boundary in response to worldwide low oxygen. Their new body plan

(compared to the ammonoids that came earlier) involved a much larger body
chamber relative to the phragmocone. Because of this, they had to use thinner
shells, and this required more complex sutures. The sutures also allowed faster
growth by increasing the rate of chamber liquid removal for buoyancy change.
Within the large body chamber was an animal that could retract far into the body
chamber, and that had very long gills relative to its ancestors.
We do not know if ammonites had four gills (like the Nautilus) or two like
modern-day squid and octopuses. The lack of streamlined shells of the majority
of early Jurassic forms makes it clear that these animals were not fast swimmers.
It is far more likely that they slowly floated or gently swam near the surface,
using their air-filled shell like a zeppelin.
The ammonites of the Jurassic period changed only in detail right up until the
Cretaceous, but then spectacular changes in shell design began to take place.
Where there remained many of the original planispiral shell design (like a
nautilus shell), other shell shapes came into being in the Cretaceous, and with
this, let us return to our dive in a late Cretacous ocean, among the ammonites.
Regardless of shape, most ammonites searched the bottoms for crustaceans or
other small food. More than a dozen different kinds of ammonites could exist in
the same environments, each with a different shell shape. Some were tiny, no
more than an inch in diameter, while others were up to six feet in diameter. Most
in the Cretaceous seas had thick, intricately branching ribs or tubercles of some
kind, defensive armament that is testament to the abundance and efficiency of
the shell-breaking predators present in these greenhouse oceans, and in all
probability the plesiosaurs and mosasaurs were their major predators.
The ammonites would have looked a bit like squids stuck in a nautilus shell.
Today’s Nautilus has ninety tentacles, while the ammonites would have had
either eight or ten. Nautiluses are scavengers, while the squids of today and the
ammonites of the Mesozoic were carnivores, needing living organisms for food.
The second mollusk of the greenhouse oceans were clams, not as bizarrely
different in shape as the rudists, but certainly different from anything alive today.
They were what we call flat clams, known as Inoceramus. Related to oysters,
they came in a variety of species, all competing on the same muddy bottoms.
None could burrow, but instead had to sit on the bottom. Some were veritable
giants, with gently ribbed, almond-shaped shells that attained lengths of more
than eight feet from their beaks to their broad apertures. Yet unlike any clam
today, their shells were almost paper-thin relative to their size, and their gently
ornamented upper shells were sometimes encrusted with a diversity of oysters,

scallops, bryozoans, barnacles, and tubeworms. Usually, however, the
Inoceramus clams lived on bottoms and in seawater that had too little oxygen for
“normal” mollusks or other invertebrates to live. A great many of our colleagues
have used geochemistry to better understand how different these clams were
from perhaps any clam living. New work by Neil Landman of the American
Museum of Natural History in conjunction with geochemist Kirk Cochran has
wonderfully shown the strangeness of these Mesozoic communities.
Just looking at the sizes of the inoceramids compared to other clams tells us
how strange they were. In the modern world, the largest clams, the Tridacna
(giant clams) of the tropics, can be six feet from end to end, thus holding
hundreds of pounds of flesh. But the next biggest clams, known as geoducks, are
at most a foot in length, with no more than a pound or two of living tissue. Some
oysters attain a foot in length as well, but not many. But the inoceramids fill that
modern-day gap between the giant Tridacna and the far smaller geoducks. An
enormous variety of the inoceramids existed from the Permian to the end of the
Cretaceous when they died out, and it was in the greenhouse oceans where they
flourished. They contained microbes allowing these big clams to live off
methane and other chemicals seeping out of the organic-rich, low-oxygen sea
bottoms of the greenhouse oceans rather than filtering food out of seawater, as
the modern clams do.
A final region of the greenhouse oceans was the mid-water region,4 the nether
regions of the oceans that are too deep for sunlight, but still hundreds to
thousands of feet above the stagnant bottoms of the seas. This vast, mid-water
environment in today’s oceans is the largest single habitat on the planet, and is
colonized by a variety of creatures adapted to a life in which they never
encounter the surface, and its sun and atmosphere, nor do they ever come in
contact with the sea bottom. Here, life depends on staying “in between,” for to
these creatures both the warm shallows and the deeper cold bottoms would be
fatal, from predation to temperature and oxygen conditions, or both. Thus,
adaptations for the attainment and then maintenance of neutral buoyancy are
paramount for existence. In our oceans, the most common of the larger
inhabitants in this region are the mid-water squid, animals that have evolved
floating tentacles or sacs within their bodies concentrated with fat or other
chemicals such as ammonia-rich solutions that renders the entire animal lighter
than seawater.
Their prey was individually small but vast in quantity and was composed of a
diverse and abundant assemblage of small swimming animals that combined are

known as the deep scattering layer (DSL)—based on their discovery by some of
the world’s first sonar, used in the 1940s. This DSL is composed of untold
numbers of small crustaceans and other arthropods such as amphipods and
isopods, as well as a variety of other phyla. By day this enormous layer of life—
extending from perhaps eight hundred to six hundred meters deep—extends for
hundreds or even thousands of miles in all directions in the ocean regions far
from shore. But as daylight fades, the entire layer slowly begins to swim upward
toward shallower depths, and with full darkness the untold gigatons of animals
making up the DSL arrive in the shallower, warmer, more nutrient-rich depths—
depths, however, that would be fatal during daylight for the tiny, succulent
arthropods making up the vast preponderance of the DSL fauna because of visual
predators such as fish and squid.
We have good evidence showing that this fundamentally new kind of lifestyle
in the sea first appeared in the Cretaceous. Before that there would have been no
food resources worth pursuing in the mid-water regions, and hence there were no
species making the extensive adaptations that a larger animal would need not
only to float throughout its life, but be able to somehow migrate hundreds of
meters upward each nightfall and then settle back down into greater depths each
morning. But with the appearance of the mid-water arthropods, evolution
quickly produced animals capable of feeding on them using new kinds of
buoyancy devices, for the most fundamental adaptation was some kind of way of
being weightless in the mid-water.
The carnivores that evolved to exploit this resource were mainly ammonites,
but in shapes very different from the traditional and ancestral planispirals, which
marked the species living just above the sea bottoms. The mid-water ammonites
had shells that let them float for their entire lives; they had bizarre shells that
would not have allowed any kind of rapid swimming speed. But once in the
thick oceanic water mass or liquid stratum inhabited by the denizens of the deep
scattering layer, food would have been so abundant that they only had to stay in
the layer, rising when it rose, slowly sinking with it during the day, to have a
food-rich and predator-free existence. They thus lived a slow, floating existence;
in essence these strange creatures acted like hot air balloons, with a large
flotation device above, attached to a small passengers’ basket suspended below
the flotation device.
The ammonites of the mid-water5 needed to efficiently control their buoyancy.
We know that the buoyancy system of the living nautiluses is quite crude and
slow to operate. But it may be that ammonites in general used their complex

septa with the beautiful sutures as part of a far better buoyancy apparatus, one
that could pump water out or let it flood back with great rapidity into otherwise
air-filled chambers as ballast. These then-new Late Cretaceous ammonites are
informally called heteromorphic ammonites, because of their shells’ departure
from the original, traditionally coiled design of ammonites from their first
appearance in the Devonian period until their final demise at the end of the
Cretaceous. They were body plans never found before or since their
approximately 60-million-year-long existence, and they lived right up to the day
that the Chicxulub asteroid fried all ammonites out of existence.
Some of the heteromorphic ammonites looked like giant snail shells, but snail
shells filled with chambers of air, with one last, longer shell portion hanging
beneath and containing the soft parts of the ammonites, tentacles and all. Others
looked like gigantic paper clips, and some were simply huge hooks. But the most
common were long, straight cones. The pointed end of the cone was the first
formed chamber, and by adulthood, these long, thin cones could reach up to six
feet in length. They hung vertically in the water, their tentacle heads hanging
straight down and beneath the chambered flotation portions of the shell. There
were named Baculites, and in the Late Cretaceous they may have been the most
common carnivores on the planet.
Vast schools of these Baculites filled the mid-water depths.6 They are often
illustrated in the many murals and paintings of the Cretaceous oceans, and
invariably they are wrongfully depicted as long, arrow-like shapes living
horizontally in the water, much as fish and squids do. But this would have been
impossible. They were vertical in orientation, with their tiny, earliest shell
portions up, and their heavy head and tentacles hanging downward. They were
never able to swim sideways or even float in a sideways orientation. Everything
was up and down to them. They probably were amazingly rapid, shooting
upward using jet propulsion and then sinking slowly back downward. The
predators of the Baculites, probably fish and sharks, would have been mystified
again and again in attempting the normal predatory attack, in which the prey
tries to escape by swimming ahead of the predator. But the attackers would have
seen a rapid upward movement of the long vertical creature, like a puppet on a
string, as they swam helplessly forward in the direction that all self-respecting
prey were supposed to flee.
THE MARINE MESOZOIC REVOLUTION

During the later Mesozoic era, a revolutionary changing of the guard took place
in the seas. Paleobiologist Gary Vermeij of the University of California at Davis
called it, simply enough, the Mesozoic marine revolution.7 It was nothing less
than a world where the marine predators ran wild in terms of evolution.
Watching our friend and colleague Gary Vermeij, blind since early boyhood,
“see” (as he describes the process) the intricate adaptations for the strengthening
of post-Paleozoic mollusk shells is to watch a concert pianist’s fingers: rapid,
complex movements of fingers seemingly gone boneless as they “play” the
many morphological keys of a snail shell, from the spines of the turret to the fat-
lip-like callus on the snail’s aperture; the gentle discovery of a calcareous filling
of the otherwise dangerous umbilical region of the shell, to the rapid trilling of
the tiny yet strength-giving teeth on the outside of the shell’s apertural lip, also
thickened. We guide him to museum drawers, and then he guides us to insights
coming to him from a single sense—touch.
Touch has memory, but touch also visualizes, and it was with touch only that
Vermeij’s agile mind took his “vision” of the ever-increasing offensive, shell-
breaking capabilities of the newly evolved, post-Permian predators, coupled to
the coevolving and ever-better calcareous suits of armor of the invertebrate
herbivores, and smaller predators into a generalization we now know as the
Mesozoic marine revolution.
At first the concept was only that predation of the post-Permian mass
extinction shifted toward shell breaking—toward new ways of gaining the rich
meat to be found in formerly impregnable fortresses such as those of the
Paleozoic clams, snails, echinoderms, and brachiopods. But the concept has
expanded.
The adaptations of the prey were no less impressive. Clams that used to live
only on the ocean bottom, or just beneath, evolved adaptations for deep
burrowing. These new clams are called heterodont clams (because of the many
“teeth” in their hinge line). They underwent major anatomical revisions by
fusing part of their mantle into a pair of siphons (what we call the neck of a
clam). These burrowing clams today remain the most diverse group of clams—a
whole spectrum of species that are capable of rapid burrowing into sand, mud, or
silt. There is but a single reason to do this: to escape predation. Sitting within
sediment rather than atop it in no way increases feeding efficiency. But it
immensely increases survivability. Others radically changing morphology to
allow a burrowing (or wood-boring) lifestyle included snails, new kinds of
polychaete worms, some kinds of fish, and totally new kinds of sea urchins.8

Another group of invertebrates showing radical innovations were the class of
echinoderms called crinoids.9 These immense flowerlike invertebrates (they are
commonly called sea lilies) were typical of the Paleozoic in that they were
attached: they could never move through life after settling from a planktonic
larval stage; they attached to the bottom. Driving through the Midwest today
provides stark evidence of their former abundance: every road cut is made of
rocks that are almost nothing but the tiny round “ossicles” that make up the long
stem of the attached crinoids. To produce such abundance, a vast, shallow,
extremely clear and warm ocean was needed, whose bottom would have been
obscured by the forest of crinoids. It is doubtful that the sun could penetrate to
these shallow bottoms, which would have been fine with the crinoids; their food
is microscopic plankton, and they live in the “slow lane,” at least metabolically.
But once attached, they could never move, and if detached by storm or predator,
they would soon die.
There is nothing like wholesale death to stimulate new evolution. The Permian
extinction virtually wiped crinoids off the planet, and in the new rules of the
predator-rich Mesozoic, they were quick meals for any predator designed to
extract some sort of food out of a crinoid—which would be difficult, as there is
probably no other example of life where so much calcium carbonate skeleton
protects so little flesh. But the attached crinoids gave way to a new group of
crinoids without stalks. These exist to the present day, and are among the most
beautiful of all life to be found in modern coral reefs. There are actually capable
of swimming—slowly and with great stateliness, using their arms to gently wing
themselves through the water.
The Mesozoic marine revolution was not only about predators and prey but
also about ever-greater utilization of new habitats.10 This included the evolution
of morphologies allowing ever-deeper burrowing by clams and snails to escape
predation, as well as the ever-increasing number of other invertebrates that were
using the sediment also for food. These changes are evidenced by an increase in
the diversity and abundance of trace fossils, similar to those that we described in
the Cambrian explosion chapter. The net result was almost complete bioturbation
of Mesozoic sediments.
It was not just the bottom and beneath the bottom of the Mesozoic oceans
where radical change was occurring among animals. For the first time in the
existence of animals, a wholesale exploitation of the water column from top to
bottom was also taking place. Many of the newly evolved forms were not
animals at all, but protozoans and even floating single-celled planktonic plants.

Important new groups of microfossils are found in Mesozoic strata, including the
evolution of a huge variety of the amoeba-like but skeletonized foraminifera,
which lived both on the bottom as well as floating well above it. Other plankton
was the siliceous radiolarian. But perhaps the greatest radical change within the
plankton of the Mesozoic and onward was the evolution of a group of algae
called coccolithophorids—whose tiny skeletons, when accumulated on a sea
bottom and turned to stone, is the well-known substance chalk.
Coccoliths are tiny plants sporting a half dozen to a dozen microscopic
calcium carbonate plates bonded to the upper part of their rather spherical
bodies. After death these tiny plates would fall to the bottom and accumulate in
untold numbers until such immense sedimentary units as the famous White
Cliffs of Dover were formed. The entire northern tier of Europe is lined by such
cliffs, from Britain to France, Poland, Belgium, Holland, all over Scandinavia,
and through much of the old Soviet Union all the way down to the Black Sea.
The coccoliths have played a large part in the planet’s temperature. Coccoliths
are white in color, and this whiteness reflects sunlight back into space, which in
turn cools the planet.
Just as in the Cambrian explosion, in which animals were stimulated to
produce new kinds of body plans based on respiratory systems, so too did
animals of the Triassic seas show a multitude of new adaptations. As we have
seen, the land fauna experimented with a variety of lung types. The same kind of
exploration took place in the oceans. The bivalve mollusks were one group that
evolved a new kind of body plan and even physiology in response to the nearly
endless expanse of nutrient-rich but low-oxygen bottoms.
The very lack of oxygen on the bottoms made them, in one sense, wonderful
places to live. Vast quantities of reduced carbon, in the form of dead planktonic
and other organisms, fell to the seafloor and were buried there. On an
oxygenated bottom this material would be soon consumed by filter-or deposit-
feeding organisms and scavengers. But the low-oxygen conditions kept these
organisms out, and not even the usual bacteria that decompose dead creatures on
the sea bottom were around. As we have seen, this is one reason that oxygen
levels plummeted in the Triassic. But the clams figured a way out of this. A few
kinds, such as the Inoceramus clams described above, who lived on the seafloor
of the bottoms that had at least some oxygen, fed not on the falling organics, but
on methane coming up from the some fraction of the organic-rich sediment.
Methanogens are a group of bacteria that thrive in low-or no-oxygen conditions,
and even several centimeters down into the sediment on a sea bottom with some

oxygen would have penetrated into an oxygen-free zone—thus allowing the
existence of the methanogens. As they metabolized, they released methane as a
by-product. The clams may have had other bacteria in their gills that could
exploit the methane and other dissolved organic material, or they may simply
have fed on the bacteria. A somewhat similar mechanism is found today in the
deep-sea vent faunas, where giant tube worms and clams use these chemicals as
food. But the difference is that the modern vent faunas are oxygenated. The
animals down there do not even need gills. The clams of the Mesozoic were not
so lucky.
Another and quite different body plan was evolved by the crustaceans in
response to oceans characterized by a critical lack of oxygen: the crabs and
lobsters. While the overall shrimp-like body form of crustaceans is found in
Paleozoic rocks, crabs are a relatively new invention. A crab is simply a shrimp-
like form in which the abdomen is tucked under the body. The fusion of the head
and thorax into a heavily armored and calcified plate makes the crab a difficult
nut to crack for its predators. And the placement of the abdomen under this
armor plating is design genius. It is the abdominal regions that are most
susceptible to breakage in any predatory attack, and by eliminating this chink in
its armor the crab rose rapidly to marine prominence. Their large claws allow
them to crack open mollusk shells among other prey—they are known as
durophagous, or shell-breaking, predators. Prior to this, few predators were able
to break into shelled organisms. Crabs and others figured out how.
Thus the accepted reason for the crab body plan, novel as it is, relates to
defense (the tucking of the abdomen, the thickening and increased calcification
of the head-thorax region) and offense, the evolution of a strong pair of jaws.
But here is another: crab design came about in some part as a primary adaptation
for increasing respiratory efficiency by putting the gills in an enclosed space
under the cephalothorax (the head-thorax), and then evolving a pump to move
water over the now-enclosed gills.
The crab gill design is a marvelous way to increase water passing over gills.
Crabs evolved from shrimp-like organisms, and in these ancestors we can see
a progression toward the crab gill system. In shrimp, the gills are partially
enclosed beneath the animal. While covered dorsally, the gills are attached to
segments and are open to water underneath.
The Mesozoic greenhouse oceans changed over time. Yet two of their most
characteristic features, the ammonites and inoceramid bivalves, might still be
with us today but for a very bad day that happened some 65 million years ago,

when the Chicxulub asteroid obliterated the Mesozoic biota out of its
characteristic existence.

CHAPTER XVI
Death of the Dinosaurs: 65 MA
Sometimes it is the great science fiction writers who can best encapsulate the
past. Here is one of the best descriptions of the most famous of all mass
extinctions, the K-T event, and as stated in our introduction, we use this older
term instead. We were delighted to discover this wonderful description from a
book by the iconic writers William Gibson and Bruce Sterling, in their book The
Difference Engine:
 
Storms of cataclysm lashed the Cretaceous Earth, vast fires raged, and cometary grit sifted through the
roiling atmosphere, to blight and kill the wilting foliage, till the mighty dinosaurs, adapted to a world
now shattered, fell in massed extinction, and the leaping machineries of Evolution were loosed in a
chaos, to repopulate the stricken Earth with strange new orders of being.
 
As we well know, those “strange new orders of being” included the many
kinds of mammals populating the Earth today. Yet how is it that we came to
know with such certainty that it was indeed an asteroid that did in the dinosaurs?
This “fact” has held sway since around 1990, or ten years after the Alvarez
group of Berkeley published their bombshell findings that have utterly changed
our understanding not only of mass extinctions but also of geological processes
in general.
The study of mass extinctions was intricately interwoven into the very fabric
of the nascent developing field of geology in its most fruitful early period, from
about 1800 to 1860. For decades there had been a dispute about the most basic of
principles that allowed explanation of how geological material and formations,
as well as the kind of animals and plants present on the Earth, came into being.
The fight was between those promoting the principle of uniformitarianism, with
the mantra that the present is the key to understanding the past on one side, and a
group pushing a principle of catastrophism on the other. The latter was
championed by the scholar who first recognized the reality of extinction, Baron
Georges Cuvier of pre-and immediately postrevolutionary France, and by later
disciples, the most important being Alcide d’Orbigny, whose lasting contribution

to geology was the development and then modernization of geological time
units. But for all the science they contributed, both Cuvier and d’Orbigny
resorted to the supernatural to explain the startling evidence for mass extinction
that they first discovered in their early studies of the fossil record. Both believed
that a supreme being brought about occasional world-covering floods that wiped
out most life and then repopulated the postflood lands and oceans.
There was ebb and flow in terms of the confidence that new generations of
geologists and naturalists had in uniformitarianism and the contrasting
catastrophism. Uniformitarianism eventually won out, as more and more
sophisticated interpretation of rocks, their features, and their ages showed no
evidence of a single world-covering flood, let alone the succession of them that
would be needed to explain the ever-growing list of mass extinctions known to
have occurred. From oldest to youngest, these were the Ordovician, Devonian,
Permian, Triassic, and Cretaceous-Tertiary mass extinctions, now referred to as
the big five. By the twentieth century, catastrophism was no longer accepted by
anyone, save the occasional crackpot writers trying to cash in on the many
humans hopeful that the past was more exciting than the grain-by-boring-grain
accumulation of the thick stratigraphic record. But in one facet—the explanation
of the mass extinctions—the uniformitarianists (including Charles Darwin)
remained uneasy.
Geology concluded that the mass extinctions were very slow, stately events,
and that given enough time, even observable changes in climate and even the
level of the oceans could explain the extinction of so many species at each of the
big five mass extinctions accepted by all geologists in the latter half of the
twentieth century.
There were a few (but only a few) cries of dissent. One of the best was from
Otto Schindewolf, professor of paleontology at the University of Tübingen in
southern Germany. Schindewolf objected to slow and stately as the reasons for
mass extinctions. Instead (but only after a career of long and careful study of the
fossil record and its changes), he speculated that perhaps far more catastrophic
and rapid events caused the mass extinctions, and suggested that the effects of a
nearby star going supernova might have been sufficient to cause one or more of
the known mass extinctions. He even gave a name to this throwback to the past
—he called it neocatastrophism, and he meant it to be a very
nonuniformitarianistic way of explaining the past.
Schindewolf’s speculations fell on deaf ears in his profession. Slow climate
change, slow sea level change were the “facts”—and presumed causes—of the

great mass extinctions. For thirty years, from 1950 on, the field of geology
slumbered, smug in its understanding that all was explainable by earthly (and
slow) causes. That, then, was the state of play concerning mass extinctions from
the time of Schindewolf’s speculations in the 1950s until 1980. And then it all
changed. On June 6, 1980, the thirty-sixth anniversary of the D-Day invasion of
Europe, the Alvarez paper on the asteroid causing the Cretaceous-Tertiary mass
extinction invaded the old, stately, yet already tottering edifice of
uniformitarianism in general, and the accepted causes of mass extinctions in
particular.1 It was a shot that started a scientific war that in some sense continues
to this day. The work of the Alvarez group answered that question.
IMPACTS AND MASS EXTINCTIONS
The presence of numerous impact craters on every planet or satellite of the solar
system with a solid surface gives stark and impressive evidence of the frequency
and importance of these events, at least early in the history of our solar system. It
is probable that impact is a hazard in most, or perhaps all, extra-solar planetary
systems as well. Impacts are probably the most frequent and important of all
planetary catastrophes. They can completely alter the biological history of a
planet by removing previously dominant groups of organisms and thus opening
the way for either entirely new groups or previously minor groups. Thus the
1980 Alvarez work took on special significance on many fronts.
Two of the most important lines of evidence used to convince most workers in
the field that the K-T extinction was indeed caused by large body impact were
the discovery of both elevated iridium values within the boundary clays and
abundant “shocked quartz” intermingled with the iridium. By 1997, high iridium
concentrations had been detected at over fifty K-T boundary sites worldwide.
Iridium is seen as an indicator of impact because it is quite rare on the Earth’s
surface, but at much higher than Earth concentrations in most asteroids and
comets. Shocked quartz grains are seen as indicators of impact because creating
the multiple lamellae on sand-sized quartz found at most K-T boundary sites can
be produced only by high pressure events, such as would occur when a large
asteroid hits rock containing quartz at high velocity. No “earthly” conditions
naturally create such quartz grains with multiple shock lamellae.
In addition to iridium and shocked quartz grains, K-T boundary sites have also

yielded evidence of fiery conflagrations that must have occurred soon after the
impact.2 Fine particles of soot were found in the same K-T boundary clays from
many parts of the globe. This type of soot comes only from burning vegetation,
and its quantity suggested that much of the Earth’s surface was consumed by
forest and brush fires.
Although originally controversial, the mineralogical, chemical, and
paleontological data gathered during the 1980s persuaded most experts that a
large (~10–15 km diameter) comet or asteroid impacted the Earth ~65 MA, and
that, at the same time, more than half of the species then on Earth became extinct
rather suddenly in the K-T. The discovery of a large impact crater of precisely
the right age in the Yucatán region of Mexico (the Chicxulub crater) largely
swept away remaining opposition to the impact hypothesis.
The ultimate killer, according to Alvarez et al., was a several-month period of
darkness, or blackout as they called it, following the impact. The blackout was
due to the great quantities of meteoric and Earth material thrown into the
atmosphere after the blast, and lasted long enough to kill off much of the plant
life then living on Earth, including the plankton. With the death of the plants,
disaster and starvation rippled upward through the food chains.
Several groups have calculated models of lethality caused by such
atmospheric change. Apparently a great deal of sulfur was tossed into the
atmosphere as well. A small portion of this was reconverted into H2SO4, which
fell back to Earth as acid rain; this may have been a killing mechanism, but was
probably more important as an agent of cooling than direct killing through
acidification. However, more deleterious to the biosphere may have been the
reduction (by as much as 20 percent for eight to thirteen years) of solar energy
transmission to the Earth’s surface through absorption by atmospheric dust
particles (aerosols). This would have been sufficient to produce a decade of
freezing or near freezing temperatures on a world that at the time of impact had
been largely tropical, and confirmed the earlier Alvarez statement that the
blackout played a part in the mass extinction. The prolonged winter was brought
about by vastly increasing aerosol content in the atmosphere over a short period
of time.
After the impact there was also dust, lots of it.3 The global climatic effects of
atmospheric dust produced by the impact of a large (10 km diameter) asteroid or
comet would include long-term (on the order of months) blackout producing
light levels below that necessary for photosynthesis, accompanied by rapid
cooling of land areas. But perhaps the most ominous prediction in this model is

the formerly unappreciated effect that the giant volume of atmospheric dust
generated by the impact has on the hydrological cycle. Globally averaged
precipitation decreased by more than 90 percent for several months and was still
only about half normal by the end of the year. In other words, it got cold, dark,
and dry. This is an excellent recipe for mass extinction, especially for plants, as
well as for the creatures feeding on plants.
Finally, it was realized that within hours after the impact, bits of rock would
rain out of the sky at high speed, and coming through the atmosphere from the
near outer space heights that they had been blasted up to, they came in hot
enough to set the Earth’s vegetation on fire. What may have been the largest
forest fires in history, on all continents, ensued, and this alone may have killed
off the dinosaurs on land.
PRECURSOR EXTINCTIONS
It is now known that as many as 75 percent of all species went extinct in the K-T
mass extinction. On land, it was marked by the loss of dinosaurs on one side, and
the appearance of mammals on the other. In the sea it was the disappearance of
ammonites on the Cretaceous side of the event, and the appearance of marine
biotas dominated by clams and snails on the Paleogene side. But as age dating
improves, we are seeing that the “mass extinction” at the Cretaceous-Paleogene
boundary is far more complicated than the original single-strike theory can
account for. We now know of at least two “pre-K-T” pulses of mass extinction
prior to the final blow, which remains fully supported. But the last few years of
research show that once again the effects of flood basalt volcanism were part of
the killing mechanisms.
There are very few dinosaur fossils, and thus using them to try to learn the rate
at which they went extinct is nearly impossible. The fossil record is full of
microfossils, and it has been the study of these that lend great support to the
claim of sudden extinction caused by the asteroid or comet’s fall. Yet we needed
to know the fate of larger fossils both on land and sea, and the most studied of
these latter have been the ammonite cephalopods, described in the last chapter.
The best place to study the extinction of the last ammonites that lived near the
equator of the Late Cretaceous world is at the thick stratal outcrops lining the
Bay of Biscay, a large region extending from southwestern France to

northeastern Spain, and best of all is at the rocky coastline near the old Basque
village named Zumaya.4 There, hundreds of meters of stacked strata ranging in
age from 72 to about 50 million years in age are laid out like the pages of an
open book. The mass extinction boundary lies in a bay defined by the rocks, and
there is even a change of lithology and color marking this unmistakable
boundary.
The oldest of the rocks along the Zumaya coastline dates to around 71 million
years ago. The strata are composed of individual stratal beds each about six to
twelve inches thick, and each bed is a pair: a thicker limestone, and a thinner,
more lime-free rock called a marl. Thousands and thousands of these pairs are
stacked one upon another and long ago lithified into the rocky coastline. From
the kind of rock and from the fossils, we know that the strata were deposited in
fairly deep water, in the deepest part of the continental shelf, or even over its
edge, at depths between two hundred and perhaps four hundred meters deep.
The strata are aligned perpendicular to most of the coastline and tilted at a
steep angle to the north. Walking along the coastline from south to north takes
one ever younger in time. But the very steep tilt of the rocks and the high range
of daily tidal change make a visit to a sizable portion of these two outcrops low-
tide dependent and very difficult walking.
At the start of the walk, well down the beach (and thus down in time as well)
from the long stairway that is the only entrance to this rocky site, fossils are
everywhere. Most are large clams, the inoceramids discussed in the last chapter,
but there are many ammonites as well, and not a few sea urchins, looking like
large stuffed hearts. There are no vertebrate bones, no shark’s teeth—and
certainly no dinosaurs—but these marine strata are the same age as nonmarine
beds found around the world holding one of the great dinosaur assemblages
known.
The inoceramids provoke the most wonder. They are up to two feet in
diameter, looking like shallow but giant plates lying side by side with smaller
versions of themselves—different species, in fact. For a hundred meters of
stacked strata they are ubiquitous in each bed, and because of the dip of the beds,
some of the bedding planes that can be examined are hundreds of square meters
in area. Fossils are most easily found on the tops or bottoms of any stratum,
rather than the sides, and the best hunting is always on the tops of large bedding
planes. At Zumaya there are many of these to be explored and collected, and
thus the fossil numbers are very large for any fossiliferous beds of any age. But
then the large clams disappear, and they do so more than a hundred meters

stratigraphically below the well-marked ammonite extinction horizon. The
ammonites and echinoids continue in abundance right up to the point where they
suddenly and dramatically disappear.
The work at the Bay of Biscay coastline, supplemented by work at other late
Cretaceous deposits, tells us that the inoceramid bivalves died out gradually
around 2 million years before the ammonites suddenly died out. In fact, using
statistical methods developed by Charles Marshall of UC Berkeley, Marshall and
coauthor Ward showed that at least twenty-two species of ammonites existed in
this region right up to the layer that contains the most important evidence of
impact: iridium, shocked quartz, glassy spherules (tektites, which are bits of rock
blown upward by the titanic impact and then turning to tiny fragments of glass as
they fell back to Earth at high speed).
The curious part about the inoceramids’ extinction is not that they died out
well before the ammonites, but that their extinction took place at different times
in different places. For instance, the last inoceramids in Antarctic Cretaceous
rocks are no younger than 72 million years in age, or about 7 million years prior
to the ammonite extinction. We now know that these globally distributed
bivalves experienced a wave of species death starting first in Antarctic regions
and then gradually moving to the northern hemisphere. It was almost like a
disease slowly moving northward and killing off the clams in gradual fashion.
But this was no disease: it was cold and oxygen.
Near the end of the Cretaceous, an oxygenated kind of thermohaline
circulation began to occur in the high southern latitudes, and over about 2
million years this cold, oxygenated bottom water spread into all the seas, moving
from south to north. Its presence spelled the end of the clams that we
affectionately called inos, and the disappearance of these clams was a signal
event in the history of life, for they had been highly successful up to that point
for more than 160 million years. But they were adapted to the other kind of
ocean, the low-oxygen and warm bottom water variety. Cold and oxygen killed
them off.
ONLY IMPACT?
We can now summarize current understanding of the primary event that appears
to have caused the K-T mass extinction. There was but a single comet strike,

coming soon (1–3 million years) after two rapid changes in global sea level,
themselves sandwiched around a major change in ocean water chemistry.5 The
impact created the large (up to 300 km diameter) crater now named Chicxulub,
located in the Yucatán Peninsula. Although there is still debate about the actual
crater size, there is now no doubt that the structure is a crater. The impact target
geology and geography may have maximized subsequent killing mechanisms.
This is especially true because the presence of sulfur-rich evaporites in the target
area, and sulfur within the incoming comet itself, may have contributed to
subsequent lethality. The 65-million-year-old comet strike in an evaporate-rich
carbonate platform, itself covered by a shallow sea at an equatorial latitude,
seems to have created unbelievably dire consequences: worldwide change in
atmospheric gas inventory, accompanied by temperature drop, acid rain (mainly
from sulfur derived from evaporites at the impact site), and global wildfires are
all proposed killing mechanisms. Most scientists (but not all) also agree that
thick, coarsely clastic sedimentary deposits found at many places along the
eastern coast of Mexico were formed by impact waves. The prolonged impact
winter was thus the most important killing mechanism—and it was brought
about by vastly increasing aerosols in the atmosphere over a short period of time.
Another recently published model describing atmospheric changes following
impact suggests that greatly increased levels of atmospheric dust generated by
the blast may have been lethal as well. The fine dust would be generated by
impact into either an oceanic or a continental target area and would produce a
long-term (on the order of months) blackout. This reduction in light levels
(below that necessary for photosynthesis) would be accompanied by rapid
cooling of land areas. This excess dust would also adversely affect the world’s
hydrological cycle. Advanced climate modeling has indicated that, following a
large impact event, globally averaged precipitation decreases by more than 90
percent for several months and is still only about half normal by the end of the
first year following the impact. The effect on the biota is now well established.6
BUT WHAT ABOUT THE DECCAN TRAPS FLOOD BASALTS?
The pages above make the case that the K-T mass extinction was largely a one-
event mass extinction. The Earth was hit, and that hit led to environmental
changes sufficient to kill off more than half of all species then on Earth. There

remains only one nagging bit of unexplained information. The asteroid hit a
planet that was already in the midst of one of the most extraordinary periods of
flood basalt volcanism known from any time in Earth history. Called the Deccan
Traps, this event caused untold tons of basalt to issue forth onto the Earth’s
surface, with an origin from deep within the Earth. Perhaps 84 million years ago,
a gigantic mass of molten rock detached from near the mantle-core boundary to
begin an upward voyage that would take around 20 million years. On its way up,
this great mass of molten rock very likely caused the Earth to undergo episodes
of true polar wander, events that happen when there is a mass imbalance such
that internal balance dictated by laws governing the conservation of momentum
of our spinning planet cause great landmass movements. These rapid movements
might have destabilized some environments. For instance, much of western
Canada and Alaska seems to have resided at the latitude of Mexico prior to 84
million years ago—but found itself far from Mexico as the Mesozoic ended.
Yet of all of the effects of flood basalts, the most consequential for life, as we
have seen in multiple episodes reported earlier in this book, is the great
outpouring of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases that accompany flood
basalt volcanism. The Earth warmed quickly at the poles and other high-latitude
regions, but less quickly at the equator. These conditions have led to what we
call greenhouse extinctions. A big flood basalt causes the high latitudes to heat,
pushing the oceans into stagnancy and then anoxia. Deep ocean waters filled
with poisonous hydrogen sulfide rise to the surface. Things then died, as they did
in the Devonian, Permian, and Late Triassic. Yet the dirty little secret is that we
students of these mass extinctions have for too long swept this unfortunate
evidence under the carpet. Who needs death by stagnation when there is more
than enough death to be handed out by an impacting asteroid?
Science gets things right, eventually, if the question is interesting enough. And
there are few more interesting questions than those pertaining to why dinosaurs
(and so much else) died out 65 million years ago. Why were there no observable
effects of the Deccan Traps,7 when all of the other flood basalts did so much
damage and caused so much obvious species extinction?
In fact, the Deccan did a lot of damage. Perhaps the best evidence of this,
modesty aside, comes from our own work in Antarctica. In 2012, one of our
students, Tom Tobin, showed that there indeed was warming of the oceans some
hundred thousand years prior to the impact—and that species did die because of
this.8 As noted, global warming (which is the result of a flood basalt, ultimately)
is larger in extent (temperature change) at high latitudes. The tropics are already

about as warm as they can be. As we are seeing in our own world, it is the Arctic
and Antarctic that bear the brunt of temperature change—and temperature-
change-caused havoc and extinction.
So too with the K-T. Yes, a large asteroid hit us. But for hundreds of
thousands of years prior to this, a suddenly warmer world was made stagnant by
flood basalt. We can finish this chapter with a hoary boxing analogy. A knockout
punch is by definition a single blow. Yet very few knockouts occur from the first
blow, no matter how devastating. It is the many rounds of jabs and body blows
that set the stage. The Deccan Traps softened the world. The asteroid finished
the job.

CHAPTER XVII
The Long-Delayed Third Age of Mammals: 65–50 MA
The 
earliest-known 
mammals 
were 
tiny, 
shrew-sized 
waifs 
named
morganucodontids, living (probably fearfully) among the many larger predators
of 210 million years ago in the latest Triassic—and then somehow surviving the
great T-J mass extinction. Soon the morganucodontids were joined by other
primitive but “true” mammals. All living mammals today, including us, descend
from the one line that survived this extinction. This is what the world came to
after its long dinosaur era came to a crashing, fiery end: a plague of rats. Or at
least rat-sized survivors.1
Paleontologists have long believed that the ancestors of all mammals living
today emerged on one of the northern continents as Pangaea slowly split apart
throughout the Mesozoic era, and then only slowly migrated south, all the way to
Antarctica and Australia, as land connections (or only narrow waterways)
developed between the continents. This has been dubbed the Sherwin-Williams
model of evolution, a reference to paint dripping over a globe from north to
south by a long-lived US paint company. But this idea has to be tossed on the
giant mound of discredited hypotheses, with new evidence coming from both
fossils and genetics. It now looks like the wave of mammalian modernization
went from south to north. Especially telling are the newly collected fossils of
advanced mammals far older than any known in the north.
Geneticists have also joined in, once again replicating a familiar pattern of
major new understandings coming from both DNA comparisons as well as evo-
devo. There has been no end of surprises in the twenty-first century.2
Here are the three most important. First, the major mammalian “groups”—the
eighteen living orders, as well as some suborders and even families still found
today—actually diversified long before the extinction of the dinosaurs, which
overturns the long-held idea that these groups did not evolve until after the K-T
calamity. Fossils suggest that most modern groups appeared around 60 million
years ago, after the dinosaurs were gone. Molecular data suggest they actually
began diversifying about 100 million years ago.3
Second, most early mammalian evolution and subsequent divergence
happened on southern rather than northern continents. Third, many groups

thought to be very distant cousins are in fact next of kin. For example,
paleontologists have always assumed that bats were in the same superorder as
tree shrews, flying lemurs, and primates. But genetic data place bats with pigs,
cows, cats, horses, and whales. Whales themselves are now known to have come
from piglike ancestors, rather than from the same stock that gave rise to seals.
Much of mammalian success came from anatomical change, including the
separation of the jaw and the ear bones, which allowed the skulls of later
mammals to expand sideways and backward, a prerequisite for bigger brains.
But the most important of all innovations was by the revolution of mammalian
teeth. The upper and lower molars of morganucodontid jawbones interlocked,
letting them slice their food into pieces.
Today’s mammals are split into two major groups: the ancestral marsupials,
which produce extremely small newborns and then keep them in a pouch—and
their more diverse and abundant descendants, the placental mammals. New DNA
studies now suggest that placental mammals began to diverge from marsupials as
early as 175 million years ago.4 Fossils have also chimed in, most spectacularly
from China.5 There, a complete new fossil of a protoplacental species found in
Liaoning Province supports the DNA inference that placentals began evolving
much earlier than previously thought. Named Eomaia, the fossil’s age at 125
million years makes it easier for paleontologists to accept the genetic evidence
that says the first protoplacentals began to evolve as much as 50 million years
earlier yet, back in the Jurassic.6
The oldest group of living placental mammals include elephants, aardvarks,
manatees, and hyraxes.7 When the African continent split off from the former
supercontinent of Pangaea, it carried these animals away to evolve on their own
for tens of millions of years. The continental dispersion also split South America
from Eurasia and North America for millions of years, and South America
became home to sloths, armadillos, and anteaters. The northern continents have
the youngest placental mammals on Earth, including seals, cows, horses, whales,
hedgehogs, rodents, tree shrews, monkeys, and eventually humans.
Yet, if a great deal of mammalian diversification predated the K-T extinction,
the most notable change—size increase—happened soon after the fall. Within
270,000 years mammals were diversifying and growing bigger, although the
really large mammals did not appear until around 55 million years ago. Then a
rapid increase in global temperature was coincident with a widespread growth of
forests around the world, even near both poles, and this aspect of the history of
plants may have helped stimulate a great increase in mammalian diversity.

THE TERRESTRIAL WORLD OF THE PALEOCENE
That there was a Paleocene at all is entirely due to the K-T mass extinction. That
mass extinction was absolutely unequivocal in its cause and effect. And the
world afterward was very, very different, on so many levels.
On land, the dinosaurs had ruled for so long that with their passing, a whole
set of new ecological relationships among the survivors had to be rather quickly
worked out. And with the sudden absence of so many land animals, the
evolutionary faucet of new species formation opened with one of the greatest
gushers of diversity that the world has ever seen. The mammals, obviously, were
the big winners on land, but birds made a comeback as well, and for some time
competed with land mammals for various resources.
So it was into this ocean regime that the rock from space dropped. The great
climate effects reverberated through the ecosystems for thousands of years, and
there was great climatic instability added to the already slightly cooled world,
both on land and in the sea. The biotic changes were no less devastating. For one
thing, the disappearance of the dinosaurs led to denser forests. Just as modern-
day elephants go a long way toward maintaining open spaces in forests by their
movement and destructive eating habits, so too the dinosaurs, of far greater size,
must have really affected vegetation patterns. But with their sudden
disappearance the forests thickened up; it was as if some exacting gardener
suddenly walked off the job, letting long-tended and pruned trees run riot.
By the Late Paleocene, more than 7 million years after the catastrophic K-T
extinction, global climate had stabilized. The planet had slowly warmed to
produce globally warm temperatures. From oxygen isotope evidence we know
that equatorial surface waters of the oceans were in excess of 20°C, reaching as
much as 26°C in some places, and thus were quite similar to ocean temperatures
in similar latitudes today. But the big difference to our world occurred at higher
latitudes. In the Arctic and Antarctic the surface of the sea was between 10°C
and 12°C, compared to the near-freezing temperatures of our time. Thus, the
difference in heat from equator and pole was some 10°C to 15°C, which is about
half of what it is today. Nevertheless, in spite of these temperature differences,
the oceanic circulation patterns were fairly similar to those of today. Most
important, oxygenated water masses that ultimately would end up on the bottom
of the ocean formed at high-latitude sites, just as they do today.
After the K-T mass extinction of 65 million years ago, it took some millions
of years for the surviving mammals to grow large enough to start affecting plant

patterns. There have been many artistic images of tiny, rat-sized mammals
crawling from bomb-shelter-like burrows in a world of stinking, rotting dinosaur
corpses. For some months, those mammals that could eat carrion would have
been in Nirvana. But soon enough there were but bones, and even these rotted
away or were buried in fairly short order, forcing all of the mammals to strike
out in a newly organizing series of food webs that were unprecedented. It was
before the time of grass, so the herbivores of early Paleocene time were leaf or
fruit eaters rather than grazers. Seemingly, there were few leaf eaters at all. Most
of the teeth of the Paleocene mammals argue for a diet of insects, fruit, or soft
shoots rather than tougher leaves; others may have been root or tuber eaters. It
was only in the latter half of the epoch that tooth morphology appropriate for
eating leaves appeared in any number. But once opened, the evolutionary faucet
fairly spewed out new kinds of mammals, ever-larger mammals among the new
in a torrent of evolution. Then, only 9 million years after the great K-T mass
extinction, once again the biotic world was affected by environmental crisis.
THE PALEOCENE EOCENE THERMAL (PETM)
By the early Cenozoic era, the Earth had suffered through at least nine mass
extinctions that we know of: the first was the great oxygenation event and the
snowball it triggered, the second more than one billion years later was during the
Cryogenian, then, in order, the late Ediacaran, late Cambrian, late Ordovician,
late Devonian, late Permian, late Triassic, and late Cretaceous mass extinctions.
The causes were amazingly varied: from sudden oxygen to too little of it; from
the appearance of predators to the onset of anoxia coupled with hydrogen sulfide
emissions to asteroid impact. But at the end of the Paleocene epoch, only 9
million years after the dinosaurs died out, there was to be a new assassin:
methane, which precipitated one of the most rapid rises in global temperatures
known. It is called the PETM: the Paleocene-Eocene thermal event.
This event was first discovered by oceanographers8 who were not at all
looking for any sort of temperature event of late Paleocene age. They were
trying to get new data on the K-T mass extinction from deep-sea cores drilled by
the US Ocean Drilling Program (ODP). But to drill down into the Cretaceous,
the drills first had to pass through Eocene and then Paleocene sediment. Cores
were taken from those depths while the drills went ever deeper toward their real

quarry.
When these younger cores were eventually examined and measured for the
carbon and oxygen isotope found in the shells of tiny, single-celled protists
known as benthic Foraminifera, the registered temperatures, as well as the ration
of carbon 12 to 13, looked like they had to be in error: they showed that when a
series of cores were compared, those with strata pulled up from ancient, deeper-
water parts of the ocean showed warmer paleotemperatures than those from
shallower paleolocalities. Even in the frigid Antarctic today, water cools with
depth, and back in the surely much warmer Paleocene, deeper water should be
obviously colder than shallower. But the numbers here said just the opposite.
Warm, deep waters and cool, shallow waters. Over a relatively short period of
time the deep ocean had anomalously warmed.
Near the Paleocene-Eocene boundary there is a striking increase in global
volcanic ash.9 Like dust, this fine material makes its way to the seafloor from the
atmosphere, but is put up there by volcanic eruption, not atmospheric storms.
This increase could only be due to a sudden increase in global volcanic activity,
about 58 to 56 million years ago. Further work in many places around the globe
confirmed these findings as being global phenomena, not anomalous events
limited to one ocean basin.
The late Paleocene tropics remained about the same (hot) temperature, but the
Arctic and Antarctic regions warmed markedly. In the Paleocene the difference
in seawater temperature between equator and pole was a hefty 17°C (it is an
even heftier 22°C now). By early Eocene times, however, the difference had
shrunk to only 6°C. And as the high latitudes warmed, the heat exchange
between the two regions slowed, reducing both the number and ferocity of
storms. The world went calm and got very hot, just as it did so many times
before. This was yet another greenhouse mass extinction.
The carbon isotope record across the Paleocene-Eocene boundary in two cores
also yielded a surprise. They showed a short-lived negative excursion—the kind
of record that occurs when the amount of plant life is reduced—a hallmark of
mass extinction. Other paleontologists began looking at the survival record of
bottom dwellers from the region, looking specifically at the common benthic, or
bottom-dwelling, Foraminifera—and found evidence of a catastrophic mass
extinction on the bottom. Was it simply sudden warming of the deep that wiped
out the cold-adapted species in short order? These results were published in the
early 1990s, and soon after a Japanese paleontologist named K. Kaiho published
studies inferring that the fate of the benthic forms was decided not by rising

temperature in the great depths of the sea, but by falling oxygen levels on the
bottom. This made a lot of intuitive sense, for warm water can often become
eutrophic and oxygen poor.
A deep bottom warming and a lowering of bottom oxygen, even a warming of
the surface waters. What was the ultimate cause? The K-T asteroid impact event
caused sufficient havoc in shallow waters to kill off almost all of the surface and
upper water column plankton, but left the deep relatively unscathed but for the
loss of nutrients from above. Warming the deepest part of the ocean could
conceivably happen if the large parts of the sea bottom quickly warmed, but this
would require an entirely new kind of deep ocean volcanism. The sea bottom
does have areas of high heat flow, but these are confined to the relatively narrow
mid-ocean mountain chains where seafloor spreading—the ocean bottom growth
phase of plate tectonics—takes place. Even much faster plate movement by
increased rate of volcanism along these mid-ocean rift systems would not do the
trick. It was correctly surmised that the entire warm bottom had come from the
warm, tropical surface waters where evaporation would make the surface waters
saltier and denser. This warm and saline water was then transported along the sea
bottom, even as far as the cold, high-latitude sites of Paleocene age.
Some aspect of ocean currents and the normal export of cold, oxygenated
surface water down onto the deep-sea bottoms was not working in the Paleocene
ocean. The deep, thermohaline circulation system—the main way that the ocean
stays mixed—was just the opposite of how such currents work in our current
ocean. The first victims were the tiny organisms requiring oxygen, the benthic
forams of the deep sea. Many of these species died out, and did so relatively
quickly in an event that lasted about four hundred thousand years. Still, to count
as a mass extinction at all, it would have to be shown that it was not just the
ocean that was affected, but land fauna as well. So the search was on for events
on land.
Wholesale changes among oceanic organisms because of this greenhouse
event occurred on the land as well.10 The newly discovered extinction in the
deep sea stimulated paleontologists to look anew (and collect anew as well) at
the fossil record of Paleocene land animals, to see if there was an extinction on
land at the end of the Paleocene epoch. It did not take long to see that a great
turnover had occurred among the mammals. Accurate dating soon showed that
the extinctions on land and sea took place simultaneously.
In terms of the fossil record on land, the event itself seemed to mark nothing
less than the start of our modern-day mammalian fauna. While there were

numerous kinds of mammals by the latter part of the Paleocene (thirty distinct
families are recognized from the collected fossils), many of these were small,
and some belonged to groups no longer present, including survivors of small and
rodent-like forms, many kinds of marsupials, some raccoon-like ungulates (a
strange paradox, having the new entirely herbivorous ungulates taking on a
meat-eating role in the Paleocene). There were also true insectivores and the first
primates (like the insectivores, still at small size). But by late Paleocene time
there were larger forms as well, and some of these were truly bizarre.
Dog-to bison-sized forms called pantodonts were leaf eaters that branched out
into living a semiaquatic lifestyle like hippos, or living in trees, as well as having
larger forms moving about on all fours on the forest floors. In general they were
stout of body, with short legs, and one cannot help but surmise that, at least
compared to modern herbivores, they were very clumsy and inelegant walkers.
Yet large as they were, by the end of the Paleocene they were joined by even
larger herbivores, the giant Dinocerata, which looked like huge rhinos even to
the strange sets of knobs and horns on their skulls.
In the piles of strata marking the transition from Paleocene to Eocene, a
reduction of species occurs, and over time—not instantly—new kinds of bones
appear. Many come from kinds more familiar to us. The first even-and odd-toed
ungulates appeared; more modern carnivores related to current groups soon
evolved to eat the new herbivores, and all had to take into account an event that
changed the very climate of the world. The lesson from past mass extinctions is
that new occurrences would not have evolved as they did unless substantial
extinction had opened the door to the possibility of new morphologies. This too
happened at the end of the Paleocene.
Our colleague Francesca McInerney has given us a wonderful summary based
on her work in the North American West that can help us describe the PETM.
First, she noted that this event is highly relevant to us humans, as the amount of
carbon released into the atmosphere, about 12,000 to 15,000 gigatons, is roughly
equivalent to what we humans are releasing over time by our industries and
energy use. The temperature change caused elevated greenhouse gases during
the PETM made the world 5 to 9 centigrade warmer than it is now. The actual
event lasted on the order of 10,000 years. Plants before and after were different
from those during the event, when all the gymnosperms, the pines and their kind,
disappeared. The plants that were present in her field area, as discovered by
paleobotanist Scott Wing of the Smithsonian, were mainly plants that until the
PETM lived in lower latitudes and thus at higher temperatures. After the event

the old plants came back, as did the insects that were present prior to the 10,000
years of literal hell on Earth. But not so the mammals. This event caused a
wholesale change in the North American mammalian fauna.
A final note. Had there been large ice sheets such as we have today they
would have rapidly melted. That causes sea level to rise. In our view this is the
single most dangerous aspect of human-caused warming: we are melting
Antarctic and Greenland ice that will over the coming centuries inundate huge
areas of current human farmland. The highest known rate of sea level rise is
currently on the south China coast, one of the most heavily populated areas on
Earth with sea-level rice farms.
GRASSLANDS AND MAMMALS OF THE COOLING CENOZOIC WORLD
From the Eocene to the start of the 23.5–5.3-million-year-ago Miocene epoch,
the world slowly began to cool. At first, during the Eocene, this was almost
imperceptible, and in fact there was a global tropical forest with crocodiles
living inside the present-day Arctic Circle. But in the Oligocene this cooling
accelerated, creating a different kind of major climate, and changing what had
been a near uniform global climate to one with extreme seasonality. At the same
time, giant continental ice sheets began to form on Antarctica, and probably
Greenland as well. These swelling ice sheets caused a rapid and dramatic fall in
sea level. At higher latitudes, forests gradually gave way in many places to
grassland meadows and savannas. But other changes were taking place as well,
changes in the atmosphere that would prove to have enormous consequences to
the history of life.
Plants need carbon dioxide. Yet the history of carbon dioxide through the
billions of years on Earth has been one of short-term rises and falls that in fact
are only minor variations in a much longer-term trend—the long-term reduction
in this gas. With this long decline, our planet is gradually cooled, especially over
the last 40 million years. Yet it is far more than the change in temperature that
affected the evolution of plants during the Cenozoic era. Perhaps even more
important has been an evolutionary formation of a more efficient form of
photosynthesis, called C4 photosynthesis, which in many plants supplanted the
more archaic mechanism, named C3 (the 3 and 4 in these terms is derived from
different chemical changes taking place as sunlight and carbon dioxide are

combined to form living plant cells and tissue). C4 photosynthesis, in fact, has
shown an extraordinarily rapid rise in importance in terms of the number of
plants using one over the other.
Plants that use the C3 pathway leave a different carbon isotope signature than
those that use C4. Not only do the plants show this signature, which can be
measured when any tissue from the plant is analyzed using a mass spectrometer
specialized in looking at living tissue, but any animal eating those plants will
leave a trace of it as well. Thus we know from the fossil record whether given
herbivorous species ate C3 or C4 plants (or even a combination of the two).
We have two lines of evidence demonstrating when C4 plants first arose. The
first is the molecular clock. By comparing the genomes of C4 to C3 plants,
geneticists deduced that the differences were large enough that the C4
mechanism could not have arisen less than 25 million years ago (or any earlier
than 32 million years ago as well). However, the fossil record yields a quite
different answer to the question of when the C4 photosynthetic method first
appeared, for the first fossils of C4 plants are only 12 to 13 million years of age.
The evolution to the C4 pathway was not a breakthrough that was then passed
down to ever-greater numbers of plant species. In fact, it may have separately
evolved more than forty times in the past, by that many separate lineages of
plants. The eventual C4 plants are fire and desiccation-resistant plants adapted to
heat and dry climates.
The most important C4 plants are grasses because of the dominance of the
grass diet to so many kinds of herbivores, large grazing mammals as well as
many kinds of birds, including the ubiquitous geese now found on most urban
lawns near bodies of water. The reduction in carbon dioxide, especially over the
last 20 million years, greatly abetted the expansion of C4 grasslands.11 Most
grasses cannot live on forest floors, where the cooler, shadier conditions do not
favor their growth.
Deforestation, however, creates a more open habitat, and therefore one that is
far better for grasses. While the main idea has long been that the long-term drop
in carbon dioxide sparked the evolution to dominance of C4 grasses, an
alternative and newer idea is that a change in forest cover of the planet was as
important as or perhaps even more important than a drop in carbon dioxide
levels. But what would have caused radical reduction in forestation? The answer
seems to be forest fires.
A dramatically underappreciated aspect of a planet with plants is the effect of
forest fires. Fire, of course, is affected by oxygen levels. In times of higher

oxygen, especially during the Carboniferous period of around 320 to 300 million
years ago, forest fires may have been ongoing. A view from space during this
interval would have shown an atmosphere darkly smudged and thick with
smoke, so that there would have been a world-covering global haze that would
have made a clear sunny day a rarity. But such smoke covering much of the
continents itself would have had a highly significant effect on global
temperatures, because much of the smoke from a forest fire can be light in color
when viewed from above. The global haze and smoke would have reflected
more sunlight back into space than would otherwise have happened, thus
changing the albedo (the degree of reflectivity of the sun’s rays hitting the
planet).
All of this would have created a chain of events radically changing not only
global climate but also the entire history of life from that point onward. The rise
of oxygen concentration and its prolonged high for more than 30 percent of all
the Carboniferous period would have caused more forest fires. As noted above,
this caused global temperature to drop, setting off a chain of events ending in
one of the most prolonged polar glaciations in all of Earth’s history. Although it
was not global in extent like the snowballs, it was nearly as long as some of
them. That time of ice may have lasted more than 50 million years, a time
interval coincident with some of the most important of all events in Earth
history, including the conquest of land by animals, the evolution of new and
advanced (for the time) land plants that were capable of colonizing upland
regions of the continents previously uninhabitable by plants, and the first
appearance of some of the most important of all vertebrate groups—including
the earliest reptiles, and soon after the ancestors of the mammals. But there is
another aspect of fire that would’ve affected the history of plant life, and
therefore the history of life in general.
New studies on Amazon basin fires have demonstrated that wildfires can
greatly influence climate, and not just in the tropics. David Beerling, in his book
The Emerald Planet, noted that during April 1988, smoke from fires may have
inhibited cloud formation over parts of North America—which in turn affected
rainfall patterns. This interval of time, in fact, was one of severe drought—and
resulted in one of the driest months of the twentieth century. This spring drought
followed some of the most extensive wildfires ever, two of them present in North
America during July of 1988, a year when gigantic areas around Yellowstone
National Park extensively burned. Beerling invokes a new way of understanding
the spread of C4 grasslands—very positive feedback system may have been put

in place.12
Positive feedbacks are those that increase environmental change within one
particular direction. In our world today, the warming atmosphere causes ever
more of the Arctic ice pack to melt, so that there is an ever-smaller percentage of
highly reflective white ice in the northern hemisphere. The white, ice-covered
oceans reflect sunlight back into space, but when the ice melts and is replaced by
dark-colored, open water, the oceans absorb much more heat—and the seas
warm. As the seas warm, more ice is melted and the cycle continues. The
positive feedback is that the warming causes more warming.
David Beerling suggested that there is a positive feedback in forest fires
causing ever more forest fires. The fires change the climate, causing more
drought, which makes ever greater areas susceptible to burning, causing a
greater extent of fire damage. And so the cycle goes—burning causes more
burning.
We enter a time when global temperatures are rapidly rising. The eventual
effects this will have on the planet is not entirely unknown. Less predicable is
the effect a new, warmed, high-sea-level world will have on human industry,
population, and civilizations.

CHAPTER XVIII
The Age of Birds: 50–2.5 MA
The history of life as often first taught to us as children is broken down thusly:
fish began in what we call the Age of Fish; some crawled ashore to start the Age
of Amphibians, which then began what was once called the Age of Reptiles or
sometimes the Age of Dinosaurs. Things finished off with an Age of Mammals.
It is not hard to see why this has become the common knowledge: humans like
to pigeonhole things, and a succession of “ages” is pigeonholing at its best. But
among the many, many problems with this account is one of many other truths:
there are no pigeons at all in this succession. Let us change that here and
consider what we might call an Age of Birds.1
The evolution of birds is a major topic of research.2 It has been a controversial
area of research as well, with two major schools of “belief”—one, that birds
evolved from a nondinosaur diapsid, something akin to one of the many
reptilian-like forms that gave rise to the dinosaurs themselves, or two, that
dinosaurs were the direct ancestors of birds. This school even invokes the
methodology of cladistics to reinforce the claim that what we call birds are in
fact dinosaurs, just highly modified.3
A host of fossils have shown that not only did many smaller bipedal,
carnivorous dinosaurs resemble birds in the way they laid their eggs but that
these eggs also looked like the eggs of birds. Even more striking has been the
new discoveries that many dinosaurs both before and after the first appearance of
Archaeopteryx even showed evidence of winglike arms, with feathers,
suggesting a second attempt by dinosaurs to gain the ability to fly. The question
was whether or not this famous fossil was even a dinosaur.4
The dispute goes back to about 1996, when paleobiologist Alan Feduccia
investigated the then newly discovered fossil of what he interpreted to be an
intriguing bird that lived about 135 million years ago, just after Archaeopteryx.
The bird, Liaoningornis, did not look like a dinosaur bird at all.5 It had massive
flight muscles attached to a breastbone similar to modern birds. Yet it was it was
found alongside fossils of ancient birds not unlike Archaeopteryx. How could
such advanced evolution have taken place so quickly? Instead, Feduccia
concluded, birds may have been already very widespread by the time that

Archaeopteryx first appeared in the time interval roughly from 140 to 135
million years ago, and that by that time they were already occupying a variety of
habitats. While more “advanced” than Archaeopteryx, they were still very
primitive by modern bird standards. So where are they? Feduccia believes that
most of them died out with the dinosaurs, about 65 million years ago, and that
the ancestors of all today’s birds evolved later, between 65 and 53 million years
ago, independently of the dinosaurs. This is the so-called big bang theory of
birds.6 Feduccia and his colleagues view any similarity between birds and
dinosaurs as simply due to convergent evolution, where natural selection
independently produces similar morphologies.
This school of thought has the modern birds appearing late—either coincident
with the 65-million-year-ago K-T extinction—or some tens of millions of years
later. This is certainly not mainstream understanding about bird evolution
anymore.7 Within the last decade a large number and variety of birds have been
found in Cretaceous rocks ranging from 130 to 115 million years ago, most from
China. Some of these fossils show that a great diversity of birds with long, bony
tails preceded the evolution of birds with the familiar short, bony tail.8 However
the dinosaur-to-birds theory was further supported by the discovery of two
species of feathered dinosaurs in China, dating from between 145 million and
125 million years ago, followed by younger, early Cretaceous birds.
In fact, a great deal of scientific interest has gone into feather research: why
did they evolve in the first place (in terms of function), and how did the wing
feathers necessary to allow flight come about in the first place? Much of this
research involves the concept of exaptation—where a particular adaptation is
coopted to do something else. We all know the value of feathers in down vests
and sleeping bags. Clearly feathers are good for insulating and staying warm, but
the feathers used for warmth are far different from those used and necessary for
a bird to fly. Feathers are rarely preserved, and like so much else in paleontology,
working out their origin, first appearance, and use involved a fossil record of
scant help. Yet as so often in the last several decades, fossils from China have
come to the rescue. In this case, exquisite dinosaur fossils that do preserve
feathers,9 and sometimes (and not just from China) even soft parts.10 Yet as is
also so often, no evidence dealing with bird evolution ever gains acceptance
without clamor of dissent and noisy opposition.11 The evolution of flight (not
just gliding), a major innovation that was successfully undertaken by arthropods,
reptiles, dinosaurs (the bird version), and mammals, has been and remains a
fertile topic of study.12

At present, over 120 avian species are known from the Mesozoic, from all
continents except mainland Africa.13 Despite this new information, controversy
surrounds several aspects of avian evolution, including the timing of the origin
and diversification of modern birds (Neornithes).14
The birds found in the oldest time intervals of the Cretaceous (which is
divided into an Early Cretaceous, which began at about 145 million years ago
and ended around 100 million years ago, and was succeeded from 100 to 65
million years ago by the Late Cretaceous). Birds of the Early Cretaceous must
have rapidly evolved into a wide range of shapes and sizes. Some were crow
sized, with strong beaks, such as Confuciusornis, a form that also possessed
enormous claws in its wings. Others from this time, such as Sapeornis, had very
long and narrow wings like those of a seagull. There were also smaller birds,
such as the sparrow-sized Eoenantiornis and Iberomesornis. Yet for all their
improvements in flying, these early Cretaceous birds still had toothed jaws
similar to those of Archaeopteryx. But the variety of skulls, wings, and feet
indicate that these Early Cretaceous birds had already specialized into a variety
of different lifestyles, including seed feeders, fish eaters, insect feeders, sap
eaters, and meat eaters. Their wings and rib cages suggest that soon after
Archaeopteryx, birds evolved flying abilities not very different from modern
birds.
For all the improvements of the Early Cretaceous birds, one remaining archaic
feature of these early birds was their teeth. All modern birds have horny beaks,
of a spectrum of morphologies that are adaptations for the many kinds of feeding
that modern birds undertake. But when did the toothless birds first appear? This
remains a contentious question—perhaps just answered in the cold wastes of the
Antarctic Peninsula.
Modern toothless birds evolved from the toothed ancestors in the Cretaceous.
But this was not so much a replacement as it was an addition, because the earlier
primitive birds, toothed and long tailed, continued to thrive and diversify
alongside the winged reptiles of the Cretaceous, including the dominant and
largest fliers of the last half of the Cretaceous, the pterosaurs. The toothed relics
continued to the end of the Cretaceous, but underwent final extinction in the K-T
event—at least according to the most recent summation of bird fossils found in
the most complete of all latest Cretaceous strata—those in the western interior of
the United States, the Hell Creek Formation, home of Triceratops, T. rex, and a
host of still-primitive birds.
The surviving lineages of birds were the comparatively primitive

Paleognathae. These include the large flightless birds such as ostriches, Rheas,
cassowaries—and the true giants we have just missed seeing, the enormous moa
of New Zealand and elephant birds of Madagascar, wiped out by humans in the
last thousand years. Some common birds of today, the aquatic ducks, the
terrestrial fowl, and the best fliers of today, the Neoaves, have their roots in the
Paleognathae.
The Hell Creek Formation and equivalent rocks in North America have now
yielded a total of seventeen species, including seven of the most ancient species
of archaic birds of all, including the diving, toothed birds belonging to the
hesperornithes group, named for a four-foot-long, stubby diving bird named
Hesperornis. The recovered assemblage includes both smaller forms and some
of the largest fliers known from the Jurassic or Cretaceous, and this tells us quite
emphatically that a great deal of avian diversification had happened by the end
of the dinosaurs’ reign.
In fact, the “avifauna” from these rocks seem to be highly slanted toward
marine birds, which is no surprise because of the nearby inland sea that carved
North America into two large subcontinents during the Late Cretaceous. None of
these groups are known to survive into the Paleogene, and their presence in the
Hell Creek Formation, which included the last 2–3 million years of the
Maastrichtian age of the Late Cretaceous, tells us that a mass extinction of
archaic birds coinciding with the Chicxulub asteroid impact in fact did take
place.15 But here is where controversy still exists: while most of the birds found
in the North American beds represent “advanced” birds from a morphological
sense, none can be categorically placed in the all-important group called the
Neornithes. This avifauna is the most diverse known from the Late Cretaceous,
although in diversity and disparity (the number of kinds of body plans) it is
lower than in modern birds. But this group of fossils is key in helping us
understand to what extent the K-T mass extinction affected birds.
If any group of vertebrates could survive the effects of an impact extinction, it
surely would be the birds. The burning of most of the world’s forests in the first
few days after the collision of the giant rock from space with the Earth; the
subsequent acid rain, followed by six months of darkness, and thus starvation
and the extirpation of surely every terrestrial ecosystem as well as all of those in
the marine and freshwater realms, save for the deep-sea communities—the
effects of this impact were immense. Yet even the deep-water ecosystems would
eventually have suffered grievously with the slowdown or cessation of the main
source of food to the deep sea, the sinking bodies of shallower water plankton

and dead animals. On land, the size of animals dictated their survivability, as the
larger animals had no chance. But birds are not large animals.
With the ability to disperse rapidly and fly quickly toward less-affected land,
it should be expected that birds as a group should show a lower extinction rate
than nonflying animals—and nonflying birds. Unfortunately, birds rarely
fossilize because they have fragile, hollow bones. Thus bird fossils are rare to
begin with. Yet from great diligence in collecting, there is now enough
information to make at least educated guesses about the fate of birds across the
Mesozoic-Cenozoic transition, a transition burned into life’s history.
By the Late Cretaceous, birds had already been on Earth longer than the time
since the large Chicxulub impact turned a dinosaur-rich world into one with only
avian dinosaurs left.
THE GREAT BIRD DIVISION
There is another source of information about the timing of modern bird
diversification: the use of DNA. In the first decade of the twenty-first century a
number of separate studies16 proposed new “evolutionary trees” of birds, based
on the DNA of extant species (evolving from presumed survivors from the times
of archaic birds). This new tree contains several surprises. For example, the
closest relatives of common freshwater diving birds known as grebes are—
flamingos! Hummingbirds are a specialized form of nighthawk, while falcons
are more closely related to songbirds than to other hawks and eagles. And
surprising as these new conclusions may be, there were even greater jaw-
droppers coming from this study.
For example, the new tree puts an order of flying birds, known as tinamous,
on a branch of the tree also shared by the flightless ostriches, emus, and kiwis.
The importance of this is that it indicates that flightlessness evolved at least
twice in this lineage, or else that the tinamous re-evolved flight from a flightless
ancestor. And still more: the new tree demonstrated that the closest relatives of
perching birds, or passerines (which are by far the largest and most successful
order of birds), are parrots. Yet with all of this new information, the age of the
most fundamental split of surviving birds, the fork in the evolutionary road that
resulted in the Neognaths and the presumably more primitive Paleognaths
remains obscure.

Modern birds are classified in Neornithes, which are only lately known to
have evolved into some basic lineages by the end of the Cretaceous, based on the
discovery of a bird fossils now named Vegavis, known from Vega Island. The
Neornithes are split into the Paleognaths (tinamous, ostriches, emus, and kiwis)
and Neognaths (all the rest of the birds). The date for the split of the Neognaths
into the familiar birds of today is also poorly understood. The best evidence
suggests that a basic split in the Neornithes occurred before the K-T extinction.
But how long before, if at all? As noted above, there remains a very convinced
group of specialists (such as Alan Feduccia) believing that the modern birds
evolved only after the K-T extinction event, as well as those having doubts about
whether the radiation of the Neognaths occurred before or after the extinction of
the other dinosaurs.
Thus new results from Vega Island in Antarctica are crucial. Vega Island is a
small island north of James Ross Island that had previously yielded one of the
most significant finds in bird evolution. This discovery offered the first evidence
that modern birds existed alongside nonavian dinosaurs at the end of the
Cretaceous.
A last question has tantalized paleontologists for years. In the mid-Cenozoic,
birds tried to become giant carnivorous dinosaurs once again. The most famous
of these were the “terror birds,” with a number shown in the illustration here.
Clearly there must have been severe competition with the then-rising modern
carnivores, ancestral to all the major terrestrial carnivorous mammals of today
(dogs, cats, bears, weasel groups).
The evolution of the large, flightless birds (ratite) still found today—such as
the iconic ostrich, cassowary, Rhea, and others—has always seemed like a return
to the bipedal dinosaur body plan. But because these giant birds cannot jump
from island to island, or cross vast continents in the kinds of migrations so
prevalent in the flying birds of the present and past, it has long been assumed
that each of the major flightless groups evolved independently through the
formation of isolated species. As most of these kinds of birds are found in the
modern-day southern continents, which were in the Mesozoic all combined in
one large landmass, the implication is that the ostriches of Africa, rheas of South
America, and cassowaries of Australia were products of the breakup of the
ancient landmass Gondwanaland. But a major surprise of the new DNA work is
that these flightless birds actually evolved into their groups not after they lost the
ability to fly, but before.17
Because Africa and Madagascar were among the first large hunks of

landmasses splitting apart from the Gondwanaland supercontinent, it was
predicted that the early isolation of Africa and Madagascar would have allowed
evolutionary forces to create the oldest of the ratites, the ostrich of Africa and
the and even larger elephant bird of ancient Madagascar. But because of the
closeness of Madagascar to Africa, ostriches and elephant birds should have
been closely related to each other but quite distinct from the other flightless
birds, including those of South America and New Zealand, where the ancient
moa (now extinct) and still-living kiwi evolved in their own isolation—at least
supposedly. Yet when DNA became available surprises were present.
The DNA work showed that the Madagascar elephant birds were more closely
related to the New Zealand birds than to the nearby African ostriches. This
unexpected result strongly supports the conclusion that these groups became
evolutionarily distinct before they lost the ability to fly.
The living ratites are—and were not—the only large, dinosaur-like birds of the
past. The largest land birds, now extinct, showed an evolutionary return to the
body plan of the bipedal Mesozoic carnivorous dinosaurs. Known scientifically
as phorusrhacids, the terror birds evolved in South America about 60 million
years ago, and lasted until about 2 million years ago, the time the great ice sheets
were spreading across the globe in the first Pleistocene ice advances. Some, at
least, made it into North America as well, and for most of the Cenozoic these
were the top carnivores of South America. There are nothing like the terror birds
living today, which might be a blessing.
New research in 2010, using CT scanning technology, has given us a new
understanding of how these behemoths lived and died. The scans revealed that
the gigantic beaks of these monster predators were hollow, which was a surprise.
This must have made the beak weak and vulnerable to breaking when moved
from side to side. Instead they may have used the beak like an ax, and also used
their powerful, talon-equipped legs for help in killing prey.
Like most flightless birds, terror birds had stubby little wings but long,
powerful legs that ended in large, taloned feet. The muscular legs produced great
ground speed; it has been estimated that some species of terror bird could reach
speeds of nearly seventy miles per hour over flat terrain, and on the vast South
American pampas, there was plenty of room to run. In this they were probably
comparable to a cheetah. The combination of running, a monstrous beak, and the
deadly talons on powerful legs surely made the terror birds very effective
predators.
They had very big heads and the largest brains of any bird. This leads to some

uncomfortable realizations. Recent work on the intelligence of African gray
parrots has led neuroscientists and psychologists alike to realize that we have
vastly underestimated the level of bird intelligence. While primatologists try to
link various primates to higher cognitive function, birds in general—and perhaps
terror birds in particular—may have been among the most intelligent species to
ever walk the Earth.

CHAPTER XIX
Humanity and the Tenth Extinction: 2.5 MA to Present
Some decades ago, several books came out suggesting that the world might be
entering into a new mass extinction (including two books by coauthor Ward, The
End of Evolution, and an update of that book retitled Rivers in Time).1 One of
these books, Richard Leakey’s The Sixth Extinction,2 was overtly referring to the
big five mass extinctions we have profiled in this book, those with more than 50
percent species loss: the events of the end of the Ordovician, Devonian, Permian,
Triassic, and Cretaceous. Here we advocate that there have actually been ten
major mass extinctions so large that they merit differentiating from the more
minor events, such as the PETM of a previous chapter, and several smaller
events in the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods. These top ten are as follows:
 
  1.   The Great Oxidation Extinction. This may have been the most catastrophic of all extinctions, if
judged on the percentage of species and individuals killed off. Oxygen would have been a deadly
poison to virtually all microbes at the time. Combined with the nearly contemporaneous first
snowball Earth, this might have been the worst of them all, and also the first out of the gate.
Imagine that you walk outside and there is no longer breathable air. Air, all right, but different. So
it was to those aquatic organisms that constituted life on Earth. The seas were filled with poison
gas: oxygen.
  2.   The Cryogenian Extinctions. The combined snowball Earth episodes of the late Proterozoic. Thick
dirty ice covers oceans and land. Photosynthesis slows and mainly stops. A rich, diverse
assemblage of life on land and in the sea (far, far richer in the sea) dies out. Not just diversity, but
biomass tumbles.
  3.   The late Vendian-Ediacaran Extinction. This included stromatolites, microbial mats and especially
Ediacarans at the Proterozoic-Paleozoic Boundary. That supposed garden of Ediacara, invaded by
voracious—and more important—active, moving animals, eating everything in their path and
ravishing the slow-moving, microbially draped oceans and land.
  4.   The late Cambrian SPICE Extinction. Extinction of most trilobites, many “weird wonders” of the
Burgess Shale, and so much else. Most important, there was a wholesale change of trilobites away
from having primitive segmentation and eyes, incapable of enrolling for defense, little defensive
ornament—probably due to an increase of predators as much as anything else. The first really
large, mobile, and armored carnivores, the nautiloid cephalopods, were involved in this extinction,

as were chemical changes.
  5.   The Ordovician Mass Extinction. Wholesale extinction of tropical species. Caused by cold or
perhaps by sea level change.
  6.   The Devonian Mass Extinction. Benthic and water column animals in the sea—the first greenhouse
extinction?
  7.   The Permian Mass Extinction. Land and sea greenhouse extinction.
  8.   The Triassic Mass Extinction. Land and sea greenhouse extinction.
  9.   The Cretaceous-Paleogene Extinction. Combined greenhouse and impact extinction.
10.   The Late Pleistocene-Holocene Mass Extinction. From 2.5 million years ago to today—climate
change and human activities.
 
It is the last on this list that should worry us. The others, especially the
greenhouse extinctions, should terrify us, but they do not, because they were—
and would be—too slow moving. The slow death … and not for our species. We
are pretty extinction-proof. We would be alive, yes, but happy? On an empty
planet? Surrounded by our domestic animal and plants, whose jumping genes
will make their own perverse and unpredictable Cambrian explosion in the long
run.
GETTING TO THE TENTH EXTINCTION
In 2010, a traveling exhibit from Ethiopia3 brought one of the most famous of all
fossils to the United States: Lucy, the early hominid.4 At about three and a half
feet tall, with remains that total only 40 percent of her original skeleton, in fact
there is not a lot to Lucy. But she has told us a great deal.
Sexual dimorphism is the term used to describe the two different
morphologies of males and females of a species. It is certainly not limited to
hominids, and it is not the case that the larger of the dimorphs is always the
male. In many animals, for instance, including a variety of cephalopods
(excepting Nautilus, interestingly enough), the female morph is the larger.
Apparently it takes more organ mass to produce eggs than sperm. In hominids,
however, from chimps to us humans, the male is the larger. The dimorphism in
humans is statistically significant, and appears to range from females being
about 90 to 92 percent the height of males, depending on race. In Lucy’s kind,
however, it was quite a different story.

Lucy is far from the only fossil skeleton of her kind. Her species,
Australopithecus afarensis, is now far better known compared to our
understanding (or lack thereof) when a team led by Don Johanson found her in
1974. One of the more recent finds is of a male skeleton of her kind that is
complete enough to allow a good estimate of his height in life. He is called Big
Man. He was five feet tall to Lucy’s three and a half. Her chin would have come
just above his navel if standing face-to-face—except it had been face to lower
chest.
If Lucy and Big Boy are representative of their genders in A. afarensis, it
means that females were only 70 percent as large as their men. There had to be
consequences to this—behavioral as well as cultural. In 2012, when
anthropologist Patricia Kramer of the University of Washington did a detailed
study5 on the relative walking speeds of males and females, based on their leg
lengths, she discovered that Big Man’s optimal walking speed would have been
2.9 mph, but Lucy’s would have been a rather slower 2.3 mph. Keeping up with
males would have been taxing for females—and living in a world filled with
predators, being constantly in a state of anaerobic respiration would not be a
very good survival tactic. Kramer thus suggested that like chimpanzees, male
and female hominids spent much of the day apart, ranging separately as they
foraged and hunted for food.
Other new fossil finds from Africa are also turning over some long-held
views. Lucy and her kind are invariably reconstructed in dioramas or
illustrations as walking upright through the Late Pliocene world of north and
eastern Africa—a place with a mosaic of grassland and small patches of open
forest. But for the first time ever the shoulder blades of a female of Lucy’s
species—but coming from a time interval about a hundred thousand years before
Lucy—show features that suggest she and her kind were tree climbers as well as
adapted for walking on the ground. The question of whether these distant
ancestors of ours also spent significant time in trees has been hotly debated,6
largely because until this new find, there was no way to see the morphological
adaptations necessary for a tree climber. The new view seems to be that
australopithecines may not have come down from the trees as early as currently
believed.
While hominids are new arrivals on Earth, our group, the primates, dates well
back into the Cretaceous, and we have an ancestor, Purgatorious, that survived
the K-T mass extinction itself—which is lucky for us. Some of the earliest
primates belonged to the lemur branch. By 45 million years ago, more advanced

primates—the first true anthropoids, which today include monkeys, apes, and
humans—appear in the fossil record of Asia. The oldest of these was found in
China and is now named Eosimias.
About 34 million years ago, surely smarter, definitely bigger, and perhaps
more aggressive monkeys evolved. One of these, named Catopithecus, has a
skull the size of a small monkey’s, a relatively flat face, and is the first primate
to sport the same arrangement of teeth humans have—two incisors, one canine,
two premolars, and three molars. We now have a good idea of our own
evolutionary tree, right up to where and when “humans” can be said to first
appear—the African genesis of the australopithecines.
Paleoanthropologists have done a remarkable job of deciphering the where
and when of the speciation event that produced our species. The human family,
called the Hominidae, seems to begin as much as 5–6 million years ago with the
appearance of Lucy and her kind, the Australopithecus afarensis described
above. Since then, our family has had as many as nine species, although there is
ongoing debate about this number, which seems to change years as both new
discoveries and new interpretations of past bones make their way into print. But
the most important descendant of the early pre-Pleistocene hominids is the first
member of our genus, Homo, a species named Homo habilis (handyman) for its
ability to use tools, which is about 2.5 million years old. This creature gave rise
to Homo erectus about 1.5 million years ago, and H. erectus either gave rise to
our species, Homo sapiens, directly about 200,000 years ago, or through an
evolutionary intermediate known as Homo heidelbergensis. Our species has been
further subdivided into a number of separate varieties. Some workers consider
the Neanderthals to be a variety, while others interpret it as separate species,
Homo neanderthalensis. A great deal of new work on recovered and decoded
Neanderthal DNA7 is one of the most intriguing aspects of human paleobiology,
with the latest evidence suggesting that the human and Neanderthal lineages
diverged before the emergence of contemporary humans and our current DNA.
They did not come from us, nor did we come from them. We both evolved from
a common extinct ancestor different from both species.8
Each formation of new human species occurred when a small group of
hominids somehow became separated from a larger population for many
generations. In the 1960s and 1970s there was a view that modern humans came
about from what has been called a candelabra pattern of evolution—that all over
the planet separate stocks of archaic hominids such as Homo erectus all evolved
into Homo sapiens at different times and places. This notion now seems

laughable.
The fossil record tells us that the so far oldest member of our species—
variably called a modern to distinguish it from more archaic forms of Homo
sapiens—lived 195,000 years ago in what is now Ethiopia. It is unknown and
not terribly important whether this fossil represents the oldest tribe of us or was
from a group that wandered in from the true origin place and was fortuitously
fossilized in Ethiopia. But very soon after, this band set out walking to the
farthest southern regions of the African continent, and then to the north as well,
finding a way out of Africa through Eurasia—and in so doing they spread out
across the globe,9 effectively isolating themselves from others of our species,
and thus adapting to the very different environmental concision in which these
wanderers found themselves. Quite different adaptations, morphological to
physiological, were necessary for survival in the sun-starved, ice-covered north
than on the plains of Africa, as well as all areas in between. As our numbers
grew, so too did our variation—and our various evolutionary changes. But all of
this was within the same species.
THE LAST ICE AGE AND LIFE
Climatologists have long theorized that climate change observed over the past
two and a half million years—the alteration between long periods of very cold
climate with growing ice sheets and dropping sea level alternating with shorter
times of warmth—were the result of the orbital changes described above as
having been first articulated by Milutin Milankovic′. Until the ice cores became
available, with their unprecedented resolution in discerning climate through
recent time, the changes were thought to have been slow. But with that resolution
a newer view became apparent.
The ice core records and other sources of climate information such as deep-
sea paleontological and isotopic records indicate that over the past eight hundred
thousand years the interglacial periods—the warmer times between the much
cooler glacial intervals—have lasted on average about eleven thousand years.
That’s almost half the Earth’s precessional cycle, orbital changes occurring every
twenty-two thousand years. The current interglacial has already lasted more than
eleven thousand years and some records suggest that we have been in the warm
period for as long as fourteen thousand years. Does this mean that the glaciers

are advancing at this moment? The answer to that question is a decided no, for
several reasons. First of all, precession is not the only orbital aspect that affects
climate. Records show that between 450,000 to 350,000 years ago there was an
interglacial stage that lasted much longer than eleven thousand years. This
interglacial was coincident with a time when orbital eccentricity was at a
minimum. Just such a pattern of minimal orbital eccentricity is under way at this
time, suggesting that the present interglacial could continue for thousands or
perhaps a few tens of thousands of years into the future—or it could end at any
time.
The Pleistocene epoch signaled a significant kind of climate change beginning
about 2.5 million years ago. The large cool grasslands and tundra of the high
latitudes during the last pre-ice-age epoch of the Cenozoic era gave way to a new
kind of land cover—ice. Year by year a slow excess of snow and ice caused the
formations of glaciers, which slowly crawled southward. Eventually continental
glaciers began to coalesce and merge with mountain glaciers, uniting in unholy
matrimony to grip the land in glacial ice and glacial winter.
By no means was the entire planet gripped in ice, as seems to be popularly
imagined. There were still tropics and coral reefs and warm sunny climes
pleasant the year around. But probably no place on Earth was unaffected in at
least some minor way; the global climate changed, causing shifts in wind and
rain patterns. Even those places far from the ice were climatically changed,
perhaps colder or even warmer, often quite dryer. Gigantic cold deserts and
semideserts expanded in front of the advancing ice sheets, while regions
normally dry, such as the Sahara desert of northern Africa, experienced increased
rainfall. Conversely, the great rainforests covering the Amazon basin and
equatorial Africa, regions of relative climatic stability for tens of millions of
years prior to the onset of the ice age, experienced a pronounced cooling and
drying such that large tracts of jungle retreated into pockets of forest surrounded
by wider regions of dryer savannas.
THE SPREAD OF HUMANITY
Many of these rapid climate changes occurred while humanity was colonizing
the globe. By about thirty-five thousand years ago, it appears that the final
evolutionary tweaks had occurred, making us as we are now. We can call these

new humans the moderns, and they conquered the world bit by bit. They arrived
in each new region slowly yet inexorably. It didn’t happen in a century. It didn’t
parallel the taming of North America by Europeans, when several centuries saw
the transformation of a giant native-vegetation-covered continent to a giant
agriculture-and concrete-covered continent. It was instead a slow conquest, with
millennia falling away like leaves as the moderns slowly spread over the globe.
Even the island continent of Australia had become the habitat of Homo sapiens
thirty-five thousand years ago. Northern Asia, however, was still undiscovered.
And beyond Asia, an even bigger territory, North and South America, had still
not experienced the first human footfall.
The first people to arrive in the vast tract of what is now Siberia were
Paleolithic big game hunters. They arrived as long as thirty thousand years ago,
with a tradition already in place for existing in this harsh climate. Eastern
Siberian stone tools show some differences from the European traditions of the
time, and were clearly influenced by the flake cultures of Southeast Asia. Yet the
major technology, the construction of large spearpoints, was formulated for
killing large animals.
The arrival of the first humans in Siberia was set against a time of slight
warming, and this warmer period, following a cooler time, may have encouraged
the spread of humans into an otherwise hostile region. Yet soon after their arrival
in Siberia the Earth began to cool again, and by twenty-five thousand years ago a
major glacial event was well under way.
In western Europe and North America the great continental ice sheets were
inexorably spreading downward to cover vast regions with ice a mile thick. In
Siberia, however, there was so little moisture that the ice was unable to form.
Into this vast treeless frozen territory, humans expanded ever eastward. Because
there was so little wood, the hides and antlers of their prey became important
resources, and the very bones of the largest quarry—the mastodons and
mammoths—were used for housing. These people became—by necessity—big
game hunters, and their principal prey may have been the mammoth and
mastodon.
As humanity crossed Asia and settled in Beringia, in a succession of small
waves between perhaps thirty and twelve thousand years ago, the continental ice
sheets covering large portions of North America expanded to maximum size in a
long series of cooling episodes, followed by rapid warming. As the ice increased
in volume, the level of the sea began to fall, causing huge land areas long
underwater to become dry land—land that would in some areas serve as

migratory paths between formerly isolated islands and large landmasses. But
when the ice finally began to melt, the level of the sea began to rise as well. As
late as fourteen thousand years ago, the continental glaciers covering most of
Canada and large portions of what is now the United States were still slowly
melting under gradually rising temperatures.
Soon thereafter, however, a new event accelerated the melting process. When
enough ice had melted so that the glaciers no longer extended out to sea from the
coast, the calving of icebergs from the eastern and western coastlines of what are
now Canada and the northern portions of the United States could no longer
occur. Each spring during the period of glacial maxima (about eighteen thousand
to fourteen thousand years ago) great fleets of icebergs were launched into the
coastal oceans, and this in turn kept the waters cool and created very cold winds
that cooled the lands as well. Yet with the cessation of iceberg formation,
warmer onshore winds arose, and the ice began to melt everywhere on the
continents in earnest.
The melting fronts of the glaciers must have been extraordinary and
extraordinarily harsh places—incessant strong winds characterized the retreating
glacial walls. So strong was the wind that it created great piles of sand and silt
carried by the wind, sediment called loess. The winds also carried in seeds, so
that the drifting soils in front the glaciers were soon colonized by pioneering
plants. First came the ferns and then more complex plants. Willow, juniper,
poplar, and a variety of shrubs were the first stable communities to transform this
ancient glacial regime; and soon thereafter successive communities of plants
arrived, depending on location. In the more temperate west, low forests
dominated by spruce were the norm; in the middle colder parts of the continent
permafrost and tundra were the norm. Yet everywhere the glaciers were in
retreat, and as they migrated, or more correctly, melted north, they were
followed by a front of advancing tundra, which soon was followed by vast
spruce forests.
Spruce communities of large areas in North America were as much open
woodland as dense forest, with copses of trees interspersed with grass and
shrubs. By no means was it similar to the great, thick Douglas fir communities
found in the few remaining old-growth forests of the Northwest, places where
dense underbrush and fallen rotting logs make passage by large game, or
humans, exceedingly difficult.
South of the ice in North America, throughout the ice age, a variety of habitats
existed. There was forest tundra, grassland, and deserts, and plants sufficient to

sustain enormous herds of giant mammals. With the end of ice and cold over so
much of the world, human populations began to increase markedly.
By ten thousand years ago humans had successfully colonized each of the
continents except Antarctica, and adaptations to the many locales led to what we
now call the various human races. While it was long thought that such obvious
features as skin color were purely adaptations to varying amounts of sun, more
recent work suggests that much of what we call “racial” characteristics might
simply be adaptations brought about by sexual selection, rather than increases to
fitness in various environments. But many other adaptations, most invisible to
morphologists, were happening as well.
Africa is revered for its abundance of large mammals. Nowhere else on Earth
can such diversity of larger herbivores and carnivores be found. Yet this animal
paradise, instead of being the exception, was the rule: all of the world’s
temperate and tropical grazing regions were quite recently of African flavor. But
like the forces that wiped out the elephants in the Karoo, an extraordinary event
has depleted the Earth’s biodiversity of large mammals over the past fifty
thousand years.
Although the disappearance of larger animals poses a tremendous challenge to
those studying extinction, a significant lesson from the past is that the extinction
of larger animals has a far more important effect on the structure of ecosystems
than does the extinction of smaller animals. The extinction at the end of the
Cretaceous was significant not because so many small mammals died out, but
because the very large dinosaurs did.
It was the removal of the very large land-dwelling dinosaurs that reconfigured
terrestrial environments. In similar fashion, the removal of the majority of larger
mammals species across most of the world over the last fifty thousand years is
an event whose significance is only now becoming apparent, and one that should
have lasting effects for additional millions of years into the future.
One time period in particular was the Late Pleistocene epoch of about fifteen
thousand to twelve thousand years ago, when a significant proportion of large
mammals in North America went extinct. At least thirty-five genera (and thus at
least this number of species) became extinct. Six of these lived on elsewhere
(such as the horse, which died out in North and South America but lived on in
the Old World). The vast majority, however, died out. In fact, most belonged to a
wide spectrum of taxonomic groups, being distributed across twenty-one
families and seven orders. The only unifying characteristic of this rather diverse
lot is that most (but certainly not all) were large animals.

The most well-known and iconic were the elephant-like animals, the
Probiscideans, including mastodons and gomphotheres as well as mammoths,
which were closely related to the two types of still-living Old World elephants.
Of these, the most widely distributed in North America was the American
mastodon, which was widespread from coast to coast across the unglaciated
parts of the continent. It was most abundant in the forests and woodlands of the
eastern part of the continent, where they browsed off trees and shrubs, especially
spruce trees. The gomphotheres, a bizarre group quite unlike anything now alive,
are questionably recorded from deposits in Florida, but otherwise were widely
distributed in South rather than North America. The last group, the elephants,
was represented in North America by the mammoths, comprised of two species,
the Columbian mammoth and woolly mammoth.
The other group of large herbivores iconic of the ice age in North America
was the giant ground sloths and their close relatives the armadillos. Seven genera
comprising this group went extinct in North America, leaving behind only the
common armadillo of the American Southwest. The largest of this group were
the ground-living sloths, ranging in size from the size of a black bear to the size
of a mammoth. An intermediate-sized form is commonly found in the tar pits of
present-day Los Angeles, while the last, the Shasta ground sloth, also the most
well known, was the size of a large bear or a small elephant. Also spectacular
was the North American glyptodont, a heavily armored creature ten feet in
length with a heavily armored, turtle-like shell. Also going extinct was an
armadillo, a genus survived by the common nine-banded armadillo.
Both even-and odd-toed ungulate animals died out as well. Among the odd-
toed forms, the horse, comprising as many as ten separate species, went extinct,
as did two species of tapir. Losses were greater among the even-toed ungulates.
Thirteen genera belonging to five families went extinct in North America alone
in the Pleistocene extinction, including two genera of peccaries (wild pigs), a
camel, and two llamas, the mountain deer, the elk-moose, three types of
pronghorns, the Saiga, the shrub-ox, and Harlan’s muskox.
With so many herbivores going extinct, it is no surprise that many carnivores
also underwent extinction. These included the American cheetah, a large cat
known as the scimitar cat, the saber-toothed tiger, the giant short-faced bear, the
Florida cave bear, two types of skunks, and a dog. Some smaller animals round
out the list, including three genera of rodents and the giant beaver. But these
were exceptions. Most animals dying out were large in size.
The extinction in North America coincided with a drastic change in plant

community makeup. Vast regions of the northern hemisphere changed from plant
assemblages dominated by highly nutritional willow, aspen, and birch trees, to
far less nutritious spruce and alder groves. Even in those areas dominated by
spruce (itself a relatively poorly nutritious tree), a diverse assemblage of more
nutritious plants were still available. However, as the number of nutritious plants
began to decrease due to the climate changes, the herbivorous mammals would
have increasingly foraged on the still-remaining, more nutritional plant types,
thus exacerbating their demise, and perhaps thus leading to the reduction in size
of many species of mammals depending on vegetation for food. As the
Pleistocene ended, the more open, high-diversity spruce forests and nutritional
grass assemblages were rapidly replaced by denser forests of lower diversity and
lower nutritional value. In the eastern parts of North America the spruce stands
changed to large, slow-growing hardwoods such as oak, hickory, and southern
pine, while in the Pacific Northwest great forests of Douglas fir began to cover
the landscape. These types of forests have a far lower carrying capacity for
larger mammals than the Pleistocene vegetation that preceded them.
It was not just North America that suffered such severe losses.10 North and
South America had been isolated from one another, and hence their faunas
underwent quite separate evolutionary histories, until the Isthmus of Panama
formed, some 2.5 million years ago. Many large and peculiar mammals evolved
in South America, including the enormous, armadillo-like glyptodons, as well as
the giant sloths (both of which later migrated northward and become common in
North America), giant pigs, llamas, huge rodents, and some strange marsupials.
When the land connection formed, free interchange between the two continents
began.
As in North America, large-animal extinction occurred among South
American mammals soon after the end of the ice age. Forty-six genera went
extinct between fifteen thousand and ten thousand years ago. In terms of the
percentage of fauna affected, the mass extinction of large animals occurring in
South America was even more devastating than those in North America.
Australia suffered even greater losses, but at an earlier time than either North
or South America. Since the age of dinosaurs the Australian continent had been
an isolated landmass, surrounded by ocean. It was thus cut off from the
mainstream of Cenozoic-era mammals. The Australian mammals followed their
own evolutionary path, resulting in a great variety of marsupials, many of large
size.
The mass extinction striking the Australian fauna during the last fifty

thousand years killed off forty-five species of marsupials belonging to thirteen
genera. Only four of the original forty-nine large (greater than twenty pounds in
weight) marsupial species present on the continent a hundred thousand years ago
survived. No new arrivals from other continents bolstered the disappearing
Australian fauna. The victims included large koala bears, several species of
hippo-sized herbivores called Diprotodon, several giant kangaroos, several giant
wombats, and a group of deer-like marsupials. Carnivores (also all marsupials)
were lost as well, including a large lionlike creature and a doglike carnivore. In
more recent times, a third predator, a catlike creature found on offshore islands,
has also disappeared. Large reptiles also disappeared, including a giant monitor
lizard, a giant land tortoise, a giant snake, as well as several species of large
flightless birds, among others. The larger creatures that did survive were those
capable of speed or those that had nocturnal habits, as noted by our great friend
Tim Flannery of Australia,
The wave of extinctions affecting the faunas of Australia, North America, and
South America coincides both with the first appearance of humanity in all three
regions and with substantial climate change. Reliable evidence now shows that
humans reached Australia between thirty-five and fifty thousand years ago. Most
of the larger Australian mammals were extinct by about thirty to twenty
thousand years ago.
A different pattern emerges in the areas where humankind has had a long
history, such as Africa, Asia, and Europe. In Africa, modest mammalian
extinctions occurred 2.5 million years ago, but later losses, compared to other
regions, were far less severe. The mammals of Northern Africa, in particular,
were devastated by the climatic changes that gave rise to the Sahara desert. In
eastern Africa, little extinction occurred, but in southern Africa, significant
climate changes occurring about twelve thousand to nine thousand years ago
were coincident with the extinction of six species of large mammals. In Europe
and Asia there were also fewer extinctions than in the Americas or Australia; the
major victims were the giant mammoths, mastodons, and woolly rhinos.
The extinction can thus be summarized as follows:
 
Large terrestrial animals were the primary creatures going extinct: smaller animals and virtually all sea
animals were spared.
Large mammals survived best in Africa. The loss of large mammalian genera in North America was 73
percent; in South America, 79 percent; in Australia, 86 percent; but in Africa, only 14 percent died
out during the last hundred thousand years.

The extinctions were sudden in each major land group, but occurred at different times on different
continents. Powerful carbon dating techniques allow very high time resolution. These types of
techniques have shown that some species of large mammals may have gone completely extinct in
periods of three hundred years or less.
The extinctions were not the results of invasions by new groups of animals (other than mankind). It has
long been thought that many extinctions take place when new, more highly evolved or adapted
creatures suddenly arrive in new environments. Such was not the case in the ice age extinctions, for
in no case can the arrival of some new fauna be linked to extinctions among the forms already living
in the given region.
 
These various lines of evidence suggested to many scientists that humanity
provoked this mass extinction. Others argue just as vigorously that the cause of
the megamammal extinction was change in resource patterns in vegetation that
occurred during the intense climate changes accompanying the end of the
Pleistocene glaciation. Most discussion about this extinction deals exclusively
with this argument over cause, with the two major camps being called overkill
(human hunting) and climate change.
Whatever its cause, a major reorganization of terrestrial ecosystems occurred
on every continent save Africa. Today, Africa is losing its megamammals as the
large herds of game become restricted to game parks and reserves, where they
become easy prey to poaching within their newly restricted habitats.
The end of the megafauna is not a clearly defined line. But then we are
looking at it from the present, and it is just a moment away. Intervals of time
lasting ten thousand years are insignificant and probably beyond the resolution
of our technology, when viewed from times tens to hundreds of millions of years
away. The end of the age of megamammals looks protracted from our current
vantage point, but will look increasingly sudden as it disappears into the past,
one of the odd aspects of time.
The megamammals still left on Earth now make up the bulk of endangered
species, and many more large mammalian species are now at risk. If the first
phase of the modern mass extinction was the loss of megamammals, its current
phase seems concentrated on plants, birds, and insects, as the planet’s ancient
forests are turned into fields and cities.

CHAPTER XX
The Knowable Futures of Earth Life
The future is a never-reachable time, the fast-moving bait to racetrack
greyhounds. If there is any lesson from life’s history, it is that chance has been
one of the two major players at the game of life, with evolution the other, and
chance makes any attempt at prognosticating events and trends in the future
history of life a very chancy proposition. But the planetary scientist and brilliant
writer Don Brownlee of the University of Washington has responded to this
seemingly impenetrable obfuscation of the future. Brownlee claims that there is
a “knowable” future, and that seemingly paradoxically events become more
knowable the further into the future they are. On this topic, Brownlee was
talking about physical and predictable changes in the properties of our planet and
our sun. One example of a knowable future that can be quite accurately predicted
is the future history of our sun, which we know will become a red giant star with
a diameter larger than the orbit of Earth and probably Mars (and thus certainly
consuming the Earth and probably Mars as well) in 7.5 billion years, give or take
a quarter billion.
The study of biological evolution on Earth has increased scientists’
understanding of the distant past, and this too offers clues to the future. One
characteristic is that evolutionary history has been importantly affected not only
by the interplay of life (competition and predation) but also by the course of the
physical evolution of Earth, its atmosphere, and its oceans. While many events
will remain dictated by chance, such as the rate and future history of asteroid
impact with the Earth, we can make highly refined estimates about predictable
changes in global temperatures, atmospheric and oceanic chemistries, and large-
scale geophysical events that will necessarily take place over Earth’s remaining
lifetime.
The concept of a habitable planet is based on planetary nurture, with life being
the ultimate result of planetary formation and change. We have already looked at
the most important elemental renewal systems that recycle important nutrients
and maintain near-constant global temperatures, and changes in (or total
cessation of) these, like the rate at which the sun expands, are knowable. For life,
the most important of these fluxes are the movement and transformation of the

elements carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus, and various trace elements. The
energetic underpinnings of the various systems largely come from two sources:
the sun and heat generated from the breakdown of radioactive material beneath
Earth’s surface. Of these, and because of its importance to life as the source of
energy through photosynthesis, the sun is the more important of the two.
The sun is a powerful nuclear reactor, but its stability is a matter of debate. As
the sun evolves, the number of particles in its core decrease as hydrogen atoms
are fused into helium atoms, but seemingly paradoxically, as the number of
atoms in the core of the sun decrease, its energy output (as light and heat) slowly
but inexorably increases.
All stars like the sun share this same characteristic. The sun has increased in
brightness by about 30 percent in the last 4.5 billion years of its life. The rise in
brightness increases the intensity of the sunlight that illuminates its planets. A
continuation of this change will cause the loss of oceans and create hellish
conditions, similar to those that exist on Venus. (The oceans do not “boil” away,
as seen in some garish depictions of the Earth’s future, but one by one, oceans’
water molecules are stripped of their hydrogen, which ascends high into the
atmosphere. The oxygen stays behind.)
For all its history, Earth has been within the “temperate zone” of the solar
system. That is, Earth has been in the “right” range of distance from the sun to
have surface temperatures that allow oceans and animals to exist without
freezing or frying. This habitable zone (actual geography in space) extends from
a well-known limit just inside Earth’s orbit to a less understood outer limit near
Mars or possibly beyond. The habitable zone moves outward as the sun becomes
brighter, and in the future the zone will pass Earth and leave it behind. Earth will
in essence become the Venus of today. The inner edge of the habitable zone is
only about 9.3 million miles (15 million km) away, and it will effectively reach
Earth in half a billion or a billion years from now (or possibly less). After this
time, the sun will be too bright for organisms to survive on Earth.
The steadily rising amount of energy hitting Earth from the sun over the past
4.567 billion years should have ended life on Earth long ago, as it did on Venus
(assuming that Venus ever had life), except for one of the most important of all
of the planetary life support systems, the planetary thermostat described in the
first chapter. For more than 3 billion years (and perhaps 4 billion years) this
system has kept the global average temperature of Earth between the freezing
and boiling points of water (except for the occasional snowball Earth event),
thus allowing the most important requirement for life—liquid water—to

continually exist on the surface of the planet for that immense amount of time.
Just as important, life, which evolved within tight temperature limits, has been
able to maintain essentially similar physiologies and internal chemical reactions
that are temperature dependent. Rising temperature because of the sun and an
increasing reduction in atmospheric carbon dioxide are the two processes that in
combination will have the greatest effect on future biotic evolution.
The rises and falls of CO2 are now fairly well documented for the last 500
million years—the time of animals. Oxygen, a requirement of all animals, is
obviously important too. We have already highlighted levels of these two gases
from past to present. But like the knowledge about the rate of the enlarging and
ever more energetic sun, the future trajectory of both carbon dioxide and oxygen
are also knowable and thus predictable.
The long-term prediction for carbon dioxide is that it will continue in the same
trend it has shown over at least the last billion years—a slow but inexorable
decrease. The lowering levels are because of both life and plate tectonics: as
more and more CO2 is used to make the skeletons of organisms, especially in the
oceans, CO2 is consumed. If these skeletons stay in the oceans, the skeletally
confined CO2 (now in calcium carbonate) will recycle. But plate tectonics makes
the continents ever larger, and an increasing amount of limestone, which is the
grave of atmospheric CO2, becomes locked to the continents as sedimentary
deposits.
One would think that the long-term trend of lowering CO2 would be a plunge
into inescapable snowball Earth conditions. But it is not cooling from a lowering
of the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere that will be a hallmark of the
aging Earth. It will be heating. The increasing heat from the sun will utterly
dwarf the cooling effects of diminishing carbon dioxide and its greenhouse gas
effects. When the average global temperature rises to perhaps 120 to 140°F (50
to 60°C), Earth will begin to lose its oceans to space.
But long before the oceans are lost in 2 to 3 billion years, life will have died
out on Earth’s surface because photosynthetic organisms, from microbes to
higher plants, will no longer be able to survive in the low-CO2 atmosphere. This
dwindling carbon resource will then cause a further reduction of planetary
habitability, because the CO2 drop will trigger a drop in atmospheric oxygen to a
level too low to support animal life.
This process is already observable. When vascular plants first colonized
Earth’s surface some 475 million years ago, they did so in an atmosphere rich in

carbon dioxide. There was no need for conserving carbon in physiological
processes. Even today, many plant species require a minimum of 150 ppm of
CO2, and James F. Kasting pointed out in a 1997 article that there is a second
large group of plants, including many of the grassy species so common in the
mid-latitudes of the planet, that use a quite different form of photosynthesis and
can exist at lower CO2 concentrations, sometimes as low as 10 ppm—the C4
plants described in an earlier chapter. These plants will last far longer than their
more CO2-addicted cousins and will considerably extend the life of the
biosphere even in a world in which CO2 levels have fallen far, far below present-
day values.
We can safely predict that the future evolution of plant life will be toward
plants that can live at lower CO2 levels than that of their stock ancestral C3
plants. Also, because global temperatures will be rising, keeping water within a
plant will be an increasing problem. Plants will have two conflicting needs—
ever larger holes in their exterior to let the small amount of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere get into the interior, where photosynthesis can take place, at the
same time trying to reduce the loss of water molecules through these same pores.
At a minimum, one can expect a future flora of tough, waxy plants that would
completely close down all portals to the outside world when there is no sunlight
for photosynthesis.
With new plants with tougher exteriors, leaves—at least in their present form
—might be expected to disappear. The same will happen to grass; the loss of
water from plants with relatively high surface-area-to-volume ratios will doom
grass blades and thin leaves alike. All of this, of course, will require a marked
change in animal life.
As early as 500 million years from now, or perhaps as much as 1 billion years
or so into the future, the level of CO2 in the atmosphere will reach a point at
which familiar plant life will no longer be able to exist. The changeover at first
will be in no way dramatic. All over the world, the plants will slowly die. But
the planet will not immediately become brown. For as one suite of plants dies,
their places will be taken immediately by another cohort of plant life that may
look nearly identical to those dying. Deep inside the tissues of these two groups
of plants, however, fundamental processes of photosynthesis will be radically
different. After this changeover, life on Earth will continue in ways probably not
too dissimilar from that which came before—at least for a time.
There is also the possibility that plants will continue to evolve other

photosynthetic pathways to compensate for lower CO2 levels. In this case, some
sort of plant life may survive at minimal CO2 levels. Eventually, however, even
these last holdouts will die out. All models suggest that CO2 will continue to
drop in volume, ultimately arriving at the critical level of 10 ppm.
The most important questions about any future evolution concern the future of
biodiversity—the number of species on Earth. Two questions that arise are: Will
there be more species than now? And if so, for how long? But as is so often the
case, to begin to answer these questions one needs to look into the past.
More than just the flora on land will be traumatized by the lower CO2 levels.
Larger marine plants and perhaps plankton as well will be affected similarly.
Marine communities thus will be strongly affected, because the base of most
marine communities is phytoplankton, a single-celled plant that floats in the
seas. A reduction in CO2 will directly affect these as well as the land plants. Yet
the disappearance of land plants will also cause a drastic reduction in the
biomass of marine plankton, even without accounting for CO2 effects on plant
volumes in the seas.
Marine phytoplankton is severely nutrient limited in most ocean settings. The
influx of nitrates, iron, and phosphates into the oceans each season causes
phytoplankton to bloom. But the source of this phosphate and nitrate is rotting
terrestrial vegetation, brought into the oceans through river runoff from the land.
As land plants diminish in volume, so too will the volume of nutrients be
diminished. The seas will be starved for nutrients, and the volume of plankton
will decline catastrophically. This decline will never be reversed, for even if land
plants rebound at low levels, as outlined above, they will never again reach the
enormous mass of material that is present in a world (such as that of today)
where CO2 starvation does not exist.
On land and sea the base of the food chains as they are constructed today will
disappear. The loss of plants will suddenly cause global productivity—a measure
of the amount of life on the planet—to plummet. But there will still be life: great
masses of bacteria, such as cyanobacteria will continue to live, because these
hardy single-celled organisms can live at lower CO2 levels that are below those
necessary to keep multicellular plants alive, and they also do not require oxygen,
something multicellular plants do.
The disappearance of plants will drastically affect landforms and the nature of
the planet’s surface. As roots disappear and surface layers become less stable,
the very nature of rivers will change. The large, meandering rivers of the modern

era date back, at most, to the Silurian period of some 400 million years ago,
when land plants first colonized the surface of the planet, for it takes root
stability to maintain the banks of meandering rivers. When plants die out or are
not present because of slope, soil, or other inopportune environmental
conditions, a different kind of river exists—braided rivers or streams, the kinds
of flows found on desert alluvial fans or in front of glaciers, two types of
environments not conducive to rooted plant life. This was the nature of rivers
before the advent of land plants, and it will again be the way that rivers flow
when CO2 drops to the plant die-off threshold.
The loss of soils will be no less dramatic. As soils are blown away, they leave
behind bare rock surfaces. As this condition begins to occur over the surface of
the planet, it will change the albedo—the reflectivity of Earth. Far more light
will reflect back into space, thereby affecting Earth’s temperature balance. The
atmosphere and its heat transfer and precipitation patterns will be radically
changed. Blowing wind will begin to carry the grains of sand created by the
action of heat, cold, and running water on the bare rock surfaces. While chemical
weathering will lessen as a result of the loss of soil, this mechanical weathering
will build up an enormous volume of blowing sand. The surface of the planet
will become a giant series of dune fields.
Although this event could signal the final extinction of all plant life on land
(and perhaps in the sea as well), it is more likely that a long period of time
(perhaps in the hundreds of millions of years) will ensue in which CO2 levels
hover at the level causing plant death. As the levels drop to lethal limits, plants
will die off, reducing weathering and allowing CO2 to again accumulate in the
atmosphere, once again allowing any small surviving seeds or rootstocks to
germinate and, at least for some millennia, to flourish at least at low population
numbers. As plant life again spreads across land surfaces, weathering rates will
again increase and thus increase the rate of carbon dioxide uptake out of the
atmosphere.
Animal life is dependent on an oxygen atmosphere. There are almost no
animals capable of living in zero-or even low-oxygen conditions (although in
2010 a tiny invertebrate able to live with anoxia was discovered deep in the
Mediterranean Sea). David C. Catling of the University of Washington has
suggested that by about 15 million years after the death of plants, less than 1
percent of the atmosphere will be oxygen in contrast to the 21 percent volume
that Earth’s atmosphere contains today.

FUTURE EVOLUTION OF HUMANS
Life is one of the main agents of both its evolution and its extinction. Coauthor
Ward’s Medea hypothesis was based on the conclusion that life has been more
enemy to itself than friend; that the various ecosystems and their species do not
become ever better adapted and successful the longer they last. As we have seen,
in fact, the actual killing done by the major mass extinctions was caused by
various toxins produced by microbial life. Thus it seems appropriate to us to end
this book with some comments about one of the most Medean of all species ever
evolved: our own. What will the future of evolution be for our own species?
The science fiction trope concerning our own future is one of an even larger
head, containing a much larger brain, high foreheads, and higher intellect. But
bigger brains are probably not in humanity’s future. The fossil record shows that
the days of rapid brain increase, at least based on skull sizes over the past several
thousand generations, seem to be over, and those conditions causing the rise in
brain size (theorized to have been largely climatic in origin) are not likely to be
repeated. But if not giant brains, what might evolution hold for the human
species? Another intriguing question is whether the human species has
undergone any significant evolution since its formation some two hundred
thousand years ago.
The surprising revelation based on genetic study is that not only has the
human genome undergone some major reshuffling since the species’ formation,
some two hundred thousand years ago, but it appears that the rates of human
evolution, if anything, have been increasing over the past thirty millennia. A
study by Henry C. Harpending and John Hawks suggests that over the past five
thousand years alone, humans have evolved as much as a hundred times more
quickly than at any time since the split of the earliest hominid from the ancestors
of modern chimpanzees some 6 million years ago. Moreover, rather than seeing
a reduction of evolution of those characteristics that in combination are used to
distinguish human races, until very recently the human races in various parts of
the world have become more, not less, distinct. Only in the past century, through
the revolution in human travel and the more open behavioral attitudes of most
humans to those of other races, has this pattern slowed. There are two main
reasons: agriculture and cities. Food and crowding.
Humans thus seem to be first-class evolvers, or at least they were until very
recently. With that known, it is possible to speculate about what the future might
hold for the human species in terms of further evolutionary change—assuming

that the species gets its few million years that appears to be the average
longevity of any mammal species. Because much of the observed evolutionary
changes of the past five thousand years involved adaptation to particular
environments, it is fair to ask how the future world, with the expectation of
larger populations than now, and with larger cities and agricultural fields among
the other offshoots of technology, might affect the species’ evolutionary outcome
—or will it be affected at all? There are many questions: Will humans become
larger or smaller, gain or lose intelligence, be it intellectual or emotional? Will
humans become more or less tolerant of oncoming environmental problems,
such as a dearth of freshwater, an abundance of ultraviolet radiation, and an
increase in global temperatures? Will humans produce a new species, or is the
species now evolutionarily sterile? Might the future evolution of humanity be
not within the species’ genes, but through the addition of silicon expression and
memory augmentation to human brains through neural connections with
inorganic machines? Is humanity but the builder of the next dominant
intelligence on Earth—the machines?
THE END OF HISTORY
For those concerned that the “End is nigh!”—and even those who worry that life
on this planet is at least under the shadow of a new mass extinction or is already
in one—there should be solace. We seem to be at a high point of species
numbers in all of the (at least) 3.4 billion-year-old history of life. Our view is
that it is impossible to prove what percentage of life is now going extinct—the
metric of deciding if a mass extinction is major (greater than 50 percent), minor
(between 10 to 50 percent), or not an extinction at all—if the denominator is not
known. Clearly there are more than 1.6 million species on Earth. If it is
determined that a new mass extinction is taking place, there is some slight solace
in the fact that after every past mass extinction, biodiversity bounced back to
even greater levels.
The latter was the argument of the great Frank Drake, in a debate with one of
us years ago about whether or not Earthlike planets are rare. Author of the
eponymous Drake equation, a way to try to estimate the number of other
intelligent species in the galaxy, he took the view that a giant mass extinction,
such as the Permian extinction, was actually a good thing for any planet. But the

price to pay … It took 5–10 million years following the Permian extinction for
biodiversity to finally arrive at even the pre-extinction levels. The world went
back to the Proterozoic in terms of biodiversity and even the kinds of life—a
situation we have elsewhere only somewhat humorously described as the empire
strikes back—in this case, the Precambrian empire of anoxic and toxic microbes.
A final prediction of Ward’s Medea hypothesis is that it should pertain to
every planet with life, and that there is only one way out of this suicidal box that
life creates simply through existing: intelligence. The intelligence to see the
future. One such future is that our species expands its habitat first to Mars, then
the asteroid belts, and finally to other stars. Another future is that the carbon
dioxide we are pumping into the atmosphere causes all the ice on Earth to melt,
raising sea levels, slowing the thermohaline circulation patterns, bringing
stagnation followed by anoxia to the ocean bottoms, and then into ever-
shallower waters, at the same time liberating toxic levels of hydrogen sulfide to
percolate out of every single ocean. In that future, only animals with very good
gas masks will survive.
History is an early warning system.
LAST WORD
Nothing lasts. That goes for planets to organisms to scientific careers. While
funerals are among the saddest events that we humans can participate in, at least
they are definitive moments marking change: from living to dead. But perhaps
even sadder is the life near its end, such as a human with a fatal malady given a
highly definitive death sentence. Such is the case for the chambered nautilus, an
animal featured in this book as the best model for the extinct ammonites, and an
animal that dodged the bullet of the major mass extinctions, if not in its present
guise, at least as a major taxonomic order. Nautiloids first appeared in the
Cambrian explosion of 500 million years ago. They are still with us but in
dwindling numbers, and are now on the brink of extinction in various Pacific
countries because of the demand for their shell: the past mass extinctions did not
kill off organisms because of their perceived beauty. The human-induced mass
extinction acts otherwise.
But even before the nautiluses became the objects of commerce, such that a
half million of their shells were shipped to the United States alone in the five

years between 2005 and 2010, they had received their own death sentence. The
nautilus body plan evolved to work in warm, shallow water. It uses an osmotic
pump that empties its chambers of the liquid each is completely filled with at its
formation; they evolved to grow their shells in shallow, calcium-rich seawater.
But along came the Mesozoic marine revolution that we profiled earlier in this
book. Nautiluses were previously impregnable in their hard outer shells until
new kinds of fish evolved during the Cretaceous and later that could easily break
the durable outer shell of the nautilus. Life became impossible in the shallow
waters. The shallows became a death sentence.
Life is about change. The nautiluses dealt with these new evolutioary and
ecological stresses over the millions of years by slowly and steadily living in
ever deeper water. Our new results show that in the last five million years, they
were living at average depths of 200 to 300 meters, but their design is ill-
equipped for these depths. They grow slower: it used to take a year to reach full
size, while now it takes ten to fifteen. Now they live as a deep sea animal, few in
number, in a dark, low-resource environment that is difficult at best. And the
predators are following them down. They can go no deeper, as their shells have a
depth limit below which they implode, causing instant death. There is no further
place to hide.
The fate of the nautilus is a metaphor for all animal life. Sooner or later
evolution, competition, and the natural changing of our Earth and sun as they
age will make any body plan obsolete. For us land animals, it is not the predators
that will do us in, but an enlarging sun and too little carbon dioxide. There will
be no place on Earth to survive. The only hope for our species, if we wish to do
what the nautilus has done—or better yet, do what the cyanobacteria have done
and last two to three billion years—is to leave. The last chapter here has been
about the history of life—on Earth. But there can be a whole new book. A whole
library of new books, in fact.
Perhaps life did start on Mars, our kind of life. The choice was to leave Mars
or die. Survival is literally in our genes.

Notes
INTRODUCTION
 1.   J. Loewen, Lies My Teacher Told Me: Everything Your American History
Textbook Got Wrong (New York: Touchstone Press, 2008).
 2.   J. Baldwin, Notes of a Native Son (Boston: Beacon Press, 1955).
 3.   N. Cousins, Saturday Review, April 15, 1978.
 4.   P. Ward, “Impact from the Deep.” Scientific American (October 2006). The
actual first use of the term “greenhouse mass extinction” is difficult to ferret
out, although I used it overtly in a Discover magazine article in the 1990s.
 5.   G. Santayana, The Life of Reason, Five Volumes in One (1905).
 6.   Fortey’s book was (and remains) a masterpiece, not just for the “facts” but
also for the stories of science in the presentation of what in lesser hands is
often delivered as more dry history. And yet it is now dated (how could it
not be, including much new work by Richard himself). We have used his
book as a bit of a stalking horse and straw man, and hope we are forgiven.
Just for starters, we take some exception to the title: assuming life is already
4 billion years old on Earth might have seemed like a good bet in the mid-
1990s when the book was written, but that might not be the case now.
Perhaps he is still right on this, but our own arguments are to come. The
reference of the book is: R. Fortey, Life: A Natural History of the First Four
Billion Years of Life on Earth (New York: Random House, 1997).
 7.   A great read on this entire aspect of the philosophy of those building the
then-nascent field of geology (and its subfield of paleontology) is in M. J.
Rudwick, The Meaning of Fossils: Episodes in the History of
Palaeontology (London: Science History Publications, 1972). This book,
early on hard to find, was later republished in more accessible presses.
Rudwick’s take on the late 1700s into the early 1800s, when the foment
over geological time and processes was intersecting with early ideas about
the stratigraphic ranges of fossils as well as early ideas about evolution, is
seminal and remains a must-read for anyone interested in time and natural
history.
 8.   We tell our undergraduate classes that Charles Darwin was a geologist
before all. His understanding of the fossil record, as well as the many kinds

of fossils he saw whenever he got off that tiny ship the Beagle (which was
whenever possible, as Darwin was severely affected by seasickness), was
crucial in preparing his mind for the observations that would lead to his
celebrated hypotheses about evolution. A good read about all of this
training is A. Desmond, Darwin (New York: Warner Books, 1992).
 9.   M. Rudwick, Georges Cuvier, Fossil Bones, and Geological Catastrophes:
New Translations and Interpretations of the Primary Texts (University of
Chicago Press, 1997).
10.   There are many works on the number of species through time, and we will
look at this in detail in the pages to come. One of the most recent is by John
Alroy and a host of other authors, “Phanerozoic Trends in Global Diversity
of Marine Invertebrates,” Science 321 (2008): 97.
11.   N. Lane, The Vital Question: Why Is Life the Way It Is? (London: Profile
Books, 2015); Life Ascending: The Ten Great Inventions of Evolution
(London: Profile Books, 2009); Power, Sex, Suicide: Mitochondria and the
Meaning of Life (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005); Oxygen: The
Molecule That Made the World (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002).
CHAPTER I: TELLING TIME
 1.   A good guide to stratigraphic usage comes from the International
Subcommission on Stratigraphy. This is a very formal group that angsts
over every term and name. They are online: one useful chapter is
stratigraphy.org/upload/bak/defs.htm.
 2.   Variety of age dating, brief synopsis of: Uranium, potassium argon, uranium
lead, strontium isotope dating, and magnetostratigraphy are all used. To
come to grips with all of this we recommend the works of Martin Rudwick,
all available in both libraries and online bookstores. These include, most
recently, M. Rudwick, Earth’s Deep History: How It Was Discovered and
Why It Matters (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014).
 3.   The first system was indeed rock type: each kind of lithology, such as
volcanic rock, metamorphic rock, and particularly the kinds of sedimentary
rock (such as sandstone, chalk, shale) were thought to be distinctive and
characteristic of a specific time. Hence the Cretaceous period was first
named for the kind of rock found commonly in Europe, white chalk. Later
it was found that the same rock types could be made at any time. See M.
Rudwick, The Meaning of Fossils: Episodes in the History of Paleontology

(London: Science History Publications, 1972).
 4.   The use of fossils for telling time, and William “Strata” Smith’s role in the
revolution of understanding and defining the geological time scale can be
found in many books. A very useful one is from our late friend Bill Berry of
UC Berkeley, a paleontologist and scientist sorely missed: W. B. N. Berry,
Growth of a Prehistoric Time Scale (Boston: Blackwell Scientific
Publications, 1987): 202.
 5.   J. Burchfield, “The Age of the Earth and the Invention of Geological
Time,” D. J. Blundell and A. C.Scott, eds., Lyell: the Past is the Key to the
Present (London,Geological Society of London, 1998), 137–43.
 6.   By the late 1800s a great deal of fame came to be associated with being the
author of a geological period. One such grab for glory was by Lapworth.
See the ever-readable M. Rudwick, The Great Devonian Controversy: The
Shaping of Scientific Knowledge Among Gentlemanly Specialists (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1985).
 7.   K. A. Plumb, “New Precambrian Time Scale,” Episode 14, no. 2 (1991):
134–40.
 8.   A. H. Knoll, et al., “A New Period for the Geologic Time Scale,” Science
305, no. 5684 (2004): 621–22.
CHAPTER II: BECOMING AN EARTHLIKE PLANET: 4.6–4.5 GA
 1.   Earthlike planets and estimations of number of ELPs: The many definitions
of what is “Earthlike” vary tremendously. The number of such planets, or at
least our estimates, vary as well. A good scientific reference is here: E. A.
Petigura, A. W. Howard, G. W. Marcy, “Prevalence of Earth-Size Planets
Orbiting Sun-Like Stars,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 110, no. 48 (2013). doi:10.1073-
pnas.1319909110, 
and 
the 
NASA 
publicity 
view,
www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/kepler/news/kepler20130103.html.
 2.   NASA’s sense of it can also be found at http://science.nasa.gov/science-
news/science-at-nasa/2003/02oct_goldilocks/ Also interesting and up to
date is S. Dick, “Extraterrestrials and Objective Knowledge,” in A. Tough,
When SETI Succeeds: The Impact of High-Information Contact (Foundation
for the Future, 2000): 47–48.
 3.   While not the scientific papers that began the revolution, this later article by
Geoff Marcy is a good entry into the subject: G. Marcy et al. “Observed

Properties of Exoplanets: Masses, Orbits and Metallicities,” Progress of
Theoretical Physics Supplement no. 158 (2005): 24–42.
 4.   D. McKay et al., “Search for Past Life on Mars: Possible Relic Biogenic
Activity in Martian Meteorite AL84001,” Science 273, no. 5277 (1996):
924–30.
 5.   P. Ward, Life as We Do Not Know It: The NASA Search for and Synthesis of
Alien Life (New York: Viking, 2005); P. Ward and S. Benner, “Alternative
Chemistry of Life,” in W. Sullivan and J. Baross, eds. Planets and Life: The
Emerging Science of Astrobiology (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2008): 537–44.
 6.   W. K. Hartmann and D. R. Davis, “Satellite-Sized Planetesimals and Lunar
Origin,” Icarus 24, no. 4 (1975): 504–14; R. Canup and E. Asphaug,
“Origin of the Moon in a Giant Impact Near the End of the Earth’s
Formation,” Nature 412, no. 6848 (2001): 708–12; A. N. Halliday,
“Terrestrial Accretion Rates and the Origin of the Moon,” Earth and
Planetary Science Letters 176, no. 1 (2000): 17–30; D. Stöffler and G.
Ryder, “Stratigraphy and Isotope Ages of Lunar Geological Units:
Chronological Standards for the Inner Solar System,” Space Science
Reviews 96 (2001): 9–54.
 7.   A. T. Basilevsky and J. W. Head, “The Surface of Venus,” Reports on
Progress in Physics 66, no. 10 (2003): 1699–1734; J. F. Kasting, “Runaway
and Moist Greenhouse Atmospheres and the Evolution of Earth and
Venus,” Icarus 74, no. 3 (1988): 472–94.
 8.   D. H. Grinspoon and M. A. Bullock, “Searching for Evidence of Past
Oceans on Venus,” Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society 39
(2007): 540.
 9.   A good general reference for the age of the Earth is G. B. Dalrymple, The
Age of the Earth (Redwood City: Stanford University Press, 1994), while
his more technical take is “The Age of the Earth in the Twentieth Century:
A Problem (Mostly) Solved,” Special Publications, Geological Society of
London 190 (2001): 205–21.
10.   This concern that the heavy bombardment would have adversely affected
life and its early history was first illuminated by Kevin Maher and David
Stevenson of Caltech in 1988, in a short letter to Nature. “Impact
Frustration of the Origin of Life,” Nature 331, no. 6157 (1988): 612–14.
Many have followed on, including Kevin Zahnle and Norm Sleep. An early
reference is K. Zahnle et al., “Cratering Rates in the Outer Solar System,”

Icarus 163 (2003): 263–89; F. Tera et al., “Isotopic Evidence for a Terminal
Lunar Cataclysm,” Earth and Planetary Science Letters 22, no. 1 (1974):
1–21. The origin of the bombardment has recently been reexamined,
concerning possible migration of outer planets several hundred million
years after the major phase of accretion: W. F. Bottke et al., “An Archaean
Heavy Bombardment from a Destabilized Extension of the Asteroid Belt,”
Nature 485 (2012): 78–81; G. Ryder et al., “Heavy Bombardment on the
Earth at ~3.85 Ga: The Search for Petrographic and Geochemical
Evidence,” in Origin of the Earth and Moon, R. M. Canup and K. Righter,
eds. (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2000): 475–92.
11.   A great deal has been written about the origin of the Earth’s atmosphere. A
good website concentrating on the role of life in this process is
www.amnh.org/learn/pd/earth/pdf/evolution_earth_atmosphere.pdf.
    A reference article can be found from K. Zahnle et al., “Earth’s Earliest
Atmospheres,” Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 2, no. 10
(2010).
12.   The evaporation of the early oceans by impact from “Texas-sized asteroids”
always got an uneasy chuckle from undergraduate classes when we brought
it up during the George W. Bush presidency. As time separates us from
those days, the concept now seems a bit different and purely scientific. A
good PDF (but with a strange name) gets into the physics of it all in an
understandable way: www.breadandbutterscience.com/CATIS.pdf.
13.   Figuring out how much carbon dioxide was in the early Earth atmosphere is
difficult. There are no real direct methods. References include: J. Walker,
“Carbon Dioxide on the Early Earth,” Origins of Life and Evolution of the
Biosphere 16, no. 2 (1985): 117-27. For Phanerozoic era (the time of
“visible life”), here are two seminal papers: D. H. Rothman, “Atmospheric
Carbon Dioxide Levels for the Last 500 Million Years,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 99, no. 7 (2001): 4167–71, and D. Royer et
al., “CO2 as a Primary Driver of Phanerozoic Climate,” GSA Today 14, no.
3 (2004): 4–15. For much of the rest of this chapter there is no better primer
than the wonderful college text by L. Kump et al., The Earth System, 3rd
ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2009). This amazing if pricey
textbook is a great doorway into what is called Earth system science. The
discussions of the carbon cycle as well as other elemental systems leading
to habitability come from this text.
14.   Ward has dealt with this topic in book-length treatment (P. Ward, Out of

Thin Air. Washington, D.C.: Joseph Henry Press, 2006). The various Robert
Berner references include R. A. Berner, “Models for Carbon and Sulfur
Cycles and Atmospheric Oxygen: Application to Paleozoic Geologic
History,” American Journal of Science 287, no. 3 (1987): 177–90. Also
highly relevant are: L. R. Kump, “Terrestrial Feedback in Atmospheric
Oxygen Regulation by Fire and Phosphorus,” Nature 335 (1988): 152–54;
L. R. Kump, “Alternative Modeling Approaches to the Geochemical Cycles
of Carbon, Sulfur, and Strontium Isotopes,” American Journal of Science
289 (1989): 390–410; L. R. Kump, “Chemical Stability of the Atmosphere
and Ocean,” Global and Planetary Change 75, no. 1–2 (1989): 123–36; L.
R. Kump and R. M. Garrels, “Modeling Atmospheric O2 in the Global
Sedimentary Redox Cycle,” American Journal of Science 286 (1986): 336–
60.
15.   W. F. Ruddiman and J. E. Kutzbach, “Plateau Uplift and Climate Change,”
Scientific American 264, no. 3 (1991): 66–74, and M. Kuhle, “The
Pleistocene Glaciation of Tibet and the Onset of Ice Ages—An Autocycle
Hypothesis,” GeoJournal 17 (4) (1998): 581–95; M. Kuhle, “Tibet and
High Asia: Results of the Sino-German Joint Expeditions (I),” GeoJournal
17, no. 4 (1988).
16.   The life and work of Robert Berner: R. A. Berner, “A New Look at the
Long-Term Carbon Cycle,” GSA Today 9, no. 11 (1999): 1–6; R. A. Berner,
“Modeling Atmospheric Oxygen over Phanerozoic Time,” Geochimica et
Cosmochimica Acta 65 (2001): 685–94; R. A. Berner, The Phanerozoic
Carbon Cycle (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 150.; R. A. Berner,
“The Carbon and Sulfur Cycles and Atmospheric Oxygen from Middle
Permian to Middle Triassic,” Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 69, no. 13
(2005): 3211–17; R. A. Berner, “GEOCARBSULF: A Combined Model for
Phanerozoic Atmospheric Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide,” Geochimica et
Cosmochimica Acta 70 (2006): 5653– 5664; R. A. Berner and Z.
Kothavala, “GEOCARB III: A Revised Model of Atmospheric Carbon
Dioxide over Phanerozoic Time,” American Journal of Science 301, no. 2
(2001): 182–204.
CHAPTER III: LIFE, DEATH, AND THE NEWLY DISCOVERED PLACE IN BETWEEN
 1.   Perhaps the best way to understand the Mark Roth work is his TED talk:
www.ted.com/talks/mark_roth_suspended_animation.

 2.   T. Junod, “The Mad Scientist Bringing Back the Dead.… Really,”
Esquire.com, December 2, 2008.
 3.   E. Blackstone et al., “H2S Induces a Suspended Animation–Like State in
Mice,” Science 308, no. 5721 (2005): 518.
 4.   D. Smith et al., “Intercontinental Dispersal of Bacteria and Archaea by
Transpacific Winds,” Applied and Environmental Microbiology 79, no. 4
(2013): 1134–39.
 5.   K. Maher and D. Stevenson, “Impact Frustration of the Origin of Life,”
Nature 331 (1988): 612–14.
 6.   E. Schrödinger, What Is Life? (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1944), 90.
 7.   P. Davies, The Fifth Miracle: The Search for the Origin and Meaning of
Life. (New York: Penguin Press, 1998), 260.
 8.   P. Ward, Life as We Do Not Know It (New York: Viking Books, 2005).
 9.   W. Bains, “The Parts List of Life,” Nature Biotechnology 19 (2001): 401–2;
W. Bains, “Many Chemistries Could Be Used to Build Living Systems,”
Astrobiology, 4, no. 2 (2004): 137–67; and N. R. Pace, “The Universal
Nature of Biochemistry,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the Unites States of America 98, no. 3 (2001): 805–808; S. A. Benner et
al., “Setting the Stage: The History, Chemistry, and Geobiology Behind
RNA,” Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 4, no. 1 (2012): 7–19;
M. P. Robertson and G. F. Joyce, “The Origins of the RNA World,” Cold
Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 4, no. 5 (2012); C. Anastasi et al.,
“RNA: Prebiotic Product, or Biotic Invention?” Chemistry and Biodiversity
4, no. 4 (2007): 721–39; T. S. Young and P. G. Schultz, “Beyond the
Canonical 20 Amino Acids: Expanding the Genetic Lexicon,” The Journal
of Biological Chemistry 285, no. 15 (2010): 11039–44.
10.   F. Dyson, Origins of Life, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1999), 100
11.   Nick Lane is an iconoclast with rather unerring judgment. For a good take
on energy complexity, see N. Lane, “Bioenergetic Constraints on the
Evolution of Complex Life,” in P. J. Keeling and E. V. Koonin, eds., The
Origin and Evolution of Eukaryotes. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in
Biology (2013).
12.   J. Banavar and A. Maritan. “Life on Earth: The Role of Proteins,” J. Barrow
and S. Conway Morris, Fitness of the Cosmos for Life (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2007), 225–55.

13.   E. Schneider and D. Sagan, Into the Cool: Energy Flow, Thermodynamics,
and Life (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2005).
CHAPTER IV: FORMING LIFE: 4.2(?)–3.5 GA
 1.   Dr. D. R. Williams, Viking Mission to Mars, NASA, December 18, 2006.
 2.   www.space.com/18234-viking-1.html.
 3.   ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa.gov/19740026174.pdf. Also see R.
Navarro-Gonzáles et al., “Reanalysis of the Viking Results Suggests
Perchlorate and Organics at Midlatitudes on Mars,” Journal of Geophysical
Research 115 (2010).
 4.   P. Rincon, “Oldest Evidence of Photosynthesis,” BBC.com, December 17,
2003 and S. J. Mojzsis et al., “Evidence for Life on Earth Before 3,800
Million Years Ago,” Nature 384 (1996): 55–59; M. Schidlowski, “A 3,800-
Million-Year-Old Record of Life from Carbon in Sedimentary Rocks,”
Nature 333 (1988): 313–18; M. Schidlowski et al., “Carbon Isotope
Geochemistry of the 3.7 × 109 Yr Old Isua Sediments, West Greenland:
Implications for the Archaean Carbon and Oxygen Cycles,” Geochimica et
Cosmochimica Acta 43 (1979): 189–99.
 5.   K. Maher and D. Stevenson. “Impact Frustration of the Origin of Life,”
Nature 331 (1988): 612–14.
 6.   R. Dalton. “Fresh Study Questions Oldest Traces of Life in Akilia Rock,”
Nature 429 (2004): 688. This work is continuing; see Papineau et al.,
“Ancient Graphite in the Eoarchean Quartz-Pyroxene Rocks from Akilia in
Southern 
West 
Greenland 
I: 
Petrographic 
and 
Spectroscopic
Characterization,” Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 74, no. 20 (2010):
5862–83.
 7.   J. W. Schopf, “Microfossils of the Early Archean Apex Chert: New
Evidence of the Antiquity of Life,” Science 260, no. 5108 (1993): 640–46.
 8.   M. D. Brasier et al., “Questioning the Evidence for Earth’s Oldest Fossils,”
Nature 416 (2002): 76–81.
 9.   D. Wacey et al., “Microfossils of Sulphur-Metabolizing Cells in 3.4-Billion-
Year-Old Rocks of Western Australia,” Nature Geoscience 4 (2011): 698–
702.
10.   M. D. Brasier, Secret Chambers: The Inside Story of Cells and Complex
Life (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 298.
11.   “Ancient Earth May Have Smelled Like Rotten Eggs,” Talk of the Nation,

National Public Radio, May 3, 2013.
12.   www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/msl/#.U4Izyxa9yxo.
13.   www.abc.net.au/science/articles/2011/08/22/3299027.htm.
14.   J. Haldane, What Is Life? (New York: Boni and Gaer, 1947), 53.
15.   L. Orgel, The Origins of Life: Molecules and Natural Selection (Hoboken,
NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 1973).
16.   J. A. Baross and J. W. Deming, “Growth at High Temperatures: Isolation
and Taxonomy, Physiology, and Ecology,” in The Microbiology of Deep-sea
Hydrothermal Vents, D. M. Karl, ed. (Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1995), 169–
217, and E. Stueken et al., “Did Life Originate in a Global Chemical
Reactor?” Geobiology 11, no.2 (2013); K. O. Stetter, “Extremophiles and
Their Adaptation to Hot Environments,” FEBS Letters 452, nos. 1–2
(1999): 22–25. K. O. Stetter, “Hyperthermophilic Microorganisms,” in
Astrobiology: The Quest for the Conditions of Life, G. Horneck and C.
Baumstark-Khan, eds. (Berlin: Springer, 2002), 169–84.
17.   Y. Shen and R. Buick, “The Antiquity of Microbial Sulfate Reduction,”
Earth Science Reviews 64 (2004): 243–272.
18.   S. A. Benner, “Understanding Nucleic Acids Using Synthetic Chemistry,”
Accounts of Chemical Research 37, no. 10 (2004): 784–97; S. A. Benner,
“Phosphates, DNA, and the Search for Nonterrean life: A Second
Generation Model for Genetic Molecules,” Bioorganic Chemistry 30, no. 1
(2002): 62–80.
19.   G. Wächtershäuser, “Origin of Life: Life as We Don’t Know It,” Science,
289, no. 5483 (2000): 1307–08; G. Wächtershäuser, “Evolution of the First
Metabolic Cycles,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 87,
no. 1 (1990): 200–204; G. Wächtershäuser, “On the Chemistry and
Evolution of the Pioneer Organism,” Chemistry & Biodiversity 4, no. 4
(2007): 584–602.
20.   N. Lane, Life Ascending: The Ten Great Inventions of Evolution (New
York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2009).
21.   W. Martin and M. J. Russell, “On the Origin of Biochemistry at an Alkaline
Hydrothermal Vent,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B-
Biological Sciences 362, no. 1486 (2007): 1887–925.
22.   C. R. Woese, “Bacterial Evolution,” Microbiological Reviews 51, no. 2
(1987): 221–71; C. R. Woese, “Interpreting the Universal Phylogenetic
Tree,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97 (2000): 8392–
96.

23.   S. A. Benner and D. Hutter, “Phosphates, DNA, and the Search for
Nonterrean Life: A Second Generation Model for Genetic Molecules,”
Bioorganic Chemistry 30 (2002): 62–80; S. Benner et al., “Is There a
Common Chemical Model for Life in the Universe?” Current Opinion in
Chemical Biology 8, no. 6 (2004): 672–89.
24.   A. Lazcano, “What Is Life? A Brief Historical Overview,” Chemistry and
Biodiversity 5, no. 4 (2007): 1–15.
25.   B. P. Weiss et al., “A Low Temperature Transfer of ALH84001 from Mars
to Earth,” Science 290, no. 5492, (2000): 791–95. J. L. Kirschvink and B. P.
Weiss, “Mars, Panspermia, and the Origin of Life: Where Did It All
Begin?” Palaeontologia Electronica 4, no. 2 (2001): 8–15. J. L. Kirschvink
et al., “Boron, Ribose, and a Martian Origin for Terrestrial Life,”
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 70, no. 18 (2006): A320.
26.   C. McKay, “An Origin of Life on Mars,” Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives
in Biology 2, no. 4 (2010). J. Kirschvink et al., “Mars, Panspermia, and the
Origin of Life: Where Did It All Begin?” Palaeolontogia Electronica 4, no.
2 (2002): 8–15.
27.   D. Deamer, First Life: Discovering the Connections Between Stars, Cells,
and How Life Began (Oakland: University of California Press, 2012), 286.
But also see the great new work from our friend Nick Lane: N. Lane and W.
F. Martin, “The Origin of Membrane Bioenergetics,” Cell 151, no. 7 (2012):
1406–16.
28.   www.nobelprize.org/mediaplayer/index.php/?id=1218.
CHAPTER V: FROM ORIGIN TO OXYGENATION: 3.5–2.0 GA
 1.   J. Raymond and D. Segre, “The Effect of Oxygen on Biochemical
Networks and the Evolution of Complex Life,” Science 311 (2006): 1764–
67.
 2.   J. F. Kasting and S. Ono “Palaeoclimates: The first Two Billion Years,”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 361
(2006): 917–29
 3.   P. Cloud, “Paleoecological Significance of Banded-Iron Formation,”
Economic Geology 68 (1973): 1135–43.
 4.   M. C. Liang et al., “Production of Hydrogen Peroxide in the Atmosphere of
a Snowball Earth and the Origin of Oxygenic Photosynthesis,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (2006): 18896–99.

 5.   J. E. Johnson et al., “Manganese-Oxidizing Photosynthesis Before the Rise
of Cyanobacteria,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110,
no. 28 (2013): 11238–43; J. E. Johnson et al., “O2 Constraints from
Paleoproterozoic Detrital Pyrite and Uraninite,” Geological Society of
America Bulletin (2014), doi: 10.1130-B30949.1.
 6.   J. E. Johnson et al., “O2 Constraints from Paleoproterozoic Detrital Pyrite
and Uraninite,” Geological Society of America Bulletin, published online
ahead of print on February 27, 2014, doi: 10.1130/B30949.1.
 7.   R. E. Kopp et al., “Was the Paleoproterozoic Snowball Earth a Biologically
Triggered Climate Disaster?” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 102 (2005): 11131–36.
 8.   J. E. Johnson et al., “Manganese-Oxidizing Photosynthesis Before the Rise
of Cyanobacteria.”
 9.   Ibid.
10.   R. E. Kopp and J. L. Kirschvink, “The Identification and Biogeochemical
Interpretation of Fossil Magnetotactic Bacteria,” Earth-Science Reviews 86
(2008): 42–61.
11.   Ibid.
12.   D. A. Evans et al., “Low-Latitude Glaciation in the Paleoproterozoic,”
Nature 386 (1997): 262–66.
13.   J. L. Kirschvink et al. “Paleoproterozoic Snowball Earth: Extreme Climatic
and Geochemical Global Change and Its Biological Consequences,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 97 (2000): 1400–1405.
14.   J. L. Kirschvink and R. E. Kopp, “Paleoproterozic Ice Houses and the
Evolution of Oxygen-Mediating Enzymes: The Case for a Late Origin of
Photosystem-II,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, Series B 363, no. 1504 (2008): 2755–65.
15.   D. A. D. Evans et al., “Paleomagnetism of a Lateritic Paleoweathering
Horizon and Overlying Paleoproterozoic Red Beds from South Africa:
Implications for the Kaapvaal Apparent Polar Wander Path and a
Confirmation 
of 
Atmospheric 
Oxygen 
Enrichment,” 
Journal 
of
Geophysical Research 107, no. 2326.
CHAPTER VI: THE LONG ROAD TO ANIMALS: 2.0–1.0 GA
 1.   H. D. Holland “Early Proterozoic Atmospheric Change,” in S. Bengtson,
ed., Early Life on Earth (New York Columbia University Press, 1994),

237–44.
 2.   D. T. Johnston et al., “Anoxygenic Photosynthesis Modulated Proterozoic
Oxygen and Sustained Earth’s Middle Age,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 106, no. 40 (2009), 16925–29.
 3.   A. El Albani et al., “Large Colonial Organisms with Coordinated Growth in
Oxygenated Environments 2.1 Gyr Ago,” Nature 466, no. 7302 (2002):
100–104.2; www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2010/06/100630171711.htm.
 4.   D. E. Canfield et al., “Oxygen Dynamics in the Aftermath of the Great
Oxidation of Earth’s Atmosphere,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 110, no. 422 (2013).
 5.   A. H. Knoll, Life on a Young Planet: The First Three Billion Years of
Evolution on Earth (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003).
CHAPTER VII: THE CRYOGENIAN AND THE EVOLUTION OF ANIMALS: 850–635 MA
 1.   R. C. Sprigg, “Early Cambrian ‘Jellyfishes’ of Ediacara, South Australia
and Mount John, Kimberly District, Western Australia,” Transactions of the
Royal Society of South Australia 73 (1947): 72–99.
 2.   M. F. Glaessner, “Precambrian Animals,” Scientific American 204, no. 3
(1961): 72–78.
 3.   Jim Gehling is one of the giants of Australian science, but more, he has
collaborated with a veritable who’s who of international science in his
career-long work on the Ediacarans. The new exhibit he organized is worth
a trip to Adelaide alone. See J. G. Gehling et al., in D. E. G. Briggs, ed.,
Evolving Form and Function: Fossils and Development (Yale Peabody
Museum, 2005), 45–56; J. G. Gehling et al., “The First Named Ediacaran
Body Fossil, Aspidella terranovica,” Palaeontology 43, no. 3 (2000): 429;
J. G. Gehling, “Microbial Mats in Terminal Proterozoic Siliciclastics;
Ediacaran Death Masks,” Palaios 14, no. 1(1999): 40–57.
 4.   P. F. Hoffman et al., “A Neoproterozoic Snowball Earth,” Science 281, no.
5381 (1998): 1342–46; F. A. Macdonald et al., “Calibrating the
Cryogenian,” Science, 327, no. 5970 (2010): 1241–43.
 5.   F. A. Macdonald et al., “Calibrating the Cryogenian,” Science 327, no. 5970
(2010): 1241–43.
 6.   B. Shen et al., “The Avalon Explosion: Evolution of Ediacara
Morphospace,” Science 319 no. 5859 (2008): 81–84; G. M. Narbonne, “The
Ediacara Biota: A Terminal Neoproterozoic Experiment in the Evolution of

Life,” Geological Society of America 8, no. 2 (1998): 1–6; S. Xiao and M.
Laflamme, “On the Eve of Animal Radiation: Phylogeny, Ecology and
Evolution of the Ediacara Biota,” Trends in Ecology and Evolution 24, no. 1
(2009): 31–40.
 7.   R. Sprigg, “On the 1946 Discovery of the Precambrian Ediacaran Fossil
Fauna in South Australia,” Earth Sciences History 7 (1988): 46–51.
 8.   S. Turner and P. Vickers-Rich, “Sprigg, Martin F. Glaessner, Mary Wade
and the Ediacaran Fauna,” Abstract for IGCP 493 conference, Prato
Workshop, Monash University Centre, August 30–31, 2004.
 9.   A. Seilacher, “Vendobionta and Psammocorallia: Lost Constructions of
Precambrian Evolution,” Journal of the Geological Society, London 149,
no. 4 (1992): 607–13; A. Seilacher et al., “Ediacaran Biota: The Dawn of
Animal Life in the Shadow of Giant Protists,” Paleontological Research 7,
no. 1 (2003): 43–54. Dolph Seilacher was one of a kind. He and his wife,
Edith, were world travelers. He was a champion of science, and one of the
warmest scientists we have known. For a full list of his work, see Derek
Briggs, ed., Evolving Form and Function: A Special Publication of the
Peabody Museum of Natural History (New Haven, CT: Yale University
2005).
10.   Martin Glaesner, a longtime faculty member at the University of Adelaide,
lives on in that institution with his well-stocked Glaesner Room in Mawson
Hall, where many of the fossil he collected and his copious notes can be
found.
11. 
 
 
South 
Australian 
Museum, 
Ediacaran 
fossils.
www.samuseum.sa.gov.au/explore/museum-galleries/ediacaran-fossils.
12.   B. Waggoner, “Interpreting the Earliest Metazoan Fossils: What Can We
Learn?” Integrative and Comparative Biology 38, no. 6 (1998): 975–82; D.
E. Canfield et al., “Late-Neoproterozoic Deep-Ocean Oxygenation and the
Rise of Animal Life,” Science 315, no. 5808 (2007): 92–95; B. Shen et al.,
“The Avalon Explosion: Evolution of Ediacara Morphospace,” Science 319,
no. 5859 (2008): 81–84.
13.   B. MacGabhann, “There Is No Such Thing as the ‘Ediacaran Biota,’”
Geoscience Frontiers 5, no. 1 (2014): 53–62.
14.   N. J. Butterfield, “Bangiomorpha pubescens n. gen., n. sp.: Implications for
the Evolution of Sex, Multicellularity, and the Mesoproterozoic-
Neoproterozoic Radiation of Eukaryotes,” Paleobiology 26, no. 3 (2000):
386–404.

15.   M. Brasier et al., “Ediacaran Sponge Spicule Clusters from Mongolia and
the Origins of the Cambrian Fauna,” Geology 25 (1997): 303–06.
16.   J. Y. Chen et al., “Small Bilaterian Fossils from 40 to 55 Million Years
before the Cambrian,” Science 305, no. 5681 (2004): 218–22; A. H. Knoll
et al. “Eukaryotic Organisms in Proterozoic Oceans,” Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society 361, no. 1470 (2006): 1023–38; B.
Waggoner, “Interpreting the Earliest Metazoan Fossils: What Can We
Learn?” Integrative and Comparative Biology 38, no. 6 (1998): 975–82.
17.   A. Seilacher and F. Pflüger, “From Biomats to Benthic Agriculture: A
Biohistoric Revolution,” in W. E. Krumbein et al., eds., Biostabilization of
Sediments. (Bibliotheks-und Informationssystem der Carl von Ossietzky
Universität Odenburg, 1994), 97–105; A. Ivantsov, “Feeding Traces of the
Ediacaran Animals,” Abstract, 33rd International Geological Congress
August 6–14, 2008, Oslo, Norway; S. Dornbos et al., “Evidence for
Seafloor Microbial Mats and Associated Metazoan Lifestyles in Lower
Cambrian Phosphorites of Southwest China,” Lethaia 37, no. 2 (2004):
127–37.
18.   The data from Svalbard are from A. C. Maloof et al., “Combined
Paleomagnetic, Isotopic, and Stratigraphic Evidence for True Polar Wander
from the Neoproterozoic Akademikerbreen Group, Svalbard, Norway,”
Geological Society of America Bulletin, 118, nos. 9–10 (2006): 1099–124;
the matching data from Central Australia are from N. L. Swanson-Hysell et
al., “Constraints on Neoproterozoic Paleogeography and Paleozoic
Orogenesis from Paleomagnetic Records of the Bitter Springs Formation,
Amadeus Basin, Central Australia,” American Journal of Science 312, no. 8
(2012): 817–84.
19.   R. N. Mitchell, “True Polar Wander and Supercontinent Cycles:
Implications for Lithospheric Elasticity and the Triaxial Earth,” American
Journal of Science 314, no. 5 (2014): 966–78.
20.   J. Kirschvink, R. Ripperdan, D. Evans, “Evidence for Large Scale
Reorganization of Early Cambrian Continental Masses by Inertial
Interchange True Polar Wander,” Science 277, no. 5325 (1997): 541–45.
CHAPTER VIII: THE CAMBRIAN EXPLOSION: 600–500 MA
 1.   Sadly, this great book is no longer required of college students. At the
University of Washington we have tried to reverse that, requiring students

enrolled in the course A New History of Life to read C. Darwin On the
Origin of Species by Natural Selection (London: 1859).
 2.   A wonderful guide to the Cambrian as well as Darwin and the Burgess
Shale is in the indispensable book by S. J. Gould, Wonderful Life: The
Burgess Shale and the Nature of History (New York: W. W. Norton &
Company, 1989). Steve, a friend to us both, was the greatest lecturer either
of us has ever heard. His was a voice that had to be heard in person. His
power as a lecturer came from his enormous intellect and mastery of both
the science of evolution and Darwin, the English master. How that voice of
reason, eloquence, and science is missed. If Huxley was Darwin’s bulldog,
Gould was his pit bull.
 3.   K. J. McNamara, “Dating the Origin of Animals,” Science 274, no. 5295
(1996): 1993–97.
 4.   A. H. Knoll and S. B. Carroll, “Early Animal Evolution: Emerging Views
from Comparative Biology and Geology,” Science 284, no. 5423 (1999):
2129–371.
 5.   K. J. Peterson and N. J. Butterfield, “Origin of the Eumetazoa: Testing
Ecological Predictions of Molecular Clocks Against the Proterozoic Fossil
Record,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102, no. 27
(2005): 9547–52.
 6.   M. A. Fedonkin et al., The Rise of Animals: Evolution and Diversification
of the Kingdom Animalia (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
2007), 213–16.
 7.   It is hard to argue with the view that the Cambrian explosion is one of the—
if not the—preeminent events in paleontology. However, those studying
how life first arose view animals as latecomers of not much importance:
that getting to life was the hard part, and animals were then foreordained
once life arose. We remain split on this. There are many good papers of
recent vintage dealing with this relative importance. Among them are: G. E
Budd and J. Jensen, “A Critical Reappraisal of the Fossil Record of the
Bilaterian Phyla,” Biological Reviews 75, no. 2 (2000): 253–95; and S. J.
Gould, Wonderful Life.
 8.   Oxygen levels in the Cambrian remain controversial. We continue to trust
Bob Berner’s work using his GEOCARBSULF models: R. A. Berner,
“GEOCARBSULF: A Combined Model for Phanerozoic Atmospheric
Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide,” Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 70
(2006): 5653–64.

 9.   N. J. Butterfield, “Exceptional Fossil Preservation and the Cambrian
Explosion,” Integrative and Comparative Biology 43, no. 1 (2003): 166–77;
S. C. Morris, “The Burgess Shale (Middle Cambrian) Fauna,” Annual
Review of Ecology and Systematics 10, no. 1 (1979): 327–49.
10.   D. Briggs et al., The Fossils of the Burgess Shale (Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution Press, 1994).
11.   H. B. Whittington, Geological Survey of Canada, The Burgess Shale (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1985), 306–308.
12.   J. W. Valentine, On the Origin of Phyla (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2004). See also J. W. Valentine and D. Erwin, The Cambrian
Explosion: The Construction of Animal Biodiversity (Roberts and Co.
Publishing, 2013). 413; J. W. Valentine, “Why No New Phyla after the
Cambrian? Genome and Ecospace Hypotheses Revisited,” abstract, Palaios
10, no. 2 (1995): 190–91. See also S. Bengtson, “Origins and Early
Evolution of Predation” (free full text), in M. Kowalewski and P. H. Kelley,
The Fossil Record of Predation. The Paleontological Society Papers 8
(Paleontological Society, 2002): 289–317.
13.   P. Ward, Out of Thin Air (Joseph Henry Press, 2006).
14.   S. Carroll, Endless Forms Most Beautiful: The New Science of Evo Devo
and the Making of the Animal Kingdom (New York: W. W. Norton &
Company, 2004).
15.   H. X. Guang et al., The Cambrian Fossils of Chengjiang, China: The
Flowering of Early Animal Life. (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2004).
16.   This nasty fight between two very literate writers would have ended up on
the dueling ground, with one or both dead, were it still the 1800s. Gould
was nothing but appreciative and polite to Simon. The reverse did not hold.
17.   M. Brasier et al., “Decision on the Precambrian-Cambrian Boundary
Stratotype,” Episodes 17, nos. 1–2 (1994): 95–100.
18.   W. Compston et al., “Zircon U-Pb Ages for the Early Cambrian Time
Scale,” Journal of the Geological Society of London 149 (1992): 171–84.
19.   A. C. Maloof et al., “Constraints on Early Cambrian Carbon Cycling from
the Duration of the Nemakit-Daldynian-Tommotian Boundary Delta C-13
Shift, Morocco,” Geology 38, no. 7 (2010): 623–26.
20.   M. Magaritz et al., “Carbon-Isotope Events Across the Precambrian-
Cambrian Boundary on the Siberian Platform,” Nature 320 (1986): 258–59.
CHAPTER IX: THE ORDOVICIAN-DEVONIAN EXPANSION OF ANIMALS: 500–360 MA

 1.   There is no better source to refer to about ancient reefs than our friend
George Stanley of the University of Montana. A good place to start is his
magnificent book: G. Stanley, The History and Sedimentology of Ancient
Reef Systems (Springer Publishing, 2001). Another good source is E. Flügel
in W. Kiessling, E. Flügel, and J. Golonka, eds., Phanerozoic Reef Patterns
72 (SEPM Special Publications, 2002), 391–463.
 2.   Archaeocyathids are one of the most curious of all fossils. In the twentieth
century they were thought to belong to no known phylum. Now they are put
into the sponges. But they have a curious structure of a “cone in a cone”—
as if one hollow ice-cream cone is stacked into a second. They are
prominent in being the very first reef-forming organisms that we know of,
as they formed three-dimensional wave-resistant structures built by
organisms—our definition of a reef. F. Debrenne and J. Vacelet,
“Archaeocyatha: Is the Sponge Model Consistent with Their Structural
Organization?” Palaeontographica Americana 54 (1984): 358–69.
 3.   T. Servais et al., “The Ordovician Biodiversification: Revolution in the
Oceanic Trophic Chain,” Lethaia 41, no.2 (2008): 99.
 4.   P. Ward, Out of Thin Air: Dinosaurs, Birds, and Earth’s Ancient
Atmosphere (Washington, D.C.: Joseph Henry Press, 2006).
 5.   P. Ward, Out of Thin Air. Also see a magnificent summary by our colleague
and coauthor on extinction, C. R. Marshall, “Explaining the Cambrian
‘Explosion’ of Animals,” Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences
34 (2006): 355–84.
 6.   J. Valentine, “How Many Marine Invertebrate Fossils?” Journal of
Paleontology 44 (1970): 410–15; N. Newell, “Adequacy of the Fossil
Record,” Journal of Paleontology 33 (1959): 488–99.
 7.   D. M. Raup, “Taxonomic Diversity During the Phanerozoic,” Science 177
(1972): 1065–71; D. Raup, “Species Diversity in the Phanerozoic: An
Interpretation,” Paleobiology 2 (1976): 289–97.
 8.   J. J. Sepkoski, Jr., “Ten Years in the Library: New Data Confirm
Paleontological Patterns,” Paleobiology 19 (1993): 246–57; J. J. Sepkoski,
Jr., “A Compendium of Fossil Marine Animal Genera,” Bulletins of
American Paleontology 363: 1–560.
 9.   J. Alroy et al., “Effects of Sampling Standardization on Estimates of
Phanerozoic Marine Diversification,” Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences 98 (2001): 6261–66.
10.   J. Sepkoski, “Alpha, Beta, or Gamma; Where Does All the Diversity Go?”

Paleobiology 14 (1988): 221–34.
11.   J. Alroy et al., “Phanerozoic Diversity Trends,” Science 321 (2008): 97.
12.   A. B. Smith, “Large-Scale Heterogeneity of the Fossil Record: Implications
for Phanerozoic Biodiversity Studies,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London 356, no. 1407 (2001): 351–67; A. B. Smith,
“Phanerozoic Marine Diversity: Problems and Prospects,” Journal of the
Geological Society, London 164 (2007): 731–45; A. B. Smith and A. J.
McGowan, “Cyclicity in the Fossil Record Mirrors Rock Outcrop Area,”
Biology Letters 1, no. 4 (2005): 443–45; A. B. Smith, “The Shape of the
Marine Palaeodiversity Curve Using the Phanerozoic Sedimentary Rock
Record of Western Europe,” Paleontology 50 (2007): 765–74; A.
McGowan and A. Smith. “Are Global Phanerozoic Marine Diversity
Curves Truly Global? A Study of the Relationship between Regional Rock
Records and Global Phanerozoic Marine Diversity,” Paleobiology, 34, no. 1
(2008): 80–103.
13.   M. J. Benton and B. C. Emerson, “How Did Life Become So Diverse? The
Dynamics of Diversification According to the Fossil Record and Molecular
Phylogenetics,” Palaeontology 50 (2007): 23–40.
14.   S. E. Peters, “Geological Constraints on the Macroevolutionary History of
Marine Animals,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 102
(2005): 12326–31.
15.   This is one of our favorite “Emperor Has No Clothes” moments in
paleontology. A team from University of Kansas hypothesized that the
Ordovician could have been caused by in intense gammaray burst from
deep space. Such events, in which enormous energy pours out of small but
energetic stars such as a pulsar or magnetar at galactic distances, are real
enough. But the suggestions that one such gammaray burst (GRB) fried the
Earth, causing the Ordovician mass extinction, is just fanciful. There is not
a shred of evidence connecting a GRB to the Ordovician mass extinction. It
could as easily have been caused by Vulcans or Darth Vader on a bad day
(but were there any other kinds for poor Vader?). See A. L. Melott and B.
C. Thomas, “Late Ordovician Geographic Patterns of Extinction Compared
with 
Simulations 
of Astrophysical 
Ionizing 
Radiation 
Damage,”
Paleobiology 
35 
(2009): 
311–20. 
Also 
see
www.nasa.gov/vision/universe/starsgalaxies/gammaray_extinction.html.
16.   R. K. Bambach et al., “Origination, Extinction, and Mass Depletions of
Marine Diversity,” Paleobiology 30, no. 4 (2004): 522–42.

17.   S. A. Young et al., “A Major Drop in Seawater 87Sr-86Sr during the Middle
Ordovician (Darriwilian): Links to Volcanism and Climate?” Geology 37,
10 (2009): 951–54.
18.   S. Finnegan et al., “The Magnitude and Duration of Late Ordovician-Early
Silurian Glaciation,” Science 331, no. 6019 (2011): 903–906.
19.   S. Finnegan et al., “Climate Change and the Selective Signature of the Late
Ordovician Mass Extinction,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 109, no. 18 (2012): 6829–34.
CHAPTER X: TIKTAALIK AND THE INVASION OF THE LAND: 475–300 MA
 1.   For a nice summary of these early tetrapods and their evolutionary
positions, 
try 
this 
website:
www.devoniantimes.org/opportunity/tetrapodsAnswer.html, 
and 
S. 
E.
Pierce et al., “Three-Dimensional Limb Joint Mobility in the Early Tetrapod
Ichthyostega,” Nature 486 (2012): 524–27, and P. E. Ahlberg et al., “The
Axial Skeleton of the Devonian Tetrapod Ichthyostega,” Nature 437, no. 1
(2005): 137–40.
 2.   J. A. Clack, Gaining Ground: The Origin and Early Evolution of Tetrapods,
2nd ed. (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2012).
 3.   E. B. Daeschler et al., “A Devonian Tetrapod-Like Fish and the Evolution
of the Tetrapod Body Plan,” Nature 440, no. 7085 (2006): 757–63; J. P.
Downs et al., “The Cranial Endoskeleton of Tiktaalik roseae,” Nature 455
(2008): 925–29; and a summary: P. E. Ahlberg and J. A. Clack, “A Firm
Step from Water to Land,” Nature 440 (2006): 747–49.
 4.   N. Shubin, Your Inner Fish: A Journey into the 3.5-Billion-Year History of
the Human Body (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008); B. Holmes,
“Meet Your Ancestor, the Fish That Crawled,” New Scientist, September 9,
2006.
 5.   A. K. Behrensmeyer et al., eds., Terrestrial Ecosystems Through Time:
Evolutionary Paleoecology of Terrestrial Plants and Animals (Chicago and
London: University of Chicago Press, 1992); P. Kenrick and P. R. Crane,
The Origin and Early Diversification of Land Plants. A Cladistic Study
(Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1997).
 6.   S. B. Hedges, “Molecular Evidence for Early Colonization of Land by
Fungi and Plants,” Science 293 (2001): 1129–33.
 7.   C. V. Rubenstein et al., “Early Middle Ordovician Evidence for Land Plants

in Argentina (Eastern Gondwana),” New Phytologist 188, no. 2 (2010):
365–69. 
The 
press 
report 
can 
be 
found 
at
www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-1319904/Fossils-worlds-oldest-
plants-unearthed-Argentina.html.
 8.   J. T. Clarke et al., “Establishing a Time-Scale for Plant Evolution,” New
Phytologist 192, no. 1 (2011): 266–30; M. E. Kotyk et al.,
“Morphologically Complex Plant Macrofossils from the Late Silurian of
Arctic Canada,” American Journal of Botany 89 (2002): 1004–1013.
 9.   Our own work on the insect and vertebrate invasions can be found in P.
Ward et al., “Confirmation of Romer’s Gap as a Low Oxygen Interval
Constraining 
the 
Timing 
of 
Initial 
Arthropod 
and 
Vertebrate
Terrestrialization,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 10,
no. 45 (2006): 16818–22.
CHAPTER XI: THE AGE OF ARTHROPODS: 350–300 MA
 1.   Our own work on the insect and vertebrate invasions can be found in P.
Ward et al., “Confirmation of Romer’s Gap as a Low Oxygen Interval
Constraining 
the 
Timing 
of 
Initial 
Arthropod 
and 
Vertebrate
Terrestrialization,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 10,
no. 45 (2006): 16818–22.
 2.   R. Dudley, “Atmospheric Oxygen, Giant Paleozoic Insects and the
Evolution of Aerial Locomotor Performance,” The Journal of Experimental
Biology 201 (1988): 1043–50; R. Dudley, The Biomechanics of Insect
Flight: Form, Function, Evolution (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2000); R. Dudley and P. Chai, “Animal Flight Mechanics in Physically
Variable Gas Mixtures,” The Journal of Experimental Biology 199 (1996):
1881–85; also C. Gans et al., “Late Paleozoic Atmospheres and Biotic
Evolution,” Historical Biology 13 (1991): 199–219l; J. Graham et al.,
“Implications of the Late Palaeozoic Oxygen Pulse for Physiology and
Evolution,” Nature 375 (1995): 117–20; J. F. Harrison et al., “Atmospheric
Oxygen Level and the Evolution of Insect Body Size,” Proceedings of the
Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 277 (2010): 1937–46.
 3.   D. Flouday et al., “The Paleozoic Origin of Enzymatic Lignin
Decomposition Reconstructed from 31 Fungal Genomes,” Science 336, no.
6089 (2012): 1715-19.
 4.   Ibid.

 5.   J. A. Raven, “Plant Responses to High O2 Concentrations: Relevance to
Previous High O2 Episodes,” Global and Planetary Change 97 (1991): 19–
38; and J. A. Raven et al., “The Influence of Natural and Experimental
High O2 Concentrations on O2-Evolving Phototrophs,” Biological Reviews
69 (1994): 61–94.
 6.   J. S. Clark et al., Sediment Records of Biomass Burning and Global Change
(Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1997); M. J. Cope et al., “Fossil Charcoals as
Evidence of Past Atmospheric Composition,” Nature 283 (1980): 647–49;
C. M. Belcher et al., “Baseline Intrinsic Flammability of Earth’s
Ecosystems Estimated from Paleoatmospheric Oxygen over the Past 350
Million Years,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107, no.
52 (2010): 22448–53. Our own take on these experiments is that they are
flawed by their failing to test using higher ignition temperatures. Even in
low oxygen, a lightning strike causes initial ignition temperatures far higher
than those used in this study.
 7.   D. Beerling, The Emerald Planet: How Plants Changed Earth’s History
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2007).
 8.   Q. Cai et al., “The Genome Sequence of the Ground Tit Pseudopodoces
humilis Provides Insights into Its Adaptation to High Altitude,” Genome
Biology 
14, 
no. 
3 
(2013);
www.geo.umass.edu/climate/quelccaya/diuca.html, and P. Ward, Out of
Thin Air: Dinosaurs, Birds, and Earth’s Ancient Atmosphere (Washington,
D.C.: Joseph Henry Press, 2006), with references therein to high altitude
nesting.
 9.   P. Ward, Out of Thin Air.
10.   M. Laurin and R. R. Reisz, “A Reevaluation of Early Amniote Phylogeny,”
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 113, no. 2 (1995): 165–223.
11.   P. Ward, Out of Thin Air.
CHAPTER XII: THE GREAT DYING—ANOXIA AND GLOBAL STAGNATION: 252–250 MA
 1.   C. Sidor et al., “Permian Tetrapods from the Sahara Show Climate-
Controlled Endemism in Pangaea,” Nature 434 (2012): 886–89; S. Sahney
and M. J. Benton, “Recovery from the Most Profound Mass Extinction of
All Time,” Proceedings of the Royal Society, Series B 275 (2008): 759–65.
 2.   The invertebrate fauna from Meishan, China, is proving to be the best-
studied marine fossil record of this catastrophic event. There is now a large

literature on this: S.-Z. Shen et al., “Calibrating the End-Permian Mass
Extinction,” Science 334, no. 6061 (2011): 1367–72; Y. G. Jin et al.,
“Pattern of Marine Mass Extinction Near the Permian–Triassic Boundary in
South China,” Science 289, no. 5478 (2000): 432–36.
 3.   C. R. Marshall, “Confidence Limits in Stratigraphy,” in D. E. G. Briggs and
P. R. Crowther, eds., Paleobiology II (Oxford: Blackwell Scientific, 2001),
542–45; see also the newer work by our Adelaide colleagues, C. J. A.
Bradshaw et al., “Robust Estimates of Extinction Time in the Geological
Record,” Quaternary Science Reviews 33 (2011): 14–19.
 4.   “End-Permian Extinction Happened in 60,000 Years—Much Faster than
Earlier Estimates, Study Says,” Phys.org, February 10, 2014. S. D. Burgess
et al., “High-Precision Timeline for Earth’s Most Severe Extinction,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111, no. 9 (2014): 3316–
21.
 5.   L. Becker et al., “Impact Event at the Permian–Triassic Boundary:
Evidence from Extraterrestrial Noble Gases in Fullerenes,” Science 291
(2001): 1530–33.
 6.   L. Becker et al., “Bedout: A Possible End-Permian Impact Crater Offshore
of Northwestern Australia,” Science 304 (2004): 1469–76.
 7.   K. Grice et al., “Photic Zone Euxinia During the Permian-Triassic
Superanoxic Event,” Science 307 (2005): 706–09.
 8.   C. Cao et al., “Biogeochemical Evidence for Euxinic Oceans and
Ecological Disturbance Presaging the End-Permian Mass Extinction
Event,” Earth and Planetary Science Letters 281 (2009): 188–201.
 9.   L. R. Kump and M. A. Arthur, “Interpreting Carbon-Isotope Excursions:
Carbonates and Organic Matter,” Chemical Geology 161 (1999): 181–98.
10.   K. M. Meyer and L. R. Kump, “Oceanic Euxinia in Earth History: Causes
and Consequences,” Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 36
(2008): 251–88.
11.   T. J. Algeo and E. D. Ingall, “Sedimentary Corg:P Ratios, Paleoceanography,
Ventilation, and Phanerozoic Atmospheric pO2,” Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 256 (2007): 130–55; C. Winguth and A.
M. E. Winguth, “Simulating Permian-Triassic Oceanic Anoxia Distribution:
Implications for Species Extinction and Recovery,” Geology 40 (2012):
127–30; S. Xie et al., “Changes in the Global Carbon Cycle Occurred as
Two Episodes during the Permian-Triassic Crisis,” Geology 35 (2007):
1083–86; S. Xie et al., “Two Episodes of Microbial Change Coupled with

Permo-Triassic Faunal Mass Extinction,” Nature 434 (2005): 494–97; G.
Luo et al., “Stepwise and Large-Magnitude Negative Shift in d13Ccarb
Preceded the Main Marine Mass Extinction of the Permian-Triassic Crisis
Interval,” Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 299 (2011):
70–82; G. A. Brennecka et al., “Rapid Expansion of Oceanic Anoxia
Immediately before the End-Permian Mass Extinction,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 108 (2011): 17631–34.
12.   P. Ward et al., “Abrupt and Gradual Extinction Among Late Permian Land
Vertebrates in the Karoo Basin, South Africa,” Science 307 (2005): 709–14;
C. Sidor et al., “Permian Tetrapods from the Sahara Show Climate-
Controlled Endemism in Pangaea”; and S. Sahney and M. J. Benton,
“Recovery from the Most Profound Mass Extinction of All Time.”
13.   R. B. Huey and P. D. Ward, “Hypoxia, Global Warming, and Terrestrial
Late Permian Extinctions,” Science, 308, no. 5720 (2005): 398–401.
14.   P. Ward et al., “Abrupt and Gradual Extinction Among Late Permian Land
Vertebrates in the Karoo Basin, South Africa.”
CHAPTER XIII: THE TRIASSIC EXPLOSION: 252–200 MA
 1.   The high heat in the lowest Triassic strata is a major confirmation of the
greenhouse extinction model.
 2.   S. Schoepfer et al., “Cessation of a Productive Coastal Upwelling System in
the 
Panthalassic 
Ocean 
at 
the 
Permian–Triassic 
Boundary,”
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 313–14 (2012): 181–
88.
 3.   The history of reefs was looked at in our chapter on the Ordovician. George
Stanley remains the primary expertise. G. D. Stanley Jr., ed., Paleobiology
and Biology of Corals, Paleontological Society Papers, vol. 1 (Boulder, CO:
The Paleontological Society, 1996), and a very accessible work on many
aspects of modern as well as ancient reefs: G. Stanley Jr., “Corals and
Reefs: Crises, Collapse and Change,” presented as a Paleontological
Society short course at the annual meeting of the Geological Society of
America, Minneapolis, MN, October 8, 2011.
 4.   P. C. Sereno, “The Origin and Evolution of Dinosaurs,” Annual Review of
Earth and Planetary Sciences 25 (1997): 435–89; P. C. Sereno et al.,
“Primitive Dinosaur Skeleton from Argentina and the Early Evolution of
Dinosauria,” Nature 361 (1993): 64–66; P. C. Sereno and A. B. Arcucci,

“Dinosaurian Precursors from the Middle Triassic of Argentina: Lagerpeton
chanarensis,” Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 13 (1994): 385–99. Other
important works on early dinosaur and other vertebrate evolution: M. J.
Benton, “Dinosaur Success in the Triassic: A Noncompetitive Ecological
Model,” Quarterly Review of Biology 58 (1983): 29–55; M. J. Benton, “The
Origin of the Dinosaurs,” in C. A.-P. Salense, ed., III Jornadas
Internacionales sobre Paleontología de Dinosaurios y su Entorno (Burgos,
Spain: Salas de los Infantes, 2006), 11–19; A. P. Hunt et al., “Late Triassic
Dinosaurs from the Western United States,” Geobios 31 (1998): 511–31; R.
B. Irmis et al., “A Late Triassic Dinosauromorph Assemblage from New
Mexico and the Rise of Dinosaurs,” Science 317 (2007): 358–61; R. B.
Irmis et al., “Early Ornithischian Dinosaurs: The Triassic Record,”
Historical Biology 19 (2007):, 3–22; S. J. Nesbitt et al., “A Critical
Reevaluation of the Late Triassic Dinosaur Taxa of North America,”
Journal of Systematic Palaeontology 5 (2007): 209–43; S. J. Nesbitt et al.,
“Ecologically 
Distinct 
Dinosaurian 
Sister 
Group 
Shows 
Early
Diversification of Ornithodira,” Nature 464 (2010): 95–98.
 5.   D. R. Carrier, “The Evolution of Locomotor Stamina in Tetrapods:
Circumventing a Mechanical Constraint,” Paleobiology 13 (1987): 326–41.
 6.   E. Schachner, R. Cieri, J. Butler, G. Farmer, “Unidirectional Pulmonary
Airflow Patterns in the Savannah Monitor Lizard,” Nature 506, no. 7488
(2013): 367–70.
 7.   A. F. Bennett, “Exercise Performance of Reptiles,” in J. H. Jones et al., eds.,
Comparative Vertebrate Exercise Physiology: Phyletic Adaptations,
Advances in Veterinary Science and Comparative Medicine, vol. 3 (New
York: Academic Press, 1994), 113–38.
 8.   N. Bardet, “Stratigraphic Evidence for the Extinction of the Ichthyosaurs,”
Terra Nova 4 (1992): 649–56. See also C. W. A. Andrews, A Descriptive
Catalogue of the Marine Reptiles of the Oxford Clay. Based on the Leeds
Collection in the British Museum (Natural History), London. Part II
(London: 1910): 1–205, as well as the wonderful new summary by R.
Motani, “The Evolution of Marine Reptiles,” Evolution: Education and
Outreach 2, no. 2 (2009): 224–35.
 9.   P. Ward et al., “Sudden Productivity Collapse Associated with the Triassic-
Jurassic Boundary Mass Extinction,” Science 292 (2001): 115–19; P. Ward
et al., “Isotopic Evidence Bearing on Late Triassic Extinction Events,
Queen Charlotte Islands, British Columbia, and Implications for the

Duration and Cause of the Triassic-Jurassic Mass Extinction,” Earth and
Planetary Science Letters 224, nos. 3–4: 589–600. Our later work in
Nevada and back in the Queen Charlottes expanded on this isotopic
anomaly. K. H. Williford et al., “An Extended Stable Organic Carbon
Isotope Record Across the Triassic-Jurassic Boundary in the Queen
Charlotte 
Islands, 
British 
Columbia, 
Canada,” 
Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 244, nos. 1–4 (2006): 290–96.
10.   P. E. Olsen et al., “Ascent of Dinosaurs Linked to an Iridium Anomaly at
the Triassic-Jurassic Boundary,” Science 296, no. 5571 (2002): 1305–07.
11.   J. P. Hodych and G. R. Dunning, “Did the Manicougan Impact Trigger End-
of-Triassic Mass Extinction?” Geology 20, no. 1 (1992): 51–54; L. H.
Tanner et al., “Assessing the Record and Causes of Late Triassic
Extinctions,” Earth-Science Reviews 65, nos. 1–2 (2004): 103–39; J. H.
Whiteside et al., “Compound-Specific Carbon Isotopes from Earth’s
Largest Flood Basalt Eruptions Directly Linked to the End-Triassic Mass
Extinction,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107, no. 15
(2010): 6721–25; M. H. L. Deenen et al., “A New Chronology for the End-
Triassic Mass Extinction,” Earth and Planetary Science Letters 291, no. 1–
4 (2010): 113–25.
CHAPTER XIV: DINOSAUR HEGEMONY IN A LOW-OXYGEN WORLD: 230–180 MA
 1.   And just as we pay homage to Bob Bakker, no student of the dinosaurs can
do without the magnificent The Dinosauria by D. B. Weishampel et al.,
(Oakland: University of California Press, 2004). Heavy, hefty, and
expensive, it is the definitive treatise still in 2014.
 2.   There is now an extensive literature on air sacs in dinosaurs. Bob Bakker
was the first to point it out, and the work of Gregory Paul greatly expanded
on this hypothesis.
 3.   D. Fastovsky and D. Weishampel, The Evolution and Extinction of the
Dinosaurs (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 2005).
 4.   P. O’Connor and L. Claessens, “Basic Avian Pulmonary Design and Flow-
Through Ventilation in Non-Avian Theropod Dinosaurs,” Nature 436, no.
7048 (2005): 253–56, but see the contrary view of J. A. Ruben et al.,
“Pulmonary Function and Metabolic Physiology of Theropod Dinosaurs,”
Science 283, no. 5401 (1999): 514–16.
 5.   W. J. Hillenius and J. A. Ruben, “The Evolution of Endothermy in

Terrestrial 
Vertebrates: 
Who? 
When? 
Why?” 
Physiological 
and
Biochemical Zoology 77, no. 6 (2004): 1019–1042. The work of Greg
Erickson is also essential: G. M. Erickson et al., “Tyrannosaur Life Tables:
An Example of Nonavian Dinosaur Population Biology,” Science 313, no.
5784 (2006): 213–17; whereas the important career work of de Ricqlès is
summarized in A. de Ricqlès et al., “On the Origin of High Growth Rates in
Archosaurs and their Ancient Relatives: Complementary Histological
Studies on Triassic Archosauriforms and the Problem of a ‘Phylogenetic
Signal’ in Bone Histology,” Annales de Paléontologie 94, no. 2 (2008): 57.
 6.   K. Carpenter, Eggs, Nests, and Baby Dinosaurs: A Look at Dinosaur
Reproduction (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000).
CHAPTER XV: THE GREENHOUSE OCEANS: 200–65 MA
 1.   R. Takashima, “Greenhouse World and the Mesozoic Ocean,”
Oceanography 19, no. 4 (2006): 82–92.
 2.   A. S. Gale, “The Cretaceous World,” in S. J. Culver and P. F. Raqson, eds.,
Biotic Response to Global Change: The Last 145 Million Years
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 4–19.
 3.   T. J. Bralower et al., “Dysoxic-Anoxic Episodes in the Aptian-Albian
(Early Cretaceous),” in The Mesozoic Pacific: Geology, Tectonics and
Volcanism, M. S. Pringle et al., eds. (Washington, D.C.: American
Geophysical Union, 1993), 5–37.
 4.   B. T. Huber et al., “Deep-Sea Paleotemperature Record of Extreme Warmth
During the Cretaceous,” Geology 30 (2002): 123–26; A. H. Jahren, “The
Biogeochemical Consequences of the Mid-Cretaceous Superplume,”
Journal of Geodynamics 34 (2002): 177–91; I. Jarvis et al., “Microfossil
Assemblages and the Cenomanian-Turonian (Late Cretaceous) Oceanic
Anoxic Event,” Cretaceous Research 9 (1988): 3–103. The work on
heteromorphic ammonites including buoyancy has been conducted by Ward
and many colleagues around the world. Ammonoid Paleobiology, Neil
Landman et al., eds. (Springer, 1996), is an excellent introduction. The
orientation of Baculites was ascertained using scale wax models, in P.
Ward, Ph.D. thesis, McMaster University, Ontario Canada, 1976.
 5.   The wonderful study (one of many!) by Neil Landman and his colleagues
was discussed in N. H. Landman et al., “Methane Seeps as Ammonite
Habitats in the U.S. Western Interior Seaway Revealed by Isotopic

Analyses of Well-preserved Shell Material,” Geology 40, no. 6 (2012): 507.
Other new findings by this group were reported in N. H. Landman et al.,
“The Role of Ammonites in the Mesozoic Marine Food Web Revealed by
Jaw Preservation,” Science 331, no. 6013 (2011): 70–72, showing for the
first time the feeding mechanisms of baculitid ammonites as well as insight
into their food sources.
 6.   Ibid.
 7.   G. J. Vermeij, “The Mesozoic Marine Revolution: Evidence from Snails,
Predators and Grazers,” Palaeobiology 3 (1977): 245–58.
 8.   S. M. Stanley, “Predation Defeats Competition on the Seafloor,”
Paleobiology 34, no. 1 (2008): 1–21.
 9.   T. Baumiller et al., “Post-Paleozoic Crinoid Radiation in Response to
Benthic Predation Preceded the Mesozoic Marine Revolution,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107,
no. 13 (2010): 5893–96.
10.   T. Oji, “Is Predation Intensity Reduced with Increasing Depth? Evidence
from the West Atlantic Stalked Crinoid Endoxocrinus parrae (Gervais) and
Implications for the Mesozoic Marine Revolution,” Palaeobiology 22
(1996): 339–51.
CHAPTER XVI: DEATH OF THE DINOSAURS: 65 MA
 1.   L. W. Alvarez et al., “Extraterrestrial Cause for the Cretaceous-Tertiary
Extinction,” Science 208, no. 4448 (1980): 1095. This was later followed
by the discovery of the crater itself: A. R. Hildebrand et al., “Chicxulub
Crater: A Possible Cretaceous-Tertiary Boundary Impact Crater on the
Yucatán Peninsula, Mexico,” Geology 19 (1991): 867–71.
 2.   P. Schulte et al. “The Chicxulub Asteroid Impact and Mass Extinction at the
Cretaceous-Paleogene Boundary,” Science 327, no. 5970 (2005): 1214–18.
 3.   J. Vellekoop et al., “Rapid Short-Term Cooling Following the Chicxulub
Impact at the Cretaceous-Paleogene Boundary,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 111, no 21 (2014): 7537–7541.
 4.   Discussions of this site and the extinction pattern recorded there are in
many references, but we rather presumptuously suggest P. Ward, Under a
Green Sky: Global Warming, the Mass Extinctions of the Past, and What
They Can Tell Us About Our Future (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian,
2007).

 5.   See also the excellent review by our colleague David Jablonski: D.
Jablonski, “Extinctions in the Fossil Record (and Discussion),”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, Series B 344,
1307 (1994): 11–17.
 6.   D. M. Raup and D. Jablonski, “Geography of End-Cretaceous Marine
Bivalve Extinctions,” Science 260, 5110 (1993): 971–73. P. M. Sheehan and
D. E. Fastovsky, “Major Extinctions of Land-Dwelling Vertebrates at the
Cretaceous-Tertiary Boundary, Eastern Montana,” Geology 20 (1992): 556–
60; R. K. Bambach et al., “Origination, Extinction, and Mass Depletions of
Marine Diversity,” Paleobiology 30, no. 4 (2004): 522–42. D. J. Nichols
and K. R. Johnson, Plants and the K–T Boundary (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2008); P. Ward et al., “Ammonite and Inoceramid Bivalve
Extinction Patterns in Cretaceous-Tertiary Boundary Sections of the Biscay
Region (Southwestern France, Northern Spain),” Geology 19, no. 12
(1991): 1181–84; but see the dissenting N. MacLeod et al., “The
Cretaceous-Tertiary Biotic Transition,” Journal of the Geological Society
154, no. 2 (1997): 265–92.
    Also see P. Shulte et al., “The Chicxulub Asteroid Impact and Mass
Extinction at the Cretaceous-Paleogene Boundary,” Science 327, no. 5970
(2010): 1214–18.
 7.   V. Courtillot et al., “Deccan Flood Basalts at the Cretaceous-Tertiary
Boundary?” Earth and Planetary Science Letters 80, nos. 3–4 (1986): 361–
74; C. Moskowitz, “New Dino-Destroying Theory Fuels Hot Debate,”
space.com, October 18, 2009.
 8.   T. S. Tobin et al., “Extinction Patterns, d18O Trends, and
Magnetostratigraphy from a Southern High-Latitude Cretaceous-Paleogene
Section: 
Links 
with 
Deccan 
Volcanism,” 
Palaeogeography,
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 350–52 (2012): 180–88.
CHAPTER XVII: THE LONG-DELAYED THIRD AGE OF MAMMALS: 65–50 MA
 1.   The gold standard for vertebrate paleontology has long been Robert L.
Carroll, Vertebrate Paleontology and Evolution (New York: W. H. Freeman
and Company, 1988). New work on the evolution of what we call the third
age of mammals in this book can be found in O. R. P. Bininda-Emonds et
al. “The Delayed Rise of Present-Day Mammals,” Nature 446, no. 7135
(2007): 507–11; Z.-X. Luo et al., “A New Mammaliaform from the Early

Jurassic and Evolution of Mammalian Characteristics,” Science 292, 5521
(2001): 1535–40.
 2.   J. R. Wible et al., “Cretaceous Eutherians and Laurasian Origin for
Placental Mammals Near the K-T Boundary,” Nature 447, no. 7147 (2007):
1003–6; M. S. Springer et al., “Placental Mammal Diversification and the
Cretaceous–Tertiary Boundary,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 100, no. 3 (2002): 1056–61.
 3.   K. Helgen, “The Mammal Family Tree,” Science 334, no. 6055 (2011):
458–59.
 4.   Q. Ji et al., “The Earliest Known Eutherian Mammal,” Nature 416, no.
6883 (2002): 816–22.
 5.   Z.-X. Luo et al., “A Jurassic Eutherian Mammal and Divergence of
Marsupials and Placentals,” Nature 476, no. 7361 (2011): 442–45.
 6.   K. Jiang, “Fossil Indicates Hairy, Squirrel-sized Creature Was Not Quite a
Mammal,” UChicagoNews, August 7, 2013; C-F. Zhou, “A Jurassic
Mammaliaform and the Earliest Mammalian Evolutionary Adaptations,”
Nature 500 (2013): 163–67.
 7.   Z.-X. Luo, “Transformation and Diversification in Early Mammal
Evolution,” Nature 450, no. 7172 (2007): 1011–19.
 8.   J. P. Kennett and L. D. Stott, “Abrupt Deep-Sea Warming,
Palaeoceanographic Changes and Benthic Extinctions at the End of the
Paleocene,” Nature 353 (1991): 225–29.
 9.   U. Röhl et al., “New Chronology for the Late Paleocene Thermal Maximum
and Its Environmental Implications,” Geology 28, no. 10 (2000): 927–30; T.
Westerhold et al., “New Chronology for the Late Paleocene Thermal
Maximum and Its Environmental Implications,” Palaeogeography,
Paleoclimatology, Palaeoecology 257 (2008): 377–74.
10.   P. L. Koch et al., “Correlation Between Isotope Records in Marine and
Continental Carbon Reservoirs Near the Palaeocene-Eocene Boundary,”
Nature 358 (1992): 319–22.
11.   M. D. Hatch, “C(4) Photosynthesis: Discovery and Resolution,”
Photosynthesis Research 73, nos. 1–3 (2002): 251–56.
12.   E. J. Edwards and S. A. Smith, “Phylogenetic Analyses Reveal the Shady
History of C4 Grasses,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
107, nos. 6 (2010): 2532–37; C. P. Osborne and R. P. Freckleton,
“Ecological Selection Pressures for C4 Photosynthesis in the Grasses,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 276, no. 1663

(2009): 1753–60.
CHAPTER XVIII: THE AGE OF BIRDS: 50–2.5 MA
 1.   A personal note to this chapter. One of us (Ward) has had two parrots as
“pets,” although it is unclear who was the pet in the relationship between
bird and human. What was clear, however, was the level of intelligence.
And this is true not just of parrots. Anyone watching crows or other
flocking birds can readily see a great and potentially evolving intelligence
at work. We dismiss them as “bird brains.” Compare the size of a brain of
an African gray parrot to that of our own, and then consider that these birds
can speak in complete sentences, do math, are complex in behavior. We all
want to hope the chickens we eat every day are stupid. Perhaps not.
 2.   K. Padian and L. M. Chiappe, “Bird Origins,” in P. J. Currie and K.Padian,
eds., Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs (San Diego: Academic Press, 1997), 41–
96; J. Gauthier, “Saurischian Monophyly and the Origin of Birds,” in K.
Padian, Memoirs of the California Academy of Sciences 8 (1986): 1–55; L.
M. Chiappe, “Downsized Dinosaurs: The Evolutionary Transition to
Modern Birds,” Evolution: Education and Outreach 2, no. 2 (2009): 248–
56.
 3.   J. H. Ostrom, “The Ancestry of Birds,” Nature 242, no. 5393 (1973): 136;
J. Gauthier, “Saurischian Monophyly and the Origin of Birds,” in K.
Padian, Memoirs of the California Academy of Sciences 8 (1986): 1–55; J.
Cracraft, “The Major Clades of Birds,” in M. J. Benton, ed., The Phylogeny
and Classification of the Tetrapods, Volume I: Amphibians, Reptiles, Birds
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988), 339–61.
 4.   A. Feduccia, “On Why the Dinosaur Lacked Feathers,” in M. K. Hecht et
al., eds. The Beginnings of Birds: Proceedings of the International
Archaeopteryx Conference Eichstatt 1984 (Eichstatt: Freunde des Jura-
Museums Eichstatt, 1985), 75–79; A. Feduccia et al., “Do Feathered
Dinosaurs Exist? Testing the Hypothesis on Neontological and
Paleontological Evidence,” Journal of Morphology 266, no. 2 (2005): 125–
66.
 5.   J. O’Connor, “A Revised Look at Liaoningornis Longidigitris (Aves).”
Vertebrata PalAsiatica 50 (2012): 25–37.
 6.   A. Feduccia, “Explosive Evolution in Tertiary Birds and Mammals,”
Science 267, no. 5198 (1995): 637–38; A. Feduccia, “Big Bang for Tertiary

Birds?” Trends in Ecology and Evolution 18, no. 4 (2003): 172–76.
 7.   M. Norell and M. Ellison, Unearthing the Dragon: The Great Feathered
Dinosaur Discovery (New York: Pi Press, 2005); R. Prum, “Are Current
Critiques of the Theropod Origin of Birds Science? Rebuttal to Feduccia
2002,” Auk 120, no. 2(2003): 550–61; S. Hope, “The Mesozoic Radiation
of Neornithes,” in L. M. Chiappe et al., Mesozoic Birds: Above the Heads
of Dinosaurs (Oakland: University of California Press, 2002), 339–88; P.
Ericson et al., “Diversification of Neoaves: Integration of Molecular
Sequence Data and Fossils,” Biology Letters 2, no. 4 (2006): 543–47; K.
Padian, “The Origin and Evolution of Birds by Alan Feduccia (Yale
University Press, 1996),” American Scientist 85: 178–81; M. A. Norell et
al., “Flight from Reason. Review of: The Origin and Evolution of Birds by
Alan Feduccia (Yale University Press, 1996),” Nature 384, no. 6606 (1997):
230; L. M. Witmer, “The Debate on Avian Ancestry: Phylogeny, Function,
and Fossils,” in L. M. Chiappe and L. M. Witmer, eds., Mesozoic Birds:
Above the Heads of Dinosaurs (Berkeley: University of California Press,
2002), 3–30.
 8.   C. Pei-ji et al., “An Exceptionally Preserved Theropod Dinosaur from the
Yixian Formation of China,” Nature 391, no. 6663 (1998): 147–52; G. S.
Paul, Dinosaurs of the Air: The Evolution and Loss of Flight in Dinosaurs
and Birds (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2002), 472; X. Xu
et al., “An Archaeopteryx-like Theropod from China and the Origin of
Avialae,” Nature 475 (2011): 465–70.
 9.   D. Hu et al., “A Pre-Archaeopteryx Troodontid Theropod from China with
Long Feathers on the Metatarsus,” Nature 461, no. 7264 (2009): 640–43; A.
H. Turner et al., “A Basal Dromaeosaurid and Size Evolution Preceding
Avian Flight,” Science 317, no. 5843 (2007): 1378–81; X. Xu et al., “Basal
Tyrannosauroids from China and Evidence for Protofeathers in
Tyrannosauroids,” Nature 431, 7009 (2004): 680–84; C. Foth, “On the
Identification of Feather Structures in Stem-Line Representatives of Birds:
Evidence from Fossils and Actuopalaeontology,” Paläontologische
Zeitschrift 86, no. 1 (2012): 91–102; R. Prum and A. H. Brush, “The
Evolutionary Origin and Diversification of Feathers,” Quarterly Review of
Biology 77, no. 3 (2002): 261–95.
10.   M. H. Schweitzer et al., “Soft-Tissue Vessels and Cellular Preservation in
Tyrannosaurus rex,” Science 307, no. 5717 (2005); C. Dal Sasso and M.
Signore, “Exceptional Soft-Tissue Preservation in a Theropod Dinosaur

from Italy,” Nature 392, no. 6674 (1998): 383–87; M. H. Schweitzer et al.,
“Heme Compounds in Dinosaur Trabecular Bone,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 94, no. 12
(1997): 6291–96.
11.   Dr. Paul Willis, “Dinosaurs and Birds: The Story,” The Slab,
http://www.abc.net.au/science/slab/dinobird/story.htm.
12.   J. A. Clarke et al., “Insight into the Evolution of Avian Flight from a New
Clade of Early Cretaceous Ornithurines from China and the Morphology of
Yixianornis grabaui,” Journal of Anatomy 208 (3 (2006): 287–308.
13.   N. Brocklehurst et al., “The Completeness of the Fossil Record of Mesozoic
Birds: Implications for Early Avian Evolution,” PLOS One (2012); J. A.
Clarke et al., “Definitive Fossil Evidence for the Extant Avian Radiation in
the Cretaceous,” Nature 433 (2005): 305–8.
14.   L. Witmer, “The Debate on Avian Ancestry: Phylogeny, Function and
Fossils,” in L. Chiappe et al., eds., Mesozoic Birds: Above the Heads of
Dinosaurs (Berkeley, California: University of California Press, 2002), 3–
30; L. M. Chiappe and G. J. Dyke, “The Mesozoic Radiation of Birds,”
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 33 (2002): 91–124; J. W. Brown
et al., “Strong Mitochondrial DNA Support for a Cretaceous Origin of
Modern Avian Lineages,” BMC Biology 6 (2008): 1–18; J. Cracraft, “Avian
Evolution, Gondwana Biogeography and the Cretaceous-Tertiary Mass
Extinction Event,” Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences
268 (2001): 459–69; S. Hope, “The Mesozoic Radiation of Neornithes,” in
L. M. Chiappe et al., eds., Mesozoic Birds: Above the Heads of Dinosaurs
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002), 339–88; Z. Zhang et al.,
“A Primitive Confuciusornithid Bird from China and Its Implications for
Early Avian Flight,” Science in China Series D 51, no. 5 (2008): 625–39.
15.   N. R. Longrich et al., “Mass Extinction of Birds at the Cretaceous-
Paleogene (K-Pg) Boundary,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 108 (2011): 15253–57; G. Mayr, Paleogene Fossil Birds (Berlin:
Springer, 2009), 262; J. A. Clarke et al., “Definitive Fossil Evidence for the
Extant Avian Radiation in the Cretaceous,” Nature 433 (2005): 305–8; T.
Fountaine, et al., “The Quality of the Fossil Record of Mesozoic Birds,”
Proceedings of the Royal Academy of Sciences B-Biological Science 272
(2005): 289–94.
16.   P. Ericson et al. “Diversification of Neoaves: Integration of Molecular
Sequence Data and Fossils,” Biology Letters 2, no.4 (2006): 543–47; but

see J. W. Brown et al., “Nuclear DNA Does Not Reconcile ‘Rocks’ and
‘Clocks’ in Neoaves: A Comment on Ericson et al.,” Biology Letters 3, no.
3 (2007): 257–20; A. Suh et al., “Mesozoic Retroposons Reveal Parrots as
the Closest Living Relatives of Passerine Birds,” Nature Communications
2, no.8 (2011).
17.   K. J. Mitchell et al., “Ancient DNA Reveals Elephant Birds and Kiwi Are
Sister Taxa and Clarifies Ratite Bird Evolution,” Science 344, no. 6186
(2014): 898–900.
CHAPTER XIX: HUMANITY AND THE TENTH EXTINCTION: 2.5 MA TO PRESENT
 1.   P. Ward, Rivers in Time (New York: Columbia University Press, 2000).
 2.   R. Leakey and R. Lewin, The Sixth Extinction (Norwell, MA: Anchor Press,
1996).
 3.   “Lucy’s Legacy: The Hidden Treasures of Ethiopia,” Houston Museum of
Natural Science, 2009.
 4.   D. Johanson and M. Edey, Lucy, the Beginnings of Humankind (Granada: St
Albans, 1981); W. L. Jungers, “Lucy’s Length: Stature Reconstruction in
Australopithecus afarensis (A.L.288-1) with Implications for Other Small-
Bodied Hominids,” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 76, no. 2
(1988): 227–31.
 5.   B. Yirka, “Anthropologist Finds Large Differences in Gait of Early Human
Ancestors,” Phys.org, November 12, 2012; P. A. Kramer, “Brief
Communication: Could Kadanuumuu and Lucy Have Walked Together
Comfortably?” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 149 (2012):
616–2; P. A. Kramer and D. Sylvester, “The Energetic Cost of Walking: A
Comparison of Predictive Methods,” PLoS One (2011).
 6.   D. J. Green and Z. Alemseged, “Australopithecus afarensis Scapular
Ontogeny, Function, and the Role of Climbing in Human Evolution,”
Science 338, no. 6106 (2012): 514–17.
 7.   J. P. Noonan, “Neanderthal Genomics and the Evolution of Modern
Humans,” Genome Res. 20, no. 5 (2010): 547–53.
 8.   K. Prufer et al., “The Complete Genome Sequence of a Neanderthal from
the Althai Mountains,” Nature 505, no. 7481 (2014): 43–49.
 9.   P. Mellars, “Why Did Modern Human Populations Disperse from Africa ca.
60,000 Years Ago?” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103,
no. 25 (2006): 9381–86.

10.   P. Ward, The Call of Distant Mammoths: What Killed the Ice Age Mammals
(Copernicus, Springer-Verlag, 1997).

A Note on the Authors
Peter Ward, Ph.D., is a professor of biology and a professor of Earth and space
sciences, and has been active in paleontology, biology, and astrobiology for more
than thirty-five years. He teaches at the Sprigg Geobiology Centre at the
University of Adelaide in Australia and at the University of Washington in
Seattle. He has written seventeen books and appeared in numerous television
documentaries, including the three-part Dinosaur series for WHYY; The End of
Evolution (based on his book, for Discovery Channel Canada); The Shape of
Life, The State of the World (David Attenborough and the BBC), and the WGBH
Evolution series through NOVA. His series, the eight-hour Animal Armageddon
funded by Animal Planet Network, was televised in 2009.
 
Joe Kirschvink, Ph.D., is the Nico and Marilyn Van Wingen professor of
geobiology at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, California, and
an external Principal Investigator at the Earth-Life Science Institute of the Tokyo
Institute of Technology in Meguro, Japan. He has challenged conventional
wisdom about our planet in a number of ways, including his claim that the entire
Earth once resembled a giant snowball, causing a crisis for biology that
stimulated biodiversity, and the theory that the Earth experienced a period of true
polar wander, rotating about the equator, which led to the Cambrian explosion.
Kirschvink is a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, the American Geophysical Union, the Japanese Geoscience Union, and
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Asteroid 27711 is named after
him.

Bloomsbury Press
An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
1385 Broadway           50 Bedford Square New York                           London NY 10018                     WC1B
3DP
USA                                   UK
 
www.bloomsbury.com
 
BLOOMSBURY and the Diana logo are trademarks of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
First published 2015
This electronic edition published April 2015
 
© Peter Ward and Joe Kirschvink 2015
 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage or retrieval
system, without prior permission in writing from the publishers.
 
No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting on or refraining from action as a
result of the material in this publication can be accepted by Bloomsbury or the author.
 
ISBN: HB: 978-1-60819-907-5
       ePub: 978-1-60819-908-2
 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Ward, Peter D. (Peter Douglas), 1949– A new history of life : the radical new discoveries about the origins
and evolution of life on earth / Peter Ward & Joe Kirschvink.

pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-60819-907-5 (hardcover) 978-1-60819-908-2 (ebook) 1. Evolution (Biology) 2. Life—Origin.
I. Kirschvink, Joseph L. II. Title.
QH366.2.W373 2015
576.8’2—dc23
 
To find out more about our authors and books visit www.bloomsbury.com. Here you will find extracts,
author interviews, details of forthcoming events and the option to sign up for our newsletters.

Selected Books by Peter Ward
Rare Earth: Why Complex Life Is Uncommon in the Universe (with
Donald Brownlee) The Life and Death of Planet Earth (with Donald
Brownlee)
Gorgon: Paleontology, Obsession, and the Greatest Catastrophe in
Earth’s History Life as We Do Not Know It: The NASA Search for
(and Synthesis of) Alien Life Out of Thin Air: Dinosaurs, Birds, and
Earth’s Ancient Atmosphere
Under a Green Sky: Global Warming, the Mass Extinctions of the
Past, and What They Can Tell Us About Our Future The Medea
Hypothesis: Is Life on Earth Ultimately Self-Destructive?
The Flooded Earth: Our Future in a World Without Ice Caps

