
A Taste
 for the
Beautiful


A Taste 
for the 
Beautiful
 
The Evolution of AttrAction
 
MICHAEL J. RYAN
P r i n c e t o n  U n i v e r s i t y  P r e s s
P r i n c e t o n  a n d  O x f o r d

Copyright © 2018 by Princeton University Press 
All drawings by Emma Ryan © 2017
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street,  
Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 6 Oxford Street,  
Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1TR
press.princeton.edu
Jacket design by Andrea Guinn
Jacket images courtesy of Biodiversity Heritage Library, Flickr
All Rights Reserved
ISBN 978- 0- 691- 16726- 8
British Library Cataloging- in- Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Adobe Caslon Pro 
and F CaslonTwelve ITC for display
Printed on acid- free paper. ∞
Printed in the United States of America
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

In memory of Stan Rand, fellow traveler
In appreciation of the 
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute


Contents
Preface  ix
Chapter One 
Why All the Fuss about Sex?  1
Chapter Two 
Why All the Whining and Chucking?  13
Chapter Three 
Beauty and the Brain  33
Chapter Four 
Visions of Beauty  53
Chapter Five  
The Sounds of Sex  77
Chapter Six  
The Aroma of Adulation  105
Chapter Seven 
Fickle Preferences  126
Chapter Eight 
Hidden Preferences and Life in Pornotopia  148
Epilogue  169
Notes  171
Bibliography  177
Index  187


Preface
I am a scientist.  This occupation affords me the opportunity to try to 
understand a small part of the natural world. I am also a professor. This 
occupation allows me to explain to others my findings in the context of 
the fields in which I work, animal behavior and evolution. My audience 
is usually college students and other scientists, although I often present 
lectures to a more general audience and quite frequently explain what 
I do to friends and family who do not have a background in science. I 
usually find that regardless of their background, many folks are inter-
ested in these stories of how sexual beauty plays out in nature and how 
our experiments in the laboratory give us insights into how and why 
sexual beauty evolved. My purpose in writing this book is to share these 
stories of sexual beauty, some from my research but mostly from others, 
with a much wider audience.
I owe a huge debt of gratitude to a large number of people. Marc 
Hauser first suggested that I write this book, and he has been a tough 
and constructive critic throughout all stages of its preparation. A stay as 
a Fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study (WIKO) in Berlin afforded 
me the opportunity to plan this book, and during the planning stage 
I benefited greatly from the feedback of Karin Akre; Robert Trivers; 
Idelle Cooper; Doug Emlen; Eric Lupfer, my agent at William Morris 
Enterprises; and Alison Kalett, my editor at Princeton University Press. 
Marc Hauser and Idelle Cooper read the entire manuscript, and Alison 
Kalett and Karin Akre did the same and also provided detailed editorial 
comments.
During the later stages of writing this book, I had a bad accident 
that left me in a wheelchair with a spinal cord injury. I would not have 
been able to complete this work without the expert and generous care at  
St. David’s Rehabilitation Hospital and Rehab Without Walls in Aus-
tin, Texas. I am eternally grateful to the staff of both of these orga-
nization, who I feel are part of a second family. During my time in 

x • Preface
the hospital, I received strong support and assistance on various tasks 
related to this book from Emma Ryan, Lucy Ryan, Marsha Berkman, 
Sofia Rodriguez, Idelle Cooper, Mirjam Amcoff, Fernando Mateos- 
Gonzalos, Karin Akre, Rachel Page, Caitlin Friesen, Tracy Burkhart, 
David Cannatella, May Dixon, Claire Hemingway, Ryan Taylor, and 
Kim Hunter. All of them are very special people.
My own research that I discuss in this book was funded by the Na-
tional Science Foundation, the Smithsonian Institution, and the Uni-
versity of Texas. To each of these institutes I am most grateful.

A Taste
 for the
Beautiful


O N E
Why All the Fuss about Sex?
The sight of a feather in a peacock’s tail, whenever I  
gaze at it, makes me sick!
— Charles Darwin
Nature usually gets down to business.  Let’s think about sleep. 
When I go to bed, I pull back the sheets, put my head on the pillow, 
and I’m in dreamland. I do not have a sleeping ritual, I don’t dance, sing, 
chant, or perfume myself. I just go to sleep. So do most animals. Eating 
is the same way. When a howler monkey finds an edible leaf, she plucks 
it and eats it; a heron just throws back his head and swallows the fish he 
speared out of the water; and a cheetah doesn’t do a celebratory dance 
before she starts to devour the gazelle she just brought down, even 
though she sprinted at her personal best of 75 mph to do so. Granted, 
in our own species we can sometimes make a bigger deal out of eating, 
especially when a meal coincides with a special event. But for the most 
part, we are little different from the howler, the heron, and the cheetah. 
Take a bite, give it a good chew, and gulp it down. Much of life for most 
animals is like that— the job is to just get it done.

2 • Chapter 1
Sex is different: a just- get- it- done policy won’t get it done. In humans 
and most other animals, extensive courtship rituals precede the sex act. 
Most of our sexual rituals are laden with accessories, including candles 
and music, poems and flowers, and even special wardrobes. The list goes 
on, but it is no less diverse for animals. Animals sing and dance, they 
perfume themselves, they show off their colors and even light them-
selves up, all in the hope of attracting a mate. Although we distinguish 
ourselves in the language and technology we deploy in courtship, all 
animals have evolved spectacular, even obscene, morphologies and be-
haviors as both sexual lures and strategies for consummation. The colors 
of butterflies and fishes, the songs of insects and birds, the sexual odors 
of moths and mammals all evolved in the service of sex. The same is true 
for many of the traits in our own species that make women sigh and 
men gasp when someone of striking beauty crosses their paths. These 
aspects of sexual beauty evolved not because they make their bearers 
live longer but because they enable them to mate more and thus pass on 
more offspring and genes to the next generation.
Sexual beauty is everywhere, woven through the fabric of all sexu-
ally reproducing animals. We humans strive for beauty; we pay for it; 
we judge whether others have it; and if they do, we treat them better. 
Animals and humans both go to extreme lengths to appear beautiful 
to those who judge them. Peacocks evolve magnificent tails that cause 
peahens to sway, fishes sport bright colors that catch the eye of the other 
sex, crickets chirp endearingly to their mates, and spiders dance and 
vibrate their webs to show off. We humans take a more active role in 
engineering our beauty than do most other animals. Perfumes, fashion, 
cars, and music have all been employed in the service of sexual beauty, 
as have the surgeon’s knife and a pharmacopeia of drugs. But to enhance 
one’s beauty, either through the painstakingly slow process of evolution 
or the more immediate gratification of beauty- engineering, one must 
have some notion of what is beautiful.
This book is about sexual beauty, where it comes from and what it 
is for. Of course, many have been inspired to write in appreciation of 
natural beauty and the enchanting mating behaviors that occur in wild 
animals. Their emphasis is usually on the details of beautiful male traits: 
How does having such a long tail benefit the peacock? How many ca-
rotenoids does the male guppy need to eat to be so brilliantly orange? 

Why All the Fuss about Sex? • 3
How many syllables can a songbird pack into his complex vocal rep-
ertoire to make him even more sexy to females? These are interesting 
questions, but they represent only one- half of the equation of sexual 
beauty, because they ignore what is going on inside the head of those 
who actually judge beauty. Such studies often assume that the female 
brain must evolve tools to figure out what is beautiful. But instead, the 
converse is often true. The brain has a long evolutionary history that 
biases how it assesses the entire world around it, not just the world of 
sex; and it functions within the framework of numerous neurobiological 
and computational constraints. I argue that instead of the brain having 
to evolve to detect beauty, the brain determines what is beautiful, and all 
of its constraints and contingencies give rise to a breathtaking diversity 
of sexual aesthetics throughout the animal kingdom. In this book, I 
will show that to understand what beauty is, we need to understand the 
brain that perceives it.
I will expand our understanding of sexual beauty by asking how the 
details of an animal’s brain give rise to its sexual aesthetics, which, in turn, 
drive the evolution of beauty in that species. Specifically, I argue that 
beauty only exists because it pleases the eyes, ears, or noses of the beholder; 
more generally, that beauty is in the brain of the beholder. Some of the brain’s 
neural circuitry has evolved to sense and respond to sexual beauty so 
that animals can find a good mate. But the brain also has other things 
on its mind besides sex. Other adaptations of the brain, such as those 
that help an animal find food, avoid becoming food, or recognize the 
difference between its mother and its father, can have unintended but 
important consequences on how that brain defines beauty. Only when 
we understand the biological basis of sexual aesthetics can we under-
stand how sexual aesthetics drive the evolution of sexual beauty.
I have a unique perspective to offer on these issues as I have spent 
the past forty years studying the sexual behavior of a tiny, bumpy frog in 
Central America.1 This work has opened my eyes and mind to both the 
diversity of sexual behavior in the animal kingdom and a core unifying 
theory that I have developed called sensory exploitation. The key idea 
is simple: features of the female’s brain that find certain notes of the 
males’ mating call attractive existed long before those attractive notes 
evolved. Thus, females are the biological puppeteers, making the males 
sing exactly what their brains desire. Beauty is indeed in the brain of the 

4 • Chapter 1
beholder, and in most cases, that means the female’s brain, although I 
will review numerous cases where males judge female beauty and where 
there is mutual display and assessment of beauty by both sexes. This 
simple idea contributed to a paradigm shift in the study of sexual se-
lection, one in which the importance of the sexual brain as a driver of 
evolution finally was acknowledged.
In this chapter, I will give some background on how scientists have 
come to understand the evolution of beauty and also explain which sex 
usually evolves this beauty and why. In the next one, I’ll focus on the  
bumpy frog that has been the focus of much of my scientific brain 
power, to show how scientists actually go about learning how the brain 
relates to mating behavior. Chapter 3 delves into how the brain defines 
beauty by discussing the evolution of sensory systems and the cognitive 
processing of sensory information. Chapters 4 through 6 describe what 
is known about visual, acoustic, and olfactory beauty throughout the 
animal kingdom. Chapter 7 describes some biological underpinnings to 
the claim that percepts of beauty are sometimes fickle. And in chapter 
8, I describe how some percepts of beauty lie masked and unknown 
until just the right individual appears to elicit attraction. This logic is ex-
tended to provide an evolutionary understanding of how various human 
enterprises, from the fashion industry to pornography, have been able to 
exploit these hidden preferences. In the epilogue, I close the book with 
some comments about the biological basis of beauty.
In our search for answers about beauty, we will explore nature and 
journey to where scientists have studied some of the world’s most stun-
ningly beautiful animals. We will probe the basic premises of why sexual 
beauty had to evolve and delve into new findings from neuroscience 
that provide insights into how the brain perceives beauty. The analogies 
between animals and humans might cause us to rethink our own sexual 
aesthetics. As with much of biology, the best place to start thinking 
about sexual beauty is with Charles Darwin. Where I will depart from 
Darwin is within an arena that he knew little about: the brain.
* * *
It is hard to overestimate the impact of Charles Darwin’s theory of evo-
lution by natural selection on our view of humanity’s place in the uni-
verse. It is one of the crowning intellectual achievements of humankind, 

Why All the Fuss about Sex? • 5
ranking right up there with Copernicus’s theory of celestial motion, 
Newton’s laws of physics, and Einstein’s theory of relativity. His book, 
On the Origin of Species, sold out in a few days; subsequent editions con-
tinued to sell out for decades; and it is still one of the most widely cited 
books in the world.2
The most amazing thing about natural selection is its brilliant sim-
plicity, which can be unpacked into three ideas or principles. The first, 
which comes from Thomas Malthus’s Essay on the Principle of Popula-
tion, is that the rate of reproduction outstrips the available resources 
to support it— not all offspring survive to reproduce.3 Consider a pair 
of house flies that sneak into your dwelling through a small tear in the 
window screen. This couple is capable of producing five hundred off-
spring during their short lifetime of one month. If all of their offspring 
and their future progeny survived to reproduce, six months later you 
would be inundated by about two trillion flies with a combined weight 
of more than 2,500 tons, whose body mass would cover more than one 
thousand square miles, an area close to the size of Luxembourg. Luckily, 
this doesn’t happen, as most of these flies die, and only a handful survive.
The second principle is that differential survival is not always ran-
dom. Some survivors are just lucky— for example, those who happen 
not to be around as your fly swatter comes bearing down. But others 
survive because they are “better”; they have adaptations that allow them 
to avoid your swat and live to reproduce. Perhaps they are more sensitive 
to the wind displacements caused by the fly swatter, or they have faster 
flight muscles that allow escape before they get splat. But they are sur-
vivors, and they get to stay on the island, or at least in your house.
The third principle is that if variation in survival traits has a genetic 
component, these traits will be differentially passed down to the next 
generation. If the surviving flies have genes for faster flight muscles, for 
example, so will their offspring. These offspring will constitute a new 
generation of flies that fly faster, live longer, and reproduce more. This is 
how natural selection causes the evolution of survival traits. Time to fix 
that tear in your window screen.
When Darwin, along with Alfred Wallace, formulated the theory 
of natural selection, he never suggested it explained everything— he 
never thought that every aspect of every individual was an adaptation 
for survival.4 He was aware of the power of culture, in animals as well as 

6 • Chapter 1
humans. Darwin also understood random variation, which occurs when 
alternative forms of the same trait can become fixed in small popula-
tions. But one thing he did not understand, at least not immediately, 
was the peacock’s tail. It caused him such consternation, he wrote to the 
botanist Asa Gray, that it made him sick. We know that Darwin was 
often sick, and a hypochondriac to boot, but such malaise in response to 
something so magnificent seems a bit extreme.5 The peacock’s tail is the 
mascot for scientific studies of animal beauty, but for Darwin it was a 
stark reminder of what his theory did not explain, and it motivated him 
to find a new theory to complement that of natural selection. He called 
it sexual selection.6
* * *
The peacock is a majestic and beautiful beast. He initiates courtship 
with a female by erecting his feathers to form a fan that spreads out 
more than 180 degrees. He has two hundred feathers up to four feet 
long that are adorned with eyelike spots and have an iridescent sheen 
that causes them to sparkle brilliantly in the sunlight. Once they are 
erect, he shakes, rattles, and rolls his feathers, causing them to hum like 
an engine and the eyespots to vibrate hypnotically. All of this beauty 
evolved in the service of sex. Peahens get to choose their mates, and pea-
cocks evolved their beauty to better compete in the sexual marketplace, 
where only the beautiful get chosen to pass their genes forward.
A peacock displaying in all his splendor is a majestic sight to us and 
to peahens alike. But have you ever seen a peacock run or fly? It’s pa-
thetic! Dragging his tail behind him, he can’t outrun a child let alone a 
fox, and he can barely fly. If Darwin was correct that natural selection 
causes adaptations for survival by weeding out the weak, where did this 
monstrosity come from, and why wasn’t it culled out long ago? This is 
why a mere feather was so distressing to one of science’s greatest minds. 
But it was mental, not physical, duress that caused this particular mal-
ady. The peacock’s tail offered a major challenge to Darwin’s theory of 
natural selection, so he went to work on another theory to explain how 
it could evolve.
The peacock’s tail was not the only challenge to Darwin’s calculus 
of survival evolution; it was just the tip of the iceberg. In his second- 
most famous book, The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex, 

Why All the Fuss about Sex? • 7
published twelve years after On the Origin of Species, Darwin noted that 
many animals, not just peacocks, harbored traits that seemed at odds 
with the process of natural selection. Many of these traits also appear 
beautiful to us and seem superfluous to the animal’s survival. Fireflies 
light up when they glide across a nocturnal meadow; crickets spend 
hours chirping during the summer nights; coral reef fishes sport colors 
that focus our gaze; frog choruses announce the coming of spring; ca-
naries sing arias that have charmed their mates for millennia and hu-
mans for centuries; bowerbirds decorate and paint their bowers with 
such creativity that one researcher invoked a comparison to Matisse;7 
and Irish elk carried around eighty- eight- pound antlers with such high 
calcium demands that this might have eventually led to their extinc-
tion.8 We are no more restrained with our sexual beauty, as we invest 
billions of dollars each year to paint, perfume, and trim parts of our 
bodies that make us more sexually attractive. None of this has anything 
to do with improved survival.
These nonsurvival traits share other commonalities. Most of them 
are more developed in males than females; they are usually employed 
in courtship or in battle for mates; and, as first haunted Darwin, many 
of these traits are detrimental to survival. Darwin called these secondary 
sexual characters because they differed between the sexes and were asso-
ciated with reproduction, although not crucial for it. How they evolved 
required some additional theorizing.
Artificial selection provides some instructive examples of how these 
showy sexual characters might evolve. It might be one of the most im-
portant human inventions since the control of fire, and Darwin used ar-
tificial selection as an analogy to natural selection. In artificial selection, 
humans are the agents of selection. We decide which traits, as the targets 
of selection, will evolve to meet our predetermined goals. We often selec-
tively breed organisms for utilitarian purposes, such as disease resistance in 
crops and greater meat yield in cattle. But we also breed animals to please 
our aesthetic senses. Fish hobbyists breed aquarium fishes with spec-
tacular colors and even implant foreign genes to make some fish glow 
in the dark, and we are all familiar with breeds of domestic dogs that 
humans have engineered because they are cute rather than functional.
Based on his intuitions derived from artificial selection, Darwin rea-
soned that if female animals also had their own aesthetics, their own 

8 • Chapter 1
standards of beauty, they too could exert selection to enhance their 
species’ beauty. If female canaries were attracted to more variable male 
song, males with more variable song would produce more offspring, and 
canary song would evolve to be highly variable over time. If female pea-
cocks found longer feathers to be sexually beautiful, they would choose 
to mate with males that have longer feathers, and consequently those 
males would have more offspring. Longer tails would come to flourish 
in future generations, even if these tails increased the male’s predation 
risk. A short- feathered peacock that cannot convince females to mate 
will not pass his genes along to any offspring, even if he is fast enough 
to outrun any fox and lives to a ripe old age. Darwin’s realizations about 
these issues allowed him to develop the theory of sexual selection using 
the same logic he employed for natural selection.
Survival is secondary to sex, merely an adaptation to keep animals 
alive so they can have a shot in the sexual marketplace. The essence of 
sexual selection is that traits of beauty that enhance an animal’s mating 
success will evolve even if they somewhat hinder survival, as long as they 
are not too burdensome, as long as the costs they impose on survival do 
not outweigh the benefits they deliver for sex. Although most species 
have about the same number of males and females, not everyone gets 
to mate. In many species, some males get more than their fair share of 
matings, while most males die as virgins. An individual’s mating success 
is influenced by how sexually attractive he is perceived to be by potential 
mates. The peacock with the longer tail, the frog with a more variable 
call, and the fruit fly with sexier odors are more sexually attractive and 
chosen by more females as mates. As with traits for survival, when sex-
ual beauty has a genetic basis, it is passed down from generation to 
generation as males evolve more seductive ornaments.
When Darwin put together his two great theories, natural selection 
and sexual selection, he went a long way toward explaining the diversity 
of life. Many unique traits evolve because they attract more mates. Of 
course, being attractive enough to be chosen by females is not the only 
way to enhance mating opportunities. Fighting off the competition is 
also effective. This book focuses on how sexual selection leads to the 
evolution of sexual beauty, but I should mention that sexual selection 
can also lead to the evolution of sexual weaponry to fight off compe-
tition for mating. This other side of the sexual selection coin has been 

Why All the Fuss about Sex? • 9
covered in great detail by Doug Emlen in his book Animal Weapons: The 
Evolution of Battle.9 But now let’s travel to the cloud forests of Central 
America to return to the topic at hand, sexual beauty, and specifically to 
think about how the two sexes contribute to this phenomenon.
* * *
Consider what has been called the world’s most beautiful bird. Birders 
from all over the world travel to the cloud forests of Central America 
to see the Resplendent Quetzal, or at least the male quetzal. The first 
time I saw one in the mountains of western Panama, my hands shook as 
I steadied the binoculars to peer at him through the fog in the forest’s 
canopy. He had a light green body marked by a bright red chest, the blue 
iridescent patch on his head added to his collage of colors, and what 
made me shake was the sight of his sparkling two- foot tail. Perching 
above us in the towering forest, he seemed more like a Mexican piñata 
than a real animal. I also saw a female quetzal, but no matter. She lacked 
all of the male’s fancy embellishments, and I hardly gave her a second 
look.
Although the difference in plumage between the male and female 
quetzal can hardly be more striking, the difference between them is 
more fundamental than their feather- deep beauty. It resides deep inside 
their bodies— in their gametes, cells that contain copies of all of the 
animal’s DNA and can be fused with a mate’s gametes to form new 
individuals and continue the cycle of life. The male’s gametes, his sperm, 
are the smallest cells in his body, and there are lots of them. Meanwhile 
the female’s gametes, her eggs, are the largest cells in her body, and there 
are fewer of them. This difference in gamete size defines the sexes, male 
and female, for all animals— everything else is secondary— even the ex-
ternal sex organs.
In humans and other animals, you can often correctly identify an 
individual’s biological sex by the sex organs. Males, with small gametes, 
often have penises, and females, with large gametes, often have vaginas. 
But human sexual identity depends both on cultural and biological fac-
tors, such as brain development. An individual with female gametes, for 
example, could have a masculinized brain. In humans, there is a differ-
ence between sex and gender, the latter being a culturally created con-
struct. Only humans have gender identities, a topic I will return to later. 

10 • Chapter 1
But even for the rest of the animal kingdom, sex organs do not always 
correctly indicate an individual’s sex, thus making the focus on gametes 
critical to determining biological sex.
One example in which the sex organs can give a misleading indica-
tion of sex occurs in some lice. Bark lice are small insects, about the size 
of a flea, often found scavenging algae and lichen under barks. Others, 
sometimes called book lice, feed on the paste that is used to bind books. 
A most bizarre group of species are less well known and cloistered away 
in some caves in Brazil, where they survive by feeding on bat guano. But 
it is not their diet that makes them so interesting. These females have a 
penis and, correspondingly, the males a vagina.10
The female bark lice use their penis as most penises were intended to 
be used, to insert into the opposite sex’s vagina when mating. But unlike 
a typical male’s penis, the female’s penis does not deposit sperm. It tele-
scopes to penetrate deep inside the male, where it then expands, anchoring 
the barbs on the penis to the male’s vaginal wall, effecting a copulation that 
can last more than forty hours. The barbs provide such strong purchase 
inside the male that when a researcher tried to separate a mated pair, the 
male was torn in two. During the marathon copulation, the penis sucks 
up large volumes of sperm into the female’s body, where they eventually 
reach and fertilize her eggs. Despite this role reversal in their sex organs, 
there is no confusion about their sex. By definition, the males are males 
because they have the smaller gametes, and the females are females be-
cause they have larger gametes. When it comes to sexual identification 
in non human animals, it all comes down to sperm and eggs, and their 
difference in size is at the root of all the other differences between the 
sexes and the reason why there is sexual selection. To understand the 
evolution of sex differences, including sexual beauty, we need to under-
stand why this difference in gamete size matters so much.
Let’s unpack this idea of how gamete size is tied to the evolution 
of sexual beauty. The human egg has a volume one hundred thousand 
times greater than a sperm.11 If your gametes are smaller, you can make 
more of them; a woman produces only about 450 mature eggs during 
her lifetime, while a man makes about 500 billion sperm during his. 
Since fertilization requires only one sperm and one egg, eggs are a lim-
iting resource. In addition, once a female has her eggs fertilized, it can 
take weeks to months to get another batch ready. Males, on the other 

Why All the Fuss about Sex? • 11
hand, can replenish their sperm supply within hours. In many species, 
once a female’s eggs are fertilized, she is out of the mating game while 
she nurtures her inner embryo— a month for a guppy, nine months for 
a human, and almost two years for an elephant. While a female is tied 
up with her embryo, a male can go on mating. As with the sex- reversed 
bark lice, there are exceptions to the patterns in sexual selection. Male 
seahorses, for example, become pregnant, and a tropical male wading 
bird, the jacana, tends the nest while the female is mating with more 
males, “feathering” their nests with more eggs. But these examples tend 
to be not only exceptions to the general rule, but as we will discuss later, 
the exceptions that prove the general rule. And the general rule is that 
in most mating systems there is an excess of males ready to mate at any 
one point in time. This imbalance results in a sexual marketplace where 
many males compete for fewer females, a marketplace that features an 
abundance of courters and a limited number of choosers. All of this 
because sperm are smaller than eggs. So what can a male do to increase 
the chances of his sperm fertilizing her eggs? How can he compete in 
the sexual marketplace?
In some cases, males can control a resource that females want and 
need, which in turn makes a male more attractive. Males can control 
areas with food, nesting sites, and refugia from predators, all of which 
are important to a female with mating on her mind. Females can then 
shop and compare resources among males and mate with the most at-
tractive choice. Of course, these resources are not free, as males have to 
fight for them, and sometimes rather fiercely. The weapons males use in 
these battles are varied and include larger size as well as assorted fangs, 
claws, horns, and antlers. The resources they defend can also vary, but all 
of them, in one way or another, are crucial to reproduction. For example, 
male damselflies defend areas of water with floating vegetation that fe-
males need to deposit their eggs; male fiddler crabs defend burrows that 
are used as refugia from predators as well as for mating; and men of the 
Kipsigis people in Kenya, as well as many other societies, accumulate 
wealth in various forms to recruit females for mating. And to the winner 
goes the spoils: the males with superior resources are more likely to be 
chosen to mate.
Although resource defense is one means by which an animal can 
enhance its sexual attractiveness, most of the interest in sexual selection  

12 • Chapter 1
centers on the beauty of the individual itself. The stunning male pea-
cock is just the beginning. I have already discussed the quetzal’s tail 
and the canary’s song, and throughout this book we will look closely at 
an incredible diversity of traits that have evolved in the name of sexual 
beauty.
Thus far I’ve explained how natural selection and sexual selection 
came to exist as scientific theories, why sexual selection usually acts on 
males, and how sexual selection can result in the evolution of beauty. I 
have argued that to understand beauty we must understand the brain of 
those who behold beauty, but I have yet to illustrate how we can explore 
this relationship between beauty and the brain. Now I will focus on 
one species, the one that provided me an entrée into this field and led 
me to begin to explore the neural underpinnings of sexual aesthetics. 
This compelling example of sexual selection favoring the evolution of 
acoustic beauty comes from a frog most unassuming in his looks but 
quite audacious in his voice. In the next chapter, we will have a detailed 
look at how the sexual aesthetics of a female can drive the evolution of 
a distinctly beautiful, although somewhat dangerous, male voice. We 
will delve into her brain’s function as well as its evolutionary history to 
uncover why she has judged this male voice to be so beautiful.

T W O
Why All the Whining and Chucking?
Frog went a- courtin’ and he did ride uh- huh . . . said “Miss Mousey 
 
will you marry me?” uh- huh. 
— Old English folk song
It was an orgy . . . of sorts.  As is often the case, however, there were 
not enough females to go around. So the males had to compete for 
females, but this competition didn’t involve brawn. There were no foot 
races or arm wrestling matches or males pounding each other. This was 
a beauty contest, and the beauty was in the males’ voices. Males started 
to sing, then their voices grew louder, and eventually their overtures to 
the females grew richer with more notes. All of this for sex.
My own consuming interest in sexual beauty started on a piece of 
land that connects the two great continents of the Western Hemisphere. 
Until recently, at least in geological time, North and South America 
were separated by a gap, where Panama is now but through which the 
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans used to flow. This gap allowed beasts from 

14 • Chapter 2
each ocean to freely mingle and interbreed, but it cut off interactions 
between the terrestrial organisms, allowing them to evolve in splendid 
isolation.1 But this isolation didn’t last. The Pacific and Caribbean tec-
tonic plates moved toward one another; the continents collided; and 
about 3 million years ago, the Panama land bridge was formed. This 
union of North and South has been heralded as the most important 
geological event in the past 60 million years, the time elapsed since 
an asteroid crashed into the earth, causing massive worldwide extinc-
tions. Cutting off the two oceans between the continents changed their 
flow of currents and brought about abrupt climate change. The most 
dramatic consequence of binding the North and South Americas was 
providing a conduit that allowed smaller mammals in North America to 
invade the south and then decimate South America’s incredibly diverse 
mammalian fauna, including giant sloths the size of elephants.
The Panama land bridge also caused an inconvenience for humans. 
It made sailing between the two coasts of North America an arduous 
journey. To sail from New York to San Francisco, for example, ships had 
to round the tip of Tierra del Fuego— a mere six hundred miles from 
the Antarctic Peninsula. Our solution was to undo the Panama land 
bridge, to once again divide North from South, this time with a canal 
connecting the Atlantic and the Pacific.
The Panama Canal has a colorful history, part of which has made 
an important impact on tropical biology.2 At the urging of Alexander 
von Humboldt, the canal was first planned in the mid- 1800s by the 
Spanish government. The French began the project in 1881, but prob-
lems with construction and especially with numerous deaths caused by 
yellow fever and malaria caused them to cede the project to the United 
States in 1903. The Isthmus of Panama, however, was part of Colombia, 
and the Colombians were not willing to accede to the demands associ-
ated with a US- built canal in their own country. In what has become an 
oft- repeated US strategy in Latin America, President Teddy Roosevelt 
used some gunboat diplomacy to aid Panamanian rebels in achieving 
independence from Colombia. The Americans ultimately completed the 
canal a decade later and kept it for themselves. By opening the fifty 
miles across the Isthmus of Panama to ship traffic, the over- water voy-
age from New York to San Francisco decreased by more than half, from 
fourteen thousand to five thousand miles. The Panama Canal, now part 

Why All the Whining and Chucking? • 15
of Panama, has recently been expanded to accommodate ships even 
larger than the one thousand– foot Panamax models that have trafficked 
through the canal during the past century.
What does this have to do with sexual beauty? The central part of 
the Panama Canal is Gatun Lake, which was formed when the Chagres 
River was dammed in 1913. Once flooded, hilltops in the area became 
islands. One of these— Barro Colorado Island (BCI)— became a nature 
reserve in 1923 and eventually the crown jewel of the newly formed 
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (STRI). Today, BCI is one of 
the most thoroughly studied tropical ecosystems in the world. Two of 
its best- known inhabitants are the túngara frog and the frog- eating bat.
In the summer of 1978, I boarded the Panama Railroad at the Bal-
boa Station in Panama City, dripping with perspiration but restless and 
eager to finally reach BCI. In those days, the train was the preferred 
means of pedestrian transportation between the oceans. The main cargo 
was Panamanian businessmen and US armed forces, as the Panama 
Canal was still under US jurisdiction. The passenger list also included a 
band of disheveled and unkempt scientists, mostly graduate students in 
their twenties, and older but no tidier STRI researchers. We stuck out 
like sore thumbs compared with the immaculately groomed business-
men in their guayaberas and the meticulously uniformed US soldiers 
clutching their M16s.
The train stopped midway between the two coasts to disgorge us sci-
entists at a stop called Frijoles. The station was merely a small cement 
bench and a tin roof that gave some protection from the intense sun or 
relentless rain, depending on the season. There was no sign of human 
settlement. Eventually, a small boat arrived to transport us to BCI. See-
ing the island for the first time, I knew it would change my life forever, 
although I had no idea where this quest would take me and for how 
long it would consume me. Viewed from that boat, BCI could not have 
appeared a more peaceful, calming, and comforting sight.
From a distance, BCI looked like a poster of harmonious nature 
wrapped in a green curtain. Up close, bright splashes of yellow- flowered 
guayacan trees punctuated the flowing green canopy. As I first got to 
know the island, I saw a toucan calling from a treetop, bopping its over-
sized bill in rhythm with its call. Before this, I had only seen these 
birds on boxes of Froot Loops and advertisements for Guinness beer. A 

16 • Chapter 2
group of meter- long green iguanas dug their nests in the sand; bright 
blue morpho butterflies the size of my hand flitted along the trails. I 
soon realized that the ambience was even more pleasant at night, when 
more than thirty species of frogs gathered in choruses across the island 
to sing for sex.
All is not what it seems, however— first appearances can be deceiving. 
When I peered behind the green curtain to glimpse the evolutionary 
drama on BCI, what I saw was “nature red in tooth and claw.” Parasites 
were everywhere: bot flies burrowed out of howler monkey flesh; gro-
tesquely large tics dug into iguanas; malaria- carrying plasmodia swam 
through the blood streams of smaller lizards; and nematodes clogged the  
guts of frogs. Predators also abounded: birds caught and consumed those 
magnificent morphos on the wing; boas squeezed the life out of small, 
rabbitlike agoutis before dining on them; and large false vampire bats— 
the biggest carnivorous bat in the world, with a wingspan of a meter 
— swooped to pick up rodents scurrying across the forest floor and then 
devour them from head to tail, loudly crunching their bones. I was also 
introduced to bivouacs of army ants that dismembered any small animal 
in its path; acacia ants that fiercely attacked other herbivores that dared 
approach their defended food source; and the nocturnal cries of coatis, 
relatives of raccoons, which punctuated the night as females ganged up 
on males to expel them from their troops. BCI was not as peaceful as I 
first thought.
Maybe sex will be different I thought— perhaps it is more benevolent. 
It is a mutual endeavor for the benefit of both males and females, court-
ers and choosers; at this point, I had hardly given the sexual conflict 
between males and females a second thought. My goal was to under-
stand how members of one sex evolved traits to make themselves more 
attractive to members of the opposite sex, or how beauty evolves in the 
service of sex. My subject was a small, brown frog that haunts mud 
puddles, a frog that Panamanians called túngara. This plain- looking frog 
has a stunning voice that determines whether a female will find a male 
attractive enough that she will mate with him.
Túngara frogs had been studied for a short time in the 1960s by 
STRI scientist Stanley Rand, arguably one of the great tropical biolo-
gists of the twentieth century. Stan became my closest colleague, fellow 
traveler, and best friend for three decades until he passed away in 2005. 

Why All the Whining and Chucking? • 17
At that time, I wrote that second only to BCI itself, Stan was STRI’s 
most valuable resource.3 Few disagreed.
What I learned from the túngara frog launched me into a lifelong 
interest in sexual beauty. I have sought to understand how beauty re-
sides in voices, in colors, and in odors, how it comes about in humans as 
well as other animals, and especially why it is we find some individuals 
so beautiful. Why do we and other animals have the sexual aesthetics 
that we do?
* * *
On my first day on BCI, I found evidence of the previous night’s orgy. 
Small piles of white foam scattered about the pond’s edge evidenced 
the debauchery that had played out the night before. I waited. Night 
descended quickly, as it does in the tropics, and the songs of insects and 
some chattering of night monkeys filled the dark as sheaths of moon-
light penetrated the forest canopy. Then the chorus began.
Men and women use all sorts of ploys and accoutrements to attract 
sexual attention: deep voices, short skirts, tailored physiques, perfume 
and cologne, fast cars and expensive watches. When froggy goes a cour-
tin’, though, it is all about song. When the sun sets and their minds, or 
at least their brains and their hormones, turn to sex, male frogs become 
singing machines. A courting túngara frog might make more than five 
thousand calls in a single night.4 There are about six thousand species of 
frogs. Most of them have loud and conspicuous mating calls, and each 
species has its own distinct sound. When I am in a chorus of frogs in 
Panama, the Amazon, Florida, or the East African plains, where there 
can be more than a dozen species calling at the same time, with a lit- 
tle preparation I can identify by ear each species without seeing a single 
one of them. What is all this singing about?
Males call to let females know who they are, where they are, and that 
they are ready to mate. These calls are designed not only to inform but 
to persuade, to charm, and to seduce. Males call loudly, incessantly, and 
add fancy notes to their calls, all traits that over evolutionary time have 
proven attractive to females. Once a female arrives at the chorus, she 
compares the calls of all these males and eventually decides which one is  
most pleasing to her ear, which male is most sexy. Her choice defines 
sexual beauty for this species. Choosing members of the opposite sex 

18 • Chapter 2
for mating based on sexual beauty is a common theme that plays out 
throughout the animal kingdom every time there is sex. Only the details 
vary.
The túngara frog is a small beast, only about thirty millimeters in 
length. Give males some standing water and they will call, be it from 
large ponds, small puddles, the overflow of streams, footprints of large 
mammals, the ditches around human settlements, and even in small 
aquaria in my laboratory. Anywhere from one to a dozen males might be 
calling in a square meter. Like the males of many frog species, male tún-
gara frogs gather in a chorus to call at a breeding site once the sun goes 
down. The calls of these males seem to emanate from an old- fashioned 
video game. They begin with a whine that is about a third- of- a- second 
long and that can be produced by itself or followed by up to seven short, 
staccato sounds known as chucks. We refer to calls with only a whine as 
simple calls and those that contain a whine and chucks as complex calls. 
We will give these calls a closer look, or listen, in a bit.
The túngara frog chorus is actually more of a sexual marketplace than 
an orgy, and in that sense it is a female’s paradise; the males are on 
display, and the females are the consumers. Males do little besides call, 
and they pretty much stay put while they are calling. A female enters 
the chorus when she is ready to mate, and I mean ready. If she does 
not mate in the next few hours, all of her eggs come oozing out of her; 
unfertilized, they are a wasted investment in reproduction and a failed 
attempt to get some genes into the next generation. She then has to wait 
another six weeks before she has a batch of eggs ready to be fertilized. 
But this rarely happens, as females are surrounded at the breeding site 
by a surfeit of males only too ready to mate. And she gets to pick.
A female gives her choice of a mate some serious thought. She will sit 
in front of one male for a time, often move on to others, and sometimes 
return to a male she has already sampled. She checks out the males by 
listening to what they have to say, that is, their whining and chucking. 
When a female decides to mate, she slowly moves to the male. He clasps 
her from the top. They are now mating, although the mechanics are a bit 
different from those to which we are accustomed.
Frogs don’t have penises, but the males do deliver the sperm to the 
females, and fertilization takes place outside the body. In túngara frogs, 
the eggs are extruded into the water by the female while the male is 

Why All the Whining and Chucking? • 19
clasping her from the top. He catches the eggs in his hind feet and spills 
some sperm on them. He then makes a nest for the eggs out of frog 
merengue. He does this by using his hind legs as a whisk, beating the 
eggs and the various fluids that come with both gametes to produce an 
exquisite foam nest. The foam nest keeps the eggs out of the water and 
away from aquatic egg predators, and it also keeps the eggs moist and 
allows them to survive short dry periods when the temporary pools of 
water they will soon call home might dry out. If all goes well, the eggs 
hatch into tadpoles in three days, and in another three weeks or so the 
tadpoles emerge as small froglets who will themselves either be charm-
ing or charmed in their own sexual marketplace.
The narrative of the túngara frog’s sex life was uncovered during 186 
consecutive nights of watching everything these frogs did from sundown 
to sunup— more than one thousand of them, all individually marked so 
I could tell them apart, record the males’ voices, measure how often they 
mated, and figure out just what attracted females to a particular male. 
The short answer to the last question is that females always seemed to 
choose to mate with males who were making whines with chucks, and 
with males who were larger than average. But where did túngara frogs 
get their sexual aesthetics, why is it that the calls of some males are per-
ceived as so much more attractive than others? The answer to this last 
question did not come easily.
If you think someone is beautiful, then he or she is beautiful— you 
are the decider. Sexual beauty emerges from the interaction of an indi-
vidual’s traits and the sensory systems and brains that perceive them. 
I find the Mona Lisa beautiful, and perhaps you don’t. We both see 
the same arrangement of colors within the frame; we just process them 
differently. Remember, beauty is in the brain of the beholder. Why is it 
that female túngara frogs find the male’s call, and especially the call with 
chucks, so attractive?
I could spend my life watching túngara frogs in puddles around Pan-
ama and learn little more about their preferences besides what seemed 
to be a strong predilection for chucks. How can we begin to glimpse 
what is going on in the female’s sexual brain in order to get a better un-
derstanding of her sexual aesthetics, to uncover exactly what it is about 
a male’s call that she finds so sexy? A few well- designed experiments 
can have the precision of a surgeon’s scalpel as they enable us to look 

20 • Chapter 2
within the female and gain unparalleled insights into her standards of 
sexual beauty.
My team of túngara researchers collects female túngara frogs at 
breeding sites in Panama and brings them into our laboratory, where we 
place one of them (the frog, not a researcher) under a small funnel cen-
tered between two speakers in a walk- in acoustic chamber. We broad-
cast calls through each speaker, using the real calls of a male or calls we 
have synthesized electronically. In one of our first experiments, we gave 
females a choice between a whine broadcast from one speaker and a 
whine- chuck from the opposite speaker. Each speaker “calls” once every 
two seconds, and the two speakers alternate calls with one another. We 
close the chamber and observe the female from outside via an infrared 
camera. We remotely lift the funnel, and the female tells us which call 
she prefers by hopping to it. She has to travel about one meter to contact 
one of the speakers, which scaled to our size would be about an eighty- 
meter trek. The only reason a female frog approaches and contacts a 
calling male is to choose him as a mate. This simple experiment, called 
phonotaxis because the bioassay is movement toward sound, allows us to 
dissect the female’s sexual aesthetics in great detail.
A male túngara frog’s call does not need a chuck to attract a female. 
When placed in an acoustic chamber, a female will approach and make 
contact with a speaker that is broadcasting only a whine. A simple whine 
call is sufficient to attract a female, but it is hardly ideal in a competitive 
sexual marketplace. What about the chucks? A chuck doesn’t do much 
on its own. If we play only a chuck from a speaker, something that never 
happens in nature, the females ignore the chuck. But the chuck is far 
from worthless, it just needs to be in the right context, and that context 
is the whine. If we put a simple and a complex call in head- to- head 
competition— a whine against a whine with one chuck— a female is 
five times more likely to go to the speaker broadcasting a whine- chuck 
than the one broadcasting a whine. The sexual potency of the chuck is 
extraordinary. Although it only increases the call’s duration and energy 
by 10 percent, it increases the male’s attractiveness by 500 percent. Give 
some thought to any change that we could make so cheaply in our own 
appearance that would have such an effect. If you can think of one, 
patent it!

Why All the Whining and Chucking? • 21
Besides choosing males that make chucks, females are also more 
likely to choose larger males as mates. How does this happen in the 
dark of night, if she cannot see who is larger? The call seemed to be an 
 obvious candidate: perhaps females can hear who is larger? In vocal-
izations of most animals there is a relationship between the frequency 
or pitch of the signal and the body size of the individual producing it. 
This is due to basic biophysics. Larger individuals have larger sound- 
producing organs— the larynx in frogs and mammals, file and scraper 
in crickets, syrinx in birds— and larger structures vibrate at lower fre-
quencies. This is true in humans as well. Those deep, resonating voices of 
Sylvester Stallone and James Earl Jones are not produced by undersized 
men. Another aspect of our morphology that influences the structure of 
our sounds is the anatomy of the trachea above the larynx, which pro-
duces the formants of the voice. Women prefer lower- pitched voices of 
larger men,5 and it has even been suggested that the descended larynx 
in humans evolved not to facilitate language, as has long been thought, 
but to lower the frequencies of vocalizations by increasing the length of 
the trachea above the larynx.6 In fact, red deer actively lower the larynx 
when they roar to decrease the pitch of the roar and thus to increase 
their apparent body size. Túngara frogs have been doing some of their 
own evolving to make their calls deeper- pitched and more attractive. 
The larynx of the túngara frog is huge compared with that of other frogs 
of similar body size. In fact, the túngara frog’s brain can fit inside the 
larynx. It seems that sexual selection has been favoring good looks, or at 
least good sounds, over big brains in this species.
Biophysics dictates that larger males have lower- pitched chucks. Do 
females prefer larger males because they are attracted to deeper chucks? 
This is another aspect of the female’s sexual aesthetics that yielded 
quickly to experimentation. I created digitally synthesized calls that had 
identical whines but varied in the chuck’s pitch. Over a large range of 
natural variation, females preferred deeper chucks. Although any ad-
vantage of women preferring baritone males is merely speculative at 
this point, I do know the advantage for this preference in túngara frogs: 
larger males fertilize more eggs. It is not that their sperm are better, 
but the greater fertilization success derives from a better mechanical 
match between the male and female. Remember, the male is on top of 

22 • Chapter 2
the female, as they mate “froggy” (not quite “doggy”) style as they both 
release their gametes. If a male is too small, his sperm gets all over the 
female’s back, and the stranded sperm are less likely to meet the eggs as 
they come out of the female.
It seems logical that this reproductive advantage to mating with large 
males is responsible for the female’s preference for deep chucks, which, 
in turn, drove the evolution of the grotesquely large larynx in these 
frogs. But logical need not mean biological; it is a good start, however, to 
generate hypotheses about what really happened to give us the biology 
we are investigating. We will return to this issue shortly.
* * *
It is often said that the best science raises more questions than it answers. 
It should be added, however, that one of the most frustrating things about 
science is that when you finally get an answer, you often then have more 
questions than when you started. This is what happened to me. Our un-
derstanding of sexual selection by mate choice in túngara frogs raised a 
serious paradox. The chuck is a pretty small sound to have such a large 
impact on the male’s beauty, and all males can produce chucks. Simple 
evolutionary logic predicts that males should spend the night chucking 
until they attract a mate. But this is not the case. Túngara frogs are re-
luctant to add chucks, and many prefer to just whine. But males should 
try to get as many mates as possible— they are males, after all, right?
As with humans, an individual’s investment in being attractive is sub-
ject to social influence, as I will discuss at length in chapter 7. Men are 
more likely to flaunt their resources to a woman if there are other men 
around, and women flirt more with men when in a crowd of women.7 
There are two social settings that get túngara frogs to make more chucks. 
Males add chucks when other males call, and this escalates into a chorus 
of complex calls where the “whine- chuckers” prevail and “whiners” are 
in the minority. Females also seem to “flirt” with males to get them to 
make more chucks. If a male refuses to escalate from a whine to whine- 
chucks, a female sometimes gives him an actual body slam that, amaz-
ingly, he responds to by adding a chuck.
So again, why this reluctance to chuck? To understand why any trait 
evolves, it is necessary to understand not only the benefits it delivers 
but the costs it incurs. As in human economics, Darwinian economics 

Why All the Whining and Chucking? • 23
predicts that it is the average benefit/cost ratio that determines the value 
of a trait and the degree to which it is favored by selection. Here, the 
currency is not euros, pesos, or dollars, but fitness— the number of off-
spring produced relative to others in the population. And unlike many 
economic transactions in humans, the goal is not maximizing relative 
benefits in the short term but rather over an individual’s entire life.
Consider, for example, a cheetah hunting for food. I have seen them 
sprint across the savannas of East Africa in a blur as they ran down 
hares and gazelles. Running fast aids the cheetah in catching its food, 
and food is essential for survival— dead cheetahs don’t mate. So chee-
tahs have evolved to run fast: they accelerate to 40 mph in three strides 
and reach a maximum speed of 70 or 75 mph, the fastest any animal 
can run.8 Why not even faster? There are physiological constraints to 
running fast. The cheetah has a relatively large heart, and it pumps so 
rapidly as the animal races that a cheetah can only maintain its maxi-
mum speed for about six hundred meters. It is so overexerted by then 
that it flirts with brain damage, and when it does catch its prey, it has to 
rest before eating.
There is a big physiological cost of calling in túngara frogs. While 
calling, their metabolic rate, and thus the rate of energy consumption, 
increases by about 250 percent. But this cost does not explain the reluc-
tance to chuck; adding a chuck to a whine is pretty close to free when 
it comes to energy. There is another cost of chucks, one that remained 
hidden to me for more than a year but that had been influencing the 
evolution of sexual beauty in túngara frogs for millennia: the cost of 
eavesdroppers.
Many of us have been embarrassed by things that we thought we 
were saying in private but that were actually overheard by others. We 
should never assume privacy. That has always been true for animals. 
When male túngara frogs call, females are not the only ones listening. 
One fierce eavesdropper is the frog- eating bat. Merlin Tuttle, who went 
on to found the world- renowned Bat Conservation International, was 
on BCI the year before I began work there, and he caught a bat, Tra-
chops cirrhosis, or the fringe- lipped bat, with a túngara frog in its mouth.9 
As one of the world’s experts on the ecology of bats, Merlin understood 
this was an odd food item for a bat and wondered what it meant for 
their lifestyle, where they lived, and in what habitats they foraged. He 

24 • Chapter 2
also wondered if the bats might hear the frogs’ calls. He wanted to team 
up with me to explore this interaction between bats and frogs. When I 
received Merlin’s handwritten letter (this was long before Al Gore “in-
vented” the Internet) I was thrilled that this bat might hold the answer 
to the riddle of the túngara frog’s chuck.
My excitement was quickly tempered, however, by what I knew 
about the biology of bats. I realized how unlikely it was that this bat 
could hear frog calls, let alone use them as cues to find the frogs. Bats are 
well known for their echolocation abilities.10 They emit high- frequency 
pulses that bounce off objects, return to the bats, and are perceived as an 
acoustic image of the world around them. Their echolocation pulses are 
ultrasonic, “ultra” because they are above our hearing range of 20,000 
hertz (Hz). The fringe- lipped bat’s echolocation call is between 50,000 
and 100,000 Hz. With their hearing range shifted to such high fre-
quencies, bats were thought to be near deaf to frequencies that we can 
hear. Frog calls, on the other hand, usually have only low frequencies. 
The loudest frequency in the túngara frog’s whine is only 700 Hz, and 
2,200 Hz in the chuck, a bit higher but nowhere near being ultrasonic.
When Merlin, our assistant Cindy Taft, and I set up one of our noc-
turnal viewing stations near the Weir Pond on BCI, we saw these bats 
regularly catching and eating calling túngara frogs; on average, about six 
frogs per hour met their demise in the jaws of these bats. We also had 
spectacular photos of the bats in the act; Merlin is a magical photogra-
pher, and soon his photos of the frog- eating bat, along with a story of 
our discoveries, were gracing the pages of National Geographic. But were 
the bats listening to the frog’s calls or using their echolocation to find 
them? We needed experiments.
How do you catch a bat? The easiest way is to a find the path the bats 
use to transit through the forest. Then, before it gets dark you string a 
thin “mist” net across the path. Bats can detect these nets with their 
ultrasonic calls, but only if they are paying attention. As with highway 
hypnosis, the bat’s mind can wander and lose focus on its echolocation 
calls when it travels the same paths night after night. If something un-
usual is in their paths, they often fly into it. This is one of the ways that 
Donald Griffin discovered bat echolocation in the 1930s. In his lab, 
he had placed various objects in the bats’ flight cage, which they deftly 
avoided using their skills in echolocation. Once the bats became used to 

Why All the Whining and Chucking? • 25
where these objects were, he moved them around and the bats crashed 
into them. Griffin called it the Andrea Doria effect, after the famous 
ocean liner collision of 1956.
Although we had observed bats eating calling frogs, that did not 
mean that the bats were orienting to the calls. They could have just 
as easily been echolocating the frog’s body. We gathered some circum-
stantial evidence in the field that frog- eating bats were attracted to the 
túngara frog’s call. We put speakers broadcasting frog calls near the bot-
tom of the mist nets in the forest; quite often the bats flew into the 
mist net right above the speaker. Since then, generations of researchers 
have used acoustic baits to catch these bats. More convincingly, we also 
placed pairs of speakers in the forest, one broadcasting the túngara frog’s 
simple calls, whines only, and the other its complex calls, whines with 
chucks. The bats came out of the canopy, swooping right over the speak-
ers. We did not know how many bats were involved, but of the more 
than two hundred passes by bats over the speakers, about 70 percent 
were to the complex call. The acid test, however, took place in a flight 
cage and mimicked the experiments I did with the female túngara frogs; 
we gave the bats a choice between a simple call and a complex call. 
Even though the bats and frogs are interested in the calls for different 
reasons— one for a meal, the other for a mate— they showed similar re-
sponses to the calls. Both frogs and bats are attracted to a simple whine, 
and both preferred the complex call to the simple one; about 90 percent 
of the bats’ responses were to the complex call. Paradox resolved! Many 
years later, Rachel Page, now a STRI staff scientist, showed that bats 
could more easily locate calls with chucks compared with calls without 
chucks.
Adding chucks to the whine increases a male’s success in attracting a  
mate, but it also increases his risk of becoming a meal. The males are 
at the tipping point between sex and survival: more chucks tilt the bal-
ance one way; fewer chucks, the other. A few years later, I worked with 
two neurobiologists, Volkmar Bruns and Hynek Burda, to show that 
frog- eating bats have adaptations in their inner ears that allow them 
to remain sensitive to the ultrasonics in their echolocation calls while 
extending their hearing down into the lower frequency range of frog 
calls.11 As far as we know, none of the close relatives of the frog- eating 
bat share these neural adaptations for sonic hearing. If that is the case, 

26 • Chapter 2
then it seems that when frog- eating bats first encountered frogs in the 
rainforests of tropical America, they probably hunted frogs with their 
echolocation calls but were deaf to the calls of the frogs. But after some 
evolutionary tinkering of their ears, and undoubtedly some reorganiza-
tion of the brain, they became the túngara frogs’ greatest nemesis and 
put some checks on the evolution of sexual beauty in this species.
* * *
Preferences of any kind are a hard thing to nail down in humans or in 
other animals, and sexual preferences are among the hardest. A variety 
of studies have shown that women prefer men with more chiseled facial 
features,12 peahens prefer peacocks with longer tails,13 and female túng-
ara frogs prefer calls with chucks. But where is the seat of these prefer-
ences, and what mechanisms regulate the preferences for one mate over 
another? What needs to change for a preference to evolve?
A behavioral preference is a phenomenon that results from an in-
teraction between incoming stimuli and inherent biases in the sensory, 
neural, and cognitive processing of those stimuli. If we want to under-
stand how preferences evolve and why they differ among species, we 
need to measure more than just the behavioral output. We need to un-
derstand what changes in the hardware contribute to these behavioral 
preferences.
To explain my desire to understand preferences at the level of the 
brain, let me give an analogy. We can compare the maximum speed of a 
cheetah and a leopard by measuring their velocity as they sprint across 
the savanna. The cheetah is faster, and it has evolved to be faster. But 
we really have learned little about how evolution has taken place until 
we go under the hood of this well- oiled running machine. If we also 
measure the biomechanical efficiency of the limbs, the size of the heart, 
and the contributions of aerobic and anaerobic metabolism to support 
such speed, we can say a lot more than just “cheetahs evolved to run 
fast”— we can actually describe what evolved.
We went under the hood of túngara frogs, and we found that both 
individual areas in the brain and complex networks that connect brain 
areas contribute to the sexual preferences for calls. We utilized two dif-
ferent approaches to determine how different parts of the brain respond 
to different sounds. In one approach, neurophysiology, electrodes record 

Why All the Whining and Chucking? • 27
impulses from neurons in various parts of the frog’s brain while different 
sounds are played. The electrodes record neural firing, and this allows us 
to determine which sounds elicit the most neural activity in different 
parts of the brain. In the second approach, gene expression, females are 
again exposed to different sounds. They are then sacrificed, and we slice 
the brain to identify the expression of certain genes that indicate neural 
activity has just taken place. These studies of the brain, combined with 
our detailed knowledge of behavioral preferences, have produced a rela-
tively simple explanation for why females prefer certain calls.
As I will discuss in detail later, the most important mate choice deci-
sion an animal can make is getting a partner of the same species. If a fe-
male mates with a male of the wrong species, a heterospecific instead of 
a conspecific, she has usually wasted her substantial reproductive invest-
ment, as little of Darwinian value ever results from these mis- matings. 
In most species, courters exhibit characteristics that provide choosers 
with unambiguous information about their species identity.
As I said before, there are about six thousand species of frogs. Nearly 
all of them call, and the calls of all of those species are different. When 
females are tested behaviorally, they almost always prefer the call of their 
own males to those of other species. Where is the seat of this call prefer-
ence? The entire neural circuitry of the auditory system, the decision- 
making system, and the behavioral output system biases the female 
to find these conspecific calls most attractive, most sexually beautiful. 
These neurons determine her sexual aesthetics, and these are the brain 
areas in frogs that must change when call preferences evolve.
In humans and frogs alike, hearing starts in the ear, the inner ear to 
be precise. The inner ear is a capsule in our head that contains organs of 
balance and hearing. Inside are hair cells embedded in membranes that 
discharge neural impulses when the membranes rock back and forth 
in response to sound or a change in the orientation of our head. The 
neurons that innervate the hair cells in the hearing organ form a large 
collection of neurons called the auditory nerve, which is the conduit of 
information from the inner ear to the brain.
As I will discuss in the next chapter, all sensory, perceptual, and even 
cognitive systems are nonlinear; that is, their neural and behavioral out-
put cannot be predicted by only the stimulus input. This is a pretty ob-
vious statement. For example, many potential stimulus inputs are not 

28 • Chapter 2
even detected. Of the entire electromagnetic spectrum, which extends 
from X- rays to radio waves, we are only able to see a small sliver of 
wavelengths, from 400 to 700 nanometers. We are blind to much of the 
ultraviolet that is seen by many birds and fishes. This restricted percep-
tual field occurs in all of our sensory modalities. Man’s best friend, the 
dog, is sensitive to thousands of airborne odors, whereas our olfactory 
system is fairly anosmic compared with the dog’s. The same is true of 
sound. Given our hearing range of 20– 20,000 Hz, we are deaf to the 
ultrasonics that dominate most bats’ auditory scene. Most bats, on the 
other hand, are deaf to most of what we have to say. The frog- eating bat, 
as we have seen, is an exception.
If we want to begin to understand how the túngara frog’s brain codes 
the sexual aesthetics of sound, we have to first know what the frog’s ear 
tells the frog’s brain. Even within its range of hearing, any ear of any 
animal hears some frequencies better than others. We are just like other 
animals in this regard. Although we hear frequencies over three orders 
of magnitude, we are most sensitive to frequencies from about 2,000 to 
5,000 Hz. Frogs, however, carry a restrictive hearing range to extremes. 
Instead of having one hearing organ in the inner ear, like all birds and 
mammals, it has two. One, the amphibian papilla (AP), is usually sen-
sitive to sounds below 1,500 Hz and the other, the basilar papilla (BP), 
is sensitive to sounds above 1,500 Hz. Many years ago, Bob Capranica, 
while first at Bell Labs and then at Cornell University, showed that 
the tuning of these two inner ears is used as a pair of filters that match 
the more dominant frequencies of the mating call of its species.14 My 
colleague Walt Wilczynski and I worked with Capranica to varying de-
grees and showed that the same is true in túngara frogs.
What does the ear hear? By playing the frog pure tones while re-
cording neural discharges from auditory nerves, Walt showed that the 
tuning of the two inner ears is well matched to the frog calls. The AP 
is tuned to right around 700 Hz— a near perfect match to an average 
whine with a dominant frequency of about 700 Hz. The BP, as expected, 
is tuned to higher frequencies, 2,200 Hz to be exact. This is close to the 
average chuck’s dominant frequency of 2,500 Hz but favors frequencies 
that are lower than average. One reason the túngara frogs prefer con-
specific calls is that these contain sounds that they hear better, and one 
reason they prefer lower- frequency chucks of larger males is that those 

Why All the Whining and Chucking? • 29
calls are closer to the peak tuning of the BP than the average chuck. This 
means that the females perceive calls of larger males as louder than calls 
of smaller males. Thus our first venture under the hood showed that 
the tuning of one of the frog’s inner ear organs, the BP, helps to define 
one part of her sexual aesthetics, namely, her preference for the lower- 
frequency chucks of large males.
The ears serve as the conduit to the brain for all of the neural stim-
ulation derived from sound. The brain is where the real action is when 
it comes to preferences of any kind. To describe this neural machinery, 
we supplemented our neurophysiology with the second approach to de-
coding these preferences. Kim Hoke worked with me and Walt to use 
gene expression to visualize the location and quantity of neural responses 
the túngara frogs showed to different types of sounds.15 After a túngara 
frog was exposed to one type of sound, either the whine, the whine- chuck, 
white noise, or the call of a heterospecific, she was sacrificed; her brain was 
thinly sliced; and then a molecular probe identified where there was ex-
pression of particular genes that are indicators of neural activity. In this 
way we were able to visualize how neural activity throughout the entire 
brain varies in response to these different sounds.
It would be ideal for us scientists if there were a single neuron that 
encoded sexual aesthetics; “push her button” with a sexy sight, sound, 
or odor, and bingo, her sex neurons fire and she is turned on, in love or 
lust depending on the species. But these types of single cells or feature 
detectors now seem to be the exception rather than the rule. Decisions, 
such as what to eat, where to sleep, and with whom to mate, are more 
likely to result from the summed responses of entire populations of neu-
rons. This makes sense given that most sexual stimuli are a complex mix 
of stimulus variables, such as the duration, frequency, and amplitude of 
sound components, and different neurons are tuned for different types 
of stimulations.
This is what Kim found to be true in túngara frogs. The hindbrain of 
the frog harbors a large area or “nucleus” responsible for auditory anal-
ysis. Kim showed that across neurons in the auditory nucleus there is 
more neural firing in response first to the whine- chuck and then to the 
whine compared with other kinds of sound. Not only do the sexually 
attractive signals elicit more neural stimulation in the auditory area of 
the brain, but they also change the activity relationships among other 

30 • Chapter 2
brain regions; that is, the degree to which activity in one brain region 
is correlated to activity in another brain region, also known as the func-
tional connectivity. When a túngara frog hears a túngara frog call, com-
pared with calls of other species, there is an increase in correlated neu-
ral activity in the neural circuits that generate decisions, in the circuits 
that are involved in the sensation of reward, and in those that generate 
motor output, namely, phonotaxis to her mate. Although some details 
are lacking, we now have a basic understanding of the underlying sen-
sory, neural, and cognitive processes that generate the sexual aesthetics 
of the female túngara frog. The seats of these preferences are no longer a 
mystery; we can open the brain and point right to them.
* * *
Biology raises questions about how things work and also why they 
evolved to work that way. We usually refer to these two sets of ques-
tions as proximate and ultimate ones, and most studies of biology re-
main firmly entrenched in one of those domains. But not this study. 
The túngara frog has become one of the best- known “model systems” in 
sexual selection because my colleagues and I have been able to answer 
questions in each domain and, even more important, because we can use 
information from one domain to explore questions in the other.
Earlier in this chapter, I pointed out that female túngara frogs prefer 
the lower- frequency chucks of larger males and that these larger males 
fertilize more of her eggs than do smaller males. And just above you 
read that this preference for larger males results from the female’s ear, 
specifically her BP, being tuned to the frequencies that are slightly lower 
than the average chuck. Thus females receive more neural stimulation 
in the BP from larger males compared with smaller ones. Evolutionary 
logic would suggest that the tuning of the female’s ear evolved to be 
what it is because it generates a preference for larger males, who fertil-
ize more eggs. Thus females whose BPs are tuned to lower- frequency 
calls of larger males will have a selective advantage over females with 
BPs tuned to higher- frequency calls of smaller males. The evolution of 
this particular sexual aesthetic, preference for lower- frequency chucks of 
larger males, evolved because it boosted the female’s Darwinian fitness. 
This is logical, but as it turns out, it is not biological; this is not what 
happened. How do we know this?

Why All the Whining and Chucking? • 31
The túngara frog has about eight close relatives, all of which are in 
South America. Half of them are in the Amazon, on the eastern side of 
the Andes, and the other half are on the western side of the Andes. Stan 
Rand and I made numerous trips to record calls and collect individuals 
of these eight species. We worked in every country in Central America, 
from Mexico to Panama, in the Andes of Peru and Ecuador, in the 
Amazon basin in Ecuador and Brazil, and in the Llanos grasslands of 
Venezuela. With the exception of some populations of an Amazonian 
species, all of the other frogs in this group have males that produce 
whines but not chucks. What is the tuning of their ears? We brought 
these frogs back to Walt Wilczynski, who characterized it, as he had 
previously done for the túngara frogs. These species were remarkably 
similar.16
In each of the species, the tuning of the AP matched the frequen-
cies in their whines. Since most of them did not make chucks or other 
higher- frequency notes, we knew they did not use their BPs in commu-
nication. But they all still had a BP, and those BPs were tuned. Amaz-
ingly, they were all tuned to the same frequencies to which túngara 
frogs were tuned. For the túngara frogs this makes sense because the 
BP tuning matches the chuck, but most of these other frog species were 
chuck- less.
Evolutionary biologists rely on a principle called parsimony to inter-
pret how events happened in the past. Parsimony posits that, all else 
being equal, the simplest explanation is more likely to be the correct 
one. Think of the human heart. We have a wonderfully adapted four- 
chambered heart that excels at oxygenating blood. But so do all of the 
other 5,500 species of mammals in the world. Did this exquisite adapta-
tion evolve 5,500 times, once in each species, or did it evolve once in the 
ancestral mammal and was then inherited by other mammalian species 
as they arose? The answer is plainly the latter.
When we apply this same logic to the túngara frog and its close 
relatives we conclude that the tuning of the BP, which they all share, 
did not evolve in each species separately but is shared through a com-
mon ancestor. That means the BP tuning existed before chucks. This 
totally flips our thinking about how the preferences for lower- frequency 
chucks evolved. Females did not evolve their tuning because of the ben-
efits of preferring larger males, but instead, when males evolved chucks, 

32 • Chapter 2
they evolved frequencies that matched the preexisting tuning of the fe-
male’s ear. We called this process sensory exploitation,17 and along with a 
more general process I discuss in the next chapter, sensory drive, this idea 
caused an intellectual revolution, or what the philosopher Thomas Kuhn 
called a paradigm shift, in the field of sexual selection.
I hope that this stroll through the sex life of a simple tropical frog 
convinces you that beauty and the brain are inextricably linked. It con-
vinced me that the brain is the missing link in our understanding of sex-
ual selection for sexual beauty not only in túngara frogs but throughout 
much of the animal kingdom.

T H R E E
Beauty and the Brain
Beauty in things exists merely in the mind which contemplates them.
— David Hume
There is no beauty without a brain . . .  just as there is no sound 
when a tree falls in the forest if there is no ear to hear it. Beauty is not 
only in the eyes of the beholders but in their ears, noses, taste buds, and 
touch receptors. These are the sense organs that are first stimulated by 
the world around us and that channel the outside world into our inside 
brain, the final destination, where our percepts of nature are formed 
and where our sexual aesthetics emerge. To understand beauty we need 
to understand the brain, and to understand sexual beauty we need to 
understand the sexual brain. The sexual brain is not a discrete module,  
but as we will see, it involves all the parts of a neural system that analyzes 
and makes decisions about sex, as well as modulates the way one feels 
about it. What makes the sexual brain complex and sexual aesthetics so 
unpredictable is that most of these neural processes are multipurpose, 
shared across domains, and recruited to perform different tasks. For ex-
ample, animals use the same retinas and photopigments to assess both  

34 • Chapter 3
food and mates. And our affective reactions to sex, drugs, and rock and 
roll are modulated by the same reward centers.
In the next three chapters we will explore beauty through each of 
three major senses: visual, auditory, and olfactory. In this chapter, we 
will consider how and why the brain has a sexual aesthetic, why it varies 
among different animals, and how the other domains in which the brain 
must function influence what we decide is beautiful.
* * *
We all know people who seem to be in their own world. This is true for 
animals as well, and the German cyberneticist Jakob von Uexküll even 
coined a word for it— the Umwelt.1 Different animals, he argued, can 
live in the same physical location but inhabit different sensory worlds, 
so much so they might as well be living on different planets.  Umwelten 
differ among species as much as their morphology and their DNA. Un-
derstanding how animals perceive their environments, and how indi-
viduals of the same species can differ in their perceptions of the world, 
helps us begin to fathom how they experience beauty.
For eons before the Irish author Bram Stoker wrote Dracula, bats 
have frightened the masses and confounded the naturalists.2 Bats are 
the only mammals capable of self- powered flight; they have small eyes, 
and yet they fly around on the darkest of nights able to navigate as if 
they had a supernatural sense. In the late 1700s, the Italian Catholic 
priest and scientist Lazaro Spallanzini tortured bats as he searched for 
their sixth sense.3 He burned out their eyes and filled their ears and 
noses with wax in an attempt to decipher just how they could find their 
way around in total darkness, but he never quite figured it out. It was 
more than a century and a half later, in the 1930s, that Donald Griffin 
and Robert Galambos solved the puzzle in a more benign way, using 
new technologies to record ultrasonic sounds and noninvasive behav-
ioral experiments to demonstrate the ability of bats to navigate in the 
dark.4 They provided the first real insights into the bat’s world of ultra-
sonic echolocation. The returning echoes of these calls, which are out of 
our hearing range, provide bats with an acoustic image of their world 
somewhat similar to our visual image. But only somewhat. The famed 
philosopher Thomas Nagel asked rhetorically, “What is it like to be a 
bat?”5 Scientists might one day be able to describe in great detail all the 

Beauty and the Brain • 35
behavioral and neural mechanisms that enable echolocation, but, Nagel 
argued, we will never know what it is like to be a bat because we can 
never have the same shared sensory and conscious experiences.
Beauty is also a sensory experience, and we describe it as such: a 
painting looks beautiful, a meal smells delicious, and a song sounds en-
chanting. Different animals experience sexual beauty in different senses; 
moths, fishes, and mammals are very keen about smelling one another, 
while crickets, frogs, and birds spend a lot of time listening. If we want 
to understand the diversity of sexual aesthetics that gives rise to the 
diversity of sexual beauty in the animal kingdom, we must understand 
how sexual beauty emerges from the senses and the brain. Extrapolating 
from Nagel, when we catch a whiff of a buck’s musk during his rut, we 
might not share the same ecstasy as a doe, but if we probe her olfactory 
system, we can at least understand why she is in ecstasy.
To understand how animals perceive beauty we will begin at the 
sense organs— the ears, eyes, and noses— as they are the portals that 
connect the individual to its outside world, the conduits through which 
sensations flow to the brain. These sense organs are gatekeepers, and not 
all sensations can enter.
I have never seen more spectacular rainbows than those over the 
Dingle Peninsula on the west coast of Ireland. They rise out of the sea, 
arch overhead, and then plunge into the green coastal hills. It is hard to 
believe there is not a pot of gold at the end. A rainbow is refracted sun-
light sorted into colored bands by particles in the air. We see the longer 
wavelengths as red bands on one border of the rainbow and the shorter 
wavelengths as blue bands on the other, with greens, yellows, and or-
anges in between. I doubt that a seagull flying overhead feels what I feel 
when I see a rainbow, and I am certain it doesn’t see what I see. Gulls, 
and many other birds, have vision that is shifted to shorter wavelengths; 
they can see ultraviolet (UV) light, which we can only sense when our 
skin is burned by UV sunlight. Thus a seagull looking at a rainbow in 
Ireland should see extra bands of color beyond the blues that are visible 
to me. Bees can also see into the UV range of light. This is why flowers 
that attract bees to pollinate them often decorate their petals with a se-
ductive tapestry of UV- reflecting markings that point to the flower’s sex 
organs, seemingly urging the bees to “come see my etchings.” Similar 
differences among animals occur in other senses. We can hear a bat’s 

36 • Chapter 3
wing as it flutters past us in the night, but we are deaf to the bat’s ultra-
sounds echoing all around us. We can hear an elephant trumpeting, but 
not the infrasounds it uses to communicate with other elephants miles 
away. A large range of odors are even further out of our reach. Not even 
Nagel would contemplate what it would be like to have a dog’s sense 
of smell; it would be too mind- boggling. Since we can only appreciate 
what we sense, differences in sense organs generate differences in sexual 
aesthetics among animals. This is the primary reason why sexual beauty 
takes so many forms.
But shouldn’t all sensory systems provide an accurate description of 
the world if, as all evolutionary biologists would argue, they evolved to 
facilitate survival and reproduction? Would it not be best to have a full 
and unbiased estimate of the world around us, rather than one limited 
to certain bands of excitation? This is another example of an assertion 
that seems logical but is not biological; it just doesn’t happen. Each of 
our sense organs responds to only a sliver of the world in its modality. 
As I just noted, human ears are sensitive from 20 to 20,000 hertz (Hz), 
making us deaf to infrasound (< 20 Hz) and ultrasound (> 20,000 Hz). 
Our eyes, by definition, are only sensitive to visible light with wavelengths 
from 400 to 700 nanometers (nm), an astonishingly narrow band of  
the electromagnetic spectrum, which extends from 0.01 nm gamma  
rays to radio waves longer than 1,000 nm. Our olfactory system, as well, 
seems anosmic in terms of the bouquet of volatile compounds in the 
environment that could be sampled, and compared with those of other 
animals who sample this world much more generously. And even within 
the accessible ranges of stimuli, our hearing, vision, and olfaction are 
all “tuned” to be more sensitive to a subsample of the stimuli that are 
sensed.
Why are our senses so stingy? There are two main reasons, constraints 
and adaptations. We just don’t have the equipment we need to access all 
of the world around us. Short, ultraviolet wavelengths pack a dangerous 
amount of energy that can wreak havoc inside our retinas, while infrared 
wavelengths have too little energy to be captured by our photoreceptors. 
There are also trade- offs. Designing an ear sensitive to ultrasonic fre-
quencies is usually done at the expense of hearing low frequencies.
There are also adaptive reasons for our restricted sensory worlds. In 
today’s realm of “big data” we know that obtaining information is often 

Beauty and the Brain • 37
the easy part. Computationally processing the data into meaningful pat-
terns remains the primary challenge. Sequencing a genome is now a 
piece of cake; figuring out what it means is a very different story. Brains 
have the same problem: computation is expensive, and the more infor-
mation pouring into our brain, the less efficiently we process it. Sensory 
channels are one way to filter out the noise from the signal before it gets 
to the brain. The only sensory experiences that matter in an evolutionary 
sense are the ones that increase or decrease our ability to survive and 
reproduce. Within the range of stimuli that a biological entity could 
possibly access, we expect our sensory organs to be most sensitive to 
what matters most. This is the case in the hearing of many frogs; their 
inner ear organs are tuned to best hear their species’ calls— what sound 
could be more adaptive than that! You might suggest that it would be 
equally adaptive to have their hearing also tuned to the echolocation 
calls of the frog- eating bat. This might be a case where adaptation meets 
constraint. We assume, but certainly do not know for sure, that there are 
some design constraints that would prohibit the ear of the túngara frog 
from hearing sounds in the ultrasonics in addition to being sensitive 
to the much lower frequencies of their whine and their chuck. On the 
other hand, there is a species of frog in China that calls in the ultrasonic, 
and seems able to hear these calls.6 This further suggests that túngara 
frogs should be able to detect bat echolocation calls, but they don’t. At 
some point we will probably know why.
* * *
Our sense organs introduce the first biases in what we perceive, and 
they establish the foundation of our sexual aesthetics. But the yeoman’s 
work takes place in the brain. Each sensory organ sends information 
to our central processing center, where it is passed from one process-
ing hub, or nucleus, to the next, each more finely sculpting a percept 
from what we see, hear, and smell. In crickets and frogs, neurons in 
the brain are tuned to different properties of the species’ mating calls, 
such as call rate, pitch, and duration. These neurons can combine their 
information such that the right call matches the percept of an attractive 
mate while other sounds, calls of other species, and even some other 
males of the same species fall short of meeting these criteria. As noted 
in the previous chapter, when a female túngara frog hears a whine, or 

38 • Chapter 3
better yet a whine- chuck, the main auditory center of her brain sparks 
with enhanced excitement compared with when she hears other sounds 
blowing in the wind or the whining of a different species. The same 
happens with sexual odors in fruit flies. Although the trip from the 
sensory channel to the brain is more direct in flies, groups of neurons in 
the brain are exquisitely sensitive to sexual odors and unresponsive to 
other kinds of smells.
Male fruit flies have a sexual pheromone, cVA, which stimulates 
courtship in females and suppresses it in males.7 The molecular struc-
ture of this pheromone is complementary to the structure of one specific 
olfactory receptor in the fly’s antennae called Or67d. The cVA molecule 
fits snuggly into Or67d, like a round peg in a round hole; this fit is the 
signal that the female is sensing a male of her own species. Square pegs, 
such as the pheromones of other species, don’t fit and thus are not iden-
tified as an appropriate mate. When this perfect fit takes place, Or67d 
sends a message to the fly’s brain, where it combines with other in-
coming stimuli to trigger the female’s sexual attraction to the male— in 
response she courts him. This is not the only stimulus important in fly 
mate attraction, but stimulating this receptor is both necessary and suf-
ficient to get females to court. How important is this receptor in defin-
ing the female fruit fly’s sexual aesthetics? When researchers replace this 
receptor with a moth pheromone receptor, the mutant flies will then 
court when they smell a male moth!
Even for animals who seem focused on one sensory modality, the 
world is a multimodal place. Yes, we do tend to think of courtship in dif-
ferent animals in the context of one sensory modality or the other. Fish 
and butterflies are often visual courters, moths and mammals use odors, 
and frogs and crickets rely on sound. Although many animals court 
primarily in one modality, most are multimodal because choosers seem 
intent on extracting as much information as they can from a courter’s 
display. Let’s think about people speaking. Our lips move, which allows 
the sounds to escape from our mouth, and as this happens, our lips 
shape the sound into discernible phonemes. But the lips incidentally 
provide information about what we are saying, enough information to 
help us understand speech in a noisy world and for a lip- reader to un-
derstand speech in a silent one. The frog vocal sac is similar to lips in 
that it is needed by the caller to make sound, but it is also integrated 

Beauty and the Brain • 39
into the listener’s perception of the courter. In a number of frog species, 
females are more attracted to calls when they can see the male’s vocal 
sac pulsing along with it.8 This visual cue, however, doesn’t do much for 
females if it is not tied to a call, just as the swinging arm of a metronome 
does little for our sense of rhythm without the sound of the beat.
Even flies have multimodal sexual aesthetics. The cocktail of modal-
ities used in their courtship and mate choice includes sounds or “love 
songs” from their vibrating wings, visually detected athletic dances, the 
“taste” of a potential mate, and as noted above, sexual fragrances. All of 
these different types of stimuli are integrated in the brain and emerge 
as defining an attractive mate in a very specific manner. For example, 
there is a lot of groping between fruit flies when they court, and since 
they have taste receptors covering much of their bodies, this means a lot 
of tasting goes on during courtship. Getting a taste of the right female 
activates the male’s taste receptor (more romantically known as ppk23+), 
which then enhances his attraction to the female he just tasted.9 But 
she only is perceived as more attractive if the taste is combined with 
the right olfactory and visual stimulants— cVA being one of them. For 
all animals, and especially for us, one of the important tasks of the sex-
ual brain is to bring together the stimulation from the different senses, 
integrate them, and then determine how this emergent concept of a 
potential mate matches up to our sexual aesthetics of a beautiful one.
Each sense is biased toward the sexual traits that stimulate it, and 
the brain to what combinations of stimuli it deems sexually attractive. 
But what are some of the rules that dictate these sexual aesthetics? As 
I suggested above, the brain has evolved to detect things that matter. 
What can matter more than getting the right mate? By the “right mate” 
I don’t mean the best mate; we’ll get to that later, but first things first. 
And the first thing is to find a partner who works, a partner whose 
gametes will fuse with yours to produce viable offspring. This first and 
most important criterion for a mate is that it be the right species, and 
the right species is your species, whomever you might be.
Choosing the right mate, the right species, is a crucial component 
of any animal’s sexual aesthetics because genes do not act alone but are 
part of an integrated genome, and genes have evolved to be functional 
in their particular genetic background, with other genes of the same 
species. Different species of platyfish, for example, have different tumor 

40 • Chapter 3
suppression genes.10 When different species are crossed, the function-
ality of these genes is disrupted, and the hybrids are cursed with mela-
noma, the same skin cancer that kills more than fifty thousand of us each 
year. In general, cross- species matings are a bad thing because genes of 
different species are often not compatible. Owing to various kinds of 
genetic incompatibilities, fertilization usually does not take place, and 
if it does, development often goes awry. The cost of this mate- preference 
error is a big one, especially for females, whose large investment in eggs 
is wasted. Luckily, the brain is pretty good at figuring out the correct 
species, because it makes choosers more attracted to traits of their own 
species (conspecifics) than to those of different species ( heterospecifics). 
The details of how the brain accomplishes this mating match vary,  
but the general principles are similar among species and across sensory 
modalities.
In the previous chapter, I noted that all of the six thousand species of 
frogs have a unique species- specific mating call. These sounds provide 
enough information for the female’s brain to correctly identify males of 
her species, as opposed to males of other species, as long as it is wired 
correctly. And the brain is wired to do this for every species that has 
been examined. The auditory system of frogs is biased to being more 
responsive to combinations of sounds from their own species. This is 
accomplished, as noted above, by sets of neurons that are biased to the 
particular patterns of sound that are peculiar to her species. The same is 
true for the auditory systems of crickets and birds, the visual systems of 
fishes and butterflies, and the olfactory systems of moths and mammals. 
The first attribute of an animal’s sexual aesthetics is usually based on 
getting a mate of its own species. This is why sexual attraction rarely 
extends to other species.
This first rule of sexual attraction can have some important unin-
tended consequences. Within a group of male sage grouse at a lek or 
male fish displaying on a coral reef, some individuals might better fit 
the profile of “conspecific” than others; they all are “right” mates, but 
some seem more right than others, and these will be preferred as mates 
because they better match the brain’s sexual aesthetics. There might be 
nothing else better about the preferred mate except that she or he is 
more sexually beautiful, but no more healthy, wealthy, or wise than the 
others.

Beauty and the Brain • 41
Once choosers have identified a group of conspecific mates, we ex-
pect them to move on to their next criterion and identify “good” mates. 
As we will see in the next chapters, certain attributes of sexual traits 
might indicate qualities of a courter that are beneficial to a chooser. If 
large antlers, broad shoulders, or a rich song indicate that a potential 
mate has control of better resources, will be a better parent, or has genes 
that are more compatible, then we would expect the brain to evolve to 
add these traits to the chooser’s sexual aesthetics. The second rule of 
an animal’s sexual aesthetic, therefore, is to not only get a conspecific 
mate (rule 1) but to get a good one (rule 2). Ultimately, a good mate is 
defined as a mate that will increase the chooser’s number of offspring, 
or in other words, one that will increase the chooser’s Darwinian fitness.
So far we have been concentrating on how the brain is wired to de-
liver conspecific and good quality mates by linking the perception of 
sexual beauty to these types of individuals. If we think of how animals 
evolve to survive in their environment, we usually envision the environ-
ment as an agent of selection that causes the animals to evolve traits, 
the targets of selection, that adapt them to the environment. Colder 
temperatures (agent) select for thicker fur (target) in many mammals, 
but this does not result in the environment now evolving even lower 
temperatures. The sexual brain, however, is both a target of selection, be-
cause it evolves in response to selection to deliver certain types of mates, 
and also an agent of selection, as it drives the evolution of sexual beauty 
in the opposite sex. Thus one way in which sexual beauty evolves is for 
courters to develop traits that exploit the chooser’s sexual aesthetics. 
This is what happened in the túngara frogs as the males evolved a chuck 
to exploit the preexisting tuning of their BP hearing organ. This is what 
we call sensory exploitation.
I will review many examples of sensory exploitation in the next three 
chapters. A most famous one was revealed by studies of platyfish and 
swordtails by Alexandra Basolo when she was a graduate student.11 
Both types of fishes are common in your local pet store. They are close 
relatives to one another but differ in the presence or absence of one 
particular sexual trait. Male swordtails have a long sword extending 
from the tail. Female swordtails tend to prefer males who have longer 
swords. What about platyfish? They lack swords, but what if a male were 
suddenly to evolve one? Basolo answered that question by attaching a 

42 • Chapter 3
plastic sword to males and giving females a choice between a normal 
male platyfish and the artificially endowed ones. The female platyfish 
preferred sworded males. This means that female platyfish have a hid-
den preference for swords even though their males do not have swords. 
Since the platyfishes and swordtails are each other’s closest relatives, 
this means that they share a recent common ancestor. Basolo applied 
the evolutionary principle of parsimony to this problem, much as I 
applied it to túngara frog hearing and túngara frog chucks in chap-
ter 2, and concluded that platyfish and swordtails share a preference 
for swords inherited from their recent common ancestor. So when she 
added a sword to male platyfish, there was an immediate preference for 
it.  Basolo didn’t have to hang around the lab until the female platyfish 
happened to evolve this preference, nor would a male platyfish have to 
wait around to be considered more beautiful if he happened to evolve a 
real sword. He would be an immediate hit with his females.
Hidden preferences are often lurking in animals’ sexual aesthetics, 
masked to others because there are yet no sexual traits to elicit it. But 
if that trait evolves, one that matches or exploits this particular sexual 
aesthetic, then it is immediately deemed to be sexually beautiful, and, 
all else being equal, it should soon evolve to be common among males. 
This notion of how sexual beauty evolves was virtually unknown before 
1990 until a few other researchers and I developed this theory. Now it 
is thought to be one of the major factors driving the evolution of sexual 
beauty.
It would seem that sworded swordtails and chucking túngara frogs 
are in the vanguard of evolutionary development among similar species, 
as they and they alone have recently acquired these sexually desirable 
traits. An alternative, however, is that they are the last species to retain 
the trait, which has died out owing to competing pressures, such as pre-
dation risk. We must remember that what evolution giveth, evolution 
can taketh away.
* * *
When males “exploit” a female’s sensory system by evolving a trait that 
attracts her to mate, the exploitation does not mean that choosing these 
males is costly to the females. When a male’s signal better matches the 
female’s neural biases, it is usually more easily perceived, and thus the fe-

Beauty and the Brain • 43
male’s mate choice is made more quickly and efficiently. Breeding areas 
are usually dangerous places because of all of the eavesdropping pred-
ators and parasites, so choosing fast often means choosing safe— fast 
sex is safe sex. Thus female choosers often benefit when their senses are 
“exploited” by male traits that evolve through sensory exploitation.
Sometimes sensory exploitation does lead to negative consequences 
for choosers. Yet even when there is an apparent cost to being sexually 
exploited, the true cost must be calculated within the context of all of 
the chooser’s other activities, which can sometimes reveal that the price 
is not as costly as we might think.
A good example comes from plant- animal sex. Most flowers reward 
their pollinators with nectar or pollen for assisting in their reproduc-
tion.12 Deceptive orchids are a big exception. These orchids use sensory 
exploitation by mimicking the silhouettes and odors of female bees to 
attract male bees that have evolved sensory systems and neural path-
ways that respond to these shapes and smells when searching for mates. 
The male bee attempts to copulate with one of these flowers and in 
doing so picks up some pollen. Eventually, the bee realizes the object of 
his desires is not a female, and he flies off. The next orchid that dupes 
him is pollinated by the pollen he carries, and he picks up more pollen 
from this second object of his misplaced sexual attention, which will 
be delivered to the next deceptive orchid he visits. He will finally find 
a female, but they are hard to come by. This waste of his time appears 
costly at first glance.
How stupid can this bee be? To be fair, we have to consider his at-
traction to mates as a signal detection problem. Consider that a set of 
stimuli can indicate either that another animal (or a plant mimicking 
one) is an appropriate mate or is not. An animal can make two types 
of correct decisions in this circumstance: accept appropriate mates and 
reject inappropriate ones. But we all make mistakes, and in signal detec-
tion theory there are two of them: a false alarm (incorrectly identifying 
the inappropriate individual as a mate) or a miss (incorrectly rejecting 
an appropriate mate). Which mistake would you rather make? It de-
pends on the costs of each mistake. If mates are plentiful and the cost of 
copulating with a flower is dear, then it would be better to have a high 
threshold for mate recognition even if this would result in missing out 
on some real matings. But if mates are hard to come by, as in the case of 

44 • Chapter 3
orchid bees, and it is not very costly to ravage a flower, then it is best to 
lower your acceptance threshold. When you finally encounter a female, 
you do not want to pass her up, and so what if you have to fool around 
with some flowers along the way? When we first consider the decision 
of a bee to be attracted to an orchid it seems pretty maladaptive, but 
when we consider the decision in the broader context of the bee’s life, 
it makes perfect sense. The small cost of ravaging a flower is less than 
the large cost of rejecting a real female as a result of having too picky a 
percept of sexual beauty.
Finally, if mating with an exploitative courter does result in a large 
cost to the chooser, then we would expect that the chooser would evolve 
a new response, perhaps a lack of response, to the exploitative trait. That 
is, the sensory biases that leads to sensory exploitation would change 
over evolutionary time. One way this could happen is by females evolv-
ing to abandon their biased preferences in favor of new preferences for 
sexual traits that are reliable indicators of important qualities of courters, 
those qualities that actually impact the number of successful offspring.
We have already seen how the importance of mating with the right 
species can influence the evolution of preferences for traits that indicate 
a courter is a conspecific. There are also traits within a species that might 
indicate an individual is a “good” mate, and we might expect choosers 
to evolve a preference for these traits when making mate choice deci-
sions. Amotz Zahavi, a renowned sociobiologist, suggested that courters 
who exhibit costly traits, such as the peacock’s tail, are demonstrating 
to choosers their underlying physical vigor in being able to bear this 
handicap.13 If there were a genetic basis for the courter’s ability to sur-
vive with this handicap, then he would pass down these genes to his 
and his partner’s offspring, and tail length would be a reliable indicator 
to females looking for a “good” mate. We will slog through some of the 
nuances of the handicap principle in chapter 8.
* * *
The brain might be our most important sex organ, but it also has other 
things on its mind. The brain and its sensory systems are crucial for de-
tecting all aspects of our environmental and social worlds, making sense 
of all those incoming data, and then responding in an appropriate man-
ner. The brain has priorities, and in some instances it has to optimize how 

Beauty and the Brain • 45
it performs tasks in one domain, which then influences how it performs 
in other domains. Food and sex are a good example of this interaction.
Food and sex have been intertwined in our culture for ages. Dinner 
is often treated as a part of a courtship ritual; oysters and chocolates are 
thought to have aphrodisiac properties; and the cherry is a symbol of 
virginity. We even refer to our sexual desires as appetites. The associa-
tion between food and sex is a bit different in nonhuman animals, and 
the interaction less transparent. In some cases, the properties of what 
animals see best can be explained by how the eyes evolved to find food. 
In primates, for example, color vision is thought to have evolved to find 
colorful ripe red fruit. The reactions of some male monkeys to the bright 
red hindquarters of receptive females, and our own attention to red and 
green traffic lights and the colorful splashes on a Jackson Pollock paint-
ing, would not be possible if our ancestors only searched for food that 
varied in the grayscale. In other species, especially in fishes, evolution 
tinkers with the wavelengths to which the retina’s photopigments are 
most sensitive in order to detect food in the complex ambient light that 
characterizes life underwater. The preferences of some fish for the bright 
courtship colors of males developed only after the eyes evolved biases to 
those colors for foraging tasks.
In the next three chapters I will discuss how sexual beauty is sensed 
by our visual, auditory, and olfactory systems, and in each case I will 
illustrate how these biases often first evolved to deal with needs other 
than sex. This general influence of the environment on the evolution of 
our senses is called sensory drive and is an important process that sets 
the stage for sexual aesthetics throughout much of the animal kingdom.
* * *
Sensory drive can be applied to higher- order brain functions that are not 
specific to any one sensory modality but instead are general processors 
that operate in any or all of our senses and can be applied to many do-
mains. These are cognitive processes, and like the sensory processes just 
discussed, they too can have an important influence on an individual’s 
sexual aesthetics, even when they evolve outside of the context of sex. I 
will review three of these processes now to set the stage for later anal-
ysis. So let us begin to get a sense for how habituation, generalization, 
and laws of comparison can be an important part of sexual aesthetics.

46 • Chapter 3
Nate Silver, the famed baseball sabermetrician and political pollster, 
asks a fundamental question in his book The Signal and the Noise: How do 
we tell them apart?14 Animals are pretty good at this; they just ignore the 
noise and attend to the signal. Ideally, sense organs filter out a lot of noise 
from a stimulus before it even reaches the brain, but for the noise that gets 
through, the brain has an excellent way to deal with it: habituation.
It makes little sense for a shore bird to listen to and process the con-
stant noise from the waves breaking on the shore; it is better off to use 
its brain to focus on searching for small fish in the surf and listening 
for the screech of hawks from above. Who has time for noise, especially 
since it is always pretty much the same? Usually it is best to ignore 
it, or more specifically, habituate to it. Besides conserving brain space 
and time, habituation also sets thresholds for knowing that something 
important has just happened, because it alerts us to when something 
has changed. When we walk down a noisy street, after a while we don’t 
sense the constant drone of traffic passing us by, we habituate to it and 
keep it out of our head. But when someone blows her horn, we imme-
diately dishabituate and are startled into alertness. Habituation and its 
flip side dishabituation are important adaptations for survival. It mat-
ters more to notice the sound of a branch breaking under the foot of a 
predator than the constant noise of wind blowing. And as noted above, 
brains evolve to sense what matters.
Habituation is a real problem in courtship that involves repetitive dis-
plays, and it seems that some complex courtship displays have evolved 
to keep the chooser from getting bored. Nightingales, for example, can 
produce more than a thousand songs in a single night. How do they 
hold a female’s interest? One solution is that if you must keep singing, at 
least vary the melody. Even in common grackles, where each male pro-
duces only a single courtship song type in nature, females show height-
ened response to artificial courtship stimuli made up of a repertoire of 
four distinct song types.15 Complexity is a good antidote for boredom; 
in the next few chapters, we will see how it has played an important role 
in the sexual aesthetics rooted in most of our senses.
* * *
Another cognitive process that looms large in how we perceive beauty 
is generalization. Just as the brain is designed to deliver appropriate 

Beauty and the Brain • 47
mates, it is also under strong selection pressure to recognize individuals 
and situations that are encountered repeatedly, in order to determine 
if and how to respond to them. The brain is an amazing organ, but it 
can’t know everything, and there is an important mechanism that allows 
us to make informed guesses when we encounter new individuals or 
situations— generalization.
If we have never seen an individual before, we can easily tell if it is 
a human or some other primate, and we often know if it is man or a 
woman, a boy or a girl. These discriminations are based on generalizations 
from what we know about our species, our sexes, and about cultural gen-
der. Sometimes our generalizations are quite accurate, while other times 
they can be horrendously wrong. On average, though, generalizing is 
usually better than making a random guess. These generalizations can 
set the stage for the emergence of sexual beauty.
A fundamental skill needed for sexual reproduction is the ability to 
tell males from females. In many animals this is learned, and in zebra 
finches, learning how to identify sex leads to some interesting biases in 
sexual attraction. Biological parents include one male and one female. 
If both parents raise their offspring, this provides a good opportunity 
for the young to learn how to distinguish the sexes. A nestling zebra 
finch learns to associate the orange beak of its mother with “female” 
and the red beak of its father with “male.”16 When it becomes an adult, 
the bird then uses this information it derived from experience with only 
two individuals, mom and dad, to distinguish the sex of all other zebra 
finches it encounters in its life. But oranges and reds vary and will not 
exactly match the color of mom’s or dad’s beak. Since the brain does not 
have a directory that associates every shade of red and orange with every 
individual it might ever meet, it makes its best guess based on what it 
does know. If a beak is more orange, the bird is more likely a female; 
if it is redder, then it is more probably a male. For intermediate shades 
between red and orange, the finch will be more likely to make mistakes. 
As we will soon see, this generalization rule not only allows correct 
identification of the sexes but sets the stage for the evolution of more 
extreme differences in beak colors between the sexes.
Sometimes it’s more important to be identified as who you are not 
than who you are. Let’s consider a male zebra finch shopping for a mate. 
He could choose one whose beak color is the most similar to his mom’s. 

48 • Chapter 3
But he could also choose a finch whose beak color is the most differ-
ent from his dad’s. “Looking for mom” involves searching for a specific 
shade of orange, while “looking for not- dad” results in an open- ended 
preference for more orange. This is what the male zebra finch does.17 
The phenomenon is called peak shift displacement, and it can lead to the 
evolution of more extreme traits— in this case maybe we should call 
it “beak” shift displacement. Even though there might be no inherent 
differences among females other than the shade of orange in their beak, 
generalization results in the evolution of more orange female beaks to 
evolve because they are more reliably identified as females and better 
match the male’s sexual aesthetics.
There are also hints of this phenomenon in our own species, as we 
often find more attractive those men with more masculine features, 
such as broader shoulders and deeper voices, and those women with 
more feminine features, more pendulant breasts and hourglass forms. 
Generalization and the open- ended preferences they generate are two 
psychological mechanisms that can go a long way toward explaining the 
evolution of elaborate sexual beauty.
* * *
Finally, we will consider a cognitive process that biases our perception of 
differences in magnitude— Weber’s Law. In both humans and animals, 
we often refer to the sexual marketplace where choosers do comparative 
shopping for courters, and most of these comparisons are based on the 
magnitude of the courter’s sexual traits. Hundreds of studies have shown 
that females often prefer males with more: brighter colors, longer tails, 
more complex songs, and bigger antlers.18 But how different do these 
traits have to be in order to be perceived as different? More precisely, 
what are the rules we use in comparing stimulus magnitude? Knowing 
how the brain compares things can help us understand what a chooser 
finds more beautiful, and it might be that there is a simple law that ex-
plains a lot of this preference and the limits over which it can operate.
Human comparisons of “how much” are often based on ratios rather 
than absolute differences; this was first posited by one of the early 
psychophysicists, the German scientist Ernst Heinrich Weber, in the 
1800s.19 If we can barely detect the difference between a one- pound 
weight and a weight only one ounce heavier, there would need to be 

Beauty and the Brain • 49
a much greater difference than an ounce for us to distinguish a one 
hundred– pound weight from a heavier one.
Weber’s Law could act as a cognitive brake to slow down the evo-
lution of exaggerated sexual beauty, at least in one species.20 As noted 
in the preceding chapter, female túngara frogs prefer mating calls with 
more chucks compared with those with fewer chucks. If this prefer-
ence is based on absolute comparisons, then the total number of chucks 
should not matter, only the absolute difference in the number of chucks. 
Thus, the probability that a female would prefer a two- chuck call to a 
one- chuck call should be the same as her likelihood to prefer a six- chuck 
call to one with five chucks. If females followed Weber’s Law, however, 
then the preference for calls with two versus one should be stronger 
than the preferences for six over five chucks. When Karin Akre, myself, 
and a team of others tested females with pairs of calls with more ver-
sus fewer chucks, it became clear that females followed Weber’s Law 
and used proportional rather than absolute differences in mate choice.21 
Since females can barely tell the difference between five and six chucks, 
there is little pressure on males to evolve the ability to produce more 
chucks than this, and thus the rate of evolution of additional chucks 
should slow down.
The frog- eating bat is also attracted to the túngara frog call. Like the 
female frogs, it prefers more chucks to fewer chucks, but unlike the fe-
males, the bats are looking for a meal and not a mate. We did the same 
choice tests with the bats that we did with the females, giving them 
choices between pairs of calls that varied only in the number of chucks. 
The bats also followed Weber’s Law. Our interpretation of these results 
is that the way in which female túngara frogs compare the number of 
chucks is not an adaptation for mate choice peculiar to this species but 
results from a way of comparing stimulus magnitude that evolved some-
time in the past before the sounds of chucks punctuated the tropical 
nights of much of Central America.
* * *
Up to this point, I have discussed how the brain forms an animal’s sex-
ual aesthetics, how our percepts of beauty are designed to deliver us 
good mates, and also how these percepts derive from other things the 
brain is designed to do. But it is important as well to understand not 

50 • Chapter 3
only why we see some individuals as so sexually beautiful, but also why 
we find them so sexually desirable. In the vernacular, we equate attraction 
with liking, and we often assume that liking and wanting are the same 
thing. But here we are wrong. “Wanting” flows from “liking,” but they 
are not synonymous. To untangle these two concepts, we now have to 
probe deeply into the brain to uncover its centers of pleasure.
New Orleans is known as the “Big Easy,” a nickname that contrasts 
its easy, laid- back lifestyle with the more hectic one in the “Big Apple,” 
that is, New York City. What could make life easier than just pushing 
a button when you want to have some pleasure? Sounds like a fantasy, 
but it is a fantasy made real by Robert Heath, a psychiatrist at Tulane 
University in New Orleans in the 1950s.22 Heath implanted electrodes 
in “deep areas” in the brains of patients with various maladies. When he 
stimulated these areas, patients who were depressed to the stage of being 
catatonic now smiled. Heath then put some of his patients in charge of 
their own pleasure, providing buttons that allowed them to electrically 
stimulate these hedonic areas of the brain. The results were scary. One 
patient stimulated himself 1,500 times during a three- hour session. 
With this patient and all others, however, their euphoria was short- 
lived; when the stimulation stopped, so did the pleasure. Similar studies 
with rats in that same decade revealed similar results; some rats deliv-
ered these jolts of joy one thousand times an hour, even forsaking eating 
to do so.
Heath had probed into the brain’s pleasure centers and initiated a 
field of research that has grown exponentially. One of the main findings 
is that the neurotransmitter associated with the reward centers is dopa-
mine. Dopamine is an opioid with properties similar to opium, heroin, 
morphine, Percodan, and codeine, all of which bind to receptors that 
stimulate dopamine production— thus this neurotransmitter’s pejorative 
association with “sex, drugs, and rock and roll” and a suite of other plea-
surable indulgences such as gambling and gluttony that are correlated 
with increased dopamine levels in the brain. As with many findings in 
science, subsequent studies revealed more detail and nuances than were 
first appreciated. We now know that there are two components to these 
rewards systems, which relate to both “liking” and “wanting.” Although 
dopamine has many functions in the brain, none of them is deliver-

Beauty and the Brain • 51
ing pleasure per se, it is not involved in “liking.” As Kent Berridge and 
his colleagues have shown, dopamine activity modulates “wanting” by 
“stamping- in incentive salience.”23 I will explain what this means.
We can ask people if they like a certain food, or we can just watch 
how their faces respond. In the Meg Ryan and Billy Crystal flick When 
Harry Met Sally, Ryan’s character fakes an orgasm while dining in the 
famed Katz’s Deli in New York City. When her sham climax is over, a 
woman nearby assumes Ryan’s orgasmic pleasure was related to what 
was on her plate and tells the waiter, “I’ll have what she’s having.” Okay, 
it is not quite that easy to gauge someone’s reaction to food, but pretty 
close. We show different facial reactions to a taste of chocolate versus 
sour milk, or to an outstanding wine versus one that is hardly drinkable. 
Rodents are little different, and Berridge used the faces that mice make 
when given food as an indication of how much they liked it. Specifically, 
he measured how much they licked their lips and whiskers when they 
received a sugary treat.
In a now classic study, the researchers increased dopamine levels by 
injecting amphetamines into one of the main sites of the dopamine 
reward system. These “doped- up” mice showed no more pleasure than 
did the normal mice in response to sugary foods, but they were willing 
to work harder to obtain food, to run longer on an exercise wheel for a 
snack. Dopamine- deprived mice, on the other hand, were not willing to 
work for food, had little interest in feeding, but when they were force- fed, 
it was clear that they found food pleasurable. This study showed that do-
pamine is not involved in liking but rather in wanting. This distinction 
also explains dopamine’s widely acknowledged role in addictions of all 
kinds: drugs, sex, gambling, and eating.
I have been emphasizing how sense organs, areas of the brain that 
integrate sensory inputs, and the cognitive processes that analyze this 
sensory information can have important consequences for how we per-
ceive beauty. The reward system is yet another area of the brain that 
can evolve to couple immediate positive reinforcement to desires that 
enhance Darwinian fitness. It is also a system that can be exploited by 
those who want to be desired. In fact, in 2015, Sprout Pharmaceuticals 
received approval from the US Food and Drug Administration to mass- 
market Flibanserin, which boosts a woman’s sexual libido, her sexual 

52 • Chapter 3
“wanting,” by boosting levels of dopamine and its close relative norepi-
nephrine, which also enhances “wanting,” and suppressing serotonin, a 
neurotransmitter known to inhibit libido.24
* * *
Now that we are familiar with some fundamentals of the sexual brain, 
we will delve into the details about how it perceives beauty through 
each of three major senses. Since humans are so visually attuned, we will 
start there. If I tell you that the rainforests of BCI are beautiful, you will 
assume I am talking about visual features such as the lush green and 
dappled sunlight, even though the sounds of birds, insects, and frogs 
and the smells of flowers and ripe fruit contribute dramatically to the 
appeal of this landscape. Our need to visualize individuals or things 
in order to know, understand, and assess them is not unique— many 
animals depend on vision to make important decisions like with whom 
to mate— and thus visual beauty is rampant throughout the animal 
kingdom. The next chapter will provide some insight into the oft- asked 
question: “What does she see in him?”

F O U R
Visions of Beauty
. . . if eyes were made for seeing,
Then beauty is its own excuse for being.
— Ralph Waldo Emerson
Tommy, the main character  in the eponymously named rock opera 
by The Who, pleads to the minions at his summer camp to see him, feel 
him, touch him, heal him;1 this naturally first appeals to their sense of 
vision. Although endowed with a varied sensory tool kit, we are primar-
ily seeing animals. We are so invested in our eyes that we recruit our 
sense of vision in idioms that have nothing to do with vision; “seeing” is 
a metaphor for understanding: “Do you see what I mean?” “He can’t see 
the forest for the trees.” “She can’t see straight.”
One of the things we see, and often take special joy in seeing, is color. 
Why else was I so moved by that spectacular rainbow arching over the 
Irish coast? Another important attribute of our visual scene is pattern, 
which is especially important in our appreciation of certain types of art, 
such as abstract expressionism. This chapter begins by taking a look at 
(yet another visual idiom) how biases in our visual system for color and 
pattern are exploited in some human domains that are unrelated to sex. 
This will then set the stage for examining how these and other visual  

54 • Chapter 4
biases influence animals’ sexual aesthetics and drive the evolution of sex-
ual beauty to ends that are sometimes quite artistic.
Much of the beauty we admire is alive with pulsating colors, whether 
they be the blue and green chromes in van Gogh’s Irises, the bold blacks 
and reds favored by Oaxacan rug weavers, or the stunning assemblage 
of yellows, reds, and oranges in a New England autumn. Although I am 
pretty sure that a female quetzal does not experience exactly the same 
excitement I reported in chapter 1 when I first viewed a male of her 
species, we both shared the experience of having our aesthetics tweaked 
by his collage of light greens, bright reds, and iridescent blues.
In contrast, let’s consider someone with whom we have a closer evo-
lutionary affinity than the quetzal, the New World howler monkey. The 
monkey’s name derives from its long- distance howl, which reverberates 
throughout the forests of much of the New World tropics. This howl 
can be elicited by the calls of other howler troops; my daughter Emma, 
who has an uncanny ability to duet with them; and, oddly enough, claps 
of thunder that punctuate the rainy season in tropical rainforests. These 
monkeys are well adapted for howling. The howl can be heard over sev-
eral kilometers, in part because it is resonated by a hollow bone near the 
vocal cords.2 This bone is twenty- five times larger than in non- howling 
monkeys of similar size. Howling, however, is the only activity that 
seems to excite these monkeys. These are not energetic animals. Accord-
ing to Alexander von Humboldt, the famed explorer, “their eyes, voice, 
and gait are indicative of melancholy.”3 Although they eat fruits, I have 
mostly observed the mantled howler monkey in Panama grazing on 
leaves, and I have always wondered if their melancholy, or at least their 
lethargy, was a symptom of ingesting large amounts of chemical com-
pounds that leaves contain to ward off herbivores. Although their howl 
is awe inspiring, there is not much stunning about their appearance. The 
mantled howler monkey is a monochromatic black, lacking any distin-
guishing hues. Yet, except for humans, it is the only other mammal in 
the New World in which both sexes have color vision.
The process of vision starts in the eyes, in the photoreceptors of the 
retina to be precise. There are two classes of photoreceptors, rods and 
cones. Rods allow us to see at low- light levels, while cones give us access 
to color and the beauty that comes along with it— without cones, van 
Gogh’s irises would fade to a grayish tint. We share the gift of color vi-

Visions of Beauty • 55
sion not only with howler monkeys, but with most Old World primates, 
including all of our closest relatives, the great apes. We can see color 
because not all of our cones are the same; different cones are more likely 
to be excited by different wavelengths of light, which we perceive as dif-
ferent colors. Not only do we need cones for color perception, we need 
at least three different types. Our cone types are referred to as short- , 
middle- , and long- wavelength cones. These cones are most sensitive, re-
spectively, to the colors (and wavelengths) blue (419 nanometers), green 
(531 nm), and red (558 nm). Most other mammals are dichromats and 
thus are not capable of true color vision; lacking a long- wavelength 
cone, they cannot perceive differences between red and green. We are 
trichromats, which means we have access to the wonderful world of 
living color to which most other mammals are blind.
Color vision is thought to be uncommon in mammals because our 
distant ancestors were nocturnal, as are many mammals today. Thus we 
assume there was little advantage for color vision, including the ability 
to discriminate red and green that comes along with three- cone types. 
For the howler monkey and other trichromatic primates, color vision in 
general and red- green discrimination in particular are important sen-
sory tools. When it is lumbering through the canopy in search of fruit, 
the howler is surrounded by green. Color vision, it has been suggested, 
evolved in howler monkeys and other primates to enhance their ability 
to find fruits, which often have a reddish hue, against a green back-
ground.4 In addition, for the handful of monkeys that eat leaves, it is 
important to recognize that not all leaves are the same. Younger leaves, 
which often flush out as red, have higher nutritional value than older 
leaves; the ability to distinguish between young and old leaves is en-
hanced by color vision. So when you stop at the red light and go on the 
green, you owe it all to your foraging primate ancestors. And when we 
are mesmerized by the hues of quetzals or the colors dripping from a 
tangled Jackson Pollock painting, we owe these joys in part to the photo - 
pigment evolution that occurred back in an ancestral monkey to carry 
out tasks that having nothing to do with aesthetics.
Recently, another potential advantage to color vision has been sug-
gested as the driving factor in the evolution of primate trichromacy. This 
idea is fairly radical, but even Darwin spent a good deal of time study-
ing it. In a book dedicated solely to animal behavior, The Expression of   

56 • Chapter 4
Emotions in Man and Animals, he discussed the most “peculiar” of all 
human behaviors.5 Guess which trait he found so peculiar— language, 
tool use, gluttony, or drinking milk from other animals? No, it was 
blushing. We all blush despite some assertions to the contrary, as Lou 
Reed acknowledged in “Sweet Jane,” a song he penned and sang with 
the Velvet Underground.6 The Misters Reed and Darwin are on the 
same page here, children are not the only ones to blush— don’t let any 
evil mother tell you otherwise.
Darwin made use of his extensive social- scientific network to gather 
data about blushing. His correspondents informed him that although 
children did blush more than adults and women more than men, blush-
ing was a characteristic of all ages (after infancy), of both genders, in all 
cultures, found in peoples inhabiting all geographical areas, and is mostly 
confined to areas of the neck and face. There were some exceptions to 
the latter. Some of Darwin’s medical- doctor informants reported that 
blushing of some women extended to areas near the breast. Darwin 
noted that blushing was correlated with certain emotional states, such 
as shame and embarrassment, and, most critically, that we had no con-
trol over it. Blushing seems like a pretty important cue, and one might 
think we have visual adaptations to tap into it, much like the howler’s 
adaptation to find fruit.
In his book Visual Revolution, the theoretical neuroscientist Mark 
Changizi argues that human color vision provides us with subtle in-
sights into a person’s emotional state, and here he means “insights” lit-
erally as well as metaphorically.7 He utilized an analytical model that 
compares the tuning of our cone receptors to the color changes that 
take place in the skin during blushing. There was a strong correspon-
dence between the two. The tuning of our photoreceptors, he concludes, 
should make us pretty good at detecting blushes. In fact, Changizi fur-
ther argues that the evolved function for primate color vision is to detect 
slight changes in skin color brought about by changes in blood circu-
lation, which might indicate emotional reactions to social situations as 
well as other physiological processes, such as physical exertion. When 
we met at a conference on Sensory Exploitation and Cultural Attractors 
in Belgium, he further explained that his company, 2AI Labs, is working 
on devices that will be capable of dynamically measuring changes in  
skin color that are below the radar of our own blush detectors. We are all 

Visions of Beauty • 57
pretty good at reading emotions from faces, but assessing subtle changes 
in skin color could allow us access to emotions that normally remain 
hidden from view.
Color is only one aspect of our visual scene, including our visual sex-
ual scene. Another is pattern. We know that the visual systems of other 
animals are more sensitive to and react differently to certain shapes. In 
a classical experiment by the neuroethologist Jörg- Peter Ewert, toads 
would lunge at a simple horizontal line resembling a worm that passed 
in front of them, but they ducked their heads in fear when the same line 
was in a vertical position, resembling a snake about to strike.8  Follow- 
 up studies detailed just how the wiring of the visual system elicited 
these different behaviors. David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel pushed the 
study of visual pattern recognition to new heights, for which they were 
awarded the Nobel Prize in 1981. Their studies of the visual system in 
cats began with the demonstration that single cells in the brain respond 
to contours of specific orientation.9 One particular advantage of cats’ 
pattern- recognition system is that it makes them very sensitive to edges 
and thus keeps them from walking off cliffs. These and numerous other 
studies of visual scene analysis demonstrate that, just as the retina is 
not equally sensitive to all wavelengths, the visual system is not equally 
sensitive to all patterns.
We would assume that all animals, including us, would evolve sensi-
tivities to patterns in nature that matter biologically, those that have some 
influence on our fitness. Right now you are looking at one of the most 
important patterns that we, as humans, have to recognize— the shapes of 
letters used in written language. But writing evolved relatively late in the 
human lineage, after our brain evolved its sensitivity to the visual scenes 
around us. Does that mean that the brain’s sensitivity to visual patterns 
cannot be biased to the shapes of our letters? Not necessarily. Changizi 
and his colleagues made the argument that the shapes of letters should 
be drawn from patterns most common in visual scenes, since these pat-
terns are the ones to which our brains should be more sensitive. When 
he and his colleagues examined the alphabets from many languages, 
they found that not all possible shapes have been recruited for letters, 
and that some shapes are more likely to be used than others. Those 
most commonly used, such as a capital or lowercase T, are the types of 
shapes that abound in the natural scenes around us. In fact, the  average 

58 • Chapter 4
number of strokes per character in the ninety- three speech/writing sys-
tems they surveyed was three, which is pretty close to the average in 
natural visual scenes. It did not matter if the system had 10 letters (e.g., 
Mangyan, Gurhmiki, Arabic) or more than 150 letters (Dene, Interna-
tional Phonetic). If needed, languages would add more kinds of strokes 
to make new letters rather than adding more strokes per letter. The most 
striking result, however, is that when the researchers plotted out the 
occurrence of nineteen structures in human visual signs compared to 
the frequency of similar images in natural scenes the correspondence 
was almost perfect. For example, the shapes T and L are most common 
both in alphabets and in nature, while an asterisk (*) is least common in 
both signs and scenes. The visual system and the letters we view with it, 
Changizi argues, are tuned to one another, but it was culture that tuned 
letters to match the visual brain, which had already been tuned to view 
the natural scenes it resided in. Although we use letters to compose love 
missives, this fascinating work is not directly germane to sexual aesthet-
ics, but it is a prime example of the general phenomenon of how signals 
evolve to exploit preexisting biases in the brain.
* * *
In this book, we are concerned with understanding sexual aesthetics in 
animals, including humans. In something of a parallel universe, scholars 
have been asking a similar question: what determines our appreciation 
for art, especially for paintings? The holy grail in each field would be a 
simple prediction, or better yet an equation, for what would be deemed 
beautiful. As David Rothenberg recounts in his book on evolution and 
art, Survival of the Beautiful, such an equation for art was proposed in 
1933 by George Birkhoff: M = O/C, where M is the measure of aesthetic 
appreciation, O is order, and C is complexity.10 Not surprisingly, this 
equation did not cause a paradigm shift in the fine arts, and it had no 
influence on how artists put brush to canvas, nor did it inform aesthetic 
preferences of those who view art. And I can guarantee you that no 
simple equation would work in animals either.
The reason it is difficult to predict the details of sexual beauty among 
animals is that the differences between the brains of species, and even 
between individuals of the same species, can promote numerous and id-
iosyncratic variations in sexual aesthetics, which in turn drive the diver-

Visions of Beauty • 59
sity of sexual beauty. Nevertheless, there are some general themes across 
species and sensory modalities. The most ubiquitous is that there usually 
is a preference for traits of greater magnitude and complexity. There are 
also discernible patterns of beauty within groups of animals relying on 
the same sense modality. For example, the sensitivity of photo receptors 
in the eyes of fishes often predict courtship colors that are preferred in 
mate choice, and the tuning of the inner ear of frogs predicts the pitch 
of the call that females find most attractive. But as with human aes-
thetics, there is no simple equation that explains the diversity of sexual 
aesthetics and resulting sexual beauty in animals. Instead we need to un-
derstand how the chooser’s brain perceives sexual traits, not only those 
traits that exist but those that could exist; that is, we need to be able to 
ascertain preferences that are hidden.
When we survey the variety of sexual beauty in nature, what we see 
are those traits that have passed muster, those that are attractive enough 
to be maintained in the genome generation after generation. What we 
do not see is the graveyard of attempts to be beautiful, traits that mu-
tated and made their bearers ugly rather than sexy. Studies I have re-
viewed up to now, and others that I will address in the rest of the book, 
show that there are hidden preferences for sexual traits yet to exist in 
a species. The evolution of sexual beauty is an ongoing experiment in 
every species; variation in courtship traits arise and are judged by choos-
ers who quickly relegate most of them to the dustbin of history. But 
those new attempts at beauty that pass muster, that trigger one of these 
hidden preferences, hit the evolutionary jackpot. In the next section, we 
will see how this has happened with colorful traits in fishes.
* * *
If I told you that the most productive forest in the world is in Califor-
nia, you might assume I meant the redwoods. You would be wrong. The 
forest I am talking about is underwater. The kelp forests of the coastal 
waters of California have a majesty which competes with that of the 
nearby redwoods and have an ecological productivity that exceeds it. I 
visited this forest with a group of fish biologists some years ago. Molly 
Cummings was a graduate student then and today is an expert on the 
evolution of animal vision. Molly invited Gil Rosenthal, Ingo Schlupp, 
and me to visit her study site off the coast of Monterey, California. The 

60 • Chapter 4
kelp forest where Cummings worked is made up of long, leafy algae, and 
that day the entire forest was rocking back and forth so vigorously with 
the surge of the tides that few of us could keep our breakfasts down. But 
the stunning light- scape of this forest had us in its grasp.
Light can degrade by small particles in the environment that can 
have profound effects on ambient lighting. This is what happens when 
droplets of the water diffract light of different wavelengths to produce 
rainbows, and thus why rainbows are so common in the misty heather 
lands of Ireland. Diffraction of light in the kelp forest creates a kaleido-
scope of variation in ambient light; in one open patch near the surface 
we were surrounded by bright blues, while only a bit deeper down the 
water had a distinctly red hue. When we descended farther, we were in 
a world of green light. We had plenty of company down there, including 
the animals in which we were interested— surf perches. These are den-
izens of the kelp forest, and different surf perch species live in different 
light environments within the forest. Although these fishes all eat simi-
lar prey, they have to find their quarry in different backgrounds of light. 
There are two general ways to detect objects against their backgrounds: 
one is to compare the colors of the target with the background, and 
the other is to compare the brightness of the target and background. 
The more the target contrasts with background, the easier it is to detect  
the target. These detection strategies are described by a burdensome 
jargon in visual ecology, but I’ll just refer to them as color and bright-
ness detection. Different light environments will favor different prey- 
detection strategies, and Cummings showed that some species have 
their photoreceptors tuned to maximize the target- background contrast 
in color, while the tuning of photoreceptors of other species maximizes 
the contrast in brightness.11
What does this have to do with sex? Enter the males. The first step 
in getting a mate is to be seen by her. Males evolve courtship colors 
to communicate with her, but like the tree falling in the forest that 
is never heard, a male’s visual displays are for naught if they can’t be 
seen— contrast is at a premium. How should a male maximize his signal 
against the visual noise in the background— enhance color contrast or 
brightness contrast? It depends on the detection strategy females use 
to find prey. In those species that use color contrast for prey detection, 
the males evolve courtship traits that maximize their color contrast but 

Visions of Beauty • 61
not their brightness contrast to females. Alternatively, in those species 
that use brightness contrast for foraging, the males evolve courtship 
traits that maximize their brightness contrast to females at the expense 
of their color contrast. This is an outstanding example of how selection 
processes that work on the visual food- detection system influence the 
aesthetics of the sexual brain, which, in turn, drives the evolution of 
sexual beauty.
As noted above, color is only one attribute of visual objects; pattern 
is another. Some patterns in nature are static, such as the stripes on 
some species of surf perch and the patterns of letters that were discussed 
above. But others are dynamic. Let’s now take a look at how the dy-
namic nature of vision can influence the dynamic patterns of courtship 
that are considered beautiful. In this case, the female is the courter, and 
the male the chooser.
One function of vision is to know where you are going, and this is 
more easily achieved if your perception of the world passing you by is 
smooth rather than jumpy. A critical parameter of the visual system for 
perceiving movement is the flicker fusion rate. This is the rate at which 
a light stimulus appears to be constant. Movies and television present 
a series of still images in rapid succession to achieve the perception of 
constant movement. The human flicker fusion threshold is about 16 cy-
cles per second (or hertz, Hz). Movies are usually recorded at 24 Hz, 
and TV usually at either 25 or 30 Hz, substantially above our flicker 
fusion threshold. If the images are presented below the flicker fusion 
rate, as are some older films and animations, movement is perceived as 
jumpy instead of smooth.
Back to sex. Although all insects use their eyes to see where they 
are going, some also use their eyes to choose mates. The male fritillary 
butterfly is a case in point, and one in which females court while males 
choose. Females remain stationary and flap their wings to attract males. 
The faster they flap, the more attractive they are to the males. The typ-
ical flapping rate of a female fritillary is about 10 Hz. In the middle of 
the twentieth century, the German biologist D.E.B. Magnus created a 
flapping machine that could mimic the female’s flapping at any speed.12 
He showed that faster is better, as males preferred a flapping rate of 10 
Hz to a slightly slower one of 8 Hz. If 10 Hz is sexier than 8 Hz, would 
12 Hz be even sexier, and if so what about 20 Hz?

62 • Chapter 4
A related question is why don’t females flap faster? There are two 
possible explanations. One is that the preference of the males does not 
extend above 10 Hz; perhaps higher speeds are merely as attractive, or 
even less attractive, than 10 Hz. The other possibility is that there are 
mechanical limits to how fast a female can flap. To drill deeper into this 
question, Magnus shifted his flapping machine into high gear and let 
it fly. He showed that males always preferred the higher flapping rates, 
even when they were supernormal; that is, faster than the flapping rate 
that typically occurs in nature. At least that was true up to a limit, and 
that limit was very fast: 140 Hz. Humans and the butterflies alike can 
perceive the individual flaps at 10 Hz since it is below the flicker fu-
sion rate for both of us. If Magnus ran his supernormal flapping tests 
with humans and asked us to choose the faster flapper, we would reach 
a threshold at about 16 Hz; 18 Hz and 25 Hz would appear similar 
to us. As they are both above our flicker fusion rate, the flaps would 
be perceived as one continuous motion. Insects generally have much 
higher flicker fusion rates than we do because they travel through their 
environment at much faster speeds and need to perceive the details of 
the optic flow of the environment whizzing by. Can you guess the flicker 
fusion rate of the male fritillary butterfly? You got it, 140 Hz!
Magnus’s exploration of the sexual aesthetics for flapping shows that 
male fritillary butterflies have a fairly open- ended attraction for flapping 
rate: the faster the courtship display the better, as long as the choosing 
male can see it. The 140 Hz speed limit on flapping preference is not 
dictated by sexual selection; instead it is a result of natural selection 
favoring a visual detection system that allows rapid travel through the 
environment. Because the flicker fusion rate is so high, certain sexual 
preferences of choosers are now in place, even if courters can’t match 
them. But if there were a major mutation that redesigned the aeronautics 
of butterfly flight to allow quicker flapping, then the advantage to the 
fastest flappers would be immediate. There would be no need for the 
choosers to evolve a new preference for a new, faster speed of flapping; 
the preference would already be there.
We can think of a human analogy with cars and speed limits, in 
which the process is reversed. Most automobiles today can exceed most 
if not all speed limits on the roads we drive. Current engineering tech-
nology would allow the design of typical autos to go even faster— racing 

Visions of Beauty • 63
cars prove the point. But existing speed limits diminish the usefulness 
of high speed for everyday use. We would not expect a big boost in 
speed until we see a big boost in speed limits. In the butterfly example, 
however, the constraint is reversed. The speed limit for flapping is 140 
Hz, an order of magnitude above the speed achievable by the butterfly. 
It would be as if the speed limits on our highways were much faster than 
any of our cars could drive, which we assume would lead to engineering 
innovations in the automobile industry. So we see that the butterfly 
system is one poised for engineering innovation to increase flapping 
speed. The fact that it has not happened suggests that there are other 
limits, probably some very basic biomechanical ones, that are constrain-
ing these innovations.
* * *
We have been considering how some basic visual processes, such as 
 detection of color, brightness, pattern, and movement, can drive the evo- 
lution of beauty. Now we will move on to some higher processing biases 
that are equally important to the visual- sexual aesthetics of animals and 
humans alike.
In chapter 3, we examined two cognitive processes that can influence 
sexual aesthetics, Weber’s Law and peak shift displacement. Weber’s 
Law dictates that decisions about quantity are based on comparisons of 
proportional rather than absolute differences. So as traits get larger, such 
as the peacock’s tail, the difference between them needs to be greater 
to be perceived. Thus Weber’s Law could put a “cognitive brake” on the 
evolution of extravagant beauty: the bigger the trait, the less likely a 
slightly bigger one will be favored by females.
The other cognitive driver of beauty discussed in chapter 3 was peak 
shift displacement. We reviewed how zebra finches use their parents’ 
beak color to identify sex, red for males and orange for females, and 
how peak shift displacement causes preferences for those traits that are 
most different from the same sex— males prefer beak colors that are 
most different from dad’s and thus more likely to be a female. Peak shift 
displacement can give rise to open- ended preferences and favor super-
normal traits, similar to the one we just saw in the fritillary butterfly. Just 
as the male butterflies favor flapping rates out of the reach of females, 
male zebra finches might prefer shades of orange beaks that females 

64 • Chapter 4
could never evolve. Although peak shift occurs through learning and 
can lead to preferences for supernormal stimuli, it does not follow that 
all supernormal preferences arise from peak shift. The butterflies’ open- 
ended preference, for example, does not involve learning but has more 
to do with the rate of stimulation of visual neurons. But regardless of 
what generates it, preferences for supernormal stimuli are important 
drivers in the evolution of sexual traits that are bigger, brighter, and 
faster. We will turn to one compelling example now.
I once visited Kenya with my colleague Merlin Tuttle to study the 
heart- nosed bat, Cardioderma cor. Like Trachops, this bat eats frogs, but 
we found that unlike Trachops, its auditory system has not been retooled 
by evolution to locate frog calls. During that trip we had two close 
brushes with death— bandits and elephants, which Merlin recounts in 
The Secret Lives of Bats: My Adventures with the World’s Most Misunder-
stood Mammals.13 A more rewarding encounter occurred in the highlands, 
where I spotted an animal that must have a fatal close encounter every 
day of his life. A bird flew across my field of vision only slightly above 
the tall grass. Until I could focus, it was a confusing sight. The bird was 
small and mostly black. Its wing span was only twelve centimeters or 
so, and it was closely followed by something much larger, maybe a half 
meter long, that stayed right on the bird’s tail. When I finally focused, I 
could see that the object behind the bird was its tail, one that was several 
times longer than the rest of its body. It was a widowbird.
It didn’t take long for me to realize how this bird got its name. I 
remember listening to a baseball game once when the pitcher threw 
a fastball close to the batter’s head. The announcer called the pitch a 
“widow maker”; the implication was obvious. More tragically, during 
the Troubles (1968– 98) in Northern Ireland, the weapon of choice of 
the Provisional IRA was the Armalite 18, an efficient killing machine 
originally designed for the US Army, which got into the hands of gun-
runners— it went by the nickname “widow maker.” I was sure that the 
long tail attached to the little bird was also a widow maker; given the 
bird’s burdened flight, it was clear its days were numbered. This orna-
ment is not a “widower maker,” as only males have the excessively long 
tails. All of this must have been clear to the Dutch physician and nat-
uralist Pieter Boddaert, who bestowed the moniker widowbird on this 
species in 1783.

Visions of Beauty • 65
The widowbird’s tail is truly remarkable, and it has evolved in re-
sponse to a sexual aesthetic that just wanted more, more, more. This is 
exactly what Malte Andersson, who wrote the classic Sexual Selection in 
1994,14 had earlier demonstrated in one of the definitive experiments in 
sexual selection.15 He measured the mating success of male widowbirds 
by counting the numbers of nests on their territories on the Kinongop 
Plateau, about one hundred kilometers north of Nairobi, where it is one 
of the most common birds. He then sought to discover if the length of 
each male’s tail would lead to differential mating success. To get at this, 
he did a “cut- and- glue” experiment. In one group he cut the males’ tails 
to make them shorter, he then glued the cut portions of those tails to 
males in another group to give them tails that were extra- long, or super-
normal. The third group was a control: he cut off a portion of the male’s 
tail but then glued it back on. The next month he again measured the 
mating success of each male and compared it to the same male’s mat-
ing success prior to the experiment. Males with supernormal tails had 
increased mating success, control males showed no change, and males 
with shortened tails had decreased mating success. Andersson showed 
that an open- ended preference for supernormal tails drives the evolution 
of tail length, and, although not proven, it seems a good possibility that 
death slows down the evolution of tail length as longer tails make more 
widows.
Not all preferences, of course, are open ended. Some are for specific 
patterns.
* * *
As with many occupations, science has its get- togethers. They can be 
small or immense; for example, the Winter Animal Behavior Confer-
ence that I attend is limited to thirty participants, whereas the meetings 
of the Society for Neuroscience usually hemorrhage at thirty thousand. 
Regardless of size, these conferences are good places to find out about 
groundbreaking research before it hits the presses. I was at a reception 
at such a conference in Kyoto, Japan, in 1991 when two well- known 
behavioral ecologists, Randy Thornhill and Anders Møller, gave me the 
scoop about their radical idea for the evolution of beauty— fluctuating 
asymmetry. This is what they suggested. We, and most other animals, are 
bilaterally symmetric. If we draw a line down the middle of our body, 

66 • Chapter 4
the left and right sides are mostly the same, such as the length of arms, 
legs, and fingers. There are exceptions, of course. Male fiddler crabs have 
one extremely large claw and one smaller one; for males of a given spe-
cies, the same claw, right or left, is the larger one. (It is more difficult to 
think of animals whose entire body plans are asymmetric; here’s a hint 
about one of them: think of the eponymous cleansing device you use in 
the shower and sink.) Most other exceptions to symmetry, however, are 
small deviations called fluctuating asymmetries (FAs), which are equally 
likely to occur on the left or the right. When animals are stressed during 
development, they have larger FAs. Thornhill and Møller’s idea was that 
animals with superior genes for survival should be buffered against de-
velopmental stressors, have lower FAs than less well- endowed individ-
uals who develop under the same stress, and, they predicted, females 
should have a preference for more symmetric males and the good genes 
they carry.16
The idea of sexual selection and FA sparked a profusion of studies 
asking if symmetry was a key ingredient in sexual attractiveness, and if 
so, why. The answer to the first question was yes; it appears to be a crite-
rion in the sexual aesthetics of a number of species, especially birds and 
humans. For example, Møller conducted a cut- and- glue study similar 
to the one with widowbirds, but he manipulated the symmetry of tail 
feathers in swallows.17 As he predicted, females preferred more sym-
metrical males. Thornhill and his colleagues showed that preferences 
for symmetry influence human perceptions of sexual beauty as well. 
Legions of researchers have shown that we are often more attracted to 
more symmetrical faces, and Thornhill even showed that women with 
more symmetrical partners have more orgasms during intercourse than 
women with partners who are a bit out of whack. Of course, in the field 
of beauty there is variation in the eyes of the beholders; other studies 
have shown that humans sometimes judge symmetrical faces as less at-
tractive than asymmetrical ones. There are exceptions in other animals 
as well; my own studies of cricket frogs showed that symmetry played 
little role in influencing attractiveness.18 If a preference for symmetry in 
mates is nearly universal across taxa (and this is a big if ), are good genes 
the only explanation for such a preference; that is, did preference for 
symmetry in courters evolve because of the genetic advantages accrued 

Visions of Beauty • 67
by choosers for their offspring? Or does the basis for this preference lie 
in some other domain?
In chapter 2, I showed how the preference for chuck number in fe-
male túngara frogs followed Weber’s Law. There were two hypotheses 
that could explain why females have this particular pattern of prefer-
ence. The first was that this preference evolved in túngara frogs because 
relative chuck number is a good indicator of relative male quality. The 
second hypothesis was that this preference results from a perceptual or 
cognitive bias— this is just how brains work; there is no need to invoke 
sexual selection to explain this preference. The fact that frog- eating bats 
also followed Weber’s Law in their preference for chuck number sup-
ported the cognitive bias hypothesis. A similar discussion has arisen 
about symmetry preferences: did they arise under selection favored by 
the advantages of getting superior males, or were they the result of a 
more general perceptual or cognitive bias?
One argument for a cognitive bias underlying symmetry preference 
is that it occurs in a variety of animals in domains having nothing to 
do with sex. We have preferences for symmetry in certain kinds of art, 
architecture, interior designs, flowers, and pets, as well as faces. Bees 
excel at learning symmetrical patterns over asymmetrical ones, and they 
prefer to pollinate flowers with more symmetrical petals. In fact, even 
chickens prefer symmetrical human faces to asymmetrical ones.19 The 
correlation between preferences of chickens and humans for the same 
human faces that varied in symmetry was 98 percent! But if there is a 
cognitive bias, where does it come from?
This issue of a cognitive bias was first addressed by studying symme-
try not in birds or humans but in computer brains. The “brains” here are 
artificial neural networks (ANNs). The networks consist of computa-
tional units that act like neurons and are connected into networks that 
mimic nervous systems. And like nervous systems, stimuli can be input 
into the system, and “neural” responses come out the other end. These 
models have a wide range of applications, including pattern recognition, 
stock market predictions, and traffic management. My colleague Steve 
Phelps and I have used them to model brain evolution.20 ANNs were 
critical in alerting FA researchers to the possibility of symmetry prefer-
ences emerging from cognitive biases.

68 • Chapter 4
Two biologists, Antony Arak and Magnus Enquist, trained ANNs 
to recognize objects that were asymmetrical; to do this, the dynamics 
of individual neurons in the network were tweaked until the output 
was greatest in response to the training objects.21 Once the ANNs were 
trained, they were then presented with novel objects that were symmet-
rical as well as asymmetrical. The networks actually showed a greater 
response to the symmetrical objects, even though they were trained to 
prefer asymmetrical ones. This means that, at least in ANNs, a prefer-
ence for a novel symmetrical trait can emerge as a result of learning to 
prefer other kinds of asymmetrical ones, supporting the idea that sym-
metry preference can result from a cognitive bias.
John Swaddle, who coauthored Asymmetry, Developmental Stability 
and Evolution with Møller,22 visited my department in Austin to lecture 
about a very different research topic— how noise pollution affects birds. 
But he still pays close attention to the world of symmetry. Over lunch, 
Swaddle argued convincingly that symmetry preference is a by- product 
of how we perceive shapes, and his work on starlings showed the same 
results as the ANNs studies, that symmetry preference can emerge as an 
offshoot of general learning phenomena. But why is this the case?
One example of such a bias comes from a theory about prototype for-
mation. The idea is that the average of a bunch of randomly asymmetri-
cal patterns is a symmetrical one. Most of us have one leg that is slightly 
longer than the other, but since the longer leg is as likely to be the right 
one as the left one, the average difference in leg length is pretty close 
to zero, and when we imagine an unknown person, we imagine him or 
her with legs of the same length. Thus, the mental image or the “pro-
totype” that emerges from being trained with asymmetrical objects is 
the average of these objects, which will be symmetrical. After learning, 
a symmetrical object then best matches the prototype. This can explain 
the results for the ANNs, starlings, and chickens. It seems that prefer-
ences for symmetry in sexual traits might have nothing to do with good 
genes of the courter but more with how the brains of the choosers work.
It is possible that symmetry preferences could deliver genetic ben-
efits to choosers even if that is not why those preferences evolved. As 
Thornhill and Møller suggested, symmetric individuals might be ge-
netically superior when it comes to overall health and vigor. Symmetry 
preferences then could, in theory, deliver genetic benefits to choosers by  

Visions of Beauty • 69
endowing them with healthier offspring. Whether or not symmetry 
preferences are beneficial to the chooser in mate choice, however, these 
preferences still would drive the evolution of symmetrical courtship 
traits because it is part of the chooser’s sexual aesthetic, even if it is an 
incidental one. Once again, we see that part of the aesthetics of the sex-
ual brain might originally have had nothing to do with sex.
* * *
We often think that people are born with their looks. The beautiful have 
won a genetic lottery, and there is little the losers can do to improve 
their fate. Cameron Russell is a high- fashion model whose good looks 
have landed her on the covers of Vogue and Elle and opened for her the 
runways at Victoria’s Secret and Chanel. But Russell has declared that 
looks are not everything, and she has become known as the “renegade 
model” for her criticisms of how the media contributes to problems of 
self- image for many young women. In a widely viewed TED Talk, she 
stuns the audience with before- and- after photos in which her image 
transforms from an innocent- looking young teenager to a sexually al-
luring vixen. “And I hope what you’re seeing is that these pictures are 
not pictures of me. They are constructions, and they are constructions 
by a group of professionals, by hairstylists and makeup artists and pho-
tographers and stylists and all of their assistants . . . and they build this. 
That’s not me.”23 Perhaps the lady doth protest too much methinks, 
because Russell, as she acknowledges, did win a genetic lottery. But she 
has been further engineered to be even more attractive, sexual, and stun-
ning and, consequently, wealthy beyond most of our dreams. But in that 
sense, she is not an exception in the community of sexual animals, many 
of whom are able to improve on their genetic- given beauty.
Richard Dawkins wrote one of the most important books in biology 
in the past century, The Selfish Gene, where he offers us a “gene- centric” 
view of evolution, a world in which genes are immortal replicators and 
individuals merely ephemeral vehicles to transport them across gener-
ations.24 He followed up that book with another important contribu-
tion, The Extended Phenotype.25 The main idea of that work is that genes 
contribute to our physical makeup, our phenotype, but our phenotype 
extends beyond our body. It includes manipulations of our bodies as 
well as tokens and resources that we accrue.

70 • Chapter 4
No force in nature causes individuals to extend their phenotypes as 
does the drive to increase one’s sexual beauty. Our own species is the 
best example of this. We all come with portfolios that contribute to our 
sexual beauty. The man with a healthy head of hair and well- chiseled 
physique looks even sexier when he hops into a Lamborghini or shows 
off his herd of cattle. For some men, when an attractive woman dons a 
pair of reading glasses, her attractiveness goes up, because they assume 
there is superior intelligence to complement her appealing physique. 
By acquiring accessories that enhance our sexual attractiveness, which 
in humans is often judged in monetary currency, we advertise what we 
have to offer a potential partner. These accessories become who we are. 
Animals are no different.
One way to enhance our beauty is to decorate our surroundings. 
“Come up to see my etchings” is a come- on that might be as old as cave 
paintings. Art seems to be an indicator trait for humans, as it reveals 
that an individual has such a surfeit of resources for fundamentals that 
she or he can splurge on excesses. The more art I have, the more expen-
sive the art I have, the more you can safely assume that I am flush with 
riches . . . want some? The cost of the art rather than the art itself is the 
meaning of the message.
Animals decorate too, and for the same reason. The animal artists ex-
traordinaire are the bowerbirds. Although the codiscoverer of the theory 
of natural selection, Alfred Wallace, provided some of the earliest sci-
entific descriptions of bowerbirds,26 it was the Pulitzer Prize– winning 
evolutionary biologist and geographer Jared Diamond, better known 
to the public for his popular books such Guns, Germs, and Steel,27 who 
brought the “artwork” of these birds to the attention of modern science. 
He reports his initial encounter with bowers in The Third Chimpanzee: 
“I had set out that morning from a New Guinea village, with its circular 
huts, neat rows of flowers, people wearing decorative beads, and little 
bows and arrows carried by children in imitation of their fathers’ larger 
ones. Suddenly, in the jungle, I came across a beautifully woven circu-
lar hut eight feet in diameter and four feet high, with a doorway large 
enough for a child to enter and sit inside. In front of the hut was a lawn 
of green moss, clean of debris except for hundreds of natural objects that 
had obviously placed there intentionally as decorations.”28

Visions of Beauty • 71
This was no kid’s playhouse; it was a male bowerbird’s boudoir. There 
are twenty species of bowerbirds, and in all of these the males construct 
bowers and decorate them lavishly with flowers, stones, shells, and man- 
made objects; some even use crushed berries to paint their bowers. The 
only function of bowers is to create an attractive environ in which the 
males display to females. It is not a nest and offers no shelter from 
the storm. It is a most interesting example of courters extending their 
pheno types in the service of sex.
Diamond had come upon the bower of the Vogelkop Bowerbird. 
This species decorates its bowers with various colored fruits, flowers, and 
butterfly wings. He was able to glimpse the bowerbird’s decorating aes-
thetics in several simple experiments. First, he moved around the deco-
rations in a male’s bower and showed that the males always moved them 
back to their original position. Diamond then found that if he placed 
poker chips near the bowers, the males would often take them and use 
them as decorations, but they were picky about which colors they used. 
In general, they disliked the white chips and preferred the blue ones, al-
though different males had different preferences for colors. Sometimes 
when Diamond added poker chips to a male’s bower, a neighboring 
male would come and steal them for his own bower. The only reason 
that males decorate their bowers is to attract females; females prefer 
males with more decorations, and females of different species often pre-
fer different colors. It is no wonder that Diamond suggested, “These are 
birds that can build a hut that looks like a doll’s house; they can arrange 
flowers, leaves, and mushrooms in such an artistic manner you’d be for-
given for thinking that Matisse was about to set up his easel.”
Only humans create more elaborately decorated structures than the 
bowerbird’s bower. Bowerbirds have a large brain, and among species of 
bowerbirds, their brain size correlates with bower complexity, which, as 
the lead- researcher neuroscientist Laney Day pointed out, “range[s] in 
complexity from simple arenas decorated with leaves to complex twig 
or grass structures decorated with myriad colored objects.” Some re-
searchers have suggested that the details of a male’s decorations— how 
rare they are, for instance— show off his brain power to females. Oth-
ers, such as Joah Madden and Kate Tanner, suggest that males choose 
decorations to exploit sensory biases in females.29 The colors of bower 

72 • Chapter 4
decorations influence a male’s attractiveness to choosing females and 
thus his mating success. The researchers tested the notion that these 
mating preferences coincide with foraging preferences, somewhat anal-
ogous to the example of surf perch discussed earlier in this chapter. For 
the two species they tested, the more that females preferred grapes as 
food, the more likely males were to include grapes in their decorations. 
As Madden himself pointed out to me, not everyone agrees with their 
findings— the diversity of bowerbirds is second only to the diversity 
of scientific opinions about why they do what they do. Understanding 
bowerbirds is still a work in progress. A remarkable example of some 
recent progress is how some male bowerbirds use perceptual illusions in 
a way that would make Walt Disney proud.
As just noted, Diamond showed that when he moved around dec-
orations of the Vogelkop Bowerbird, the males returned them to their 
original position. We would not hang a painting just anywhere on a wall, 
but why are these birds so particular about where they put their decora-
tions? As with alphabets and symmetry, preferences for patterns are tied 
up with pattern perception. The decorations so carefully placed around a 
bower differ both in size and in the distance from the male’s display area 
in his bower court. The size of the image that a decoration projects onto 
the female’s retina is dependent on its size and its distance from the fe-
male. Like most of us, she can calibrate size and distance. But as we will 
soon see, the males can manipulate her calibration to make themselves 
look better. Yes, this seems vague now, but I will explain.
Objects that are farther away look smaller because they subtend a 
smaller angle on our retina. Our visual system “knows” this happens, 
and we can make a good estimate of size independent of distance. But 
imagine if our brains could not compensate for this basic fact. You might 
think the coffee cup on your desk is really larger than the looming sky-
scraper in the background. You might not be frightened by that grizzly 
bear that appears to be a speck on the horizon; you could just squash 
her underfoot if she gets too close. But, of course, if she gets too close, it 
would be too late because in reality she is much larger than a speck. We 
know that perceived size changes with distance, and we don’t get fooled. 
Or at least we don’t get fooled all of the time.
Artists have hijacked our joint perception of distance and size to their 
advantage to manipulate what we think we see. Hobbits and dwarves 

Visions of Beauty • 73
in a movie seem to be standing with other, larger characters but are ac-
tually some distance away to make themselves appear smaller. The Cin-
derella Castle at Disney’s Magic Kingdom offers an example relevant to 
the bowerbirds. If the windows in a building are all the same true size, 
the images of the windows on higher floors look smaller, since they are 
farther away. Our brains compensate for the image- size/distance effect 
to give us a realistic estimate of the height of the building. But Uncle 
Walt has deceived us. The windows on higher floors are smaller than 
those below; thus they appear to be farther away than they really are, 
and the Castle becomes taller in our brains. This is called forced per-
spective. Pretty clever on Disney’s part, but remember that bowerbirds 
have pretty large brains themselves.
John Endler is one of the most creative evolutionary biologists 
around. He made his career with detailed studies of the evolution of 
color in guppies in Trinidad. More recently, he and his colleagues dis-
covered how the Great Bowerbird has picked up on this trick of forced 
perspective.30 As with the Vogelkop, a male Great Bowerbird can be 
very particular about how he arranges his decorations, such as shells 
and bones. Males construct bowers with a long avenue. Females enter 
the avenue, and from this vantage point they view the male displaying 
from his bower court. The male arranges the objects in a pattern such 
that they increase in size with distance from the avenue entrance and 
thus are larger as they get closer to the bower. This pattern creates a 
forced perspective opposite that of the Cinderella Castle, making the 
bower seem smaller than it actually is. We can’t look into the avenue 
through the bowerbirds’ eyes and brains, but Endler and his colleagues 
guessed that this particular arrangement of ornaments gives the females 
an exaggerated perspective of the size of the male displaying on what 
is falsely perceived as a small bower. So no matter how large the male 
really is, he will appear even larger by constructing this perceptual illu-
sion. As with the Vogelkop Bowerbird, the Great Bowerbird also places 
its objects back in the same places after they have been moved around 
by intrusive researchers.
Bowerbirds are not the only ones who decorate for sex. Some African 
cichlid fishes build volcano- shaped bowers in the sand that can be up 
to three meters in diameter, and like the bowers of bowerbirds, aspects 
of the bowers contribute to the male’s sexual beauty. Other cichlids 

74 • Chapter 4
 decorate their territories with snail shells, but unlike bowers, the shells 
have a more utilitarian function, as this is where females lay their eggs. 
The more shells on the male’s territory, the more females he mates. In a 
bizarre case, another bird, the male Wheatear, carries stones to his nest 
cavities prior to when his mate lays her eggs; the stones don’t attract 
her, since she is already there. In an average week, a forty- gram bird will 
carry one to two kilograms of stones to his nest— as much as fifty times 
his weight. The stones serve no immediate purpose, but researchers have 
suggested that much like guys pumping iron in the gym, these males 
are showing off their strength to their females. In one last example, 
many fiddler crabs erect pillars to add to their displays in which they 
wave their large claw back and forth. The vertical structure of the pillars 
is especially detectable given the layout of detectors in the crabs’ eyes. 
Although in many of these cases we do not know how these extended 
sexual phenotypes interact with the sexual brain, my guess is that they 
are importantly influenced by perceptual and cognitive biases that con-
tribute to the chooser’s sexual aesthetics.
* * *
A relatively new science addresses human visual appreciation for beauty 
from the mechanistic perspective, neuroaesthetics. Humans have a well- 
developed visual aesthetic sense that we apply to numerous domains 
such as the fine arts, natural scenes, and, of course, sexual beauty. How 
does our visual perception of traits interact with our sexual brain to elicit 
the percept of beauty? Visual neuroaesthetics asks the brain why it likes 
what it sees. As the cognitive neuroscientist Anjan Chatterjee points 
out, visual processing can be divided into three categories: early, inter-
mediate, and late. Early vision extracts simple elements from the visual 
environment, such as color and brightness, much as was noted about 
surf perch earlier in this chapter. Intermediate processing segregates 
those elements into coherent regions, and later processing determines 
which of these coherent regions get our attention.31 Forced perspective 
in bowerbirds arises in this late stage of processing.
Our visual aesthetics can be influenced by each these processing 
categories, and biases in them can arise from cultural influences or be 
hard- wired in the brain. The preference for symmetric faces, Chatter- 

Visions of Beauty • 75
jee argues, probably does not involve cultural experience, as this prefer-
ence is found across cultures. In addition, the behavior of infants, which 
in theory still might conform to some cultural expectations, also sug-
gests a hard- wired preference for symmetry: within a week of being 
born, infants have a preference for looking at more symmetrical faces, 
and by six months of age they actively engage more attractive faces. As 
we saw in symmetry preferences in other animals, there seem to be some 
basic properties of the visual system that bias the sexual brain toward 
preferring symmetry. The preferences of swallows for tail symmetry, 
fishes for stripe symmetry, and our own preferences for symmetry in 
art and faces might all derive from the same basics of how vision works.
There are numerous examples of culturally based percepts of beauty. 
Darwin, for example, concluded that variation in human skin color 
arose from culturally derived preferences for mates of a particular skin 
color. Similarly, preferences for hair color, hair style, overall body form, 
and waist- to- hip ratio are all thought to be molded by our local culture. 
The nature- nurture debate, the importance of the roles of genes versus 
experience, is no longer an interesting one in biology. Most traits seem 
to be influenced both by genes, be it sequence differences in DNA or 
regulation in gene expression, and by the world around them, both in-
side and outside of the body. Traits do not differ in being either “nature” 
or “nurture” but by the degree to which nature and nurture interact. Re-
gardless of where one stands on the nature- nurture spectrum— and this 
debate still rages on in the social sciences— this really has little effect on 
how beauty evolves to tweak our sexual brain. Whether preference for 
a courtship color derives from the opsin sequence that determines color 
sensitivity of photoreceptors, as in surf perch, or if it is due to learning 
of their parents’ beak colors, as in zebra finches, these preferences drive 
the evolution of courtship color.
Our percepts of beauty are strongly influenced by our sensory sys-
tems, but they do not reside there. As discussed in chapter 1, the sexual 
brain involves all the neural systems that access information about sex-
ual beauty in the world around it, analyzes that information, and then 
makes decisions, such as what is beautiful. One area in which studies 
of human aesthetics surpass those of animal aesthetics is in the use of 
neural imaging techniques to determine how various visual stimuli, be 

76 • Chapter 4
they abstract art or sexual images, boost the dopamine reward system, 
the part of the brain that modulates “liking and wanting,” which was 
introduced in the preceding chapter.
Numerous studies of humans have shown that viewing attractive im-
ages, be they faces or whole bodies, stimulates various areas of the brain 
that are associated with the reward system. But not only do we feel plea-
sure when we view sexually attractive images, we feel desire. The reward 
system is where pleasure becomes linked to desire. Not only do we like 
it, we want it. This is the same system that is hijacked by some drugs, 
foods, and gambling and that can turn some basic hedonic pleasures 
into disabling addictions, a topic I will further dissect in chapter 8 when 
we visit pornotopia. Neuroaesthetics holds great promise in being able 
to unravel our sexual aesthetics by understanding not only why sexual 
traits are attractive but why we desire them so much. It is the sexual 
desire that is at the base of our percepts of sexual beauty.
Neuroaesthetics studies usually gather information about subjects’ 
response to visual images rather than to attractive sounds or smells. So 
much of what we perceive when it comes to sex comes through our eyes. 
But we also listen, touch, and smell to assess sexual beauty, and many 
other animals are much more heavily invested in these other sensory 
modalities. Next, we turn our eyes and ears to animals that care more 
about the sounds of their partners than their looks.

F I V E
The Sounds of Sex
The song functions as affective rather than symbolic symbols, and the 
variety is generated not to diversify meaning, but rather to maintain 
the interest of anyone that is listening.
— Peter Marler
Helen Keller reportedly observed  that blindness separates people  
from things, but deafness separates people from people.1 Of course, 
people in the deaf community are hardly isolated from one another, 
and they forcefully reject Keller’s assertion. But the different senses ac-
cess the world differently and their perceptions can have quite different 
textures. Sight offers one and sound another. The sounds of sex are not 
restricted to the gasps and grunts of the human bedroom. Sounds con-
stitute a major portion of courtship in both animals and humans. The 
songs of birds, frogs, and crickets, the roars of red deer, the drumming 
of fishes, and even a substantial portion of human music is all wrapped 
up in sex.
As we discovered in chapter 2, nearly all of the six thousand species 
of frogs known to inhabit our planet have mating calls that are specific 
to their species. When researchers have asked, they find that females 

78 • Chapter 5
are nearly always attracted to the calls of their own species over others, 
and when researchers drill deeper, they find that female frogs’ brains are 
wired to make their males sound more attractive than interlopers from 
other species. The onset of spring in the temperate zone or the rainy sea-
son in the tropics often erupts with thousands of male frogs and toads 
singing the call of their species in an attempt to seduce females. This 
is what we heard both during the day and after sundown in the cloud 
forests in the mountains of western Panama during one visit in 1990. In 
the area around Fortuna there is a diurnal frog, the harlequin frog Ate-
lopus varius, which has a bright green patterning on a black background. 
It is conspicuous to both our eyes and ears as it makes short, high- 
pitched whistles from atop rocks in the splash zone of the fast- flowing, 
cold streams that travel from the mountaintops. It is not common for 
frogs to call for mates during the day, but neither is it rare. These frogs 
are unusual, however, in that they lack ears, or at least external ears, the 
eardrums that are typically on the outside of frogs’ heads. Harlequin 
frogs also lack the middle ear bones that connect the external ear to the 
inner ear. Given the auditory challenges of these frogs, my friends Walt 
Wilczynski and Stan Rand and I wondered if they could even hear, and 
if so, could they locate the source of a call with such a deficient auditory 
system?
When we visited Fortuna, harlequin frogs were so common we had 
to be careful not to step on them as we hiked up the streams. We con-
ducted experiments on their localization behavior; we played them calls 
of intruder males from a speaker in the stream hoping to spark a fight 
and see how well the resident frog could locate the source of the intrud-
er’s call. To make a painfully long story mercifully short, the frogs did 
appear able to find the source location of the calls, but our experiments 
failed to give us any insights into how they did it. Our research failed 
quite spectacularly, but we received some succor during the night, when 
we were serenaded by the mating calls of hundreds of frogs of a dozen 
or so species; we knew that these other species of frogs could hear and 
that they did it the old- fashioned way, using all the parts of a normal 
frog’s ear. We resolved that we would have to rethink our research ap-
proach to these earless frogs and come back to Fortuna some other time 
to delve into the mechanics of the harlequins’ hearing.

The Sounds of Sex • 79
That day never came and never will. Stan Rand passed away in 2005. 
By then, so had nearly all of the frogs on these mountains in western 
Panama, meeting their demise at the hands the deadly chytrid fungus 
that has caused the extinction of legions of frogs throughout the world. 
When I was told that researchers could no longer find any frogs in For-
tuna, I was incredulous. Two friends, Tony Alexander and Steve Phelps, 
and I went to Fortuna to see and hear for ourselves. Tromping through 
the forest for days and nights in perfect conditions for frogs, light rain 
at night, misty clouds during the day, we searched, training our ears on 
the deafening silence emanating all around us. In total, we heard one 
single peep from one single frog. When we tracked down the call and 
saw him, we had the feeling we were looking at the loneliest animal in 
the world. Unfortunately, this is the kind of catastrophe that Rachel 
Carson forebode in Silent Spring, the book that helped launch the envi-
ronmental movement.2
Since that time, chytrid has spread from the mountains of western 
Panama, across the Panama Canal, and is now heading for South Amer-
ica. Recently, my graduate student Sofia Rodriguez and I found that 
even túngara frogs in the far reaches of the Darién Gap, an undisturbed 
primary rainforest far from any roads that seem to facilitate chytrid’s 
invasion, have now become infected.3 Túngara frogs and some other 
lowland frogs seem to have some resistance to the fungus; although it 
is debilitating to individuals, there seems to be no population extinc-
tions yet attributable to the fungus in túngara frogs. This is probably 
because these frogs reside in the lowlands, where high temperatures are 
not suitable for the fungus. Another part of the explanation might be 
that males unintentionally advertise their chytrid status, and females  
are able to discern this information. Sofia showed that the calls of in-
dividual infected males differed from those who were not infected.4 She 
then tested female preferences for pairs of calls of males when they  
were in each of these two conditions. Females preferred the calls of 
males when they were healthy over the calls of the same males when 
they were infected with chytrid. Although I rejoice at the continued 
survival of my favorite species of frog despite the onslaught of chytrid, 
this provides little solace given the incredible loss of biological diversity 
that has resulted from this single microorganism.

80 • Chapter 5
Please excuse the slight diversion from the topic at hand, but this 
book is about real animals, and many of them have real problems sur-
viving, not just in finding sex. Now we will drill deeper into the sexual 
aesthetics responsible for all of the lovely sounds made by these animals.
* * *
Hearing is a remarkable feat, as is vision, but they are quite different. 
When we speak, we vibrate the two vocal folds in our larynx, each less 
than a couple of centimeters in length. The vibration results in changes 
in the air pressure around the larynx. These changes in pressure are sub-
sequently modulated by the resonant frequencies of our throat, and as 
the pressure fluctuations exit the body, they are further shaped by our 
tongue and lips. When a word escapes our mouth, it changes the air 
pressure around us as molecules become more tightly and then more 
loosely packed in a pattern that eventually imparts meaning to the 
sound. Those changes in sound pressure first initiated by our vocal folds 
eventually reach the heads of our targets, the persons whose behavior 
we want to manipulate. When they hear us, their ears might not burn, 
but their eardrums vibrate in response to these pressure changes. The vi-
brating eardrum moves the chain of middle ear bones, one end of which 
is anchored to the inside of the eardrum and the other to the inner ear, 
and these shaking bones cause the fluid in the inner ear to slosh around. 
When the fluid sloshes, the hair cells in the inner ear, the auditory neu-
rons, fire and these neural responses all reach the auditory brain, where 
they are processed in great detail. If these are sounds of sex, the auditory 
system feeds these neural responses into the sexual brain. I have left 
out some detail here, and there is wonderful variation on the theme of 
hearing among animals. But you should get the general picture, or at 
least hear the sound track.
Let’s reflect a bit on how marvelous hearing is. Imagine being blind-
folded and placing your hands on the surface of a still pond as someone 
launches a rock into it. You would be able to tell something happened 
as you felt the water’s surface vibrate. Maybe, if your senses were quite 
keen, you could guess the size of the rock, at least whether it was a 
pebble or a boulder, but never its color, its temperature, or who threw 
it. Those surface vibrations tell you very little. But if I flap these two 
little folds of tissues inside my larynx, I cause fluctuations in air pressure 

The Sounds of Sex • 81
waves that can inform you about any number of things, and besides 
garnering all of that “intended” information I am sending, you could 
also make a good guess of my gender, size, and age. Also, with my flap-
ping folds I could elicit various emotions from you, such as amusement, 
anger, or fear, and I could even make you approach me, avoid me, or 
attack me . . . or someone else.
In this chapter we will think about how by merely making sounds 
courters can inform choosers of not only who they are, such as what 
species, but what they are like, if they are young or old, fit or infirm. We 
will also consider how these sounds have been designed to reach deep 
into the chooser’s brain to best influence the chooser’s attentional and 
motivational states, her hormonal milieu, her reward systems, and even-
tually her choice of a mate.
* * *
We have already considered how important it is that choosers mate with 
courters of their own species, conspecifics, since matings with hetero-
specifics are usually a waste of energy. We expect, and indeed we find, 
that this need has resulted in courters evolving traits that identify who 
they are and choosers evolving perceptual biases that make conspecific 
courters more attractive. Thus the brain, in this case the auditory brain, 
should evolve to incorporate aspects of the conspecific courtship song 
into its sexual aesthetics. Both we and female canaries find the male 
canary’s song enchanting, but we can be sure that robins and turkeys 
and certainly crickets and frogs find nothing sexy about those voices. 
The details of how the acoustic- aesthetics of choosers’ brains become 
wired to favor their own singers varies. For example, as we discussed 
with túngara frogs, the frequencies to which their inner ears are tuned 
start the process; while in crickets the auditory nerves in the thorax are 
more responsive to the rhythm of the chirps; and in birds very little bias 
toward conspecific sounds arises in the periphery, such as the inner ear, 
but are resident in various areas of the brain. The brain has numerous 
ways to bias it to the sounds of its own species.
Once the brain is wired for its own species’ song, some songs will 
better match the percept of what that species is supposed to sound like. 
There might be no differences among courters in their health, their re-
sources, or their genes, but some might just happen to better match the 

82 • Chapter 5
resident aesthetics, sound a bit more like a canary is supposed to sound, 
for example, than do their sexual competitors. These are the courters 
who will get more mates, because— and only because— they are sexually 
beautiful.
Vocalizations do not only vary among species, but there can be sub-
stantial differences among populations of the same species. A friend 
of mine, Eddie Johnson, had a faculty position in Idaho, far from his 
birthplace in Brooklyn, New York. Despite having been out of Brooklyn 
for many years, Eddie’s accent was straight out of the Bowery Boys; no 
one could have mistaken its origin for anywhere else. No one, that is, 
except a secretary in his department. While I was lecturing there, she 
told me how compassionate she thought the faculty were to hire some-
one with such a severe speech impediment; in her mind, the English 
language seemed to have only one dialect, and it was hers. In Pygmalion, 
and its adaptation My Fair Lady, Dr. Henry Higgins is able to place any 
 English person’s origins with amazing accuracy, based only on his or her 
accent or dialect.
Differences in dialect are also known to occur in animals, especially 
songbirds. The canaries and zebra finches discussed previously are only 
two of the more than five thousand species of songbirds. Like frogs, 
different species of songbirds have different songs, and unlike frogs, 
songbirds learn their songs from their fathers or neighbors early in life. 
Some songbirds never learn another note after that, while others are 
able to continue to expand their repertoires year after year. Nobody, nei-
ther bird nor beast, learns things perfectly. It is quite common for a 
male to grow up to sing slightly differently from his father. Over gen-
erations these differences accumulate, and eventually one population of 
White- crowned Sparrow, for example, will sound a good bit different 
from another population. They have different dialects. Does this matter? 
It seems that it does, because not only do males learn what songs to sing 
while in the nest, but females learn what songs are attractive. A number 
of studies, especially those with White- crowned Sparrows, show that 
females prefer the songs of males of the local dialect.
There are many anecdotes of dialect preferences in humans, but it is 
not always a preference for the local dialect. I know many women from 
the southern United States who find the Sopranos- like dialect of certain 
New Jerseyans quite unappealing, and I know a lot of Jersey boys who 

The Sounds of Sex • 83
melt when they hear the drawl of a southern belle. In birds and humans, 
dialect preferences need not be tied into any utilitarian benefit for the 
chooser, even though we can imagine that there could be benefits. For 
example, some have suggested that a bird’s dialect indicates it is best 
adapted to local habitats, so females that reside in these habitats should 
prefer those males. The suggestion is logical, but there are scant data to 
show that it is biological, that this really happens in nature. It might be 
merely that choosers like what they find familiar, or in some cases what 
they find exotic.
Our dialects can hint not only at where we are from geographically 
but also where we are perched on the social ladder. Consider the follow-
ing sentences in which only a single word, the one in parentheses versus 
the preceding word, varies:
Jack was waiting (wading) for a bus in front of his school.
Jack had been playing (plain) sports all day and was very tired.
He was worried about falling (fallen) asleep on the bus and miss-
ing his stop.
In each of these sentences the homophone in parentheses is typically 
associated with lower socioeconomic status. When young women from 
Ontario heard these sentences read by similarly aged men from Scot-
land, the women were acutely aware of social status and found the more 
“proper” vernacular to be the more attractive one.  When women choose 
partners, they want resources; and, Jillian O’Connor and her colleagues 
from McMaster University and MIT argued, what is a better predictor 
of resources than diction?5
* * *
Certainly for humans, and also for most other animals, the most com-
mon mate choice decision is not the one between species or between 
courters with different dialects but the decision between courters of the 
same species in the same population. Females are not easily seduced, and 
males must be quite persistent in their vocal advertisements if they hope 
to secure a mate. Many songbirds, crickets, and frogs will call thousands 
of time a day in an attempt to persuade and seduce their females. These 
behaviors are costly: the rate of oxygen consumption increases substan-
tially, as does lactic acid in the muscles, when calling. In some species, 

84 • Chapter 5
males lose weight, stress hormones increase, and testosterone decreases 
after days of calling, which then forces males to take a break for a few 
days to replenish their energy reserves. This energetic cost of calling 
should act as a filter to eliminate the more sickly and least healthy males 
from participating in the sexual marketplace.
There is an additional cost of broadcasting sounds for sex, namely, 
eavesdroppers. Eavesdroppers abound, and listening in on the conversa-
tion of others is a common means by which predators and parasites find 
a meal or a host. I have already discussed one expert eavesdropper, the 
frog- eating bat. The eavesdropper par excellence, however, is a parasitic 
fly called Ormia. These flies have evolved an intricate ear, unique among 
all other insects, which allows them to hear the chirps of crickets. Fe-
males use the crickets as a host for their developing larvae. A female 
alights on a calling male, and her larvae crawl off. They then begin to 
burrow inside the male. They eat him from the inside out as they de-
velop, eventually killing him. Diabolically, they first feast on his call-
ing muscles, which mute his song. This keeps him from inadvertently 
attracting more Ormia with competing larvae. Ormia invaded Hawaii 
about one hundred years ago, and the local crickets are paying a price. 
Marlene Zuk and her coworkers showed that parasitism has become so 
high on the Hawaiian island of Kauai that crickets have evolved the ul-
timate adaptation to thwart them— silence.6 Male crickets make sound 
by rubbing their wings together; as the file on one wing is moved across 
the scraper on the other wing, it “chirps.” The mutation that prohibits 
calling in the crickets on Kauai is one that changes the shape of the 
wing; “flat- wing” males are unable to call, and they have to intercept 
females passing through the area if they are to mate. Interestingly, the 
silent, flat- wing mutant recently appeared on the nearby island of Oahu. 
It seemed most likely that the mutant crickets had done some island 
hopping, but this is not the case. Nathan Bailey and his colleagues have 
shown that the genetic mutations that lead to flat wings are different on 
the two islands.7
The ability to avoid predators and parasites could act as another fil-
ter that restricts the sexual marketplace to the healthier, or perhaps the 
stealthier, males in the population. In most cases, we do not know if the 
males who avoid predators and parasites while calling have good genes 

The Sounds of Sex • 85
or good luck. In the case of the Hawaiian crickets, however, we know 
that it is a lucky mutation that takes them out of the calling game.
There are many types of information about a courter that a chooser 
can garner from listening to how he sounds. Those vocal folds we all flap 
when we talk are not all the same size, and in mating, size often matters. 
In general, the larger the vocal folds, the slower they vibrate and thus 
the lower frequency of sound they produce. Not surprisingly, larger peo-
ple have larger vocal folds and thus lower- pitch voices; controlling for 
body size differences between the genders, men still have lower voices 
than women. This is because testosterone causes an increase in the mass 
of the vocal folds. In the same study of preference for sociolinguistic 
differences, O’Connor and her team also showed that women preferred 
lower- pitched, or as they put it, more masculine voices.8 Their expla-
nation is that higher testosterone levels can indicate good health, and 
women want healthier males. This preference could be a direct benefit to 
both the woman and any children she and her baritone- beau produce, 
as he is likely to be around longer to care for them all. It is also possi-
ble that this type of preference provides indirect genetic benefits if his 
greater health will be passed down to his offspring. Therefore, choosing 
more masculine voices could also be choosing genes that are good for 
survival.
* * *
In the previous chapter, I reviewed numerous ways in which visual dis-
plays of courters have evolved to exploit some of the fundamental pro-
cesses of the visual brain. Given the way the auditory brain works, there 
are several strategies that courters can adopt to make themselves more 
attractive to choosers. Also in chapter 4, I talked about how important 
it is for courters to be seen; it is equally important for them to be heard.
I live in Austin, Texas, the self- proclaimed “live music capital of the 
world.” A lot of that music is performed outside, and much of it can be 
heard from great distances. Standing a reasonable distance in front of 
a stage, I can hear the crisp, rapid pulses of a saxophone and the high 
pitch of a fiddle as well as the slower beat of the drum and lower pitch 
of a bass guitar. But as I walk away, eventually those crisp pulses all 
blend together into one continuous sound, and the high notes of the 

86 • Chapter 5
fiddle dissipate into the atmosphere. If I keep going farther, all that 
my ears can pick up are the banging of the drums and the booming 
of the bass. This is because not all sounds transmit as efficiently over 
distance and across environments. Courters would benefit to take note 
of a few generalities about sound transmission: the faster the rate of 
separate sounds, be they notes of a sax or syllables of a sparrow, the more 
the pulses degrade with distance; the higher the frequency of sound,  
the more amplitude it loses with distance; and the denser the habitat, 
such as forests as opposed to fields, the greater the loss of pulse structure 
and high frequencies.
Are courters, or at least their genes, heeding these general princi-
ples of the physics of sound? The courtship calls and songs of many 
animals are loud screams for attention rather than tender whispers of 
intimacy. The larger the distance over which a courter is heard, the bigger 
its audience of potential mates, and in a number of cases animals have 
evolved those sounds that increase the size of their sexual audience. The 
ornithologist Eugene Morton started the discipline of habitat acoustics 
when he surveyed the songs of more than a hundred species of birds in 
the forests and fields of Panama and showed that birdcalls in the field 
had higher frequencies and faster pulse rates than those in the forest.9 
These birds have evolved to be heard and to be heard more clearly over 
longer distances by employing those sounds that do best in their own 
habitats: high frequency and fast pulses in the field, and low frequency 
tones and whistles in the forest. Great Tits in Europe as well as cricket 
frogs in Texas even show acoustic adaptations among different popula-
tions within the species.10 The Great Tits, for example, use faster pulse 
rates that resemble Morse code when singing in the fields of Morocco 
but resort to more tonal singing when in the forests of England. When 
we hear birds, crickets, and frogs singing in the far distance, it is no 
accident; their songs have evolved in response to some basic principles 
of physics to travel far, and we just happen to be around to hear them.
These species have had plenty of time to evolve courtship songs that 
are a good match for where they sing. But what happens to birds that 
are suddenly stuck in urban environments with their onslaught of an-
thropogenic noise? There probably has not been enough time to evolve 
noise- proof songs, but changes in behavior are not restricted to the hum-
drum rate of mutation and selection. Many behaviors are flexible and 

The Sounds of Sex • 87
serve as rapid- response teams that keep the organism going until evo-
lution catches up.
Hans Slabbekoorn and his colleagues in the Netherlands have shown 
that songbirds have the know- how and the behavioral flexibility to take 
matters into their own hands, or at least their own voices, and not wait 
around for genes to mutate. When the researchers compared the songs 
of Great Tits in urban areas compared with tits in more rural ones, 
they found that the city birds used higher- pitched syllables that boosted 
their songs above the frequency band of the city sounds. One of his 
students, Wouter Halfwerk, then showed that males who sang these 
higher- pitched songs were more likely to be chosen as mates, probably 
because it was easier for the females to detect those signals against the 
noise.11
From a courter’s perspective, noise is anything that interferes with 
his signal. The biggest source of noise for most courters is not the wind, 
the sounds of other species, or even the din of the city, but the guy next 
door. A courter needs to stand out against this noise so that he is the one 
heard, the one the chooser notices. One way to do this is to raise your 
voice as the surrounding noise levels increase. This is called the Lom-
bard Effect when it occurs in response to what we typically consider 
noise, like the wind or the city, but courters also raise their voices when 
competing with other courters. Calling louder is not the only solution 
to standing out. As noted in chapter 2, túngara frogs add more chucks 
to their calls when competing with other males, despite the costs of 
increased predation risk. Other animals call faster, for a longer time, or 
add more notes. There are many solutions to being heard against “social 
noise” and it seems that animals have figured out most of them.
There is a lot going on in the world around us, and we are constantly 
being bombarded with stimulation. As mentioned in chapter 3, we tend 
to ignore repeated stimulation and return our attention when some-
thing changes. We habituate to the same old– same old, and dishabituate 
when there is something new and worthy of our attention. This is an-
other basic principle that courters use in designing their sexual signals.
One of the striking features of songbirds is they often have quite large 
song repertoires. Nightingales, for example, can produce more than 150 
song types. Numerous mimetic birds, like mockingbirds and birds of 
paradise, will imitate songs of other species, as well as pianos and even 

88 • Chapter 5
lawn mowers, to extend their repertoire size. In most cases studied, fe-
males find these larger repertoires more attractive than smaller ones. 
Why so?
More than a half- century ago, Charles Hartshorne, a well- known 
philosopher of “process theology” and a bird enthusiast, suggested the 
“monotony- threshold hypothesis” to explain why birds evolved large 
song repertoires.12 Hartshorne thought complex birdsong was better at 
holding the attention of neighbors who might otherwise intrude on 
one’s territory. This idea was seconded by the famed animal behaviorist 
Peter Marler, quoted in the epigraph to this chapter, who also argued 
that variety in songs evolved not to expand songs’ meaning but to main-
tain interest. Hartshorne’s idea has some support from the behavior of 
female birds, their auditory neurons, and their genes.
The ornithologist William Searcy showed that a female grackle 
might be initially attracted by a male’s song, but she loses interest as 
the male repeats the same song syllable over and over again.13 If the 
syllable changes, however, the female’s libidinous desires return, and she 
responds with courtship solicitation displays, in effect signaling “come 
on, let’s get it on!” A parallel phenomenon occurs at the level of the neu-
ron, as shown by the neurogeneticist David Clayton.14 When a zebra 
finch hears the same song syllable repeatedly, her auditory neurons stop 
responding: they habituate. If the syllable changes, the neuron responds 
again; it is released from habituation. The female’s boredom and release 
from it are not restricted only to her behavior and neurons, but also 
influence her DNA. Expression of the gene zenk, which indicates signal 
saliency, is suppressed in response to the same repeated syllable and 
enhanced when a new syllable is experienced. From these studies, we 
have gained some idea about why female songbirds find more loqua-
cious males more beautiful— they are less boring.
For any sexually selected trait, we can ask why males don’t always 
evolve the most beautiful, and the answer is usually that they cannot 
afford the costs. Túngara frogs can chuck more than they do, but they 
are held at bay by frog- eating bats; crickets could chirp almost endlessly, 
but if they do so, they are more likely to become the home and meal for 
parasitic flies. What keeps male songbirds from adding an endless vari-
ety of notes? Elizabeth and Scott MacDougall- Shackleton show that in 
Song Sparrows, repertoire size also acts as a hurdle to the less healthy.15

The Sounds of Sex • 89
Songbirds have pretty special brains to produce these wonderful mel-
odies that keep us and their females so entranced. Researchers know a 
lot about how the bird brain generates song. One of the most important 
areas is called the HVc, for “higher vocal control center.” In general, the 
HVc is larger in species with larger song repertoires; it is larger in males 
than in females; and the difference in the size of the HVc between the 
sexes varies as a function of the size of the song repertoires of males and 
females. The MacDougall- Shackletons found that in Song Sparrows, 
males with large repertoires not only had larger HVcs, but they were in 
better body condition. They also exhibited less physiological stress and a 
more robust immune system compared with their smaller- brained and 
less loquacious brethren. This could mean that males with more songs 
might be better fathers since they are physically more fit, a direct ben-
efit for the choosing female because she might then be able to produce 
more young. If there are genetic differences, rather than developmental 
differences, that promote larger repertoires, bigger brains, and healthier 
offspring, this would pass down some indirect genetic advantages to 
their offspring as well.
* * *
Although choosers should be concerned about the quality of their mates, 
whether it be their species membership or their general health, matings 
are only worthwhile if they produce offspring. As the abundance of fer-
tility clinics attests to, having sex and reproducing are not the same 
thing. For reproduction to take place, the male and female need to be  
on the same page physiologically. Males are usually ready to go, as shown 
in chapter 1, but the development of eggs is more complicated than that 
of sperm; thus a female’s fertile period is shorter than the male’s. But the 
male can tweak the female’s hormones and hasten her horniness. But 
the female’s internal reproductive physiology is discerning, and males 
have to do things just right.
Ringdoves (Streptopelia risoria) are close relatives to the common pi-
geons that populate many cities around the world. If you have spent 
any time in a big city, especially New York or Venice, and watched the 
pigeons instead of just feeding them or shooing them away, you might 
have noticed a male making cooing sounds and vibrating his vocal 
pouch while he strutted around a female. Even if you watched closely, 

90 • Chapter 5
however, you probably would not see them mate. That takes place only 
after a male entertains the female for days, and when it does finally 
occur, it is over in a jiffy. For most birds, the sex act consists of a mere 
“cloacal kiss,” as males of most species lack anything like a penis.
Researchers have studied the ringdove to understand how this coo-
ing gets inside the female’s head and then straight to her hormones. 
The details have emerged over many years of research initiated by the 
late Danny Lehrman, one of the best- known comparative psychologists 
of his time, who founded the Institute of Animal Behavior at Rutgers 
University in Newark, New Jersey, a city which seems to have enough 
pigeons to feed the world. Lehrman showed that courtship in ringdoves 
is not restricted to males displaying to females but instead is a series 
of detailed interactions between the sexes.16 The initiation of courtship 
is what we are seeing on the city streets. If a male is sexually receptive 
himself, specifically if his testosterone level is above some threshold, he 
begins to court. A male bows his head and begins to coo as he struts 
around the female in a display aptly termed the bow- coo. The male’s 
cooing influences the female’s sex hormones, causing her estrogen lev-
els to escalate, and she now calls back, joining in a duet with him that 
affects him in two ways— his testosterone increases, and he courts the 
female even more vigorously. At some point, the female’s estrogen levels 
begin to drop, and the hormone that modulates parental behavior, pro-
lactin, begins to rise; the male and female then start to make a nest to-
gether. Then, and only then, the male and the female kiss, not with their 
mouths but with their cloacae. With the female’s cooperation, the male 
climbs on top of her; they align the openings of their sexual organs; and 
the male expels of bit of sperm inside the female. Now that his deed is 
done, the male’s testosterone drops off and his prolactin increases, which 
primes him for his paternal duties, as he shares in both incubating the 
eggs and feeding the nestlings. The entire process, from first bow- coo to 
the final kiss, takes days.
Some interesting details were added to this already quite complete 
story by one of Lehrman’s protégés, Mae Cheng.17 It was thought that 
early in courtship the male’s call caused the female to call, and that 
her act of calling caused her estrogen levels to increase. Instead, Cheng 
discovered, it is the female hearing herself call that stimulates her own 
hormone levels. And, what is especially surprising, the female only re-

The Sounds of Sex • 91
sponds to the male if he is looking at her. At least in this species, a male’s 
wandering eyes can doom a relationship.
In the ringdoves, we see how the female sexual brain is hooked up to 
her sexual physiology. Her decision to reciprocate a male’s sexual inter-
est both influences and is influenced by her sexual hormones. The male 
must push all the right buttons, keep pushing them for days on end, and 
give the female his undivided attention to get her physiology to com-
municate to her brain that this male is sufficiently attractive to be re-
warded with sex. Ringdoves are not unusual in using courtship to tweak 
the hormones of those desired for sex. Singing in songbirds, chirping 
in crickets, calling in frogs, and roaring in red deer all influence female 
hormone levels, bringing them into the state in which they desire sex.
As I have been emphasizing throughout, sex is more likely to happen 
when one sex finds the other sexually beautiful. As just explained, it is 
also more likely to happen when both sexes are in a physiological state 
for sex. In chapter 3, I showed how liking sex is not the same as want-
ing sex. Similarly, reproductive hormones that cause females to ovulate, 
build a nest, clean the house, and tend to their offspring are not the ones 
that drive the desire for sex. That happens in the reward system, and 
recent studies of birds show how song seems to link up the reproductive 
system with the desire to reproduce.
Donna Maney and her colleagues have been exploring this link in 
White- crowned Sparrows.18 We already know that in sparrows, just as 
in ringdoves and other songbirds, male song influences the level of re-
productive hormones such as estradiol and, by extension, female physi-
ological readiness to mate. These researchers also examined areas in the 
reward system, specifically the nucleus accumbens and the ventral stri-
atum, which are where norepinephrine and dopamine are released and 
where “liking” is coupled to “wanting”— in this case, where the pleasure 
of hearing a male’s song is linked with the sexual desire for it. They 
found that overall gene activity in these areas increased when females 
were exposed to courtship song. But not at all times . . . 
The context in which sexual signals are produced and received can 
influence their meaning. Season and sex are two such contexts. The song 
of the White- crowned Sparrow serves several functions, and one is ad-
vertising his territory to other males. Males assign a negative salience 
to songs of other males and respond to them aggressively rather than 

92 • Chapter 5
sexually. Male White- crowned Sparrows sing in the breeding season, in 
the spring, but they also sing in the winter, out of the breeding season. 
Females are attracted to singing males in the breeding season but will 
attack those same males when the males are singing out of the breeding 
season. The difference in the female’s response between the seasons is 
based on her estrogen levels. Courtship song only turns on the reward 
system when her estradiol levels are high. They only trigger sexual desire 
when she is reproductively ready. Thus males can use sound to tweak not 
only the female’s reproductive readiness but also her sexual desires, her 
liking as well as her wanting. But only if all the stars are aligned. Song 
only triggers liking and wanting if the female is hormonally ready for 
reproduction. Liking sex, having sex, and wanting sex are not the same 
as reproducing, and all of these systems have to be aligned for choosers 
to desire their courters. In most animals, the act of sex is inextricably 
linked to the function of reproduction, and it is not surprising that some 
sexual traits evolved to trigger both of these functions.
* * *
Two major themes of this book are that the brain has other things on 
its mind besides sex, and that these other brain functions can influence 
which stimuli are perceived as sexually attractive. Courters can also trig-
ger behavioral responses in choosers that have nothing to do with sex 
but that up the courter’s chances of having it. In chapter 4, we saw how 
courters use certain visual displays to exploit the chooser’s need for food 
and their desire not to become food. Acoustic courters can be just as 
deceitful.
Animal hearing sensitivity can evolve for hearing sounds related to 
sex or for other functions. The ears of crickets, for example, have audi-
tory neurons that are tuned either to the sonic frequencies of mating 
calls or the ultrasonic frequencies of bat predators. Ron Hoy, an expert 
on insect hearing, and his colleagues showed that crickets reduce most 
of the variation in what they hear into these two categories, depend-
ing on whether the sounds they hear are below or above 16,000 Hz— 
females approach sounds in the lower- frequency category and flee from 
those in the higher- frequency category.19
Moths are another groups of animals that use their hearing to avoid 
predators. Many moths have evolved ears that hear bats and organs that 

The Sounds of Sex • 93
produce ultrasonic calls to jam the bat’s echolocation calls. We are used 
to seeing moths at night, and most of them are in fact nocturnal. There 
are some, however, that have abandoned the night for the day, where 
birds rather than bats become their main predator. Even though the dan-
ger from bats is gone, these diurnal moths have retained their anti- bat 
weapons; they can still hear and call in the ultrasonic. Not to be waste-
ful, selection has co- opted these anti- predator adaptations to be used 
for courtship; ultrasonic clicks have now moved from the moth’s arsenal 
of defense to its arsenal of courtship. Even some moths that are noc-
turnal recruit their acoustic bat defenses for courtship. The Asian corn 
borer is one of these moths.
The Asian corn borer is one of the worst pests in all of Asia, causing 
millions of dollars of damage and sometimes totally devastating corn 
crops. The female corn borer lays a couple of hundred eggs on a corn 
stalk, and the larvae bore into and consume pretty much every part of 
the plant. The eggs are often infected by bacteria, which only makes 
them more of a pest. The bacteria feminizes males, resulting in mostly 
female broods, which then enhances the growth and spread of the pests 
throughout agricultural fields in that part of the world. This moth also 
calls during courtship. The male rubs his two wings together to produce 
ultrasonic calls, sounds that initially evolved to battle bats but are now 
used to signal sex.
Not all the bat weapons the moths evolved are morphological; some 
are behavioral. Besides hearing bats and jamming the bat’s echolocation, 
some moths go into steep, erratic dives or just freeze when they hear bat 
calls. The corn borers will freeze in response to bat echolocation calls, 
and the males have exploited this response in their females. Ryo Na-
kano, a biologist at the University of Tokyo, and his group have shown 
that males produce a low- amplitude call when engaged in courtship 
with females. The call is very similar to a feeding buzz of a bat, the rap-
idly pulsed series of echolocation calls the bat makes when it is rapidly 
closing in on its target for the kill. Nakano showed that if corn borer 
males are muted or females deafened, then courtship is usually not suc-
cessful, but if males call and females listen, then sex is almost guaranteed 
to follow. The reason that this call is so successful is because females 
respond to the call as if it were made by a bat rather than a male moth. 
She freezes in fear, and while she is in this paralytic state, there is little 

94 • Chapter 5
resistance to the male mating with her.20 Jim Morrison of The Doors said 
“sex is full of lies”; we can add that in this case those lies are entangled 
with fear.
The male corn borer moths mimic predators searching for food in 
order to trick their females. Heather Proctor found that male water 
mites mimic food to get a mate. Like other hearing animals, water mites 
are very sensitive to vibrations in the world around them, but these vi-
brations are in the water rather than the air. This is a good thing, since 
one of their favorite foods are copepods, who set up a very character-
istic pattern of vibration as they scoot across the water’s surface. Males 
have evolved to mimic this vibration pattern to lure females who do 
not realize that the source of the signal is a male until she grabs him, at 
which time the male begins to vigorously court her. If hunger motivates 
the female’s approach to the male, Proctor predicted, in nature hungry 
females should be the ones more likely to be duped by the male food- 
mimics and thus these females should be the ones most likely to mate. 
She conducted a clever experiment using two groups of females: mites 
in one group had not been fed for several days, and mites in the other 
group were able to dine to their hearts’ delight. Males were then added 
to each group and the number of matings counted. Females who were 
hungry for food were the ones more likely to mate, as predicted; their 
higher rate of mating was entirely linked to their desire for food, which 
then resulted in their being fooled into sex.21 We see that not only can 
courtship signals evolve to match sensory, perceptual, and cognitive bi-
ases, it can also exploit behavioral responses that have nothing to do 
with sex.
* * *
The renegade- model Cameron Russell and numerous animals have 
shown us that we are not stuck with the looks with which we are born. 
Neither are we stuck with the songs we can sing. If we have some help, 
some imagination, we can improve on what we have; we can extend our 
acoustic phenotypes.
On one trip I took with Stan Rand, we searched for a close relative 
of the túngara frog in coastal Peru. This region of northwestern Peru, 
which includes the Sechura Desert, seemed an inhospitable place for 
both humans and frogs. We drove for miles seeing little vegetation and 

The Sounds of Sex • 95
no water. The prehistorical inhabitants of this area, the Chimor, who 
grew out of the Moche civilization, survived on both agriculture and the 
sea from about AD 900 to 1470, at which time they met their demise at 
the hand of the expanding Inca Empire. The Chimor had a predilection 
for marine mammal meat, and some of their drawings show nets for 
capturing sea monsters.
The most spectacular of the ruins the Chimor left behind is Chan 
Chan, a UNESCO World Heritage site and at one time the largest 
adobe city in the world. Stan and I wandered into an amphitheater that 
had been used for ceremonies, probably both religious and political. 
Whether priest or politician, we can be sure that whomever was speak-
ing wanted to be heard. Of course, boom boxes were off in the distant 
future, and there was no ability to electrically amplify sounds. But there 
was the science of acoustics, and the Chimor architects applied some of 
its basic principles to designing this amphitheater, shaping it to project 
the voice of a speaker to an attending crowd. When a speaker stood in 
a particular place his voice would be resonated, its amplitude enhanced, 
and his words of wisdom would boom across the crowd. We tried it for 
ourselves. Stan took the place of the speaker, and I moved back into the 
area where the crowd would have assembled. Stan imitated a túngara 
frog call, and it reached me with an amplitude and richness that the 
real frogs could never match. I almost dropped on all fours and hopped 
to Stan! The Greeks, Romans, and other groups in the Western Hemi-
sphere also mastered this trick in acoustic engineering, and the practice 
of using our environment to enrich our voices never died out.
Growing up in the Bronx in the 1950s in my pre- teens, my friends 
and I often came across groups of young men congregating in alleyways 
and building foyers, combing their greasy hair straight back to look like 
Elvis; yes, they were greasers. Although the Bronx was certainly not 
crime- free in those days, these guys were not shooting up or even drink-
ing down. They were singing, usually in syncopated harmony, songs by 
the likes of the Everly Brothers, Buddy Holly, and the Platters. They 
sought out these small enclosures because of the impressive effects on 
their singing. We would watch and listen from a distance. The song-
sters usually ignored and tolerated us. We never heard a sound this rich 
and resonant from our pocket- sized, Japanese transistor radios. These 
guys were pretty good at enhancing their voices, at extending their   

96 • Chapter 5
phenotypes. Like the Chimor, the greasers used the walls around them 
to aid their natural voices.
As noted earlier in this chapter, when courters use sound, they usu-
ally want to be heard over the greatest area possible so as to reach the 
biggest audience of choosers. When choosers can hear calls of more than 
one courter, they usually prefer the loudest of the calls. Like the greasers 
in the allies of the Bronx and the Chimor in the amphitheaters of Peru, 
some animals have figured out how to enhance their courtship sounds 
in this way.
Many species come with built- in traits that enhance the amplitude 
of their calls: frogs and howler monkeys have large vocal sacs; cicadas 
have resonators on their body walls; and whales have resonators in their 
heads that ultimately help their sounds come out louder and travel far-
ther. Others engineer the environment to match their voice or vary their 
voice to match the environment.
Sound frequency and sound wavelength are negatively related to 
one another. Higher- frequency sounds have shorter wavelengths, and 
lower- frequency sounds have longer ones. If you play sound into a tube, 
the sounds that come out louder are those whose wavelengths match 
the length of the tube. In woodwinds, such as flutes, sound is produced 
by blowing air across a narrow hole at one end of the instrument, which 
then causes the air column within the flute to vibrate. The frequency  
of the vibration, what we perceive as pitch, is determined by the length 
of the air column: the longer the flute, the lower the pitch. But flutes 
are not stuck with the pitch determined by their length. Musicians can 
extend the flute’s sounds, its acoustic phenotype, by changing its ef-
fective length with a mere touch of the finger. By opening and closing 
holes on the instrument, its effective length changes. When all holes 
are closed, the effective length is the longest and the pitch the low-
est, whereas opening various holes decreases the effective length and 
increases the pitch. Humans have applied basic acoustics to engineer 
a variety of pleasing sounds we call music, and animals have done the 
same to enhance their own music.
Some crickets and frogs in Australia, like the Chimor and the greas-
ers, use chambers to resonate their calls. They call from inside burrows 
in the soil that, depending on the species, they either construct at a 
length that best matches the wavelengths of their mating calls, or they 

The Sounds of Sex • 97
position themselves in an abandoned burrow at the distance from the 
opening that gives them the best resonance.
The herpetologist Jianguo Cui and his colleagues have shown that 
the Emei music frog in China goes one step further and uses the inter-
action between its call and its environment to advertise its real estate 
to females. This is how it works: a male calls from inside a nest he con-
structs to hold a female’s eggs. The calls that emanate from inside the 
nest have more energy in lower frequencies and longer notes compared 
with the same calls that are broadcast from outside the nest; the effect 
on the inside- nest calls is mostly due to the size of the burrow entrance 
and the depth of the burrow leading to the nest. When females were 
given a choice between the same call broadcast from inside and outside 
of the nest, a vast majority preferred the longer, more resonant call from 
inside. They prefer the males with better “real estate.”22 These vocalists 
engineer their environment to match the call, but a frog in Borneo does 
just the opposite: it manipulates its call to match its environment.
The Bornean tree- hole frog, as its eponymous moniker suggests, is 
found in the forests of Borneo, where he calls from tree holes. The tree 
holes differ in size, and the size of the inner air- filled cavity also varies 
with the amount of water that has accumulated in the tree hole. The 
wavelengths that are best resonated depend on the size of the empty 
cavity. There is not much this frog can do to change the cavity size; he 
can’t carve out the tree, truck in rainwater, or siphon it out. Being stuck 
with his tree hole and the amount of water in it, this frog’s solution is to 
adjust his calls’ frequencies and wavelengths to best match the cavity’s 
size so it increases the calls’ amplitude to reach as many females as pos-
sible. How do we know this?
In a very clever experiment, two researchers, Björn Lardner and Mak-
larin bin Lakim, placed frogs in artificial cavities partially filled with 
water. The researchers recorded the frogs’ calls as they slowly drained 
water from the faux tree hole. As the water drained, the cavity space be-
came larger, making longer and longer wavelengths the ones that would 
be best resonated. As all this was happening, the frogs actively changed 
the wavelength of their calls to match the cavity’s resonance.23 So as 
with the Chimor and the Bronx greasers, when animals have some-
thing important to say, they use all kinds of tricks to be sure everyone  
hears it.

98 • Chapter 5
When we think of animal sounds, we usually think of voices. There 
are lots of other ways to make sounds, however. Crickets, whose names 
come from the French criquer, meaning “little creaker,” rub a file on one 
wing along a scraper on the other to produce the chirps so character-
istic of summer nights in the temperate zone. Cicadas take a different 
approach and vibrate a drumlike tymbal organ on their body wall. Toad 
fish shake their sonic muscles two hundred times per second, the fastest 
muscle movement of any vertebrate, to make their swim bladders hum, 
which is a great alternative if you can’t sing. In all of these examples, as 
well as our own voices, to make sound you have to vibrate something. 
I once came across what is probably the most direct way to produce 
sound one sunny afternoon in the El Duque Reserve in Amazonian 
Brazil. Although there was not a cloud in the sky, I could swear I heard 
rain dropping on the dry leaf litter on the forest’s floor. I kept peering 
upward in vain for the rain that was responsible for this sound and saw 
nothing; when I finally looked down, I saw hundreds of ants scurrying 
around. When I got on my hands and knees for a closer look, I saw that 
they were all banging their heads into the ground; there were so many 
of them and they were banging their heads so hard that they really 
sounded like rain. Eventually, the ants settled down and their sound 
ceased. What was this all about? I found their nest, stuck a stick inside, 
and out came the ants. The sounds of banging heads once again filled 
the forest. I thought I had discovered a true oddity of nature, but a little 
research when I got home revealed that although an odd behavior, it is 
a well- known one in a number of ants and termites. The function of the 
sound is to warn nest- mates of predators, or of field biologists molesting 
their nest. There are a lot of ways to make sounds besides with a voice, 
just vibrate something. As we will now see, voiced animals can be very 
creative about adding to the sounds that come out of their mouth.
Hummingbirds are pretty amazing animals. They can beat their 
wings up to forty times per second, and while doing so they can stay 
virtually motionless in space while they delicately insert their extra- long 
beaks into the nectary of a flower. Like songbirds and parrots, they also 
learn their songs. For me, the most impressive characteristic of these 
small, seemingly fragile birds is the aerial courtship dive. In both An-
na’s and Costa’s Hummingbirds, when a female enters a male’s territory, 
he hovers and sings in front of her as he flares the patch of glistening 

The Sounds of Sex • 99
feathers on his throat. If the female doesn’t spook, he then treats her 
with some amazing aerial acrobatics. He flies thirty meters into the air 
and then launches himself like a dive bomber and hurtles toward the 
object of his sexual desire; he might repeat this dive up to twenty times. 
To ensure that he has the female’s attention, he punctuates his dive 
with a loud buzz. This sound was long assumed to be part of the song 
until Chris Clark, then a graduate student at the Museum of Vertebrate 
Zoology of the University of California, Berkeley, showed that these 
sounds are produced as air passes over and vibrates the bird’s outer tail 
feathers. He examined a dozen or so species, including the Anna’s and 
Costa’s Hummingbirds and their closest relatives, and found that most 
of the species have aerial courtship that always includes tail buzzes. But 
in a smaller subset of these species, males also add sounds produced the 
old- fashioned way— they sing them. The vocalized sound and the tail 
buzzes are so similar that it was long assumed they were both part of 
the song. Because the buzzes evolved before the songs, Clark concluded 
that the similarity between the two sounds must have resulted from the 
song evolving to mimic the tail buzzes.24 Even though hummingbirds 
are vocal animals, in this case the voice plays second fiddle to the tail. 
Other birds literally play fiddles— or more appropriately, violins— to 
enhance their courtship.
Manakins are the real pranksters of avian courtship. Unlike songbirds 
and hummingbirds, they lack the ability to learn song, but as a group 
they experiment with a variety of sounds. The crown jewel of manakin 
courtship to my eye, or more accurately to my ear, is the Club- winged 
Manakin. In my classes I show students a video of one of these birds 
from a study by Kim Bostwick of the Laboratory of Ornithology at 
Cornell University, which features a close- up of a brown- chested, red- 
capped male on a perch. When he sings, he bends forward and quickly 
erects his dark wings with their light chevron markings, and he contin-
ues to hold them upright while producing a rapidly pulsing sound simi-
lar to a violin. I ask the students to explain what is happening, and each 
year I get the same answers: the male is singing as he bends forward, 
and he raises his wings as a visual cue to supplement the sound. We then 
look at the video in slow motion. The more observant students notice 
that the beak is closed when the sound is produced; this is normal for a 
frog, but humans and birds open their mouths when they vocalize. The 

100 • Chapter 5
most observant students notice a very slight and rapid back- and- forth 
movement of the erect wings.
Bostwick realized that these wing movements are responsible for 
these sounds. Aiding her laserlike observational powers with real la-
sers, she showed that males are vibrating their wings one hundred times 
per second, more than twice the rate at which hummingbirds do. Their 
wings have a morphology that shares some of the basic properties of 
a violin. Each wing has a specialized feather with a series of ridges and 
another feather with a stiff up- curved tip. When a male raises his wings 
and vibrates them against one another, the tip on one wing strikes against 
the ridges on the other wing and . . . viola, the forest is alive with the 
sounds of violins!25 This is just one more example of the creative extent 
to which animals’ brains, morphologies, and behaviors conspire to mold 
their sounds of sex to please the senses of their courters. But nobody 
engineers sound better than we do.
* * *
I am in Edinburgh as I finish up this chapter, a World Heritage City 
where the Scottish culture flows more abundantly than the 250 flavors 
of whisky at its famed Albanach Bar. It is a crisp, sunny, spring day; the 
grass is green; the flowers are colorful; and there is a kilted bagpiper 
every few blocks. Standing at a corner waiting for the traffic light to 
change, the bagpipes command me to move. The Sturm und Drang is 
unmistakable, the pitch, the rhythm, the phrasing, everything about this 
music is martial. Although the piping did not quite make me want to 
fight or become aggressive, the music had an effect— it was calling me 
to at least move if not march. All of a sudden, the red light seemed 
interminable.
Animal songs and calls are not evolutionary precursors of human 
music. They do, however, share many similarities. Both are primarily 
social behaviors. They can establish social bonds, reduce and initiate 
conflict, and, of greatest concern to us, both can be intricately entwined 
with courtship and sex. The effectiveness of animal songs and human 
music derive from the fact that both influence the affective or emotional 
state of the chooser through the structure of the sound. This is unlike 
language, in which the structure of the sound is usually arbitrary rela-
tive to the meaning assigned to it; in courtship and music the details of  

The Sounds of Sex • 101
the sounds themselves are both the message and the meaning. Given 
that this is the case, we expect to find some generalities in how acoustic 
courtship signals and music elicit some similar emotions. And we do.
Earlier, I discussed Eugene Morton’s discovery that the acoustic prop-
erties of the local environment influence the evolution of the structure 
of birdsong. He also proposed a set of “motivation- structural rules” to 
predict how different sounds of some birds and mammals elicit differ-
ent emotional responses from their receivers.26 There are eight specific 
rules, but Morton summarized them more briefly: “birds and mammals 
use harsh, relatively low- frequency sounds when hostile and higher- 
frequency, more pure tone– like sounds when frightened, appeasing, or 
approaching in a friendly manner.”
We know from our own experience that different sounds better fit 
different situations. The best understood example might be “motherese” 
or baby talk, a cooing pattern of higher frequency speech that is cross- 
culturally used when interacting with infants; not only mothers talk to 
babies like this. When we want to soothe someone, child or adult, we 
tend to use quiet sounds that are long and tonal with long onset and 
offset times, that is, the amplitude slowly increases in the beginning 
and then slowly decreases at the end to avoid startling the receiver— 
“oooooohhh.” In contrast to this type of soothing speech, if we are in 
an argument or a fight, we raise our voice and employ sounds that are 
short, harsh, and have quick onset and offsets. In anger we could protest, 
“screeeeeeeew yooooooouuu” in a tonal voice, but instead we ejaculate, 
“Screw yoU!” in a manner that sounds as harsh as its meaning.
Our own rules about the functions of different sound structures are 
also applied to how we vocally interact with animals. Whether tending 
camels, walking our dog, or riding a horse, we use short, harsh, click-
ing sounds to initiate locomotion and more tonal, drawn- out sounds to 
command the animal to stop. When we do this, it might seem as if we 
are imposing our own structure- function rules on animals, but instead, 
we are using sounds that match their own structure- function rules, 
which just happen to be similar to ours. Patricia McConnell is a world- 
renowned dog trainer and author whose titles include Feisty Fido, The 
Other End of the Leash, and The Cautious Canine. As a graduate student, 
McConnell delved deeply into the command sounds used by trainers. 
In one experiment, naive domestic dogs were first trained to  respond 

102 • Chapter 5
to the types of sounds that typically signaled “go” and “stop”: four short 
notes with a rising fundamental frequency indicated go, and one long 
note with a descending fundamental frequency indicated stop. Another 
group was raised to stop when it heard the four short notes and to go 
when it heard the long note. Each group was then trained to learn the 
opposite association. Initially, both groups learned to associate go and stop 
with the acoustic signals with which they were trained. But when trained 
in the reversal learning trials, the group that was trained from the atypical 
association to the typical one learned faster than the group that first 
learned the typical association and then was asked to learn the atypical 
association.27 This study, together with Morton’s theory of  motivation- 
structural rules, suggest that there might be some generality of structure 
and function over a wide range of species, including our own, because 
these particular sound structures interact with the receiver’s neurobiol-
ogy and psychology in similar ways.
Music is similar to animal signals in that it can elicit a variety of emo-
tions. Here is part of a list from two Swedish psychologists, Patrik Juslin 
and Daniel Va¨stfja¨ll, on the responses music evokes: subjective feeling, 
listeners report that they experience emotions while listening to music; 
physiological reactions, similar to those shown to other “emotional” stim-
uli, music induces changes in heart rate, skin temperature, electrodermal 
response, respiration, and hormone secretion; brain activation, responses 
to music involve regions of the brain implicated in emotional responses; 
emotional expression, music makes people cry, smile, laugh, and furrow 
their eyebrows; action tendency, music influences people’s tendencies to 
help other people, to consume products, or to move.28 Yes, just try listen-
ing to bagpipes when you are waiting for the light to turn green.
Different types of music evoke different emotions, although defining 
the features that cause each emotion can be quite complicated. One 
generally recognized connection is that different musical keys tend to 
evoke different emotions: songs in major keys tend to elicit happiness; 
those in minor keys are sad; and songs played with a blues scale are, 
well, bluesy. Centuries ago, Christian Schubart offered a detailed de-
scription of the emotional aspects of different keys in his Ideen zu einer 
Aesthetik der Tonkunst, which Rita Steblin translated in A History of Key 
Characteristics in the 18th and Early 19th Centuries. His descriptions are 
reminiscent of an overindulgent wine connoisseur. Here are just a few 

The Sounds of Sex • 103
examples: “D Major, The key of triumph, of Hallelujahs, of war- cries, 
of victory- rejoicing. Thus, the inviting symphonies, the marches, holi-
day songs and heaven- rejoicing choruses are set in this key; D Minor, 
Melancholy womanliness, the spleen and humors brood; F# Minor, A 
gloomy key: it tugs at passion as a dog biting a dress. Resentment and 
discontent are its language; Ai Major, Key of the grave. Death, grave, 
putrefaction, judgment, eternity lie in its radius.” And finally, getting 
closer to our own concerns, “A Major, This key includes declarations of 
innocent love, satisfaction with one’s state of affairs; hope of seeing one’s 
beloved again when parting; youthful cheerfulness and trust in God; 
Bi Major, Cheerful love, clear conscience, hope, aspiration for a better 
world.”29 As Schubart seems to imply, music can influence our sexual 
mood, and its actions can be as primal as the effect of the ringdove’s 
bow- coo.
In an article published in the Archives of Sexual Behavior, David Bar-
low and his coworkers determined how music influences how we feel 
about sex. The experiment was simple enough. Give a man some happy 
or sad music, show him a porn flick, measure his erection, and ask how 
horny he is. The approach might sound a bit lowbrow, but not the music. 
They used samples from Mozart’s Eine kleine Nachtmusik and Divert-
mento no. 136 to induce a positive mood and Albinoni’s Adagio in G 
Minor and Barber’s Adagio pour Cordes to induce a negative one. They 
do not report similar details about the porn videos. The results were 
what we might expect, penis tumescence and sexual arousal were both 
elevated when the subject was primed with music that induced a posi-
tive emotional state compared with the negative music.30 It is no acci-
dent that romance in everyday life often includes a sound track.
Music also reaches deep into our brain, targeting the same reward 
areas that stimulate liking and wanting. Anne Blood and Robert Za-
torre, both scientists at McGill University, conducted PET scans (pos-
itron emission tomography) on subjects who heard music that had a 
chilling effect on listeners. When the subject reported a sensation of 
“shivers down the spine” or “chills,” the PET scans revealed increased 
blood flow to various regions of the mesolimbic reward system, showing 
activation of those same brain areas, such as the ventral striatum and nu-
cleus accumbens, that were stimulated in White- crowned Sparrows and 
túngara frogs in response to their mating sounds, which they both liked 

104 • Chapter 5
and wanted.31 Dan Levitin, also at McGill University and the author of 
the entertaining This Is Your Brain on Music, and his coworker Vinod Meno 
at Stanford University confirmed and extended these essential finding with 
fMRIs (functional magnetic resonance imaging), which provide more 
resolution than PET scans.32 As noted in chapter 3, these reward areas 
are also exploited by addictive pleasures such as food, sex, drugs, and 
gambling. We now see that there is a linkage within the triad of sexual 
selection, dopamine, and “music” (including acoustic courtship), which 
nicely parallels the mantra of the 1960s— sex, drugs, and rock and roll.
Now that we have “seen it all” and “heard it all”— or at least seen 
and heard a lot about how sights and sounds interact with sex— we will 
move on to what might be our most primal of all senses and begin to 
understand the scent of sex.

S I X
The Aroma of Adulation
Smell is a potent wizard that transports you across thousands of  
miles and all the years you have lived.
— Helen Keller
We see, we hear, and we smell.  These three senses all channel stim-
ulation from the world around us into our brains, where their informa-
tion is merged and collated, some getting more attention than others, 
and where this information is then used to form our percepts about the 
world and to help us decide how to interact with it. All of these mo-
dalities can be important conduits into our sexual brain, and different 
animals usually depend more heavily on one modality than the others to 
identify potential mates and to learn something about them— their spe-
cies, their sex, their health, and their readiness to mate. Some animals, 
including us, recruit all of these modalities to experience the sexual 
beauty of our mates. The sensations and the information we glean from 
each sense are different but often are complementary. Let’s consider an 
example, unrelated to sex, of how these senses differ and how they can 
complement one another.

106 • Chapter 6
It has been dry for some time, as it often is here in Texas. We are 
in a drought that started six years ago and is still going strong. Lake 
Travis, the main source of water for the ever- growing city of Austin, is 
two- thirds dry; boat docks there have not felt the embrace of lake water 
for years. But sometimes I venture out onto my deck and I can imme-
diately, even though it is not raining, sense that relief is on the way; the 
smell of rain fills the air. We have all sensed this heady fragrance but 
have probably thought little about its origin. The smell of rain is called 
petrichor, a word derived from the Greek petra (stone) and ichor, which, 
in Greek mythology, is the ethereal blood of the gods. Petrichor is pro-
duced by oils trapped in soil and stone, which become volatile when 
exposed to the moisture in the air that proceeds the falling rain. I am 
not the only one who gets excited by the smell of petrichor; during these 
same droughts cattle become restless when exposed to it.
The smell alerts me to the possibility of rain, but where is this po-
tential rain? My sense of smell is of little help here, but suddenly I see 
a strike of lightning in the distant southwest. Now, I know that not 
only will it rain, but I know the direction of the oncoming storm. Two 
senses, two different types of information about the same phenomenon. 
But how far away is it? Do I need to quickly get under cover, or can 
I relax for a while? As noted in chapter 4, judging the distance of an 
object can be tricky. But five seconds after I see the lightning, I hear 
the thunder. They both occurred nearly simultaneously at the source  
of the storm. When lightning discharges, it heats the surrounding air to 
temperatures that exceed those of the sun; this causes the air to rapidly 
compress, which produces the initial loud crack of the thunder. The air 
then slowly expands, which gives us the rumbles that follow. Since light 
travels faster than sound, I saw the lightning before I heard the thunder. 
Light travels so fast, about three hundred thousand meters per second, 
that we can consider it instantaneous when we experience it within our 
own planet. (Once we breach our planet, it is a different story. It takes 
eight minutes for the sun’s light to reach us, but still pretty quick for a 
93 million– mile journey.) Sound, on the other hand, travels at a more 
leisurely pace of 330 meters per second. Because five seconds elapsed 
between when I saw the lightning and when I heard the thunder, I can 
reckon that the storm is 1,650 meters away, about a mile. To sum up 
this rather simple experience, I smelled it was going to rain, I saw the 

The Aroma of Adulation • 107
direction it was coming from, and I heard how far away it was. Who 
needs Doppler radar?
These three sensory modalities have both strong points and weak 
points when they are used in communication, including sexual com-
munication. Visual signals result from reflecting light from the sun to a 
receiver, but if there is no light, there is no visual signal, so it only works 
well in the day. Visual communication is fast, and it gives very accu-
rate information about the location of the source. You would never say 
about someone whom you could see standing on a corner, “I think she is 
somewhere in that direction.” If you see her, you know exactly where she 
is, because seeing relies on a direct line of sight— if your friend ducks 
into a crowd, you have lost her, or at least you have lost visual contact 
with her. In acoustic communication, the sender creates its own energy, 
as noted in the preceding chapter, by vibrating body parts. Unlike visual 
communication, it is not restricted to daylight, nor does it require a di-
rect line of sight. When your friend fades into the crowd, she can give 
a quick yell or whistle to help you to keep track of her whereabouts, al-
though not as accurately as if you could see her. Both visual and acoustic 
signals are ephemeral, now you see them, now you hear them, but after 
the signal is produced, you don’t experience it any more.
Olfactory communication shares fewer similarities with these other 
modalities. There is something about odors that makes them seem 
more primal than the color of someone’s hair or the timbre of his voice. 
Consider this exchange between two characters in Scent of a Woman, in 
which the blind Frank, played by Al Pacino, is evidently charmed by the 
airline attendant, as he explains to his young companion:
Frank: Where’s Daphne? Let’s get her down here.
Charlie: She’s in the back.
Frank: The tail’s in the tail. Ooohhaa. Oh, but I still smell her. Women, what 
could you say? Who made ’em? God must have been a fucking genius. The 
hair. They say that the hair is everything, you know? Have you ever buried 
your nose in a mountain of curls, just wanted to go to sleep forever?
* * *
Olfactory communication only takes place when the molecules that 
constitute the odor make their way to the olfactory receptor cells of 

108 • Chapter 6
the receiver. In some cases, the travel is short and direct, as when dogs 
sniff butts. In other cases, the odors are deposited on an object, such as 
when dogs urinate on a tree or fire hydrant, and the receiver comes into 
contact with the stationary odor. In many cases, however, the odor mol-
ecules travel through the environment, riding the wind as they head for 
a chance encounter with a distant receiver. This is what happens when 
a female dog releases pheromones that indicate she is in “heat”; seem-
ingly every male dog in the neighborhood gets the message that she is 
reproductively active and ready to mate . . . just listen to all that howling. 
Because the movement of molecules in the atmosphere can be tortuous, 
anything but a straight line, the directional information of odor cues is 
not very accurate. The only way to find the source of an odor is to follow 
its concentration gradient, which usually, but not always, increases the 
closer you get to the source. If you want to communicate your location, 
it is better to rely on a wave or whistle than your body odor. If your 
friend farts in a crowd, it is the sound more than the odor that will give 
away her location. Folks in the crowd will know the general direction 
from which the odor is coming, but not exactly who is responsible for it, 
as they exchange accusatory glances.
If you want to make a lasting impression, odor cues are the best. A 
dog who bares his teeth and growls at an intruding neighbor effectively 
defends his space, but when he leaves, those defense signals leave with 
him. A little bit of urine, however, goes a long way, or at least is present 
for a long time, and is a constant reminder to any intruder that it enters 
this area at its own risk.
Odors are important for different functions, but as with eyes and 
ears, there is only one channel that funnels all this information to the 
brain. The reception of odor is a bit simpler than the reception of light 
or sound, because the molecule that is the signal binds directly to the 
olfactory receptor. These olfactory receptor cells are in the noses of all 
vertebrates, the vomeronasal organs of some vertebrates, and in the an-
tennae and feet of many insects. Some of these olfactory receptors are 
quite sensitive and can detect a few molecules of odor that have traveled 
kilometers from their source. The olfactory receptors on the antennae 
of the silkworm moth, one of the best odor detectors on the planet, 
captures 80 percent of the odor molecules that pass by, and the binding 

The Aroma of Adulation • 109
of a single odor molecule to a single receptor is sufficient to trigger the 
male’s search for a mate. It is impossible to be more sensitive than that.
We need to pause for a bit of jargon. I have been using the terms odors 
and pheromones seemingly interchangeably, but they are not the same. 
Anything that gives us information is a cue, like the body odor of our 
lost friend. If that odor evolved specifically for communication, it is a 
signal. A pheromone is an odor- signal; it evolved to inform. I remember 
picking up a pamphlet on Telegraph Avenue in Berkeley, a home to the 
counterculture of the 1960s, many years ago when I was a postdoc. It 
was a diatribe against capitalism and rude people, titled Flatulence as 
a Social Weapon. Dialectics aside, it hopelessly confused the notions of 
odors and pheromones.
The other bit of jargon is the vomeronasal organ, or VNO. It is found 
in the roof of the mouth of many amphibians, reptiles, and mammals. It 
is nowhere to be found in fishes, birds, crocodiles, Old World primates, 
marine mammals, and some bats. Odors can enter this organ through 
the roof of the mouth and sometimes the nose. The forked tongue of 
the serpent evolved not to lie to Eve about the apple in Eden but to 
grab odor molecules from the air and then insert them into the VNO. 
A lot of pheromonal communication involves the VNO in animals that 
have it. Some researchers have argued that the seeming lack of a VNO 
in humans (we are not sure about this yet) indicates that we do not 
have pheromones. That logic is wrong because there is nothing that re-
stricts an odor message to only the VNO— otherwise fish would not 
have pheromones, which is demonstrably not the case. We will not be 
concerned whether it is the VNO or the nose that helps to link external 
odors to our sexual brain.
Wherever olfactory receptors are found, they bind to different odor 
molecules that can be associated with quite different sources, such as 
rain, sex, and food. In mammals, these receptors are embedded in the 
mucous membrane inside our nose. Sniffing the air brings more mol-
ecules into the nose and increases our chances of smelling something 
in the environment. Mammals with a VNO expedite its odor- sensing 
capabilities with a flehmen response, as when a horse curls its top lip 
upward and bares its teeth. This is not exaggerated sniffing. The horse 
closes its nostrils when producing a flehmen response, which forces air 

110 • Chapter 6
into its mouth and channels the odors to the VNO. It is amazing that it 
is not known if humans have a functional VNO.
Olfactory receptors are usually neurons, and wherever they are found, 
in the toes or nose, they react to odors in the same way. When an odor 
binds to a receptor, it triggers a series of biochemical changes in the 
cell that eventually cause the neuron to fire. In mammals, these neural 
discharges are fed forward to the olfactory lobe of the brain. The olfac-
tory lobe, in turn, projects to numerous other parts of the brain that are 
involved in different functions, sex being only one of them. Olfaction 
is alone among the senses in its immediate linkage to parts of the brain 
that are involved in memory, emotions, and the pleasures of “liking” 
and “wanting” governed by the mesolimbic reward system discussed in 
chapter 3. All of the other senses, including seeing and hearing, pass 
through relay stations lower in the brain for more processing before 
eventually projecting to pleasure centers. Odors waste no time and get 
right to the point. This direct linkage between olfaction and emotion is 
another attribute that makes this sense seem so primal.
Olfaction proceeds similarly in insects, and it is perhaps best under-
stood in moths. Their olfactory receptors extend in netlike fashion from 
the antennae. There are two smells that are exciting to a male moth: 
the female’s pheromone and the odors of the flowers it feeds on. The 
antennae contain an abundance of receptors that capture both of these 
classes of odors. When a receptor is stimulated by an odor, this stimula-
tion is fed forward to a part of the moth’s brain called the antennal lobe. 
Within the antennal lobe moths have groups of cells called glomeruli. 
Separate glomeruli act as a “sexual brain” or a “foraging brain” and are 
stimulated by different odors. The olfactory receptor cells that bind to 
sexual pheromones terminate in the macroglomerular complex, where 
the neural code for species and sex recognition is found. The olfactory 
receptor cells that detect floral odors, on the other hand, bypass this 
complex of cells and terminate in a region called the main antennal 
lobe; this is the moth’s “foraging brain.”
Sometimes sex and food are dependent on one another. Fruit flies 
often court on deposits of rotting fruit because this is where they lay 
their eggs. Olfactory receptors that detect food odors sensibly project to 
the flies’ foraging brain. But one set of food- odor receptors where genes 
critical for male courtship (fruitless) are expressed go straight to the 

The Aroma of Adulation • 111
sexual brain.1 If these receptors are not stimulated by food odors, then 
the male does not court. The interpretation is that male courtship will 
not ultimately be successful if the female has no place to lay her eggs. 
The male is not being chivalrous; he is being strategic.
Now that we know some of the details of this powerful sense, we can 
figure out how it figures into the sex life of so many and such different 
animals.
* * *
As I have pointed out many times, the most critical decisions about 
mating are doing it with correct species and with a partner willing and 
able. Olfactory cues are often the best for figuring that out. This is prob-
ably because odors are so closely tied to who we are and what we feel. 
The link between genes and odors is probably shorter and more direct 
than the same links in other signals.
Genes don’t produce traits directly; there really are no genes “for” 
behavior. Instead, our DNA makes RNA, and our RNA makes pro-
teins or regulates the action of other genes. This gets especially com-
plicated when we ask naive questions about “genes for birdsong,” for 
example. There are many aspects of physiology, morphology, and be-
havior that must be coordinated to result in a song. Genes must provide 
the blueprint for the construction of neurons that generate the specific 
rhythm of the song; genes have to direct the development of the carti-
lages, muscles, and bones along a very specific pathway that culminates 
in the bird’s voice box; and genes must then somehow engineer the 
neural networks that connect all of these parts to get them to work in 
concert in order to produce those wonderful concerts diagnostic of so 
many songbirds. Coding genes to make a specific olfactory molecule 
is more straightforward. Genes orchestrate biochemical pathways that 
syn thesize chains of compounds, and these compounds are the signals 
themselves. Pretty simple.
Not all odors come from genes, however. Environmental odors can 
act as olfactory fingerprints that reveal a good deal about ourselves. The 
odor of someone who has spent the night boozing and smoking in a 
bar provides an unmistakable fingerprint of this behavior. Other ani-
mals also use odors to track where individuals have been. Beehives are 
guarded by certain bees whose job is to admit only colony members. 

112 • Chapter 6
If one takes a bee from the same hive as the guard bee, doses her with 
the odor from another hive, and then reintroduces her back to her own 
hive, the guard bee reacts as if the manipulated bee smells of smoke and 
booze, or worse, as if she is an alien from another hive.2 The guard’s reac-
tion to the offending olfactory message, however, is a bit more extreme 
than ours would be to the stench of a barfly: the guard bee kills the mes-
senger because of the olfactory message she now carries. When it comes 
to mate choice and these types of environmentally acquired odors, one 
main message is that if you smell like me, you must be like me. That is 
good when looking for the same species or, as we will soon see, not so 
good when looking for someone with different genes.
Odors can also reveal with whom we have been hanging out, and 
the consequences here can also be harsh. Many a relationship has been 
derailed by a man returning home to his partner bearing the scent of an-
other woman. As I will discuss below, most women who wear perfume 
have a specific scent that they feel is “them,” so when a philandering 
male returns home, the details of the alien scent does not matter, just 
the message that it is alien. But there might be details of a cheating devil 
in the scent’s bouquet. Glendale.com, a dating site that arranges illicit 
 affairs, reported the top ten perfumes used by cheating women and cheat-
ing men. If her man returns not only with a foreign perfume but specifi-
cally with a scent of Guerlain’s Shalimar, Chanel’s Coco Mademoiselle, or 
Givenchy’s Very Irresistible, it might be time to get counseling.
Animals don’t get counseling, they get right to the point. Female red- 
backed salamanders have low tolerance for a philandering mate. These 
small amphibians are common under rocks, logs, and mosses of forests 
in northeastern North America. They are ideal animals for behavior and 
ecology experiments, as they are perfectly content living in small terrari-
ums. Experimenters at Southwestern Louisiana University documented 
the consequences of a male salamander going astray. Pairs of salaman-
ders were maintained in separate terrariums mimicking what we might 
think of as marital bliss. But then the researchers interceded, planting 
doubts about the male’s fidelity in the mind of his mate. They removed 
the male and placed him in another terrarium for a short time before 
returning him to his partner. If he had been placed in an empty terrar-
ium, his return home was uneventful, but if had he visited a terrarium 
with another female, he had hell to pay. Even though the female was his 

The Aroma of Adulation • 113
size, she grabbed him mid- body with her jaws and body- slammed him 
onto the ground several times.3 Lesson learned, although in this case it 
was the experimenter and not her mate who should have been the target 
of the female’s wrath.
The environment appends some interesting phrases to the message 
of sexual scents by informing receivers of where an individual has been 
and with whom. Other odors more tightly influenced by genes provide 
different types of information. Fruit flies, fishes, snakes, and mammals 
all rely on olfactory signals that are coded in the genes to identify spe-
cies, but moths are the champions when it comes to using scents for sex. 
In these animals, the typical roles of courters and choosers are reversed 
between the sexes; the females advertise their desires with odors, and 
the males key in on those odors to track down their mates. Females emit 
volatile pheromones that they waft into the air and that can travel with 
the wind for kilometers. When the male detects these pheromones, he 
follows the odor gradient upwind until he locates the solicitous female. 
Not only do the pheromones direct him; they focus him during his 
search for sex— too much perhaps. When the sexual odors stimulate his 
antennal lobes, he becomes oblivious to the sounds of bat predators who 
might be tracking him down.
There are many different species of moths broadcasting in the olfac-
tory airwaves, similar to a surfeit of radio stations packing the available 
bandwidth of radio waves. Just as numerous, distinct FM and AM sig-
nals keep the radio stations separate on the dial, there is an abundance 
of odors that could be recruited to keep species identification error- free. 
Even though there are more than 100,000 possible different volatile 
pheromones available to moths, this would not provide a unique com-
pound for each of the 160,000 species of moths worldwide. Moths do 
not, however, assign one unique odorant to each species. For example, 
140 species of moths and the elephant all share the same primary sex-
ual attractant in their recognition pheromones.4 Confusion does not 
arise, however, because the different species of moths, like a growing 
number of wineries around the world, are into blends, changes in the 
ratios of different odorants provide another axis of variation for unique 
species identification. (Of course, there are other factors that keep a 
male moth from copulating with an elephant, more to do with smashing 
than blending.)

114 • Chapter 6
Most moths pick two odors for their sexual bouquet and emphasize 
one of them, yielding a blend with a major and minor olfactory com-
ponent. Sometimes the major component for one species is the minor 
component for another. When moths evolve new signals, it is often  
by changing the ratio of the blend rather than adding or deleting a sep-
arate component. And these moths seem to have the latitude to evolve 
shifts in their blends as easily as a winemaker might shift the ratio of 
Malbec to Cabernet Sauvignon.
The cabbage looper is a well- known agricultural pest. As a caterpil-
lar it wreaks havoc not only on cabbage but also broccoli, cauliflower, 
collards, kale, mustard, radish, rutabaga, turnip, and watercress. Given 
the number of folks who would like to see this moth dead, there has 
been extensive research into how it survives and reproduces. Its sexual 
pheromone is a two- part blend in a ratio of 100:1.5 The moth has olfac-
tory cells on the antennae that match each component and in the same 
100:1 ratio. Thus, when the male whiffs his female’s scent of 100 parts 
A to 1 part B, the neurons that code for A and B in his sexual brain, the 
macroglomerular complex just mentioned, fires in the same ratio. This is 
how their brains code mate recognition, and it is the site of their sexual 
aesthetics when it comes to the scent of sex. But what is attractive to one 
species is anathema to another. Because all 160,000 species of moths 
evolved from a common ancestor, and each species has both a unique 
sexual signal and a unique neural code to recognize it, there must have 
been a lot of evolution of both the signals and the receivers. How do 
these signals and the aesthetics for them evolve?
Evolution is often a slow, finicky process that we do not witness di-
rectly but rather deduce from patterns in nature: animals with thick fur 
live in cold climates, the length of a bat’s tongue is precisely long enough 
to probe the flowers it pollinates, and bacteria are no longer threatened 
by antibiotics that have been in long and continual use. All of these re-
lationships, we assume, are adaptations that result from evolution, even 
though we did not witness evolution taking place. Sometimes, though, 
we luck out, and evolution takes place right before our very own eyes.
In a laboratory strain of cabbage loopers, the evolution of a new spe-
cies recognition signal and the neural code for it took place right under 
the noses of researchers. One day, lightning struck (metaphorically), and 
some mutant females started mixing their pheromone blends in equal 

The Aroma of Adulation • 115
proportions of the two olfactory components— 50:50 (A:B) instead of 
100:1. Initially, these females did not elicit much sexual attention from 
males, but then lightning struck again, and some males evolved a new 
preference, which made this mutant blend quite attractive.6
What changed in the males to make these normally oddly odiferous 
females smell sexy? The logical hypothesis is that the recognition code 
in the brains of the mutant males changed from 100:1 to 50:50. But 
as we have seen before, the logical solution is not always the biological 
solution, and this is yet another case. In these males, the code in the 
brain remained the same— neurons firing to A and B in a proportion of 
100:1 signaled a desirable mate even though she was emitting her odors 
of A and B in equal proportion. How does this happen? In this case, the 
evolutionary action was at the receptors; the sensitivity of the receptors 
to component B changed, and the gain of these receptors was reduced 
by a hundredfold. Now it took one hundred units of odor B to elicit the 
same response from the olfactory- sexual brain that one unit previously 
elicited. The brain’s code to recognize the mutant pheromone remained 
100:1 even though the two components in the mutants were in equal 
proportion in the air and on the receptors. In both mutant and normal 
males, the same pattern of firing defined sexual beauty, despite being 
triggered by very different ratios of stimuli. Although the wild type and 
mutant females smelled quite different, there were equally beautiful to 
their own kind.
* * *
The opposite of speciation is hybridization. Although matings between 
different species usually do not produce viable offspring, it can happen; 
and when it does, it creates individuals that are neither the species of 
their mother nor their father but some mix. Hybridization can occur 
when we muck up an animal’s sensory world. I mentioned fish biologist 
Gil Rosenthal as one my companions exploring the kelp forests off the 
coast of California. I introduced Gil to the natural wonders of sword-
tails in northeastern Mexico when he began his studies as my graduate 
student. Shortly thereafter, Gil introduced me to two wonderful spe-
cies of swordtails in the mountains of Hidalgo, Mexico. On a stunning 
St. Patrick’s Day, when the verdant hills of Hidalgo had a hint of Eire 
(although lacking the rainbow), a group of us hiked half a day over 

116 • Chapter 6
the mountains into a spectacular valley that served as the residence of 
two swordtail species, Xiphophorus malinche and X. birchmanni.7 In this 
place, the two species obeyed the societal command reminiscent of the 
mournful refrain from the Janis Ian song “Society’s Child,” charging 
people to stick to their own kind.8 They knew they were different spe-
cies, and they acted that way.
But this wasn’t true everywhere. Later, as a professor, Gil and his 
graduate student, Heidi Fisher, were working at a site on a larger river 
where the two swordtail species are found together. There as well, the 
two species had typically abided by the standard biological etiquette 
of no mating with heterospecifics. But one day Gil and Heidi found 
evidence that sexual bedlam had broken out— it was hybrids gone wild. 
X. malinche and X. birchmanni acted as if they didn’t care, or at least 
couldn’t recognize, with whom they mated.9 The researchers surmised 
that this sexual indiscrimination might have something to do with an 
orange processing plant recently constructed upriver, whose discharges 
were polluting this site and causing eutrophication. They did experi-
ments with these fish and showed that females could not discriminate 
between different and same species when tested in their home river 
water. When the same females were tested in clean water, however, they 
returned to typical biological norms and preferred males of their own 
species. Gil and Heidi realized that a by- product of eutrophication is 
humic acid, and that humic acid binds to olfactory receptors. Could 
the humic acid be blocking the ability of the female swordtails to dis-
criminate mates? They tested females in clean water, and once again 
showed there was a preference for males of the same species, but when 
they added humic acid to the water, the female’s discrimination ability 
disappeared. When the effect of the humic acid wore off, the females 
once again biased their sexual overtures to males of their own species. 
This all makes wonderful sense. We can’t appreciate visual beauty in the 
dark, a melodious song masked by sounds of the city, or sexual odors if 
our noses are otherwise occupied. You can’t desire what you can’t sense.
Odors can inform choosers about a lot more than the species of the 
courter. As I am sure we are all tired of hearing by now, there is strong 
selection on choosers to mate with courters of the same species because 
their genes are complementary. The swordtails notwithstanding, making 
babies by combining genes from different species doesn’t always work 

The Aroma of Adulation • 117
well. So a first priority in mate choice is getting a partner with similar 
genes. Within a species, though, not all genes are the same. I have blue 
eyes. If yours are brown, you have different genes for eye color (when we 
say different “genes” we usually mean different alleles or “gene variants” 
of the same gene). I am of Irish decent. If you are from the Middle East, 
we have some genetic differences, and we both differ from people in 
Asia, who have about 20 percent more genes from our Neanderthal rel-
atives hanging around in their genomes.10 But no genes vary like MHC 
genes.
The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a set of genes that 
function in our immune response. They identify cells from alien forms 
such as pathogens and parasites, and when they find them, they alert the 
body to recruit T cells to fight the invasion. The MHC genes need to 
be variable in order to accurately distinguish cellular friend from a huge 
diversity of foes, the “friend” being our own cells. This is why MHC 
genes are the most variable in all of the vertebrates. Because of all this 
variation, individuals can choose mates that yield offspring better armed 
to fight disease than either parent; that is, as long as choosers mate with 
courters who have MHC genes very different from their own. But how 
can we vertebrates tell if partners meet our MHC criterion?
Genomics allows us to have the MHC genes of prospective partners 
scanned and then compared to our own to determine our best match, 
at least in terms of MHC genes. I predict it will not be long before 
some overpriced dating services will require genome scans, and the first 
match they will use is MHC. But what is an animal, or a person without 
the resources to pay for a genome scan or more likely a genome scam, to 
do? Do we just decide that MHC is one of the inner attributes of a po-
tential partner that we will only know when it is too late, like a volatile 
temper or a drinking problem? Do we have to wait for evidence that our 
child is immune- compromised to know we made a poor partner choice? 
No. It turns out that we are already paying very close attention to the 
MHC genes of potential partners; we just don’t know it.
We can’t see genes, but genes contribute to phenotypes. Eye color 
gives us a pretty accurate idea of the underlying genes that contribute to 
it. In other cases, the phenotype is not a very accurate predictor of genes, 
because many genes, rather than a single gene, might contribute to the 
phenotype, and the environment might play an overwhelming role in 

118 • Chapter 6
determining outward appearance. For example, genes influence body 
mass in humans, but so do beer, ice cream, and slothfulness. Looks can 
deceive, especially for the eugenicist.
There is, however, a phenotypic window that gives a good view of 
MHC genes— the animal’s odors. This linkage between smell and genes 
is best understood in rodents in which odors in the “mouse urinary 
products” are correlated to MHC variation. Among species that have 
been studied, rodents with similar MHC genes smell similar to one 
another, while those with different MHC genes smell different. This 
sets the stage for a new criterion of beauty, not the MHC genes per se, 
but the scent they produce. This sexual aesthetic is a relative one. The 
fine details of a courter’s MHC genes are not important, just whether 
they are different from the chooser’s. MHC- based mate choice, how-
ever, occurs only in animals that use odor as an important criterion in 
mate choice.
What about us? We are somewhat sensitive to odors, and we all know 
how important scents are in courtship. We use flowers as a courtship 
gift not only because flowers look beautiful but because of their fragrant 
bouquet. There is a billion- dollar perfume industry, which we will come 
to later, that bottles fragrances to enhance our own bouquet. In addition, 
much of our behavior and physiology can be subconsciously influenced 
by odors. A classic study by Martha McClintock showed that the men-
strual periods of undergrads in a college dorm tended to become syn-
chronized over time.11 The only logical cue was odor, and McClintock 
later identified the odor in question, the first human pheromone known 
to science.
We all know our behavior can be influenced by subtle cues of which 
we are consciously unaware. In a study relevant to the role of odors in 
sex, Geoffrey Miller, author of The Mating Mind, reported that men in 
strip clubs tipped more for a lap dance when the dancer was ovulating.12 
Although there were many uncontrolled variables in this study, such as 
the dancer’s own behavior, Miller argued that the dancer’s odors caused 
the enhanced generosity of their patrons. Although not experimentally 
verified, this conclusion does not seem so far- fetched, given McClin-
tock’s research into the correlation of odors and menstrual cycle. The 
“stinky tee shirt” experiment, however, is now the benchmark for show-
ing the general link between smell and sex in humans, and specifically 

The Aroma of Adulation • 119
for demonstrating that MHC odors are an important criterion of our 
sexual aesthetics, one we don’t even realize.
This is how the experiment conducted by Claus Wedekind and his 
colleagues works. Participants, male college undergraduates as is the 
case in many experiments on humans, volunteer to wear the same tee 
shirt for two consecutive nights. During this time, they refrain from 
bathing or using any fragrance such as perfumes, colognes, or deodor-
ants. After this ordeal, they then put their tee shirt in a plastic bag and 
bring it to the laboratory, where women sniff the tee shirts and rate the 
attractiveness of the shirts’ odors. In addition, the men and women have 
all previously been tested in order to determine their MHC type, and 
women report if they are using oral contraceptives.13
Women found the odors of men with MHC types different from 
their own odors more attractive than the odors of men with more sim-
ilar MHC genes. Also as predicted from animal studies, the odor’s at-
tractiveness was not absolute— some guys did not generally smell bet-
ter than others— but was context dependent; the odor’s attractiveness 
depended on the woman’s own MHC type. A clever experiment with 
dirty participants but clean results: women’s percepts of beauty, like that 
of rodents, sticklebacks, and a myriad of other animals who sniff for sex, 
are influenced by MHC- based odors. (It is important to note, however, 
that these results have been replicated in some studies but not in oth-
ers.)14 The finding of MHC- based odor preferences in humans dovetails 
nicely with other studies that show a woman’s sense of smell becomes 
heightened when she is sexually receptive, when mating is on her mind, 
and also that women rank a male’s odor as the most important factor 
in choosing a sexual partner, whereas men rank the woman’s looks as of 
paramount importance.
There is a slight catch to the stinky tee shirt experiment. The expected 
pattern of odor preferences applied only if a woman was not taking oral 
contraceptives. If she was on the pill, her preference was reversed; odors 
from men with more, not less, similar MHC genes were sexier. What  
is going on with the oral contraceptive? Why would a pill that influ-
ences cycles of reproductive hormones bias what smells good sexually?
Let’s get back to the basic theory behind MHC- based mate choice. 
The prediction is that if a chooser can evaluate MHC genes, then she 
should prefer a mate with different MHC genes to produce healthier 

120 • Chapter 6
offspring. As noted above, it is MHC’s role in immune function that 
makes MHC so variable. And this genetic variability is also a good in-
dicator of how closely related we are to one another. Many animals use 
MHC variation as a clue to family heritage in contexts other than mat-
ing, usually when they are searching for assistance or wanting to share 
public goods. Frog tadpoles, for example, school with one another to re-
duce predation risk by means of a “selfish herd” effect; the more tadpoles 
hanging out together, the less likely you will be the one eaten by that 
hungry fish.15 But they are not indiscriminate when sharing this benefit, 
as they prefer to herd with siblings over non- siblings. A good sniff of 
MHC- based odors lets them know if a neighbor is sib or non- sib.
Might females on the pill be more concerned about kinship than 
mating? The birth control pill functions by manipulating a woman’s re-
productive hormones to simulate pregnancy. Ovulation does not take 
place when a woman is pregnant, so women on the pill, if all is working 
well, do not get pregnant. Wedekind and his colleagues figured that a 
woman on the pill does not have mating on her mind, or at least does 
not have reproduction as a subconscious goal, so she is not interested in 
odor cues that indicate a good MHC- partner. Okay, this sounds fine, 
but then why do these women prefer the opposite, the odors of men 
with more similar MHC genes? Since the hormonal milieu of these 
women suggests that they are pregnant, then a post- pregnancy strategy 
kicks in. Identify those who can assist in child rearing, as we know it 
takes a village, in this case an unselfish herd, to raise a child. And who 
best to help in child rearing but close relatives? In some of today’s mo-
bile societies we are not always around relatives who are able to help out 
in family life. But the researchers correctly point out that the biology we 
have today, whether it is our morphology, behavior, or our sexual aes-
thetics, has a long evolutionary history and is sometimes better adapted 
to past conditions than present ones.
There is the potential for some unfortunate and unintended conse-
quences to this interaction of mate- odor preferences and oral contra-
ceptives, as pointed out by the researchers Fritz Vollrath and Manfred 
Milinski.16 Let’s say a couple is dating and the woman is on the pill. 
They fall in love, marry, and remain happy, and all this marital bliss leads 
to a decision to have a child. The woman stops taking contraceptives, 
and now the man she is sleeping with smells to her like her uncle! Not 

The Aroma of Adulation • 121
quite, perhaps, but now she is exposed to an odor of a man whose MHC 
is more rather than less similar to her own, and which she thus finds 
less attractive. We do not know if this scenario ever plays out in the real 
world, but it is a possibility that new couples might want to take into 
account.
* * *
The Darién National Forest, a UNESCO World Heritage site, is far 
from the crowded streets and bagpipers of that other World Heritage 
site I discussed, Edinburgh. Here, the raucous calls of red- and- green 
macaws replace the rhythmic pulsing of the bagpipes, and there are no 
red lights to tell you to stop or green ones to make you go. The Darién is 
a twelve thousand– square kilometer stretch of jungle in southern Pan-
ama along the border with Colombia. It is sometimes called “impene-
trable,” and this is one reason why it is the only gap in the forty- eight 
thousand– kilometer Interamerican Highway that stretches from Alaska 
to Argentina. It is also where Balboa landed on the Atlantic side of the 
Isthmus of Panama and marched to the other side to “discover” the 
Pacific Ocean.
The Darién Gap might be relatively impenetrable to some, but the 
indigenous Embera have been here since the late 1700s, when they dis-
placed the native Guna to the San Blas islands and neighboring main-
land. It is still burdensome to get around in the Gap; boats, horses, and 
hiking are the most efficient means of transportation. But there is noth-
ing impenetrable about this forest when it comes to the chytrid fungus 
that killed off so many frogs in the mountains of western Panama and, 
we discovered, has recently arrived in the Darién.17
The Darién is one of the major hotspots for biodiversity in the West-
ern Hemisphere, if not the world. One group of organisms that flour-
ishes here is orchids. With long, simple, green leaves, they parasitize 
trees and usually are found high in the canopy. One way to see a lot of 
them is to find some trees that have fallen over and brought the canopy 
down to your level. This happens more often than you might guess. I 
have always been amazed by how many trees in the tropics just fall over, 
often in response to wind or a rainstorm. It is probably because the soil 
is so wet and thin here, which is also why so many trees have huge but-
tresses to keep them from toppling down. Fallen trees are critical in the 

122 • Chapter 6
ecology of the forests because they create gaps in the canopy that allow 
the usually dark surface to sparkle in the sun. The forest soil is a store-
house for a great diversity of seeds, defecated by birds and other animals 
that disperse them, and many seeds will not germinate until they have 
enough light. Pull back the curtains of the canopy to let some light in, 
and, presto, a variety of tree species begin to sprout. Light gaps are one 
of the most important facilitators of forest plant diversity.
Light gaps are also great places to find canopy species, be they ar-
boreal frogs and insects, or parasitic orchids and bromeliads. We hiked 
through a light gap that opened up after a huge espavel tree crashed 
to the ground. This giant of the forest is in the Anacardiaceae family 
and can grow to fifty meters in height. When this one came down, it 
brought numerous smaller trees along with it, many of which were lit-
tered with orchids.
In chapter 3, I talked about how deceptive orchids exploit the sex 
drive of orchid bees to assist them in pollination.18 The orchids accom-
plish this feat by evolving flower parts that resemble the silhouette and 
the fragrance of a female bee. In at least one case, the orchid’s odor is 
even more attractive to a male bee than the aroma of a virgin female. 
In order to be deceptive, these plants have evolved to become top- of- 
the- line bee- perfumeries. Some bees, however, have turned the tables 
on the orchids by exploiting the plant’s perfumeries for their own gain. 
They mix the fragrant odors from the orchid with a few drops of their 
own lipids to produce a greasy extraction similar to the enfleurage used 
in the perfume industry. The bees then suck up the perfumes from the 
plant and store them in body sacs for later use during courtship. In this 
bizarre web of nature, the male bees have engineered their phenotypes 
to make themselves more attractive to females by exploiting odors of 
orchids that have been engineered to be sexually attractive to bees so 
that the bees will help the orchids have more plant sex.
What happens if a male bee depends on orchid perfumeries for its 
courtship odors and then the orchids disappear? Such a situation has 
befallen some individuals of an orchid bee, Euglossa viridisima, which is 
native to Central America. Some of these bees were transported to Flor-
ida, where they thrived despite the fact that their orchid- perfumeries 
were nowhere to be found. But the bees didn’t do without. Instead, they 
harvested odors from more than a dozen flowers that have components 

The Aroma of Adulation • 123
that allowed them to reconstitute the bouquet of their former orchid- 
perfumery. In fact, in their search to recreate their long- lost perfumes, 
the bees even become a bit creative, throwing in some basil to accent 
their aroma. So we see that humans are not the only species that rely on 
outside sources to enhance their sexual fragrance.
* * *
The greatest engineering feat in the history of human sexual beauty is  
perfume, and its role in human romance is legendary. Some aromas seem 
to go right to the sexual brain, where they immediately elicit liking and 
wanting. What determines the scents we engineer to enhance our own 
bouquets? Can we ask the engineers themselves?
Luca Turin, the subject of Chandler Burr’s The Emperor of Scent, gives 
some entertaining and informative insights into the perfume industry.19 
Given how high the stakes are in this $5 billion business, one would 
think the theory of perfume would be well worked out. To the contrary, 
argues Turin. The industry is peopled by organic chemists who know 
which perfumes have been successful and take a rather random, hit- 
and- miss approach to assembling various compounds. These products 
are then tested by a panel of “noses,” and most of them are deemed 
 unacceptable. This method is costly and not very successful, as only a 
small percentage of bouquets ever make it to market.
Turin argues that if the perfume industry knew more about the biol-
ogy of olfaction, it could use a bit of reverse engineering to increase its 
success rate. The problem, he argues, is that we don’t know how olfaction 
works— or perhaps that he is one of the few folks who does know. He 
argues that it is not a lock- and- key mechanism where the structure of 
the odor “fits just right” into the receptor, but instead olfaction is based 
on the vibrational patterns of the molecules themselves whose detection 
is more akin to how we process sound. As of now, Turin’s theory does 
not have strong support, but who knows, he might be right.
Regardless of how we sense perfumes, the theory had always been 
that we use them to mask unpleasant odors with pleasant ones. Not 
so, argues Manfred Milinski, who is the Director of the Max Planck 
Institute for Evolutionary Biology. Milinski did groundbreaking work 
on MHC and mate choice in stickleback fishes, so he has been contem-
plating the relationship between odors and sexual attraction for some 

124 • Chapter 6
time.20 He has also focused his interest on humans.21 He notes that 
some perfumes are reminiscent of some body odors, and then argues 
that the origin of perfumes is based on exploiting our olfactory bias 
to enhance our MHC- based odors. Given our ever- increasing under-
standing of the potency of MHC- based odors, Milinksi’s idea about the 
origins of perfume makes sense. It seems logical, but is it biological, and 
how can one test this idea?
The most direct approach would be for us to characterize our own 
MHC odors and compare the chemical profiles of those odors to the 
chemical profiles of the perfumes we prefer. MHC odor research is not 
quite there yet, and, anyway, a list of organic compounds that comprise 
an odor does not necessarily tell us which of those odors are most sa-
lient. Milinski and Claus Wedekind, of stinky tee shirt fame, took a 
different approach.
In a study involving hundreds of men and women who were “finger-
printed” for their MHC types, individuals were given thirty- six different 
compounds that are commonly used to produce perfumes. They were 
asked to choose the fragrance that they would prefer to wear them-
selves, and the fragrance they would prefer that their partners wore. 
Even though we don’t know what our MHC- linked odors smell like, 
we assume that folks with the same MHC genes have the same MHC 
odors. Thus the researchers predicted that folks with the same MHC 
genes should prefer the same perfume odors. And that they did.22
What about preferences for the odor of your partner, what would you 
like them to smell like? One prediction is that we do not want our part-
ners to smell like us: it doesn’t matter what your partner smells like as 
long as it is different. Remember, as far as we know, MHC- odor based 
preferences place a premium on genes and odors that are just different 
from ours, not different in any specific way. The preferences for these 
subjects in the odors they wished for their partners matched this pre-
diction: they wanted their partners to smell different from themselves, 
but otherwise there was no consensus among folks with the same MHC 
genes as to what smelled good on their partners, despite the consistency 
as to what smelled good on themselves.
* * *

Plate 1. A calling male túngara frog at a typical breeding 
site in central Panama. The male’s large vocal sac is as 
distinctive as his complex call. 
Photo by Ryan Taylor

Plate 2. A nesting pair of túngara frogs. The male is on top as 
he clutches the female; they are in amplexus. The foam nest 
is produced when the male beats the jelly around the eggs 
with his hind feet. He is visibly exhausted after an arduous 
hour of nest construction.
Photo by Ryan Taylor

Plate 3. A fringe-lipped bat with a túngara frog. This bat can 
locate a calling frog by homing in on the call alone; the bat 
need not rely on its echolocation system to locate the frog. 
The túngara frog is its favorite prey in central Panama. 
Photo by Merlin Tuttle
MerlinTuttle.org

Plate 4. A male peacock erecting its tail feathers, or train, while 
courting a female. Although the tail is enchanting to females, 
it is this beautiful structure which, Darwin declared, made him 
sick every time he saw it.
Photo by Jyshah Jysha
https://margotstaubin.wordpress.com/2014/10/20/pride-and-peacocks

Plate 5. The golden-headed lion tamarin is an endangered 
species found in lowland tropical forests in the state of 
Bahia, Brazil. It lives in social groups in which both males 
and females care for the young and for juveniles. Little else is 
known about its mating system. It is considered by some as 
the world’s most beautiful primate. 
Photo by Steve Wilson
http://flickr.com/photos/26811962@N05/9221310569. Licensed 
under Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic

Plate 6. Sexual selection often results in extreme differences between males 
and females. In many species the male is more adorned than the female, as 
seen here in the collared lizard: the more colorful male, top, is contrasted 
with the less colorful female, bottom. 
Photos by A. K. Lappin

Plate 7. The peacock spider is a type of jumping spider; the 
male’s colorful display is reminiscent of a peacock. His beau-
tifully adorned abdomen is only raised when the male courts 
the female, at which time he waves it back and forth in an 
invitation to mate. 
Photo by Jurgen Otto

Plate 8. The red bird of paradise is a native of Indonesia. 
The males, one of which is shown here, are characterized by 
a pair of long tail wires. During courtship these tail wires 
seem to outline the male in the middle of a heart. 
Photo by Tim Lehman

Plate 9. A male swordtail characin, right, a native of Trinidad, 
Taboga, Venezuela, and Colombia, extends its pectoral fin-ray 
with a piece of flesh that resembles a food item to the female, on 
the left. The female is attracted to this faux food item at which 
time the male initiates courtship.
Photo by Nicolas Kolm 

Plate 10. An illustration of how a female greater 
bowerbird might view a male bowerbird displaying 
at his bower.
Illustration by John Endler

Plate 11. Male and female fireflies engage in spectacular 
nocturnal visual displays. As with many other courtship 
displays, the patterns of flashes are distinctive for each spe-
cies. This image is a time-lapse photograph of synchronous 
fireflies from The Great Smoky Mountains National Park, 
near Elkmont, Tennessee. 
Photo by Radim Schreiber

Plate 12. The quetzal is the national bird of Guatemala, and 
its image adorns the country’s flag. Some consider the male 
resplendent quetzal to be the world’s most beautiful bird. My 
binoculars began to shake in my hands the first time I saw one. 
Photo by Dominic Sherony
Photographed at Savegre, Costa Rica, April 15, 2011, Resplendent 
Quetzal (Pharomachrus mocinno). Uploaded by Magnus Manske. Li-
censed under Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 2.0 Generic. 

Plate 13. A male hairy caterpillar extruding his hair 
pencils. The tubes, or coremata, are inflated by blood 
pressure causing sex pheromones to be secreted 
through the hairs. 
Photo by Rodney and Smudge Foster Rentz

Plate 14. Guppies are known not only for their spectacular colors but 
also for incredible variation in those colors—as is the case especially 
of guppies in streams in Trinidad. Only a small sample of the striking 
variation is shown here.
Photo by Cara Gibson and Anne Houde

Plate 15. A bee orchid pseudo-copulating with an 
orchid. Although this behavior appears maladaptive, 
it makes perfect sense in the context of the bee’s 
strategy for finding females. As females are few and 
far between, it behooves the male bee to copulate with 
anything resembling a female. 
Photo by Nicolas J. Vereecken

Plate 16. A cricket, left, and the fly, Ormia, that parasitize 
this cricket. Just as frog-eating bats are attracted to the 
frog’s mating call, these flies are attracted to the cricket’s 
mating call. The fly deposits its larvae on the calling cricket 
and the larvae burrow inside, eating the male from the 
inside out as they develop.
Photo by Norman Lee

The Aroma of Adulation • 125
We have now explored the three major senses involved in our sexual 
aesthetics: seeing, hearing, and smelling. There are others senses used 
for sex by us and by other animals— tactile and electrical signals, for 
example. But it is these big three that are the best understood in terms 
of contributing to our sexual aesthetics and whose biology help us un-
derstand why we and other animals might perceive some as beautiful 
and some as not. But our sexual aesthetics do not act in a vacuum. In the 
next chapter, we will see how our social environment can have surpris-
ing and sometimes irrational effects on whom we find beautiful.

S EV E N
Fickle Preferences
A woman is always a fickle, unstable thing.
— Virgil
In the previous chapters,  we have seen how biases in the brain 
can influence our sexual aesthetics. Some of these biases have evolved 
because they steer the chooser toward a mate who is better: the right 
species, the opposite sex, disease- free, complementary genes, and more 
resources. In other cases, the biases for beauty exist for reasons outside 
of mate choice, and courters evolve traits that exploit these biases: ap-
pendages that look like food, calls that sound like predators, and court-
ship colors that stimulate eyes engineered to find prey. In all of these 
cases, we would expect biases for beauty to be stable— a peacock’s tail 
should not appear diminished to a peahen only because it is Monday  
morning.
Fickle preferences, however, are common and might even be the rule 
rather than the exception. You can hear men whining Virgil’s sentiment 
since time in memoriam. It is leveled as a criticism, but it merely means 
that when it comes to judging a man’s attractiveness, women sometimes 

Fickle Preferences • 127
change their minds. But not only women and not only humans are fickle 
in their judgments of beauty, and there are many good reasons for being 
fickle. In this chapter, we will explore those reasons and ask why it is that 
percepts of beauty change in real time and not just evolutionary time.
* * *
Clocks keep ticking, and we know time flies. But we are usually oblivi-
ous to the power time has over how we perceive the world and how we 
make decisions about what we perceive. Our view of sexual beauty is es-
pecially susceptible to the tick- tock of time, and if we get an  inkling that 
time is manipulating us, we usually deny it. When it comes to beauty we 
like to think we have our standards and that those standards are fairly 
stable. Our standards might change over the years but not so much over 
months or weeks or minutes. But change they do, sometimes in the 
wink of an eye.
There is no better repository of truths about the trials and tribu-
lations of finding a sexual partner than country- western music. One 
of its stars, Mickey Gilley, provided a clever insight into our shifting 
percepts of sexual beauty in his song “Don’t the Girls All Get Prettier 
at Closin’ Time.”1 This song strikes a chord in many men because it 
reveals how fickle we are, how little control we have over it, and how 
we would rather deny it. Here is the story line: Mr. Gilley sings about 
a man in a bar longing for female companionship. When he checks out 
the prospects early in the evening, none of the patrons are quite up to 
his standards. This situation doesn’t improve as closing time approaches, 
so now the lonely cowboy is faced with the reality of another lonely 
night. What can he do?
Mr. Lonely could solve his problem by lowering his standards; they 
are probably unrealistic anyway, which may be why he is so lonely. The 
lyrics suggest this is exactly what he does, but he does so at a price. 
When he awakes in the morning he is faced with the dissonance that 
comes from violating his sexual mores of settling for less: “If I could 
rate them on a scale from one to ten, / I’m looking for a nine, but eight 
could work right in. / A few more drinks and I might slip to five or 
even four, / But when tomorrow morning comes and I wake up with a 
number one / I swear I’ll never do it anymore.” Too bad for Mr. Lonely, 
because another solution would have been to maintain his standards of 

128 • Chapter 7
aiming for high numbers but to change his perceptions of beauty such 
that more individuals fall into categories eight and nine. In doing so, he 
could thus spare himself the guilt and embarrassment that comes with 
compromising his principles.
Gilley’s song is entertaining. But it is more than just a song; the intu-
ition it provides has motivated some real science. “Despite psychology’s 
attempts at keeping pace with hypotheses generated by song writers, re-
search dealing with perceived physical attraction has fallen far behind,” 
Jamie Pennebaker and his colleagues wrote in 1979.2 They remedied 
that situations with a study of how perceptions of beauty change as 
closing time approaches.
These researchers visited several bars in Virginia. Three times during 
the night they asked the patrons to score others of both the same and 
the opposite gender on an attractiveness scale of 1 to 10. The results 
were striking. The scores given by men and women patrons for mem-
bers of their own gender tended to decrease a bit during the night, but 
their scores for members of the opposite gender shot up as closing time 
approached. This study, eponymously named for Gilley’s song, corrob-
orated his hypothesis that the girls do get prettier, or at least they seem 
prettier, at closing time— and so do the boys. One of Pennebaker’s in-
terpretations of these results was based on the psychological theory of 
dissonance, or as the authors put it, “If the subjects were committed to 
going home with a person of the opposite sex, it would be dissonant 
to consider an unattractive partner. The most efficient way of reducing 
such dissonance could be to increase the perceived attractiveness of the 
prospective alternatives.” It is analogous to a professor curving the rela-
tively poor grades on an exam and then becoming convinced he must be 
doing a great job teaching.
Pennebaker’s study was repeated on the other side of the world in 
2010 to address an uncontrolled variable in the original study— alcohol. 
A mantra of this book is that beauty is in the eye of the beholder, but 
we also know that sometimes beauty is in the eye of the beer- holder. The 
more recent study was conducted in Australia, where beer is king. The 
procedures were similar to the Virginia study, as were the results: per-
ceived attractiveness of members of the opposite gender waxed as the 
night waned. But researchers in the Australian study also measured the 
blood alcohol concentration of those passing judgment on the beauty 

Fickle Preferences • 129
of their peers. There was a “beer- goggle” effect: folks looked more at-
tractive when the scorers had more alcohol. However, this effect was 
still observed when alcohol concentration levels were controlled for, and 
the closing- time effect was still there pulling on our percepts of beauty.3 
Thus all of the efforts of nature and nurture that go into shaping our 
sexual aesthetics can be undone by the ticking of a barroom clock.
Not all clocks are in bars. All animals have their own biological 
clocks, and one that is especially hard to acknowledge is aging. The 
famed social- evolution theorist, Robert Trivers, in his book Deceit and 
Self- Deception, pokes fun at his own deceptions about his own sexual 
beauty, which are subject to this ticking. Trivers talks about chatting 
up an attractive young woman as they are walking down the street. He 
glances to the side and notices they are being followed by an old, de-
crepit fellow, graying, hunched over, and limping. Trivers quickens his 
pace, looks over his shoulder, and the stalker is still there. Only then 
does Trivers realize that he is the stalker— he had been seeing his own 
reflection in the store windows.4 The presence of a young attractive 
woman made him think and feel that he was younger, so much so that 
for a moment he was unrecognizable to himself.
The ticking of the biological clock in women receives a lot more at-
tention than it does in men. Women have two clocks running simul-
taneously that are tied to reproduction and, not surprisingly, influence 
how they engineer their beauty and modulate their desire for sex. The 
first clock governs the reproductive cycle. In chapter 5, we discussed  
how this cycling of reproductive hormones in White-crowned Sparrows  
influences both liking and wanting sex. The same thing happens in 
women about every month. As with all vertebrates, the time during the 
reproductive cycle when eggs are ovulated and available to be fertilized 
is limited. In previous chapters, I gave examples of how humans and 
other animals engineer their beauty. If appearing attractive helps to get 
mates, and the function of mating is to get your eggs fertilized, then 
one might predict that women should be more attentive to their phys-
ical appearance during ovulation. The evolutionary psychologist Martie 
Haselton and her colleagues made just this prediction.
Their approach to testing their “fertility- ornamentation” hypothesis 
was simple. They photographed women when the women were in both 
the fertile period and the nonfertile period of their menstrual cycle. The 

130 • Chapter 7
researchers then showed these photographs to judges who were asked 
to rate which of the pair of photos of the same woman suggested she 
was trying to appear more attractive. There was a significant effect in 
the expected direction. In general, women in their fertile period ap-
peared “more fashionable, nicer and showed more skin” than did the 
same women when in their nonfertile period.5 Fertility ornamentation 
is not restricted to visual cues; in another study Haselton showed that 
women also spoke in higher- pitched, more feminine voices during the 
fertile period.6 Finally, it is not only what women do to themselves but 
what they do to other women when they themselves are fertile: they 
are more critical of other women’s attractiveness and less likely to share 
monetary rewards with them. As Haselton and her team pointed out, all 
of these results might explain previous studies that show men are more 
possessive of their partners in the fertile period (in animals, we call this 
mate- guarding). Alternatively, it might just be that this is a time when 
men have more to lose, whether or not women are advertising their 
fertility.
The second biological clock is that of aging, and it ticks down re-
lentlessly to the final closing time for all of us. In terms of reproductive 
potential, it ticks with more urgency in women as they approach meno-
pause. A man’s sperm can remain viable, even if his spirit is less willing, 
throughout much of his life, although we now know that genetic mu-
tations in the sperm increase with age and the male’s ability to fertilize 
eggs decreases with his age.7 Once a woman is in her twenties, however, 
her fertility decreases with age until she reaches menopause, at which 
time reproduction is no longer an option. But women don’t take this 
pressure lying down. According to Judith Easton and her colleagues, 
“women have evolved a reproduction expediting psychological adaptation 
designed to capitalize on their remaining fertility.”8 What might this 
fancy- named adaptation be? It is a pretty simple one: middle- aged 
women fantasize more about sex and actually have more sex than their 
younger cohorts. The interpretation is that when time is running out, be 
it in a bar or in one’s reproductive life, it is no time to be too fussy.
Let’s not close this discussion of closing times with the idea that it 
is only humans who watch the clock. Kathleen Lynch investigated this 
phenomenon in túngara frogs and showed they too have standards of 
beauty that change with time. As we found out when we visited one 

Fickle Preferences • 131
of their orgies in chapter 2, a female túngara frog only shows up at 
the sexual marketplace on the night she is ready to mate. If she doesn’t 
mate that night, all the eggs she ovulated are wasted; those genes never 
make it to the gene pool but instead are flushed out of the female’s 
reproductive tract to become food for the fishes and insects that swim 
in her breeding pool. Does the female túngara frog also have a “repro-
duction expediting psychological adaptation” to ward off such waste? 
She does, and one would think she also had been taking her cue from 
Mickey Gilley. Lynch tempted females with a synthetic mating call that 
deviated substantially from the normal call of a male túngara frog, and 
which other studies had shown to be unattractive to them. Early in the 
evening, females were attracted to the normal call when it was broad-
cast in the testing arena, but they usually ignored the deviant call. Later 
in the night, when females were approaching their own closing time, 
their standards of acceptable beauty had changed, and now they were 
quite accepting of this deviant and usually unattractive call; they even 
responded to this call faster than they would have to an normal call 
earlier in the evening.9
Female túngara frogs are not alone in this type of fickleness; other fe-
male animals respond similarly with age: older roaches need less court-
ship before they decide to mate, and guppies and house crickets become 
less choosey with age. All these animals become more permissive as clos-
ing time closes in, perhaps reducing their “dissonance” along the way.
In humans, both sexes can vary their sexual strategies with creeping 
age: they can enhance their sexual beauty with ornaments or just kid 
themselves about how attractive they are. In animals, there are fewer 
examples of males responding to the steady approach of the grim reaper. 
An illuminating example comes from the males of the common fruit 
fly, Drosophila melanogaster, for whom death comes too quickly— thirty 
days, and they are gone.
Male fruit flies have mature sperm a mere two days after they emerge 
from their pupal case, but they are less fertile than their elders of seven 
days. These youngsters are also at a disadvantage when they compete 
with their elders for females. For both male and female fruit flies, mating 
makes babies, but it also shortens their lives, owing to, it is thought, all 
of the energetic costs involved in courtship and reproduction.10 So there 
might be some advantage for young males to forsake mating until they 

132 • Chapter 7
are older, when sex will more likely lead to offspring. There are numerous 
ways to avoid sex when young, but as we know from our own species, ab-
stinence is not an especially effective one, especially when the will is weak. 
The evolutionary solution in fruit flies is that younger males don’t notice 
females as readily, compared with the more sensitive older males.
In the previous chapter, we talked about the olfactory receptor neu-
rons (ORN) in moths that are involved in courtship. These are the ORNs 
that express the gene fruitless, a gene that plays a key role in courtship. 
Fruitless is also in fruit flies— in fact, it was discovered in these animals. 
ORNs that express fruitless are also key to courtship in fruit flies, where 
they go by the sexy name of OR47b.11 When researchers arrange sexual 
competitions between seven- day- old and two- day- old males, the older 
ones have a 2:1 mating advantage.12 Could this be because more mature 
males can better detect females? Researchers addressed this question 
by knocking out the genes that are responsible for the OR47b neurons. 
They then placed the mutant seven- day- old flies in competition against 
normal flies of the same age: the normal males got more matings. Thus 
OR47b neurons are important for older males to get matings. Is the 
same true for younger males? When the same experiments were re-
peated with the younger males, the results were different: two- day- old 
mutants with no OR47b receptors did just as well as the normal two- 
day- old males. Even though two- day- old males have these neurons, 
they don’t seem to make any difference in mating success.
These results suggest that OR47b neurons account for the difference 
in mating success between younger and older males. Why? An obvious 
guess is that these neurons are more mature and more sensitive in older 
males. To test this idea, the researchers conducted neural recordings of 
OR47b, very much as we did with túngara frogs as described in chap-
ter 2. Instead of playing sounds for an animal, they blew female odors 
across the males’ receptors and found the OR47b receptors to be more 
than one hundred times more sensitive in seven- day- old than in two- 
day- old flies. In this case, the response of old age to sexual opportunity 
is motivated by different concerns from most of the examples just dis-
cussed. The male fruit flies have evolved increased sensitivity to females 
when they are older in order to curb their sexual appetite when they are 
younger. When younger, a male is less likely to be successful in attract-
ing a female, and this effort might actually increase his mortality risk. 

Fickle Preferences • 133
In this example, at least, older males are not wiser, just more sensitive. 
Internal clocks can explain a lot of the variation we see in what animals, 
including us, find sexually attractive. So the next time a love interest 
appears fickle, just check the time.
* * *
It is not only our internal biology that makes us fickle; there are exter-
nal forces at work as well. We would like to think that we are originals, 
unique members of our species. Technically, this is true; no two indi-
viduals are exactly alike. But much of what is “us” is copied from others. 
Our genes are copies of our parents’ genes; our language is copied from 
others when we are young; and our tastes in music, art, food, and the 
sports teams we root for are cultural norms copied from those around 
us. Furthermore, teenage sex, marijuana and alcohol abuse, and a realm 
of irritating adolescent behaviors are all partly blamed on the inability 
to resist copying peer behavior. Much of this makes sense. When an-
imals are social, and we are among the most social, there is plenty of 
public information out there, and sometimes it is to our advantage to 
attend to it. If someone is successful, let’s do what he or she did and 
hope for the same outcome. If we want to fit into a group, there is always 
pressure to be like other group members. Not all peers are created equal, 
however, and the pressure of peers varies, depending on who they are. 
We all know that careful choice of our associates is one way to extend 
and enhance our phenotypes.
A wonderful example of this is played out in the movie Legally Blonde. 
A snooty young woman blows off the request for a date from an awk-
ward, nerdy young man— “women like me don’t date losers like you.” 
The charming, beautiful, down- to- earth Elle Woods (played by Reese 
Witherspoon) happens to hear the conversation and feels for the poor 
guy. So, she approaches him and in tears asks this stranger how he could 
have broken her heart like that. She then marches off faking a broken 
heart. After Elle leaves, Miss Snooty, who has been eavesdropping, goes 
back to the guy and asks, “So when did you want to go out?”
The notion that our view of beauty is influenced by the sexual aesthet-
ics of others is called mate choice copying. Although it is hardly a surprise 
that this occurs in our own species, mate choice copying only became 
a serious topic for evolutionary biologists when researchers were trying 

134 • Chapter 7
to figure out why so few males garnered so many of the matings on 
sage grouse leks. Leks are the most extreme sexual marketplace in the 
animal kingdom and characterize the mating system of a diverse array 
of animals. Males gather in a specific area, the lek, for the sole purpose 
of advertising their sexual wares to females, and females are in charge 
in deciding which males get to mate. Paradoxically, only a few males  
are successful (and very successful at that), but the difference between 
the males in terms of things researchers can measure, such as their size, 
age, plumage colors, and mating displays, are not all that different. How 
can small, or even nonexistent, differences in the males’ appearance lead 
to such large differences in their mating success?
Sage grouse leks are peculiar places. These birds live in the sagebrush 
country of North America, and there is nothing outstanding about 
where their leks occur. But although they are seemingly located at ran-
dom, the leks occur in the same place from year to year. Records from 
Native Americans show that some of these sites have been in use for 
more than one hundred years. My first encounter with a sage grouse 
lek was in Wyoming early one morning while the stars still filled the 
sky and the temperature skirted freezing. As the sun began to rise, I 
was treated to the sight of dozens of males strutting around with their 
pin-like tails erect and their chests puffed out; two yellow sacs rocketed 
out from their white chest- feathers as the males produced odd swishing 
sounds. A few females moved through the lek in no apparent hurry as 
they surveyed the courters. Female sage grouse have complete freedom 
to choose their own mates, but it seems they are not all that confident 
in making their own choice.
A female grouse gets nothing more from her mate than sperm; he 
will never be a parent, good or bad, and he offers neither food nor pro-
tection to his mate. Although a large number of males appeared to the 
researchers to be equally attractive, only a few were chosen as mates by 
females. Consequently, each year fewer than 10 percent of the males com-
pleted more than 75 percent of all copulations, but there didn’t seem to be 
anything about these males that could account for their extreme attrac-
tiveness.13 So how is it that a few male sage grouse, not that different from 
the rest, are viewed by most of the females as being the most attractive?
The paradox disappears if we entertain the possibility that female 
grouse don’t always think for themselves. What if mating decisions are 

Fickle Preferences • 135
not made independently by females, but are influenced by what others 
find attractive? Consider this scenario: there is a group of equally good- 
looking males, but when one of these males is chosen by a female, he be-
comes even more attractive in the eyes of onlooking females, who then 
copy the choice of their peers. When this happens, the chosen male is 
off to the races; the more he mates, the more attractive he becomes, 
which delivers him more mates, making him even more attractive to the 
copycats. Mate choice copying seems to be a logical solution to this par-
adox, but is it the biological solution— that is, does it really happen? Al-
though studies of sage grouse motivated the explanation of mate choice 
copying, these birds are not ideal subjects for experimentally testing its 
validity. But fish are.
Guppies are one of the most variably patterned vertebrates. They 
sport a variety of colors splattered over their bodies. But orange reigns 
supreme in the eyes of the females. Much like the eyes of the surf perch 
discussed in chapter 4, the heightened sensitivity of guppies to certain 
colors evolved in response to the food they must see; in this case orange 
fruits that fall into the water. Male guppies, it has been argued, evolved 
orange ornamentation to exploit this sensory bias in females. But it is 
not only the colors she sees in males that influence the female’s choice, 
it is also what she sees other females choosing.
The biologist Lee Dugatkin used a simple experiment to show that 
female guppies show mate choice copying, as was suggested for sage 
grouse and portrayed by Reese Witherspoon. Dugatkin placed a female 
guppy in an aquarium with two males, each in a separate compartment 
on opposite ends of the female’s home tank. The female could go to both 
sides to court each of the males. The amount of time she spent courting 
each male indicated her relative attraction to him, and as others had 
shown before, she usually preferred the male with more orange. Dugat-
kin then placed the test female back in a transparent container in the 
middle of the tank, and placed a female, the “model,” in the compart-
ment of the less- preferred of the two males. From her container, the test 
female could watch this male court the model female. The model was 
then removed, and the preference of the test female, who had just been 
a voyeur of the less- preferred male’s sexual activities, was retested. Her 
initial preference proved fickle; she reversed her preference and now 
spent more time with the male who had been shunned earlier.14 These 

136 • Chapter 7
results offered one possible resolution to extreme skew in mating suc-
cess in other species— even if all males are equally attractive, one has to 
be chosen first, and if females are copycats, the chosen male will enjoy a 
substantial proportion of all the matings. There are now numerous stud-
ies that have demonstrated the potency of social context in influencing 
a female’s percepts of sexual beauty.
Mate choice copying is not restricted to guppies, and understanding 
this helped some of us resolve another paradox in another fish. Sailfin 
mollies are typical fish in that males and females reproduce by mating 
with each other. A similar- looking species of fish, the Amazon molly, 
however, consists entirely of females. It is named for the all- female tribe 
in Greek mythology whose only contact with men was for procreation. 
Amazon mollies are somewhat similar in that they also still need males. 
Although Amazon mollies produce clones of themselves with unfertil-
ized eggs, they still need sperm to get their eggs to develop; the sperm 
does not fertilize the egg but delivers some sort of a biochemical nudge 
to get the eggs to start developing. Given this burden of needing to 
mate with a male, Amazon females are in a bit of a quandary, since there 
are no male Amazons. So what to do? The female’s solution is to find 
a male that would be most like a male Amazon if Amazon males were 
to exist.
Amazon mollies resulted from an evolutionary mistake. They evolved 
about three hundred thousand years ago in Tampico, on the Gulf Coast 
of northern Mexico. This mistake, which gave rise to a brand- new spe-
cies, occurred when a female shortfin molly mistakenly mated with a 
male sailfin molly. In rivers north of Tampico in Mexico and in Texas, 
Amazons live together with sailfin mollies; south of Tampico, they co-
habit with shortfin mollies. Depending on where they live, Amazon 
females use either male sailfin or male shortfin mollies as sources of the 
sperm to get their eggs on the road to reproduction.
Scientists had understood this bizarre mating system from the Am-
azon’s perspective for some time, but I became interested in it because I 
was troubled by not understanding why male sailfins would agree to be 
part of such an odd couple. I was troubled not because I have anything 
against matings between different species— they usually don’t work out, 
but if fishes want to try, maybe they will be the exception— but because 

Fickle Preferences • 137
I did not understand what the males got out of this. There is always a 
cost to mating: energy invested, time wasted, and predators attracted. 
For males, who usually try to mate as much as possible, the costs of 
mating are usually far outweighed by the benefits of successful fertil-
ization. But there is no chance of making babies who carry any of the 
male’s genes when a sailfin mates with an Amazon. The endeavor seems 
a total waste. Nevertheless, remember the orchid bee in chapter 3 who 
helps plants have sex? I wondered if, on closer examination, male sailfins 
were behaving in a manner that made adaptive sense. Maybe there was 
some subtle, hidden advantage that these males extracted from their 
dalliances with the Amazons.
Scientists had given only fleeting attention to the seemingly mal-
adaptive behavior of these males; the consensus was that they were 
stupid and horny. The fish either could not tell the difference between 
their own sailfin females and Amazons (stupid), or they just didn’t care 
(horny). I was sure about the horny part— they are males, but I doubted 
that they were really that stupid. If I could tell apart female sailfins and 
Amazons, certainly the sailfin males could. We “asked” the males if they 
could discriminate by placing a male in a tank with a sailfin female and 
an Amazon and counting how many times the male tried to insert his 
intromittent organ, the fish’s equivalent of a penis, into each female. 
Although sailfin males would mate with both types of females, they 
showed a strong preference for their own: horny but not stupid. So why 
bother with Amazons?
My postdocs Ingo Schlupp and Cathy Marler and I wondered if the 
recent studies by Dugatkin might hold the key to this odd pairing of 
sailfins and Amazons. Might male sailfins benefit from mating with the 
Amazons because of mate choice copying making them appear sexier to 
their own females? Our experiment was similar to that of Dugatkin’s. A 
female sailfin was given a choice between two sailfin males. Inevitably, 
the female preferred one male to the other, usually the slightly larger 
one. We then let the test female witness the less- preferred male courting 
a female Amazon. Would a female sailfin copy the mate choice of an 
Amazon female? She did. When her preference was again tested, the 
female sailfin now found the previously less- preferred male more at-
tractive. Mate choice copying took place even though the sailfin female 

138 • Chapter 7
was copying the mate choice of another species.15 Male sailfins might 
be wasting their sperm when they mate with Amazons, but they are not 
wasting their time; they are enhancing their attractiveness.
The female sailfins also have an added twist to their copying behavior, 
one that was revealed by an evolutionary psychology student at my uni-
versity, Sarah Hill. Sarah was interested in human mating behavior and 
would often come to our weekly lab meetings where we talked about 
animal sex. She was a bit frustrated that she could not do the types of 
experiments with humans that we can routinely do with fish. So she 
added fish to her repertoire of studies.
Sarah wanted to know if the quality of the model influenced the 
degree of mate choice copying by a female. Again, the sailfins and Am-
azons offered a good study system. As mentioned above, males will mate 
with Amazon mollies, but they prefer sailfin mollies; in their eyes, their 
own females have higher “utility” than Amazons. If a female is con-
fronted with two males, one courting an Amazon female and the other 
courting a sailfin female, we— and more important, the voyeur sailfin 
female— can assume that the male with his own female is more attrac-
tive than the male with the Amazon female.
Sarah repeated what had by now become the standard mate choice 
copying test. In her experiments, however, after the female sailfin chose 
a male, both of the males were given models. The preferred male was 
given an Amazon female while the un- preferred male was given a sail-
fin female. Thus the utility of the models varied. We predicted that the 
sailfin model should skew the female preference to the un- preferred 
male even though the preferred male was also consorting with a model, 
just a less desirable one. And this is exactly what happened.16 It is not 
just having a consort that influences your attractiveness, but also how 
attractive that consort is.
Most of us probably do not need to be convinced that mate choice 
copying occurs in humans, and there are plenty of data to support our 
intuitions. Most of these psychology experiments follow similar proce-
dures, but the participants are WEIRD, so let me digress. A constraint 
on researchers studying humans, one which confronted Sarah Hill, is 
that there are many types of experiments that they are ethically barred 
from performing. Overall, this is a good thing, but it does cramp the 
scientific style of psychologists who study humans. An alternative ap-

Fickle Preferences • 139
proach to an experiment is the questionnaire, but asking questions only 
works if you have someone to answer them. Luckily for many psychol-
ogists in academia, they have a captive audience— undergraduates who 
enroll in classes in which they are required to participate in studies as 
part of a class or for additional course credits. As the psychologist Joe 
Henrich and his colleagues pointed out in an article published in Be-
havioral and Brain Sciences, the participants in most of these studies are 
WEIRD (Western Educated from Industrialized Rich Democracies).17 
Well, okay, they might be weird, but they are still human, so can’t we ex-
trapolate findings based on them to other humans? Yes, to some extent, 
but we must remember that these subjects are usually from countries 
that in composite represent only 12 percent of the world’s population. 
Also, for the most part, these subjects are teenagers or in their early 
twenties. This means their brains are not yet fully developed: they tend 
to be more risk- insensitive, more interested in immediate gratification, 
and somewhat limited in their life experiences. Finally, there is reason to 
believe that the subjects are not always deeply committed to giving true, 
unbiased answers to the questions they are asked. But they are what they 
are; we just need to remind ourselves that they are not everyone and that 
results from WEIRD subjects might not apply across countries, cul-
tures, classes, and ages. For example, in chapter 4, I briefly mentioned 
that a woman’s waist- to- hip ratio, independent of body mass, influences 
her attractiveness to men: 0.71 is the ideal. Most of the studies that 
contribute to this result are WEIRD- based, and nearly all of them were 
conducted with subjects who have been exposed to Western culture 
through mass media. The anthropologist Lawrence Sugiyama measured 
men’s preferences for women’s waist- to- hip ratio and body mass in a 
remote tribe of the Shiwiar in Amazonian Ecuador. Here he discovered 
that men found body mass more important than waist- to- hip ratio.18 
These results do not negate other studies showing the importance of 
waist- to- hip ratio, but they do show that there probably is an important 
cultural influence on this particular aspect of female beauty. As cultures 
vary, so might their sexual aesthetics.
Studies of humans revealed the importance of mate choice copying 
even before evolutionary biologists gave it that name. The psychologists 
Harold Sigall and David Landy anticipated much of the research on 
mate choice copying in 1973. They asked, “Do the impressions created 

140 • Chapter 7
in bystanders contribute to our desire to have relationships with beau-
tiful others?” They conducted experiments in which a subject entered a 
waiting room containing two other undergraduates, one man and one 
woman. The man, the target, was of average attractiveness, and he was 
paired with a woman, the model, who was either attractive or unat-
tractive, each condition being further enhanced by the model’s clothing. 
The subjects were later asked to rate their overall impressions of the man 
and the degree to which they might “like” or “dislike” him. Men were 
rated more favorably when they were paired with an attractive woman 
than with an unattractive woman.19 Although these studies were not 
explicitly evaluating sexual attractiveness, the hint is there.
More recent studies in the specific context of mate choice copying 
have shown similar effects. David Waynforth, an anthropologist, showed 
undergraduates photographs of men by themselves and then with a date, 
either an attractive or unattractive one. The subjects were asked to rate 
the attractiveness of the man’s face. A male’s attractiveness increased if 
he was with an attractive date.20 Sarah Hill, returning to humans after 
her short foray into animal sexual selection, showed that the utility of 
the model in human mate choice copying is not categorical— that is, 
attractive models promote while unattractive models detract from the 
target’s attractiveness— but that the effect scales more continuously as 
the model’s attractiveness varies.21 It seems we do not pigeon- hole oth-
ers as either attractive or unattractive but judge them on a spectrum of 
more or less attractive. However, we are judgmental!
Just because a man becomes more attractive in the eyes of a voy-
eur when he is with an attractive partner does not mean he is seeking 
out this effect. But he well might be. Trophies usually document the 
winners of a competition. Although we often speak of competing for 
a trophy— for example, “our team will bring home the trophy!”— the 
trophy is only being used as a metaphor for winning the competition; 
the trophy documents victory. As Jarod Kintz writes in This Book Is Not 
for Sale, “A trophy isn’t about the hardware, the gold- painted statue 
mounted on marble, it’s about the recognition of excellence. A trophy 
is a physical representation of the abstract concepts of hard work and 
dedication. And that’s precisely why I don’t have any trophies.”22 It is in 
this sense, I think, that some use the derogatory term trophy wife for a 
much younger, attractive spouse of an older, usually rich, man. She doc-

Fickle Preferences • 141
uments his success in the competition of life, or at least the competition 
of making money, and men love to flaunt their trophies!
There is more than hearsay evidence that men are conscious of the 
“utility of their model.” Do they knowingly flaunt their attractive part-
ners? In the study just mentioned by Sigall and Landy, the male targets 
reported that they thought they would be rated more favorably when 
they were with an attractive model than an unattractive one, especially 
if an onlooker thought that the attractive model was a girlfriend. A 
more recent study shows that not only do men know this, they flaunt it. 
Undergraduates in Missouri were told they would be handing out pam-
phlets on campus while paired with a partner of the opposite sex with 
whom they were to pretend to have a relationship. The subjects were 
given a photo of their prospective, but fictional, partner and were then 
asked to decide if they wanted to hand out these pamphlets in areas fre-
quented by undergraduates or areas with administrators. The “flaunting” 
hypothesis predicted that men matched with attractive partners would 
want to “flaunt” their partners to their peers, but if they were assigned 
unattractive partners, they would want to “conceal” these partners by 
working the area with administrators rather than other students. Both 
men and women followed the axiom “if you’ve got it, flaunt it.”23
We need to be a bit cautious in interpreting some of these studies on 
human preferences for beauty. First, as I mentioned, the studies tend 
to use subjects from one particular demographic that need not be rep-
resentative of humans in general. Second, the studies often use proxies 
that are somewhat removed from the general phenomenon being in-
vestigated. For example, preferring the photograph of one individual 
over that of another individual need not be indicative of how individuals 
choose mates. Third, just because humans and fish, as well as some other 
animals, exhibit mate choice copying does not necessarily mean that 
this feature evolved under the same selection forces, that it is influenced 
by the same mix of nature and nurture, or that it serves similar functions 
in different species. Nevertheless, studies of evolutionary psychology are 
asking important questions about why we are who we are.
In this section, we have seen that our social peers influence how we 
are perceived: their attractiveness creates a halo effect on our own at-
tractiveness. This seems logical, although it is a fairly recent finding that 
sexual aesthetics can be so socially pliable. In the next section, we delve 

142 • Chapter 7
into a more recent, and seemingly illogical, effect of social context on 
how we perceive beauty.
* * *
Crazy is a word we often hear associated with being in love, being in 
lust, and falling for someone. Consider the titles of some songs: “Crazy 
Love,” Frank Sinatra; “Crazy in Love,” Kenny Rogers; “Crazy for This 
Girl,” Evan and Jaron; “Crazy Stupid Love,” Cheryl Cole; “Crazy Wild 
Desire,” Webb Pierce; “I’m Crazy ’bout My Baby,” Marvin Gaye; and 
“Crazy in Love,” Beyoncé; it sounds like a playlist for an asylum! Crazy 
and love might go together because we often do not understand just 
what someone finds attractive in another person.
The opposite of crazy is sane. When people are sane, we assume they 
are rational, but when people are irrational we don’t assume they are in-
sane. This is a good thing, because irrationality is rampant, and we hope 
the inmates are not running the asylum, in our species or in any others. 
Yet we know little about how rational our percepts of sexual beauty 
might be. To explore this turf, I need to explain what I mean by rational, 
and here I draw on the insights of economists rather than philosophers, 
as the former provide more quantitative substance. According to classic 
economics dogma, individuals behave rationally when they behave in a 
manner that maximizes some utility. Economists assume that we strive 
to maximize economic gain; evolutionary biologists, who have bought 
heavily into classic economic analysis, assume that animals strive to 
maximize their Darwinian fitness.
How do we know if an individual is behaving rationally, since usually 
we cannot predict the amount of money or the number of meetings they 
will acquire in the long term? Two important criteria are that a rational 
individual is one who makes choices that obey the simple mathematical 
axioms of transitivity and regularity. Transitivity assumes that if A > B 
and B > C, then A > C. Transitivity is common in our world. If Lucy 
is taller than Emma, and Emma is taller than Gwen, we don’t need a 
ruler to know that Lucy is taller than Gwen. Transitivity is a useful rule 
that increases our information about relationships. But transitivity is 
often violated. The children’s game rock- paper- scissors is an example 
of intransitivity: rock beats a scissors by crushing it; rock loses to paper 
because it gets covered by paper; but paper’s dominance is short- lived 

Fickle Preferences • 143
because it is beat by scissors: snip, snip, snip. Intransitivity is common 
in adult games as well. Consider a common gambler’s fallacy: team X 
beat team Y a few weeks back; last week team Y beat team Z; therefore, 
X should beat Z this Sunday (X > Y, Y > Z, so X > Z). X is sure to win, 
right? You can put your money on it. The fallacy that sports are transi-
tive has made many a bookie rich. As they say in American professional 
football, this is why they play the games on Sunday.
Many theories about how mate choice evolves assume that it is transi-
tive. As far as we know, and we don’t know all that much, that faith is well 
placed when it comes to our perceptions of sexual beauty; transitivity has 
been demonstrated in zebra finch preference for bill color, pigeon pref-
erence for plumage pattern, and cichlid preference for body size. A slight 
exception is a study of transitivity in túngara frogs, in which Stan Rand 
and I conducted the experiments and our colleague Mark Kirkpatrick 
analyzed the data with some of his mathematical wizardry. Females were 
given choices between all possible pairs of nine male mating calls. The re-
sults of that study showed that the female frogs tended to be intransitive.24
There is a surprising dearth of studies of transitivity in human mating 
preferences. But when addressed, transitivity seems to be supported. 
A study by the evolutionary biologist Alexandre Courtiol and his col-
leagues, for example, showed partner preferences for height in humans: 
women preferred men taller than themselves, and men preferred women 
shorter than themselves. There was a ceiling and floor effect for both 
genders; people became less attractive as partners when their height 
approached the ceiling or the floor. But within the considerable range in 
which height mattered, preferences for it were transitive.25
The other criterion of economic rationality is regularity. This occurs 
if the perceived relative value of A versus B is not influenced by the ad-
dition of an inferior third party, C. I exhibit regularity when my choice 
between a Czech lager and an IPA is not influenced by whether the 
tavern also serves Coors Light— and, believe me, it is not. But regularity 
is not always the case; not only is regularity often violated, it is used 
against us in the world of commerce. A well- known violation is the 
asymmetrically dominated decoy, or competitive decoy, effect. Here is 
an example, and consumers beware.
You are shopping for a car, and you are interested in a vehicle that has 
both a low price tag and high fuel efficiency. Your car dealer shows you 

144 • Chapter 7
two models: car A gets twenty- five miles per gallon (mpg) at a price tag 
of $25,000, while car B gets only fifteen mpg but costs less at $20,000. 
How to decide? As you ponder the relative costs and benefits, the sales-
person decides she will make the choice for you, or more precisely she 
will manipulate you to think you made the choice for yourself. Watch 
out . . . here comes the decoy. The salesperson is bubbling over with sta-
tistics and good- natured banter as she shows you a third option, car C: 
twenty- two mpg at a whopping $40,000. Car C is way out of your price 
range, and she knows it. So how is she manipulating you by offering you 
a product she knows you will not want? All of a sudden your decision 
becomes easier. You now decide to purchase A. You get the best fuel 
efficiency of the three at a good price— at least a good price compared 
with the decoy, although you now choose the more expensive car of the 
two you originally considered. And by the way, the salesperson’s com-
mission is based on how much the car costs, not how far it can drive on 
a gallon of gas.
So how does this work? One interpretation is based on the name of 
the phenomenon: asymmetrically dominated decoy. The decoy, C, is a poor 
choice compared with both A and B, but A is superior, or dominates, 
C on both value metrics, gas mileage and price, while B dominates C 
on only one metric, price. Thus A is the superior choice. Another ex-
planation has a more perceptual basis. When comparing the costs of 
the vehicles, B was better than A: $20,000 compared with $25,000. 
But when C was introduced, it expanded the range of prices being 
compared— $20,000 to $40,000— thus the difference between A and 
B, a mere $5,000, no longer seemed that substantial compared with 
the $15,000 difference between A and C. Since the gas mileage of C, 
twenty- two mpg, was between that of A and B, the range over which 
gas mileage was compared stayed the same, from fifteen to twenty- five 
mpg, as did the perceived difference between A over B. Again, A is the 
superior choice but for a different reason.
Given how competitive decoys so easily influence human behavior 
in the economic marketplace, it is not surprising that that their effects 
extend to the sexual marketplace. The social psychologist Constantine 
Sedikides and her associates, including Dan Ariely, the author of Pre-
dictably Irrational, queried students about what they found attractive in 
partners. In one of their experiments, subjects reported their preferences 

Fickle Preferences • 145
among three male models; the targets were neither real nor photos, but 
rather descriptions of the attributes of each male. Males A and B were 
always two of the three in the triad: A was physically more attractive 
than B, and B had a better sense of humor than A. Subjects were given 
one of two triads to evaluate, each with A and B, and a competitive 
decoy, C. There were two variants of the competitive decoy. In one triad, 
the decoy was CA, who was about as attractive as A but with even a 
worse sense of humor. When confronted with this triad, the subjects 
preferred A to B. When the decoy was CB, whose was about as comedic 
as B but much less attractive, subjects preferred B.26 As with the hypo-
thetical example of cars, one of the metrics of valuation was expanded 
by the decoy. In the first case it was humor and in the second case, 
attractiveness. Expanding a metric consequently devalued the male’s 
phenotype who had excelled in that metric.
There is little evidence that we pick our cohorts to maximize com-
petitive decoy effects. But we could. The previous section tells me that 
if I want to enhance my attractiveness, I should go out on the town 
with an attractive female in tow and let mate choice copying work its 
magic. If there are no attractive women around willing to help, we have 
just learned how I can do this with same- gender friends. I just have to 
be strategic about it. Let’s say women tend to view my best buddy as 
favorably as they do me, but he is better looking and less funny. I should 
recruit a third friend to join us, and in choosing a recruit pay close at-
tention to how his attractiveness and sense of humor relate to that of 
me and my best friend.
There is something very intuitive about mate choice copying, whereas 
competitive decoy effects just seem crazy. Is this a case where humans 
are overthinking things and where animals are actually “smarter,” or at 
least more rational, than us? Or do they also fall prey to these decoys? 
We know far more about decoy effects in humans than in other animals.
Foraging is one domain in animal behavior where irrationality is 
known to rear its crazy head. It has been demonstrated in bees, hum-
mingbirds, and Gray Jays. Let’s take the Gray Jays as a case in point. 
In one experiment, jays were presented with a favorite food, raisins, 
at different distances inside a wire mesh funnel that the birds would 
have to traverse to get the food: two raisins at fifty- six centimeters ver-
sus one raisin at twenty- eight centimeters. We would predict that the  

146 • Chapter 7
jays would prefer more raisins and closer raisins; in this case, the jay’s 
choices were biased toward the single, closer raisin. A competitive decoy 
was then introduced: two raisins at eighty- four centimeters. The birds 
succumbed to the decoy effect; they now preferred the two raisins at 
fifty- six centimeters.27 Even though these effects seem crazy, at this 
point we should all be pretty good at predicting them. If you didn’t 
correctly guess the jay’s behavior yourself, go back and read the previous 
paragraphs again, at least before you go shopping for a car.
Can decoys influence the sexual aesthetics of animals? The only con-
clusive evidence comes from a study by Amanda Lea and me on túngara 
frogs. Amanda identified three mating calls whose relative attractive-
ness to females were documented years before. We refer to those mea-
sures as the call’s “static attractiveness” because it is based on qualities 
of the call’s sound that are fairly constant within a male and that elicit 
consistent preference rankings when they are presented to females in 
choice experiments at the same call rates, as explained in chapter 2. Fe-
males also prefer faster rather than slower call rates. Amanda combined 
the more attractive static call with the less attractive call rate and vice 
versa. When given a choice between two calls, A (higher static attrac-
tiveness, slower call rate) and B (lower static attractiveness, faster call 
rate), females had a slight preference for B. Amanda then introduced a 
decoy, call C. This call was similar to A in static attractiveness and had a 
substantially slower call rate than both A and B. Females preferred call 
A to call C, and B to C; call C, therefore, was an inferior alternative. 
When the females were given a choice between all three options, the 
preference switched from call B to call A.28 This change in preference 
was predicted because, as with the cars, human attractiveness, and jays’ 
raisins, the metric in which B was more attractive than A was call rate, 
and the introduction of C, with a much slower call rate than both A and 
B, expanded the range of call rates being compared— all of a sudden 
B’s call rate did not seem that much better than A’s. So we can’t really 
answer the question: do female túngara frogs find call A or call B more 
attractive? It depends; theirs can be a fickle preference that depends on 
who else is singing along.
Decoys don’t even need to be real; we now know that phantom de-
coys are lurking in the netherworld of many a marketplace. Let’s go 
back to that car lot for a minute. What if, instead of showing you car 

Fickle Preferences • 147
C, the salesperson merely described it to you, but said it was all sold 
out and she could not get you one: Would this still bias your choice to 
car A? Yes. Just knowing about a decoy is enough to skew you choice, 
thus the moniker phantom decoy. This makes it even easier to manipu-
late consumers, as a decoy in the bush has the same effect as a decoy in 
the hand. Phantom decoys also influence female túngara frogs. Amanda 
conducted a second experiment in which the speaker broadcasting the 
decoy was not on the floor, where females could approach it, but on the 
ceiling, where it was out of their reach— túngara frogs are not tree frogs 
and never climb to find a mate. The results were the same as before. Call 
C elicits a decoy effect if it is perceptible, even if it is not accessible.
Fickleness arising from decoys is well known in humans in several 
domains, including percepts of sexual beauty. My guess is that túngara 
frogs are hardly an exception in being influenced by sexual decoys, and 
decoy effects will account for a number of instances of fickle sexual pref-
erences in the animal kingdom. Our studies also predict that courters in 
many species might have figured out how to use this effect to actively 
manipulate their attractiveness with the cunning and deceitfulness of a 
car salesperson.
This chapter has shown that biases in what we perceive as beautiful 
are not only properties of biases in our sensory systems and brains, but 
also biases brought about by the physiological and social contexts in 
which evaluations of beauty are made. All sources of bias also can give 
rise to preferences that remain hidden until some novel trait reveals it. I 
have mentioned hidden preferences throughout. In the next chapter, we 
will more thoroughly confront this important, but only recently appre-
ciated, influence on the evolution of sexual beauty.

E I G H T
Hidden Preferences and Life in Pornotopia
There are known knowns . . . there are known unknowns. . . .  
But there are also unknown unknowns— the ones we  
don’t know we don’t know.
— Donald Rumsfeld
This was US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld’s  response 
to a question about the lack of evidence for weapons of mass destruction 
in Iraq, evidence which the United States presented as a “known known” to 
justify invading that country. When the press dug deeper and found that no 
such evidence existed, the government’s excuse was that it didn’t know that 
it didn’t know there were no weapons . . . or something along those lines.
Life is filled with discovering things we didn’t know existed. This in-
cludes finding out that we sometimes like the unknowns. For 169 lines 
in Dr. Seuss’s classic children’s story Green Eggs and Ham, Sam explains 
in excruciating detail how he dislikes green eggs and ham, despite the 
fact that he has never tasted them: “I would not like them here or there. 
I would not like them anywhere. I do not like green eggs and ham. I do 
not like them, Sam- I- am.”1 Finally, after being coaxed to try them, Sam 
discovers that in fact he does like green eggs and ham. Sam had a hidden 

Hidden Preferences • 149
preference that stayed under the radar because it had never been probed 
by the right stimulus.
Traits of sexual beauty only evolve if they elicit a preference in a 
chooser. Thus, when we survey these traits in nature, we always find 
corresponding preferences for them in the opposite sex. This is hardly 
surprising, since beauty is in the brain of the beholder; beautiful traits 
only evolve if someone finds them beautiful. But how did this match 
between trait and preference, between the beauty of the bearer and the 
aesthetics of the beholder, come about?
Throughout much of this book, we have seen how preferences for 
traits can exist but remain untapped by courters until one of them just 
happens upon a trait, either through mutation or learning, that lures 
the hidden preference out into the open. A classic example is the ex-
periment with swordtails and platyfish reviewed in chapter 3. When 
artificial swords were added to male platyfish (a group of fish that lack 
this trait), these newly endowed males were suddenly more attractive 
in the eyes of their females. This experiment seems to mimic the evo-
lution of the sword in the swordtail; the preference was already in the 
platyfish- swordtail ancestor, perhaps as a general preference for larger 
males, which male swordtails exploited in an energetically cheaper way 
to appear larger.2 Genetic mutations, rather than experimental manipu-
lations, gave the male swordtails their sword. Since their females had a 
hidden preference for swords, the newly endowed males were immedi-
ately perceived as more attractive than their unendowed comrades.
In this chapter, I will delve deeper into the details of how traits and 
preferences come to match, and I will dwell a bit more on the relatively 
new hypothesis of hidden preferences and their exploitation. I briefly 
addressed this topic in chapter 3, but here I will consider the details and 
nuances of just how it happens.
* * *
Evolution can bring about the match between beautiful traits and the 
aesthetics that favor them in three ways: choosers can evolve preferences 
for already existing traits that deliver benefits to choosers; traits and 
preferences can evolve simultaneously; and, traits can evolve that are 
immediately found attractive because they exploit hidden preferences.3 
Let’s look at each of these possibilities in detail.

150 • Chapter 8
Preferences can evolve when they enhance an individual’s ability to 
reproduce, such as when they spark a desire for courters who are the cor-
rect species, fertile, disease- free, and who provide resources and care for 
offspring. These preferences will evolve to higher frequencies in a pop-
ulation than preferences that ignore these qualities of a potential mate, 
because these preferences result in choosers producing more offspring.
There are legions of examples of preferences that have evolved like 
this. Consider, for example, how feather color might evolve in birds. 
Imagine a population of Red- winged Blackbirds. Every spring, the 
marshes throughout North America echo the musical trill of males who 
sit on reeds as they flash their bright red sexual badges to females who 
are trying to decide on a partner. Then imagine that another species of 
blackbird, the Yellow- headed Blackbird, begins to cohabit the marsh, as 
they occasionally do. There are a few ways to tell these species apart, but 
for the female red- wingeds, the red wing- badge of the males is the most 
reliable. In this scenario, selection strongly favors female red- wingeds 
who mate only with males with red badges compared with females who 
show no preference for traits that distinguish between the males of 
the two blackbird species. These undiscriminating female Red- winged 
Blackbirds mate at random, and thus often mate with the wrong species. 
Furthermore, selection also favors females who prefer males with the 
brightest red badges because these are the males most different from 
the yellow- headed species. This type of open- ended preference for red is 
similar to that exhibited by the male zebra finches discussed in chapter 
3, who prefer females who look the most different from males, females 
with the most- orange beaks. This is one way that preferences evolve to 
prefer certain traits— in this case, the traits that are more likely to ensure 
matings with males of the same species.
Now let’s imagine that another visitor arrives; not another species 
of bird, but one of their parasites— feather lice. Some males have genes 
that make them resistant to the lice. Other males not endowed with 
genetic resistance are infected and become sickly, which in turn inhib-
its their ability to defend territories with high resources. These sickly 
males are not ideal mates, and this is a fact they cannot hide. Their 
infections quickly become public information as they are afflicted with 
something akin to a scarlet letter: the lice cause the male’s red badge 
to fade from bright to dull. This results in another bout of selection 

Hidden Preferences • 151
that favors females choosing males with the brightest red badges, the 
healthiest males. These discriminating females now reap multiple ben-
efits from their mate choice: fertilization by males who are the cor-
rect species; who have higher quality resources for the female and her 
offspring; avoiding males with sexually transmittable parasites; and 
obtaining genes for their offspring that might make them parasite-  
free.
In the case described above, female choice is based only on the male’s 
sexual trait, the red badges; the females cannot see the male’s genes 
for parasite resistance. Females gain the advantage of these parasite- 
resistant genes being passed on to their offspring because these genes 
are correlated with bright coloration. Therefore, bright coloration 
evolves under direct selection because it is directly favored by females, 
while parasite- resistant genes evolve by indirect selection because they 
are correlated with traits that are under direct selection, bright color-
ation. The anti- parasite genes hitchhike a ride across generations with 
the genes for bright coloration. In this case, female preferences can 
evolve for traits that benefit the females even if these are not the traits 
the females were targeting in their mate choice.
Not only can multiple male traits be correlated and thus evolve to-
gether; preferences and traits can also evolve simultaneously. Let’s con-
tinue with this example, where badge brightness and genes for parasite 
resistance are correlated, and assume that a preference for bright males 
does not influence the female’s immediate reproductive success. This is 
true in the wild, as female Red- winged Blackbirds almost always lay 
three or four eggs, irrespective of the father. But if females are able to 
channel these parasite- resistant genes, these good genes for survival, 
into their offspring, their babies will be more likely to reach adulthood. 
Since these offspring harbor not only parasite- resistant genes from their 
father, but also the genes to prefer red from their mother, both of these 
genes increase in frequency in the next generation. This is one way that 
preference and trait can evolve together. The preference evolves because 
it is linked to the survival genes and genes for red color, not because the 
preference is under direct selection. The logical case for the simultane-
ous evolution of good genes and preferences for “good genes” is strong, 
but the number of cases that support it is small relative to the research 
effort to find such effects over the past forty years.

152 • Chapter 8
Thanks to Ronald Fisher, we understand another way that indirect 
selection can happen. Quiz a statistician on Ronald Fisher, and she will 
tell you that he is among the greatest statisticians of the twentieth cen-
tury and responsible for some fundamental contributions such as the 
analysis of variance and the eponymously named Fisher’s exact test. Ask 
her about Fisher’s contributions to evolution, and she is likely to draw a 
blank. Similarly, most evolutionary biologists are aware of Fisher’s con-
tributions to sex ratio theory, selection analysis, and his fundamental 
theorem of natural selection, but they often don’t realize they have been 
using some of his statistical tools throughout their careers. Fisher was 
a man of great insights, and one of his most perceptive is Fisher’s the-
ory of runaway sexual selection.4 This is sometimes called the sexy son 
hypothesis, and it is another way that preferences can evolve through 
indirect selection.
In the previous example, we saw how red badges and genes for par-
asite resistance can co- evolve. Runaway sexual selection proceeds in a 
similar fashion. The difference is that the female’s preference for red 
becomes correlated with the male’s “sexy” red badge. The greater the 
number of females that prefer red badges, the faster red badges will 
evolve in the population, and the faster will preferences for red badges 
also evolve, because female preference for red is correlated with the 
male’s red badge. All those offspring from the sexy red- badged males 
have both red badge genes and red badge preference genes. This is an-
other case of genetic hitchhiking, and it occurs without any increase in 
survivorship genes in the population.
As with preference evolution for “good genes,” the logic underlying 
Fisher’s runaway sexual selection hypothesis is strong, but only a few 
experimental studies support the notion that it has been an important 
force in the evolution of sexual beauty and the preferences for it. Fisher 
presented this idea in 1930 in his book The Genetical Theory of Natu-
ral Selection,5 but it was not until another half- century had passed that 
Russ Lande and Mark Kirkpatrick verified Fisher’s idea mathematically 
and set the stage for numerous studies searching for any footprint left 
behind in nature by Fisher’s insight into the evolution of sexual beauty 
and the preferences for it.6 There is now good evidence from studies on 
stalk- eyed flies that this process can occur in nature. This classic study 
shows that the genes for stalk length and for preferences for stalk length 

Hidden Preferences • 153
are inherited together when there is selection based on stalk length but 
no selection on the preference for it.7
We will now dive into the last process that can give rise to the match 
between sexual beauty and sexual aesthetics, one that occurs when court-
ers evolve traits that exploit hidden preferences in choosers. Let’s return 
to the blackbird scenario, but at a time before the males had evolved 
red badges. Occasionally, a mutation arises that causes the evolution of 
a red badge. As of yet there is no preference for males with these red 
badges, but there is a cost, as predators can spot these males more easily. 
All cost and no benefit quickly drives the mutation to extinction. Now, 
let’s imagine that a new, supernutritious food source appears, a species 
of bright red worm that is more nutritious than the ubiquitous brown 
worms in the marsh. Selection now favors blackbirds who are better 
able to detect bright red worms. Subsequently, when a male evolves a 
red badge, he immediately attracts the attention of others who are now 
cued into red.
Being conspicuous is often the first step to getting a mate but also to 
becoming a meal. When the odds favor getting a mate, then the muta-
tion for the conspicuous sexual trait should be favored in the population 
in spite of the risk it brings. The blackbird scenario with red worms is 
just an imaginary example, but real studies of real animals show this is 
not an unlikely scenario.
In the previous chapter, I talked about mate choice copying in gup-
pies, and in that context, briefly mentioned that females prefer males 
with more orange. Females vary in how attractive they find orange. Dif-
ferent populations in the guppies’ resident mountain streams of Trini-
dad show variation in both the strength of this preference by females 
and the amount of orange in males. As we might expect, the strength of 
the females’ preference for orange and the amount of orange sported by 
the males are correlated among the river systems: in rivers where males 
have abundant orange coloration, females have strong preferences for 
orange; in rivers where the males are more dully colored, females have 
less of a preference for orange color. But what gives rise to variation 
in the preference? What is the foundation of the sexual aesthetic for 
orange?
Helen Rodd and her colleagues pointed out that guppies often feed 
on orange fruit.8 The researchers suggested that the preference for food 

154 • Chapter 8
is at the root of the guppies’ preference for orange males. The females are 
not fooled into thinking the males are fruits, but instead, the researchers 
hypothesized, the females develop a gestalt attraction to orange that 
spills over from their food preference into their mating preference. They 
tested this hypothesis by placing poker chips of different colors in tanks 
of male and female guppies from different populations whose females 
showed varying degrees of preference for orange coloration in males. 
Somewhat amazingly, the time inspecting orange chips by both sexes 
predicted the strength of females’ preferences for orange courtship col-
oration in each population. The conclusion was that males evolved or-
ange coloration to exploit a general attraction to orange that evolved in 
the domain of foraging. One could argue, however, that the direction of 
cause- and- effect might be reversed. Perhaps females initially evolved a 
preference for orange males that then predisposed them to prefer or-
ange fruit. John Endler and Gemma Cole resolved this issue by recreat-
ing this evolutionary scenario in the lab.
Endler and Cole’s approach was to artificially select for guppies to 
prefer certain colors of food and then ask if this would result in an 
evolutionary change in the male’s color. They separated guppies into 
different groups, or “lines,” and then presented them with a simulated 
food item that was either blue or red. The preference for food color 
evolved, and the subsequent generations of the two lines differed in 
their preferences for red versus blue food. Rodd’s study would predict a 
correlated change in the female’s preference for male color. And that is 
indeed what seemed to happen. As the food preference evolved across 
generations, so did the amount of orange sported by males: it increased 
in the lines that were selected to prefer red food and decreased in the 
lines selected to prefer blue food.9 Of course, the males were constrained 
in their color change by available genes, so they could not turn actu-
ally red or blue, but orange and red stimulate very similar patterns of 
photo receptors, while blue is quite different. The only obvious agent 
that could cause an increase in the male’s coloration in this experiment 
was female preference. These experimental results seem to nail down 
the earlier interpretation by Rodd and her colleagues: preferences for 
orange fruits give rise to preferences for orange males.
When we observe sexual beauty and the preferences that favor it, we 
are seeing only the present, the mere tips of long branches on the tree of 

Hidden Preferences • 155
life that have been evolving for millennia. Without more information 
from careful experiments like those above, we cannot really glimpse the 
past processes that brought about this match. The arrow of causation 
between trait and preference can point either way, and in some cases 
even both ways. These three different evolutionary processes can reach 
the same endpoint for very different reasons.
* * *
There are no free lunches in the sexual marketplace. Regardless of how 
traits and preferences evolve, they incur costs as well as reap benefits. 
It is the cost- benefit ratio, and how this changes through time, that 
determines their legacy. Given the cost- benefit ratio involved in sensory 
exploitation of hidden preferences, this might be an especially easy pro-
cess to trigger. Let me back up this assertion.
A hallmark of sexually attractive traits is that they are costly. Whether 
they are the showy tail of a peacock or the bright colors of a guppy, 
these traits usually take more energy to produce, more time to maintain, 
and are more conspicuous to predators than other types of traits. In 
the example of attractive red badges evolving in blackbirds, a mutation 
that causes red badges can quickly disappear from the population if it 
is attractive to predators but not yet attractive to females. This must 
happen often: a mutation gives rise to a conspicuous sexual trait, but 
it goes extinct while waiting around for a mutation in the preference 
gene that will deem this trait attractive and thus beneficial. If there are 
hidden preferences, however, then when a trait like the red badge arises, 
it will incur the same cost, but there is not the risk of waiting around 
for a preference mutation to occur— the benefit is immediately provided 
by the previously hidden but now- exposed preference. Thus, given the 
same mutation for an attractive trait, that trait is more likely to evolve if 
hidden preferences for it already exist.
Hidden preferences influence the evolution of sexual traits, but what 
causes the evolution of hidden preferences? There are numerous sources. 
They often arise from selection based on sensory, perceptual, and cog-
nitive systems in other domains. Selection on color preferences related 
to food— such as the examples of the guppies, and the surf perch and 
bowerbirds discussed in chapter 4— show how selection on sensory sys-
tems in the domain of foraging results in hidden preferences for male 

156 • Chapter 8
 courtship colors. Another possibility involves selection to correctly iden-
tify sex, which in zebra finches generates hidden preferences that can 
arise from peak shift displacement, as discussed in chapter 3. In most 
cases, we expect the origin of the hidden preferences to be an adaptive 
response to the world around them, with an influence on perceptions 
of beauty that is incidental rather than the immediate consequence of 
selection and evolution.
Hidden preferences will nearly always be related to adaptive advan-
tages in other domains. Thus, to compute the evolutionary costs and 
benefits of a hidden preference, we must take into account not only how 
it impacts the chooser’s mating success but also how it relates to func-
tions in other domains that influence the chooser’s fitness. Let’s go back 
to the guppies and imagine that males with more orange attract more 
parasites, and by courting a more orange male rather than a less orange 
male, a female is more likely to become parasitized herself. If she gains 
no other benefits from the more orange male, we might assume that ex-
hibiting this hidden preference for especially orange males is maladap-
tive, all costs and no benefits. And similar to a new sexual trait without 
the benefits of a preference, a newly exposed hidden preference with 
only costs should also go extinct. But if preferences for food and mate 
color are inextricably linked, then to give a fair accounting of the fitness 
costs and benefits of the hidden preference, we also need to take into 
account benefits of this bias- toward- orange in the foraging domain. The 
trait facing costs and benefits is not just “preference for oranger males” 
but “bias toward orange in general.” This is reminiscent of the behav- 
ior of orchid bees mating with orchids I discussed in chapter 3. It seems 
downright silly and certainly maladaptive for an animal to have sex 
with a plant until we consider this perversion in the context of the bee’s 
mate- searching strategy. Since female bees are hard to come by, then it 
is better for the male bee to be too eager to mate, and sometimes mate 
with a flower, rather than too discriminating, and sometimes pass up 
real female bees.
Yet tracing the evolution of courtship behavior in terms of traits 
that exploit hidden preferences might suggest that such inclinations 
are maladaptive. In fact, there are few, if any, examples of this being the 
case. Instead, the opposite usually holds: once hidden preferences are 
revealed, they deliver benefits rather than costs to the chooser. How is 

Hidden Preferences • 157
that? Hidden preferences probably reduce search costs to choosers.10 
Courters that exploit these preferences often do so because they are 
more conspicuous to choosers; for example, they are more easily seen 
in guppies, surf perch, and fiddler crabs, and more easily heard in many 
frogs, insects, and songbirds. In the fiddler crab example, males that 
erect towers by their burrows are more easily seen by females, since 
the structure of her eyes make her especially sensitive to objects pro-
truding vertically from the surface. Besides being an extension of the 
male’s sexual phenotype, the towers also direct females to shelter from  
predators.11
Not only are exploiting males more easily sensed; their sexual traits 
can facilitate quicker mating decisions and longer memories of the sig-
nals. Female túngara frogs decide on a mate faster when choosing be-
tween a whine- chuck and a whine than when faced with the choice 
between two whines. In addition, females also remember the location 
of a whine with multiple chucks over a whine- only or a whine with a 
single chuck.12 My colleague Molly Cummings and I recently reviewed 
hundreds of cases in which males evolved sexual traits to exploit hidden 
preferences. In most cases, these preferences appear to aid rather than 
impede finding a mate, thus decreasing the time involved in searching.13
The sexual marketplace is a dangerous place, but one that can’t be 
avoided. It is the only place to shop for a mate, but it is also filled with 
predators shopping for food and parasites looking for a home. The 
quicker the sexual consumer can get out of there, the less likely it will 
become the consumed. So having your hidden preferences exploited 
might not be all that bad— in fact it might be mostly good.
* * *
I have mentioned a few examples of traits that have evolved to exploit 
hidden preferences. What I find especially interesting are examples of 
hidden preferences for traits that are not only lacking in the species of 
interest but also in any closely related species, traits that researchers 
rather than evolution have brought into being. These examples give us 
insights into how the preference landscape is ripe with hidden prefer-
ences waiting to be exploited. It is this lability of the preference land-
scape that affords the chooser’s brain so much creative power in driving 
the evolution of sexual beauty.

158 • Chapter 8
The ornithologist Nancy Burley conducted some early and insightful 
experiments on hidden preferences. When birds are kept in aviaries, it 
is hard for researchers to keep track of who is who. One solution is to 
put bands on their legs, and if the bands are different colors, then re-
searchers can identify the birds without handling them. Zebra finches 
do not have leg bands in nature, so it was a shock when Burley found 
that leg bands influence the attractiveness of both sexes. Males are more 
attracted to females adorned with black and pink leg bands, and they 
are not attracted to females with light blue or light green leg bands. 
Females, on the other hand, prefer red- banded males and also avoid 
males with light blue or light green bands. Besides providing one of the 
early windows into hidden preferences, Burley’s study was also impor-
tant because it revealed that studies of mating success in captive birds 
could be biased by the use of leg bands. Burley also pushed the envelope 
a bit with her experiments. She adorned male grassfinches with what 
looked like “party hats.” Some species of birds have crests, which are 
elongated feathers on the head, but there are 120 species of grassfinches, 
and none of them have crests. Yet when elongated feathers are added  
to the tops of males’ heads in two grassfinch species, they look ridicu- 
lous to us but more sexually appealing to females than the typical males 
of their species.14
Other researchers have taken this approach of adding novel traits to 
males to search for hidden preferences in females. Mosquito fish have 
been introduced all over the world as a biocontrol agent. As its name 
implies, mosquito larvae can constitute a substantial component of  
the diets of these fish. In Australia, a country that is infamous for failed 
biocontrol efforts such as introducing cane toads, the introduced mos-
quito fish experiment failed because these fish outcompeted other nat-
ural mosquito predators. Like the cane toads, mosquito fish are now 
considered pests Down Under. There is nothing colorful or exciting 
about these fish. The males are small, only a few centimeters long, and 
they lack any conspicuous courtship traits or behaviors. Males have a 
sexual organ, a gonopodium, that they use to inseminate females, some-
what like a penis. But in most ways it is nothing like a penis. It is a 
long, modified fin with a groove on the outside. Sperm travels down 
this groove and, when the end is inserted into a female, the sperm enters 
the female’s body. Except for the gonopodium, the males make little 

Hidden Preferences • 159
investment in sex; they lack the flashy colors of guppies and the sexual 
ornaments of swordtails. But . . . what if?
This is the question that the animal behaviorist Jim Gould and his 
colleagues asked. In twenty- nine separate experiments, they presented 
to females models of male mosquito fish that had been manipulated in 
a myriad of ways. Tail fins were stretched out, dorsal fins were morphed 
to appear sharklike, swords were added, fish were blackened, speckled, 
and whitewashed. In almost every comparison, females showed pref-
erences for the weird, the novel, and the outlandish males.15 The real 
males might be conservative in their approach to sexual beauty, but deep 
down, below the radar, their females are yearning for anything but con-
servative; they are teeming with hidden preferences. The same occurs in 
túngara frogs. Even though these males have outdone their close rela-
tives by evolving the chuck, an incredibly attractive syllable that when 
added to their call increases a male’s attractiveness by 500 percent, most 
of their females’ acoustic desires are unmet. In a series of experiments 
quite similar to Gould’s, we conducted thirty- one experiments in which 
we manipulated calls in varying ways, such as replacing the chuck with 
blasts of white noise, calls of other species, and even bells and whistles. 
Like Gould, we also found an astounding promiscuity of preferences.16 
Females found many of these acoustic accoutrements attractive, even 
bells and whistles. When the chuck evolved, it was lucky enough to ex-
ploit a hidden preference, but we now see it was not uniquely attractive. 
Many different kinds of sounds might have worked just as well; the luck 
of the chuck was being first.
The evolution of sexual beauty in many cases is analogous to an artist 
experimenting with paint on a canvas or a musician tinkering with new 
combinations of beats and chords. They are probing for what will ring 
true with the aesthetics of their audience. All three are creative pro-
cesses. All of them surround us with beauty by probing deep into our 
brains to find out just what we will consider beautiful.
* * *
So what about us? Do we adopt sexual traits that exploit hidden sex-
ual preferences? Of course we do, and we do so quite easily, especially 
because we can synthesize forms, images, and sexual scenarios. Indus-
tries that target our sexual aesthetics, much like the perfume industry, 

160 • Chapter 8
can create artificial stimuli, readily test them in the marketplace, and 
quickly determine those that happen to match preferences of consum-
ers, whether those preferences are hidden or plain as day. I will end this 
chapter with two interesting examples of how commerce does this. One 
example is cute and entertaining; the other is disturbing.
First, the cute one— a toy doll that has become an icon in Western 
culture. I have six younger sisters and two daughters; for much of my 
life there has always been Barbie. Although Barbie is not a sex toy, some 
have argued she represents unrealistic standards for sexual beauty in  
women. Barbie is getting old, but she has hardly aged a day since her 
birthday, March 9, 1959, when she made her debut at the American In-
ternational Toy Fair in New York City. Some folks have problems with 
Barbie, feeling that she promulgates a sexist view of women’s place in 
society. But many consider her beautiful; she exudes cues of youth and 
fertility. Barbie is long and slender; her ample breasts indicate she is 
sexually mature; their perkiness testifies to her young age; and her long, 
luxurious hair is a signal of health. Some might think she is so beauti-
ful that she is unreal, and they would be right. Barbie is a supernormal 
stimulus, exhibiting an exaggeration of traits that puts her in the realm 
of the unreal, as many have pointed out before— she is a fake.
Barbie is only one- sixth of life- size, so let’s blow her up to normal 
size and see how she compares with the real thing. Some details of Bar-
bie’s physique are merely average. Her head circumference (twenty- two 
inches) is about normal, and her bust is only a bit on the smaller size 
(thirty- two versus thirty- five or thirty- six inches). But most of her other 
parts are dwarfed compared with those of an average woman. Petite is 
an understatement. Her waist (sixteen inches) and hips (twenty- nine 
inches) are tiny and give her a waist- to- hip ratio of 0.56, miniscule com-
pared with real US women, who average around 0.80, and even much 
smaller than the 0.71 ratio that many men find more attractive than av-
erage, as discussed in chapter 7. Her neck, wrists, forearms, ankles— and 
especially her thighs— are like matchsticks. The life- size Barbie would 
be pretty useless in the real world. With her super- thin and extra- long 
neck, she wouldn’t be able to raise her head; her tiny waist would limit 
her to half a liver and only a few inches of intestine; and with her tiny 
feet, thin ankles, and top- heavy form, she would have to walk on all 
fours.17 Even though Barbie is dysfunctional, many still find her beauti-

Hidden Preferences • 161
ful, a real doll! This might seem odd until we think about some parallels 
with real, live women.
According to Forbes magazine, Gisele Bündchen earned $42 million 
in 2013, making her the world’s highest- paid supermodel at that time.18 
As the money proves, many people in Western society find supermodels 
superattractive. Of course, supermodels are not your typical Western 
women. The average supermodel is five feet, ten inches tall and 107 
pounds, a good bit different from your average non- super US woman, 
who is five feet, four inches tall and 166 pounds. Supermodels exist, 
but they are rare. In the mass media, however, they are paraded around 
constantly so that we can all admire their beauty, purchase the products 
they are hawking, and be seduced to think that their beauty is normal. 
In fact, their type of beauty seems to be tugging at an otherwise hidden 
preference for Barbie- like bodies— one for abnormally long and slender 
women— a concealed predilection that might exist because of our biol-
ogy, our culture, or some combination of the two.
Hidden preferences, like the hypothesized “Barbie” preference, exist 
under the radar of selection. As I have mentioned before, if the hid-
den preference is a detriment to the chooser once it is revealed, then 
it should be weeded out by selection. A preference for a Barbie- like 
woman would not have survived in preindustrial society, such as the 
“environment of evolutionary adaptedness” of the Pleistocene era when, 
as evolutionary psychologists argue, much of our current behaviors were 
formed.19 Even if she happened to survive scurrying around on all fours 
and being limited to half a liver and barely any intestines, her birth canal 
would have been too narrow to pass a newborn. As Barbie went extinct, 
so would any preferences for her as a mate.
But we are not living in the Pleistocene, and hidden preferences for 
supernormal sexual stimuli no longer lurk under the radar. Today, a 
wide range of sexual stimuli are accessible with the click of a computer 
mouse. This simple act lures these hidden preferences out into the open 
and recruits these likings to support a $10 billion– dollar industry. Wel-
come to pornotopia.
* * *
Pornotopia, a current term to describe pornography in Victorian England, 
is a fantasy land of supernormal sexual stimuli created mostly for men.20 

162 • Chapter 8
This fantasy land is peopled by women who exude sexuality. Typically 
they are young, seemingly just “barely legal,” with long hair and legs, 
unblemished skin, full lips, and a waistline that has never been extended 
by a developing child. The women are real, although some of their parts 
might be artificial, but they are hardly normal, as they are drawn from 
the extremes of the distribution of what real women look like. But it is 
not just their looks that are extreme, their sexual behavior departs from 
the mean as well. As Catherine Salmon describes it, “Sex in pornotopia 
is all about lust and physical gratification, without courtship, commit-
ment, mating effort or long- term relationships. In pornotopia, women 
are eager to have sex with strangers, easily sexually aroused and always 
orgasmic.”21 Pornotopia is the perfect place for men to put into practice 
that most basic of male mating strategies we encountered in chapter 
1— think quantity not quality, mate often, and let the females make all 
the investments in offspring.
Excessive viewing of pornography is considered a compulsive sexual 
behavior, but according to the DSM- 5, the latest version of the Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, it is not an addiction.22 
It is certainly a sexual fetish, which, as defined by L. F. Lowenstein in 
the journal Sexuality and Disability, is easy to know when you see it: “A 
sexual fetish is identified by the use of a nonliving object as the exclu-
sive or preferred method of achieving sexual gratification.”23 We think 
of most animals as more utilitarian than we are; they reserve sex for its 
evolved function— reproduction. So I was quite surprised when I saw a 
psychologist at my own university, Michael Domjan, present a lecture 
on sexual conditioning in quails revealing that other animals can also 
develop sexual fetishisms.
Quail are good subjects for sexual research. They are easy and cheap 
to care for, they respond well in experiments, and they like to have sex. 
Most male birds lack a penis or any other type of intromittent organ, so 
sex involves a cloacal kiss instead of penile intromission. They have to 
climb onto the back of the female while the two sexes bring their cloa-
cae into contact and the male “spits” a bit of sperm into her reproductive 
tract. Keep this bit of bird biology in mind as we explore the dark side 
of quail sex.
Domjan used Pavlovian conditioning to delve into the quails’ own 
land of pornotopia.24 We probably all need a reminder of how Pavlov-

Hidden Preferences • 163
ian conditioning works; let’s start with a joke: Pavlov walks into a bar; 
the bartender rings the bell over the counter signifying that it is time 
for the last round; and Pavlov exclaims, “I forgot to feed my dog!” If 
the joke does not reawaken the memories of Pavlov’s classic classical- 
conditioning experiment, here is how it works. Typically, dogs salivate 
when they anticipate food. In his experiments, Pavlov rang a bell and 
then he gave the dog food. The dog salivated. Pavlov kept this up until 
the bell caused the dog to salivate in response to the bell in anticipation 
of the food. When this happened, the dog had been conditioned. In 
these types of experiments, the bell is the conditioned stimulus (CS), an 
artificial, experimental stimulus; the food is the natural, unconditioned 
stimulus (US); and the salivating response to the food is the natural, un-
conditioned response (UR). The goal of the experiment is to condition 
the subject so the CS causes the UR— merely hearing the bell makes 
the dog salivate. Follow- up experiments can determine the strength  
of the CS- UR association once it is acquired by determining how long 
it takes for this association to be extinguished; for how many trials will 
the dog continue to salivate at the sound of the bell if the food never 
appears?
Back to the quail. Domjan and his colleagues placed a male quail in 
an arena. The male was presented with a terry cloth object placed over a 
vertical cylinder and filled with soft polyester fibers—  something akin 
to a sex toy. This is the CS. The CS was presented for thirty seconds 
and then immediately followed by presentation of a live female, the 
US, for five minutes, which was usually plenty of time for the couple to 
mate. Conditioning took place when the male approached and inter-
acted with the CS prior to the release of the female. There were thirty 
conditioning trials. This was then followed by thirty extinction trials in 
which the males had access to the sex toy but not to females.
These sexual- conditioning experiments were successful; after half- a- 
dozen or so trials, all of the males were conditioned; they exhibited the 
UR of approaching and inspecting the terry cloth object. The surprising 
result was that about half of the males actually tried to copulate with the 
inanimate object— they had developed a sexual fetish. This sex toy had 
little resemblance to a female except that it was soft; it had no cloaca- 
like opening that could welcome a male’s cloacal kiss. Nevertheless, it 
still elicited copulation behavior from many of the males.

164 • Chapter 8
The conditioning trials were then followed by extinction trials. As 
before, males were presented with the sex toy, but this stimulus was 
never reinforced by the later presentation of live females. In these trials, 
most of the males eventually stopped interacting the terry cloth object, 
but the males who had developed a sexual fetish showed no decrease 
in their sexual appetite for the sexual toy. The terry cloth object now 
became a sexual object in its own right, or more precisely a sexual fe-
tish. It was valued by the males not because it presaged an avenue for 
sexual gratification, a real female, but because it became an avenue for 
sexual gratification itself.25 This series of experiments by Domjan and 
his colleagues did not uncover a hidden preference, like many of the 
experiments just discussed, but created a new preference, in this case 
a maladaptive one in which the preference for a fetish continues even 
when it is no longer associated with a real, live sexual partner.
The quail experiments did not investigate the neurochemical pro-
cesses underlying the development of sexual fetishes. But these exper-
iments offer a glimpse into how compulsive desires for pornography 
might develop in humans. In the case of humans, the underlying neuro-
chemical processes are beginning to be explored.
We know something about what pornography does to the brain. In 
chapter 3, I discussed the difference between liking and wanting. The 
dopamine reward system is the one that causes us to want what we 
like. As we noted in that chapter, mice lick their whiskers when they 
like food. Block their dopamine receptors, and they still show the same 
degree of liking in response to a sugar treat as normal mice, but they are 
not willing to work to get more sugar. They like sugar but don’t want it. 
Our brains are tuned for sex— we like it and want it.
A clever experiment with humans showed how liking and wanting 
can be disentangled when we view sexual beauty. Men were asked to 
rate computer images of faces of men and women in order of attractive-
ness. They were then allowed to view any of the faces that they pleased. 
They ranked facial attractiveness in both genders (liking) but then spent 
more time viewing attractive faces of women (wanting). The behavioral 
results were complemented by fMRI studies of brain activation; there 
was increased activation of brain areas associated with the dopamine 
reward system during the “wanting” compared to the “liking” activities 
of the test subjects.26

Hidden Preferences • 165
The dopamine reward system is an adaptive mechanism for animals 
to want things that are good for them in a Darwinian sense. Only in 
humans, it seems, has the reward system been exploited; gambling, eat-
ing, drugs, and sex have hijacked this system, leading to the demise of 
many an addict. Sex might be the activity that most easily exploits the 
reward system because, as J. R. Georgiadis pointed out in an article in 
Socioaffective Neuroscience and Psychology, sexual orgasm causes the most 
powerful natural dopaminergic reward in the human nervous system.27 
The potency of this positive reinforcement makes addiction to pornog-
raphy easy to understand and easy to happen.
Both men and women view pornography, and they do so for what 
might be considered positive (for example, increase in sexual knowl-
edge) and negative reasons (for example, interpersonal distress). Many 
studies show that men use pornography more often, are more drawn 
to hard- core pornography, and are more likely to be compulsive users 
of pornography.28 Much of the research and discussion of compulsive 
pornography use addresses this problem in men, and this is where I will 
concentrate the discussion.
Many men like pornography because it is a supernormal stimulus, just 
as moths like the supernormal concentrations of sex pheromones and 
supernormal speeds of wing beats. While viewing pornography, men 
often masturbate and experience orgasm and with it an unparalleled 
charge of dopamine. This neurochemical charge cements the incentive 
salience of the pornographic images; it makes men not just like porn but 
want more of it. They develop a sexual fetishism attributable to a com-
bination of the initial attraction to a supernormal stimulus and positive 
reinforcement owing to the orgasm and the resulting stimulation of the 
dopamine system. Liking leads to wanting; and in some, the wanting 
leads to compulsion; and despite what the DSM- 5 says, it seems like 
an addiction. In the extreme, these compulsions can lead to asocial or 
antisocial syndromes in which life in pornotopia replaces the real thing.
Not only can pornography become an object of one’s sexual desires; it 
can also instruct how to act out these desires. Pornography is becoming one 
of the main conduits for sexual education. And consequently, it might 
shape neurons in our brain that teach us how to perform sex. Porn has 
replaced the locker room and health class as the disseminator of knowl-
edge about the “birds and the bees.” Prior to easy and  widespread access 

166 • Chapter 8
to porn, few teenagers could receive firsthand tutoring about a wide as-
sortment of sexual acts. The locker- room experts of days past, quite often 
only a few years older than their “students,” might have known firsthand 
about kissing, petting, and getting to first, second, or even third base; 
but their knowledge had its limits. Not so with Internet porn, which 
is not only rife with a wealth of sexual activities, but provides graphic 
illustrations as to what they are and how to perform them, leaving little 
to the imagination.
In an essay in Brain and Addiction, Donald Hilton digs deep into this 
notion of pornography as a supernormal stimulus and raises another 
serious concern dealing with “mirror neurons.”29 Mirror neurons are 
visual- motor neurons that were first discovered in the prefrontal cortex 
of monkeys. These neurons fire both when a monkey performs a cer-
tain action and when it sees another performing the same action. One 
function of motor neurons is in aiding imitation. The pattern by which 
mirror neurons fire when observing an action can act as a template as to 
how they should fire when an individual performs the same motor pat-
tern. A second function has to do with “action understanding.” When 
motor neurons are fired by observing a particular action, the observer 
ascribes a meaning to that action based on what the observer would be 
doing to generate the same pattern of firing. When I watch someone 
swing a baseball bat, my mirror neurons that fire are the same ones that 
fire when I am swinging a bat. Thus, I now know what I am seeing.
In studies using fMRI of brain areas containing mirror neurons, sub-
jects were asked to view video clips of pornography. The studies revealed 
increased neural activity during viewing that was correlated both with 
enhanced sexual emotions and penile erections. Although these studies 
demonstrate correlation and not causation, they do suggest a poten-
tial role of mirror neurons in either learning to imitate or learning the 
meaning of sexual acts. Given the increasingly violent and demeaning 
nature of some forms of pornography, Hilton is concerned about the 
potential “negative emotional, cultural, and demographic effects” that 
pornography stamps into various networks of the neural system that are 
involved in learning and in understanding how to appropriately interact 
with a sexual partner. A frightening consequence of this multibillion- 
dollar industry is that pornography might create neural templates rede-
fining in our brains what is normal sexual behavior.

Hidden Preferences • 167
It must be noted that the function of mirror neurons is still a bit 
controversial, especially the function and even the existence of mirror 
neurons in humans.30 But if pornography influences an individual’s idea 
of what sex is supposed to be like, then Hilton’s concern is still valid, 
regardless of whether mirror neurons are involved. This final section 
also suggests that Naomi Wolf was quite prescient in her assertion more 
than a decade ago that “for the first time in human history, the images’ 
power and allure have supplanted that of real naked women. Today real 
naked women are just bad porn.”31
Today, it now seems clear that supernormal stimuli, hidden prefer-
ences, and the neural circuits for liking and wanting all conspire to drive 
the pornography industry. The results are analogous to what has been 
happening in the evolution of sexual beauty for millennia. But instead 
of courters evolving traits that influence sexual preferences of choosers, 
humans have entire industries, including but not limited to pornog-
raphy, invested in creating stimuli that target our sexual aesthetics in 
cultural rather than evolutionary time. Remember that the next time 
you hear birds sing, see a firefly flash, or a watch a supermodel hawking 
a product that you really don’t need.


Epilogue
Beauty is all around us, and it is intoxicatingly diverse.  Much 
of this diversity exists because beauty enters our sexual brain through 
different sensory modalities, which strains our ability to make compar-
isons: we cannot objectively rank the beauty of a dance, a song, and a 
fragrance. The diversity of beauty is no less astounding within a sin-
gle sensory domain— the collage of colors of many fishes and the vocal 
repertoires of songbirds are both overwhelming. The existence of all 
this diversity makes it obvious that there is no single Platonic ideal of 
beauty. This is true within our own species and also among the hundreds 
of thousands of species that reproduce sexually. The diversity of beauty 
springs from the diversity in how different species and even individuals 
of the same species sense the world around them. Our sexual aesthetics, 
those of humans and other species, are not handed down from above but 
are generated from within, specifically from within our brains. We are 
the ones who define beauty, and understanding the existence of beauty 
as well as our taste for it is not possible without viewing beauty through 
the brain of the beholder. If nothing else, I hope I have convinced you 
of this fact.
The brain sciences, which embrace neuroscience, psychology, and 
several areas of medicine, are making amazing strides in the beginnings 
of what has been called The New Century of the Brain. Often the re-
lation between the brain and evolution is an afterthought. When re-
searchers do consider the two in tandem, the focus is usually on how 
the brain evolved to be as it is. Regardless of the target species, this is 
a compelling question, but an equally compelling one is how the brain 
drives evolution. This book presents one scenario of how this happens.
I have considered how the brain drives the evolution of beauty. But 
I have done so mostly in one scenario, when courters evaluate choos-
ers during mate choice in heterosexual pairs. But there is certainly 
more diversity in sexual behavior than I have covered here. Most of my 

170 • Epilogue
 examples involve females choosing males, or mutual evaluation by males 
and females. Although I have mentioned males choosing females, I have 
not drilled deeply into the factors that flip this equation from the more 
typical form of females choosing males. Biologists understand why this 
happens; it is just not within the scope of this book.
I also have not considered homosexual pairs, a phenomenon that is 
not restricted to humans. There are many compelling questions here, but 
we might be asking the wrong questions if we consider heterosexual/
homosexual as two invariant categories rather than two ends of a spec-
trum of sexual preference. Nevertheless, it would be of interest to know 
if “homosexual” individuals evaluate beauty in same- gender individuals 
by using the very same parameters that members of the opposite gender 
would employ to evaluate the beauty of the same individuals. And, if 
not, why not? Understanding the evolution of sexual beauty in a het-
erosexual mating paradigm is an important quest, but not the only one.
Of course, beauty is not restricted to sexual beauty. The perspec-
tive I present here also leads us to wonder how the idiosyncrasies and 
quirks in our own brains influence our own appreciation of “beauty” in 
a grander sense, as it applies beyond sex. Why is a rainbow “beautiful”? 
Why does the mere refraction of light into bands of color inspire awe? 
We can pose the same question about a work of art, a field of flowers, 
and an expertly executed move on the football field. Might any of these 
percepts of beauty be a side effect of our sexual aesthetics? Or, alterna-
tively, can our appreciation of beauty in other domains influence what 
we find to be sexually beautiful? What is it about our senses, our brains, 
and our cognitive architecture that gives us an appreciation for beauty 
all around us? Why does beauty matter so much?
Like Darwin, we will continue to be confounded by aspects and ele-
ments of beauty as we encounter them, but we have come to understand 
so much more about the evolution of beauty since his time. As scientific 
exploration continues into the future, we are sure to expand even further 
our ability to see the ways that beauty is woven into existence, the many 
forms it assumes, and the wild appreciations it elicits.

Notes
Chapter 1. Why All the Fuss about Sex?
Epigraph: Darwin (1860).
 
1. Ryan (2010).
 
2. Darwin (1859).
 
3. Malthus (1798).
 
4. Slotten (2004).
 
5. Smith (1990).
 
6. Darwin (1871).
 
7. Diamond (1992).
 
8. Moen, Pastor, and Cohen (1999).
 
9. Emlen (2014).
 
10. Yoshizawa, Ferreira, Kamimura, and Lienhard (2014).
 
11. Yeung, Anapolski, Depenbusch, Zitzmann, and Cooper (2003).
Chapter 2. Why All the Whining and Chucking?
Epigraph: Song quoted in Langstaff and Rojankovsky (1955).
 
1. Simpson (1980).
 
2. McCullough (2001).
 
3. Ryan (2006).
 
4. Ryan (1985; 2011).
 
5. Collins (2000).
 
6. Evans, Neave, and Wakelin (2006).
 
7. Buss (1994).
 
8. Zoological Society of London, https://www.zsl.org/cheetah-fast-facts.
 
9. Tuttle (2015).
 
10. Griffin (1958).
 
11. Bruns, Burda, and Ryan (1989).
 
12. Johnston, Hagel, Franklin, Fink, and Grammer (2001).
 
13. Petrie and Williams (1993).
 
14. Capranica (1965).
 
15. Hoke, Burmeister, Fernald, Rand, Ryan, and Wilczynski (2004).
 
16. Wilczynski, Rand, and Ryan (2001).
 
17. Ryan (1990).

172 • Notes to Chapters 3 and 4
Chapter 3. Beauty and the Brain
 Epigraph: Hume (1742).
 
1. Von Uexküll (2014).
 
2. Internet Archive, https://archive.org/details/drac_stoker.
 
3. Galambos (1942).
 
4. Griffin (1958).
 
5. Nagel (1974).
 
6. Feng, Narins, Xu, Lin, Yu, Qiu, Xu, and Shen (2006).
 
7. Kurtovic, Widmer, and Dickson (2007).
 
8. Taylor and Ryan (2013).
 
9. Toda, Zhao, and Dickson (2012).
 
10. Meierjohann and Schartl (2006).
 
11. Basolo (1990).
 
12. Jersáková, Johnson, and Kindlmann (2006).
 
13. Zahavi (1975); Zahavi and Zahavi (1997).
 
14. Silver (2012).
 
15. Searcy (1992).
 
16. ten Cate and Rowe (2007).
 
17. ten Cate, Verzijden, and Etman (2006).
 
18. Ryan and Keddy- Hector (1992).
 
19. Weber (1978).
 
20. Cohen (1984).
 
21. Akre, Farris, Lea, Page, and Ryan (2011).
 
22. Heath and Mickle (1960).
 
23. Kringelbach and Berridge (2012).
 
24. US Food and Drug Administration, http://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/News 
room/PressAnnouncements/ucm458734.htm.
Chapter 4. Visions of Beauty
 Epigraph: Emerson (1899).
 
1. Written by Pete Townshend, performed by The Who, “See Me, Feel Me,” 
Tommy (1969).
 
2. Dunn, Halenar, Davies, Cristobal- Azkarate, Reby, Sykes, Dengg, Fitch, and 
Knapp (2015).
 
3. Quoted in New World Encyclopedia, http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org 
/entry/Howler_monkey.
 
4. Dominy and Lucas (2001).
 
5. Darwin (1872).
 
6. Written by Lou Reed, performed by the Velvet Underground, “Sweet Jane,” 
Loaded (1970).
 
7. Changizi (2010).
 
8. Ewert (1987).
 
9. Hubel and Wiesel (1962).
 
10. Rothenberg (2012).

Notes to Chapter 5 • 173
 
11. Cummings (2007).
 
12. Magnus (1958).
 
13. Tuttle (2015).
 
14. Andersson (1994).
 
15. Andersson (1982).
 
16. Møller and Thornhill (1998).
 
17. Møller (1992).
 
18. Ryan, Warkentin, McClelland, and Wilczynski (1995).
 
19. Ghirlanda, Jansson, and Enquist (2002).
 
20. Phelps and Ryan (1998).
 
21. Enquist and Arak (1994).
 
22. Møller and Swaddle (1997).
 
23. TED Talk, https://www.ted.com/talks/cameron_russell_looks_aren_t_every 
thing_believe_me_i_m_a_model?language=en.
 
24. Dawkins (2006).
 
25. Dawkins (1999).
 
26. Slotten (2004).
 
27. Diamond (1999).
 
28. Diamond (1992).
 
29. Madden and Tanner (2003).
 
30. Kelley and Endler (2012).
 
31. Chatterjee (2011).
Chapter 5. The Sounds of Sex
 Epigraph: Marler (1998).
 
1. Tom Harrington, “About Deafness,” under “FAQ: Deaf People in History; 
Quotes by Helen Keller,” Gallaudet University Library, February 2000, http://libguides 
.gallaudet.edu/content.php?pid=352126&sid=2881882.
 
2. Carson (1962).
 
3. Rodríguez- Brenes, Rodriguez, Ibáñez, and Ryan (2016).
 
4. Rodríguez- Brenes, Garza, and Ryan (unpublished data).
 
5. O’Connor, Fraccaro, Pisanski, Tigue, O’Donnell, and Feinberg (2014).
 
6. Zuk, Rotenberry, and Tinghitella (2006).
 
7. Pascoal, Cezard, Eik- Nes, Gharbi, Majewska, Payne, Ritchie, Zuk, and Bailey 
(2014).
 
8. O’Connor, Fraccaro, Pisanski, Tigue, O’Donnell, and Feinberg (2014).
 
9. Morton (1975).
 
10. Hunter and Krebs (1979); Ryan, Cocroft, and Wilczynski (1990).
 
11. Halfwerk, Bot, Buikx, van der Velde, Komdeur, ten Cate, and Slabbekoorn 
(2011).
 
12. Hartshorne (1973).
 
13. Searcy (1992).
 
14. Mello, Nottebohm, and Clayton (1995).
 
15. Pfaff, Zanette, MacDougall- Shackleton, and MacDougall- Shackleton (2007).
 
16. Lehrman (1965).

174 • Notes to Chapter 6
 
17. Cheng (2008).
 
18. Earp and Maney (2012).
 
19. Wyttenbach, May, and Hoy (1996).
 
20. Nakano, Takanashi, Skals, Surlykke, and Ishikawa (2010).
 
21. Proctor (1992).
 
22. Cui, Tang, and Narins (2012).
 
23. Lardner and bin Lakim (2002).
 
24. Clark and Feo (2008).
 
25. Bostwick and Prum (2005).
 
26. Morton (1977).
 
27. McConnell (1990).
 
28. Juslin and Västfjäll (2008).
 
29. Steblin (2002).
 
30. Mitchell, DiBartolo, Brown, and Barlow (1998).
 
31. Blood and Zatorre (2001).
 
32. Menon and Levitin (2005).
Chapter 6. The Aroma of Adulation
 Epigraph: Helen Keller, The World I Live In, chap. 6, “Smell: The Fallen Angel,” reprinted 
in Ragged Edge Online, 5 (September 2001): http://www.raggededgemagazine.com 
/0901/0901ft3-2.htm.
 
1. Grosjean, Rytz, Farine, Abuin, Cortot, Jefferis, and Benton (2011).
 
2. Seeley (2009).
 
3. Prosen, Jaeger, and Lee (2004).
 
4. Bradbury and Vehrencamp (2011).
 
5. Domingue, Haynes, Todd, and Baker (2009).
 
6. Ibid.
 
7. Ryan and Rosenthal (2001).
 
8. Written and performed by Janis Ian, “Society’s Child” (1965), Between the Lines 
(1975).
 
9. Fisher, Wong, and Rosenthal (2006).
 
10. Meyer, Kircher, Gansauge, Li, Racimo, Mallick, Schraiber, et al. (2012).
 
11. McClintock (1971).
 
12. Miller (2011).
 
13. Wedekind, Seebeck, Bettens, and Paepke (1995).
 
14. Garver- Apgar, Gangestad, Thornhill, Miller, and Olp (2006).
 
15. Villinger and Waldman (2008).
 
16. Vollrath and Milinski (1995).
 
17. Rodríguez- Brenes, Rodriguez, Ibáñez, and Ryan (2016).
 
18. Schiestl (2005).
 
19. Burr (2004).
 
20. Milinski (2006).
 
21. Milinski (2003).
 
22. Milinski and Wedekind (2001).

Notes to Chapters 7 and 8 • 175
Chapter 7. Fickle Preferences
 Epigraph: Virgil, Aeneid, 4.569, in Bartlett’s Familiar Quotations, https://books.google 
.com/books?id=W3SG1hJSArIC&pg=RA1-PR39&lpg=RA1-PR39&dq=virgil+ 
aeneid+A+woman+is+always+a+fickle,+unstable+thing.
 
1. Written by Baker Knight, performed by Mickey Gilley, “Don’t the Girls All Get 
Prettier at Closin’ Time,” Gilley’s Smokin’ (1976).
 
2. Pennebaker, Dyer, Caulkins, Litowitz, Ackreman, Anderson, and McGraw (1979).
 
3. Johnco, Wheeler, and Taylor (2010).
 
4. Trivers (2011).
 
5. Haselton, Mortezaie, Pillsworth, Bleske- Rechek, and Frederick (2007).
 
6. Bryant and Haselton (2009).
 
7. Wyrobek, Eskenazi, Young, Arnheim, Tiemann- Boege, Jabs, Glaser, Pearson, 
and Evenson (2006).
 
8. Easton, Confer, Goetz, and Buss (2010).
 
9. Lynch, Rand, Ryan, and Wilczynski (2005).
 
10. Partridge and Farquhar (1981).
 
11. Lone, Venkataraman, Srivastava, Potdar, and Sharma (2015).
 
12. Lin, Cao, Sethi, Zeng, Chin, Chakraborty, Shepherd, et al. (2016).
 
13. Wiley (1973).
 
14. Dugatkin (1992).
 
15. Schlupp, Marler, and Ryan (1994).
 
16. Hill and Ryan (2006).
 
17. Henrich, Heine, and Norenzayan (2010).
 
18. Sugiyama (2004).
 
19. Sigall and Landy (1973).
 
20. Waynforth (2007).
 
21. Hill and Buss (2008).
 
22. Jarod Kintz, This Book Is Not for Sale, Amazon Digital Services, Kindle ed., May 
2011, http://www.amazon.com/This-Book-SALE-Jarod-Kintz-ebook/dp/B0051OE 
DDA.
 
23. Winegard, Winegard, and Geary (2013).
 
24. Kirkpatrick, Rand, and Ryan (2006).
 
25. Courtiol, Raymond, Godelle, and Ferdy (2010).
 
26. Sedikides, Ariely, and Olsen (1999).
 
27. Shafir, Waite, and Smith (2002).
 
28. Lea and Ryan (2015).
Chapter 8. Hidden Preferences and Life in Pornotopia
 Epigraph: US Department of Defense, “DoD News Briefing— Secretary Rumsfeld and 
Gen. Myers,” February 12, 2002, http://archive.defense.gov/Transcripts/Transcript.aspx 
?TranscriptID=2636.
 
1. Seuss (1988).
 
2. Rosenthal and Evans (1998).

176 • Notes to Chapter 8
 
3. Kirkpatrick and Ryan (1991).
 
4. Fisher (1930).
 
5. Ibid.
 
6. Lande (1981); Kirkpatrick (1982).
 
7. Wilkinson and Reillo (1994).
 
8. Rodd, Hughes, Grether, and Baril (2002).
 
9. John Endler, personal communication.
 
10. Ryan and Cummings (2013).
 
11. Christy and Salmon (1991).
 
12. Ryan, unpublished data.
 
13. Ryan and Cummings (2013).
 
14. Burley and Symanski (1998).
 
15. Gould, Elliott, Masters, and Mukerji (1999).
 
16. Ryan, Bernal, and Rand (2010).
 
17. Samantha Olson, “Barbie’s Body Measurements Set Unrealistic Goals for Little 
Girls: Sales Plummet,” Medical Daily, December 31, 2014, http://www.medicaldaily 
.com/pulse/barbies-body-measurements-set-unrealistic-goals-little-girls-sales-plum 
met-316006.
 
18. Forbes, http://www.forbes.com/pictures/eimi45mdj/no-1-gisele-bndchen/#7ed 
42a453c02.
 
19. Prescott (2012).
 
20. Marcus (2008).
 
21. Salmon (2012).
 
22. American Psychiatric Association (2013).
 
23. Lowenstein (2002).
 
24. Köksal, Domjan, Kurt, Sertel, Örüng, Bowers, and Kumru (2004).
 
25. Ibid.
 
26. Aharon, Etcoff, Ariely, Chabris, O’Connor, and Breiter (2001).
 
27. Georgiadis (2012).
 
28. Hald (2006).
 
29. Hilton (2013).
 
30. Turella, Pierno, Tubaldi, and Castiello (2009).
 
31. Wolf (2003).

Bibliography
Aharon, I., Etcoff, N., Ariely, D., Chabris, C. F., O’Connor, E., and Breiter, H. C. (2001). 
Beautiful faces have variable reward value: fMRI and behavioral evidence. Neuron 
32: 537– 51.
Akre, K. L., Farris, H. E., Lea, A. M., Page, R. A., and Ryan, M. J. (2011). Signal per-
ception in frogs and bats and the evolution of mating signals. Science 333: 751– 52.
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM- 5). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association Publishing.
Andersson, M. (1982). Female choice selects for extreme tail length in a widowbird. 
Nature 299: 818– 820.
——— (1994). Sexual Selection. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Basolo, A. L. (1990). Female preference predates the evolution of the sword in swordtail 
fish. Science 250: 808– 10.
Blood, A. J., and Zatorre, R. J. (2001). Intensely pleasurable responses to music correlate 
with activity in brain regions implicated in reward and emotion. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 98: 818– 23.
Bostwick, K. S., and Prum, R. O. (2005). Courting bird sings with stridulating wing 
feathers. Science 309: 736.
Bradbury, J. W., and Vehrencamp, S. L. (2011). Principles of Animal Communication. 
Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
Bruns, V., Burda, H., and Ryan, M. J. (1989). Ear morphology of the frog‐eating bat 
(Trachops cirrhosus, family: Phyllostomidae): Apparent specializations for low‐fre-
quency hearing. Journal of Morphology 199: 103– 18.
Bryant, G. A., and Haselton, M. G. (2009). Vocal cues of ovulation in human females. 
Biology Letters 5: 12– 15.
Burley, N. T., and Symanski, R. (1998). “A taste for the beautiful”: Latent aesthetic 
mate preferences for white crests in two species of Australian grassfinches. American 
Naturalist 152: 792– 802.
Burr, C. (2004). The Emperor of Scent: A True Story of Perfume and Obsession. New York: 
Random House.
Buss, D. M. (1994). The Evolution of Desire. New York: Basic Books.
Capranica, R. R. (1965). The Evoked Vocal Response of the Bullfrog. MIT Press Research 
Monograph, no. 33. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carson, R. (1962). Silent Spring Greenwich, CT: Fawcett Publications.
Changizi, M. (2010). The Vision Revolution: How the Latest Research Overturns Every-
thing We Thought We Knew about Human Vision. Dallas, TX: Benbella Books.
Chatterjee, A. (2011). Neuroaesthetics: A coming of age story. Journal of Cognitive Neu-
roscience 23: 53– 62.
Cheng, M.- F. (2008). The role of vocal self- stimulation in female responses to males: 
Implications for state- reading. Hormones and Behavior 53: 1– 10.

178 • Bibliography
Christy, J. H., and Salmon, M. (1991). Comparative studies of reproductive behavior in 
mantis shrimps and fiddler crabs. American Zoologist 31: 329– 37.
Clark, C. J., and Feo, T. J. (2008). The Anna’s hummingbird chirps with its tail: A new 
mechanism of sonation in birds. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences 275: 955– 62.
Cohen, J. (1984). Sexual selection and the psychophysics of female choice. Zeitschrift für 
Tierpsychologie 64: 1– 8.
Collins, S. A. (2000). Men’s voices and women’s choices. Animal Behaviour 60: 773– 80.
Courtiol, A., Raymond, M., Godelle, B., and Ferdy, J. B. (2010). Mate choice and human 
stature: Homogamy as a unified framework for understanding mating preferences. 
Evolution 64: 2189– 203.
Cui, J., Tang, Y., and Narins, P. M. (2012). Real estate ads in Emei music frog vocaliza-
tions: Female preference for calls emanating from burrows. Biology Letters 8: 337– 40.
Cummings, M. E. (2007). Sensory trade‐offs predict signal divergence in surfperch. 
Evolution 61: 530– 45.
Darwin, C. (1859). On the Origin of Species. London: J. Murray.
——— (1860). Charles Darwin to Asa Gray, April 3. Darwin Correspondence Project, 
Cambridge University. http://www.darwinproject.ac.uk/letter/?docId=letters/DCP 
-LETT-2743.xml;query=2743;brand=default.
——— (1871). The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex. London: J. Murray.
——— (1872). The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. London: J. Murray.
Dawkins, R. (1999). The Extended Phenotype: The Long Reach of the Gene. Oxford: Oxford 
Paperbacks.
——— (2006). The Selfish Gene. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Diamond, J. (1992). The Third Chimpanzee. New York: HarperCollins.
——— (1999). Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies. New York: W. W. Nor- 
ton.
Domingue, M. J., Haynes, K. F., Todd, J. L., and Baker, T. C. (2009). Altered olfactory 
receptor neuron responsiveness is correlated with a shift in behavioral response in 
an evolved colony of the cabbage looper moth, Trichoplusia ni. Journal of Chemical 
Ecology 35: 405– 15.
Dominy, N. J., and Lucas, P. W. (2001). Ecological importance of trichromatic vision to 
primates. Nature 410: 363– 66.
Dugatkin, L. A. (1992). Sexual selection and imitation: Females copy the mate choice 
of others. American Naturalist 139: 1384– 89.
Dunn, J. C., Halenar, L. B., Davies, T. G., Cristobal- Azkarate, J., Reby, D., Sykes, D., 
Dengg, S., Fitch, W. T., and Knapp, L. A. (2015). Evolutionary trade- off between 
vocal tract and testes dimensions in howler monkeys. Current Biology 25: 2839– 44.
Earp, S. E., and Maney, D. L. (2012). Birdsong: Is it music to their ears? Frontiers in 
Evolutionary Neuroscience 4: 14.
Easton, J. A., Confer, J. C., Goetz, C. D., and Buss, D. M. (2010). Reproduction expe-
diting: Sexual motivations, fantasies, and the ticking biological clock. Personality and 
Individual Differences 49: 516– 20.
Emerson, R. W. (1899). The Early Poems of Ralph Waldo Emerson: T. Y. Crowell and 
Co. Google Books. https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=YFARAAAA 
YAAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PA1&dq=If+eyes+were+made+for+seeing,+Then+Beauty+is+ 

Bibliography • 179
its+own+excuse+for+being.+Emerson+1899+&ots=X7se7ZSdQv&sig=K-hrqu 
vmuqY8wRdkZr2qKe4ZTFU#v=onepage&q&f=false.
Emlen, D. J. (2014). Animal Weapons: The Evolution of Battle. New York: Henry Holt.
Enquist, M., and Arak, A. (1994). Symmetry, beauty and evolution. Nature 372: 169– 70.
Evans, S., Neave, N., and Wakelin, D. (2006). Relationships between vocal characteris-
tics and body size and shape in human males: An evolutionary explanation for a deep 
male voice. Biological Psychology 72: 160– 63.
Ewert, J.- P. (1987). Neuroethology of releasing mechanisms: Prey- catching in toads. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 10: 337– 68.
Feng, A. S., Narins, P. M., Xu, C.- H., Lin, W.- Y., Yu, Z.- L., Qiu, Q., Xu, Z.- M., and 
Shen, J.- X. (2006). Ultrasonic communication in frogs. Nature 440: 333– 36.
Fisher, H. S., Wong, B. B., and Rosenthal, G. G. (2006). Alteration of the chemical 
environment disrupts communication in a freshwater fish. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B: Biological Sciences 273: 1187– 93.
Fisher, R. A. (1930). The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Galambos, R. (1942). The avoidance of obstacles by flying bats: Spallanzani’s ideas 
(1794) and later theories. Isis 34: 132– 40.
Garver- Apgar, C. E., Gangestad, S. W., Thornhill, R., Miller, R. D., and Olp, J. J. (2006). 
Major histocompatibility complex alleles, sexual responsivity, and unfaithfulness in 
romantic couples. Psychological Science 17: 830– 35.
Georgiadis, J. R. (2012). Doing it . . . wild? On the role of the cerebral cortex in human 
sexual activity. Socioaffective Neuroscience and Psychology 2: 17,337. doi: 10.3402/snp 
.v2i0.17337.
Ghirlanda, S., Jansson, L., and Enquist, M. (2002). Chickens prefer beautiful humans. 
Human Nature 13: 383– 89.
Gould, J. L., Elliott, S. L., Masters, C. M., and Mukerji, J. (1999). Female preferences in 
a fish genus without female mate choice. Current Biology 9: 497– 500.
Griffin, D. (1958). Listening in the Dark: The Acoustic Orientation of Bats and Men. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Grosjean, Y., Rytz, R., Farine, J.- P., Abuin, L., Cortot, J., Jefferis, G. S., and Benton, R. 
(2011). An olfactory receptor for food- derived odours promotes male courtship in 
Drosophila. Nature 478: 236– 40.
Hald, G. M. (2006). Gender differences in pornography consumption among young 
heterosexual Danish adults. Archives of Sexual Behavior 35: 577– 85.
Halfwerk, W., Bot, S., Buikx, J., van der Velde, M., Komdeur, J., ten Cate, C., and Slab-
bekoorn, H. (2011). Low- frequency songs lose their potency in noisy urban condi-
tions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
108: 549– 54.
Hartshorne, C. (1973). Born to Sing. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Haselton, M. G., Mortezaie, M., Pillsworth, E. G., Bleske- Rechek, A., and Freder-
ick, D. A. (2007). Ovulatory shifts in human female ornamentation: Near ovulation, 
women dress to impress. Hormones and Behavior 51: 40– 45.
Heath, R. G., and Mickle, W. A. (1960). Evaluation of seven years’ experience with 
depth electrode studies in human patients. In Ramey, E. R., and O’Doherty, D. eds., 
Electrical Studies of the Unanesthetized Brain. New York: Paul B. Hoeber.

180 • Bibliography
Henrich, J., Heine, S., and Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world? 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33: 61– 83.
Hill, S. E., and Buss, D. M. (2008). The mere presence of opposite- sex others on judg-
ments of sexual and romantic desirability: Opposite effects for men and women. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 34: 635– 47.
Hill, S. E., and Ryan, M. J. (2006). The role of model female quality in the mate choice 
copying behaviour of sailfin mollies. Biology Letters 2: 203– 5.
Hilton, D. L. (2013). Pornography addiction— a supranormal stimulus considered in 
the context of neuroplasticity. Socioaffective Neuroscience and Psychology 3: 20,767. doi: 
10.3402/snp.v3i0.20767.
Hoke, K. L., Burmeister, S. S., Fernald, R. D., Rand, A. S., Ryan, M. J., and Wilczynski, 
W. (2004). Functional mapping of the auditory midbrain during mate call reception. 
Journal of Neuroscience 24: 11,264– 72.
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. (1962). Receptive fields, binocular interaction and func-
tional architecture in the cat’s visual cortex. Journal of Physiology 160: 106– 54.
Hume, D. (1742). David Hume’s Essays, Moral and Political, 1742. Phrase Finder. http: 
//www.phrases.org.uk/meanings/beauty-is-in-the-eye-of-the-beholder.html.
Hunter, M. L., and Krebs, J. R. (1979). Geographical variation in the song of the great tit 
(Parus major) in relation to ecological factors. Journal of Animal Ecology 48: 759– 85.
Jersáková, J., Johnson, S. D., and Kindlmann, P. (2006). Mechanisms and evolution of 
deceptive pollination in orchids. Biological Reviews 81: 219– 35.
Johnco, C., Wheeler, L., and Taylor, A. (2010). They do get prettier at closing time: A 
repeated measures study of the closing- time effect and alcohol. Social Influence 5: 
261– 71.
Johnston, V. S., Hagel, R., Franklin, M., Fink, B., and Grammer, K. (2001). Male fa-
cial attractiveness: Evidence for hormone- mediated adaptive design. Evolution and 
Human Behavior 22: 251– 67.
Juslin, P. N., and Västfjäll, D. (2008). Emotional responses to music: The need to con-
sider underlying mechanisms. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 31: 559– 75.
Kelley, L. A., and Endler, J. A. (2012). Illusions promote mating success in great bow-
erbirds. Science 335: 335– 38.
Kirkpatrick, M. (1982). Sexual selection and the evolution of female choice. Evolution 
36: 1– 12.
Kirkpatrick, M., Rand, A. S., and Ryan, M. J. (2006). Mate choice rules in animals. 
Animal Behaviour 71: 1215– 25.
Kirkpatrick, M., and Ryan, M. J. (1991). The paradox of the lek and the evolution of 
mating preferences. Nature 350: 33– 38.
Köksal, F., Domjan, M., Kurt, A., Sertel, Ö., Örüng, S., Bowers, R., and Kumru, G. 
(2004). An animal model of fetishism. Behaviour Research and Therapy 42: 1421– 34.
Kringelbach, M. L., and Berridge, K. C. (2012). The joyful mind. Scientific American 
307: 40– 45.
Kurtovic, A., Widmer, A., and Dickson, B. J. (2007). A single class of olfactory neurons 
mediates behavioural responses to a Drosophila sex pheromone. Nature 446: 542– 46.
Lande, R. (1981). Models of speciation by sexual selection on polygenic traits. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 78: 3721– 25.
Langstaff, J. M., and Rojankovsky, F. (1955). Frog Went A- Courtin’. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt.

Bibliography • 181
Lardner, B., and bin Lakim, M. (2002). Animal communication: Tree- hole frogs exploit 
resonance effects. Nature 420: 475.
Lea, A. M., and Ryan, M. J. (2015). Irrationality in mate choice revealed by túngara 
frogs. Science 349: 964– 66.
Lehrman, D. S. (1965). Interaction between internal and external environments in the 
regulation of the reproductive cycle of the ring dove. In Beach, F. A., ed., Sex and 
Behavior, 355– 80. New York: Wiley.
Levitin, D. J. (2011). This Is Your Brain on Music: Understanding a Human Obsession. 
London: Atlantic Books.
Lin, H.- H., Cao, D.- S., Sethi, S., Zeng, Z., Chin, J. S., Chakraborty, T. S., Shepherd, 
A. K., et al. (2016). Hormonal modulation of pheromone detection enhances male 
courtship success. Neuron 90: 1272– 85.
Lone, S. R., Venkataraman, A., Srivastava, M., Potdar, S., and Sharma, V. K. (2015). 
Or47b- neurons promote male- mating success in Drosophila. Biology Letters 11. doi: 
10.1098/rsbl.2015.0292.
Lowenstein, L. (2002). Fetishes and their associated behavior. Sexuality and Disability 
20: 135– 47.
Lynch, K. S., Rand, A. S., Ryan, M. J., and Wilczynski, W. (2005). Reproductive state 
influences female plasticity in mate choice. Animal Behaviour 69: 689– 99.
Madden, J. R., and Tanner, K. (2003). Preferences for coloured bower decorations can be 
explained in a nonsexual context. Animal Behaviour 65: 1077– 83.
Magnus, D. (1958). Exerimentelle Untersuchungen zur Bionomie und Ethologie des 
aisermantels Argynnis paphia Girard (Lep. Nymph.). Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie, 
15: 397– 426.
Malthus, T. (1798). An Essay on the Principle of Population, as It Affects the Future Im-
provement of Society with Remarks on the Speculations of Mr. Godwin, M. Condorcet, and 
Other Writers. London: Printed for J. Johnson, in St. Paul’s Church- Yard.
Marcus, S. (2008). The Other Victorians: A Study of Sexuality and Pornography in Mid- 
Nineteenth- Century England. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Marler, P. (1998). Animal communication and human language. In Jablonski, N. G., and 
Aiello, L. C., eds., The Origins and Diversification of Language, 1– 19. San Francisco: 
California Academy of Sciences.
McClintock, M. K. (1971). Menstrual synchrony and suppression. Nature 229: 244– 45.
McConnell, P. B. (1990). Acoustic structure and receiver response in domestic dogs, 
Canis familiaris. Animal Behaviour 39: 897– 904.
McCullough, D. (2001). The Path between the Seas: The Creation of the Panama Canal, 
1870– 1914. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Meierjohann, S., and Schartl, M. (2006). From Mendelian to molecular genetics: The 
Xiphophorus melanoma model. Trends in Genetics 22: 654– 61.
Mello, C., Nottebohm, F., and Clayton, D. (1995). Repeated exposure to one song leads 
to a rapid and persistent decline in an immediate early gene’s response to that song 
in zebra finch telencephalon. Journal of Neuroscience 15: 6919– 25.
Menon, V., and Levitin, D. J. (2005). The rewards of music listening: Response and 
physiological connectivity of the mesolimbic system. Neuroimage 28: 175– 84.
Meyer, M., Kircher, M., Gansauge, M.- T., Li, H., Racimo, F., Mallick, S., Schraiber, 
J. G., et al. (2012). A high- coverage genome sequence from an archaic Denisovan 
individual. Science 338: 222– 26.

182 • Bibliography
Milinski, M. (2003). Perfumes. In Voland, E., and K. Grammer, K., eds., Evolutionary 
Aesthetics, 325– 39. Berlin: Springer.
——— (2006). The major histocompatibility complex, sexual selection, and mate choice. 
Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 37: 159– 86.
Milinski, M., and Wedekind, C. (2001). Evidence for MHC- correlated perfume prefer-
ences in humans. Behavioral Ecology 12: 140– 49.
Miller, G. (2011). The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of Human 
Nature. New York: Anchor.
Mitchell, W. B., DiBartolo, P. M., Brown, T. A., and Barlow, D. H. (1998). Effects of 
positive and negative mood on sexual arousal in sexually functional males. Archives of 
Sexual Behavior 27: 197– 207.
Moen, R. A., Pastor, J., and Cohen, Y. (1999). Antler growth and extinction of Irish elk. 
Evolutionary Ecology Research 1: 235– 49.
Møller, A. P. (1992). Female swallow preference for symmetrical males. Nature 357: 
238– 40.
Møller, A. P., and Swaddle, J. P. (1997). Asymmetry, Developmental Stability and Evolu-
tion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Møller, A. P., and Thornhill, R. (1998). Bilateral symmetry and sexual selection: A meta‐
analysis. American Naturalist 151: 174– 92.
Morton, E. S. (1975). Ecological sources of selection on avian sounds. American Natu-
ralist 109: 17– 34.
——— (1977). On the occurrence and significance of motivation- structural rules in 
some bird and mammal sounds. American Naturalist 111: 855– 69.
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical Review 83: 435– 50.
Nakano, R., Takanashi, T., Skals, N., Surlykke, A., and Ishikawa, Y. (2010). To females 
of a noctuid moth, male courtship songs are nothing more than bat echolocation 
calls. Biology Letters 6: 582– 84.
O’Connor, J. J., Fraccaro, P. J., Pisanski, K., Tigue, C. C., O’Donnell, T. J., and Feinberg, 
D. R. (2014). Social dialect and men’s voice pitch influence women’s mate prefer-
ences. Evolution and Human Behavior 35: 368– 75.
Partridge, L., and Farquhar, M. (1981). Sexual activity reduces lifespan of male fruit 
flies. Nature 294: 580– 82.
Pascoal, S., Cezard, T., Eik- Nes, A., Gharbi, K., Majewska, J., Payne, E., Ritchie, M. G.,  
Zuk, M., and Bailey, N. W. (2014). Rapid convergent evolution in wild crickets. Cur-
rent Biology 24: 1369– 74.
Pennebaker, J., Dyer, M., Caulkins, R., Litowitz, D., Ackreman, P., Anderson, D., and 
McGraw, K. (1979). Don’t the girls get prettier at closing time? A country and west-
ern application to psychology. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 5: 122– 25.
Petrie, M., and Williams, A. (1993). Peahens lay more eggs for peacocks with larger 
trains. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 251: 127– 31.
Pfaff, J. A., Zanette, L., MacDougall- Shackleton, S. A., and MacDougall- Shackleton, 
E. A. (2007). Song repertoire size varies with HVC volume and is indicative of male 
quality in song sparrows (Melospiza melodia). Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 
B: Biological Sciences 274: 2035– 40.
Phelps, S. M., and Ryan, M. J. (1998). Neural networks predict response biases in fe-
male túngara frogs. Proceeding of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 265: 
279– 85.

Bibliography • 183
Prescott, J. W. (2012). Perspective 6: Nurturant versus nonnurturant environments 
and the failure of the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. In Narvaez, D., 
Panksepp, J., Schore, A. N., and Gleason, T. R. eds., Evolution, Early Experience and 
Human Development: From Research to Practice and Policy, 427– 38. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Proctor, H. C. (1992). Sensory exploitation and the evolution of male mating behaviour: 
A cladistic test using water mites (Acari: Parasitengona). Animal Behaviour 44: 745– 52.
Prosen, E. D., Jaeger, R. G., and Lee, D. R. (2004). Sexual coercion in a territorial salaman-
der: Females punish socially polygynous male partners. Animal Behaviour 67: 85– 92.
Rodd, F. H., Hughes, K. A., Grether, G. F., and Baril, C.T. (2002). A possible non- sexual 
origin of mate preference: Are male guppies mimicking fruit? Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B: Biological Sciences 269: 475– 81.
Rodríguez- Brenes, S., Rodriguez, D., Ibáñez, R., and Ryan, M. J. (2016). Amphibian 
chytrid fungus spreads across lowland populations of túngara frogs in Panamá. PLoS 
One 11 (5): e0155745.
Rosenthal, G. G., and Evans, C. S. (1998). Female preference for swords in Xiphophorus 
helleri reflects a bias for large apparent size. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America 85: 4431– 36.
Rothenberg, D. (2012). Survival of the Beautiful: Art, Science, and Evolution. London: 
AandC Black.
Ryan, M. J. (1985). The Túngara Frog: A Study in Sexual Selection and Communication. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
——— (1990). Sensory systems, sexual selection, and sensory exploitation. Oxford Sur-
veys in Evolutionary Biology 7: 157– 95.
——— (2006). Profile: A. Staney Rand (1932– 2005). Iguana 13: 43– 46.
——— (2010). An improbable path. In Drickamer, L., and Dewsbury, D., eds., Leaders 
in Animal Behavior: The Second Generation, 465– 96. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
——— (2011). Sexual selection: A tutorial from the túngara frog. In Losos, J. B., ed., 
In Light of Evolution: Essays from the Laboratory and the Field, 18– 203. Greenwood 
Village, CO: Ben Roberts and Co.
Ryan, M. J., Bernal, X. E., and Rand, A. S. (2010). Female mate choice and the potential 
for ornament evolution in túngara frogs, Physalaemus pustulosus. Current Zoology 56: 
343– 57.
Ryan, M. J., Cocroft, R. B., and Wilczynski, W. (1990). The role of environmental selec-
tion in intraspecific divergence of mate recognition signals in the cricket frog, Acris 
crepitans. Evolution 44: 1869– 72.
Ryan, M. J., and Cummings, M. E. (2013). Perceptual biases and mate choice. Annual 
Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 44: 437– 59.
Ryan, M. J., and Keddy- Hector, A. (1992). Directional patterns of female mate choice 
and the role of sensory biases. American Naturalist 139: S4– S35.
Ryan, M. J., and Rosenthal, G. G. (2001). Variation and selection in swordtails. In Du-
gatkin, L. A., ed., Model Systems in Behavioral Ecology, 133– 48. Princeton, NJ: Prince-
ton University Press.
Ryan, M. J., Warkentin, K. M., McClelland, B. E., and Wilczynski, W. (1995). Fluctu-
ating asymmetries and advertisement call variation in the cricket frog, Acris crepitans. 
Behavioral Ecology 6: 124– 31.

184 • Bibliography
Salmon, C. (2012). The pop culture of sex: An evolutionary window on the worlds of 
pornography and romance. Review of General Psychology 16: 152.
Schiestl, F. P. (2005). On the success of a swindle: Pollination by deception in orchids. 
Naturwissenschaften 92: 255– 64.
Schlupp, I., Marler, C. A., and Ryan, M. J. (1994). Benefit to male sailfin mollies of 
mating with heterospecific females. Science 263: 373– 74.
Searcy, W. A. (1992). Song repertoire and mate choice in birds. American Zoologist 32: 
71– 80.
Sedikides, C., Ariely, D., and Olsen, N. (1999). Contextual and procedural determinants 
of partner selection: Of asymmetric dominance and prominence. Social Cognition 17: 
118– 39.
Seeley, T. D. (2009). The Wisdom of the Hive: The Social Physiology of Honey Bee Colonies. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Seuss, D. (1988). Green Eggs and Ham. New York: Beginner Books / Random House.
Shafir, S., Waite, T. A., and Smith, B. H. (2002). Context- dependent violations of ratio-
nal choice in honeybees (Apis mellifera) and gray jays (Perisoreus canadensis). Behav-
ioral Ecology and Sociobiology 51: 180– 87.
Sigall, H., and Landy, D. (1973). Radiating beauty: Effects of having a physically attrac-
tive partner on person perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 28: 218.
Silver, N. (2012). The Signal and the Noise: Why So Many Predictions Fail— but Some 
Don’t. New York: Penguin.
Simpson, G. G. (1980). Splendid Isolation: The Curious History of South American Mam-
mals. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Slotten, R. A. (2004). The Heretic in Darwin’s Court: The Life of Alfred Russel Wallace. New 
York: Columbia University Press.
Smith, F. (1990). Charles Darwin’s ill health. Journal of the History of Biology 23: 443– 59.
Steblin, R. K. (2002). History of Key Characteristics in the Eighteenth and Early Nineteenth 
Centuries. Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press.
Sugiyama, L. S. (2004). Is beauty in the context- sensitive adaptations of the beholder? 
Shiwiar use of waist- to- hip ratio in assessments of female mate value. Evolution and 
Human Behavior 25: 51– 62.
Taylor, C. R., and Rowntree, V. (1973). Temperature regulation and heat balance in 
running cheetahs: A strategy for sprinters? American Journal of Physiology— Legacy 
Content 224: 848– 51.
Taylor, R., and Ryan, M. (2013). Interactions of multisensory components perceptually 
rescue túngara frog mating signals. Science 341: 273– 74.
ten Cate, C., and Rowe, C. (2007). Biases in signal evolution: Learning makes a differ-
ence. Trends in Ecology and Evolution 22: 380– 87.
ten Cate, C., Verzijden, M. N., and Etman, E. (2006). Sexual imprinting can induce 
sexual preferences for exaggerated parental traits. Current Biology 16: 1128– 32.
Toda, H., Zhao, X., and Dickson, B. J. (2012). The Drosophila female aphrodisiac phero-
mone activates ppk23+ sensory neurons to elicit male courtship behavior. Cell Reports 
1: 599– 607.
Trivers, R. (2011). Deceit and Self- Deception: Fooling Yourself the Better to Fool Others. 
London: Penguin.
Turella, L., Pierno, A. C., Tubaldi, F., and Castiello, U. (2009). Mirror neurons in hu-
mans: Consisting or confounding evidence? Brain and Language 108: 10– 21.

Bibliography • 185
Tuttle, M. (2015). The Secret Lives of Bats: My Adventures with the World’s Most Misun-
derstood Mammals. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Villinger, J., and Waldman, B. (2008). Self- referent MHC type matching in frog tad-
poles. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 275: 1225– 30.
Vollrath, F., and Milinski, M. (1995). Fragrant genes help Damenwahl. Trends in Ecol-
ogy and Evolution 10: 307– 8.
Von Uexküll, J. (2014). Umwelt und Innenwelt der Tiere. Berlin: Springer- Verlag.
Waynforth, D. (2007). Mate choice copying in humans. Human Nature 18: 264– 71.
Weber, E. H. (1978). E. H. Weber: The Sense of Touch. Cambridge: Academic Press.
Wedekind, C., Seebeck, T., Bettens, F., and Paepke, A. J. (1995). MHC- dependent mate 
preferences in humans. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences 
260: 245– 49.
Wilczynski, W., Rand, A. S., and Ryan, M. J. (2001). Evolution of calls and auditory 
tuning in the Physalaemus pustulosus species group. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 58: 
137– 51.
Wiley, R. H. (1973). Territoriality and non- random mating in sage grouse, Centrocercus 
urophasianus. Animal Behaviour Monographs 6: 85– 169.
Wilkinson, G. S., and Reillo, P. R. (1994). Female choice response to artificial selection 
on an exaggerated male trait in a stalk- eyed fly. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Lon-
don B: Biological Sciences 255: 1– 6.
Winegard, B. M., Winegard, B., and Geary, D. C. (2013). If you’ve got it, flaunt it: 
Humans flaunt attractive partners to enhance their status and desirability. PLoS One 
8: e72000.
Wolf, N. (2003). The porn myth. New York Magazine, October 20.
Wyrobek, A. J., Eskenazi, B., Young, S., Arnheim, N., Tiemann- Boege, I., Jabs, E., Gla-
ser, R. L., Pearson, F. S., and Evenson, D. (2006). Advancing age has differential 
effects on DNA damage, chromatin integrity, gene mutations, and aneuploidies in 
sperm. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
103: 9601– 6.
Wyttenbach, R. A., May, M. L., and Hoy, R. R. (1996). Categorical perception of sound 
frequency by crickets. Science 273: 1542– 44.
Yeung, C., Anapolski, M., Depenbusch, M., Zitzmann, M., and Cooper, T. (2003). 
Human sperm volume regulation: Response to physiological changes in osmolality, 
channel blockers and potential sperm osmolytes. Human Reproduction 18: 1029– 36.
Yoshizawa, K., Ferreira, R. L., Kamimura, Y., and Lienhard, C. (2014). Female penis, 
male vagina, and their correlated evolution in a cave insect. Current Biology 24: 
1006– 10.
Zahavi, A. (1975). Mate selection: A selection for a handicap. Journal of Theoretical Bi-
ology 53: 205– 14.
Zahavi, A., and Zahavi, A. (1997). The Handicap Principle: A Missing Piece of Darwin’s 
Puzzle. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zuk, M., Rotenberry, J. T., and Tinghitella, R. M. (2006). Silent night: Adaptive disap-
pearance of a sexual signal in a parasitized population of field crickets. Biology Letters 
2: 521– 24.


Index
abstinence, 132
acacia, 16
accessories, 2, 70
accident, 86, 103
accoutrements, 17, 159
acrobatics, 99
Adagio pour Cordes, 103
addiction, 51, 76, 162, 165– 166
adobe, 95
adorned, 6, 158
adulation, 105, 107, 109, 111, 113, 115, 117, 
119, 121, 123, 125
advantage, 21– 22, 30, 55, 57, 62, 66– 67, 72, 89, 
131– 133, 137, 151, 156
aeronautics, 62
aesthetics, 3– 4, 7, 12, 17, 19– 21, 27– 30, 33, 
34– 42, 45– 46, 48– 49, 54– 55, 58– 59, 61– 63, 
65, 66, 69, 71, 74– 76, 80– 82, 114, 118– 120, 
125– 126, 129, 133, 139, 141, 146, 149, 153, 
159, 167, 169– 170
Africa, 23
agoutis, 16
Akre, Karin, 49
Alaska, 121
Albanach Bar, 100
Albinoni’s Adagio in G minor, 103
alcohol, 128– 129, 133
Alexander, Tony, 79
algae, 10, 60
alien, 112, 117
alleles, 117
alphabets, 57– 58, 72
Amazon, 17, 31, 98, 139
Amazon molly, 136– 138
amphetamines, 51
amphibian, 28, 109, 112
amphitheater, 95, 96
amplitude, 29, 86, 93, 95– 97, 101
Anacardiaceae, 122
anaerobic, 26
ancestor, 31, 42, 45, 55, 114, 149
Andersson, Malte, 65
Andes, 31
Andrea Doria, 25
Animal Weapons: The Evolution of Battle, 9
animations, 61
Anna’s hummingbird, 98– 99
ANNs (artificial neural networks), 67– 68
anosmic, 28, 36
Antarctic Peninsula, 14
antennae, 38, 108, 110, 114
anthropogenic, 86
anthropologist, 139– 140
antibiotics, 114
antisocial, 165
antlers, 7, 11, 41, 48
aphrodisiac, 45
appendages, 126
appetite, 45, 132, 164
Arabic, 58
Arak, Antony 68
arboreal, 122
architects, 95
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 103
arena, 4, 71, 131, 163
Argentina, 121
arias, 7
Ariely, Dan, 144
Armalite, 64
aroma, 105, 107, 109, 111, 113, 115, 117, 119, 
121– 123, 125
arousal, 103
arsenal, 93
artist, 58, 69– 70, 72, 159
artwork, 70
Asia, 93, 117
Asian corn borer, 93– 94
assemblage, 54
assessment, 4
asteroid, 14
asylum, 142
asymmetric, 66
asymmetrically dominated decoy, 143– 144
asymmetry, 65– 66, 68

188 • Index
Asymmetry, Developmental Stability and Evo-
lution, 68
Atelopus varius, 78
atmosphere, 86, 108
attractant, 113
attractiveness, 11, 20, 66, 70, 72, 119, 126, 128, 
130, 134, 138– 141, 145– 147, 158– 159, 164
audience, 69, 86, 96, 139, 159
auditory, 27– 29, 34, 38, 40, 45, 64, 78, 80– 81, 
85, 88, 92
Australia, 96, 128, 158
autumn, 54
avenue, 73, 109, 164
avian, 99
aviaries, 158
bacteria, 93, 114
badge, 150
bagpiper, 100, 102, 121
Bailey, Nathan, 84
Balboa, 15, 121
bandits, 64
bandwidth, 113
Barbie, 160– 161
barfly, 112
baritone, 21, 85
Barlow, David, 103
Barro Colorado Island (BCI), 15– 17, 23– 24, 52
barroom, 129
bartender, 163
baseball, 46, 64, 166
basil, 123
basilar papilla, 28
Basolo, Alexandra, 41– 42
beads, 70
beak, 47– 48, 63, 75, 98– 99, 150
bedroom, 77
beehives, 111
beer, 15, 118, 128– 129
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 139
beholder, 3– 4, 19, 33, 66, 128, 149, 169
Belgium, 56
Berridge, Kent, 51
Beyoncé, 142
bilaterally, 65
bin Lakim, Maklarin, 97
biomechanical, 26, 63
biophysics, 21
birdcalls, 86
birders, 9
birdsong, 88, 101, 111
Birkhoff, George 58
bivouacs, 16
blackbird, 150– 151, 153, 155
bladders, 98
blending, 113
blindness, 77
Blood, Anne, 103
bluesy, 102
blush, 56
boas, 16
Boddaert, Pieter, 64
bookie, 143
booze, 112
boozing, 111
Bornean tree- hole frog, 97
Borneo, 97
Bostwick, Kim, 99– 100
boudoir, 71
bouquet, 36, 112, 114, 118, 123
bower, 7, 70– 71, 73– 74
bowerbirds, 7, 70– 74, 155
Bowery Boys, 82
brain, 3– 4, 9, 12, 17, 19, 21, 23, 26– 30, 32– 35, 
37– 41, 43– 52, 57– 59, 61, 67– 69, 71– 76, 78, 
80– 81, 85, 89, 91– 92, 100, 102– 103, 105, 
108– 111, 114– 115, 123, 126, 139, 147, 149, 
157, 159, 164– 166, 169– 170
Brain and Addiction, 166
Brazil, 10, 31, 98
bromeliads, 122
Brooklyn, 82
Bruns, Volkmar, 25
Bündchen, Gisele,161
Burda, Hynek, 25
Burley, Nancy, 158
Burr, Chandler, 123
butterflies, 2, 16, 38, 40, 61– 64, 71
buttresses, 121
bystanders, 140
cabbage looper, 114
Cabernet Sauvignon, 114
calcium, 7
calculus, 6
California, 59, 99, 115
camels, 101
camera, 20
canaries, 7– 8, 12, 81– 82
cancer, 40
candidate, 21
cane toad, 158

Index • 189
canine, 101
canopy, 9, 15, 17, 25, 55, 121– 122
capitalism, 109
Capranica, Robert, 28
captive, 139, 158
Cardioderma cor, 64
Caribbean, 14
carotenoids, 2
Carson, Rachel, 79
cartilages, 111
categorical, 140
categories, 74, 92, 128, 170
caterpillar, 114
cattle, 7, 70, 106
cave, 10, 70
cavity, 74, 97
Chagres, 15
Chan Chan, 95
Chanel, 69, 112
Chanel’s Coco Mademoiselle, 112
Changizi, Mark, 56– 58
Chatterjee, Aanjan, 74
cheetah, 1, 23, 26
Cheng, Mae, 90
Chimor, 95– 97
chimpanzee, 70
China, 37, 97
chivalrous, 111
chooser, 11, 16, 27, 38, 40– 41, 43– 44, 46, 48, 
59, 61– 62, 67– 69, 74, 81, 83, 85, 87, 89, 92, 
96, 100, 113, 116– 119, 126, 149– 150, 153, 
156– 157, 161, 167, 169
choosey, 131
chorus, 7, 16– 18, 22, 103
chuck, 20, 29, 38
chytrid, 79, 121
cicada, 96, 98
cichlid, 73, 143
Cinderella Castle, The, 73
circuitry, 3, 27
circuits, 30, 167
circulation, 56
Clark, Chris, 99
climate, 14, 114
cloaca, 90, 162– 163
coatis, 16
cocktail, 39
Coco Mademoiselle, 112
codeine, 50
cognitive, 4, 26– 27, 30, 45– 46, 48– 49, 51, 63, 
67– 68, 74, 94, 155, 170
cohabit, 136, 150
coherent, 74
Cole, Cheryl, 142
Cole, Gemma, 154
cologne, 17, 119
Colombia, 14, 121
coloration, 151, 153– 154
colorful, 14, 45, 59, 100, 158
compatible, 40– 41
competition, 8, 13, 20, 132, 140– 141
competitive decoy, 143
competitors, 82
complexity, 46, 58– 59, 71
component, 5, 29, 39, 50, 114– 115, 122, 158
composite, 139
cone, 54– 56
connectivity, 30
connoisseur, 102
conscience, 103
consciously, 118
conspecific, 27– 28, 40– 41, 44, 81
conspicuous, 17, 78, 153, 155, 157– 158
constraint, 3, 23, 36– 37, 63, 138
consumers, 18, 143, 147, 157, 160
context, 20, 38, 43– 45, 91, 119– 120, 136, 140, 
142, 147, 153, 156
continents, 13– 14
contraceptive, 119– 120
cooperation, 90
Coors Light, 143
copepods, 94
Copernicus, 5
copulation, 10, 134, 163
copycats, 135– 136
coral, 7, 40
Cornell, 28, 99
correlated, 30, 50, 56, 118, 151– 154, 166
correlation, 67, 118, 166
cortex, 166
costly, 42– 44, 83, 123, 155
courters, 11, 16, 27, 38– 39, 41, 44, 48, 61– 62, 
66, 68, 71, 81– 83, 85– 87, 92, 96, 100, 113, 
116– 118, 126, 134, 147, 149– 150, 153, 157, 
167, 169
Courtiol, Alexandre, 143, 175, 178
courtship, 2, 6– 7, 38– 39, 45– 46, 59– 62, 69, 
75, 77, 81, 86, 88, 90– 94, 96, 98– 101, 104, 
110– 111, 118, 122, 126, 131– 132, 154, 156, 
158, 162
cowboy, 127
crab, 11, 66, 74, 157

190 • Index
creaker, 98
crests, 158
cricket, 2, 7, 21, 35, 37– 38, 40, 66, 77, 81,  
83– 86, 88, 91– 92, 96, 98, 131
criquer, 98
crocodiles, 109
Crystal, Billy, 51
Cui, Juanguo, 97
Cummings, Molly, 59– 60, 157
cyberneticist, 34
damselflies, 11
dancer, 118
Daphne, 107
Darién, 79, 121
Darwin, Charles, 1, 4– 8, 55– 56, 75, 170
Darwinian, 22, 27, 30, 41, 51, 142, 165
Dawkins, Richard, 69
Day, Laney, 71
deafness, 77
deceit, 129
deception, 129
deceptive orchids, 43– 44, 122
decorations, 70– 73
decoy, 143– 147
decrepit, 129
Dene, 58
denizens, 60
deodorants, 119
Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to Sex, 
The, 6
detectable, 74
detection, 43, 60– 63, 123
detectors, 29, 56, 74, 108
diabolically, 84
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM), 162, 165
dialect, 82– 83, 109
Diamond, Jared, 70– 72
Dingle Peninsula, 35
disease, 7, 117, 126, 150
dishabituate, 46, 87
Disney, Walt, 72– 73
disperse, 122
displacement, 5, 48, 63, 156
dissonance, 127– 128, 131
dissonant, 128
diversity, 3, 8, 12, 35, 59, 72, 79, 117, 122, 169
doll, 71, 160– 161
dominance, 142
Domjan, Michael, 162– 164
“Don’t the Girls All Get Prettier at Closin’ 
Time,” 127
dopamine, 50– 52, 76, 91, 104, 164– 165
Doppler effect, 107
Dracula, 34
Drosophila melanogaster, 131
duet, 54, 90
Dugatkin, Lee, 135, 137
duped, 94
dupes, 43
duration, 20, 29, 37
eardrum, 78, 80
earless, 78
Easton, Judith, 130
eavesdropper, 23, 84
eavesdropping, 43, 133
echolocation, 24– 26, 34– 35, 37, 93
economists, 142
Ecuador, 31, 139
Eden, 109
Edinburgh, 100, 121
Eine kleine Nachtmusik, 103
Einstein, Albert, 5
Eire, 115
El Duque Reserve, 98
electrodermal, 102
electrodes, 26– 27, 50
electromagnetic, 28, 36
electronically, 20
elephant, 11, 14, 36, 64, 113
Elle, 69, 133
embellishments, 9
Embera, 121
embryo, 11
emergence, 47
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 53
Emlen, Doug, 9
emotion, 56– 57, 81, 101– 102, 110, 166
Emperor of Scent, 123
Endler, John, 73, 154
endowed, 42, 53, 66, 149– 150
energetic, 54, 84, 131
energy, 20, 23, 36, 81, 84, 97, 107, 137, 155
enfleurage, 122
England, 54, 86, 161
Enquist, Magnus, 68, 173, 179
eponymous, 66, 97
erect, 6, 74, 99, 100, 134, 157
erection, 103, 166
escalate, 22, 90

Index • 191
Espavel, 122
Essay on the Principle of Populations, 5
estradiol, 91– 92
estrogen, 90, 92
etchings, 35, 70
eugenicist, 118
Euglossa viridisima, 122
eutrophication, 116
Evan and Jaron, 142
Everly Brothers, 95
evolution, 2– 6, 8, 10, 12 22– 26, 30, 41– 42, 
 44– 45, 47– 49, 54– 56, 58– 59, 61, 63– 65, 67, 
69, 73, 75, 87, 101, 114, 147, 19, 151– 157, 
159, 167, 169– 170
evolutionary psychology, 129, 138, 141, 161
Ewert, Jörg- Peter, 57
Extended Phenotype, The, 69
exploitation, 3, 32, 41– 44, 56, 149, 155
exponentially, 50
extinction, 7, 14, 79, 153, 163– 164
eyespots, 6
facial, 26, 51, 164
feminizes, 93
fertility, 89, 129– 130, 160
fertilization, 10, 18, 21, 40, 137, 151
fertilize, 10– 11, 18, 21, 30, 129– 130, 136
fertilizing, 11
fetish, 162– 164
fetishism, 162, 165
fickle, 4, 126– 127, 129, 131, 133, 135, 137, 
139, 141, 143, 145– 147
fiddler crabs, 11, 66, 74, 157
fidelity, 112
filter, 37, 46, 84
finch, 47– 48, 63, 75, 82, 88, 143, 150, 156, 158
fins, 159
firefly, 7, 167
firmly, 30
Fisher, Heidi, 116
Fisher, Ronald, 152
fitness, 23, 30, 41, 51, 57, 142, 156
flapper, 62
flatulence, 109
flea, 10
flehmen, 109
Flibanserin, 51
flicker, 61– 62
Florida, 17, 122
fluctuating, 65– 66
fluctuations, 80
fMRI, 104, 164, 166
football, 143, 170
foraging, 45, 55, 61, 72, 110, 145, 154– 156
Forbes, 161
formants, 21
Fortuna, 78– 79
fragrance, 39, 106, 118– 119, 122– 124, 169
frequency, 21, 24– 25, 28– 32, 36– 37, 58, 80– 81, 
85– 87, 92, 96– 97, 101– 102, 150– 151
Frijoles, 15
fringe- lipped bat, 23– 24
fritillary, 61– 63
frog, 3– 4, 7– 8, 12– 13, 15– 32, 37– 42, 49, 52, 
59, 64, 66– 67, 77– 79, 81– 84, 86– 88, 91, 
94– 97, 99, 103, 120– 122, 130– 132, 143, 
146– 147, 157, 159
frog- eating bat, 15, 23– 25, 28, 37, 49, 67, 88
froggy, 17, 22
froglets, 19
fruit, 45, 52, 54– 56, 71, 110, 135, 153– 154
fruit fly, 8, 38– 39, 55– 56, 110, 113, 131– 132
fruitless, 110, 132
functional connectivity, 30
fungus, 79, 121
Galambos, Robert, 34
gambler, 143
gamete, 9– 10, 19, 22, 39
Gatun, 15
Gaye, Marvin, 142
gazelle, 1, 23
gender, 9, 47, 56, 81, 85, 128, 143, 145, 160, 
164, 170
gene, 2, 5– 8, 18, 27, 29, 39– 41, 44, 66, 68– 69, 
75, 81, 84– 88, 91, 110– 113, 116– 120, 124, 
126, 131– 133, 137, 150– 152, 154– 155
generalization, 45– 48
genetic, 5, 8, 39– 40, 44, 66, 68– 69, 84– 85, 89, 
117, 120, 130, 149– 150, 152
genetically, 68
Genetical Theory of Natural Selection, The, 152
genius, 107
genome, 37, 39, 59, 117
genomics, 117
geographer, 70
germs, 70
gestalt, 154
gift, 54, 118
Gilley, Mickey, 127– 128, 131
Givenchy, 112
Glendale.com, 112

192 • Index
glomeruli, 110
gluttony, 50, 56
goal, 7, 16, 23, 120, 163
gonopodium, 158
Gore, Al, 24
Gould, Jim, 159
government, 14, 148
grackle, 46, 88
gradient, 108, 113
grail, 58
grapes, 72
grassfinch, 158
grasslands, 31
gratification, 2, 139, 162, 164
graveyard, 59
grayscale, 45
greasers, 95– 97
Great Tits, 86– 87
Green Eggs and Ham, 148
Griffin, Donald, 24– 25, 34
grizzly bear, 72
groundbreaking, 65, 123
grouse, 40, 134– 135
guano, 10
guayaberas, 15
guayacan, 15
Guerlain, 112
Guinness, 15
guitar, 85
gulls, 35
Guna, 121
gunboat, 14
gunrunners, 64
Guns, Germs, and Steel, 70
guppy, 2, 11, 73, 131, 135– 136, 153– 157,  
159
Gurhmiki, 58
Gwen, 142
habitat, 23, 83, 86
habituate, 46, 87– 88
hairstylists, 69
Halfwerk, Wouter, 87
handicap, 44
hares, 23
harlequin, 78
harmony, 95
Hartshorne, Charles, 88
Haselton, Martie, 129– 130
hats, 158
Hawaiian, 84– 85
Heath, Robert, 50
heather, 60
hedonic, 50, 76
hemorrhage, 65
Henrich, Joe, 139
herbivores, 16, 54
herd, 70, 120
heroin, 50
heron, 1
herpetologist, 97
Hertz, 24, 36, 61
heterosexual, 169– 170
heterospecific, 27, 29, 40, 81, 116
Higgins, Henry, 82
high- fashion, 69
hijacked, 72, 76, 165
Hill, Sarah, 138, 140
hilltops, 15
Hilton, Donald, 166– 167
hindbrain, 29
History of Key Characteristics in the 18th and 
Early 19th Centuries, A, 102
hitchhike, 151
Hobbits, 72
Hoke, Kim, 29
Holly, Buddy 95
homophone, 83
hormonal, 81, 120
hormone, 17, 84, 89– 91, 102, 119– 120, 129
hotspots, 121
howler, 1, 16, 54– 56, 96
Hubel, David, 57
hues, 54– 55
humans, 2, 4, 6– 7, 9, 14, 17, 21– 23, 26– 27, 48, 
52, 54, 57– 58, 62– 63, 66– 67,  70– 71,  76– 77, 
82– 83, 94, 96, 99, 109– 110, 118– 119, 
123– 124, 127, 129– 131, 138– 141, 143,  
145, 147, 164– 165, 167, 169– 170
Humboldt, Alexander von, 6, 54
humdrum, 86
Hume, David, 33
humic, 116
hummingbirds, 98– 100, 145
hunger, 94
HVc, 89
hybridization, 115
hybrids, 40, 116
hypnosis, 24
hypochondriac, 6

Index • 193
hypothesis, 22, 67, 88, 115, 128– 129, 141, 149, 
152, 154
Ian, Janis, 116
Ideen zu einer Aesthetik der Tonkunst, 102
idiosyncrasies, 170
iguanas, 16
illusion, 72– 73
imagination, 94, 166
imitation, 70, 166
immune, 89, 117, 120
Inca, 95
indicator, 29, 44, 67, 70, 120
indigenous, 121
indirect genetic benefits, 85, 89
indirect selection, 151– 152
infancy, 56
infants, 75, 101
infected, 79, 93, 150
infrared, 20, 36
infrasound, 36
inmates, 142
inner embryo, 11
inner ear, 25, 27– 29, 37, 59, 78, 80– 81
innovation, 63
inseminate, 158
Interamerican Highway, 121
intercourse, 66
Internet, 24, 166
intestine, 160– 161
intimacy, 86
intransitive, 143
intransitivity, 142– 143
intromission, 162
intromittent, 137, 162
intruder, 78, 108
intuitive, 145
invade, 14
invasion, 79, 117
inventions, 7
investment, 18, 22, 27, 40, 159, 162
Iraq, 148
Ireland, 35, 60, 64
iridescent, 6, 9, 54
Irises, 54
irrational, 125, 142, 144
Isthmus of Panama, 14, 121
jacana, 11
Japan, 65
Johnson, Eddie, 82
Jones, James Earl, 21
judgment, 103, 127– 128
jungle, 70, 121
Juslin, Patrik, 102
kale, 114
kaleidoscope, 60
Katz’s Deli, 51
Keller, Helen, 77, 105
kelp, 59– 60, 115
Kenya, 11, 64
kingdom, 3– 4, 10, 18, 32, 35, 45, 52, 73, 134, 
147
Kinongop Plateau, 65
kinship, 120
Kintz, Jarod, 140
Kipsigis, 11
Kirkpatrick, Mark, 143, 152
Kuhn, Thomas, 32
Kyoto, 65
lactic, 83
lager, 143
Lamborghini, 70
Lande, Russ, 152
Landy, David 139, 141
language, 56
Lardner, Björn, 97
larvae, 84, 93, 158
larynx, 21– 22, 80
Lea, Amanda, 146– 147
Legally Blonde, 133
Lehrman, Danny, 90
leks, 134
leopard, 26
Levitin, Dan, 104
libido, 51– 52
lice, 10– 11, 150
lichen, 10
lightning, 106, 114– 115
likelihood, 49
limbs, 26
lineage, 57
linkage, 104, 110, 118
lipids, 122
liver, 160– 161
lizards, 16
lobe, 110, 113
location, 29, 34, 78, 107– 108, 157

194 • Index
locomotion, 101
logic, 4, 8, 22, 30– 31, 109, 152
Lombard Effect, 87
Louisiana, 112
Lowenstein, L. F., 162
lowland, 79
lust, 29, 142, 162
Luxembourg, 5
Lynch, Kathleen, 130– 131
macaws, 121
MacDougall- Shackleton, Elizabeth, 88– 89
MacDougall- Shackleton, Scott, 88– 89
macroglomerular, 110, 114
Madden, Joah, 71– 72
Magnus, D.E.B., 61– 62
major histocompatibility complex (MHC), 
117
maladaptive, 44, 137, 156, 164
malady, 6, 50
malaise, 6
malaria, 14, 16
Malbec, 114
Malthus, Thomas, 5
mammal, 2, 14, 18, 21, 28, 31, 34– 35, 38,  
40– 41, 54– 55, 64, 95, 101, 109– 110, 113
Manakin, 99
Maney, Donna, 91
Mangyan, 58
mantled howler monkey, 54
mantra, 104, 128
marijuana, 133
marital, 112, 120
marketplace, 6, 8, 11, 18– 20, 48, 84, 131, 134, 
144, 146, 155, 157, 160
Marler, Cathy, 137
Marler, Peter, 77, 88
martial, 100
mascot, 6
masculinized, 9
masked, 4, 42, 116
masturbate, 165
mate choice, 59, 69, 118, 126
mate choice copying, 133, 135– 141, 145, 153
Matisse, 7, 71
Max Planck Institute, 123
McClintock, Martha, 118
McConnell, Patricia, 101
McGill, 103– 104
McMaster, 83
meal, 1, 25, 35, 49, 84, 88, 153
mechanism, 26, 35, 47– 48, 123, 165
melanoma, 40
melody, 46, 89
membrane, 27, 109
Meno, Vinod, 104
menopause, 130
merengue, 19
mesolimbic reward system , 103, 110
metabolic, 23
metabolism, 26
metronome, 39
Mexico, 31, 115, 136
MHC (major histocompatibility locus), 
 117– 121, 123– 124
microorganism, 79
milieu, 81, 120
Milinski, Manfred, 120, 123– 124
millennia, 7, 23, 155, 167
Miller, Geoffrey, 118
mimic, 61, 67, 94, 99, 149
Missouri, 141
mites, 94
mirror neurons, 166– 167
Moche, 95
mockingbirds, 87
modality, 28, 36, 38– 40, 45, 59, 76, 105, 107, 
169
mold, 100
Møller, Anders, 65– 66, 68
Mona Lisa, 19
monochromatic, 54
monotony, 88
monsters, 95
monstrosity, 6
Morocco, 86
morphine, 50
morpho butterflies, 16
morphology, 2, 21, 34, 93, 100, 111, 120
Morse code, 86
mortality, 132
Morton, Eugene, 86, 101– 102, 173– 174, 182
mosquito, 158– 159
moth, 2, 35, 38, 40, 92, 93, 108, 110, 113– 114, 
132, 165
motherese, 101
motivation, 101– 102
motor neurons, 166
mountain, 9, 78– 79, 107, 115– 116, 121, 153
mountaintops, 78
movie, 61, 73, 133
Mozart, 103

Index • 195
mucous membrane, 109
multibillion, 166
multimodal, 38– 39
Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 99
mushrooms, 71
musician, 96, 159
musk, 35
mutant, 38, 84, 114– 115, 132
mutation, 62, 84– 86, 130, 149, 153, 155
muted, 93
My Fair Lady, 82
mythology, 106, 136
Nagel, Thomas, 34– 36
Nairobi, 65
Nakano, Ryo, 93
nanometers, 28, 36, 55
National Geographic, 24
natural selection, 4– 8, 12, 62, 70, 152
Neanderthal, 117
nectar, 43
nectary, 98
neighbor, 82, 88, 108, 120
neighborhood, 108
nematodes, 16
nemesis, 26
nestling, 47, 90
Netherlands, 87
netherworld, 146
neuroaesthetics, 74, 76
neurobiologists, 25
neurobiology, 102
neurochemical, 164– 165
neuroethologist, 57
neurogeneticist, 88
neuron, 27, 29, 37– 38, 40, 64, 67– 68, 80, 88, 
92, 110– 111, 114– 115, 132, 165– 167
neurophysiology, 26, 29
neuroscience, 4, 65, 165, 169
neuroscientist, 56, 71, 74
neurotransmitter, 50, 52
Newark, 90
New Guinea, 70
New Jerseyans, 82
nightingales, 46, 87
Nobel Prize, 57
nocturnal, 7, 16, 24, 55, 93
noise, 29, 37, 46, 60, 68, 86– 87, 159
nonlinear, 27
norepinephrine, 52, 91
nostrils, 109
novel, 68, 147, 158– 159
nucleus, 29, 37
nucleus accumbens, 91, 103
nurture, 11, 75, 129, 141
Oahu, 84
Oaxacan, 54
O’Connor, Jillian, 83, 85
odiferous, 115
odor, 2, 8, 17, 28– 29, 36, 38, 43, 107– 116, 
118– 124, 132
odorant, 113
olfaction, 36, 110, 123
olfactory, 4, 28, 34– 36, 38– 40, 45, 107– 116, 
124, 132
On the Origin of Species, 5, 7
opioid, 50
opium, 50
opsin, 75
optic, 62
oral, 119– 120
orchid, 43– 44, 121– 123, 137, 156
orgasm, 51, 66, 165
orgasmic, 51, 162
orgy, 13, 17– 18, 131
origins, 82, 124
Ormia, 84
ornamentation, 129– 130, 135
ornithologist, 86, 88, 158
ornithology, 99
ORNs, 132
ovulation, 120, 129
oysters, 45
Pacino, Al, 107
Page, Rachel, 25
pamphlet, 109, 141
Panama, 9, 13– 15, 17, 19– 20, 31, 54, 78– 79, 
86, 121
Panamax, 15
paradigm, 4, 32, 58, 170
paradigm shift, 4, 32, 58
paradox, 22, 25, 134– 136
parasite, 16, 43, 84, 117, 150– 152, 156– 157
parsimony, 31, 42
pathogens, 117
pathway, 43, 111
Pavlov, 163
Pavlovian, 162
peacock, 1– 2, 6– 8, 12, 26, 44, 63, 126, 155
peahen, 2, 6, 26, 126

196 • Index
peak shift displacement, 48, 63– 64, 156
pendulant, 48
penile, 162, 166
penis, 9– 10, 18, 90, 103, 137, 158, 162
Pennebaker, Jamie, 128
percept, 4, 33, 37, 44, 49, 74– 76, 81,105, 119, 
127, 129, 136, 142, 147, 170
perception, 34, 39, 41, 48, 55, 61, 66, 72, 74, 
77, 128, 143, 156
perceptual, 27– 28, 67, 72– 74, 81, 94, 144, 155
Percodan, 50
perfume, 1– 2, 7, 17, 112, 118– 119, 122– 124, 
159
perfumeries, 122– 123
perspective, 3, 73– 74, 87, 136, 170
perspiration, 15
Peru, 31, 94, 963
pest, 93, 114, 158
petals, 35, 67
petra, 106
petrichor, 106
phantom decoy, 146– 147
pharmaceuticals, 51
pharmacopeia, 2
Phelps, Steve, 67, 79
phenotype, 69– 70, 74, 94, 96, 117, 122, 133, 
145, 157
pheromone, 38, 109– 110, 113– 115, 118, 165
philosopher, 32, 34, 88, 142
phonemes, 38
phonetic, 58
phonotaxis, 20, 30
photopigments, 33, 45
photoreceptors, 36, 54, 56, 60, 75
physiological, 23, 56, 89, 91, 102, 147
physiology, 89, 91, 111, 118
physique, 17, 70, 160
pianos, 87
pigeon, 89– 90, 140, 143
pigment, 55
pill, 119– 120
pillars, 74
piñata, 9
pinlike, 134
pitcher, 64
planet, 34, 77, 106, 108
plasmodia, 16
Platonic, 169
Platters, 95
platyfish, 39, 41– 42, 149
playhouse, 71
Pleistocene, 161
plumage, 9, 134, 143
poker, 71, 154
politician, 95
pollen, 43
pollinate, 35, 43, 67, 114
pollination, 122
pollinators, 43
Pollock, Jackson, 45, 55
pollster, 46
pollution, 68
pond, 17– 18, 80
porn, 103, 165– 167
pornography, 4, 161– 162, 164– 167
pornotopia, 76, 148, 161– 162, 165
portals, 35
portfolios, 70
positron, 103
predation, 8, 42, 87, 120
predator, 11, 16, 19, 43, 46, 84, 92– 94, 98, 113, 
126, 137, 153, 155, 157– 158
predetermined, 7
Predictably Irrational, 144
predisposed, 154
preexisting, 32, 41, 58
preference, 21– 22, 26– 27, 29– 30, 40, 42, 
44, 48– 49, 59, 62, 64– 68, 74– 75, 82, 85, 
 115– 116, 119, 135, 137– 138, 143, 146, 
 149– 157, 159, 161, 164, 170
prefrontal cortex, 166
pregnancy, 120
prehistorical, 95
preindustrial, 161
prey, 23, 60, 126, 145
priest, 34, 95
primate, 45, 47, 55– 56, 109
Proctor, Heather, 94
prolactin, 90
promiscuity, 159
proportion, 115, 136
protégés, 90
proteins, 111
proxies, 141
psychiatrist, 50
psychologist, 90, 102, 129, 138– 139, 144, 
161– 162
psychology, 102, 128, 138, 141, 165, 169
psychophysicists, 48
puddles, 16, 18– 19
Pulitzer Prize, 70
pulse, 86

Index • 197
pupal, 131
puzzle, 34
Pygmalion, 82
quail, 162– 164
questionnaire, 139
quetzal, 9, 12, 54– 55
rabbitlike, 16
raccoons, 16
radar, 56, 107, 149, 159, 161
rainbow, 35, 53, 60, 115, 170
rainforest, 79, 26, 52, 54
rainstorm, 121
rainwater, 97
Rand, Stan, 16– 17, 31, 78– 79, 94– 95, 143
rationality, 143
ratios, 48, 113, 115
rattles, 6
receiver, 101– 102, 107– 108, 113– 114
reception, 65, 108
receptor, 33, 38– 39, 50, 56, 59, 107– 111,  
115– 116, 123, 132, 154, 164
recognition, 43, 57, 67, 110, 113– 115, 140
red- backed salamander, 112
Reed, Lou, 56
reef, 7, 40
refracted, 35
refraction, 170
reinforcement, 51, 165
relationships, 29, 114, 140, 142, 162
relativity, 5
renegade model, 69, 94
repertoire, 3, 46, 82, 87– 89, 138, 169
replicators, 69
reproduction, 5, 7, 11, 18, 36, 43, 47, 89, 92, 
120, 129– 131, 136, 162
reptiles, 109
resonance, 97, 104
resonant, 80, 95, 97
resonators, 96
respiration, 102
Resplendent Quetzal, 9
retina, 33, 36, 45, 54, 57, 72
reversed, 62– 63, 113, 119, 135, 154
revolution, 32, 56
rhythmic, 121
ringdove, 89– 91, 103, 129
ritual, 1– 2, 45
roaches, 131
roar, 21, 77
robins, 81
Rodd, Helen, 153– 154
rodent, 16, 51, 118– 119
Rodriguez, Sofia, 79
Rogers, Kenny, 142
romance, 103, 123
Romans, 95
Roosevelt, Teddy, 14
Rosenthal, Gil, 59, 115
Rothenberg, David, 58
Rumsfeld, Donald, 148
runaway sexual selection, 152
runways, 69
Rutgers, 90
Ryan, Emma, 54, 142
Ryan, Lucy, 142
Ryan, Meg, 51
sabermetrician, 46
sage, 40, 134– 135
sagebrush, 134
sailfin molly, 136– 138
salesperson, 144, 147
salience, 51, 91, 165
salient, 124
Salmon, Catherine, 162
San Blas, 121
savanna, 23, 26
saxophone, 85
scalpel, 19
scam, 117
scarlet letter, 150
scent, 104, 107, 112– 113, 114, 118, 123
Schlupp, Ingo, 59, 137
Schubart, Christian, 102– 103
scraper, 21, 84, 98
screech, 46
seagull, 35
seahorses, 11
Sechura Desert, 94
secondary sexual characters, 7
secretion, 102
Secret Lives of Bats: My Adventures with the 
World’s Most Misunderstood Mammals, The, 64
Sedikides, Constantine, 144
Selfish Gene, The, 69
selfish herd, 120
sender, 107
sensation, 30, 35, 103, 105
sensitive, 5, 25, 28, 36– 38, 45, 55, 57, 94,  
108– 109, 118, 132– 133, 157

198 • Index
sensory, 3– 4, 19, 26– 28, 30, 34– 38, 40– 45, 51, 
53, 55– 56, 59, 71, 75– 76, 94, 107, 115, 135, 
147, 155, 169
sensory bias, 44, 71, 81, 135
sensory drive, 32, 45
sensory exploitation, 3, 32, 41, 43– 44, 155, 165
Sensory Exploitation and Cultural Attractors, 56
serotonin, 52
serpent, 109
Seuss, Dr., 148
sex role reversal, 10, 102
Sexuality and Disability, 162
sexual selection, 4, 6, 8, 10– 12, 21– 22, 30, 32, 
62, 65– 67, 104, 140, 152
Sexual Selection, 65
Shalimar, 112
sharklike, 159
sheaths, 17
Shiwiar, 139
shortfin molly, 136
siblings, 120
Sigall, Harold, 139, 141
signal, 21, 29, 37, 38, 42– 43, 46, 58, 60, 87– 88, 
91, 93– 94, 101– 102, 107– 109, 111, 113– 114, 
125, 157, 160
Signal and the Noise, The, 46
silkworm, 108
Sinatra, Frank, 142
Silver, Nate, 46
Slabbekoorn, Hans, 87
sloths, 14
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute 
(STRI), 15
snail, 74
Socioaffective Neuroscience and Psychology, 165
sociobiologist, 44
socioeconomic, 83
sociolinguistic, 85
songbird, 3, 82– 83, 87– 89, 91, 98– 99, 111, 
157, 169
songsters, 95
sonic, 25, 92, 98
Sopranos, 82
Spallanzini, Lazaro, 34
sparrow, 82, 86, 88– 89, 91– 92, 103
speaker, 20, 25, 78, 95, 147
speciation, 115
species, 1– 3, 5, 7– 8, 10– 12, 16– 18, 21, 26– 31, 
34, 37– 40, 42, 44– 45, 47– 49, 54, 58– 61, 64, 
66, 70– 72, 77– 79, 81– 83, 86– 87, 89– 91,  
96, 99, 102, 105, 110– 118, 122– 123, 126, 
132– 133, 136, 138, 141– 142, 147, 150– 151, 
153, 157– 159, 169
spectrum, 28, 36, 75, 140, 170
sperm, 9– 11, 18– 19, 21– 22, 89– 90, 130– 131, 
134, 136, 138, 158, 162
spiders, 2
spine, 103
spite, 153
spleen, 103
stalker, 129
stalk- eyed flies, 152
Stallone, Sylvester, 21
Stanford, 104
starlings, 68
Steblin, Rita, 102
stickleback, 119, 123
Stoker, Bram, 34
Streptopelia risoria, 89
stressors, 66
striatum, 91, 103
Sturm und Drang, 100
subconscious, 120
Sugiyama, Lawrence, 139
supermodel, 161, 167
supernormal, 62– 65, 160– 161, 165– 167
surgeon, 2, 19
survival, 5– 8, 23, 25, 36, 46, 58, 66, 79, 85,  
151
Survival of the Beautiful, 58
survivors, 5
survivorship, 152
Swaddle, John, 68
“Sweet Jane,” 56
sword, 41– 42, 149, 159
swordtail, 41– 42, 115– 116, 149, 159
symbol, 45, 77
symmetric, 65– 66, 68, 74
symmetry, 66– 69, 72, 75
synchronized, 118
syncopated, 95
syndromes, 165
syrinx, 21
tactile, 125
tadpoles, 19, 120
Taft, Cindy, 24
Tampico, 136
Tanner, Kate, 71
tapestry, 35
tavern, 143
teenage, 133

Index • 199
teenager, 69, 139, 166
teens, 95
teeth, 108– 109
temperature, 41, 79– 80, 102, 106, 134
template, 166
termites, 98
territory, 65, 74, 88, 91, 98, 150
testosterone, 84– 85, 90
Third Chimpanzee, The, 70
This Book Is Not For Sale, 140
This Is Your Brain on Music, 104
Thornhill, Randy, 65– 66, 68
threshold, 43– 44, 46, 61– 62, 88, 90
throat, 80, 99
ticks, 16
Tierra del Fuego, 14
timbre, 107
toad, 57, 78, 98, 158
Tokyo, 93
Tommy, 53
tomography, 103
tone, 28, 86, 101
toucan, 15
trachea, 21
Trachops cirrhosus, 23, 64
trainer, 101
transitive, 143
transitivity, 142– 143
triad, 104, 145
tribe, 136, 139
trichromats, 55
trill, 150
Trinidad, 73, 153
triumph, 103
Trivers, Robert, 129
troops, 16, 54
trophy wife, 140– 141
tropics, 17, 54, 78, 121
Tulane, 50
tumescence, 103
tumor, 39
túngara, 15– 26, 28– 32, 37, 41– 42, 49, 67,  
79, 81, 87– 88, 94– 95, 103, 130– 132, 143, 
146– 147, 157, 159
Turin, Luca, 123
turkeys, 81
Tuttle, Merlin, 23– 24, 64
tymbal, 98
ultrasonic, 24– 25, 28, 34, 36– 37, 92– 93
ultraviolet, 28, 35– 36
Umwelt, 34
unconditioned, 163
UNESCO World Heritage site, 95, 121
unfertilized, 18, 136
urinary, 118
urinate, 108
urine, 108
utilitarian, 7, 74, 83, 162
vagina, 9, 10
valuation, 145
vampire, 16
van Gogh, 54
variation, 5– 6, 21, 58– 60, 66, 75, 80, 92, 113, 
117– 118, 120, 133, 153
variety, 26, 59, 67, 77, 88, 96, 99, 102, 122, 135
Västfjäll, Daniel, 102
Velvet Underground, 56
Venezuela, 31
Venice, 89
vertebrate, 98– 99, 108, 117, 129, 135
viable, 39, 115, 130
vibration, 80, 94, 96
vice, 146
vigor, 44, 68
viola, 100
violin, 99– 100
Virgil, 126
virgin, 8, 122
Virginia, 128
virginity, 45
vision, 35– 36, 45, 52– 57, 59, 61, 63– 65, 67, 69, 
71, 73– 75, 80
Visual Revolution, 56
vixen, 69
vocal, 3, 38– 39, 54, 80, 83, 85, 89, 96, 99, 169
vocalists, 97
vocalizations, 21, 82
Vogelkop Bowerbird, 71– 73
Vogue, 69
Vollrath, Fritz, 120
vomeronasal, 108– 109
von Uexküll, Jakob, 34
voyage, 14
voyeur, 135, 138, 140
waistline, 162
waist- to- hip ratio, 75, 139, 160
Wallace, Alfred, 5, 70
wardrobes, 2
wavelength, 28, 35– 36, 45, 55, 57, 60, 96– 97

200 • Index
Waynforth, David, 140
wealth, 11, 166
weapon, 8, 9, 11, 64, 93, 109, 148
weavers, 54
Weber, Ernst Heinrich, 48
Wedekind, Claus, 119– 120, 124
Weir Pond, 24
WEIRD (western, educated, industrialized, 
rich, and democratic), 138– 139
Western Hemisphere, 13, 95, 121
wheatear, 74
When Harry Met Sally, 51
whiskers, 51, 164
whisky, 100
widow, 64– 65
widowbird, 64– 66
widower, 64
Wiesel, Torsten, 57
Wilczynski, Walt, 28– 29, 31, 78
winemaker, 114
wineries, 113
wingspan, 16
winter, 65, 92
wisdom, 95
Witherspoon, Reese, 133, 135
wizardry, 143
Wolf, Naomi, 167
womanliness, 103
woodwinds, 96
World Heritage City, 100
Xiphophorus birchmanni, 116
Xiphophorus malinche, 116
youth, 160
youthful, 103
Zahavi, Amotz, 44
Zatorre, Robert, 103
zebra, 47– 48, 63, 75, 82, 88, 143, 150, 156, 158
zenk, 88
Zuk, Marlene, 84

