
To the reader: 
Throughout the book the generic "businessman" and the 
pronoun "he" have been used for the sake of brevity. In all 
instances it is the author's intention to imply both the male 
and female gender. 
I 

Contents 
Acknowledgements 
ix 
Introduction 
1 
1 
The Essence of Thick Face, 
Black Heart 
7 
2 
Preparation for Thick Face, 
Black Heart: Eleven Principles 
For Getting Free 
29 
3 
Dharma: The Wish-Fulfilling Tree 
71 
4 
Dharma and Destiny 
91 
5 Winning Through Negative 
Thinking 
109 
6 The Magical Power of Endurance 
135 
7 
The Mystery of Money 
161 
8 
Deception Without Deceit 
187 
vu 

CONTENTS 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
Sixteen Noble Attributes of Work 
203 
The Advantage of Playing the Fool 223 
Thriving Among the Cunning & 
Ruthless 
Acquiring the Killer Instinct 
Thick Face, Black Heart 
Leadership 
Thick Within, Black Within 
Paths to Thick Face, Black Heart 
How a Piranha Eats the Shark 
Epilogue 
Appendix: Thick Black Theory 
231 
265 
287 
303 
325 
345 
363 
367 
VUl 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Acknowledgments 
My gratitude to all those who have passed through my life, 
whether in a positive or negative manner. All have contributed 
in some way to the substance of this book. 
My gratitude to: 
• Kurt Survance, who patiently saw me through my numerous 
false starts and provided me the necessary insights to structure 
this book. 
• Karen M. Dibblee; without her input this book would not 
have been the same. 
• Gayle Vrla, my friend, who is always there for me. 
• Dottie Walters, for her unfailing spirit and support. 
• J.J. Liu Tsai, my former classmate, for her love and friend-
ship. 
• Tamra Sinclair for her great patience. 
I give a special thanks to the reference departments of the 
Marin County Library in California and the Mulmoah 
County Library in Oregon. 
To all I am indebted. Without their teamwork this book 
would not have been possible. 
IX 

fl
THICK 
FACE 
BLACK 
HEART 

INTRODUCTION 
Introduction 
I
n 1949, at the age of three, holding tight onto my 
mother's skirt, I ran with my parents and two 
younger brothers across a Shanghai airport runway. 
Amid the sound of bombs blasting, we boarded the last 
commercial flight out of China. 
From a life of affluence and privilege, my family was 
reduced to the condition of faceless immigrants among 
millions in Taiwan who had fled the conquering communists. 
All the possessions we were able to salvage from the devasta-
tion of our lives fit into the suitcases my parents carried. 
In 1969, when I was 22,1 left Taiwan to begin a new life 
in America. Once more a faceless immigrant, I arrived in Los 
Angeles with two suitcases containing the few possessions I 
was able to bring to my new home: clothes I had made for 
myself, a few personal effects, and two books. 
By this time, I had already read hundreds of books, and I 
owned many; but I brought only two to the United States: 
Sun Tzu's Art of War and a slim, black-bound volume written 
by Lee Zhong Chang called, Thick Black Theory. 
The Art of War, an ancient book of strategy and wisdom, 
is fairly well known in the West. Thick Black Theory, howev-
er, is a relatively modem work and is still virtually unknown 
outside of China. 
Although I cannot say exactly why I brought Thick Black 
Theory with me, at the time I had a strong, intuitive sense that 
l 

INTRODUCTION 
it would prove to be very important. In its original form, it is 
an erratic, difficult book. Lee's writing is obscure. His 
arguments include great intuitive leaps that often left me 
behind. But after my first reading of Thick Black Theory, I 
knew that there was something very profound in it. For the 
past twenty years I have returned to this book time and time 
again, not quite knowing why, except for a powerful and 
disturbing sense that it held the key to a puzzle I was trying 
to solve. It has colored the way I now think about all the 
experiences of my life. I left many precious possessions 
behind in Taiwan, but was able to bring Lee's invaluable book 
with me to America. 
Lee first published his ideas in 1911, a year of chaos and 
profound change in China. It was the year of the overthrow of 
the Ching dynasty, the last in a succession of imperial 
dynasties that stretched back to the beginning of human 
civilization. 
Thick Black Theory has never been translated or published 
outside of China. Even within China, Lee's frank discussion 
of the uses of ruthlessness and hypocrisy was so disturbing to 
the ruthless and hypocritical, that Thick Black Theory has been 
banned almost since the day of its publication. 
Even if Thick Black Theory were to be faithfully translated, 
it would still be incomprehensible to most non-Chinese. The 
Chinese language is highly context-oriented. The basic build-
ing blocks of the language are short, three and four character 
phrases that have an extended meaning far beyond the literal 
meaning of the characters that make up the phrase—somewhat 
like idiomatic expressions in English. This extended meaning 
is derived from history, ancient literature, folk-tales, and a 
myriad of other sources. Thus, in a few characters, a Chinese 
writer can express a very complex idea by skillfully combining 
these associations. Foreigners who are considered fluent in 
Chinese, but do not have an intimate knowledge of the 
2 

INTRODUCTION 
Chinese culture, often understand the words, but are unaware 
of the levels of meaning that are subtly implied. 
With Lee's work, this difficulty is even more extreme. His 
chaotic style makes him difficult to understand even for 
learned Chinese. He writes in brief, disconnected epigrams that 
are meaningless to anyone not deeply immersed in Chinese 
literature. 
In its original form, Lee's Thick Black Theory is of little 
use to Westerners. But I have always felt that his profound yet 
bluntly honest vision of the world, which is the essence of 
Lee's philosophy, would be of great importance to anyone 
who desires to exert a measure of control over their own life. 
It is this vision, this attitude, this essence, that I refer to 
simply as Thick Face, Black Heart. 
Lee estimated that it would take three years of studious 
endeavor to master the practice of his ideas. Lee's ideas 
ignited the sparks within me that led me to explore in great 
depth for the past twenty years, the unchartered reality of our 
daily lives in relation to Thick Face, Black Heart. 
In my inquiry, I discovered there are two distinct levels of 
understanding. There is the superficial aspect: learning the 
methods and practices by which you can get what you want by 
imposing your will on others, and there is the deeper, spiritual 
understanding of Thick Face, Black Heart as the natural and 
proper state of your soul. 
Having been raised in China, I was already immersed in 
Buddhism, Taoism, and Confucianism, despite the fact that I 
was Catholic. The principles of these religions are so deeply 
ingrained in Chinese culture that it is not necessary to formally 
profess any of them to be influenced by them. My continuing 
search for understanding took me to all parts of the world. I 
studied the Hindu scriptures and Christian mystics. At one 
point in my life, I gave up my successful business career in 
Los Angeles and moved to a remote mountain in the Oregon 
Cascades for a long period of meditation and soul-searching. 
3 

INTRODUCTION 
As my horizons broadened, I came back to my Chinese 
roots with a new perspective. I looked at Buddhism, Taoism, 
Confucianism, and their Japanese extraction: Zen Buddhism. 
It became clearer and clearer to me that these diverse religions 
and philosophies shared the same central principle and that if 
I could understand and extract this principle, it would give me 
the power and control over my own life that I sought. In my 
struggle to articulate this principle, I kept coming back to Lee 
Zhong Chang and the phrase, Thick Face, Black Heart. 
Although I do not believe that at the time he wrote Thick 
Black Theory, Lee himself clearly realized the full breadth and 
depth of his subject, I understand now that the value of Lee's 
work was in his putting a secular face on a principle that had 
previously always been discussed in abstract, religious or 
philosophical terms. 
For years I tried, without success, to write about Thick 
Black Theory. Finally, I turned away from it and wrote my 
first two books, The Chinese Mind Game and The Asian Mind 
Game. Now, at last, I can write Thick Face, Black Heart. The 
ideas I express are my own, but I wish to acknowledge my 
debt to Lee. However, my book is not an interpretation of 
Lee's work. To me, his book was not so much a source of 
knowledge but rather a way of looking at things, a starting 
point for the development of my own thoughts and a touch-
stone for the examination of new ideas and experiences. 
The result of my inquiry is that from this book, you can 
receive the instant benefit of the knowledge of Thick Face, 
Black Heart as a concentrated, potent capsule. The knowledge 
revealed in this book will mirror your own life experiences 
that are familiar to you and that you are not able to verbalize. 
Because of the novel ideas in this book, in an instant, a 
revelation in your understanding can occur. 
4 

Give up virtue, renounce wisdom; 
people will benefit a thousand times. 
Give up kindness, renounce morality, 
people will embrace love and filial piety. 
Give up cleverness, renounce greed, 
bandits and thieves will vanish. 
—Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching 

A The Essence of 
Thick Face, 
Black Heart 
When you conceal your will from others, that is Thick. 
When you impose your will on others, that is Black. 
—Lee Zhong Chang 
T
hick Face, Black Heart, is the secret law of nature 
which governs successful behavior in every aspect 
of life. The American pioneers had it. The Asian 
businessmen use it. From the ancient to the present, all 
successful people utilize the secret. Thick Face, Black Heart 
is the wisdom of the soul and it knows no division of national-
ity, race, or religion. The implementation of this law benefits 
people in their business practices as well as in their personal 
lives. By being true to the law of nature in our daily encoun-
ters, we will fulfill the highest potential within and around us, 
thus leading us to the proper unfolding of our destiny. 
7 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
through the utilization of the power of Thick Face, Black 
Heart, each one of us will discover the destiny to which we 
must be true. 
Americans are constantly bombarded through the media 
with images of success and happiness. Success is often judged 
by our possessions; the make of car we drive, the designer 
watch we sport, or the latest fashions we have wrapped around 
our bodies. 
A successful life is one that is lived through understanding 
and pursuing one's own path, not chasing after the dreams or 
fulfilling the expectations of others. 
Many people are so completely obsessed with the pursuit 
of false euphoria that they attempt to deny the existence of 
life's difficulties. A positive attitude is important, but it is only 
part of the story. Understanding how to surmount pain, doubt 
and failure is a vital component in winning the game of life. 
So often we are so concerned with what makes us feel good 
that we forget what makes us great. 
Character is not made out of sunshine and roses. Like steel, 
it is forged in fire, between the hammer and the anvil. By 
getting in touch with the power of Thick Face, Black Heart, 
you will realize a new consciousness. 
One of the results of reading this book will be the shatter-
ing of your traditional concepts of ruthlessness. Thick Face, 
Black Heart is and is not about ruthlessness. You will learn 
that by adapting and adopting a form of non-destructive 
ruthlessness, you will gain the freedom necessary to achieve 
effective execution of your life's tasks. 
Thick Face, Black Heart is not about mastering a specific 
skill nor is it something I can give to you. The power of Thick 
Face, Black Heart is already within you. It is your inner 
strength and the natural state of your true self, where perfect 
joy, clarity, courage, and compassion are an inseparable part 
of you. 
By tapping into this power, to whatever degree you can, 
you cannot fail to benefit. The power of Thick Face, Black 

THE ESSENCE OF THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Heart will guide you to be effective in your actions and lead 
you to your desired results. Most of all, by getting in touch 
with this power within you, you will gain unshakable clarity 
and focus to help you discover and achieve your intended 
destiny. 
The Inward State 
Thick Face, Black Heart is not a doctrine in itself. Rather it 
concerns an element that is common to many doctrines. On its 
practical, less philosophical level, Thick Face, Black Heart is 
simply about action and its effectiveness. 
To take an example from modem America: dozens of 
books are published each year that attempt to teach you how 
to make yourself a more effective executive, a better salesper-
son and generally a happier, more dynamic individual. In these 
books the author prescribes a course of action that will lead to 
the desired result. It is generally a plan that has worked for the 
author and for some of his students. But it doesn't necessarily 
work well for many readers, even though they carefully follow 
the author's instructions. For example, two people can read the 
same book on lion-taming. They can enter the lion's cage 
dressed identically. They can use identical gestures and words 
to command the lion, but the results will not be the same. One 
of them will get the lion to jump through the hoop and the 
other will end up as a gruesome mess on the floor of the 
lion's cage. 
These authors do not seem to be aware that there is an 
inward state that must be achieved in order for words and 
actions to be effective. The experts who write these books are 
good at what they do because they have had the luck to 
achieve that state intuitively or unconsciously. They do not 
seem to comprehend the problems of those who have not been 
so fortunate. 
9 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Thick Face, Black Heart is a theory of great practical use. 
It can be applied to any endeavor, and utilized for either good 
or evil purposes. The first superficial exposure to Thick Face, 
Black Heart is often shocking and repellent because it can 
serve the criminal as easily as the saint. It seems to be a 
selfish, ruthless and completely amoral concept. However, I 
contend that these do not necessarily have to be destructive 
attributes. 
As the name implies, there are two elements to this inward 
state: the Thick Face, and the Black Heart. 
Thick Face—The Shield 
Consider the Asian concept of face. It refers to how other 
people think about you and treat you. Most Asians are 
tremendously concerned that others think well of them and 
especially that others display respect for their personal dignity. 
Juxtapose this idea with the Western notion that having a thick 
skin and being insensitive to criticism and the negative opin-
ions of others is the best. Fused together, these two ideas 
approximate the concept of Thick Face: a shield to protect our 
self-esteem from the bad opinions of others. A person adept 
at Thick Face creates his own positive self-image despite the 
criticism of others. 
In attempting any goal, there is always room for doubt 
about our ability to achieve, our motives for achieving, or our 
worthiness to receive the benefits of achievement. Often we 
feel a need to first improve ourselves and that only after we 
have become more worthy, will we be able to achieve the 
fulfillment of our dreams. 
The thick-faced person has the ability to put self-doubt aside. 
He refuses to accept the limitations that others have tried to 
impose on him and, more importantly, he does not accept any 
of the limitations that we commonly impose on ourselves. He 
10 

THE ESSENCE OF THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
does not question his ability or worthiness. In his own eyes, 
he is perfect. 
The world has a tendency to accept our own judgement of 
ourselves. By his absolute self-confidence, the thick-faced 
person instills confidence in others. They see him as success-
ful and allow him the latitude to succeed. 
Former President Reagan represents a good example of a 
Thick Face. He had very limited skills as an administrator. His 
aides' most important job was to prevent him from making 
off-the-cuff remarks about complex issues. Whenever he did, 
he invariably betrayed an appalling ignorance of the subject. 
But Mr. Reagan had such an unshakable image of himself as 
a great statesman that he acted decisively even when totally 
ignorant of the issues involved. His simple answers made 
America feel confident. After years of social turmoil at home 
and humiliation abroad, Americans began to feel good again; 
to feel that things were under control once more. The Ameri-
can people shared Ronald Reagan's opinion of himself and he 
finished his term of office as the most popular president in 
recent history. 
On the other hand, another former president, Jimmy Carter, 
better understood the awesome responsibilities of his office, 
but was completely overwhelmed by them. He was too keenly 
aware of his own limitations. Consequently, he agonized over 
important issues. The American people interpreted his agony 
as incompetence and turned him out of office by a wide 
majority. By truly appreciating the difficulties facing the 
nation and allowing the public to share in his insecurities, 
Carter projected a sense of powerless despair. 
If Colonel Oliver North had felt one shred of guilt about 
the crimes to which he admitted involvement in the Iran-
Contra Affair, he would be in jail today. Instead, he is a free 
man, a symbol of patriotism to millions, and a speaker who 
commands huge fees. He expressed no remorse for his 
criminal actions. Oliver North believed so strongly that he was 
a patriot that he communicated a heroic image to millions of 
11 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
people. A man less convinced of his own righteousness would 
have been severely punished for his crimes and ostracized by 
the public. 
A Thick Face need not be assertive or aggressive. He may 
be humble and submissive. Thick face is the ability to adopt 
whatever manner the situation calls for without regard for 
what other people think of you. 
There is an ancient Chinese story about a young man 
named Han Xin who had a reputation as a skilled Kung-Fu 
fighter. One day when Han was walking through the streets of 
his city he was stopped by two men who had heard of his 
skill. The pair challenged him to a fight to the death. Han tried 
to decline the challenge but the men would not let him walk 
away. They insisted he must either fight or crawl like a dog 
through the leader's out-spread legs. Although to the Chinese 
this is an unspeakable humiliation, Han Xin chose to crawl 
rather than fight. 
Word of his humiliation and his cowardice spread quickly 
through the city. He was laughed at openly, but never once 
offered any excuse or explanation for his seemingly spineless 
action. Later in his life, he revealed himself to be one of the 
most formidable and fearless warriors in the history of China. 
To him, the pair of unschooled ruffians had posed no threat. 
It was simply that they were unworthy adversaries. In his heart 
he knew himself to be a fearless warrior. He did not care what 
anyone else thought. Han's Thick Face was a meek and 
cowardly facade, adopted to save himself the trouble of killing 
two such inconsequential hoodlums. 
In contrast to Han Xin's inner sense of his own worth, 
there is the case of a friend of mine who is currently involved 
in helping a doctor develop and patent a prototype piece of 
medical equipment. In the beginning, there was a vague and 
inconclusive discussion about a partnership in exchange for 
my friend's technical expertise in building the apparatus. 
Since then, my friend has worked tirelessly, but nothing 
more has been said about the partnership or any other form of 
19 

THE ESSENCE OF THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
compensation. My friend is reluctant to bring it up because he 
does not have the prototype working properly and he does not 
feel worthy of compensation. He has not asked my advice, so 
I have not given it. I think he would do well to adopt the thick 
face of a man with a strong sense of his own worth. He would 
get his partnership for precisely the reason he is using as an 
excuse not to confront the doctor: the device is not yet 
working right. He is still needed. 
When he has it working and feels confident enough to go 
to the doctor to discuss compensation, who knows what he 
will get? At that point, he will be at a severe disadvantage. 
The doctor will have already achieved his objective and may 
have no further use for him. 
Black Heart—The Spear 
Black Heart is the ability to take action without regard to how 
the consequences will affect others. A Black Heart is ruthless 
but it is not necessarily evil. 
Before the advent of modern medicine, a surgeon operated 
without being able to anesthetize the patient. He had to be able 
to cut swiftly and decisively without any regard for his 
patient's screams and entreaties. In order to be effective, he 
had to be extremely callous and emotionally detached from the 
pain he caused. 
Conversely, a general who is so full of human compassion 
that he is reluctant to order soldiers to their death is of no use 
to his country. He will be defeated and his people conquered; 
whereas a black-hearted general can put the carnage of battle 
out of his mind and fully concentrate on the required result— 
victory. 
An entrepreneur must be able to make hard decisions 
regarding unprofitable operations. If he cannot, his company 
will fail. The end result of short-sighted compassion for some 
13 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
employers will be the closure of their entire operation and all 
of their employees out of work. 
The black-hearted person is above short-sighted compas-
sion. He focuses his attention on his goals and ignores the 
cost. 
A black-hearted person has the courage to fail. Attempting 
effective action always implies the risk of failure. A surgeon 
who has an accident victim in need of a potentially dangerous 
operation knows that the safest course for him is not to 
operate. Although the patient is likely to die, the surgeon risks 
little censure. If he operates and the patient dies, he knows 
that he risks being blamed for the death. 
Two Sides of the Same Coin 
Thick Face and Black Heart are two sides of the same coin. 
When one possesses the strength of Thick Face, one can 
ignore the criticism and disapproval of the masses. This same 
strength is also the source of the Black Heart; it allows one to 
effectively use the spear to cut through the ignorant and 
preconceived ideas of the masses. 
It is not possible to practice Thick Face without Black 
Heart, just as it is not possible to practice Black Heart without 
Thick Face. The Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner must 
exercise his ability to ignore criticism, ridicule or vilification 
from others, and, at the same time, carry out his duties as he 
sees fit. At any given time, one may freely draw upon more 
power of Thick Face and less power of Black Heart or visa 
versa as the situation dictates. 
i/i 

THE ESSENCE OF THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Three Phases of 
Thick Face, Black Heart 
Phase 1: Winning at All Cost 
Thick Face, Black Heart at its crudest level has no moral 
overtones. It purely addresses how to get what you want: in 
another words, winning at all costs. Thick Face at this level is 
total lack of conscience; Black Heart is absolute ruthlessness. 
In its crudest, most superficial form, Thick Face, Black 
Heart is not about ethics, it is about effective action. A brief 
glance at the newspaper provides an example: employees of a 
major airline have been caught falsifying maintenance reports 
and safety checks in order to reduce operating costs. The 
executives who ordered these falsifications clearly understood 
that they were placing the lives of their passengers, pilots and 
crews in great jeopardy—which was totally disproportionate 
to the money they were saving. 
A spear is a useful tool for peacekeeping as well as a 
weapon of death. Thick Face, Black Heart like the spear, does 
not in itself contain evil and yet one can apply Thick Face, 
Black Heart purely for the pursuit of selfish gains at any costs. 
Some people are intuitively skillful at utilizing Thick Face, 
Black Heart as a tool to fulfill their selfish motives. For these 
people, no price is too high to pay for victory, as long as it is 
achieved at someone else's expense. 
From ancient times to the present, from East to West, there 
are many instances of people who have gained through the 
utilization of Phase One Thick Face, Black Heart. Observe the 
failure of the American savings and loan institutions, and the 
illegal dealings of the Bank of Credit and Commerce Interna-
tional. All of the "prestigious" individuals behind the scenes 
15 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
of these institutions are masters of the Thick Face, Black 
Heart practice at its crudest level. 
Their face is impenetrably thick; it shields them from all 
possible criticism from others and from their own consciences. 
Their hearts are so black that when they used their spears on 
the unsuspecting, trusting public, they fated these innocent 
depositors to slow death from financial bleeding. For these 
individuals, selfish gain is the aim and Thick Face, Black 
Heart is the means. 
Phase One Thick Face, Black Heart leads us to winning, 
yet our victory often has no sweetness. More often than not, 
life, through its mysterious forces, will cause our ill deeds to 
catch up with us. To conquer others through ruthless means is 
not difficult: all you must do is agree to sell your soul to the 
devil. 
There are three stages of this Phase One level: 
The first stage: Thick as a castle wall, black as charcoal. This 
is the level of the cheap hustler, crook and con man. Although 
the face is as thick as a castle wall, it is penetrable. Their 
blackness is apparent to all who see them. They are distasteful 
and repulsive in everyone's eyes. 
The second stage: Thick and hard, black and shimmering. 
These people are more advanced practitioners. They have 
strengthened their face by hardening it; they have polished 
their Black Heart to make it more appealing. They are no 
longer the cheap hustler. Their outward appearance is respect-
able. They are the kind of people you think you can trust, only 
to discover later you have been taken. 
The third stap;e.: So thick it is formless, so black it is color-
less—the highest level. This is the level of seemingly virtuous 
men who can ruthlessly pursue their own ends while being 
is 

THE ESSENCE OF THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
extolled by their victims for their virtue. Some of our politi-
cians, from the past to the present, have achieved such a state. 
Phase 2: Self-inquiry 
Conquering others requires force. 
Conquering oneself requires strength. 
—Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching 
Beneath Phase One, lie deeper essences of Thick Face, Black 
Heart. Some people practice Phase One Thick Face, Black 
Heart and find it to be repellent, even to themselves. Conse-
quently, they begin a process of self-inquiry. 
Self-inquiry is a spiritual process. We cannot honestly or 
completely address Thick Face, Black Heart without mention-
ing the spiritual side of life, as this aspect colors the realities 
of all of our business practices and personal conduct. People 
bring who they are to business and they usually behave in 
business as they behave everywhere else. 
In the eyes of the Oriental, there are no divisions between 
business, the art of war, philosophy, and spirituality. The 
wisdom of spirituality is the root of mundane living. While the 
wisdom is one, the applications are infinite. Conversely, the 
Western world generally segments the knowledge of living 
into pieces and then files them away in separate compart-
ments. Those who practice Phase One of Thick Face, Black 
Heart without the cultivation of Phase Two can become 
dangerous people. 
At the stage of self-inquiry, the individual is often vulnera-
ble because he has rejected the powerful, wicked behaviors of 
Phase One and is in search of the realm of the unknown. His 
spirit is also demanding greater satisfaction from his conduct. 
He is in a state of uncertainty, confusion, and sometimes pain 
and anger. 
17 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
He is overwhelmed by his own new discovery of a multi-
tude of enemies within himself in the form of his own 
character defects: greed, anger, self-doubt, self-limitation, 
jealousy, envy, fear, shame, worry, small-mindedness, hatred, 
delusion, desire, selfishness, laziness, hypocrisy, and preten-
sion. He has discovered that his own mind is the root of high 
and low, honor and insult, joy and sorrow, while at the same 
time, his foes are many and his capacity to overcome these 
obstacles is meager. 
At this stage, even though he may look disheveled and be 
considered disjointed by others, within himself, he is going 
through a powerful transformation. 
Phase 3: The Warrior 
This final phase is the combination of all previous phases. 
Here you will be able to create a meeting ground for the 
sublime and the ruthless. The following are the qualities of a 
warrior. 
Dispassion and Detachment 
After Phase Two, the practitioner becomes indifferent and 
courageous. He adopts the warrior's attitude—dispassion and 
detachment. He sees life as a battle that must be fought. There 
is no way out. Victory is the only aim. 
He dispassionately does battle with the wicked outer 
elements while courageously facing his inner enemies. He is 
then able to detach from them, so that their presence does not 
thwart him. It is this power of detachment and dispassion 
which enables the warrior to face life's challenges with calm 
and grace. 
18 

THE ESSENCE OF THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The thirteenth century Hindu philosopher, Shankaracharya, 
mentioned that even the greatest warrior, when standing in the 
midst of the battle field, sweats with fear. However, while his 
body is fearful and his mind is fearful, his spirit is fearless. He 
is able to detach himself from the fear of the body and the 
mind, clinging instead to the fearlessness of his spirit. 
Recently, I watched an old movie; a story about the 
courage and love of the early American pioneer settlers. It was 
evident that they understood the sublime state of calm 
detachment. They were indifferent to suffering, taking action 
in spite of their fear, enduring the loneliness, quietly accepting 
and overcoming the adversity while never losing sight of their 
objectives. Witnessing their warrior-like courage and self-
determination moved me many times to tears during the film. 
It is not that you are not affected by the challenges and 
become inert in this state of detachment. Rather, you are not 
controlled by your emotions, so you may press on with greater 
courage and renewed energy. 
Fit for Greatness 
I have seen many people grow old, but not graciously. Their 
eyes reflect pain and disillusionment. They have been beaten 
by life; they have so many broken dreams. The hope and ex-
pectations of youth have vanished—only death awaits. 
The mistake they made was in not preparing themselves for 
the harsh lessons their Creator set for them on their life's path; 
necessary lessons to strengthen their spirit and make them fit 
for greatness. Unlike the warrior who accepts harsh discipline 
as a privilege and honor, these people are like pieces of grain 
caught in the millstone, ground down by the wheel of life, in 
agony and in pain. 
As most do, I used to pray for good times and good 
fortune. The prayer of "Let thy will be done" used to scare me 
to death. However, in reality this world in which we live is 
19 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
fragile and ever changing, and our existence and survival is 
delicately connected to the invisible thread of God's grace. 
Gain and loss is the constant human condition. 
As I watched the fire in the Oakland and Berkeley hills in 
the San Francisco Bay Area that burned 700 luxury homes, it 
confirmed again that it doesn't matter how much we wish to 
ignore the possibility of any negative and unpleasant aspects 
of our lives, our Creator writes His own script for life. Now 
when I pray, I pray for the unshakable inner strength and the 
strength of the warrior to accept these harsh lessons and learn 
from them, not to be destroyed by them. 
The Union of the Spiritual 
and the Material Worlds 
In this book we will be dealing mostly with Phase Three. We 
will learn how to live in this world and not be a victim of it; 
nor will we impose pain and loss unjustly on those who do not 
deserve it. Our objective in practicing Thick Face, Black Heart 
is to be able to defend ourselves against others' aggression. 
In this way we become warriors, but not in the traditional 
Western sense of "The killing machine." The outer ability of 
the warrior to effectively execute his objective is guided by 
inner wisdom which is cultivated through the acceptance of 
life's challenges and the quest for spiritual balance. 
The sixteenth century Japanese sword master Miyomoto 
Musashi said "The warrior is one who uses the pen and sword 
with equal skill." The message here is that to be a truly great 
warrior, you must be skilled with more than your weapon. The 
great soldier is a balanced being, who through his understand-
ing of life is able to master the virtue of his weapons. How 
the samurai handles his sword is metaphorically equivalent to 
how we handle our daily tasks, especially the task of surviv-
ing. Musashi also said "The way of warrior skill is the way of 
nature. When you are in line with the power of nature, 
20 

7. 3 ESSENCE OF THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
knowing the rhythm of all situations, you will be able to cut 
and strike the enemy naturally." 
As you practice the Phase Three Thick Face, Black Heart, 
gradually you will see no division or conflict between the 
spiritual world and the mundane world. Your spiritual strength 
will become an essential tool to conquer the day to day 
realities. As we incorporate the sublime spiritual insights into 
the ruthless business world, we will gain the best of both 
worlds. 
A True Thick Face, Black Heart 
Practitioner 
When the great Too is forgotten, 
virtue and morality arise. 
When knowledge and intelligence are born, 
the great pretense begins. 
When there is no harmony within the family, 
filial piety and devotion arise. 
When the country is confused and in chaos, 
loyal officials appear. 
—Lao Tze, Too Te Ching 
In every action there are two aspects—the inner and the outer. 
The inner is the force which motivates one's actions. It is 
unseen by anyone. The outer is the expression of the inner 
state and it is visible to all. 
Contrary to common understanding, a good man's actions 
are not always gentle. They may be ruthless, cold and dispas-
sionate. The greatest sage of China, Lao Tze, understood the 
true nature of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
21 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
A friend of mind once made a very profound statement 
when he said, "When people act overly nice, I always wonder 
about their motives." There was once a master who had charge 
over many disciples. All entertained great intentions to gain 
enlightenment, yet each waged battle with their uncontrolled 
desires. The master would appear to ignore their misbehavior 
and allow them to indulge in their minor mischief, but 
suddenly, like a thunder bolt, he would strike. He punished the 
offenders severely, sometimes even with a whip across the 
body so the disciple would never forget the lesson. 
A witness may have believed this action by the master to 
be violent and cruel. Yet the disciples only experienced the 
love of the master and was grateful for the master's teaching. 
In the Christian Holy Bible, St. Mark tells the story of the 
money changers in which Jesus Christ goes into the temple in 
Jerusalem and angrily overturns all their tables and chairs, 
saying that God's temple was for prayer, not for use as "a den 
of thieves." Even though Jesus' outward expression was one 
of anger, this did not affect his peaceful inner state. 
Conversely, some people wear permanent, plastic smiles on 
their faces in their eagerness to be considered by others as 
nice people. It is very obvious to most that their smile is 
merely skin deep, yet these people spend all of their construc-
tive energies putting up this sweet facade, which leaves them 
empty and powerless within. 
A good man's outward appearance and actions sometimes 
may appear to be cruel and violent and his expression egotisti-
cal, yet he possesses a pure heart within. On the other hand, 
a false prophet may express an apparent high degree of 
outward humility and gentleness, but inwardly his sole 
objective is self gain. A false prophet, in order to thrive, is 
dependent on the approval of the public, whereas a good man 
lives in harmony with himself—he neither seeks nor needs 
external approval. 
The natural way of Thick Face, Black Heart is beyond 
human manipulation, beyond the petty standards of human 
22 

THE ESSENCE OF THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
judgement. When one acts in harmony with the Universal 
Will, one's actions are aligned with the good of all and benefit 
all. You are neither self-righteous, nor too eager to please; nor 
are you seeking approval. In action, you are swift, competent 
and dispassionate. In yielding, you are unabashed, and have no 
concern for others' judgements. In conquering, you are 
effective and can be ruthless. In action and non-action, you 
are changeless. You are a true Thick Face, Black Heart practi-
tioner. 
23 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Summary Of Key Points 
• Thick Face, Black Heart is the secret law of nature 
which governs successful behavior in every aspect of 
one's life. 
• So often we are so concerned with what makes us feel 
good that we forget what makes us great. Understand-
ing how to surmount pain, doubt, and failure is an 
important aspect of the game of winning at life. 
• Character is not made of sunshine and roses. Like 
steel, it is forged in fire, between the hammer and the 
anvil. 
• A successful life is one that is lived through under-
standing and pursuing one's own path, not chasing 
after the dreams of others. 
• Thick Face, Black Heart is and is not about ruthless-
ness, yet you will learn that by adapting and adopting 
non-destructive ruthlessness, you will gain the free-
dom in actions necessary to achieve effectiveness in 
the execution of your life's task. 
• By getting in touch with this power within you, you 
will gain unshakable clarity and focus to help you 
discover and achieve your intended destiny. 
• Thick Face—the shield: protect yourself from the 
criticism and the negative opinions of others. 
24 

THE ESSENCE OF THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
• The thick-faced person has the ability to put self-
doubt aside. He refuses to accept the limitations that 
others have tried to impose on him and, more impor-
tantly, he does not accept any of the limitations that 
we commonly impose on ourselves. In his eyes, he is 
perfect. 
• Black Heart—the spear: to do battle with others and 
yourself. 
• A Black Heart is ruthless, but it is not necessarily evil. 
• The black-hearted person is above short-sighted 
compassion. He focuses his attention on his goals and 
ignores the cost. A black-hearted person has the 
courage to fail. 
• The Think Face, Black Heart practitioner must exer-
cise his ability to ignore criticism, ridicule, or vilifica-
tion from others, and at the same time carry out his 
duties as he sees fit. 
• Thick Face, Black Heart at its crudest level has no 
moral overtones. It is purely addressing how to get 
what you want. Thick Face at this level is totally un-
conscionable; Black Heart is absolutely ruthless. 
• The wisdom of spirituality is the root of mundane 
living. The ability to judge good from evil is essential 
to the practitioners of Thick Face, Black Heart. There 
is no one out there you have to conquer. When you 
have successfully conquered yourself, the world will 
be at your feet. 
• The ultimate courage of a Thick Face, Black Heart 
warrior is dispassion. This means having the courage 
25 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
to fight in spite of fear; to be able to detach from the 
emotions associated with defeat so that its presence 
does not thwart you. 
• The Union of the Spiritual and the Material Worlds: 
you will be able to create a meeting ground for the 
sublime spiritual world and the ruthless business 
world. Ultimately, you will see no division or conflict 
between the spiritual world and the ruthless world. 
Your sublime spiritual insight will become an essential 
tool to conquer the day-to-day realities. 
• When one acts in harmony with the Universal Will, 
one's actions are aligned with the good of all and 
benefit of all. You are neither self-righteous, nor too 
eager to please, nor are you seeking approval. In con-
quering, you are ruthless. In action and non-action, 
you are changeless. You are a true Thick Face, Black 
Heart practitioner. 
26 

The proper function of man 
is to live, 
not to exist. 
—Jack London 

JL Preparation 
for Thick Face 
Black Heart: 
Eleven 
Principles For 
Getting Free 
The flower which is single 
Need not envy the thorns 
That are numerous. 
—Rabindranath Tagore 
29 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
I. Breaking the Constraints of Inner 
Images and External Standards 
T
hick Face, Black Heart is not simply a clever way 
to manipulate the world for your personal advan-
tage. It is the natural state of our being. This state 
has been lost to us because of well-meaning people who 
drilled into us all the rules of how we ought to behave and 
how we ought to feel. It is lost to us because of an inner 
image we have created of ourselves out of other people's 
expectations and beliefs. Achieving Thick Face, Black Heart 
means first reclaiming the natural state of our true self. 
A friend of mine in his late forties had been one hundred 
pounds overweight most of his adult life. Although he had lost 
all the weight at least seven times, he would always gain it 
back. During a psychological consultation he discovered the 
root cause of his problem. He realized that whenever he was 
skinny he would act much more aggressive and not be so 
"jolly and nice" to others. Since childhood, his family had 
taught him that the most valued virtue is to be "nice" to 
people. Consequently, he ate to suppress his more expressive 
energy. 
Beginning with childhood, most of us have been taught that 
the highest prize in the world is the approval of others. 
Perhaps it is not stated in so many words, but it is implied in 
everything we are told is right and good. We are obedient in 
order to please our parents. We are studious and well-behaved 
in order to please our teachers. We share our toys so our 
playmates will like us. When we try to get our own way, we 
are told we are being selfish and bad. Somehow, ideas of good 
and bad get tangled up in our young minds with the need to 
gain the approval of others. In fact, the people who teach us 
right and wrong are themselves victims of this same confu-
sion. 
30 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
As we grow older, it becomes apparent that to defer 
constantly to others and seek their approval is not the most 
efficient way to get ahead. Yet, most of us continue with this 
ineffective behavior. Sometimes we experiment with selfish-
ness but usually discover that it produces bad feelings within 
us as a result of our early conditioning. "Nice" people aren't 
supposed to be selfish too often. Even though we know that 
success in our endeavors requires a certain measure of self-
centeredness, we continue to be nice. The only reward for this 
is our self-righteousness about our great "virtue." 
So it is with many of the other "selfless" virtues. But this 
is, in fact, pretentious and covert behavior. Often we disguise 
our concern for ourselves as concern for others, and we 
continue to purchase the approval of others by giving up our 
right to get our own way. 
We often allow others to treat us unfairly because we do 
not want to confront or challenge them, nor do we wish to 
disturb our deeply ingrained notions of right and wrong. 
Instead, we comfort ourselves with feelings of moral superiori-
ty. We tell ourselves that we are above engaging in conflict 
over unimportant trifles. But despite what we think, we turn 
the other cheek; not because it is right, but because it is easy. 
A $33,000 Lesson 
I learned the lesson that "trying to be nice" may not be the 
right thing to do by paying a $33,000 tuition fee. 
Jim is a successful Washington D.C. based businessman. 
He is one of the most respected people in the world of 
political forums. He books speakers for political meetings and 
conferences, and publishes a weekly political newsletter. 
The day we met, we liked each other instantly. He is a 
warm-hearted individual with a passion for Asian culture. 
Recently, Jim came to Portland, Oregon, where I was living 
at the time. He was accompanying a political candidate on the 
31 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
campaign trail. Later, we met for dinner. While we were 
chatting, I asked how his newly published book was doing. He 
told me that he had employed a publicity firm on a retainer for 
the past ten months and although it cost several thousand 
dollars per month, he had received many requests to appear on 
television and radio as a result of the publicists' work. 
Jim proudly pulled five or six typewritten pages out to 
show to me. The pages contained a list of the television and 
radio shows on which he had appeared. Impressed, I took a 
closer look. Except for one appearance on KABC-TV, the rest 
were only minor radio stations! I couldn't believe my eyes. 
Why hadn't they booked him on some of the more popular 
radio and TV talk shows, I wondered. What were these 
publicists doing for their money? 
After I left Jim I thought to myself, perhaps he'd like me 
to give him some help. Because I've been doing my own 
publicity for the past three years, I've learned quite a bit about 
the business. I know that to be booked on one popular show 
is a hundred times better then being booked on innumerable 
insignificant shows. I also know that some press agents try to 
justify their retainers by filling their client's calendar with a 
clutter of small radio bookings, often having very few listen-
ers. It is truly no trouble for me to help him out, I thought. I 
have many good contacts who would take my recommendation 
seriously. 
The next day, I called Jim. I said I wanted to help him by 
giving him some of my contacts and that he could use my 
name as a referral. He was very happy. He thanked me 
profusely, then added, "I would like to review your new book, 
The Asian Mind Game, in my next newsletter." 
The next morning, my phone rang. It was Jim's cheerful 
voice. "I wanted to thank you again for giving me those names 
yesterday," he said. 
"You are most welcome," I replied. "No problem at all." 
He continued, "My company publishes a booklet listing 
every organization that employs political speakers." 
32 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
"I know. I have one," I replied. 
He added, "And this is updated monthly. It now contains 
over three hundred listings." 
I was not sure where he was leading with this conversation. 
Maybe he wanted to thank me for my help by giving me an 
updated list as a gift. 
But he continued, "My secretary tells me you have let your 
subscription run out." 
"Yes, because I was moving, many things fell through the 
cracks." I was trying to be nice by lying. The truth was I had 
six month's worth of the newsletter still sitting in my filing 
cabinet waiting to be read and I certainly didn't want to 
continue my subscription. 
Disregarding me entirely, Jim came in for the kill: "How 
would you like to pay for it—credit card or check?" 
"Can you bill me? I am in the middle of something and I 
don't want to stop," I said vaguely. I was feeling very 
uncomfortable about his pressure to renew a subscription I 
really didn't want. I tried to be as polite as I could. I wanted 
to brush him off and get rid of him quickly. 
But Jim pushed even more. "We do not review books for 
people who are not our subscribers." He wanted his money 
and he wanted it now. 
Still wishing to be nice, I said reluctantly, "Okay, I will go 
and get my credit card." Consequently, I paid him $300. 
I had spent thousands of dollars to generate those contacts. 
Telephone calls, faxes, promotion, travel; it all came to quite 
an investment, and I gave these to him as a favor. Surely he 
realized that? He then asked me to pay for a $300 subscription 
by way of thanks! 
Of course, I was facing a master Thick Face, Black Heart 
practitioner. He was a Thick Face practitioner because he had 
no consideration of what I would think of him. His eyes were 
on his objective. Although I had not openly said I did not care 
to continue the subscription, I had sent many subtle messages. 
He either didn't hear these messages or didn't care. 
33 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
He was a Black Heart master because he was willing for 
me to dig into my pocket to support his newsletter, even after 
I had already given him thousands of dollars' worth of 
information. 
Jim was doing everything right according to Thick Face, 
Black Heart. My mistake was that I didn't even have a 
business objective except wanting to be nice to him. Worse 
yet, I hadn't set a value on my press booking recommenda-
tions. I gave them away as if they had no value at all. I gave 
Jim the contacts believing "nice" people do nice things for 
each other. 
He was merely being true to his objective: to get ahead. On 
the other hand, if I had truly given with no strings attached, 
then what he had done would not have been offensive to me. 
The truth was my niceness was a false gesture used to try to 
gain approval from Jim. 
We can easily fall into this kind of trap. Idealistically we 
are taught to give expecting nothing in return, but realistically 
most of us are conditioned to give with expectations. In this 
encounter with Jim, at the back of my mind, I had been doing 
my bookkeeping. 
Our conversation should have gone more like this: "Jim, 
would you like me to introduce you to some of the great 
shows I was on? They made a really significant impact on the 
promotion and sales of my books." Jim would, of course, have 
said yes. 
I then would have continued; "For the past three years, I 
have very actively promoted my books among television and 
radio stations. I have gained a great deal of insight. You can 
sell more books by going on one good show then you can 
with a hundred small stations or unpopular shows. I would 
personally like to call these shows for you to recommend you 
and your book. How much would this be worth to you?" 
Since I would be putting Jim on the spot, he probably 
would say something like he hadn't intended to pay me, or he 
might ask me how much I wanted for my service. 
34 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
I then would have said: "Jim, I don't want you to pay me 
in cash. I'm suggesting we set up an agreement to barter each 
other's services. Let me propose something. These booking 
connections represent an investment of three years of promo-
tional effort. The talk show hosts and I have very good 
relationships. The time investment alone is worth thousands of 
dollars. I sold my first self-published book, The Chinese Mind 
Game, solely through media exposure, with no distribution 
setup. As a result I earned six figures in one year. I think 
placing a barter value of about $10,000 would be fair. Don't 
you think so?" 
If he didn't like the $10,000, I would have negotiated. 
Once the price was established, we would talk about the 
proposed barter method. The service I wanted that Jim had to 
offer was to book me on speaking engagements. Since he 
charges a 30% commission per booking, in order to earn his 
$10,000, he would have to generate $33,000 worth of book-
ings for me. 
Jim taught me a valuable lesson. Being nice for the sake of 
gaining the approval of others can be very costly. 
A genuine friendship in personal or business life can be a 
tangible commodity, yet it also demands unconditional giving 
and support of each other. A false niceness with a secret 
agenda can turn good friends into the worst enemies by 
thwarting expectations of each other. 
35 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
II. Searching for Your Own 
Inner Conviction 
When his duty is to face danger 
and he flees, it is cowardice. 
—Mahatma Gandhi 
Many of us were taught that when someone slaps you, you 
should turn the other cheek. This is not always the best course 
of action. There is a time to submit to being slapped and there 
is a time to hit back twice, so you will not be slapped again. 
If someone slaps your face, you might turn the other cheek for 
one of several reasons. Perhaps you have chosen the path of 
submission with a full understanding of what that means. It 
might be that even though you feel the impulse to strike back, 
you suppress your anger because you have been taught that 
violence is wrong. Or, it might be that you are afraid to 
further provoke your antagonist. 
If you turn the other cheek out of an inner conviction such 
as Han-Xin did in the previous chapter, so be it. If you have 
to suppress an impulse to strike back, it means that you have 
not truly accepted the truth of turning the other cheek, but 
have allowed your actions to be constrained by the standards 
of others. This in turn perpetuates the role of the victim for 
yourself. If you turn the other cheek because you are afraid to 
hit back, it does not mean you are morally superior. It simply 
means you are a coward. 
The Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner understands that 
hitting back does not necessarily make you a bad person. It 
might well be that in punishing violent behavior, you are 
acting as a peacemaker. The truth is that most of the common-
ly accepted standards of behavior are arbitrary and the 
^fi 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
arbitrators themselves are often flawed individuals who have 
perpetuated their own weakness and fear under the guise of 
virtue. 
III. Discovering the Mystery Within the 
Staunchness of the Oak and 
the Yielding of the Grass 
The world consists of a delicate balance of two great opposing 
forces. Asian philosophy refers to them as Yin and Yang. All 
things are composed of these two forces. Things which are 
thought to be opposite are more intimately related than is 
commonly believed. Opposites are not two entities which 
balance each other. They are, in reality, two aspects of the 
same thing. Darkness cannot exist without light, nor good 
without evil. Violence and non-violence arise out of the same 
place in the human soul. 
Just as there are two aspects to all things, there are two 
aspects to human actions—the inward motivation and the 
outward appearance. Without considering the inward motiva-
tion, it is impossible for us to judge our own actions or the 
actions of others. The sage and the criminal might commit the 
same crime against the state out of entirely different motives. 
Christ was crucified between two thieves because those who 
stood in judgement of him saw no great difference between his 
actions and those of two petty criminals. 
You need to understand that you possess creative and 
destructive forces in equal measure. Both compliment each 
other and cannot by judged by common standards of good and 
evil. Each has its proper time. It is part of understanding 
yourself and your destiny to know when to exercise your 
destructive force and when to submit to the destructive force 
of others. The grass bends easily in the wind. The great oak 
stands unmoved. A strong wind can uproot the oak, but no 
37 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
wind, however strong, can uproot the grass that bends flat 
before it. 
The ideal practitioner of Thick Face, Black Heart is the one 
who has Thick Face, Black Heart inwardly, yet whose outward 
appearance can be dominating or submissive as the situation 
calls for. He does not have a public or private image of 
himself to live up to or one that dictates how he must be-
have. 
In the Chinese ancient classic, The 36 Strategies, Strategy 
27 states: "Pretend to be a Pig in Order to Eat the Tiger." 
According to this concept, when the Asian hunter is ready to 
hunt the tiger, he will sit and contemplate the easiest way to 
bag a tiger. The conclusion he reaches is that he will make 
himself the bait for the tiger. He dresses in pig's clothing and 
waits in the woods. The tiger will come close, thinking this 
pig will make a delicious lunch. When the tiger is so close the 
hunter cannot miss, he will shoot the tiger. 
In Asia, heroes are not judged for their prowess in hunting 
and shooting the tigers, but rather for their strength and ability 
to endure the humiliation of being pigs. 
When you have no evidence that you are greater than your 
circumstances, you must never let go of your vision of victory. 
Einstein noted that a great person knows of his or her great-
ness long before anyone else does. If you are willing to do 
whatever is needed to overcome the strongest opposition— 
even including yielding and being able, when necessary, to 
look like a pig—you will win. 
Furthermore, you must be able to endure the humiliation 
others so willingly impose on you for your apparent failures. 
A person who can do this is destined to be great. 
IV. Understanding Yourself 
To achieve the state of Thick Face, Black Heart, examine the 
38 

PREPARATION FOR T H I C K FACE, BLACK HEART 
role you are currently playing in this world. In order to free 
yourself from the domination of arbitrary ideals and discover 
the true standards by which you should behave, you need to 
find the courage to do what must be done without regard to 
what others may think. 
Extraordinary people don't care what others think of them. 
Thick Face, Black Heart seems to come naturally to them. 
They do well in getting what they want because they are 
unencumbered by others' opinions. However, most people 
have been conditioned to be affected by the opinions of others. 
I am not advising you to become an amoral, self-centered 
person, but to recognize the difficulties that are involved for 
a naturally caring, sensitive person such as yourself, to pursue 
your own legitimate self-interest. There is something valuable 
for you to learn from these more detached people: their 
disregard for others' opinions enables them to focus on the 
accomplishment of their objectives. This can only be done by 
achieving a clear understanding of yourself and your actions. 
Self-observation is essential for self-growth. You must first 
understand the motives for your own actions in order to 
understand others. It is especially important to look within 
yourself in times of great distress and misfortune. If you can 
succeed in detaching yourself from the misery of your 
experience, you will see, with complete clarity, the real nature 
of the situation. The proper course of action will then shine 
forth. 
The world is not so simple that we can just make and 
follow rules about what is wrong and right. We seek an 
understanding of ourselves so that we will know what we 
ought to do in any given situation. You will gradually replace 
the beliefs you were taught with the truths you discover. It is 
not whether you turn the other cheek that is important. Why 
you do or do not is most significant. 
Self-knowledge is a more reliable guide to behavior than 
adherence to arbitrarily imposed standards, though both are 
susceptible to error. You will make mistakes no matter which 
39 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
path you follow, but mistakes made on the path to self-dis-
covery will correct themselves, while those made through 
blind adherence to subjective standards simply perpetuate the 
folly. 
In this sifting process, you will discover that many of the 
concepts you were taught were in fact, correct after all, but 
your self-examination will not have been in vain. Your beliefs 
will become your convictions. More importantly, you will 
have freed yourself from the need for others' approval. 
But don't take my word. Carefully observe your thoughts 
and actions. You will see for yourself the false and arbitrary 
nature of many of the standards under which you are laboring. 
Within each one of us there is a silent voice that wants to 
cry out and shout: "I exist! I exist! I have needs, wants, and 
desires which are noble and good. My ideas and rules may be 
different than yours, but they are mine and deserve to be 
expressed. Unless I am nourished, satisfied, and fulfilled, how 
can I be of use to anyone else?" 
Coco Chanel, the famous French fashion designer, started 
her career not as a designer but as a well-to-do lady of 
society. She always dressed in the manner she liked, regardless 
of the current trends. Her unique style, particularly her bobbed 
hair and raised hemline, went against all fashion standards of 
the time. When she began, she was heavily criticized for her 
eccentricities, yet she ended up providing a basis for the 
radical changes in fashions of the 1920s. Now, nearly a 
century later, her name, Coco Chanel, epitomizes the very best 
in the world of haute couture. 
Recently, I was at my athletic club peddling a stationary 
bicycle and casually flipping through a magazine geared 
toward young women. One tip given for gaining "acceptance" 
was to leave home with wet hair while carrying a large bag, 
then run the last half block to the office. The idea was to 
create the "health club before work" look. The magazine also 
encouraged readers to leave a few cassettes by new hot 
40 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
musical groups lying around the house to create a hip image, 
even if they are never played. 
I fail to see how these image-creating devices can possibly 
help young women gain the success they are seeking. They are 
merely receiving advice on how to get others' approval by 
spending a great deal of energy creating lies, rather than 
spending their energy in the pursuit of genuine interests. 
V. Breaking the Bondage of 
Fear of Success and Fear of Failure 
The fear of success is much more powerful than the fear of 
failure. That is why there are so many more people prone to 
become failures than successes. 
Each one of us is driven to a certain extent by fear—fear 
to rise, fear to fall, fear that we will remain in the same place. 
So many of us think that we want to be rich, that we want to 
be famous, that we want to accomplish great deeds, but often 
these feelings are just idle ruminations. Most of the things we 
think we want come at the price of leaving behind our familiar 
life and venturing into the unknown. Every time we accom-
plish something and move ahead, we have to exchange the 
known conditions of our life for uncertainty and unfamiliarity. 
Even though most people think they are trying to succeed, 
they are simply going through the motions. The last thing in 
the world that they want is to get off the familiar treadmill and 
actually get somewhere. 
Before we can succeed, we must clearly understand that 
success means change and the risk of failure. The failure of 
those who do not try anything great is commonplace and 
comfortably private. The failure of those who attempt extraor-
dinary accomplishments is much more public and generally 
accompanied by sighs of satisfaction from ordinary failures. 
When we don't pay our bills, a computer somewhere writes us 
41 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
a nasty letter. When Donald Trump doesn't pay his bills, it 
makes the six o'clock news. 
Success also requires the courage to risk disapproval. All 
independent thought, new ideas, or endeavors beyond the 
common measure are greeted with disapproval ranging from 
skepticism and ridicule to violent outrage. To persevere in 
anything exceptional requires inner strength and the unshak-
able conviction that you are right. 
VI. Understanding the Nature of Illusion 
and Reality 
This is perfect. 
This is perfect. 
From the perfect springs the perfect. 
If the perfect is taken from the perfect, 
only the perfect remains. 
—Ancient Hindu Scripture 
In ancient India, a group of young monks were watching their 
master prepare chappatis (pancakes). He would pour a ladle 
full of batter out and watch it spread across the surface of the 
hot griddle and form an odd round shape. As the pancake 
assumed its final form, he would smile and say, "Perfect." 
The students were puzzled. Each of the pancakes was a 
different shape, some of them were burned around the edges, 
and none were perfectly round. Finally, one of the students 
asked the master, "Master, how can these pancakes be perfect? 
Pancakes are supposed to be round and they are not supposed 
to be burned." 
The master lifted the last pancake off the griddle and put 
it on his young disciple's plate. It was shaped somewhat like 
a gourd. "Perfect," he repeated. 
42 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Once a great teacher told me, "If you don't like the world 
you see, change die prescription of your glasses." 
At the time of writing this chapter, I spoke to an old friend 
on the telephone. We had not met for over ten years. As we 
recalled some of our past encounters, I remarked, "Everything 
that has happened is perfect." My friend said, "I don't 
understand what you mean and I am not sure you do either." 
The truth is as simple as "change your prescription." There 
is nothing wrong with the world but your view of it. How do 
I know this? Maybe you are thinking the same thing as my 
friend, "These are just words. How does she know what she 
is talking about?" The way I know mis to be true is through 
direct experience. 
Years ago, I spent a great deal of time in deep spiritual 
contemplation and meditation. One day, after I finished my 
daily meditation, I was in an ecstatic state. My heart was 
bursting with love and joy. I experienced that the only 
substance existing in the universe was love and nothing but 
love. God had truly created this universe out of His own love. 
While I was in this state, I got into my car and drove to my 
appointment across town. On this hot and smoggy summer's 
afternoon, I was driving along the San Diego Freeway in the 
midst of chaotic traffic. Normally I would have seen Los 
Angeles and the freeway as an irritating bunch of people 
displaying their vicious manners and driving senselessly trying 
to get to wherever they were going. I had always thought 
drivers in Los Angeles should drive tanks instead of cars. But 
this time, my experience was transformed; I felt there was 
only love. I felt that the whole of Los Angeles was an 
extension of myself. In fact, I experienced that oneness with 
the whole universe. At that moment, I saw only perfection. 
Even a chaotic freeway was part of the expression of God's 
perfection. 
For me, this state did not last. It faded away eventually. 
But a glimpse of this perfect vision was enough. I knew then 
through my intuitive mind that the reality of the world is 
43 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
always perfect, even when we do not perceive it to be so. 
While I was privileged to have a glimpse of this reality, I also 
then knew that the very wise ones from the ancient to the 
present are always living in this state of understanding. 
In our everyday lives, we constantly attempt to fix our 
reality. We want it to fit into our concept of "perfection." 
A couple of years ago, I conducted a radio interview with 
Joseph Barbera, the founder of Hanna-Barbera Studios and 
creator of the animated cartoon classics, "Yogi Bear," "Tom 
and Jerry," plus many more. During our conversation, he 
spoke of how perfectly his life had turned out. He said that 
sometimes when you are in the midst of it, it may not seem to 
be going well, but when you look back, then the perfection is 
apparent. 
Joseph Barbera was once a struggling cartoonist, making a 
living by selling his cartoon pieces to New York magazines. 
He selected some of his better cartoons and sent them to Walt 
Disney to request a job. For a struggling cartoonist, working 
for the Disney Studio was the ultimate dream come true. 
Disney replied, writing that he would interview Mr. Barbera 
on his next trip to New York. But Disney never called on him. 
Obviously, at that time it was a great disappointment for 
Barbera. Now as he looks back, he is delighted Walt Disney 
didn't come to see him. Barbera said, "I probably would have 
become a devoted member of his staff and still would be with 
Disney studios today." 
The concept of seeing everything as perfect is not only a 
comforting thought when you are experiencing life's major 
disappointments. It is also a powerful tool for the Thick Face, 
Black Heart practitioner when applied to insignificant day to 
day annoyances. 
As I was writing this chapter, I took a break to run some 
errands. On the way to each destination, even though they 
were places I had been to before, I kept getting hopelessly 
lost. It was a hot summer's day and I was driving a half-ton 
4x4 pickup truck. I thought to myself, I really fail to see any 
44 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
purpose for repeatedly getting lost. In the midst of this, the 
thought of seeing every manifestation as perfection entered my 
mind. I knew that in the mystery of life, there is perfection 
beyond my understanding. If our Divine Maker does not will 
it, not even a single leaf will dare to fall. 
I calmly accepted this irritating experience. Although I 
continued to get lost, my state of mind had transformed from 
potentially explosive to relaxed and calm. 
I realized that there are even benefits to be reaped by this 
seemingly pointless and frustrating experience. At this moment 
I was able to master my thoughts and to direct them positive-
ly. 
Through this experience, I was reminded of countless other 
events like this. By having this incident happen to me at this 
time, it was important for me to share it with you. In this way, 
we can all look back and examine similar incidents in our 
past. Consequently, in the future we can place them in the 
proper perspective of seeing the imperfect manifestation of 
reality as perfect. 
I remember a time when unexpectedly stuck in heavy 
traffic, I had consciously decided to enjoy the view of the San 
Francisco Bay while waiting for the blockage to clear. I 
noticed directly behind me in another car, an attractive and 
professionally dressed woman alone. She was screaming at the 
traffic and beating her fists on the steering wheel, while her 
face was flushing to ever deeper shades of crimson. Her 
irritation and frustration served only to exacerbate her agitation 
and had no impact on the traffic at all. 
Like the monks, you may have an idealized vision of how 
things are supposed to be. But the world unfolds to its own 
rhythm and purpose. It is important for you to strive beyond 
the common human understanding, beyond preconceptions of 
what should be and what shouldn't be. In time, you will see 
the perfection in the seemingly imperfect manifestations of the 
world. 
45 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
VII. Master the Distinctions Between 
Virtue and Vanity 
While God waits for His church 
to be built of love, 
men bring stones. 
—Rabindranath Tagore 
A Holy Man's Sacred Vow 
A holy man was meditating beneath a tree at the crossing of 
two roads. His meditation was interrupted by a young man 
running frantically down the road towards him. 
"Help me," the young man pleaded, "A man has wrongly 
accused me of stealing. He is pursuing me with a great crowd 
of people. If they catch me they will chop off my hands." 
The young man climbed the tree beneath which the sage 
had been meditating and hid himself in the branches. "Please 
don't tell them where I am hiding," he begged. 
The holy man saw with the clear vision of a saint that the 
young man was telling him the truth. The lad was not a thief. 
A few moments later, the crowd of villagers approached and 
the leader asked, "Have you seen a young man run by here?" 
Many years earlier, the holy man had taken a vow to 
always speak the truth, so he said that he had. 
"Where did he go?" the leader asked. 
The holy man did not want to betray the innocent young 
man, but his vow was sacred to him. He pointed up into the 
tree. The villagers dragged the young man out of the tree and 
chopped off his hands. 
46 

PREPARATION FOR T H I C K FACE, BLACK HEART 
When the holy man died and stood before Judgement he 
was condemned for his behavior in regard to the unfortunate 
young man. 
"But," he protested, "I had made a holy vow to speak only 
the truth. I was bound to act as I did." 
"On that day," came the reply, "you loved vanity more than 
virtue. It was not for virtue's sake that you delivered the 
innocent man over to his persecutors, but to preserve a vain 
image of yourself as a virtuous person." 
The limited human wisdom which guides our concept of 
virtue often becomes our compelling force for evil. Our false 
concept of virtue often is nothing but vanity and an attempt to 
gain praise or to be self—righteous about how "virtuous" we 
are, so we may feel superior to others. So many times, 
because this false virtue is accompanied by a dose of human 
ignorance, virtue becomes an effective weapon in making 
humanity a victim. 
I 
• 
The Crimes Against Humanity 
When it comes to the victimization of humanity under the 
banner of "virtue," there are no divisions of East, West, past, 
or present. 
In China, near the end of the Ming Dynasty, (early 1600 
A.D.), bandits and peasant forces rose against the Ming Court. 
The rebellious horde rode through villages robbing the 
villagers and raping young girls. In China at that time, female 
virtue was sacred. When a young girl was raped, the only 
option open to her parents was to serve her with a strong 
poison, thus cleansing the family name. So, when a young girl 
experienced the horrible fate of being raped, she then had to 
face the even worse fate of being poisoned by her family. 
When Galileo made his findings known to the world— 
namely that the sun does not encircle the earth but visa 
versa—all the "most virtuous" members of the C a t h o l i c c church 
47 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
condemned him by burning his books and imprisoning him for 
most of his remaining life. 
This ignorance—guided virtue is not the sole property of 
the past. Not so long ago, in the 1950s, the whole nation of 
the United States went through their own "witch hunt," led by 
Senator Joseph McCarthy. 
Today, "virtuous" citizens with sincere intentions attempt 
to impose their standards and moral codes regarding many 
social issues onto others in the name of "goodness and 
decency." The question we have to ask ourselves is, can we be 
so sure that our concept of virtue has not become a compelling 
force for hatred, intolerance and hypocrisy? Are we not, once 
more, victimizing humanity? 
Virtue, contrary to what most people think, is not some-
thing you wear outside of yourself for public display, as the 
following story demonstrates. 
The Whore and the Priest 
A Hindu priest lived across the street from a prostitute. Each 
day as he was going in to do his prayers and meditation, he 
would see men coming and going from the prostitute's room. 
He would see the woman herself greeting them or bidding 
them farewell. Each day the priest would imagine and ponder 
the shameful acts that were committed in the whore's room 
and his heart would fill with strong disapproval of the 
woman's immorality. 
Each day the prostitute would see the priest at his spiritual 
practices. She would think how beautiful it must be to be so 
pure, to spend one's time in prayer and meditation. "But," she 
would sigh, "it is my lot to be a whore. My mother was a 
whore and my daughter will be one too, such are the ways of 
this land." 
48 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The priest and the whore died on the same day and stood 
before Judgement together. Much to his astonishment, the 
priest was condemned for his wickedness. 
"But," he protested, "my life has been one of purity. I have 
spent my days in prayer and meditation." 
"Yes," said Judgement, "but while your body was engaged 
in those holy actions, your heart was consumed with vicious 
judgements and your soul was ravaged by your lustful 
imagination." 
The whore was commended for her purity. 
"I do not understand," she said, "for all my life, I have sold 
my body to every man who has had the price." 
"Your life's circumstances placed you in a whore house. 
You were bom there, and it was beyond your strength to do 
otherwise. But while your body was performing unworthy acts, 
your heart was always so pure and forever fixed in contempla-
tion on the purity of the holy man's prayers and meditation." 
The Mourning 
Mourning can be a vain competition among the survivors to 
demonstrate a deeper attachment to the departed and a greater 
bereavement. In Asian society this is especially true. 
While I was attending college in Taipei, I rented a room in 
the house of a wealthy widow, where she lived with her three 
sons and their families. During the time I stayed there, the 
widow, in her eighties, fell ill and was hospitalized. A month 
later, she was brought home and died. 
The sons arranged for an elaborate mourning ritual and 
burial. The body was laid out in the main room of the house. 
For the next week, every afternoon at three a Tao priest would 
arrive in his huge colorful robe to perform a ritual for the dead 
and the family would gather for an hour of mourning. As soon 
as the priest began chanting, fifteen people would simulta-
neously break out in loud, forlorn wailing. They would 
49 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
alternate inarticulate sobs and cries with articulate expressions 
of grief. "How could you leave us here without your wisdom 
and guidance?" one would wail. "You suffered so much 
because we failed in our familial duties!" another would 
lament. Each lamentation grew louder and more disconsolate 
than the last until the bellowing was quite unbelievable. Then, 
precisely at four o'clock, it ceased and everyone went about 
their business until the following day at the same time. 
As the week wore on, the eyes grew drier even though the 
wailing remained just as loud. It was important to demonstrate 
the depth of bereavement not only to the other members of the 
family, but the sound of grief had to carry all the way to the 
neighbors' houses. My room was directly above the room 
where the body was laid out. I was completely exhausted just 
listening to the daily mourning. The participants were also 
absolutely drained. It was with unmistakable relief that they 
finally buried the old woman. 
It was not a tragic or unexpected death. The woman had 
lived a long and very comfortable life. Her death had come 
peacefully after a brief illness. There was no cause to feel 
sorry for her at all. In a land where one does not have to walk 
far to encounter truly tragic and pathetic lives, her life was a 
cause for celebration. The mourning was entirely for the 
benefit of the survivors and the neighbors. 
Virtue is a delicate substance. No one can judge or measure 
your virtue, not even yourself. When you are truly aligned 
with virtue, there is no sense of arrogance, righteousness, or 
superiority. When you are truly aligned with virtue, a harmony 
pervades. 
VIII. Overcoming Fear 
Fear is the most destructive of emotions. Fear is to a man's 
soul as a drop of poison is to a well of spring water. Fear 
50 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
wears so many different masks and comes in so many forms. 
Deep down in our subconscious we are wise enough to 
recognize the fragility of how this universe was put together; 
that our existence and survival hangs on the invisible threads 
of God's grace. In our conscious awareness, fear is a vague 
but constantly nagging uneasiness. Most people do not even 
know that they are afraid most of the time. 
Once there was a reporter who during an interview asked 
a well-known national news anchorman, "What are you afraid 
of?" The anchorman was taken by surprise and placed in a 
potentially vulnerable position. He would have to truly expose 
himself if he were to deal with it honestly. He quickly 
addressed the question by giving superficial answers: "I am 
afraid of natural events such as earthquakes and floods." 
The reporter asked him if there was anything else and he 
said no. The anchorman could not tell the truth for fear of 
what his audience would think. He was in the public eye and 
was protecting his public image. It was obvious that one of his 
biggest fears was to answer this question. But it was not his 
fault that he felt the need to lie by omission. In general it is 
unacceptable in our society to admit your fears in a formal or 
business environment. 
Wherever we turn, we are face to face with different 
aspects of fear. It is the biggest barrier for us to overcome in 
order to experience and fulfill our true potential. If you intend 
to practice Thick Face, Black Heart it is vitally important that 
you take a good look at how and when fear manifests itself in 
your life. Although the experience of fear is universal, it 
assumes different forms for each individual. 
I grew up in a family where fear was the regular staple 
served during breakfast, lunch, and dinner. My parents grew 
up under the domination of the Japanese Imperial Army in 
Manchuria. Fear was the main element the Japanese utilized 
to control the Chinese citizens. After the Japanese defeat at the 
end of World War II, my family then had to live through the 
devastating experience of the collapse of the Chinese govern-
51 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
ment and their monetary system. In addition, as large land-
holders, they had to cope with the threat of the new Commu-
nist policy to eradicate "evil" landlords from the face of the 
earth. Forced to leave China, my parents' fears were worsened 
by the hopelessness of living as refugees in Taiwan with three 
young children to care for. 
Fear was a permanent resident in our household. The air 
was so thick with fear that even when we were not afraid, we 
were afraid. I remember a couple of years ago, while I was 
lying in bed, out of nowhere a tremendous feeling of fear hit 
me. I had never before experienced such potency of feeling. 
Though I could think of no reason to be fearful, I was so 
afraid that I got sick to my stomach. 
Suddenly, I realized, the fear I felt was the fear from my 
parents—fear of the unpredictability of the fragile, material 
world in which they had lived. I had swallowed their fear just 
by being in their environment and in that moment, had 
recreated it in its full intensity. All my life, I have watched 
how fear works. I contemplate the mystery within the fear. 
Not long ago, I was in a shopping mall at closing time. I 
saw a young store clerk, looking terribly frustrated. She was 
kneeling near a rolldown steel door, with sweat showing 
through her thin blouse. I asked her what was wrong and if 
she needed any help. 
She told me she had been trying to lock the door for the 
past half hour but she couldn't. She said that until the door 
was locked, she couldn't go home. After I looked at the steel 
door, it was clear that the position of the lever at the bottom 
had moved past the slot on the side of the door frame. 
However, she would not allow me to lift the steel door even 
slightly, for fear the alarm would go off She told me that 
once the door was down, if it was lifted, the alarm would be 
triggered. 
This young woman's attention was focused solely on the 
fear of the alarm going off I finally convinced her to lift the 
door just a bit higher to find the slot. Out of desperation, she 
52 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
gave up her position and we locked the door. Instead of 
controlling her fear, the sales girl had allowed it to dominate 
her actions to the point where she was completely inert and 
useless. 
Fear does not have to be a negative entity. Through my life 
experience practicing Thick Face, Black Heart I have discov-
ered that there are six elements involved in handling fear. 
1. The Usefulness of Fear 
There is a popular Chinese maxim: "The hat is good, the shoes 
are good. However, if you put the hat on your feet, and the 
shoes on your head, then both become useless." 
The emotion of fear is not bad, as everything under heaven 
has its purpose. If we understand the purpose of fear we may 
use the emotion of fear to benefit our life rather than empower 
it to hasten our self-destruction. 
Fear does not have to be destructive. If we learn to respect 
fear and channel the emotion of fear for a higher purpose, it 
will benefit us. Just think: if you never experience any fear, it 
is probably because you are living your life too safely, beneath 
your capacity and avoiding challenges. Such a life can be 
summed up in one word—nothing. An ancient wise man once 
said, "I would rather have fear and worry then nothing." 
Due to the grace of fear, we learn to respect the laws of 
nature. We do not foolishly jump into a blazing fire, or drown 
ourselves in the depths of the ocean. We do not jump out of 
an airplane without proper training and equipment. Due to the 
grace of fear, a mother will tenderly watch and protect her 
child from harm. 
During the course of my work, a FBI agent contacted me 
to ask for my assistance. He wanted me to watch for Chinese 
spies who were pretending to be members of visiting delega-
53 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
tions. He told me these people came to the United States and 
secretly contacted their people here. I told him that all the 
people I had come across were who they said they were. Even 
during my visits to China they were still working at the same 
posts. Furthermore, what he was asking might give the 
Chinese government cause to imprison me and I had no desire 
to spend my retirement in a Chinese jail. I was not afraid to 
be honest about, nor was I ashamed of my great fear of 
Chinese jails where human rights are given no consideration 
at all. 
As a matter of fact, he was rather relieved at my unwilling-
ness to cooperate. I think one of his objectives in speaking 
with me was to find out whether or not I was sympathetic to 
the Peoples' Republic of China, above and beyond my 
allegiance to the United States of America. 
Do not be afraid of fear. Employ Thick Face, Black Heart 
to shield and protect you from your illusion of harm. Our 
creator did not place fear in our hearts in order to destroy us, 
but rather to guide and protect us. Understand your fear, 
befriend your fear. Talk to your fear, and ask how you can 
utilize it for your benefit rather than your destruction. To the 
grace of fear, I pay respect and bow deeply. 
54 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
2. The Eyes Of Fear 
The content of fear may be intense and gripping, 
so much so that it overwhelms us completely. 
But when we look beyond that content at the fear itself, 
what do we find? 
Pure energy, energy which, if we focus on it directly, 
will begin to reveal its real nature. 
Then, instead of filling us with agitation, 
the energy of fear can actually lead us 
to a state of exhilaration, or intense concentration, 
or love. 
—Ancient Hindu Scripture 
To overcome fear, first you have to find the courage and will 
to confront fear. Fear is never so terrifying once you look into 
its eyes. A Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner will use his 
spear to pierce the eye of fear. 
For no apparent reason, I had been always afraid of deep 
water. Whenever I was swimming in the deeper part of a pool, 
I felt panic and fear. Whenever I took a dive, from the 
moment my body touched the bottom until I came up, I felt 
that the time seemed unbearably long. 
Fifteen years ago, I took a cruise to the Caribbean. While 
the ship was anchored in the U.S. Virgin Islands, I took a 
deep sea diving class. I decided to take a look at what it 
would really be like if I went down to the bottom of the sea. 
After a half hour of brief instruction, with a group of ten 
people and an instructor, I walked into the sea with my 
oxygen tank. While in the water, whenever my mind thought 
about being at the bottom of the sea, I felt fearful. I would 
then say to myself, "I am one with the ocean, I am one with 
the all the creatures in the ocean. I am God's child. Wherever 
55 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
I am, I belong. I have the same right as the fish to make this 
ocean my own." These were not just words, they were 
direction and guidance for my mind. The words became 
thoughts and experiences. I then felt at ease with the idea of 
swimming at the bottom of the sea. 
My diving experience was the highlight of my whole trip. 
In fact, it was one of the highlights of my life. I knew then 
that I could master my fear at will; I just had to look into its 
eyes. Years ago, I decided to organize and conduct a full day 
seminar about how to do business with Asians. The morning 
of the seminar while I was dressing, I was overcome by fear. 
Suddenly it hit me; "I had never spoken in front of any large 
groups. What if I opened my mouth and nothing came out? 
What would this do for my professional reputation? How 
would I get through this day?" In that instant, I had envisioned 
the entire day and was convinced I would fail and be devastat-
ed. 
As I was driving towards the hotel, I thought to myself, "I 
either shape up or admit defeat." I decided the only way I 
could get rid of my fear was to stop wanting to avoid the 
feeling of being fearful. To stop resisting it. The more I did 
not want to feel fearful, the more intense the fear got. 
I mentally took my fear from my heart, placed it in front 
of me on my dash board, and started to stare into this fear 
with great intensity. I said to myself, "Let me be more fierce 
then fear itself." Suddenly the fear I had been feeling was 
replaced by the intense courage that I had created to stare at 
the fear. By the time I arrived at the hotel, I was charged with 
power and enthusiasm. 
My first seminar was a great success. After I had finished 
at 4:00 p.m., no one wanted to leave—they wanted to hear 
more! 
My experience was not extraordinary. Often the bravest 
warriors were originally the greatest cowards. The more fear 
you confront and conquer, the greater courage you will 
possess. 
56 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
3. Diversity is Fear 
The most profound knowledge is often only available through 
direct perception and experience. Words alone are never 
sufficient to explain such mysteries. Understanding the nature 
of fear and how to take control of it is of great importance in 
our daily life. Knowing the source of fear is the essential 
element; without it, your understanding of fear will not be 
complete. 
The profound and simple truth is that the universe was 
created by our Divine Maker. He created the whole universe 
out of himself and no other substance. In reality all things and 
creatures are one with our Maker. Just as in the material 
world, all elements consist of atomic particles, yet they are 
manifested as infinitely different forms. Whenever we experi-
ence ourselves as separate from that power of Oneness, fear 
enters. 
When I was afraid of deep water, the source of my fear 
was that I experienced myself as being separate from the 
water. When I focused my mind and heart and concentrated on 
becoming one with the water and all the creations within, then 
I expanded to include the water and the one who created the 
water. I also was included within it. 
A friend of mine shared with me that normally, she is 
extremely afraid about the judgements and opinions of others. 
For her, this was a source of constant anxiety. Once, after 
completing a spiritual retreat, for a few days, she experienced 
a state of complete serenity. She was without fear. 
In this state of fearlessness, there was no effort needed not 
to be afraid. There was simply a sense of pure peace, serenity, 
harmony and great clarity. A feeling of well-being in which 
she saw that although she was different from others, in 
essence she was the same. There was no diversity. She 
experienced that all of creation was one with the Creator. Yet 
57 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
she was not consciously experiencing the thought. In that 
oneness, you are part of the whole in each pulsating moment 
of time. Thought does not exist. 
This harmonious state is experienced by those who dedicate 
their lives to vigilance in practicing the highest form of Thick 
Face, Black Heart. To obtain this state is within human reach, 
but make no mistake about it, it is only through rigorous 
vigilance and practice that it will manifest. 
The experience of diversity manifests in a way that affects 
our daily lives. For example, in the business world whenever 
a salesman sees that his own interest is the opposite of his 
potential customer, he is fearful. He sees that in order for him 
to make a dollar, the potential customer will have to dish out 
ten dollars. Deep down, he knows he is a noble human being. 
He does not wish to have a total stranger "lose" ten dollars so 
he may gain one dollar. Consequently, he is afraid to approach 
the customer. 
If the salesman took a different perspective and sought 
unity among his customers' interests, then his fear would not 
exist. Would you be afraid if you knew for certain that by 
communicating information concerning your service or product 
to the potential buyer, he would benefit tremendously? In our 
daily lives, whenever you can find unity among diversity, you 
will experience no fear. 
4. Master Detachment 
Performing your duty without attachment or aversion 
is a great antidote to the poison of fear. 
—Bhagavad Gita 
If you are not concerned about the outcome of a circumstance, 
you will experience no fear. When you attach yourself to 
expectations, anxiety and fear will overcome you. The 
58 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
outcome will be what it will be, regardless of your expecta-
tions and fears. 
5. Ignoring the Fear 
I am an old man and have a great many troubles, 
but most of them never happened. 
—Mark Twain 
For most of us, fear is not grounded in any real possibility of 
catastrophe; rather it is a state of emotional uneasiness. Mark 
Twain clearly understood this well as he said that most of our 
worries and fears never come true. Don't give your fear too 
much importance. An ignored guest often departs un-
announced. 
6. In Spite Of Your Fear, 
Do What You Have To Do 
Faith is the bird that feels the light 
and sings when the dawn is still dark. 
—Rabindranath Tagore 
This is the essence of the message of fear. During your daily 
encounters, in spite of your fear, do what you have to do. 
You, as the Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner will press 
ahead and walk through the clouds of fear that may arise on 
your path to success. 
59 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
IX. Voyage Beyond the Avoidance of 
Pain and the Pursuit of Pleasure 
The man who is not troubled by pain and pleasure, 
who remains the same, 
he is wise and makes himself fit for eternal life. 
—Bhagavad Gita 
Beneath the fear of success and failure is the fear of pain. The 
most motivating factor in human actions is the desire to avoid 
pain and do what promises us pleasure. 
There may be religious individuals who would argue that 
this is not so with them. The aim of devotion, however, is the 
possible deliverance out of eternal pain into eternal pleasure— 
the bliss of God. 
If an individual can convince others that doing things his 
way will increase the pleasure of living and lessen the pain of 
life, that individual would certainly be a popular man. Just 
look at political speeches given during the past hundred years. 
They have changed very little: "If you vote for me, your life 
is going to be better, you will have more money to spend, 
your children will have a higher standard of education to 
ensure their prosperous future, you will have luxurious low-
cost housing, you will have a strong defense, you will have 
cultural programs to enrich your lives, and I promise you that 
there will be no increase in taxes." Whoever can paint the 
most convincing mental picture gets elected. 
Hitler understood this principle. When he came to power in 
1930, Germany was in a deep economic slump. The German 
people were still carrying the heavy disgrace of their defeat in 
World War I. They were suffering both physically and 
emotionally. 
60 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Hitler's socialist Nazi party promised a better economic life 
and the possibility of a re-glorified Germany. The promise of 
a better life was more attractive than their harsh and hopeless 
reality. The German people opened their arms and embraced 
him. 
Hitler delivered his promise. He brought Germany out of 
economic depression and went on to unite the German-speak-
ing world. In 1938 he was at the top. According to some 
historians, if Hitler had died in 1938, he would now be known 
as the greatest statesman in the history of Germany. 
Eva Duarte Peron of Argentina, popularly known as Evita, 
seemed to have acquired something akin to sainthood by the 
time of her death in 1952. She used only one weapon to 
secure the dictatorial position of her husband. She convinced 
the poor masses of Argentina that she and her husband were 
their only hope for a better life. She used herself as an 
example, having been raised in the slums of Argentina. 
"Follow me. You too can rise to the top." Argentina believed 
her. 
Hitler delivered something tangible. Eva Peron delivered 
hope. Both convinced the masses that they had the means to 
lessen the pain and increase the pleasures of life. 
Half a century later, people have not grown wiser. We are 
still eager to embrace anyone who promises to increase our 
pleasure and lessen our pain. We operate our whole lives out 
of a desire for pleasure and the avoidance of pain. We are like 
laboratory rats who have found out which door hides the 
cheese. 
Our former president, Ronald Reagan, is a master at 
manipulating this simple human emotion. In order to fulfill his 
promise of making the American people "feel good," he had 
to create a false prosperity. He borrowed against America's 
future, turning the United States from the largest creditor 
nation to the largest debtor nation in eight short years. 
History has proven that the blind pursuit of pleasure and 
avoidance of pain causes the human race to sabotage itself. 
61 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
We blindly pursue individual pleasure at any cost, and rob 
ourselves of our possibility to be great. The remedy to cure 
this current national character defect is Thick Face, Black 
Heart. Abraham Lincoln understood that the price of greatness 
lay beyond the pursuit of pleasure and avoidance of pain. He 
fought for the very existence of the principle of democratic 
government and was willing to risk the devastating destruction 
of his beloved nation. 
X. Acquire the Courage to Believe 
in Yourself 
Many of the things that you have been taught were at one time 
the radical ideas of individuals who had the courage to believe 
what their own hearts and minds told them was true, rather 
than accept the common beliefs of their day. In the world of 
science, Galileo and Darwin come immediately to mind. Their 
ideas questioned the cherished belief of man's pre-eminent 
place in God's Universe. They threw the dogmatic religious 
establishment into paroxysms of rage. 
I spent the first part of my life in provincial China and the 
subsequent years in modern America. Time and time again I 
have noticed how customs that seem of such fundamental and 
unquestioned importance in one culture reveal themselves to 
be trivial and arbitrary when viewed from the perspective of 
a different culture. 
I remember an old woman who lived in our street when I 
was a child. We children called her Auntie Wong. Though 
elderly, she was a lively and energetic person. Like the other 
women of her age, she dressed in the old style and pulled her 
hair back in a neat bun, ornamenting it with a jade and silver 
stick pin. But unlike the other old women, Auntie Wong 
moved purposefully when she walked. She did not hobble 
slowly on tiny, broken and disfigured feet. 
62 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
In Auntie Wong's youth it had been the custom to break 
the bones of young girls' feet and then bind them tightly with 
the toes bent under so they would heal into tiny, deformed 
feet. It was ingrained into people's thinking that these mis-
shapen feet were a necessary component of female beauty. 
Besides being thought of as beautiful in and of themselves, 
bound feet caused a woman's hips to sway in what was 
considered a most irresistible manner. But sensuality really 
had nothing to do with it. A woman's hips swayed because 
she could not walk straight. 
But Auntie Wong's mother had been a woman of enormous 
courage. She forbade anyone to bind her child's feet. She 
physically restrained the members of her outraged family from 
performing the ritual. For the remainder of her life, she stood 
as a shield between her daughter and those who would cripple 
her. When Auntie Wong's mother died, Auntie Wong was 
thirteen years old and her feet were already much too large to 
bind. 
From the vantage point of twentieth century America it is 
easy to minimize the enormity of Auntie Wong's mother's 
courage. Foot binding is to us such an obviously barbaric and 
pointless practice that it seems common sense would prohibit 
it. However, in Auntie Wong's world, only servants and 
peasant women had unbound feet. It brought great shame on 
her family to have a daughter whose very feet proclaimed her 
to be coarse and without breeding. 
But many old customs changed in China during the early 
years of this century. Foot binding fell out of favor. Auntie 
Wong's generation was the last to be subjected to it. Rather 
than spending her life as a social pariah, Auntie Wong was 
one of the few women of her generation to be in tune with the 
prevailing standards of the new China. The women who had 
been crippled by foot binding grew old as relics of a bygone 
era. The invisible chains of customs and cultural practices are 
more binding than the shackles of iron. Your life will be very 
63 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
difficult if you violate accepted standards of conduct without 
important reasons. 
Nonetheless, as a Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner, it 
is essential to break free from the bondage and have the 
courage to be true to your convictions. 
XI. Realize the Thick Face, Black Heart 
Nature of the Creator 
To every thing there is a season, 
and a time to every purpose under heaven. 
—Ecclesiastes, The Holy Bible 
Most of the religions of the world recognize a Creator or 
Creative Force. They may differ regarding His specific identity 
and many of His attributes, but there is surprising agreement 
on the idea that all things happen through the will of this 
Creator. One of the great mysteries of religion is why a benign 
and omnipotent Creator would allow suffering to come into 
the world. God may mark the sparrow's fall, but He neverthe-
less lets him fall. The Creator's destructive force is so violent 
and causes so much human misery, both through the blind 
forces of nature and the actions of the wicked, that He seems 
callous and unjust. 
But the created Universe is huge, spanning unthinkable 
ranges of time and distance. Galaxies coalesce out of clouds 
of dust drifting in the vast icy blackness of interstellar space. 
Stars ignite, planets form and life begins. Eventually it is all 
consumed in its own fire and returns to dust, ready for the 
cycle to begin again. The Creator does not modify His plan 
for the convenience of an infinitesimal fragment of creation, 
nor does He explain Himself. The Universe is run according 
64 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
to immutable principles that are far, far greater than our small 
concerns. 
Creation and destruction are not opposites, as they seem. 
They are two aspects of a single force. The Universe is a 
constant cycle of creation and destruction. Both are equally 
necessary. 
As I write this, there is a huge forest fire raging out of 
control in the mountains nearby. Despite the fact that scientists 
clearly understand the need for periodic fires to maintain a 
healthy forest, hundreds of men using millions of dollars 
worth of equipment are frantically trying to extinguish the 
flames. The local timber industry cannot see beyond its need 
for the standing timber being lost. Animal lovers lament the 
loss of animal life without considering that this cataclysm is 
a necessary and natural part of preparing the way for the 
generations of wild beasts to come. Only the Creator has a 
face thick enough and a heart black enough to allow His grand 
design to unfold without concern for these matters. 
Often when we categorize something as wrong or bad, it is 
because we do not possess the breadth of vision to see its 
necessity in the overall scheme of things. 
65 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Summary Of Key Points 
• Breaking the constraints of the inner images and 
external standards: From childhood, most of us have 
been taught that the highest prize in the world is the 
approval of others. Perhaps it is not stated in so many 
words, but it is implied in everything we are told is 
right and good. Thick Face, Black Heart is the natural 
state of your being. This state has been lost to you 
because of well-meaning people who drilled into you 
all the rules about how you ought to behave and how 
you ought to feel, and it is also lost to you because of 
an inner image you have created of yourself out of 
other peoples' expectations and beliefs. You must 
reclaim the natural state of your true self. 
• Searching for your own inner conviction: There is time 
to submit to being slapped and there is a time to hit 
back twice. It is not whether or not you turn the other 
cheek that is important. It is why you do, or do not, 
that counts the most. 
• Discovering the mystery within the staunchness of the 
oak and the yielding of the grass. The grass bends 
easily in the wind. The great oak stands unmoved. A 
strong wind can uproot the oak, but no wind, however 
strong, can uproot the grass that bends flat before it. 
The ideal practitioner of Thick Face, Black Heart is 
one who possesses Thick Face, Black Heart inwardly, 
yet whose outward appearance can be dominating or 
submissive as the situation demands. He does not have 
66 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
a public or private image of himself to live up to or 
one that dictates how he must behave. 
• Understanding yourself: In order to free yourself from 
the domination of arbitrary standards and discover the 
true standards by which you should behave, you need 
to find the courage to do what you must without 
regard to what others may think. 
• Self-observation is essential for self-growth. You must 
first understand the motives for your own actions in 
order to understand others. 
• Self-knowledge is a more reliable guide to behavior 
than adherence to arbitrarily imposed standards. 
• Breaking the bondage of the fear of success and fear 
of failure: Success means change and risk of failure. 
The failure of those who attempt extraordinary accom-
plishments is much more public and generally accom-
panied by sighs of satisfaction from ordinary failures. 
Success also requires the courage to risk disapproval. 
All independent thought, new ideas, or endeavors 
beyond the common measure are greeted with disap-
proval ranging from skepticism and ridicule to violent 
outrage. To persevere in anything exceptional requires 
inner strength and the unshakable conviction that you 
are right. 
• Understanding the nature of illusion and reality: In our 
everyday lives, we constantly attempt to fix our 
reality. We want it to fit into our concept of "perfec-
tion." Seeing everything as perfect is not only a 
comforting thought when you are experiencing life's 
major disappointments, it is also a powerful tool to the 
67 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner when applied to 
insignificant, day-to-day annoyances. 
• Master the distinctions between virtue and vanity: The 
limited human wisdom which guides our concept of 
virtue often becomes the compelling force for evil. 
Our false concept of virtue often is nothing but vanity 
and an attempt to gain praise or to be self-righteous 
about how "virtuous" we are, so we may feel superior 
to others. Often, because this false virtue is accompa-
nied by a dose of human ignorance, virtue becomes an 
effective weapon in making humanity a victim. 
• Overcome fear: Fear is to man's soul as a drop of 
poison is to a well of spring water. 
• Everything under heaven has its purpose. If we under-
stand the purpose of fear we may use the emotion of 
fear to benefit our life rather than empower it to 
hasten our self-destruction. 
• Fear is never so fearful once you look it in the eyes. 
• In reality all things and creatures are one with our 
Maker. Just as in the material world, all elements 
consist of atomic particles, yet they manifest them-
selves in infinitely different forms. Whenever we 
experience ourselves as separate from that power of 
Oneness, fear enters. When a salesman sees his own 
interest is the opposite of his potential customer, he is 
fearful. When a salesman seeks unity with his custom-
er's interests, then his fear does not exist. 
• If you are not concerned about the outcome of a 
circumstance you will experience no fear. Whatever 
68 

PREPARATION FOR THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
the outcome will be, will be, whether you fear it or 
not. 
• Don't give your fear too much importance. An ignored 
guest often departs unannounced. 
• In spite of your fear, do what you have to do. 
• Voyage beyond the avoidance of pain and the pursuit 
of pleasure. We operate our whole lives on the desire 
for pleasure and the avoidance of pain. We are like 
laboratory rats who have found out which door hides 
the cheese. History has proven that the blind pursuit of 
pleasure and avoidance of pain causes the human race 
to sabotage itself. The price of greatness lies beyond 
the pursuit of pleasure and avoidance of pain. 
• Acquire the courage to believe in yourself. Many of 
the things that you have been taught were at one time 
the radical ideas of individuals who had the courage to 
believe what their own hearts and minds told them 
was true, rather than accept the common beliefs of 
their day. 
• Realize the Thick Face, Black Heart nature of the 
creator. Destruction is an essential part of Creation. 
Only the Creator has a face thick enough and a heart 
black enough to allow His grand design to ruthlessly 
unfold. The Creator does not modify His plan for the 
convenience of an infinitesimal fragment of creation, 
nor does He explain Himself. The Universe is run 
according to immutable principles that are far greater 
than our small concerns. 
69 

According to your life, 
your duties have been prescribed for you; 
follow them and your 
desires will be naturally fulfilled. 
— B h a g a v a d Gita 

3Dharma: 
The Wish-
Fulfilling 
Tree 
The Concept of Dharma 
Dharma is the foundation that supports life. 
—Mahabharata 
T 
he word "Dharma" comes from Sanskrit, the 
oldest language in the world and one which 
originated in ancient India. It has been confirmed 
by leading Western linguists that Sanskrit is the root of 
virtually all known languages and according to Hindu mythol-
ogy, is the language spoken by the gods. Dharma came from 
71 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
the root word dhar, which means "to support, uphold, and 
nourish." So, Dharma is often defined as that which supports 
life; it is the sustaining force of the world, the divine coher-
ence of the universe. 
Dharma is the understanding of appropriate action for any 
given circumstance. It means "to act in accordance with one's 
duty." Each person, depending on his station in life, will have 
a different Dharma. For example, a warrior's Dharma is to 
slay the enemies of his nation. A physician's Dharma is to 
save lives, even the lives of his enemies. These two actions, 
although completely different, are both correct. If Dharma is 
followed, the world will be in harmony with the natural law. 
Dharma is the foundation of Thick Face, Black Heart. In 
order to successfully become a righteous Thick Face, Black 
Heart practitioner, the awareness of Dharma must be constant-
ly in one's consciousness. Otherwise, as mentioned in Chapter 
I, you will become an unconscionable Thick Face, Black Heart 
practitioner who is willing to win at all costs but without any 
regard for the consequences to other people. Only by main-
taining this awareness of Dharma will we begin to gain insight 
into what is required for proper discrimination in thought and 
in action. 
Dharma, Your Protector and Liberator 
People who practice Dharma accept life as it comes and 
perform their duty accordingly. Dharma is a natural law which 
guides us to recognize at any given moment the role each one 
of us is playing in life. Being true to the duty of that particular 
role at any given time and the very act of accepting and 
performing that action to the best of our ability—that is 
following Dharma. That act will become our protector and 
savior. The following Hindu story demonstrates the practicality 
of this concept. 
72 

DHARMA: THE WISH-FULFILLING TREE 
Two frogs, a father and his son, accidently fell into a 
bucket of milk. They started swimming for their lives. They 
swam for a long time but there seemed no hope of their 
getting out. The father said to the son, "I am getting tired. I 
am going to drown." The son tried to encourage his father. 
"No, keep swimming, keep swimming. Something will happen. 
Have faith." So, the father kept swimming. But half an hour 
later, the father gave up and sank to the bottom. The son went 
on swimming. During this time the churning milk, whipped by 
his unceasing efforts to save his life, had begun to form a ball 
of butter that soon became solid beneath his feet. Using this 
island of butter as a platform, he managed to hop out of the 
bucket. He mourned, "If my father had just held on a little 
longer, he'd be with me now." 
Dharma works for humans just as it does for frogs. 
Seventeen years ago, Leslie was a teenager and used to help 
me clean my house in exchange for piano lessons. Five years 
ago, I talked with her mother, and asked how Leslie was doing 
as I had not seen her for many years. It was then I learned this 
following fantastic story. 
The Miracle Power of Dharma 
After Leslie graduated from high school, she began working 
as a bookkeeper for a small manufacturer. The company 
produced a certain unique component, and produced it better 
and more cheaply than anyone else. Not only did they sell this 
component all over the United States, they also exported the 
product to other countries. 
After working there for about eight years, Leslie began to 
discover evidence which indicated that the company managers, 
the owner's two sons, were stealing company money from the 
sole owner: their mother. Knowing full well that it might mean 
losing her job—after all, it is not uncommon to "shoot the 
73 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
messenger"—she nevertheless decided she was duty bound to 
inform her employer of her sons' theft. 
As the owner never actually came to the factory, Leslie 
made an appointment to meet with her at her home. At this 
meeting, Leslie carefully showed the woman the books and 
other details which clearly laid out the extent and magnitude 
of the sons' theft. Instead of shooting the messenger as Leslie 
had feared, this woman turned to her and said, "I want to sell 
this company and I would like you to buy it." 
"I have no money," Leslie said. 
To which the owner replied, "This is what we will do. I 
will set a value for the purchase of the company. You will pay 
me a certain amount of money from the company's receivables 
each month, over a five year period, after which time you will 
own the company free and clear." She then promptly fired her 
sons and had the paperwork drawn up for the sale. Leslie has 
now owned the company for years and employs her own 
mother as the office manager. 
In this story Leslie and the company owner had both 
demonstrated impeccable commitment to their Dharma. The 
company owner, who was also a mother, followed her Dharma 
and dedicated herself to restoring the integrity of her company 
and at the same time, teaching an unforgettable lesson to her 
own sons. 
Leslie was willing to risk her livelihood in performing the 
job she was paid to do. Her dedication and courage as an 
employee was rewarded by gaining the sole ownership of a 
company, without actively pursuing it and without any capital 
of her own. This outcome was beyond her wildest dreams. 
Thick Face, Black Heart practitioners are vigorous in 
pursuing the rightness of their actions. They question them-
selves in each and every situation, "What is my Dharma at this 
moment?" Just as we have mentioned before, the Dharma of 
a warrior is the opposite of a physician's, yet they are both 
correct. On the other hand, if a warrior refuses to kill and a 
physician refuses to save, then both actions would be insup-
74 

DHARMA: THE WISH-FULFILLING TREE 
portable. By being true to their Dharma, their actions will be 
guided by the rhythm of natural law which will protect and 
support all their efforts. 
The Grace of Dharma 
The grace of Dharma works in subtle and mysterious ways 
throughout our life. John is in commercial real estate sales. He 
is hard-working, and always performs his duty diligently, but 
as it sometimes happens in this business, he went through a 
dry period. He spent an entire month carrying out his normal 
activities: lots of cold calls to prospects and visits to potential 
customers in an attempt to generate new business. All he got 
were rejections. 
John was so depressed, he decided he could use a little 
vacation and took a trip to Hawaii. Once there, he quickly 
relaxed at the beach and started to enjoy himself. Within a 
couple of days he ran into a fellow traveler who turned out to 
be a wealthy real estate investor. After all his hard work, and 
when and where he least expected it, he set up a very profit-
able deal. 
John was puzzled. "All the hard work I did produced no 
results, yet here I am out playing, with work the furthest thing 
from my mind, and what do I get? A great client. Maybe 
working so hard is not healthy for business." What John did 
not know was that due to his hard work, the power of Dharma 
shined its grace upon him as reward for his commitment to 
duty. Dharma became his protector and liberator. 
Dharma of A Debtor and A Creditor 
Financial misfortune happens all too often in today's uncertain 
economic arena. Previously stable individuals suddenly are 
75 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
unable to fulfill their obligations or repay their debts. If you 
should ever find yourself in this situation, after the shock of 
feeling helpless, ask yourself, "What is my Dharma?" 
The Dharma of a debtor in this case is to do the best he 
can do to show goodwill and intent to repay the debt. He must 
make the necessary sacrifices and adjust his lifestyle accord-
ingly, without paying so much that he destroys any possibility 
of recovery. He must not deprive himself or his family of 
essential needs. 
On the other hand, a creditor's Dharma is to allow the 
debtor to restructure the debt so he may continue with his 
basic living and have a chance to recover financially. He will 
therefore have the means to repay the original debt. I am not 
telling you something you don't already know. I merely relate 
this to you to illustrate the framework of Dharma. 
A Warrior's Dharma 
George is an important officer at the Pentagon. He participated 
in the strategic designs for the Grenada invasion, the takeover 
in Panama, and the speedy victory of Operation Desert Storm 
in the Gulf From his outward appearance, he is a military 
man. Yet privately, he is a very spiritually minded individual. 
His whole life is centered around his spiritual commitment. 
Those who know about his devotion to the spiritual life 
have asked him, "How can you be in the military? How can 
you design the ways and means to kill people and still be such 
a spiritual man?" He answers, "It is my Dharma to be a 
military man, just like Arjuna in the Bhagavad Gita. I too am 
a warrior." 
The Bhagavad Gita or "Song of God" is the most sacred of 
Hindu scriptures. Written in approximately 2,000 B.C., it is an 
epic poem which chronicles the battle between two branches 
of a ruling family over the succession to the throne. The old 
76 

DHARMA: THE WISH-FULFILLING TREE 
King, Dhritarashtra, scion of the Kaurava clan, decrees that his 
own son, Duryodhana, is less worthy to succeed him than 
Yudhishthira, the pure—hearted leader of the Pandava clan. 
Duryodhana rebels against his father's will and gathers the 
forces of the Kaurava clan to claim the throne by force. 
The Bhagavad Gita is a conversation between a great 
warrior of the Pandava clan, Arjuna, the brother of 
Yudhishthira, and the Lord Krishna, a divine embodiment of 
God, who is serving as Arjuna's charioteer for the coming 
battle. We pick up the story after the armies have been arrayed 
against each other, and just before battle is to commence. 
Arjuna requests that Krishna drive his chariot between the two 
armies for his last observations. 
Arjuna is the greatest warrior in the world. He has slain 
men, serpents, and demons. He has even conquered the God 
of death, yet when he sees relatives and friends lined up to do 
battle with each other, he is overcome with doubts. He cries 
out to Lord Krishna: 
"I see my kinsman. They are all standing arrayed for battle. 
How can this be right for me? I do not long for victory, nor 
kingdoms, nor pleasures, because in order to gain these I must 
kill my own relatives, elders, and benefactors. I would not kill 
them even if it gained me the universe and beyond; how much 
less for the sake of the earth? 
"O Lord, if the righteousness within me is destroyed, Thy 
love for me would vanish, and Thou wouldst abandon me. 
Without Thee, my heart would be shattered with grief." 
Arjuna throws away his mighty bow and sinks down into 
the seat of his chariot, disconsolate. He is ready to renounce 
his family's claim to the throne. 
In his divine wisdom, Lord Krishna understands the dual 
nature of Arjuna's agony: it is as difficult for Arjuna to detach 
himself from the familiar feelings of compassion and familial 
loyalty as it is to make war on his cousins. Krishna counsels 
him to rid him of his false compassion. He advises him to 
fight the battle without anger or passion, but in fulfillment of 
77 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
his duty to himself and his country. The fight is not about the 
throne and the kingdom, it is about fighting to sustain the 
Dharma, the natural order of the world. 
The Battle Must Be Fought 
Each one of us is a warrior in our own right. We are the 
warriors of life and life is an eternal battle. We choose to 
enter the battlefield from the day we are born. We are 
committed to win the battle of life. Just like a warrior in the 
midst of the fierce fight, there is no way out. He can choose 
to fight courageously to ensure his survival and victory, or he 
can choose to get killed. We do not have to like the fight. We 
simply have to fight to the best of our abilities. To survive in 
life, we have to confront the inner negativities and the outer 
realities. 
I have a friend who is always complaining how hard her 
life is, and how hard her job is and who is always hoping for 
a new profession that will be easy. She's a dreamer who is 
unwilling to make any effort in life. One time, during one of 
our chats, I mentioned that a literary agent has to read reams 
of unsolicited proposals and manuscripts. He has to decide 
who he will take on as new clients. He has to contact publish-
ers and announce the new work he is representing. He must 
then follow up with the publishers and negotiate contracts with 
them. In addition he has to try to convince the author that the 
deal he is presenting is a good one and try to convince the 
publisher they should pay more for their interest. He has to try 
to sell the foreign rights, movie rights, and recording rights 
and must simultaneously handle masses of problems between 
the author and publishers. All this takes place from the time 
a book is sold to the time the book goes out of print, and 
includes the complex management of his administrative staff 
and the multitude of menial tasks involved. An agent has to 
78 

DHARMA: THE WISH-FULFILLING TREE 
juggle all the balls in the air, often with many clients. My 
friend got the point and remarked, "I thought my job was 
hard." 
In fact, nothing is hard nor easy. Competition for survival 
is the condition of life. It is our Dharma to fight the battle of 
life courageously and righteously. 
A Soldier's Dharma 
During Operation Desert Storm, some soldiers refused to fight. 
They said that killing others was against their personal and 
religious beliefs. I thought this was nonsensical considering 
they had signed up voluntarily as members of the armed 
forces, whose main duty is to defend the nation when we are 
at war. There is a popular Chinese maxim: "A nation may 
support its troops for thousands of years to prepare for the few 
moments when they will be needed." 
When you sign up as a member of the armed forces, you 
give up your personal rights. It does not matter if you approve 
of the cause or the war. You do not have to like killing other 
fellow beings. Your Dharma is to obey and perform your duty 
as you have been trained to do. 
The soldier's Dharma is not to receive a monthly salary 
and hang around collecting GI educational benefits or to enjoy 
the glamour of traveling around the world—although these are 
side benefits. For thousands of years, the soldier's Dharma has 
always been to kill and be killed in the name of defending the 
nation which they serve. 
79 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The Guiding Force 
Where there is Dharma, there is victory. 
—Mahabharata 
Neil works for a structural engineering company. One day I 
received a call from Neil. He said, "My employer asked me to 
go Spain to oversee a project which we have been working on 
for nearly two years. I don't really want to go as I may have 
to be there for three to six months, or even longer. I don't 
want to leave my girlfriend for such a lengthy period." 
I asked, "Can they send someone else?" 
"Not really," he said. "This project is my responsibility," 
I replied, "Then the decision is easy. As an employee of a 
small, newly established company, it is your Dharma to 
support and serve your employer and make sure of the total 
success of the company. If I were you, I would tell your 
employer, 'It is my intention to serve you in any way I can. 
I will gladly go to Spain for as long as I am needed, as you 
see fit.'" And I added, "As for your girlfriend, you will just 
have to invite her to Spain to spend some time with you." 
A Salesman's Dharma 
I, myself, had a profound experience while traveling in Taiwan 
on business. One of my objectives there was to represent a 
U.S. firm on a visit to their Taiwan representative. This 
Taiwan company had been doing a very poor job of selling the 
U.S. company's product. 
I spent a long time attempting to rehearse in my mind how 
I should approach the Taiwan company. Should I be casual 
so 

DHARMA: THE WISH-FULFILLING TREE 
and friendly or take a more official stand to find out why their 
sales performance had been so poor? I went through many 
ways to open the conversation, but none felt right. The 
problem was that this Taiwan company's owner was a dear 
friend of mine. Being heavy handed or coming to him with a 
very light touch seemed equally inappropriate. During my self 
inquiry, I was undecided. 
I asked myself, what is the Dharma in this situation? I then 
realized the only proper way to approach the Taiwan company 
was to be open and direct and to find out how I (representing 
the U.S. company's interest) could better serve them. I should 
find out what their difficulties were, and how could I help. If 
I supported them in doing their job better, they would in 
return do a better job for my U.S. client. 
As soon as I realized what my Dharma was in this circum-
stance, I felt totally open and positive towards these people. I 
no longer had to rehearse how to speak to them. With a proper 
attitude toward the situation, the words which came out of my 
mouth could only be right. 
Know Thy Dharma 
I am totally convinced, whatever your occupation, you will do 
well if you can properly identify your Dharma for that job. A 
chair, to be useful, must understand its Dharma and be willing 
to let people sit on it. A pencil is only useful when the pencil 
carries out the Dharma of a pencil. If the chair refuses to let 
people sit on it or the pencil refuses to perform its writing 
function, they are useless. 
When a manufacturing engineer is hired to create new 
products but insists on sharing his "wisdom" in accounting 
with the company controller, he is not going to last long in 
that company. 
81 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The Adharma of Benazire Bhutto and 
Corazon Aquino 
The opposite of Dharma is Adharma which is defined as going 
against one's proper duty in life. In my recent trip to Asia, I 
had an extensive discussion with a U.S. news agency Asian 
bureau chief regarding the Philippine President Corazon 
Aquino and the former Pakistan Prime Minister, Benazire 
Bhutto. I asked him about his impression of both women since 
he had met them several times and followed their political 
careers closely. Among the many points we discussed, one 
interesting observation he made was that Bhutto and Aquino 
both inherited their political image from others: Bhutto from 
her father, Aquino from her husband. 
Bhutto is strong-willed, combative in nature, and often 
provokes confrontations with the opposition. She inherited her 
father's political popularity along with his political enemies. 
She made no attempt to soften the opposition's tension. Bhutto 
was removed from her office in August 1990. 
Aquino inherited her husband's image as the guardian of 
democracy for the Philippine people. At the time of writing, 
Aquino has already had weathered seven coup attempts. She 
dealt with the rebels initially in a style of a democratic 
goddess; with a gentle slap on the hands, she told the rebels 
not to do it again. Although she survived the coups they 
damaged her administrative and political credibility. She did 
not produce the promised better life for her people. 
Bhutto and Aquino had seemingly opposite styles: one hard 
and one soft. Logically, if the soft did not work, then the hard 
line should. What went wrong? 
Outwardly the two leaders were doing opposite things. In 
essence, however, they did exactly the same. 
82 

DHARMA: THE WISH-FULFILLING TREE 
Bhutto, in order to be Bhutto, had to be confrontational. 
That was the style of her father which she had adopted and 
her supporters expected. Aquino, in order to be Aquino, 
needed to be kind and benevolent. Such was the image of her 
husband which she had adopted as her own. 
The images that brought Bhutto and Aquino to power are 
no longer beneficial to them as rulers. Popularity does not feed 
starving people, nor does it secure their party's political 
position. 
Bhutto should have made peace with the oppositional 
forces. She should have gotten them to join her in working for 
the good of the land. Aquino should have been severe in her 
punishment of those who participated in the first coup attempt. 
She should have set an example for military discipline which 
would have established clear standards of reward for the loyal, 
and punishment for the rebellious. 
Nature's law, unlike Aquino's, is that you must choose 
before you act. After an action is delivered, absolute conse-
quences follow. A friend of mine who is a fervent Christian, 
mentioned to me after he read this passage, "Unlike the 
Eastern concept, the Christian God is compassionate." My 
answer to him was, "Try jumping off the thirteenth floor and 
see if you fly; will God change his law for you?" 
Aquino should have given up her benevolent, mother-like 
image and concentrated on the business of reconstructing the 
devastated Philippine national economy. That was more 
important than laboring over the fundamental elements of 
governing, the internal stability of her government, and her 
own life. 
Both Bhutto and Aquino are women who labored under the 
burden of someone else's destiny. In Aquino's case, it was the 
destiny of her martyred husband; in Bhutto's, that of her 
executed father. Both of their failures came about because they 
did not exercise the powers of their office according to the 
requirements of their own destiny—their actions were 
adharmic. 
83 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Both betrayed their Dharma—as the protector of the land 
and their people. The people of these nations who had 
supported them lost, once again. 
The American Pioneer's Dharma 
As I was writing this chapter, the Solomon Brothers' illegal 
cornering of the American bond market was all over the 
financial newspapers. Whatever the cause of this incident and 
whoever was responsible for this, the answer is simple. These 
people were motivated by greed and driven by the intense 
desire for instant gratification. Perhaps the fault does not lie 
solely with those individuals who have committed the crimes. 
Rather it lies deeply in the present American social culture. 
America as a nation has recently become obsessed with the 
idea of instant gratification. There is a popular saying, "There 
are no free lunches." Ever so many people, especially during 
the past decade, have dedicated their entire energy in the 
pursuit of that instant gratification. When a nation begins to 
disproportionately place value on individuals who can generate 
the largest sum of money within the shortest time as a 
measure for success, the nation's character has to suffer. 
Two hundred years ago, America was founded by people 
of character who were true to the spirit of Thick Face, Black 
Heart. They understood the simple Dharma of how to make a 
nation strong for generations to come. They understood the 
fundamental value of hard work and endurance. I often ask 
myself, what would America be today if two hundred years 
ago, our founding fathers and early settlers were driven solely 
by the desire for instant gratification? 
84 

DHARMA: THE WISH-FULFILLING TREE 
Mrs. Chen's Miscalculation 
Mrs. Chen was Japanese. During World War II, she married 
a young Taiwanese physician who was studying in Japan. She 
accompanied her husband to Taiwan. As the Japanese were 
not regarded as benevolent rulers by some Taiwanese subjects, 
she was not well received by Mr. Chen's family. 
A couple of years later, she had a child which unfortunately 
(by her cultural standards) was a girl. After the delivery she 
was told she could not have another child. Mrs. Chen was an 
intelligent and practical woman. Long term planning was the 
pride of the Japanese and their trademark. Mrs. Chen definite-
ly had inherited this Japanese characteristic. She thought to 
herself that in order to secure her position in this family she 
must have a son, for only a son could take care of her in her 
old age. While she was raising her daughter, in her heart she 
was planning how she could gain a son. She talked over her 
concerns with some close Japanese women friends nearby. 
One of the women in the group was pregnant and already had 
four sons who were becoming financial burdens on the family. 
An agreement was reached. A son was born and Mrs. Chen 
adopted him. She had found the solution to her fear. 
Forty-five years later, times have changed. Mrs. Chen's 
daughter turned out to be an extremely capable young physi-
cian and inherited her father's medical practice. Mrs. Chen is 
now living with her daughter and son-in-law and has done so 
for the past twenty years since her husband's death. Her 
adopted son, who originally was supposed to be the solution 
to her fear, instead turned out to be the source of her fear and 
anxieties. He failed in school and became a compulsive 
gambler. He went through a great deal of the family fortune 
and borrowed money from unsuspecting family friends and 
relatives. 
85 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Trial and Error 
To discover the right action at any given moment in your life 
is not an easy task. Even the best of people do not always 
know their Dharma in accordance with destiny. Often we 
discover our Dharma through trial and error. 
St. Francis of Assisi, in his younger years, had a strong 
desire to be a martyr so he traveled to Morocco, a Moslem 
nation that strongly opposed Christianity and one which killed 
many of its followers. Convinced he would be killed, St. 
Francis instructed his followers to continue his teaching and 
live austere lives. After he undertook the long and difficult 
journey, he could not even get himself arrested. Although 
disappointed, he was wise enough to realize that a silent 
power was calling him to a different path. Obviously, the 
Dharma of St. Francis was not to get himself needlessly killed, 
rather to fulfill his destiny as a great teacher and spiritual 
aspirant. 
As we pursue a better understanding of our Dharma 
through trial and error, we begin to fine tune ourselves to 
recognize the silent voice of the universal will. 
Conclusion 
Dharma is the natural law which guides the rightness of our 
actions and is the foundation of Thick Face, Black Heart. By 
pursuing Dharma, our life will unfold naturally and thus 
produce the proper fruit at each given stage of our life. By 
living under the grace and guidance of Dharma, life itself 
becomes the eternal wish-fulfilling tree. 
86 

DHARMA: THE WISH-FULFILLING TREE 
Summary Of Key Points 
• Dharma is the understanding of proper actions in any 
given circumstance. It means "to act in accordance 
with one's duty." 
• Dharma is a natural law that guides us to recognize at 
any given moment the role each one of us is playing 
in life. Being true to the duty of that particular role at 
any time and the very act of accepting and performing 
that action to the highest of our ability—that is follow-
ing Dharma. That act will become our protector and 
liberator. 
• Dharma is the foundation of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
Thick Face, Black Heart practitioners are vigorous in 
pursuing the rightness of their actions. They question 
themselves in each and every situation, "What is my 
Dharma at this moment?" 
• The grace of Dharma works in subtle and mysterious 
ways throughout our lives. 
• Where there is Dharma, there is victory. 
• Whatever your occupation, you will do well if you can 
properly identify your Dharma for that job. A chair, to 
be useful, must understand its Dharma and be willing 
to let people sit on it. A pencil is only useful when the 
pencil carries out the Dharma of a pencil. If the chair 
refuses to let people sit on it or the pencil refuses to 
perform its writing function, they are useless. 
87 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
• For a truly spiritual individual, the path of spirituality 
is like walking on a razor's edge; it is a diligent 
pursuit of one's perfection. However for some others, 
the pursuit of spirituality is merely a vague notion; it 
actually is a pretext, an excuse to practice inertia and 
avoidance of life's challenges. 
• Nature's law, unlike man's, is that you must choose 
before you act. After an action is delivered, absolute 
consequences follow. 
88 

The lotus 
offers its beauty to the heaven, 
the grass 
its service to the earth. 
—Radindranath Tagore 
i

^¥ Dharma and 
Destiny 
A Destiny Waits to Unfold 
M
any teachers preach that you must do what you 
love, then you will be very good at your job. 
This is only part of the story. Most people 
have not reached a clear state of realizing exactly what they 
love to do and what they are good at. These people need to go 
through a period of discovery. The familiar question, "What 
do you want to do when you grow up?" is not an easy 
question to answer, even for adults of any age. 
If you feel you are stuck in your work right now, whatever 
it is, keep on doing it with dedication and devotion. You were 
not placed in that position entirely by accident. There are 
lessons there for you to learn. Your total commitment to your 
present work and the experience you accumulate can serve as 
a springboard for the unfolding of your greater destiny. 
Take me for example. I had been a consultant for U.S. 
companies and individuals who were doing or wished to do 
91 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
business with Asians. I liked my work but always felt there 
was something missing, yet I performed my work faithfully. 
Only by doing so was I able to discover what was missing in 
my work: the satisfaction I could gain from my ability to 
reach large numbers of people and inspire their thinking. 
By continuing to perform my work and through my 
experience of doing business with Asians, I realized there was 
a need for Americans to understand in depth the Asian mind 
in their business dealings. It was then I saw the way to reach 
and inspire large numbers of people would be through writing 
a book about this very issue. Accordingly, I wrote about the 
Asian mind set in business dealings with Westerners. 
The success of the book led to great personal satisfaction. 
I went on to write more books expanding the topic. Years 
later, I 'realized I did not have to write only about Asian 
business strategies. There was an abundance of rich wisdom 
from the Orient I could communicate to Western readers. It 
was due to this realization, that you are now reading Thick 
Face, Black Heart. 
The most amazing thing about this is that I had totally 
forgotten that I had always been passionate about writing. I 
had written many short stories when I was in seventh grade 
and many of them appeared in student publications. By eighth 
grade, I felt ready to write a long Chinese novel. I spent every 
moment I could writing and finished the novel in one semes-
ter. I have no idea what was taught during that time. My 
grades suffered severely as a result of my obsession, but I 
didn't care. My reality existed only in the characters I created 
for my book. The rest of the world seemed to be covered by 
a haze of unreality. 
When I finished, having no idea how to get a novel 
published, I sent my only manuscript to the top newspaper 
editor in Taiwan. The editor returned my manuscript with a 
very kind letter. I felt so embarrassed at having been rejected, 
I threw it into the school trash dump and never wrote again. 
92 

DHARMA AND DESTINY 
Finally, twenty five years later, I am back to writing again. 
The circle has come full course. 
By simply being aware that there is a Divine plan for your 
life that awaits to unfold in the course of life itself, you will 
begin to be consciously in tune with every incident that comes 
into your professional and personal life. Treat each incident 
with the eye of a good detective and try to unveil the mystery 
of your fate. This is the first and the most essential Dharma in 
discovering your destiny and your life path. 
Occupation in Dharma 
To answer the most asked question, "How can I find out what 
kind of occupation is best suited for me?", examine the 
following list: 
1. While performing your present duties, utilize Thick Face, 
Black Heart and strive to seek in your mind and in your soul 
the vocation that will satisfy you both spiritually and material-
ly. The key here is "while performing your present duty," 
because most of us don't have the luxury to quit our work and 
go out searching for ourselves for an indefinite period. 
Furthermore, your very station in life is often the best place to 
provide answers to your life's unanswered questions. 
2. Give everything you've got to the job that you are doing. 
By doing so you will feel good about yourself. Maybe your 
job is unimportant, but your effort and dedication will uplift 
you and give you greater daily satisfaction. In turn, that 
satisfaction will work as your anchor for greater accomplish-
ments. 
3- By diligently performing your duty, you may shorten the 
time it will take to learn whatever lessons await you from 
93 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
working in that position. Life may then more quickly reveal 
your next stage of progress. This could be a promotion to a 
position that is more suited to the grand design of your life's 
objectives. Or perhaps you will perform your job so well that 
you become a threat to your immediate superior, so you get 
fired. If the latter happens, then you know for sure the 
universe is saying, "You have stayed too long on this job, and 
something better awaits you now." You may gain so much 
self-esteem and self-confidence that you see you have no 
need of that job and you will quickly take a better one. A 
better offer might come to you out of nowhere. In any case, 
the result is you will create movement in your life that will 
lead you to the next level. 
4. Do not get discouraged. Know that everything you ever 
learn from life is not wasted, even simple tasks such as 
learning how to index or file documents. One day when you 
discover your intended occupation, you will realize why you 
were put into those meaningless jobs. There is a reason for 
everything, even if it is not clear at the time. 
5. Follow the above Dharma. Life cannot withhold from you 
what is rightfully yours. 
6. Patience is the greatest virtue. Give life time. 
94 

DHARMA AND DESTINY 
Dharma of Acceptance and Surrender 
The opportunity for victory is provided by the enemy. 
—Sun Tzu's Art of War 
Once a good commander has fully utilized all his facilities to 
win the battle, then he awaits the opportunity for victory to be 
provided by his enemy. 
In life's battle, once you have done everything within your 
power to realize your life's vision, all that remains to be done 
is graciously to accept the outcome and proceed. 
A good friend of mine has often said, "I'd rather be lucky 
than smart." However, luck is not something you can always 
depend upon; it is smart to understand the Dharma of accep-
tance and benefit from it. 
I learned this through first hand experience. All my life I 
have always been a champion of self-effort. Sometimes my 
self-effort paid off and other times the result was meager, but 
nothing impacted and changed me so fundamentally as the 
occurrence of a recent event. 
When I was writing my last book, I had done everything 
right. I worked overtime to get my finished work to the 
publisher on time. I had successfully obtained an endorsement 
from the Texas oil man, T. Boone Pickens Jr., in addition to 
one from an editor of USA. Today. The book was scheduled 
to be published on February 15, 1991. Then came Desert 
Storm in January. All the media's attention turned towards the 
war, and my book missed its opportunity for its grand 
entrance. However, I learned an invaluable lesson. If I had not 
Pushed myself and my editor to the limit in order to get the 
work done, if I had been late in turning in my manuscript, 
things might have worked out better. There are wise words 
from the Chinese tradition, "Human beings' efforts to mold the 
95 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
outcome of a given situation are nothing compared to what 
Heaven can do." These words are no longer just words. 
Because of the book incident, they have become ingrained in 
my soul. When things don't turn out as expected it may be a 
blessing in disguise. Now, after I have done my best, I relax 
and watch to see the outcome. Deep down at an unseen level, 
I know I will never be the same again. To others, I may not 
look any different, but I know I have gained a unique insight 
into the Dharma of acceptance and surrender. 
Shortly after this realization, I attended a convention. I was 
scheduled to speak at one in the afternoon to kick off the 
opening. However, when I got there I discovered that the 
convention was in total disarray. While I was standing in the 
hallway for over 45 minutes waiting for the convention staff 
to clear up the confusion, a distinguished gentleman passed by 
me. I recognized him as the President of a large national retail 
outlet. I had recently been attempting to convince this particu-
lar company's buyer to purchase a new patented invention my 
partner and I had developed. The buyer had been interested 
but non-committal. The delay caused by the poorly organized 
convention caused me to be standing in the hallway which led 
to my meeting with the chief decision maker of this company. 
This ultimately resulted in a very financially rewarding 
situation. 
Learn the Dharma of acceptance and surrender because you 
never know what awaits you in its intricate and mysterious 
weavings. 
Pre-destiny and Self-effort 
I shared with two people that I was writing a book entitled, 
Thick Face, Black Heart. On these two separate occasions, 
immediately following my communications, both asked me, 
"Do you think life is pre-destined or the result of self-effort?" 
96 

DHARMA AND DESTINY 
Initially, I did not think the question related to the topic of 
Thick Face, Black Heart. However, as it seemed other people 
thought it should be part of the book, I have decided to 
include it. 
Nature equips a bee with everything it needs to fulfill its 
intended destiny. In the same way, our Maker has provided us 
with everything we need to achieve our highest potential. It 
was no accident you were born into your family, received a 
certain education, and were confronted with certain, unique 
experiences in life. All these are part of the training necessary 
to prepare one for a successful journey through life. 
Let us take a look at two Prime Ministers of Great Britain, 
John Major and Margaret Thatcher. John Major did not finish 
high school and Margaret Thatcher was a grocer's daughter. 
But these apparent disadvantages became important elements 
which molded their character and distinguished them from the 
traditional aristocratic politicians. Their humble backgrounds, 
rather than being a disadvantage, actually contributed to the 
success of their political popularity. 
During my first ten years in the United States, I was caught 
between two cultures. I was no longer Chinese, nor was I an 
American. I was like a fish out of water. As time progressed, 
I began to see that my knowledge and experience of both East 
and West had become a great asset rather than a liability. 
Every incident in life, big or small, joyful or painful, occurs 
not by accident. Our lives are carefully guided by unseen 
forces that govern and control every aspect of the universe. 
These mysterious workings are designed to facilitate our 
personal growth and fulfillment. 
Each one of us is born into a certain environment in order 
to fulfill our intended destiny. It is possible that self-effort 
which incorporates human will, desire, and ability are part of 
pre-destination. However, this pre-destiny cannot unfold on 
Us own accord. Even if you know your destiny, it is only as 
good as the effort you make to bring it to reality. Therefore, 
Pre-destiny and self-effort become as two wheels of the same 
97 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
cart. Believe it or not, even in ancient China, there is a phrase, 
"Heaven helps those who help themselves." 
There is a story of two sons who were born on the same 
day. One was born into a rich family, the other into poverty. 
Both mothers took their sons to the same fortune teller in 
town. The fortune teller told the rich lady that her son would 
be exulted and would assist the Emperor of China. The poor 
lady was told her son would be a beggar. 
Because the rich lady thought her son was going to be 
important when he grew up, she spoiled him. This resulted in 
his wasting his life away along with his family's wealth. In 
the end his family's own residence was repossessed by the 
debtor and they were forced out of their home and had to live 
on the street. On the other hand, the poor lady, terrified by the 
prophecy, diligently educated her son in an effort to assist him 
avoid his ill fated destiny. The son studied relentlessly and 
excelled through the ancient examination system. He was 
consequently exulted and assisted the Emperor of China. 
However, while self-effort is vitally important, some of the 
undeniable evidence of my own life leaves me unable to 
totally discount the inexplicable mystery within the concept of 
pre-destiny or die existence of fate. 
Years ago, I took an interest in studying Chinese antique 
jade artifacts. My teacher is also a renowned Chinese Tao 
scholar and well versed in / Ching. He did a calculation of my 
past and future, recounting details which I found very coinci-
dental. My personal chart indicated I was born into a royal 
family, who lost favor with the new ruler of the land and were 
sent into exile. These ancient texts were written thousands of 
years ago. Many concepts, such as royalty and the ruler of the 
land, have become outdated. However we still can find a 
equivalent of those terms in today's world. My family in the 
early twentieth century were the equivalent of royalty, and the 
communists were the equivalent of the new ruler of the land. 
My family was exiled to Taiwan. Furthermore, my chart 
indicated mat my younger brother would have some of his 
98 

DHARMA AND DESTINY 
limbs damaged and as a consequence, his activities would be 
restricted. My younger brother in fact contracted polio when 
he was ten months old. 
Although the knowledge of pre-destination may be an 
intriguing subject, it has very little use to us without our self-
effort, especially as most of the sources who provide the 
information concerning pre-destination are questionable and 
often unreliable. Therefore, self-effort is the only thing that 
we can count on in our day to day lives. 
The Dharma of Self-effort 
The following are important factors to the Dharma of self-
effort: 
1. Quest for harmony: Self-effort does not mean blind effort. 
The Dharma of self-effort also includes striving to know when 
to exercise the discrimination of acceptance and surrender to 
a disappointing outcome. However, this does not mean giving 
up, but rather finding harmony within oneself in order to 
regather the necessary strength and move on to the next level 
of life. 
2. Tenacious determination: The American cartoonist and 
creator of "Pogo," Walt Kelly, often said, "We have seen the 
enemy and he is us." In the battle of life, you are the enemy 
and you are the warrior. In the battle of life, as long as you 
are fighting, you are winning. Each day if you fail a hundred 
times but win once, that single win will strengthen you and 
provide you the strength for the next win. Never let go of your 
fight. 
Our Almighty Creator could have fashioned a more gentle, 
harmonious living environment, yet the world we ended up 
with obviously delights his heart. God seems to be content 
99 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
with his wholly imperfect world. As I often have said, God is 
a low achiever. Look what fun he has watching us, as we 
draw upon all our faculties in an effort to persevere and 
overcome the obstacles within and around us. 
3. There is no quitting: life is a school. This school does not 
give out passing grades, but demands a perfect 'A' from each 
student on every subject. You can never quit this school and 
this school has no time limit for graduation. You will not 
graduate until you get it "right." If you are a Christian, your 
schooling might end when you draw your last breath. If you 
are Hindu or Buddhist, then you will never graduate until you 
realize your full Divinity, and that might take millions of 
incarnations. God is not democratic. He demands of His 
children the best they can be. He demands they be like Him 
and the cost for failing the courses is your liveliness and 
happiness. However, as long as you are fighting the battle 
tenaciously and courageously, the magical, unseen hand of the 
Divine is there to aid. This is not merely rhetoric, but a 
common experience that many people have found to be true. 
4. All good things come to those who strive with patience: our 
sense of self-limitation did not form overnight. Thus, we 
require patience to readjust our course. A good phrase from 
the ancient Chinese elucidates this point; "Dripping water, in 
time, will cut a hole through the stone." When we were 
infants, like bees we were in tune with our natural instincts— 
we heard only the pure voice from our Divine Maker. As we 
learned the way of men, we adopted their "guidance" and 
tuned out the voice of our Maker. Whenever we are willing to 
listen to the criticism of others, there is never a shortage of 
volunteers. 
With self-determination and self-effort, no one can keep you 
from manifesting your true destiny. The mystery of a towering 
fruit tree lies dormant within a tiny seed. 
100 

DHARMA AND DESTINY 
Be True to Your Life, True to Your 
Desires 
Some people are not aware of the importance of searching for 
and discovering their proper and true role in life. A Thick 
Face, Black Heart practitioner knows the magnitude of this 
challenge. It is vital to discover what is right for you and to 
this end, to be able to put your plans into action, you must 
follow through with your plans and accept and endure 
whatever consequences occur. Furthermore, know when to 
make appropriate adjustments and have the courage to do so 
as each level of life unfolds and reveals itself. 
Nita's Grief 
Nita is a 41-year-old professional single woman working in 
insurance. Recently she told me about an experience of self-
discovery. She had been born into a first generation Japanese-
American family. Her father, with his traditional Japanese 
attitudes about life, had placed much more importance on his 
two sons than his daughter. As a result of this she had 
developed an unnaturally strong desire to please her father. 
Consequently, she unconsciously made a decision to gain her 
father's acceptance by doing highly respected work that was 
traditionally performed only by Japanese men. 
She attended law school. She had no love for law; her real 
desire was to be a housewife and to have her husband take 
care of her while she did flower arranging and made ceramics. 
But she believed that becoming a lawyer was something that 
would please her father very much. She finished her three 
years in law school. She describes those years as being hell 
like—the hardest thing she had ever done. After that, it took 
101 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
work they are performing right now in the context of the 
bigger picture of their destiny. 
An Employee's Dharma 
An employee's Dharma is simple—support the employer 
wholeheartedly. Your employer may not be perfect, smart, or 
worthy of your service, but by your act of working at your 
particular company, you have entered into an unwritten 
contract of support. 
I am a true believer, if you don't like the company your 
work for, quit your job. But it you choose to stay and draw a 
payroll check from that company, morally you don't have the 
freedom to sabotage the company's morale through your 
constant expressions of dissatisfaction. You are duty-bound to 
present any constructive suggestions that occur to you. If it is 
rejected and you feel that you no longer can serve the compa-
ny without certain changes being made, then you have the 
choice to exercise your courage to resign your job. If you wish 
to remain, then support the company and its management. The 
choice must always be yours. 
I watched a client of mine fire one of his engineers, Hank. 
Hank is at the top of his field in terms of expertise and 
competence. However, he continually complained about the 
office and the owner. He even went as far as to make outra-
geous criticisms of the owner in front of customers. I person-
ally witnessed this incident. 
I was at a New Year's party. The party host was the 
president of my client's customer company. Hank attended the 
party as the representative for my client, his employer. Soon 
after the party began, Hank started his angry attack of his 
employer with great passion. This continued for three hours. 
Everyone at the party was embarrassed by his behavior, except 
Hank. The more he talked, the more emotional he became. 
104 
J

DHARMA AND DESTINY 
After three hours of verbal assault, our hostess was very 
concerned that her husband might jeopardize his professional 
position by doing business with such a questionable company. 
Hank's behavior was caused by his lack of inner harmony. 
Due to his unceasing criticism from within, he was in turn 
abusive to others. The one who finds fault in others is always 
first unconsciously finding fault in himself. 
Hank's mind was out of control. His mind was like an 
undisciplined dog on a leash—instead of following the owner, 
it leads the owner in all directions, yet it has no idea where it 
is going. It finally makes a victim of its owner. Hank was 
fired by his previous employer for similar conduct. 
Hank's behavior may be extreme, but by no means is he an 
isolated case. I have known so many companies where the 
employees' favorite pastime is to gather together and criticize 
the company's management team. In such a situation, the 
employees victimize themselves as well as the company. 
Dharma of Support 
A Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner understands that the 
Dharma of success includes support. It is essential, if you wish 
to succeed in life, to find someone who is willing to support 
you unconditionally in fulfilling your dreams, or realize that 
you and your mind must form your own support troops. 
Without support in the tough competitive world of survival, 
the task of achieving extraordinary success will be inordinately 
difficult. This is also true for business. Without the support of 
their employees, it would be difficult to compete in today's 
fierce market. 
105 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Summary Of Key Points 
• According to your life, your duties have been pre-
scribed for you; follow them and your desires will be 
naturally fulfilled. 
• Many teachers preach that you must do what you love, 
then you will be very good at your job. This is only 
part of the story. Most people have not reached a clear 
state of realizing exactly what they love to do and 
what they are good at. These people need to go 
through a period of discovery. 
• By simply being aware that there is a Divine plan for 
your life that awaits to unfold in the course of life 
itself, you will begin to be consciously in tune with 
every incident that comes into your professional and 
personal life. Treat each incident with the eye of a 
good detective and try to unveil the mystery of your 
fate. 
• It is impossible to attain true spiritual perfection if you 
have avoided discovering the path by which you can 
contribute to society as an individual. 
• Human beings' effort to mold the outcome of a given 
situation is nothing compared to what Heaven can do. 
When things don't turn out as expected, it might be a 
blessing in disguise. Understand the wisdom of the 
Dharma of acceptance and surrender. 
106 

DHARMA AND DESTINY 
• It is possible that self-effort which incorporates human 
will, desire, and ability is part of pre-destination, and 
this pre-destiny cannot unfold of its own accord. 
Therefore, pre-destiny and self-effort become as two 
wheels of the same cart. 
• Be true to your life, true to your desires 
• Some people say, "If God himself would just speak to 
me and let me know what he really wants me to do, I 
would be delighted to do that, no matter how meaning-
less and humble the work." In fact, God has spoken 
many times but they weren't listening. 
• Sometimes people feel whatever the work they are 
doing, it could not be what God intended for them to 
do. They blame the work. The missing piece here is 
not what is wrong with the work they are doing, but 
rather understanding the relationship between the work 
they are performing right now in the context of the 
bigger picture of their destiny. 
• The Dharma of an employee is to support the employ-
er wholeheartedly. If you cannot support the company 
you work for, quit your job. You don't have the 
freedom to sabotage the company's morale and 
reputation through your constant expression of dissatis-
faction. 
• By living under the grace and guidance of Dharma, 
life itself becomes the eternal wish-fulfilling tree. 
107 

All effort was sacred to Him. 
Between the most negative, foolish, 
and ignorant of people, 
and the most positive, confident, self-assured, 
there lies a space so small that our Maker 
regards it with a smile. 
—Chin-Ning Chu 
inspired by 
Elizabeth Waterhouse 

Winning 
Through 
Negative 
Thinking 
You Can Succeed the Way You Are 
T
hick Face, Black Heart practitioners do not accept 
the common rules of success. They need no 
consensus of their validity from others. They 
investigate uncharted ideas by observing the natural workings 
of the world. 
In this chapter you might find inconsistencies with other 
chapters. Thick Face, Black Heart reveals the workings of the 
universe the way it is and seeks no consistency since inconsis-
tency is an important element of the real world. 
In past decades, the idea that we need to change our 
negative attitudes to positive ones before we can succeed has 
109 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
been pounded into us. If you learn only one thing from 
reading of this book, it should be that you can succeed the 
way you are. 
For once, those who have been annoyed at the concept of 
superficial positive thinking have a method they can live by 
and believe in. 
A Death Sentence Awaits 
If you do not consider yourself the most positive person you 
have ever known, don't worry. The secret is that most of the 
perky people lie about how positive they are. Even the best 
motivational teachers, speakers, or authors have their moments 
of private grief. No one in the world is purely positive nor 
absolutely negative. However, those whose livelihood depends 
upon promoting the concept of positive thinking have been 
able to convince the rest of the world that if you are not 
absolutely positive about life at all times and under any 
circumstances, then you are an inferior being. The pressure of 
not been like "everyone else," so optimistic and cheerful, is 
worse than actually experiencing negativity. We all thought, 
somehow, that something must have been terribly wrong with 
us, making us unable to embrace positivity. All these ideas 
lead to the final logical conclusion: "I am just no good and a 
bom loser." 
In truth, each one of us since the moment of our birth has 
been given a death sentence; only the date is unknown. 
However, the fact of death is always present in the deepest 
part of our subconscious mind. Between the time of birth and 
the time of death, we do the best we know how. If you and I 
have acted to the best of our abilities, it will more than fulfill 
the bargain we made with our Creator at the moment of birth. 
no 

WINNING THROUGH NEGATIVE THINKING 
Success Has No Rules 
Success comes in every shape and profile. Countless good 
books have been published on this subject. All this informa-
tion can contribute to our effort towards success; but the truth 
remains—success has no rules. Success comes to some of the 
most negative people, as well as the most positive ones. 
Success comes to those who try hard and even to those who 
make no visible effort. What promoters of positive thinking 
theories fail to realize is that success does not discriminate; it 
can come to those who project either negative or positive 
attitudes. 
I am not deprecating the validity of positive thinking. 
However, if you are just not a naturally positive thinker, no 
matter how you try, then we have to take a moment to 
examine the negativity and find evidence that you can be 
successful even though you are negative by nature. 
Let me give you some examples. Mark Twain was labeled 
a pessimist and a sarcastic skeptic, and his stories were often 
about "the damned human race," yet these unique qualities 
made Mark Twain, Mark Twain. His negativity contributed to 
his literary genius. 
Let us further examine some popular personalities with 
whom we are all familiar. Elizabeth Taylor, for example, is 
always in the news. Most of her news is inspired by her 
negative nature: her weight, her drinking, her drug addiction, 
her marriages and divorces. Furthermore, she is considered by 
one of her ex-husbands as a champion when it comes to her 
ability to create her own sicknesses. Despite all of these 
negative" qualities, she has enjoyed a life of unsurpassed 
success. 
Spencer Tracy, according to Katharine Hepburn, was an 
extremely moody, guilt-driven individual. He thought the 
ill 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
world would have been better if he hadn't been born. Despite 
his low "self-esteem," he was, and still is, a great screen 
presence. 
Humphrey Bogart is one of the greatest film stars who ever 
lived. His personality was not generally considered "lightheart-
ed and cheerful." He could never be like Ronald Reagan. 
Humphrey Bogart was successful because of his unique 
personality. People loved him for what he was. 
Marilyn Monroe and Ernest Hemingway were considered 
emotional, unstable, highly erratic, classic cases of manic 
depression. Both ended their lives by their own hands; 
however, their "negativities" became essential elements in 
success during their lifetimes. These "negativities" were made 
up of who they were and didn't prevent them from manifest-
ing career success beyond their dreams. 
I am not an advocate of copying their suicidal personalities, 
but I use these examples to exaggerate a point. Your 
negativities will not stand in your way of success in your 
worldly pursuits. They are pan of you. Learn to love them, 
accept them, and learn to use them. 
A friend of mine, who is a successful television sitcom star, 
was in the height of his career when I first met him in the late 
1970s. His show was often rated No. 1 during the seven years 
it ran. Two years ago, another show was created around him, 
and that show was also a hit. The character he portrayed in the 
story is very much like himself, a rather negative, pessimistic 
but lovable fellow. While receiving a six-figure salary per 
episode, he still worried to death about whether or not he 
could make his mortgage payment. In fact, he worries from 
one television hit to another. 
112 

WINNING THROUGH NEGATIVE THINKING 
If You Have Chicken Manure, 
Sell Fertilizer 
If you have chicken manure, you would do well to sell 
fertilizer. Even chicken manure has its value. Like the 
Tibetans say, "If you are lying on the ground, you must use 
the ground to raise yourself." If you are negative, use those 
negativities to succeed. 
Chris is a brilliant man. The main problem with his career 
development, however, is that he is too smart for his own 
good. Because he is a quick learner with an inquiring mind, he 
has learned just about everything he ever wanted to know 
during his forty years of life. During his college years he was 
eighty credits over the graduation requirements, yet he 
received no degree. He was interested in the pursuit of 
knowledge but not interested in obtaining a diploma. Later, he 
found this hurt him in his search for employment. 
Chris has tremendous ability to master knowledge, yet this 
is his biggest blessing as well as his biggest curse. He knows 
a little of everything. In short, to the general public, Chris 
appears to be a jack of all trades and master of none. 
Chris once told me he was tired of getting nowhere in his 
career. He knew so much, yet he could not put all he knew on 
his resume. If he put everything he knew and had done on his 
resume, it would make him look ridiculous. What he did 
choose to put on his resume was not very impressive com-
pared to the experience of other people who had led more 
focused lives. Chris began to hate his life and his ability to 
quickly pick up knowledge, but I encouraged him to utilize his 
natural ability as a quick and deep learner to advance himself. 
He only minor adjustment he needed was to add a little 
practicality and focus in his life. Chris enrolled in a university 
MBA program, which accepted him and gave him credit for 
113 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
his work experiences. Chris finished the MBA program 
effortlessly in his spare time while keeping his job. After 
completing his MBA program, his company promoted him to 
the position he had always dreamed about. 
Let Negativities Be 
We are all programmed to believe that certain behavior and 
tendencies are considered positive, and others are negative. We 
commonly accept that a successful person is a positive person, 
and if you are not positive, you are doomed to fail unless you 
can change. Therefore, we spend enormous energy attempting 
to change, rather than focusing on being successful. 
If you consider yourself a negative individual and your 
inner voice often tells you that you "can't do it," don't fight 
back. Yield to your voice by ignoring it. Don't focus your 
energy in an attempt to change your opinion of yourself. By 
ignoring your voice, you are able to free yourself from the 
trap that says "change comes before success." 
You can be as negative as you want to be, moping and 
cursing all the way, while doing what you are supposed to in 
the course of achieving success. Bette Midler, a very popular 
singer, film star and comedienne mentioned once during an 
interview that her husband thought she was the most pessimis-
tic person he had ever known. Then she burst out laughing. 
Obviously her pessimistic viewpoint of life didn't bother her. 
She was able to talk about it in public and laugh openly. 
The Power of Hating Life 
If you think your life is a drag, and you hate it, I will not 
attempt to talk you out of your opinion. However, I think you 
114 

WINNING THROUGH NEGATIVE THINKING 
can benefit much more if you change the object of your 
hatred. Instead of hating life, hate God. 
Yes that was not a typo, and you have read correctly. Hate 
God. Ironically, so many people love God but hate everybody 
else. The man who hates his fellow man and loves only God 
is no lover of God. 
If hatred exists within you, then the best thing you can do 
is re-channel the hate from man to God, since the essence of 
God is love. Other people's attitudes towards him are inconse-
quential. Unlike humans, God cares not whether you hate Him 
or love Him. He is like a fire, which you may love or hate, 
but as long as you come close to fire, it will warm you. The 
emotion of hate and love come from the same source. Hate is 
the other side of love, and only due to love can hate exist. In 
the Bible, Revelation 3:16 says, "So then because thou art 
lukewarm and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my 
mouth." The only time God will ignore you and silently wait 
for you is when you totally ignore him. 
As long as you focus your attention towards God, He will 
purify you, support you and rehabilitate you. You may then 
see your hatred transformed into divine love. 
Your Negativity Does Not Have As 
Much Power As Your Imagination 
Thinks It Has 
We all have been told at one time or another how powerful 
our thoughts are. This concept has exacerbated our fear of our 
uncontrolled, negative thoughts. What would happen if all our 
negative thoughts came true? However, the power of thinking 
is not that simple. You have no power to manifest your every 
thought. Not yet. I am telling you that your negativity does not 
have as much power as your imagination believes it to have. 
115 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Every time a commercial jet takes off with hundreds of 
passengers aboard, a large percentage of those passengers have 
entertained the possibility of an airplane crash. If your power 
of negative thinking is as powerful as you have imagined, with 
the collective negative power among the passengers, we might 
never have a successful landing. Don't fear your negative 
thoughts. Devote yourself to your craft with tenacity and 
determination and you will be much closer to success than 
struggling to change yourself first. 
The Standards of Negativity Are Not 
Carved in Stone 
The standards of judging negativity are artificial human 
manipulations and are not carved in stone. The standards often 
change according to our time and culture. What was consid-
ered positive in a given era may be considered negative in 
another. For example, the aggressive, high-tone, pushy, go-
getting manner is considered a great attribute in the American 
business world. However, when applied in certain parts of 
Asia, it is considered repulsive. 
Being able to look directly into your counterpart's eyes is 
considered a very positive personal attribute in America. Yet 
in certain parts of Asia, it is considered offensive. 
Realism is a Positive Attribute 
Negativities do not have to be liabilities. I resent the term 
"negativity." It sounds so negative! Often, the so called 
"negative" people are the most realistic people. On the other 
hand, being overtly optimistic sometimes can be a liability in 
the real world. A CEO can not afford the luxury of excessive 
optimism, because it will lead him to failure—just like an 
116 

WINNING THROUGH NEGATIVE THINKING 
overly optimistic general who becomes careless underestimates 
his battlefield foe and leads his troops to their demise. The 
results can be costly. 
Similarly, the coach and the quarterback shouldn't adopt 
the cheerleader's ardent enthusiasm. If the coach and the 
quarterback fail to realistically size up their opposing teams' 
strengths, their positive thinking alone will not assure them 
victory. 
A realistic person tends to forecast potential problems and 
anticipate difficulties realistically. The Texas oil entrepreneur, 
T. Boone Pickens Jr., explains that the shortcomings of most 
geologists are that they are too optimistic. However, as a 
independent oil man without the backing of huge conglomer-
ates, he has had to be much more pragmatic about his drilling 
ventures. 
When I was younger, I used to be obsessed with optimism. 
I could not tolerate any thought of a possible ill outcome. If 
anyone even suggested that I should weigh the worst case 
scenarios with the best case scenarios, I would have been 
offended. The truth is, I was too scared to examine "real life." 
Instead, I lived in the world of "make believe." 
It is good to have a positive attitude because it allows you 
to see everything as within your reach. The possibility of ill 
fate or bad luck becomes the sole property of those people 
who think negatively. 
Now, I realize that being realistic is not being negative. It 
is positive. It is not because of negativity that a cruise ship 
captain educates his passengers on how to behave in an 
emergency. He doesn't plan on having the ship sink. He is 
merely realistic and prepared. 
Gilbert, a vice president in charge of commercial loans at 
a major bank, told me he preferred working with the realistic 
borrower rather than the overly enthusiastic borrower. The 
realistic borrower understands the potential difficulties and is 
Prepared to ride the waves of challenge, while an overly 
117 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
enthusiastic borrower tends to underestimate the actualities of 
starting or expanding a business. 
Use Negativities as Springboards to 
Success 
If you are inclined to be jealous and envious of the success of 
others, do not try to eliminate these thoughts of negativity, 
rather use them to fuel your life's engine. When you become 
jealous and envious of others' accomplishments, you must 
search within yourself to learn how you can surpass them and 
let them become jealous of you instead. Do not waste your 
energy attempting to overcome your jealousy. 
If you are angry at others for the injustices they have done 
to you, the greatest revenge is to light your own fire of rage 
and rise above them to the top. The greatest revenge is to live 
well, prosper, and succeed. 
If you are greedy, expand your greed. Be the best greedy 
person you know. Go beyond the greed for things. Trade the 
greed and desire of hoarding material items for that of 
hoarding success. Also, become greedy to know God, your 
Maker. If you like to worry, then divert that energy from 
worry to action. Worry will not prevent destiny from unfold-
ing. However, self-effort has the power to change destiny. 
Worry can be your motivational force for action. No matter 
what your shortcomings, learn to use them to enhance who 
you are. 
Most people working in film or theater often are more 
willing to be honest and expose their personal "defects" than 
business people. Some of our greatest actors and actresses are 
uncomfortable being themselves. This very quality makes it 
easy for them to adapt to any character presented to them. 
While most are obsessed with "finding themselves," these stars 
are uncomfortable doing so. Ironically, this same "defect" 
118 

WINNING THROUGH NEGATIVE THINKING 
contributes to their professional success and financial prosperi-
ty-
Whatever your negativities are, contemplate them. Find 
how you can channel that energy and use it as a springboard 
for success. 
Thriving on Others' Negativity 
The only way to succeed is to make people hate you. 
—Josef Von Sternberg (1894-1969) 
When others tell you that you can't do this, you can't do that, 
you're a lofty dreamer, a chronic loser, "This is just another 
of your stupid dreams, just look at you... why can't you face 
who you really are?" you feel hurt and angry. Use their 
negative energy plus the negativity that you feel for them to 
create an emotion explosive enough to support and realize 
your dreams. Again, success is the sweetest revenge. 
Allow a Little Room to Fail 
Most of us do much better with agreements that we make with 
others, than those we make with ourselves. 
In the closing sentence of J.D. Salinger's novel, The 
Catcher in the Rye, Holden says, "How do you know what 
you're going to do till you do it? The answer is, you don't." 
If you are one of those perfect human beings who always 
knows what your agenda is and can always keep every 
resolution you make, more power to you. If you find you are 
having problems keeping those rules you made with yourself, 
Such as, "Starting tomorrow, I will lose weight," or, "I am 
119 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
going to stop smoking tomorrow," or "I will never do that 
again," you are not alone. 
Somehow, deep in ourselves we feel inadequate when we 
can't stick to our own resolutions. Ironically, we become the 
lawmaker, then the lawbreaker, then the judge and executioner. 
We are the source of our own misery. 
Since you initiated the rules, you can also ininitiate them 
or create others tomorrow. The evil is not so much in breaking 
the rules, but in the shame and guilt that make you judge 
yourself as "unworthy." 
Thick Face, Black Heart practitioners accept and acknowl-
edge truthfully their own inadequacies. They are free from 
guilt and shame. They will break their resolutions and create 
others at will. After all, failing in your resolutions and creating 
others is part of the game. While the intent is noble, the flesh 
is at times weak. Don't lose heart, give yourself a little room 
to fail and empathize with others when they fail. 
Moderate vs. Extreme Criticism 
I have seen mediocre authors publishing best sellers while the 
brilliant, talented writers create no work at all. Randall is a 
graduate of English literature and is working as an assistant 
manager at a supermarket. He has great passion for literature 
and the talent to match it. When reading others' work he is 
extremely critical and thinks their work isn't worth the paper 
it's written on. However, he will never write anything himself. 
If he does start a piece, he will never finish it. Halfway to 
completion he gives up because he finds it is just not good 
enough and doesn't deserve to be finished. 
The real reason Randall doesn't finish his work is that he 
is so afraid that others will judge his work as harshly as he 
judges theirs. Moderate criticism is beneficial for maintaining 
high professional standards. However, when you overdo it to 
120 

WINNING THROUGH NEGATIVE THINKING 
the point of paralyzing your own creativity, the self-criticism 
becomes detrimental. Use Thick Face to shield yourself from 
potential criticism and send your work into the world. You 
might be surprised at its reception. 
Make Fewer Agreements 
If you are the type of person who cannot keep your agree-
ments with others, make a rule that you will not make an 
agreement simply because it is expected of you. Tell the truth 
to yourself about your deficiency. Then you will liberate 
yourself from the remorse of broken agreements and the 
damage they cause to your personal and professional reputa-
tions. 
A friend of mine always practices this. He never "volun-
teers" to agree to do anything, because he may regret it or 
leave a promise unfulfilled. If he is cornered, he will consider 
everything carefully before he responds with a "yes." If you 
keep a few agreements that are vital, you will be known as a 
person who keeps their agreements and can be trusted. 
The Positive Aspect of Procrastination 
No human trait is absolutely bad or good, not even the most 
evil of them all—procrastination. When it is applied properly, 
procrastination can be a great asset. 
When we move too fast, we sometimes have to reverse the 
consequences of our previous actions just to arrive on neutral 
ground. Sometimes, by not hastily taking action, you can let 
your idea simmer and mature. Only act when you have clearly 
identified the proper course of action. 
Recently, within a twenty-four hour period, I received three 
0r four phone messages from a client. He didn't call the 
121 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
second day. Somehow, intuitively, I didn't think I should call 
him back too soon. I waited another day. When I did speak 
with him, he told me it was a good thing that I hadn't called 
him back immediately. Otherwise, he would have given me a 
piece of his mind. He thought something had gone wrong at 
the time of his calls. Later, he discovered that his assumption 
was in error. If I had called him back the first day, he would 
have had to apologize later and I would have had to listen to 
his rancor. 
Sometimes problems do have a way of working themselves 
out. The more we try to fix them, the worse they get. That is 
the time to procrastinate a little and let time do its work. 
The Virtue of Inconsistencies 
Only the mediocre are always at their best. 
—Jean Giraudoux 
Consistency is not always a virtue unless you are an accoun-
tant. Somehow, our world tends to consider consistency a 
positive trademark and inconsistency a negative one. In reality, 
consistency and inconsistency are equally valuable. 
If you are one who thinks you are cursed by inconsistency, 
you have overlooked its virtues. In fact, not even God Himself 
is always consistent. He creates drought during the rainy 
seasons and floods during the dry seasons. Due to the power 
of His inconsistencies, we fear him and offer our unceasing 
prayers to appease Him. 
Just imagine what our world would be like if all the human 
beings on earth were always consistent. We would have the 
same music, the same paintings, the same architecture, the 
same fashions, the same movies, and the same books. There 
would be no poetry or romance. Inconsistency makes the 
122 

WINNING THROUGH NEGATIVE THINKING 
world ever new. Furthermore, in business your inconsistency 
will always keep your opponents on their toes. In your 
marriage, inconsistency will keep your spouse fascinated and 
your marriage new. 
In ancient Japan, the greatest honor for a warrior was to die 
on the battlefield. A fourteenth-century Japanese warrior was 
going to war to support the cause of the Emperor. He knew 
the Emperor's cause for war was wrong and that the Emperor 
did not have the support of the people. He also knew that 
losing the war and his death were inevitable, nevertheless, his 
loyalty compelled him to do his duty. 
His 13-year-old son followed him to the battlefield, as the 
good son of a warrior should. But the warrior asked his son to 
leave and go back home. The son requested the honor to 
follow the ancient Samurai code and die with his father. The 
warrior had to choose between dishonoring the tradition of the 
code of the Samurai or the death of his only son—a waste of 
precious life for a lost and unjust cause. 
The warrior told his son that he should live and grow up to 
watch the changes to come. This ancient warrior broke a 
sacred code by sparing his son's life and sending him home 
alone so he could grow up to celebrate life. 
Negativity and Creativity 
Certain personalities are like slow trains, always moving 
steadily. Others shoot out like a rocket, soar high, then die. 
The world needs both kinds. 
Regular, stable people rarely have the capacity to achieve 
greatness. Unlike them, your negativities and manic depressive 
moods can be your greatest asset. 
A high jumper must bend his knees and lower his body just 
before he makes that high leap. Like the high jumper, some 
People must have a period of inactivity before they can take 
123 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
the necessary leap into productivity. The bear and the snake 
hibernate before the season of activity resumes. 
For some, the time of hibernating and resting is the 
essential process for generating highly creative energies. The 
important thing is to love your negativities and not judge 
them, and learn to use them to raise yourself up. Enjoy your 
non-productivity; know that it is part of your productivity. 
When you are inspired, you will soar like a rocket and burn 
like a comet. 
The famous American author, Jack London, once remarked, 
"I would rather be a superb meteor, every atom of me in 
magnificent glow, than a sleepy and permanent planet." 
Neurosis and Insecurity 
Today in our society, it is vital to exhibit your sense of self-
confidence. It is a delight to watch people who are absolutely 
secure with themselves. However, if your are not among them, 
don't lose heart. The secret is to fake it until others are 
convinced that you are not faking. 
I am going to reveal one of the greatest secrets: "Only fools 
and saints are totally and absolutely secure about themselves. 
The rest of the world is faking it in different degrees, and 
some are better fakers than others." 
Only an absolute fool can be so ignorant of the way of the 
universe that he feels secure in his blissful ignorance. Within 
each one of us, we have this ever-present suspicion that we 
are much greater then our circumstances. The potential for 
who we are and what we could be is so vast that we have not 
begun to scratch the surface. We know we will not find 
security within us until we have touched all the Void with our 
mind and our soul. In the meantime, we are, to different 
degrees, faking our security. 
124 

WINNING THROUGH NEGATIVE THINKING 
Negativity Is Not the Source of Your 
Problem 
Often we blame our negativity as the cause of failure in our 
work. In fact, the source of our problem is not our nega-
tivities, but rather that we have chosen uninspiring tasks that 
bring forth our negativities. 
Recently, I was with my partner doing a patent search for 
our new invention. As I was doing the work, I found I was 
very negative towards the whole process of the search. I felt 
ashamed of my selfishness and unwillingness to help. I asked 
myself why I was behaving this way. Then I realized it was 
not because I was negative and unwilling to do the work. I 
was willing to do the work, but I just didn't want to do that 
work. I couldn't stand being in that patent office doing 
repetitive, numerical, rule-following tasks, which I have 
always hated. My conclusion was that I am neither lazy nor 
selfish. When I perform work that is suited to my nature, the 
job will be effortless and even inspiring. I finally paid an 
attorney to do the search. 
Make Your Negativity Pay for Itself 
In my recent trip to Australia, I visited a petting zoo, and I fell 
madly in love with the Australian wombat. It's a slow-moving 
creature which looks like a large fur ball with two pairs of 
short legs. It has thick skin, dense fur and a fat belly, and it 
spends most of it's day eating and sleeping. It's a cuddly 
animal though, and I found it to be a lovable, petable one that 
would roll on his back and allow you to scratch his fat 
stomach. The wombat would make a great pet, and I wondered 
125 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
how such a precious animal is able to defend itself from 
predators in the wild. 
Upon my return to the United States, I did some research 
on the wombat. I discovered the wombat didn't know his own 
shortcomings; that nobody had told him he was supposed to 
be a "lean and mean fighting machine." Instead, he utilizes all 
of his "negative features" to defend himself. When a predator 
comes near, the wombat will crawl into his small cave. He 
will curl up like a fur ball and tighten up his bony, thick skin 
and thick fur back, so the predator is unable to sink its teeth 
into him. At the same time, when a predator's head is in the 
wombat's cave attempting to eat him, the wombat will raise 
his large body and crush the predator's head against the top of 
the cave with his back. 
Whatever your negativity is, make it pay for itself. If your 
negativity is that you love to sit and do nothing but read, find 
out how can you read all day and get paid for it; perhaps find 
a job at a publishing company or library, or be a book critic. 
If your negativity is a love of eating, find out how can you get 
a job centered around food. Maybe you can be a chef or write 
a food column. If your negativity is a love of watching 
movies, turn the world upside down and find out how can you 
make a living in the movie business. If you cannot find an 
occupation centered around your favorite "negativity," create 
a job that no one has thought about. 
During one of my radio interviews with the legendary 
baseball manager, George "Sparky" Anderson, he told me his 
shortcoming was that he knew baseball inside out, but he 
couldn't play it well. Because George "Sparky" Anderson 
couldn't play the game well enough to be a valuable player to 
the team, he later became a legendary baseball manager and 
coach. Within your so-called negativities there is a hidden 
asset waiting to be unfolded. Your negativity will pay for 
itself, if you let it. The mystery of living is hidden in every 
corner within the mystery of your nature. Contemplate upon 
the wisdom of the wombat. 
126 

WINNING THROUGH NEGATIVE THINKING 
The Ghosts of Negativity 
1. The Blind Justifications 
There is nothing wrong with your negativities and shortcom-
ings. We human beings are told by others that our negativities 
are our defeat. Thus we are blinded and cannot discover the 
possibilities existing within the realm of our "negativities." 
The ghost of negativity is never your negativities. It is your 
convenient use of your "negativity" as a anchor to justify your 
failures. "God helps those..." If you give your negativities 
enough thought, you may discover that they, in fact, could be 
the strongest assets in your professional and personal develop-
ment. 
2. The Wickedness Within the Judgements 
When you start to label your feelings, emotions, and activities 
as being negative by others' standards, you are judging 
yourself according to others' standards. You are in trouble. 
The evil of all negativities is not within the negativity itself, 
but in the judgments of our negativities. These judgments 
come in the vicious forms of guilt, shame, and self-blame. 
In the United States, anyone who gets up at noon is 
generally considered a person who has a negative outlook on 
life. The truth is, a late riser is a late riser, nothing more. You 
might have to find an occupation that fits your natural sleeping 
rhythm. However, when you started to add another's judg-
ments about what a lazy bum you are for being a late riser, in 
Edition to your own judgements and feelings of guilt about 
127 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
your inability to get up early in the morning, suddenly you 
have a bundle of negativities that you need to overcome. 
Worse yet, you may come to a conclusion that you are simply 
a hopeless failure. 
Salvador Dali, the great Spanish artist, worked for days 
without sleep, then he would sleep for days or even weeks. 
Sometimes he was productive, and other times he just hiber-
nated and did nothing. Winston Churchill was also a night 
owl, and often slept to the noon hour. Hugh Hefner, the 
founder of Playboy magazine, is famous for his nighttime 
work schedule. 
The root of this evil and wickedness is not in the late rising 
itself, rather within the judgement about the late raising. 
Protect yourself from others' judgement by shielding yourself 
with Thick Face. Protect yourself from your own criticism, 
blame and shame with the Black Heart, detached and indiffer-
ent. 
Positively Negative 
You have spent years obsessed with being positive and trying 
to overcome your negativities. If you had spent that energy 
focusing on manifesting your dreams instead of trying to be 
positive, you might be much further ahead. 
Look at the great determination you've exhibited in being 
so negative for so long. Utilize this determination, which can 
easily be turned around to become a force that actually 
nurtures the seed of success. 
Tap into the power of your determination and refocus your 
attention away from your negativity. Instead, focus on your 
dreams and never let go of the flame of hope. 
Life is made up of the unrealistic and the irrational, and the 
Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner knows this well. Make 
your hopes and dreams your tugboat of life, pulling you along. 
128 

WINNING THROUGH NEGATIVE THINKING 
The moment our Creator creates us, He makes sure we have 
unlimited supplies of "Regenerated, ever-new hopes." 
Let your negativity be. Do your work, focus your energy 
on the flame of hope. Be a positively negative thinker. 
129 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Summary Of Key Points 
• You can succeed the way you are. 
• Success comes in every shape and profile. Success 
comes to some of the most negative people as well as 
the most positive ones. Success has more equal vision 
and less prejudice than people who are promoting the 
positive thinking theory. 
• If you give your negativities enough thought, you may 
discover that they are in fact the strongest assets in 
your professional development. 
• Don't attempt to change your opinion about yourself. 
By ignoring your inner voice of self-judgment, you 
are able to free yourself from the trap that says 
"change comes before success." 
• Your negativity does not have as much power as your 
imagination thinks it has. 
• The standards of judging negativity are artificially 
humanly manipulated and are not carved in stone. The 
standards often change according to our times and 
culture. What was considered positive in a given time 
or space can be considered negative at another. 
• It is not so bad to break the rules you made with 
yourself. Since you initiated the rules you can also 
ininitiate them or create others tomorrow. 
130 

WINNING THROUGH NEGATIVE THINKING 
• The evil is not in breaking the rules, but in the shame 
and guilt that make you judge yourself as unworthy. 
• By making and keeping a few vital agreements, you 
will actually be known as the man who keeps his 
agreements and can be trusted. 
• Nothing is absolutely bad or good, not even procrasti-
nation. When applied properly, procrastination can be 
a great asset. 
• Consistency is not always a virtue unless you are an 
accountant. 
• A high jumper needs to bend his knees and lower his 
body before he makes that high leap. Like the high 
jumper, some people need to bend low in order to 
jump high in the game of life. 
• For some, the time of hibernating and resting is an 
essential process for generating highly creative ener-
gies. 
• Often we blame our negativities as the cause of failure 
in our work. In fact, the source of our problem is not 
our negativities, but rather that we have chosen 
uninspiring tasks which bring forth our negativities. 
• The important thing is to love your negativities, not to 
judge them, and to learn to use them to raise you up. 
• The evil of all negativities is not in emotions and 
thoughts themselves, but in the judgments of these 
emotions and thoughts. Often judgments come in the 
vicious form of guilt, shame, and self-blame. 
131 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
• Gather all of your negativities, without intentions to 
correct them and without judgment. While living and 
working with your negativities, know that these 
qualities are what make you unique. Be positively 
negative. 
• Do not focus your attention on your negativities, but 
on your dreams and never let go the flame of hope. 
Your hope might be unrealistic and irrational, but keep 
on hoping. Make your hopes and dreams be your 
tugboat of life pulling your along. 
• Remember the wombat. 
132 


Weeping may endureth for a night, 
but joy cometh in the morning. 
—Psabns 30 

6 The Magical 
Power of 
Endurance 
Soaring—The Fable of the Pung Bird 
True end is not in the reaching of the limit, 
but in a completion which is limitless. 
—Rabindranath Tagore 
O
ne morning, years ago, I woke up with an over-
whelming feeling of aloneness overtaking my 
soul. I felt as if my spirit was covered by layers 
of dark clouds. I lived but made no difference to the world. I 
had given nothing significant to the Mother Earth; I took what 
the world allowed me to take. In the realm of thoughts, I had 
135 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
left no mark and claimed no victory. I stood alone in the pit 
of my soul. 
I felt the world could do very well without me. I didn't see 
any hope, only despair. Then I picked up a book which I had 
purchased many years earlier and had never opened. The book 
is called Nan Hua Jin by Chuang Tzu. Chuang Tzu was a 
great teacher and philosopher who lived in China over 2,200 
years ago. When I opened the book to the first chapter, 
entitled "Soaring," tears welled up from the depths of my 
being. In this short story by Chuang Tzu the mystery of my 
state of mind at that moment was revealed. 
"In the North Sea of China," the legend says, "there is a 
fish called Kun which is thousands of meters long. This great 
fish evolves into a bird called Pung. Pung also measures 
thousands of meters long. Swooping as he flies, his wings 
expand like the clouds covering the sky. Pung flies over the 
great sea southward to his destination: The Celestial Pool. 
"The great Pung flies towards the South Sea, beating the 
water with his majestic wings for over 3,000 kilometers, but 
first he spins the wind into a tornado that rises to a height of 
90,000 kilometers. It takes six months to reach such a height; 
only then is the Pung bird ready. Now, with the Pung's back 
against the pure blue sky and nothing blocking it, the Pung 
can set upon his course southward with no obstacles. How can 
one compare such magnitude with the morning mists, the dust, 
or insignificant creatures? 
"If the water is not deep, it cannot support a large ship; but 
empty a cup of water on the shallow floor, and a straw can 
float like a boat. If you place a cup there, it will sink. In the 
same way, if the wind is not sufficient, it cannot support huge 
wings. Only at a height of 90,000 kilometers is there enough 
space to support the Pung. So the Pung can finally begin his 
great journey. 
"When a cicada heard this story, he said to a dove, 'When 
I fly, I rise quickly to the elm tree. Sometimes I don't reach 
it and I simply fall back to the ground, but I make forward 
136 

THE MAGICAL POWER OF ENDURANCE 
progress. Why does the Pung have to struggle upward 90,000 
kilometers, without making any visible progress, before 
starting his journey south?' 
"When a person takes a journey to the nearby woods, to 
return a few hours later, he doesn't have to prepare a supply 
of food. If he has to travel 100 kilometers, he would need to 
prepare food for overnight. If he has to travel 1,000 kilome-
ters, he would need to prepare food for three months. What do 
the cicadas and doves understand about such matters? The 
mountain cicadas never know spring and autumn, because they 
are short lived." 
As I was contemplating the moral of this story, I realized 
that when one is destined for greater accomplishments in life, 
the preparation for such a journey can be extensive. 
Just as the Pung struggled upward without making any 
visible progress toward his destination and despite the ridicule 
from other birds and insects, he continued to flap his wings 
straight upward until he arrived at a great height above the 
earth's atmosphere. With lesser birds still chattering about his 
foolishness, he spread his great wings and soared effortlessly 
soudiward and into the Celestial Pool. 
You must develop your powers of endurance as the Pung 
did, even in the face of criticism and ridicule, in order to 
achieve your goals. Armed with Thick Face, Black Heart, you 
too are able to soar 90,000 kilometers upward to begin your 
glorious journey to victory. 
Winning is a Matter of How You 
Keep Score 
to general, we are accustomed to judging a winner in relation 
to time. A horse is a winner if he comes in faster than the 
others. A student gets a high mark if he finishes his test within 
a given time. No matter how much knowledge the student has, 
137 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
if he cannot put it all down on the paper within a certain time 
limit, his knowledge will not be reflected in his grades. 
We are all programmed to judge success and winning in 
relation to how fast we can produce visible results. Seldom are 
people generous enough to give us time to cultivate ourselves, 
even though that cultivation would bring greater fruit. Like the 
Pung Bird, we have to endure criticism from the lesser birds 
for our apparent failures and foolishness. Chuang Tzu, more 
than 2,000 years ago, saw the difficulties that an extraordinary 
man with an extraordinary vision would encounter in the 
world in which we live. Two thousand years later, technology 
has advanced tremendously, but the human heart remains the 
same. 
Fortunately, the time to judge the ultimate success of each 
individual is at the moment of his death. In this case, time is 
working in our favor. As long as we have the necessary 
strength to endure the time of self-cultivation, like the Pung 
Bird, the ultimate victory belongs to those who endure and 
persist to die end. 
Defeat is the Mother of Success 
One who is skilled in defeat, 
shall never see destruction. 
— T a i Wong Gong 
"Defeat is the Mother of Success," is a popular Chinese 
maxim taught to all Chinese elementary school children. I can 
still clearly recall the lyrics and the music of a nursery rhyme 
adopting this principle in my first grade class. "There is a 
good saying, 'Try it again.' After you fail once or twice, try 
it again. It will increase your determination. It will strengthen 
your endurance. Don't be afraid, be courageous, try it again." 
138 

THE MAGICAL POWER OF ENDURANCE 
As I grow older, the more I appreciate this simple and 
profound wisdom. 
The following is a story of one man's life. He failed in 
business at the age of 21. He was defeated in a legislative race 
at the age of 22, and failed again in business at 24. He was 
devastated by the death of a sweetheart when he was 26, and 
subsequently had a nervous breakdown when he was 27. At 
34, he lost a congressional race, and lost it again two years 
later. He lost a senatorial race at the age of 45. After another 
two years, he failed in an effort to become Vice President. He 
then went on to lose another senatorial race at the age of 49. 
Finally, at the age of 52, he became the Sixteenth President of 
the United States. The man was Abraham Lincoln. 
President Lincoln is, among all the people from the past to 
present, the man I most admire and respect. When his fellow 
men rejected him at the polls, Lincoln could have been 
devastated, but every disappointment brought forth the courage 
to march on toward his ordained destiny. He often tried to 
joke about his political defeats. He would say, "Well, I feel 
just like the boy who stubbed his toe—too damned badly hurt 
to laugh and too damned proud to cry." 
139 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Endure by Enduring 
Understanding the difficulties, 
enduring the hardships, 
predicting the risks, 
tolerating the abuse; 
for such a person, 
all ensure fame and success. 
—Chinese Maxim 
Once I was reading an Asian classic in which a young man 
asked his elder, "How do I endure?" The elder answered, "You 
endure by enduring." This simple statement stayed with me. 
Many people have told me they think Asian people are 
very patient. In fact, it is not that patience is their greatest 
virtue, but rather that these people have an infinite ability to 
endure the unendurable. 
Endurance and Thick Face, Black Heart 
Our civilization, our culture, our independence, 
depend not upon multiplying our wants: self-indulgence, 
but upon restricting our wants: self-denial. 
—Mahatma Gandhi 
What makes a great one great? It is not that he possesses the 
image of the knight in shining armor like St. George slaying 
the dragon. Such an image has been held dear by the execu-
tives who are climbing the corporate ladders. What makes one 
140 

THE MAGICAL POWER OF ENDURANCE 
truly great is knowing how to suffer the insufferable and how 
to endure the unendurable. 
Everyone knows how to thrive in the good times. It is the 
trying times that separate the one who has substance from the 
one who merely possesses the image. 
Through trials and tribulations, one endures by enduring. 
Thus, the human spirit triumphs over itself. 
Thick Face, Black Heart is the foundation which supports 
you in enduring the humiliation of defeat and criticism, to rise 
above it and dare to do what is right in fulfilling one's 
destiny. Abraham Lincoln said, "Let us have faith that right 
makes might, and in that faith, let us to the end, dare to do 
our duty as we understand it." 
The power which gives us strength and courage to endure 
the unendurable is the power of Thick Face, Black Heart. All 
great people possess it. Thick Face, Black Heart is a state of 
mind, not a outward behavior. 
Lincoln's Thick Face, Black Heart 
Lincoln, perhaps the greatest President in the history of the 
United States, possessed a complete understanding of Thick 
Face, Black Heart. He was often described as insecure, shy, 
depressed, gloomy, melancholy, secretive, non-confrontational, 
self-doubting, and preoccupied with the idea of premature 
death and even the possibility that he might go mad. He was 
uncomfortable in high society gatherings, and his etiquette was 
often considered substandard. 
If we put all these pieces of the picture together what we 
have is a rather unsuccessful, gloomy human struggling for 
professional and personal survival. It seems that the authors of 
all the twentieth century self-help books had people like 
Abraham Lincoln in mind. On the contrary, Lincoln is a 
141 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
master among Thick Face, Black Heart practitioners. Let us 
examine some of his Thick Face, Black Heart characteristics. 
Detachment 
Lincoln's whole life was about fighting his own feelings of 
inadequacy. If all men were meant to be created equal, God 
was certainly stingy with Lincoln's humble beginnings. From 
childhood, Lincoln learned to endure the humiliation that 
accompanied the obvious disadvantage of being poor. His 
existence until the age of 21, when he left his father's world, 
was no better than that of a work horse. 
After Lincoln left home, he never returned again. Lincoln 
might not have known what he wanted out of life at that time, 
but it was clear that he did not want what he had for his first 
21 years. 
Lincoln did not invite his father, Thomas Lincoln, to his 
wedding, nor did he take his family to visit Thomas Lincoln. 
When his father died in a nearby Illinois county in 1851, 
Lincoln did not attend the funeral. 
Some historians think Lincoln had great contempt for his 
father's intellectual limitations. I think Lincoln was a man of 
principle with an intuitive direction of his life objectives. His 
father's environment was not nurturing physically or spiritual-
ly. As a child, Lincoln was deprived of family security, living 
in the violent environment of the frontier. Even more violent 
than the frontier was the poverty he experienced. 
Lincoln did his duty for 21 years. Any contribution that he 
could have made towards his father had been made. They 
were clear of each other's debt. Without guilt or malice, 
Lincoln never saw his father again after the age of 21. While 
some may regard his actions as heartless, those who under-
stand Thick Face, Black Heart know that Lincoln acted in this 
manner in order to be true to his destiny. 
142 

THE MAGICAL POWER OF ENDURANCE 
One can see that Lincoln embodied the power of detach-
ment. He forsook the harmful environment of his father and 
safeguarded himself from the judgment of others about his 
relationship with his father. Lincoln possessed the power of 
Thick Face, Black Heart. He demonstrated this ability repeat-
edly throughout his lifetime. He always sacrificed the small 
for the larger, "just" objectives. 
Guarding His Interests 
As a lawyer, Lincoln's fee was fair and reasonable, but he did 
expect prompt remuneration for his services. If clients refused 
to pay up, Lincoln sued them to get his money. He was a 
scrupulous warrior who defended his self-interest. 
Labeled as Unholy 
Lincoln was deeply religious, yet he belonged to no church. 
He read free-thinking philosophers such as Voltaire and 
Thomas Paine. Lincoln had to endure the humiliation of being 
labeled "an unholy and irreligious man." In that era, outwardly 
expressed morals were valued above all else. Lincoln had the 
self-confidence to know in his heart that he was devoted in 
the eyes of God, and that others' judgements should not affect 
him. He was a true man of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
Enduring the War Years 
Once Lincoln mentioned to an old friend that all the trouble 
and anxieties of his life could not equal the opposition and 
criticism he received during the Civil War. They were so 
143 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
great, Lincoln said, the he did not think he could possibly 
survive them. 
In the flames of Civil War, Lincoln endured. It seems 
Lincoln was born into a tough environment to be trained as a 
man of Thick Face, Black Heart in order to lead this nation 
out of its darkest time. Lincoln had to endure massive hate 
mail. From all over the country came cries that Lincoln was 
too stupid and unfit to be President or to reunite the country. 
Yes, Lincoln was unsure of himself, inexperienced and 
melancholy. But he also was more than that. He was a man of 
conviction; a man of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
Ruthlessness 
As the war grew blacker, Lincoln grew blacker. Lincoln 
argued, "Necessity knows no law." Lincoln resorted to one 
harsh war measure after another: embracing martial law and 
military arrest. Civilians were tried in military courts without 
juries. He imprisoned at least 14,000 people, including a 
congressman. 
When Lincoln was criticized, he replied that the only regret 
he had was mat he hadn't arrested General Robert E. Lee 
when he had the chance. 
A Man Made For His Time 
A great man such as Abraham Lincoln is the gift of the 
Creator to his time. Lincoln's strength was not tainted by his 
melancholy moods; rather he drew strength from his personal 
history of tragedies. He had endured the unendurable from his 
childhood to adulthood. 
The hard life he had endured made him capable of endur-
ing the burden of the whole nation. Thus, anchored on his 
144 

THE MAGICAL POWER OF ENDURANCE 
personal strength, he led this nation through its most trying 
period. 
In Search of a Stress Free Life 
Imagine if I could give you a miracle formula, or a pill that 
would enable you instantly to eliminate all the negative 
experiences in your life. How wonderful would your life be? 
You would have no worries and would live stress free. Right? 
Wouldn't this be the ultimate dream come true? 
But the fact is that if such a pill or formula existed it 
would not make you happy or even stress free. Researchers at 
the University of California at Berkeley have backed this up 
with a study that shows our society puts too much emphasis 
on eliminating negative experiences when trying to alleviate 
stress. 
The absence of negative experiences in our life does not 
alone contribute to the quality of our life. As humans we need 
challenges in order to develop fully and bring forth all the 
positive aspects within ourself. The only way to feel truly 
happy is by confronting these challenges and overcoming 
them. As children of the Divine, we want to touch life's every 
fiber—even the negative ones—and feel alive by riding high 
on life itself. 
145 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Endurance, Crisis and Opportunity 
God is the toughest taskmaster I have known. 
He tries you through and through. 
When you find your faith or your body is failing you, 
and you are sinking, 
He comes to your assistance. 
He proves to you that you must not lose your faith... 
I cannot recall a single instance when, 
at the eleventh hour, He has forsaken me. 
—Mahatma Gandhi 
The Chinese word for crisis is made by combining two 
characters: crisis and opportunity. By observing life, the 
ancient Chinese wise men realized that the true nature of crisis 
is an opportunity in disguise. This is similar to the Western 
concept of "When God closes a door, He opens a window." 
Without the strength to endure the crisis, we will not see 
the opportunity within. It is within the process of endurance 
that opportunity reveals itself. Opportunity always exists 
within a crisis situation, but when we lose heart in a devastat-
ing crisis, we are blinded by our own emotion. When we can 
calmly endure the unendurable, the opportunity for a better 
alternative surfaces and reveals itself. 
146 

THE MAGICAL POWER OF ENDURANCE 
Crisis—A Renovation of Your Life 
The divine guidance often comes 
when the horizon is the blackest. 
— M a h a t m a Gandhi 
We all welcome changes for the better. However, changing for 
the better sometimes becomes disguised. Like an old house, in 
order to renovate and redecorate the place, you first have to 
tear it up. Then you put it back together. The house does not 
panic. But when it comes to the reconstruction of our life, we 
panic and struggle. 
Whenever there are crises, that is the time to test our ability 
of endurance. Without ability to endure emotional turmoil and 
the chaos that comes with changes, there would be no hope 
for reconstruction. Endurance is never an easy task, however 
it is essential element in overcoming crises. 
The following practical points are beneficial during a crisis 
situation. These remedies contain the elements of endurance 
that will propel you through the journey of your dark night. 
1. Give Up Struggling 
After we have done everything we can think of to fix a crisis, 
the following are likely to happen. One, we admit defeat and 
feel victimized by our circumstances. The other is that we will 
finally get smart enough to give up struggling and stop trying 
to correct the situation according to our concept of "lightness." 
We gather our courage and face up to our fear. By doing so, 
we begin to detect new possibilities. 
147 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
A drowning swimmer struggles with all his might, yet the 
power of the waves are mightier than his meager human 
effort. He screams for help. Help arrives, yet no one can get 
ahold of him to rescue him because he will not stop strug-
gling. Not until the swimmer is willing to give up struggling 
is he manageable and able to be rescued. 
2. Allowing a Solution to Make Itself Clear 
When in crisis, we, like the drowning swimmer, render the 
Divine's helping hand unable to reach us by our panicky 
efforts and struggles. During each crisis, the helping hands of 
the Divine are always present in the form of new opportuni-
ties. The key to recognition of these opportunities is to stop 
panicking and go with the flow, allowing a solution to present 
itself. 
3. Work Through Your Agony and Grief 
Whenever tragedy strikes, there is no point in me telling you 
not to grieve and instead to live life as if it were a dream. Life 
may be a dream and a play in the eyes of our Maker, but we 
are stuck with the nightmares. 
During times of stress, work out your grief, because until 
you are able to thoroughly experience your pain, it will be 
harder to deal with any new possibilities. However, do not 
indulge in excess misery. Keep your misfortune private and 
only share it with those who can truly support you. 
Walter received his lay-off notice in December 1991, just 
before Christmas. He felt devastated and hurt when he walked 
out of his office, but when he got home he tried to tell his 
wife about his ill fate with dignity and courage. He wanted to 
act like a "man," to suppress his emotions. However, his wife 
148 

THE MAGICAL POWER OF ENDURANCE 
Karen knew he hurt deeply, so she tried to get him to talk 
about the incident. At first she had tremendous difficulty 
setting him to open up, but finally he wept out loud and 
continued uncontrollably. As he wept, he poured out his 
worries—the guilt he felt over losing his job and other 
problems that he had carried hidden in him for a long time. 
He cried for three days. 
The second day, after a sleepless night, he went out at 
6:00 a.m. to the corner liquor store. The shop clerk, an 
intelligent looking middle-aged man, asked him if he was 
celebrating Christmas early. Walter told him no, but that he 
had just lost his job. 
"I understand," the clerk said. "I was in marketing and sales 
at a large corporation. But after I lost my job, my wife and 
kids left me and I ended up working here." 
Instantly the tears swelled up in both of their eyes. At that 
instant, they both felt the depth of their wounds. 
Walter normally didn't drink much, but after finishing off 
his beer that afternoon he wished to return to the liquor store, 
replenish his supply, and continue his conversation with the 
clerk. Karen told him not to commiserate with the liquor store 
clerk because it would only exacerbate Walter's own feelings 
of failure. She felt Walter might develop the idea that he 
shared the same fate and would end up like the clerk. "Misery 
loves company," she said. "Visiting the clerk will only 
compound both your pain." 
After three days of weeping and drinking, Walter was 
emotionally and physically depleted, but he picked himself up 
and started talking with Karen about what he should do next. 
They scoured the newspaper ads, took inventory of then-
assets, borrowed books from the library on how to change 
careers, and read up on ways to write a dynamic resume. 
Walter made finding a job his full time job. Within three 
weeks, he had five interviews and eventually landed a better 
Position than his old job—one with a higher salary, two weeks 
m o r e vacation time and only four work days a week. 
149 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
You will fear no criticism and agonize over no defeat. You 
will take chances that you normally would not. Suddenly, a 
multitude of opportunities unveil themselves. You are experi-
encing unfamiliar ease in your business dealings, after all it 
was not "your" life, your were living. The problems belonged 
to someone else, and you were the temporary custodian of the 
situation. Your attitude will transform as your old and unbear-
able life receives a transfusion of new possibilities. 
On my desk is a sign that reads, "Live your life as if it 
were someone else's." This helps me remember not to get too 
caught up in the drama of life. 
I shared this thought with a friend of mine. The discussion 
prompted him to say to me, "As a matter of fact, the life you 
are living is not yours, anyhow. Most of us live out our life in 
our heads, and the person who lives in our head is not our true 
self. We live with our minds so full of hopes, fears, and 
fantasies, that we basically don't experience most of our 
reality. The idea you've just expressed can free people from 
the limitations that they have set for themselves. Most of us 
are trapped by our sense of what and who we think we are." 
Knowing how to handle adversity is a valuable skill. It is all 
about the state of mind; the state of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
Liabilities and Endurance 
The manner in which you interpret your liabilities determines 
how they affect you. Although I covered this in the chapter on 
negative thinking, I would like to reiterate it under the context 
of endurance. You cannot turn liabilities into assets unless you 
are able to endure the despondent, dark periods. 
Our negative experiences in life are essential elements for 
us to fulfill our intended destiny. Unless we possess the power 
152 

THE MAGICAL P O W E R OF ENDURANCE 
of endurance to live through the dark of the night, we will not 
see the glory of daybreak. 
I was recently giving a lecture for a large African-
American audience. My audience told me that since some of 
them were born black and poor, they felt they already had a 
slow start in life from the beginning. I replied, "Look at 
Dr. Martin Luther King. If he had been born white and rich, 
what would he have made of himself? He'd be just another 
smart white boy." In fact, there is nothing you need to do to 
turn your liabilities into assets, because destiny has already 
done the job for you. 
Dr. King did not choose to be an African-American, but he 
was nevertheless. Thomas Edison did not choose to be 
burdened with a learning disability thus making him unfit for 
school. Yet because Edison did not receive standard schooling, 
in his world everything was possible. Who and what he was 
were his assets. 
What separates those who reap the fruits of their seeming 
liabilities and those who became a true liability to themselves 
lies in the power of one's ability to endure the time before 
they are recognized. 
The Sweet Fruit of Endurance 
Dick is working for a specialized custom design engineering 
company. His expertise is in robotics. Two years ago he was 
employed by this company to create a robotic control system 
for industrial equipment. The company owner had a brilliant 
vision, which was to be the calling card of the company. As 
time went on, the complexity of the system generated doubts 
in the mind of the company owner as to whether the whole 
thing was even worth it. The more doubts the owner had about 
the project, the less important Dick became in the company's 
pecking order. He was first hired as manager of the project; 
153 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
later he was demoted to a regular engineer supporting other 
projects. 
Many times Dick thought of quitting, but deep down in his 
heart he wanted the project finished. He believed it would be 
a revolutionary piece of hardware in the area of industrial 
manufacturing, so he stayed on. Each day, after he had 
finished working on other projects, he would work on his 
robotic control project. In the meantime, the company created 
another type of manufacturing hardware without any intelligent 
capacity. The owner began to sing a different tune, that what 
people really wanted was just dumb hardware that worked 
well. 
One day the owner told Dick, "I am thinking about 
scrapping the whole robotic control project." 
Dick had put his heart and soul into this project, and he 
knew the benefit of this hardware. He objected strongly, "If 
you don't want the control system, I will personally go out to 
seek buyers for different applications." The owner walked 
away saying nothing. Dick was left totally devastated, but he 
continued his work. 
Two days after that conversation, a European manufactur-
ing company came to United States to see the demo of this 
company's hardware. The owner knew this was a long shot, 
because the manufacturing company had already visited more 
than five companies all over the world. After three days of 
demonstrations, by accident a manager mentioned that there 
was a robotic control system that was 95% complete. The 
European buyers requested a demonstration the next day. 
Dick was able to demonstrate his pet project. It was a hit. 
After the demo, these buyers talked of nothing but Dick's 
robotic control hardware. They said to the owner, "This is the 
highlight of our trip." The foreign manufacturing company 
purchased the full system worth over two million dollars. 
Dick endured the humiliation of being demoted and 
working on a system no one seemed to think was important. 
154 

THE MAGICAL POWER OF ENDURANCE 
Finally, the company owner began to see his original vision 
had been correct all along. 
A Strategy for Romance 
The quality of endurance has infinite usage, not only limited 
to our traditional concept. For example, the problem with 
man-woman relationships is that when the man wants the 
woman, the woman doesn't want the man. When the woman 
wants the man, the man doesn't want the woman. The 
common relationships between sexes are more like a game of 
tug of war than a storybook, poetic romance. 
It seems that within many men and women lives an 
invisible hunter, a stalker who enjoys the exercise of the hunt 
far more than the warmth of intimacy. So the game goes on. 
The next time you notice these hunter characteristics in 
your romantic interest, go ahead and create the hunt by first 
adopting the Thick Face, Black Heart detachment—play hard 
to get! Detach yourself from your instinctive need to get close 
and intimate. Hold back just enough, so that you don't turn off 
the magnetism between you and your pursuer, and let them 
also have a little fun hunting you down. 
However, you cannot adopt this strategy unless you are 
able to master the spirit of endurance and deprive yourself of 
the joy of being a hunter yourself. The secret that enables you 
to endure the pain of this detachment is keeping your eyes on 
your objective. The objective will be different for each person. 
To some it will be a serious, entangled relationship, while 
others may simply want casual companionship. The point is 
that you've acquired this relationship and won your "prize" on 
your own terms. 
Recently a friend of mine told me that he and his girlfriend 
were not doing very well. As a matter of fact, she had 
announced that she would like to see other people. My friend 
155 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
was devastated, since he was horribly attached to her. I 
advised him to try something drastic, because she was pretty 
much a lost cause. 
He went back to his girlfriend and told her that it would be 
fine for her to see anyone she wanted, just not him. Three 
days later, they were married in Las Vegas. I'm not sure how 
long the marriage will last, but at least my friend was very 
happy that he got his "prize." 
Conclusion 
The spirit of endurance is one of the most powerful concepts 
we can learn. It can fulfill your objectives in life with no 
external effort. You do not have to conquer others, you only 
need to be tough with yourself. The ability to endure is your 
natural spiritual fiber. This strength that enables one to endure 
the unendurable is also the source of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
156 

THE MAGICAL POWER OF ENDURANCE 
Summary Of Key Points 
• The spirit of endurance is an imperative quality in the 
expedition in our personal growth. This spirit was not 
a stranger to the early settlers and our founding 
fathers. Through endurance, this nation was bom and 
made great. 
• When one is destined for greater accomplishments in 
life, the preparation for such a journey can be exten-
sive. 
• Defeat is the Mother of Success 
• Endure by enduring—understanding the difficulties, 
enduring the hardships, predicting the risks, and 
tolerating the abuse, all ensure fame and success for 
such a person. 
• What makes one truly great is knowing how to suffer 
the insufferable and how to endure the unendurable. 
Everyone knows how to thrive in me good times. It is 
the trying times that separate the one who has sub-
stance from the one who merely possesses the image. 
• Through trials and tribulations, one endures by endur-
ing. Thus the human spirit triumphs over itself. 
• Thick Face, Black Heart is the foundation which 
supports you in enduring the humiliation of defeat and 
criticism, to rise above it and dare to do what is right 
in fulfilling one's destiny. 
157 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
• The Chinese word for crisis is made by combining two 
characters: crisis and opportunity. By observing life, 
the ancient Chinese wise men realized that the true 
nature of crisis is an opportunity in disguise. This is 
similar to the Western concept of "When God closes 
a door, He opens a window." 
• Without the strength to endure the crisis, one will not 
see the opportunity within. It is within the process of 
endurance that opportunity reveals itself. 
• Opportunity always exists within a crisis situation, but 
when we lose heart in a devastating crisis, we are 
blinded by our own emotion. When we can calmly 
endure the unendurable, the opportunity for a better 
alternative surfaces and reveals itself. 
• Going with the flow is not about giving up self-effort, 
but rather about accepting the reality. You must learn 
to recognize when it is the time for action and when 
it is time to sit out. 
• When you immerse yourself in inactivity, you are also 
gathering and nurturing your inner strength. By doing 
so, without anxiety and with a detached spirit, you are 
able to focus yourself and thus create a force of 
powerful momentum and unshakable clarity. 
• Live your life as if it is someone else's. You will find 
tremendous freedom and relief. A transformation of 
your attitude will occur. 
• Liabilities depend on how you see them; you can 
easily turn them into assets if you start to view your 
liabilities in a different light. However, one will not be 
158 

THE MAGICAL POWER OF ENDURANCE 
able to turn liabilities into assets unless he is able to 
endure the despondent, dark periods. 
• Our negative life situations are essential elements for 
us to fulfill our intended destiny. However, unless we 
possess the power of endurance to live through the 
dark of the night, we will not see the glory of day-
break. 
159 

With what you get from others, 
you make a living for yourself 
What you give to others, 
makes a life for yourself. 
—Hindu Maxim 
1

The Mystery 
of Money 
Poverty is the greatest violence. 
— M a h a t m a Gandhi 
The Wisdom of Ancient China 
M
oney is not the complete reward of a Thick 
Face, Black Heart practitioner, but to most, it 
is an important part of it. 
As a child, I learned to write each Chinese character by 
endlessly repeating the strokes that made up the character until 
they were so indelibly burned into my memory that my hand 
could create them automatically. I learned the common 
meaning of the characters but never gave a thought to the 
deeper meaning of the symbols themselves. Now, as an adult, 
I am often struck by the poetic and sublime wisdom of the 
ancient scholars who created words out of simple pictorial 
161 
7 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
symbols representing the basic elements of their lives and the 
world around them. 
The Chinese character for money is composed of three 
symbols. One symbol means gold. The other two represent 
spears. The character for poverty is also composed of three 
symbols. The symbols depict a man standing at the bottom of 
a pit, bent as if under a great burden. These characters not 
only represent money and poverty, they also say something 
profound and beautiful about those two states. 
During my college years in Taiwan, a friend had convinced 
me to accompany her on a visit to the local fortune teller. 
After the old man had told her fortune, she asked him to tell 
mine. He handed me a brush and a slip of paper and asked me 
to write a word. I drew the character meaning sky or heaven. 
He took the paper and studied the character. Beside it he drew 
the character representing money: gold flanked by two spears. 
"Study this character carefully," he insisted. "It will reveal 
to you the mystery of money. Gold is tightly bound to 
struggle." 
As I remembered the old man's words, I wondered why 
there were two spears connected to the idea of money. It 
seemed to me that just one would have adequately conveyed 
the idea that a struggle was involved in acquiring wealth. I 
drew the character and studied it carefully as the old man had 
commanded me to do. Quite suddenly I understood the 
mystery of money and the dual nature of the struggle that 
surrounds it. 
The Outward Battle 
The first spear symbolizes the outward struggle for survival. 
Although the earth contains abundance, its bounty is not 
equitably distributed among the billions of people who need 
to share in that abundance. From the beginning of civilization 
ifi? 

THE MYSTERY OF MONEY 
to the present day, one nation has battled another to acquire 
the other's resources. In the day-to-day struggle among 
individuals, the conflict is not often as direct and bloody as it 
can be among nations, but it is just as ruthless. 
In the modern industrialized world, the principal struggle 
for survival takes the form of the struggle for money. Money 
plays an important role when it comes to furthering one's 
success. A well-managed business offering a superior product 
or service may still be overwhelmed by a less efficient 
competitor who is better capitalized. A brilliant and able 
politician will not accomplish his agenda if he is out-spent and 
defeated for election by an inferior opponent. A ballet, play, 
or movie of great artistic importance will never be produced 
if its creators cannot attract the necessary funding. Anyone 
who wishes to accomplish their goals or claim a share of the 
earth's abundance must first be prepared to do battle for 
money. 
Many times during my seminars, people will ask me: "If I 
have no money, how can I start a business and make it?" 
Nolan Bushnell founded the Atari video game company with 
only $500. Four years later, he sold the company to Warner 
Communications for $28 million. However, with the $28 
million he began numerous enterprises that cost him millions 
of dollars to support, and many of these ventures eventually 
went bankrupt. A worthwhile project can succeed through a 
grass roots effort when one is willing to fight for the opportu-
nity to manifest their vision. 
It is never an easy path. If you don't have a worthy idea 
and superb execution, then money alone cannot save you. It 
can only prolong the time period before you lose it all. So the 
game of monetary success is not only about getting the 
money; it is also about have a great idea and being able to 
keep that money multiplying through worthy efforts. 
163 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The Battle Within 
The second spear represents the battle within. Before one can 
fight and win the outward battle, one must win the battle 
within. Poverty is more a state of mind than an external 
condition. Most people struggle for small rewards because 
they are shackled by an unarticulated belief that they are not 
the kind of people who are worth the finer things in life. It is 
essential to transform your state of mind within yourself: you 
are worthy of whatever material rewards you seek, so long as 
you acquire them honestly and honorably. 
Unclaimed Gifts 
It was told that a holy man, because of his great virtue, was 
taken by the angels to visit heaven. As the angels were 
escorting him through the heavenly mansion, they passed 
through a great hall piled high with gifts of every kind. The 
man asked his guides why all these gifts were here. They 
replied, "These are all the things people prayed for but quit 
their prayers right before they were to be delivered." 
Our Divine Maker never stops us from possessing worthy 
gifts. It is we who lack faith in our worthiness to receive the 
gifts that prevents us from possessing them. Some just quit 
wanting them because they lose heart, convinced they will 
never get what they want. For others, the objects of their 
desire are transitory. One day they want a new coat, the next 
day a new car. When the weather turns cold they start wishing 
for a Hawaiian vacation. Their desires are little more than idle 
daydreams. If we are steadfast in our efforts to attain our 
worthy desires, they may come to us, but idle dreams seldom 
come true. 
164 

THE MYSTERY OF MONEY 
A Fair Exchange of Value 
Money and wealth are obtained through interactions with 
others. You exchange your labor for money. In order to get a 
fair exchange value, it is necessary to convince the people 
with whom you do business that you can be of benefit to 
them. It is necessary for you to project a sense of your own 
worth. In order to do this you must first have a strong inner 
sense of your own worth. 
To have a sense of your own worth, you have to do 
something that is worthy of your own respect first. This 
includes hard work along with determination and perseverance. 
Concentrate your energy on the things that make you of worth 
to others: the competent and faithful performance of your 
duties, care in honoring your commitments, and bringing 
energy and creativity to your tasks. Too often we dissipate our 
energy in resenting the success of others and railing at fate for 
keeping us from acquiring the wealth we seek. This is the 
battle within. 
The Fruits of Poverty 
Money may not buy happiness, 
but it certainly will buy a lot of convenience. 
—Chinese proverb 
Almost everyone thinks they want to be rich, but in reality, 
most of us are where we want to be financially. Obtaining 
Prosperity is not about what you are willing to do to gain it; 
more importantly, it is about what you are willing to give up 
in exchange for it. This is an extremely important principle to 
165 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
remember. It is like the making of a superior athlete. The first 
thing the athlete has to confront is the question, "What am I 
willing to give up to become a great athlete? Am I willing to 
give up the times that I spend with my friends? Am I willing 
to forego the parties and fun times that my friends enjoy? Am 
I willing to forego delicious, fattening food in exchange for a 
disciplined diet program?" The list goes on. 
Ruby is an apartment manager with a meager income. In an 
attempt to improve her financial situation, she works part time 
selling real estate but her hard work has never provided her 
any meaningful financial rewards. 
As I watch Ruby, I realize that she is extremely attached to 
the fruits of her poverty. She is attached to the duties and the 
rewards of managing the apartment complex. By performing 
her job as apartment manager, Ruby satisfies her "psychologi-
cal needs." 
Ruby is the type of person that we commonly label as a 
"power tripper." A few months after a tenant moves in, Ruby 
starts acting more like a boot camp sergeant than an apartment 
manager. She thrives on the power she holds over her tenants, 
especially when she is on the "right" side in the list of do's 
and don'ts of the apartment's regulations. 
Ruby thinks she wants to make more money through 
selling real estate, so she may give up her meager pay and 
long working hours as an apartment manger. But subcon-
sciously, her spirit feeds on the satisfaction and power of 
policing others as she performs her present duties. She could 
not possibly be content to give it up in exchange for an 
occupation that would require her to cater to the needs of her 
paying clients, even though it would mean a significant 
improvement in her financial status. 
Ruby's mind sees no difference between the potential 
satisfaction that wealth can bring versus the satisfaction 
experienced by staying in poverty. As a matter of fact, Ruby 
is subconsciously so attached to this specific advantage of 
being poor that she has great doubt about the value of trading 
166 

THE MYSTERY OF MONEY 
a proven pleasurable experience (power tripping over others) 
for the unknown experience of being rich. 
Ivan is a middle-aged businessman who has had numerous 
business ventures throughout his life. Unfortunately, he had a 
habit of taking his businesses to the top only to watch them 
crash to bankruptcy with time. After twenty years of these ups 
and downs, Ivan finally discovered the cause of his failures. 
Whenever he was on the top he would live an extravagant 
lifestyle and at times, would even sink into decadence. Deep 
down, Ivan is a pure-hearted, down-to-earth man. Therefore 
his periods of decadent living would rub against his natural 
grain—the simple, harmonious lifestyle he truly felt comfort-
able with. This would eventually drive Ivan to unconsciously 
sabotage his own enterprises through a series of bad business 
judgements. When he finally realized the reason behind his 
downfalls, he was able to discipline himself and avoid 
repeating past patterns while thriving on the waves of success. 
Squeeze Money Too Tight, 
It Will Slip Out of Your Hands 
Money is the element of life that inspires the greatest of 
emotions in individuals. It is tightly connected with the 
emotions of agony and ecstacy. When you have money, you 
never feel you have enough. If you have lost money, you wish 
you had appreciated it more when you did have it. 
June, a 43-year-old Australian lady, is currently studying 
English literature at a Los Angeles junior college. She was 
referred to my friend, Bob, as someone who could assist Bob 
in editing a series of short stories he had written. June had 
never before edited fiction stories, but 15 years ago, while she 
was in Australia, she had worked as a documentary film 
editor's assistant. She had a natural instinct for drama. During 
the past 15 years in the United States, June had come upon 
167 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
rough times. She often had to earn her living by performing 
tedious labor at minimum wage. She had grown extremely 
bitter about the world, and her attitude towards money and 
people was very negative. Six months ago, she was fired from 
her used car sales job. She was unemployed once again. 
Although June did not have a track record that demonstrat-
ed her talent, Bob sensed her natural intuition. After meeting 
with June, Bob decided to give her a try. Bob agreed to pay 
June the sum of three thousand dollars for three short stories. 
After working with Bob and finishing one story, June start to 
think to herself that perhaps she was working too cheaply. She 
thought she could change her working arrangement from a 
project basis to an hourly basis to earn more money. She 
presented her case to Bob, arguing and crying how she was 
being exploited by Bob for her cheap labor. Bob allowed that 
if June would accurately keep track of her working time, he 
would pay her twenty-five dollars an hour. June was delighted 
because she had never received such a large hourly sum for 
her work. 
June began working on the next story. She soon realized 
that after she eliminated her meal times, her fifteen minutes 
per hour of cigarette breaks, and the time she spent visiting 
about her life during working hours, her actual working hours 
were few. She spent only ten hours on the next story. This 
translated to approximately two hundred fifty dollars per story. 
She realized she had just shot herself in the foot. Again she 
wanted to renegotiate with Bob. She cried to Bob that, by 
counting the hours, the love had gone out of their working 
space and that she wanted that love back. She wanted to go 
back to the original arrangement. Bob replied, "The love has 
not gone out of me. I have always had within me. If the love 
has gone out of you, then it is up to you to get it back. To be 
more accurate, the whole thing to you was never about love. 
It was only about money. What happened here is because you 
wanted to get more money out of this situation. You squeezed 
168 

THE MYSTERY OF MONEY 
the money too tight and it has slipped from your hands." Bob 
then sent her home. 
Accidental Wealth 
The battle within must be fought and won not only to establish 
in your own mind your right to material wealth, but to develop 
within yourself the ability and will to go out into the world 
and fight for it. 
Wealth is an uncertain thing. Every day fortunes are made 
and lost. The person who has acquired wealth by successfully 
fighting the inward and outward battles is not so devastated by 
financial catastrophe as is the person who has acquired wealth 
by accident of birth or windfall. Msfortune may strip him of 
material wealth, but he still has the ability, will, and confi-
dence to acquire it again. 
My mother was born to great wealth. The only child of an 
only child, she inherited a huge estate that had not been 
dispersed over the generations to a number of heirs. Although 
she enjoyed all the comforts and privileges that wealth brings, 
she had been raised in a household of domestic discord. Her 
father had openly and lavishly supported a mistress and a 
second family. This was a cause of constant strife between my 
grandparents. 
When it came time for my mother to marry, she decided 
that the best way to avoid flagrant infidelity was to marry a 
man of modest means. She chose my father, a poor but worthy 
distant relative. She then settled down into what she thought 
would be a tranquil and genteel life. But this was not to be. 
After my parents were married, they moved to Tienjin. 
With my mother's monthly income from the land rental back 
in Manchuria plus my father's salary, they were able to live 
lavishly in the British governed section of the town. In early 
1948, while the Communist forces led by Mao Tzedung were 
169 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
steadily approaching Tienjin, my parents left their house to the 
care of our servants and moved into a newly purchased 
chateau in Shanghai's French territory. A year later, they were 
forced to leave all their wealth and flee to Taiwan. As we left 
our home in Shanghai, again my parents admonished the 
housekeepers to take good care of everything because we 
would return in a couple of months. 
Forty-three years later, my parents are still in Taiwan. For 
years they waited for external events to restore their affluence 
in the same sudden way it had disappeared. While fortunes 
were being made all around them in Taiwan's post Vietnam 
War prosperity, my father was content to take a government 
position that paid a modest salary. Neither he nor my mother 
ever made a serious attempt to become wealthy through their 
own efforts. 
Great fortune had not done for my parents what they had 
expected it to do. Because neither of them had ever engaged 
in the inward and outward battles for wealth, they were unable 
go out and restore their fortunes. 
On the other hand, if you are fortunate enough to inherit 
wealth and not have the misfortune to lose it, it can sometimes 
be a curse as well. In Circus of Ambition, John Taylor 
describes how old-money families like the Rockefellers "felt 
imprisoned by their wealth." 
"By stripping them of the need to work, inherited wealth 
encouraged idleness and engendered feelings of worthlessness. 
Heirs to other great East Coast fortunes, such as the children 
of J. Seward Johnson of Johnson & Johnson, actually felt 
degraded by their money. Wealth, they came to believe, 
created a corrosive mistrust of others." 
170 

THE MYSTERY OF MONEY 
Wealth and Talent 
The Chinese character for wealth—the accumulation of money 
and other assets—is composed of two symbols: One is a sea 
shell, the medium of exchange in very ancient times; the other 
is the symbol for the unique ability or talent that each of us 
possesses—the literal meaning of the symbol is "brilliance." 
The path to wealth is not to chase money for its own sake, 
but to understand and develop your own intrinsic talents and 
inclinations. You must seek a livelihood that allows you to do 
what you were intended to do and one that brings you joy. If 
you do, the money will take care of itself. Too often we select 
a job because it pays well or offers security. But no matter 
how well a job pays initially or how secure it makes you feel, 
it will turn out to be a dead end unless it is in line with your 
own particular talents. It will eventually rob you of your 
enthusiasm and creative brilliance. At best, you will become 
mediocre and your rewards will likewise be mediocre. 
Because each of us possesses a spark of individual bril-
liance, every one of us is capable of accomplishing something 
that cannot be accomplished by anyone else in our own unique 
way. Striving to discover our niche in this vast human market 
is part of our conquest of life. 
In most cases, life does not play hide and seek; rather, we 
are blind. Our unique abilities often display themselves in 
many situations in the course of our lives. Because we are so 
focused on making a living, we do not see anything else. In 
this case, for our own good, sometimes life will pull the rug 
from under us, so we are compelled to look around and 
discover new possibilities. 
171 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
may be, you rarely give a beggar money because you want to 
reward him for his skill in begging. 
As spiritual beings, we often turn to our Maker to fulfill 
our desires magically. We do this by begging to God in our 
prayers. Actually, our prayers often sound more like shopping 
lists than devoted worship. Sometimes they read like a 
contract of performance; if you do this, then I will do that. 
If our Maker did indeed grant every demand, then He 
would be more inclined to respond to your wishes if you 
approached him not as a beggar but rather as his child, 
knowing that because he created you in his own image. What 
he has, you also have. 
As a child of The Divine who is made in his image and 
possesses all of his attributes, it is demeaning for you to beg 
for the fulfillment of your desires. As the child of God, you 
embody the full splendor of His finest attributes, and every 
"worthy" desire can be fulfilled through your God-given 
abilities. You are able to perform actions coupling wisdom 
with discrimination and undying determination to persist until 
you obtain all your heart's desires. 
The more you explore your ability to bring forth your God-
given attributes in attempting to fulfill your worldly needs, the 
more you will be able to sense His presence in your daily 
endeavors. The Divine image is no longer a painting of an old 
man with a white beard appearing in the sky among the 
clouds. His image is an ever-present, tangible force that 
reveals itself through your noble attributes. 
Adapt the Divine Touch in Our Work 
What makes a great artist great is his ability to recreate his 
Maker's creativity in his work. A good lawyer taps into his 
Maker's wisdom in delivering a convincing defense. In the 
same way, a good business manager copies, on a smaller 
174 

THE MYSTERY OF MONEY 
scale, The Maker's ability to manage the vast universe. No 
matter what occupation you are in, the manifestation of your 
excellence is in direct proportion to the degree you are able to 
bring forth the hidden divine qualities from within and apply 
these qualities to your daily tasks. 
During an interview, Luciano Pavarotti, the most renowned 
tenor of our time, identified the practice of yoga as the single 
most important factor contributing to his singing excellence. 
The word "yoga" in Sanskrit, means union. Pavarotti spoke of 
the union of the small individual entity with the universal 
entity and how this affects him as a singer. 
The more you are able to manifest the Maker's qualities, 
the easier it will be for you in your quest of self-fulfillment, 
and your pursuit of rightful monetary rewards in your profes-
sional life. 
This is particularly visible among the creative occupations, 
perhaps because the artist is able to see the result of his work 
as a completed whole, whereas the businessman's work is an 
ongoing process. I have noticed that the difference between a 
great artist and a competent artist is not in their technical 
ability, but lies rather in the expression of their soul. You see 
in the work of great artists the manifestation of that Divine 
force, just as if they were touched by God himself. 
A great dancer such as Baryshnikov transcends human 
limitations and brings us into the realm of the celestial world. 
The voices of Luciano Pavarotti and Joan Sutherland touch our 
hearts with overwhelming love and joy. The great artist 
Vincent Van Gogh painted works that not only copied nature, 
but interpreted and glorified its mysteries. His paintings are 
more than just paintings. They are bridges connecting the 
human world to the world of The Divine, and we are willing 
to pay millions to possess his masterpieces. 
175 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Operate Your Life As If 
You Have Arrived 
As you master your skill, this alone does not necessarily 
guarantee the rewards that come with success. Pavarotti is a 
wealthy man. Van Gogh made strangers who possessed his 
paintings wealthy but never enjoyed a decent living himself. 
The ability to bring forth the divine touch in your work, alone 
does not guarantee financial reward. 
There is another aspect to this mysterious puzzle. You need 
to perceive yourself as being successful and then operate your 
life as if you are. It is essential to uproot from your conscious-
ness thoughts that you somehow are lacking and are unworthy. 
Operate from abundance and self-importance. To some Thick 
Face, Black Heart practitioners this comes naturally; to others 
we have to work consciously at it. When Grace Kelly first 
appeared in Hollywood she was a nobody, but she carried 
herself naturally, as if she already were a great star. When she 
actually was a great star, she looked and acted more like a 
princess than a movie star. 
Before you can garner the external rewards, you first must 
inwardly experience that they already belong to you. In short, 
your inner reality will take the form of a self-fulfilling 
prophecy. Your actions will be unforced and much more 
effective because they are motivated from within, not because 
you are mechanically following a formula. Outer success will 
follow the actions and attitudes you manifest due to your 
experience of success as an inner reality. 
176 

THE MYSTERY OF MONEY 
Transforming Your Attitude 
The famous book Think and Grow Rich teaches us how we 
can think ourselves to riches. Throughout the years I have 
carefully observed how people obtained wealth. It is not 
thinking, reading, or listening that transfers us from poverty to 
wealth. Rather, it is a switch of attitude from the center of our 
being. You can think all you want, you can affirm all you 
want, you can understand all you can possibly understand, but 
it will not necessarily change you or your circumstances. 
These are necessary steps; however, your circumstances 
will not change until your knowledge and your understanding 
take on a living form from within. Because you have trans-
formed, suddenly everything becomes possible. 
This transformation has no fixed formula. It results from 
your willingness to do battle within, and your unceasing 
courage to cultivate your inner strength to overcome your 
liabilities. Through this self-cultivation, you will eventually 
produce the magical fruit that will transform your attitudes in 
every aspect of your life. 
A Transformation 
In the mid-1970s, after a heart-breaking divorce, I decided to 
try my wings in the world of money making. After looking 
around, I saw that the Southern California real estate market 
was booming and most of the realtors were driving prestigious 
cars. They seemed to have more than enough money. I too got 
my license and began to work in the world of real estate. 
I was able to support myself in a small degree of comfort, 
but nothing impressive. During this time, I began to read many 
wonderful books in an attempt to transform my relationship 
177 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
with money. Besides reading about it, I practiced daily and 
lived the messages I read. 
Later, I met a dynamic lady, Judy. I teamed up with Judy. 
We worked diligently for one month. We did everything we 
were supposed to do, but nothing happened. We didn't make 
any money. One morning we met as usual, but didn't have our 
normal enthusiasm; we were like two deflated balloons. That 
morning we were scheduled to see all the newly available 
properties. We felt too depressed to see anything, so we 
decided we would stop by an old Spanish church and just sit. 
The church was completely empty except for the two of us. 
Judy took a seat on the right side of the church and I took a 
seat on the left. The air was calm. The church walls echoed 
silently with the prayers offered over the past 100 years. I 
looked up at the altar and gazed at the limp Christ hanging 
from the cross. Sadness and love leaped out of my heart to 
him. I began my prayer in the form of a silent conversation 
with the Christ on the Cross: 
"Since I was nine years old, I have loved you so. I was 
willing to do anything to be your champion. Do you remember 
that I used to lie in front of my family worship altar, and pray 
for stigmata like St. Francis of Assisi? As I grew older, I 
realized you tested your followers in the trial of life rather 
than the dramatic miracles of stigmata. I was afraid I would 
not pass your test of life. Stigmata seems so much easier and 
more glorified than silently enduring the tests of living. 
"I remembered what you had done to Job in the Old 
Testament. You removed all of his wealth, then his health, 
then his basic human dignity. Only when he demonstrated his 
unshakable devotion did you restore everything to him tenfold. 
I am afraid of such a test. My flesh is weak. Deep down, I am 
always afraid to surrender myself. If I really surrender myself 
to you, you will turn me into a homeless bag lady since I have 
no friends or relatives around. You will turn my life into a 
mess, just as you did Job's." 
178 

THE MYSTERY OF MONEY 
A gentle, clear voice from the depth of my being replied, 
"What was right for Job is not right for you. Job wanted the 
test for his own satisfaction. He wished to prove his love of 
me to himself. It was not I who needed the proof. There is no 
need for you to be destitute for my sake. I assure you I will be 
with you always. You are my very own. My blessing goes 
with you everywhere. You shall have no lack." 
I wept uncontrollably for over half an hour. They were 
tears of relief and gratitude. The burden I had carried all my 
life dissolved in an instant; it disappeared like melting ice. At 
this time, I heard the sweet voices of the school students 
singing "America the Beautiful" echoing through the side door 
behind the altar. I thought to myself, it is not by accident that 
on the back of the American dollar bill is printed, "In God We 
Trust." Whoever designed the dollar bill understood that the 
foundation of our money system was God's grace, therefore, 
"In God We Trust." Our founding fathers trusted God as the 
supporter and sustainer of our monetary system, yet I had so 
little faith. I wept even harder. 
As I walked out of the church, Judy met me at the front 
door. Through her tearful eyes, I knew she had just had a 
similar experience. We looked at each other, and simulta-
neously we spoke out, "Let's go buy a house." We went to see 
the new houses on the market. We bought two houses within 
two hours. 
I had no idea how I was going to pay for them. I didn't 
even have my share of the down payment. Judy and I were in 
an extraordinary state, though. We experienced no lack, only 
abundance. In that state of mind anything is possible. I told 
her I only had a few thousand dollars in my bank account. I 
said it without guilt or apology. Judy said, "I will loan you the 
money." 
Judy's husband had just been laid off a month earlier by 
Rockwell International, and was temporarily out of a job. 
Rockwell gave him some stocks as compensation for his 15 
years of service. Judy sold the stocks, loaned me the down 
179 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
payment, and I became the proud (50%) owner of two lovely 
homes in the prestigious neighborhoods of Studio City and 
Sherman Oaks in Southern California. We had a transforma-
tion of our attitudes about money. 
Nothing had to make sense anymore. It was illogical for 
Judy to loan me the money and for me to own half the house; 
furthermore, she had no idea how I was going to pay her back, 
and neither did I. It was even more illogical for her to sell her 
only financial security while her husband was out of work. 
Engineering jobs were scarce; there were lay offs everywhere. 
But, as your attitude changes, your relationship to your reality 
changes also. 
After that day, everything we touched turned to gold. We 
performed our work with diligence and delight. Most of all, I 
knew I was a winner and I knew I would never have to be 
fearful again of becoming a bag lady. 
A few months later, besides being able to pay Judy back 
the money she had loaned me, I acquired three more proper-
ties, plus a beautiful home with a double lot, swimming pool, 
complete with a full guest house. I moved in and furnished the 
place with everything new. My inner change of attitude 
earmarked the beginning of a new life for myself. 
The Indifferent Attitude Towards Money 
Whether you have plenty of money or a little, remember, 
"Money is not part of who you are. You didn't bring it with 
you at birth, nor will you take it with you at death." Enjoy 
your money. Have money work for you and make it contribute 
to your life. See money for what it is, but no more. Don't let 
money take over your whole life, because money is fickle. 
Keep an indifferent attitude towards it. 
180 

THE MYSTERY OF MONEY 
Fine T^ine Your Understanding of 
Universal Timing 
For most of us, whether our desires are tangible or intangible 
objects, noble or ignoble pursuits, one thing is certain—we 
want to obtain them immediately. If our desires are not 
granted in a timely manner, anger, tension, and desperation 
will arise, and finally we will lose all heart and accept defeat. 
We are like young infants who demand our milk bottles 
with great urgency. If the bottles are kept from our mouths for 
a mere moment, we will wail in protest. In order to keep 
harmony, the mother must acquiesce to the baby's whims and 
adjust her needs to fit the infant's timing. 
Unlike the human mother, our Divine Maker insists that 
we, his children, lean to fine tune our understanding of his 
timing. We must lean to accept that the Creator gives 
according to his own schedule, regardless of our demands. 
When you learn God's timing, you learn how to live and work 
in harmony with yourself and others around you. Most 
importantly, you understand the art of communion with the 
silent voice of the universal will. 
At the close of 1991, the mortgage interest rate plunged to 
almost a thirty-year low. A friend of mine, Sonya, grew 
anxious and upset because she and her husband could not raise 
enough money for a down payment on a house. At night she 
would dream about watching her children playing at a new 
home. Her expectations and thwarted desires made her accuse 
her husband of not being able to fulfill her most basic needs. 
Recently she told me about her worries. I told her it does 
not matter how high or low the interest rate moves. When the 
time is right, the perfect house and the method to pay for it 
will reveal itself harmoniously and effortlessly. You must be 
content with whatever your starting point or financial condi-
181 
Ifc. 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
tion is, because that is your launch pad to begin your journey 
towards prosperity. 
Conclusion 
The mystery of money is not a one or two dimensional 
formula. Even the wealthiest people have no fixed formula to 
guarantee their own prosperity. In so many ways, prosperity 
is connected with our ability to bring forth every aspect of our 
Maker's qualities. In addition to the qualities mentioned here, 
the qualities of endurance, self-confidence, perseverance, self-
respect, determination, discipline, love, compassion, generosi-
ty, joy, courage, righteousness, efficiency and even ruthless-
ness should also be included. The more we can bring forth 
these qualities, the more we will tap into the power of our 
Maker. Ultimately, through our inner and outer battles, we will 
experience our connection with the Divine, the source of 
universal abundance. 
For the practitioner of Thick Face, Black Heart this is a 
task that is never completed. Each day we experience a 
thousand successes and a thousand failures. Victory lies in 
perseverance. If we are steadfast in correcting our course, we 
can repeatedly recreate ourselves as the heirs to the abundance 
of the world. That is the mystery of money, the mystery of 
wealth: We do not have to beg; we need only claim that which 
is ours by right. 
182 

THE MYSTERY OF MONEY 
Summary Of Key Points 
• The Chinese character for money is composed of three 
symbols. One symbol means gold. The other two 
represent spears. The character for poverty is also 
composed of three symbols. The symbols depict a man 
standing at the bottom of a pit, bent as if under a great 
burden. These characters not only represent money and 
poverty, they also say something profound and beauti-
ful about those two states. 
• The first spear symbolized the outward struggle for 
survival. Anyone who wishes to accomplish their goals 
or claim a share of the earth's abundance must first be 
prepared to battle for money. 
• The second spear represents the battle within. Before 
one can fight and win the battle without, one must win 
the battle within. Poverty is more a state of mind than 
an external condition. 
• Money and wealth are obtained through interactions 
with others. 
• To have a sense of your worth, you have to do some-
thing that is worthy of your own respect first. 
• In reality, most of us are where we want to be finan-
cially. Obtaining prosperity is not about what you are 
willing to do to gain it; more importantly, it is about 
what you are willing to give up in exchange for it. 
183 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
• Money is the element of life that inspires the greatest 
emotions in individual human beings. It is tightly 
connected with the emotions of agony and ecstacy. 
When you have money, you never feel you have 
enough. If you have lost money, you wish you had 
appreciated it more when you did have it. 
• The path to wealth is not to chase money for its own 
sake, but to understand and develop your own intrinsic 
talents and inclinations. 
• Each of us possesses a spark of individual brilliance, 
every one of us is capable of accomplishing something 
that cannot be accomplished by anyone else in our 
own unique way. Striving to discover what is our 
niche in this vast human market is part of our con-
quest of life. 
• In most cases, life does not play hide and seek; rather, 
we are blind. Our unique abilities often display them-
selves in many situations in the course of our lives. 
Because we are so focused on making a living, we do 
not see anything else. 
• The world is like a pyramid of people struggling with 
one another. You don't have the choice of whether or 
not to join in the struggle, but you can choose where 
to fight. Don't fight your battle at the bottom of the 
pyramid. It is much too crowded down there. It is 
easier near the top. 
• You don't have to beg in your prayers for material 
prosperity. The abundance of the world is freely given 
to those who claim it as their natural birthright. 
184 

THE MYSTERY OF MONEY 
• Adapt the divine touch in our work. What makes a 
good artist, dancer, lawyer, or businessman good is his 
ability to recreate his Maker's creativity in his work. 
• Outer success will follow the actions and attitudes you 
manifest due to your experience of success as an inner 
reality. 
• Money is not part of who you are. You didn't bring it 
with you at birth, nor will you take it with you at 
death. Enjoy money, but keep an indifferent attitude 
towards it. 
185 

Means and ends 
are convertible terms 
in my philosophy of life. 
—Mahatma Gandhi 
i jiufe

8 Deception 
Without 
Deceit 
A New Perspective on Deception 
T
he word "deception" often has negative connota-
tions due to the influence of the Western religious 
concept of good and evil. From the Eastern point 
of view, the reality of life spans degrees of grey. Rarely is the 
reality of life solely black or white. In the same way, we 
seldom find someone totally pure and untainted by evil 
thoughts or someone rotten to the core without an ounce of 
goodness. 
Deception, to the Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner, is 
a tool to be utilized to gain necessary advantages. Evil does 
not exist in deception itself, but rather in the user and uses. In 
Mark H. McCormack's book, What They Don't Teach You At 
Harvard Business School, he states in the chapter on negotiat-
187 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
ing, "The game aspect of negotiation is saying and doing 
things which puncture those perceptions that come too close 
to reality while encouraging those perceptions which are 
furthest from the truth." 
The 2000 year old Chinese battle strategy book, Sun Tzu's 
Art of War is a guide book for deception. Sun Tzu stated, 
"War is a game of deception...if one is able and strong, then 
one should disguise oneself in order to appear inept and 
weak...when you are ready to attack, you must convey the 
impression that you will not attack..." 
An American client told me, "compared to Asians, we are 
not very good at practicing deception. We refuse to acknowl-
edge that we even practice it as to do so would violently 
contradict our cultural belief system. Even though people in 
the Western culture are repelled by the idea of deception, in 
reality, we are unable to escape it." While Westerners are 
practicing deception, they pretend that they are not, whereas 
Asians accept the reality of deception as the necessary element 
in their daily lives. They write books on and glorify the study 
of the art of deception. 
The Utility of Deception 
As each one of us seeks people and conditions that can benefit 
our survival, sometimes it is almost impossible to accomplish 
your greater and worthier objective without employing some 
degree of deception. Our greatest president, Abraham Lincoln, 
understood the spirit of Thick Face, Black Heart: the fine art 
of deception without deceit. 
In Abraham Lincoln's early, fragile political stage, he never 
expressed openly an intent to free the slaves and make them 
equal. His position was to follow the majority opinion, which 
proposed to segregate the blacks after they were freed. 
188 

DECEPTION WITHOUT DECEIT 
After a decisive victory, Lincoln delivered his famous 
Gettysburg speech, in which he abandoned the position on 
segregation and stated clearly that all men are created equal. 
Lincoln could not speak freely in the early stages of his 
political career. He had to use deception to secure the neces-
sary votes to gain control of die presidency—only then could 
he do the greater good for the blacks to free them from the 
insufferable bonds of slavery and inequality. 
Creating the Illusion of Utility 
For thousands of years, Chinese masters who have practiced 
Thick Face, Black Heart have been documenting different 
methods of creating attractive "bait" to motivate their counter-
parts to act according to their secret agendas. 
The worm is seen, but the hook is unseen. The outer 
appearance draws us, but the hidden catches us. 
In the same way, when you wish to motivate others to 
participate with you on a personal or business level, you too 
need to create an attractive bait. You have to make the 
benefits obvious to attract your intended participants. If you 
cannot find a legitimate benefit, then create an illusion of one. 
By applying this principle, you will be able to entice your 
potential counterpart to participate with you. In time the 
benefits will, in fact, be realized by both. The following is 
such a story. 
Deception Without Deceit 
Grass seed is a very important agricultural commodity in 
Oregon. The state supplies nearly 70% of the cool season 
grass seed for the United States and fulfills nearly 50% of the 
world's seed demands. Oregon grass seed companies have 
189 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
always been interested in selling seed to China. The problem 
has been that as determined as Oregon growers have been to 
sell to the Chinese, the Chinese have been equally determined 
not to buy. As far back as the early 1980s, the American Seed 
Trade Association had pitched the grass seeds to a touring 
Chinese Vice-Minister of Agriculture, only to receive a flat 
"No." In fact, given the Chinese idea of grass, the suggestion 
was ludicrous. It was tantamount to selling refrigerators to 
Eskimos. 
In Chinese, the word "grass" is used pejoratively as a 
metaphor. A stupid person is said to have a container of grass 
between his ears. The Chinese have never planted grass for 
ornamental purposes. The Chinese consider grass a weed, and 
their idea of beautification is to pull grass out rather than plant 
it. My client, in trying to sell grass seed to the Chinese in the 
early 1980s, was suggesting that they expend precious foreign 
exchange to purchase more grass to pull up and throw away! 
The Chinese considered the idea of buying grass seeds a huge 
joke. 
Still, in 1986 I took on one particular grass seed company 
as a client. Perhaps little could be done, I thought, but if 
anything could be done, I could do it. 
I went to China and presented an intriguing picture to the 
Chinese government outlining the overwhelming benefits to 
them, and portraying the Americans as naive. Since Chinese 
officials have always adopted a general attitude that foreigners 
are naive, my presentation was easily accepted. 
I told the Chinese that the American company was looking 
for a low-cost production source. The American company 
would like the seeds to be produced in China, and would buy 
them back at the same price they were purchasing seeds from 
American farmers. In this way, the project would provide the 
Chinese government with the opportunity to earn much-
needed foreign currency. I was welcomed with open arms and 
treated like royalty. 
190 

DECEPTION WITHOUT DECEIT 
I knew China would not be able to produce quality grass 
seeds at a reasonable cost, given the weather conditions and 
their agricultural methods. In order to sell it back to the 
United States under terms similar to those given to American 
farmers, China would have to lose money. 
As the Chinese enthusiastically began their grass seed 
production, I also began to visit China frequently. Accompa-
nied by the American technical personnel, we taught the 
Chinese the necessary production skills and advised them on 
the benefits of grass seed and how to maintain a plush green 
lawn. 
A couple of years later, the Chinese ceased production of 
American grass seed because it was too expensive for them. 
However, in the process, they had learned the value of 
American grass seed. They began to buy directly from my 
client's company. 
As I had initially anticipated, the efficiency and beauty of 
the American product was not lost on the Chinese who hosted 
the 1990 Asian Olympic games. With 7,000 athletes participat-
ing in the view of thousands of international media and 
hundreds of thousands of spectators, the event was a showcase 
for modem China. They had used the superior American grass 
seed in their Olympic village stadium and it was a great hit. 
After the success of the Asian Olympic Games, the 
imported American grass seed became the hottest commodity 
and commanded as much as $5 a pound as result of supply 
and demand. (The same grass seed is selling for less than $1 
per pound in the United States.) Even though the average 
monthly income of a Chinese worker is $25, lawns are 
beginning to sprout in public places. The Chinese now see the 
nice, even, and thick emerald-colored carpets as beautiful 
rather than undesirable. American grass seed now even grows 
m the grounds of the Beijing's ancient royal garden, which is 
Presently the home and office of China's highest official, 
Deng Xiaoping and also Jiang Zemin, the Secretary General 
o the Chinese Communist Party. 
191 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
In this incident, both the Chinese people and my American 
client benefitted from my deception by creating the necessary 
illusion. 
The Principle of Utility 
Although we consider ourselves civilized and train ourselves 
to act with grace and good manners, after we remove this false 
facade we find that we are driven by the impulse of self-
preservation, like all creatures. Everything we do is influenced 
by this instinct. 
For example, the institution of marriage is often bound by 
this principle of utility. A husband and wife create an environ-
ment that nurtures one another. They depend on each other for 
emotional, spiritual, and financial support. If the couple no 
longer experiences love and affection, they will remain 
together only as long as there are more benefits in staying 
together than in parting. These benefits could be financial 
security, welfare of the children, or social status. The reasons 
for keeping a dead marriage afloat are countless, but the 
motivation is singular—self-preservation. When a man and a 
woman can no longer squeeze any benefits out of their 
relationship, they split. 
The relationship between parents and children cannot 
escape this rule either. Mothers would not be able to love their 
children if our Maker hadn't implanted that love in them. 
Parents experience self-nurturing by unconditionally nurturing 
their children. 
Some parents do not see their children as an expression of 
love. Instead, they see their children as punching bags; using 
the children as the object of their frustrations towards life by 
abusing them physically, verbally, and emotionally. 
The nurtured child stays with the nurturing parents out of 
the love they each have for one another. The love they feel 
192 

DECEPTION WITHOUT DECEIT 
within themselves in like a spring shower, which softens and 
nourishes the other's heart. 
The abused child stays with their parents purely out of 
instinct for survival. Even bad parents are necessary for their 
physical survival. However, the children run away when the 
pain becomes unbearable. 
The principle of utility dominates everything we do; we 
practice utility to support our survival. Even if we are doing 
selfless service for others, we always benefit equally or more 
than the our benefactor. 
In the business world, we spend time with those who can 
or will enhance our financial or social status. If a relationship 
is not mutually beneficial, very little time will be spent 
together. 
Recently, when discussing this utility principle with a 
friend of mine, he asked me, "Isn't this very negative, when 
you identify human beings with these traits?" 
I replied, "No. If I told you that when you put your hand 
in the fire it would be burned, or if you didn't know how to 
swim, and wanted to jump into the ocean that you would 
drown, does that make me evil? Is it wrong of me to inform 
you of the nature of things? I don't believe it is of any virtue 
to insist on being ignorant of human nature." 
Understanding the workings of human nature without 
pretense allows us to learn how to relate to each other more 
realistically. 
Unconditional Support 
Around 2700 years ago, in China, Guan was a noble prince 
whose ancestor's kingdom had been demolished prior to his 
birth. His family had escaped to the neighboring country of 
Chi and fell to the lowest social class. Bao, a wealthy scholare of regal birth recogniz
193 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
the former prince. Guan's family was so poor that he did not 
even have money for meals; his livelihood was provided solely 
by Bao. Later when Bao provided capital for a business 
venture by Guan, Guan spent it for his personal needs. Bao 
defended Guan by saying, "Guan is so poor he has a great 
demand for cash. His intention was never wicked." Soon both 
had became the target of gossip for the nation. People were 
laughing at the stupidity of Bao and the ungratefulness of 
Guan. 
Three times Guan was challenged by enemies to a dual; 
three times he fled. Bao would vindicate his cowardliness by 
saying, "Guan has an old mother at home. It would be against 
his filial duty to place his body in jeopardy. When Bao was 
selected to be Prime Minister he deferred and insisted on Guan 
instead. 
Guan proved himself to be one of the greatest Prime 
Ministers in the history of China. However, without the 
unconditional support and trust of Bao; Guan and China would 
both have been losers. Confucius remarked, "Without Guan's 
wise governing, Chinese civilization would have dissolved at 
that time." 
Most of my life, I followed the code of unconditional 
support set by Guan and Bao. Through the experience of life, 
I realized Guan and Bao's relationship was the exception 
rather then the rule. The common human relationship normally 
has a different set of rules. 
194 

DECEPTION WITHOUT DECEIT 
Mutual Benefit 
When benefits are mutual, 
then cooperation will follow. 
Mutual cooperation results in benefits, 
and thus leads to affection. 
—Tai Wong Gung 
Tai Wong Gung lived around 3,100 years ago and, at that 
time, wrote the first military text in the world. His philosophy 
was later adopted by countless Chinese military strategists; 
even the highly acclaimed Art of War by Sun Tzu was based 
on his work. His military strategy was not based solely on 
maneuvering and placing the troop formations, but rather on 
the understanding of human nature. Through his personal 
observations and studies of human behavior, he discovered 
that there existed unwritten laws mandating the principles of 
utility and mutual benefit that ordinary human beings uncon-
sciously followed. By utilizing this understanding, he could 
predict the outcome of any given situation, thus maximizing 
his advantage. He was the first known Thick Face, Black 
Heart practitioner in the history of China. 
As Tai Wong Gung stated above, "When the benefits are 
mutual, then cooperation will follow..." This is the simple 
principle of utility. This principle applies in the international 
arena as well as our personal fives. The following stories 
illustrate my point. 
195 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Nelson Mandela in Japan 
Nelson Mandela, the South African anti-apartheid leader, 
visited Japan in late October 1990. He was disappointed and 
rather surprised to learn that Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu had 
turned down the request of $25 million needed by Mandela to 
support the cause of the African National Congress. The 
official reason Kaifu gave was that the Japanese government 
did not support any political groups. 
$25 million was not a large sum of money for Japan, one 
of the modem world's wealthiest countries. The question was 
not about $25 million, rather it was about "utility." If the 
Japanese government could have realized how they could 
benefit from supporting Nelson Mandela's cause, the financial 
support would have followed. 
Despite the fact the Japanese government did not openly 
support any political group, there have always been many 
ways to get the job done. The Japanese government could 
have encouraged donations from their private sectors. Japan's 
large corporations have always had a close working relation-
ship with their government. After three days' effort in fund 
raising, Mandela walked away with only $3,000 donated by 
the private Japanese citizens who were sympathetic to his 
cause. $3,000 was not even enough to cover Mandela's travel 
expenses. 
The Japanese had followed the European communities in 
canceling their trade relationship with South Africa. Even so, 
Japan had traditionally enjoyed a friendly relationship with the 
South African white ruling power. There were no visible 
benefits to be gained by worsening an already deteriorating 
relationship with this government. Furthermore, supporting the 
battle against apartheid had never been a top priority in 
196 

DECEPTION WITHOUT DECEIT 
Japan's international policy. The Japanese government in 
general is not very sensitive to racial struggles. 
When Japan chose to follow the world economic powers in 
boycotting trade with South Africa, it was not motivated by 
the human rights issue, but rather, by the fact that Japan was 
merely following their own agenda in creating their new world 
leader image. 
When and if the Japanese government can identify the clear 
benefits in supporting Nelson Mandela's cause, then the 
financial support will follow. 
The story above is not about political issues, but is meant 
to clarify the motivation behind the Japanese government's 
decision in refusing to support Mandela's cause. 
A Strategy for Self-preservation 
In good times, bad times, ancient times, and today, there are 
always some young, up-and-coming individuals who exhibit 
extraordinary talent and capabilities in their chosen field. 
Before they "arrived" at the top, while they were in the 
process of proving themselves and utilizing all of their 
resources to push themselves forward and upwards, they were 
often labeled as "climbers." Interestingly, our society usually 
looks down on "climbers." I believe we should lend a hand to 
those truly capable climbers. Unless we were bom into the 
Kennedy or Rockefeller families, each one of us is on our way 
up to new plateaus. Today's nobody may become tomorrow's 
somebody. While you are on your way up, for your own sake, 
lend a hand to another climber. 
Once during an interview a reporter asked Gregory Peck 
why he would volunteer to share the leading role position with 
an unknown actress, Audrey Hepburn, in the film, Roman 
Holiday. His answer was, "My motive was a selfish one. She was so brilliant, I k
197 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
be an instant star. If I took the leading role alone it would 
have made me a laughing stock. It's all about self-preserva-
tion." 
Mr. Lin, a Taiwan business and political leader, told me, 
"Years ago the present Republic of China's Presidential Chief 
of Staff Y. S. Tsiang "voluntarily" removed himself from the 
political circle and started a teaching career. At that time very 
few people came to visit him. Everyone thought he had no 
more future in politics. Since I had always admired his 
charisma, I would invite him to my house for dinner or tea. 
No one could even imagine then he would be holding the 
position of Chief of Staff today." 
Needless to say, they are still good friends. You can never 
understand or know the mystery of fate; we should always 
lend a hand to those capable individuals during the time they 
are on their way up. For the Thick Face, Black Heart practitio-
ner, this is good strategy for self-preservation. 
The Key to Being Important 
Mr. and Mrs. Smith are farmers in central California. They are 
just common folk performing their daily duties. They have no 
money nor power to influence anyone or to change anything. 
Like most of us, they are not particularly "important." 
Their daughter Christine, told me, "My father and my 
mother are so opposite. My father's whole attitude towards 
others is to try and impress on them how important he is, 
because deep down he knows he is not. Conversely my mother 
knows she is not important and she accepts it. She never tries 
to impress anyone or prove a point to show how important she 
is. Beneath her quiet and gentle manner, she is very wise and 
down to earth. She understands the basic virtue of life—to 
serve your fellow man. Through service, she increased her 
198 

DECEPTION WITHOUT DECEIT 
value to her community, therefore automatically she became 
important." 
On the other hand, Philip is a brilliant graphics designer. 
His small studio is always struggling from month to month. It 
is not the quality of his art work that jeopardizes his financial 
success but rather the quality of his personality. Like Mr. 
Smith, Philip too felt a lack of "self importance." To Philip, 
the most important thing is not success in business nor making 
money. The most important thing to Philip is to be "important" 
in other's eyes. 
He is doing just the opposite of Mrs. Smith. Rather than 
make himself useful to his customers through excellent 
service, he is often having an ego competition with the very 
people he is supposed to be serving. Whenever a customer 
spoke to him in a tone of voice that he considered "disrespect-
ful" he would turn down the work, even though his schedule 
was totally empty and he was desperately in need of money. 
Unfortunately, most of his prospective customers did not meet 
his standard of "respect." I asked him why he felt so offended 
by these people. His answer was, "They think that just because 
they have a little money they can order me around." 
Whenever people give him praise, he will soak it up like a 
dry sponge in a puddle of water. He can feast on that praise 
for days. 
Although Philip is desperately seeking agreement that he is 
"important," and craves to be respected, unlike Mrs. Smith, he 
does not understand that the key to being important is in 
making yourself useful to others. 
The Distinction Between the Con-man 
and the Businessman 
A friend once stated, "A businessman and a con-man both 
understand the value of utility of deception. The only differ-
199 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
ence between the con-man and the businessman is this: The 
businessman will ultimately deliver the benefits he has 
promised. The con-man will not." 
A good businessman has the ability to identify clearly to 
his customer the benefits of doing business with him. He 
pursues and convinces others that he is able to deliver such 
benefits. He makes others feel good about their wise choice to 
do business with him. 
Even when a businessman is misleading others, he does it 
with the intention of eventually delivering what he has 
promised. Sometimes, he may not be able to control all the 
elements which may cause his failure to keep his own 
promise. On the other hand, when a con-man misleads his 
victims, he never intends to make his promise come true. 
There is a popular American phrase, "Fake it until you 
make it." This statement works well for a con-man as well as 
for a businessman. Both employ the skills of deception and 
make others perceive the benefits to be gained by associating 
with them. The difference between the con-man and business-
man is not in their outward actions, but rather in the expres-
sion of their soul. 
Conclusion 
The idea of discussing the concept of deception may be at first 
be repulsive to some, yet this is most definitely a beneficial 
tool in working with man's practical nature. It can assist each 
of us in avoiding needless set-backs and cause us to gain a 
winning edge. 
200 

DECEPTION WITHOUT DECEIT 
Summary Of Key Points 
• Evil does not exist in deception itself, but rather in the 
user and uses. 
• Human beings will invest time and energy with those 
who can benefit them the most, now or sometime in 
the future. This is the simple principle of utility in 
everything we do; we do it for the benefit of support-
ing our survival. Even if we are doing selfless service 
for others, we receive the inner rewards. The giver 
always benefits equally or more than the recipients. 
• A good business deal incorporates: "In my business I 
include your interest; in your business, you include my 
interest." 
• We should lend a hand to ambitious and capable 
individuals for the sake of self-preservation. 
• The key to making yourself important is to serve your 
fellow man. Through service, you will increase your 
value to others. 
• The con-man and businessman both employ the skills 
of deception and make others perceive the benefits to 
be gained by associating with them. The difference 
between the con-man and businessman is not in their 
outward actions, but in the expression of their soul. 
Wk,
201 

When you work, you fulfill 
a part of earth's fondest dream, 
assigned to you when that dream is born. 
—Kahlil Gibran 

V Sixteen Noble 
Attributes of 
Work 
T
hrough the expression of work, we earn our 
monetary rewards. This book would not be com-
plete without mentioning work. We predominately 
utilize Thick Face, Black Heart either with others or with 
ourselves during the period when we are performing our duties 
at work. 
1. Work: The Fondest Human 
Expression 
Work is a primary method used to express ourselves in 
fulfilling our obligation to support ourselves. Through work, 
we contribute to the collective good of society and the 
evolution of man. Work is an essential part of our self-
expression and self-preservation. Only through work can the 
203 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
idea and the spirit of Thick Face, Black Heart take on a 
visible form. 
2. Provide For Yourself And Others 
As a young man passed through a forest, he saw a lion taking 
a piece of meat to an injured tiger. The young man thought to 
himself, "God is good; He provides for all His creatures. Just 
look at that tiger—God also takes care of him. As I am the 
child of God, for certain, God will provide for me." 
The young man went back to his small hut at the edge of 
the forest. He stopped hunting and waited for God to provide 
for him. A week passed and nothing happened, so he went 
hungry. Two weeks, then three weeks passed, and still 
nothing. Soon he was dying of starvation. A holy man passed 
by his hut and asked him what had happened. With the little 
strength he had left in his body, he told his story. 
The holy man said, "When you saw the two animals, you 
should have learned from the lion and not the tiger. The lion 
provides for himself and also provides for others." 
I salute all the world's entrepreneurs, because they risk 
everything in their pursuits. Additionally, they are able to 
provide for themselves while creating jobs for others. 
3. Work as Spiritual Unfoldment 
There is no division between your daily work and your 
spiritual unfoldment. Every situation will accelerate your 
spiritual evolution. Your work is where your spiritual 
unfoldment takes place. 
Through work, we encounter people and events that mirror 
our spiritual state. Through work, people and events either 
irritate us or uplift us. Whether it be irritation or inspiration, 
204 

SIXTEEN NOBLE ATTRIUTES OF W O R K 
the universal intention is to utilize that particular situation to 
teach us a beneficial lesson. 
Nothing in life happens by accident. If people and events 
in your life stir strong emotions, it signals the need to take a 
good look at yourself in that area. 
4. Work: The Greatest Teacher 
The purpose of labor is to learn. 
When you know it, the labor is over. 
The apple blossom exists to create fruit. 
When that comes, the petals fall. 
— K a b i r , a prophet 
Each time I write a book, I learn much more about the subject 
than I initially dreamed there could possibly be to learn. For 
example, the concept of Thick Face, Black Heart has been in 
my mind for over twenty years. But as I describe Thick Face, 
Black Heart here, it has taken on a whole new dimension of 
clarity. It is no longer just a feeling in my heart. As I have 
laid it on paper and divided it into the different aspects of life, 
it has become tangible. Work is the greatest teacher. 
205 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
5. Work Does Not Need You, 
You Need Work 
He must perform his duty, however difficult it may seem, 
for it frees him from the bondage of worldly life. 
If he carries out the duty given to him 
according to his nature, 
he overcomes the bondage of living. 
—Lord Krishna, Bhagavad Gita 
God created this universe for us. The universe does not need 
us, but we need the universe. Similarly, the work we do does 
not need us, but we need the work. If any one of us disappears 
from this planet, the planet will continue to exist. If our planet 
disappears from this galaxy, the galaxy will continue to exist. 
If the our galaxy disappears from the universe, the universe 
also will continue to exist. 
In 1990, a galaxy over a billion light-years from earth was 
discovered. Anything that is a billion light-years away is 
beyond my comprehension. It really puts our self-importance 
into a proper perspective. 
Not long ago, during my meditation, I heard my voice 
asking a question, "Does the world need a book on Thick 
Face, Black Heart?" 
Another voice answered, "The world does not need this 
book, or any other book. But you need to write it." The 
answer surprised me. I thought I was writing this book 
because the world needed it. In contemplating this wisdom, I 
have discovered how profoundly true it is. In fact, I couldn't 
help doing it. I was driven from within. All great works are 
produced because their creators are driven involuntarily. The 
206 

SIXTEEN NOBLE ATTRIBUTES OF WORK 
necessity to create is such a great force that it overcomes all 
human reason. 
6. Through Work, Destiny Unfolds 
Your work is to discover your work 
and then with all your heart give yourself to it. 
— L o r d Buddha 
When you are true to your assigned work, your destiny will be 
true to you. If you currently are out of work, then make 
finding the appropriate work your full-time job. If you can't 
find work that suits you, it may be time for you to take the 
leap into the entrepreneurship that you always dreamed of. 
Before, you did not have the courage to quit your job and lose 
that regular paycheck. Often desperate situations provoke 
dramatic actions. 
7. Life Evolves Through Actions 
If you know all the great knowledge, but you sit and do 
nothing, your knowledge will be worth nothing to yourself or 
others. Even a philosopher needs to talk about his beliefs or 
write them down so others can benefit from his profound 
wisdom. 
The universe is ever-changing and acts unceasingly. An 
individual is ever active, whether he is sleeping, eating, or just 
sitting. Even in the motionless, deep-sleep state, his internal 
body is ever active, supporting his life. As infants, we work 
unceasingly to learn the wonders of our new world. As 
students, we work to acquire basic knowledge and skill from 
our studies. As adults, we work to support ourself and others. 
207 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
As elders, we work to maintain the well-being of our physical 
bodies, and contemplate the life behind us and the path before 
us, contributing our experiences and time to those who need 
guidance. The bottom line is, as long as you possess a body, 
you cannot escape work. 
8. Embrace The Farmer's Virtue 
We gain freedom 
when we have paid the full price 
for our right to live. 
—Rubindranath Tagore 
Whenever work is mentioned, the idea of procrastination and 
inertia arise instantaneously. There are many, many motiva-
tional books and tapes on the market. The objective of these 
books is to move people from non-action to action, and 
eventually from action to effective action. 
I have done extensive consulting work in agriculture and 
during the years, have dealt with both American and Asian 
fanners. What American farmers have in common with the 
rest of the farmers of the world is their dedication to work. 
The time for planting and the time for harvesting does not 
wait. If you procrastinate and miss the planting season, you 
will have no crop for the whole year. If you miss the harvest-
ing season, you will have crops rotting in the field. If you 
miss the time for fertilizing the crops, you will have a poor 
harvest for the year. 
The farmer's rich harvest is dependent on his timely 
dedication to his work. He does not have to read motivational 
books to overcome his inertia. Farmers understand the 
meaning of, "The dictionary is the only place where success 
comes before work." 
208 

SIXTEEN NOBLE ATTRIBUTES OF WORK 
9. The Working Secret of 
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart 
My faith in truth, my vision of the perfect, 
help thee, Master in thy creation. 
—Rabindranath Tagore 
The greatest natural musical genius ever to live, Wolfgang 
Amadeus Mozart, described how he composed his music. 
"When I am, as it were, completely myself, entirely alone, 
and of good cheer—say, traveling in a carriage, or walking 
after a good meal, or during the night when I cannot sleep; it 
is on such occasions that my ideas flow best and most 
abundantly. Whence and how they come, I know not; nor can 
I force them. Those ideas that please me I retain in memory, 
and am accustomed, as I have been told, to hum them to 
myself. If I continue in this way, it soon occurs to me how I 
may turn this or that morsel to account, so as to make a good 
dish of it, that is to say, agreeable to the rules of counter-
points, to the peculiarities of the various instruments, etc. 
"All this fires my soul, and provided I am not disturbed, 
my subject enlarges itself, becomes methodized and defined, 
and the whole, though it be long, stands almost complete and 
finished in my mind so that I can survey it, like a fine picture 
or a beautiful statue, at a glance. Nor do I hear in my imagina-
tion the parts successively, but I hear them, as it were, all at 
once. What a delight this is I cannot tell! All this inventing, 
this producing, takes place in a pleasing lively dream. Still the 
actual hearing of the total ensemble is after all the best. What 
has been thus produced I do not easily forget, and this is 
Perhaps the best gift I have my Divine Maker to thank for. 
209 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
"When I proceed to write down my ideas, I take out of the 
bag of my memory, if I may use that phrase, what has been 
previously collected into it in the way I have mentioned. For 
this reason the committing to paper is done quickly enough, 
for everything is, as I said before, already finished; and it 
rarely differs on paper from what it was in my imagination. At 
this occupation I can therefore suffer myself to be disturbed; 
for whatever may be going on around me, I write, and even 
talk, but only of fowls and geese, or of Gretel or Barbel or 
some such matters. But why my productions take from my 
hand that particular form and style that makes them Mozartish, 
and different from the works of other composers, is probably 
owing to the same cause which renders my nose so large or so 
aquiline, or, in short, makes it Mozart's, and different from 
those of other people. For I really do not study or aim at any 
originality." 
When we perform our work, we have to be silently in tune 
with our inner selves for guidance. Each person hears their 
inner silent voice differently. To some it comes naturally; 
others must cultivate that intuition through meditation and 
other spiritual practices. 
10. Using Intuition as a Business Tool 
The definition of intuition according to the dictionary is as 
follows: 1. direct perception of truths, facts, etc., independent-
ly of any reasoning process. 2. pure, untaught, non-inferential 
knowledge. 
Intuition is a commodity that is extremely undervalued in 
the Western world, yet everyone who has ever succeeded in 
any extraordinary task has always drawn upon this power. 
A good trial attorney must be well versed in law and 
should research his case. However, he also needs to perceive 
210 

SIXTEEN NOBLE ATTRIBUTES OF WORK 
intuitively the minds of his jury so that his presentation will 
sway them in favor of his client. 
I was told by a homicide detective that a good detective 
understands how to follow his instincts and gut feelings, 
whether he is seemingly on the right track or not. A good 
businessman, after examining his available data, ultimately 
will have to rely on his gut feelings to make the final decision. 
Many revolutionary scientific breakthroughs, often begin 
with an intuitive perception of unknown potential by a 
scientist. He then proceeds to prove his intuition through 
scientific experimentation and conclusions. 
At age sixteen Einstein asked, "If I moved at the speed of 
light, what would light look like?" This question was the seed 
for his theory of relativity, which he spent the rest of his life 
trying to explain to the world. 
One of the foundation blocks of organic chemistry, the 
benzene ring, was revealed in a dream. The originator, F.A. 
Kekule, was trying to solve the puzzle of how carbon chains 
are connected. One night he had a profound dream in which 
he saw six snakes writhing, each biting another's tail. He 
immediately awoke and realized his subconscious had just 
given him the formation of the primary hexagon—a structure 
made up of carbon atoms that is me base of the benzene ring. 
A year ago, I went to the race track for the first time in my 
life with some friends. Since I do not understand a thing about 
the horse and the race, I decided to rely on my intuition. 
Fortunately, I was sitting very close to the front and had a 
plain view of the horses as they displayed themselves prior to 
the race. As each horse came up, I would "tune in" to that 
horse and sense the condition and the spirit of the horse at that 
moment. I was able repeatedly to place the top three horses in 
the order they came in. All of my friends couldn't believe 
their eyes. I have not been to the racetrack since. Maybe I 
didn't want to break my glorious betting record. 
211 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
To put it simply, a well-developed intuition is a valuable 
tool in the work place. The source of this intuition is the same 
that provided inspiration for Mozart's compositions. 
11. Work in the Light of Grace 
Our Maker's grace, the condition of being in His favor, is like 
sunshine. It indiscriminately showers light on all. Those who 
stand under the sun immerse themselves in the warmth of the 
sun's rays and receive the full benefit from them. Those who 
hide under the tree deprive themselves of the sun. 
Through the power of His grace, the universe came to 
existence. Through the power of His grace, human beings are 
able to perform their daily duties and maintain their bodily 
functions. 
In this same way, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart learned how 
to listen to the music from his Maker. Such creativity is not 
through man's effort alone, but is a gift of your own soul—the 
Divine Grace. 
Each one of us possesses that grace within. Some of us are 
more in touch with it, while others are not. What made Mozart 
different was the ability to hear the music from "nowhere." As 
Mozart said, He merely dictated it according to the principles 
of composition in his time. 
12. Discover Your Natural Rhythm 
With our Creator's infinite imagination, the world never ceases 
to provide us with wonders. Each one of us is unique. What 
works for one does not necessarily work for others. 
For example, early to bed, early to rise, is an acceptable 
norm for proper living. It is wonderful for those who enjoy the 
tranquility of dawn to rise early, but for others the norm might 
212 

SIXTEEN NOBLE ATTRIBUTES OF WORK 
be detrimental. As I mentioned earlier, Salvador Dali, Winston 
Churchill and Hugh Heffner all shunned a pattern of rising 
early each day and instead concentrated on working when they 
felt most comfortable. 
This section is specially written for those who find it 
difficult to follow the nine-to-five schedule. If your natural 
working rhythm works best at night, try to find work that will 
allow you to do so. 
13. Reach for Your Limitless Limit 
A timber fit for pillars 
should not be misused for chopsticks. 
—Chinese Maxim 
If you are capable, then stop selling yourself short by limiting 
your imagination. By the same token, if you are assigned an 
easy task and it is beneath your ability, then you are wasting 
your talent and will perform poorly. 
In ancient China, a talented young man was assigned to 
govern a small, remote village because he had offended a 
powerful relative working in the royal court. After he arrived 
at his new post, all he did was drink and sleep. He ignored all 
work and let his tasks pile up. A year later the court sent an 
auditor, who upon arriving heard the villagers complain about 
how the young man had neglected his duties. The auditor 
found the young man drunk, as usual, and he questioned him 
about his disregard for duty. The young man replied, "Come 
back in three days, and everything will be done." Three days 
later, the auditor returned to discover a well-groomed young 
man in an orderly office with all his assignments completed. 
the young man had finished a year's worth of work in only 
three days. 
213 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The auditor later learned that the young man had been cast 
out to the remote village because he was a victim of a 
personal vendetta. When the auditor returned to court, he 
reported to the Emperor that a valuable talent had been 
misused, at a great loss to the country. The young man was 
summoned to court and reassigned to a worthy and honorable 
post. 
14. Three P's of Work 
The three P's of work are not a secret to most. However, they 
deserve mention. 
Purpose: Purpose to work is like a flight chart to a pilot or a 
navigational map to a sea captain. You have to know where 
you are going and how to get there before you take off for 
your destination. 
Perseverance: I covered this to a great extent in the endurance 
chapter. 
Patience: Nothing is possible without patience. Unfortunately, 
in this physical world, time and distance are two elements that 
we have to make room for. Nothing happens just by snapping 
your fingers. Even simple tasks like my trips to Asia needed 
patience, since I sat on the airplane more than ten hours at a 
time. With patience, everything seems to glide along more 
smoothly. Without it, life seems more explosive and chaotic. 
214 

SIXTEEN NOBLE ATTRIBUTES OF WORK 
15. Work: The Highest Worship and 
Highest Sacrifice 
If you perform the sacrifice of doing your duty, 
you do not have to do anything else. 
Devoted to duty, man attains perfection. 
—Lord Krishna, Bhagavad Gita 
When one's duty is performed with a sense of detachment, the 
very work performed becomes a sacrifice and therefore a 
worship to our Maker. 
What do I mean by detachment? Because we are made of 
flesh, it is necessary to receive a monetary reward to support 
our life. Being overly concerned with the reward will never 
enhance the outcome of our work but instead will interfere 
with our performance. When an archer's eye is on the prize 
rather than the bull's-eye, he surely will miss the bull's-eye 
as well as the prize. 
What do I mean by sacrifice? Sacrifice is an act of offer-
ing—offering our labor to the One who grants us the ability 
to act. We perform our work without the attachment to self-
gratification. Just adopting this attitude, our efforts become a 
sacrifice to our Maker. Thus, the sacrifice serves as worship. 
Treating your work as sacrifice and worship will not lessen 
your compensation. Whatever reward we deserve will come to 
us. In fact, this attitude will transform the ordinary task to 
something sacred. It will enhance your performance and lead 
to greater compensation. 
215 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
16. The Harmony of Divine Will and 
Human Will 
Every morning in my affirmation I read "Being attuned to the 
Divine will is the most important factor in attracting success. 
To discover through the right meditation how to be in harmo-
ny with the Divine will is man's highest obligation." 
When human will is misguided, even success brings 
nothing but sorrow. A great being once said, "Human beings 
practice motivation blindly; they motivate themselves into 
action and often land at a place where they don't even 
belong." 
In today's industrious society, people are compelled to keep 
up with the pace of the rest of the world. They need to be 
motivated constantly to work harder, longer and better. They 
buy the newest motivational tapes and books, and if that is not 
enough they even will buy subliminal tapes to give them that 
extra push. All these "blind motivations" are attempted in 
pursuit of success. 
There is nothing wrong with pursuing success. Whatever 
our life's objective might be, each one of us should reach out 
and try to touch the farthest star in our personal constellation. 
But when all our attention is placed upon motivation and 
actions as the means to reach success, we are missing an 
important ingredient: the guidance of the Divine will. Thus, 
we didn't enjoy what, in the beginning, appeared to be success 
and ultimately we were disappointed. 
I speak of this from first-hand experience. Years ago, I had 
a business that did very well for the first couple years. After 
that, everything somehow went wrong. Even ordinarily easy 
tasks turned out wrong unexpectedly. It looked like a cosmic 
conspiracy against my business. But I thought my determina-
tion could overcome anything. I thought that I just needed to 
216 

SIXTEEN NOBLE ATTRIBUTES OF WORK 
work harder and put more money into the business. I struggled 
for a couple more years with my partners. The more pressure 
I felt to save the business, the more I neglected praying and 
listening for the Divine voice. I didn't even need any motiva-
tional tapes or books, because my blind motivation was driven 
by desperation. My determination to succeed and save the 
company was just about as strong as God's determination for 
me to change occupations. But it wasn't until every possible 
door was closed that I realized there is a will that is stronger 
and wiser then my will, which I must be in harmony with— 
the Divine will. 
After closing the company, by chance I came across that 
profound passage: "Human beings practice motivation blind-
ly...." If I had found this passage earlier I might have saved 
myself much heartache. On the other hand, if I had read this 
before my devastating experience, I wouldn't have recognized 
the depth of its wisdom. 
217 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Summary Of Key Points 
• Work: The Fondest Human Expression. When you 
work, you fulfill a part of earth's fondest dream 
assigned to you when that dream is born. 
• Provide For Yourself And Others. 
• Your Work Is Where Your Spiritual Unfoldment 
Takes Place. Through work, we encounter people and 
events that mirror our spiritual state. 
• Work: The Greatest Teacher. The purpose of labor is 
to learn; when you know it, the labor is over. The 
apple blossom exists to create fruit; when that comes, 
the petals fall. 
• Work Does Not Need You, You Need Work. 
• Through Work, Destiny Unfolds. Your work is to 
discover your work and then with all your heart to 
give yourself to it. 
• Life Evolves Through Actions. The bottom line is, as 
long as you posses a body, you cannot escape work. 
• Adopt The Farmer's Virtue. The time for planting and 
the time for harvesting does not wait. If you procrasti-
nate and miss the planting season, you will have no 
crop for the whole year. The farmer's rich harvest is 
dependent on his timely dedication to his work. He 
218 

SIXTEEN NOBLE ATTRIBUTES OF WORK 
does not have to read motivational books to overcome 
his inertia. 
• The Working Secret of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. 
Flow with the Divine Grace. Mozart did not study or 
aim at any originality. 
• Using Intuition as a Business Tool. Intuition is a com-
modity that is extremely undervalued in the Western 
world. Yet, everyone who has ever succeeded in any 
extraordinary task has always drawn upon this power. 
To put it simply, intuition is your gut feeling. A well-
developed intuition is a bankable commodity and the 
source of this intuition is the same that provided 
inspiration for Mozart's composition. 
• Work in the Light of Grace. Grace is like sunshine. It 
indiscriminately showers light on all. In the same 
manner, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart learned how to 
listen to the music from his Divine Maker. Such 
creativity comes not through man's effort alone, but is 
a gift of your own soul—the Divine Grace. 
• Discover Your Natural Rhythm. With our Creator's 
infinite imagination, the world never ceases to provide 
us with wonders. Each one of us is unique. What 
works for one does not necessarily work for others. 
• Reach for Your Limitless Limit. A timber fit for 
pillars should not be misused for some small task. If 
you are capable, then stop selling yourself short by 
limiting your imagination. 
• Three Principles of Work: Purpose, Perseverance and 
Patience. 
219 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
• Work: The Highest Worship and Highest Sacrifice. 
You perform the sacrifice of doing your duty; you do 
not have to do anything else. Devoted to duty, man 
attains perfection. 
• The Harmony of Divine Will and Human will. Being 
attuned to the Divine will is the most important factor 
in attracting success. To discover through the right 
meditation how to be in harmony with the Divine will 
is man's highest obligation. 
220 


If one is able and strong, 
then one should disguise oneself 
in order to appear inept and weak. 
—Sun Tzu's Art of War 

The 
Advantage 
of Playing 
the Fool 
Victory Through Submission 
T
he ancient Chinese classic, The 36 Strategies, is 
a manual on how to achieve victory without direct 
confrontation. This book has been studied by all 
the Asian businessmen and politicians. Because I have 
included The 36 strategies in my previous publications, we 
will not go into details at this point. One can easily perceive 
the essence of these strategies just by examining the titles: 
"Pretend to be a pig in order to eat the tiger"; "Be wise but 
play the fool"; and "Escape is the best policy." 
It is a fact of life that no matter how strong or ruthless you 
are, there will always be someone stronger and more ruthless 
10 
223 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
than you. It is important to cultivate the sensitivity to recog-
nize when you should fight back and when you should submit. 
It is even more important to develop the strength to endure 
this period of submission. When it comes to achieving your 
objectives, submission sometimes can be even more effective 
than fighting back. 
Japan's economic success today clearly demonstrates the 
power of submission. After their defeat in World War II, 
Japan's status fell from being the master of half of the world 
to that of an occupied nation. Japan learned the hard lesson 
that aggression does not always accomplish one's objective. 
After 45 years of silent submission, today Japan is thriving 
once more. 
When You Win, You Lose 
"When you win, you lose." This great wisdom is from the 
teachings of St. Francis of Assisi. This is profound insight and 
it is not easy to perceive at first, but the following story will 
illustrate the point. 
Years ago, I met a man in his early sixties who seemed to 
be without hope, as if he were trapped in a dark pit. He had 
been unemployed for over three years and had lost his life's 
savings. 
It had all started five years earlier when he entered the high 
finance world of a lucrative, overseas real estate venture. It 
turned out to be a total fraud. He lost over $270,000. 
He was so upset about his loss that he started to pursue 
justice. His obsession forced him to take large amounts of 
time off from work, which finally resulted in his dismissal. 
After three years of legal battles and unemployment, he had 
devoured his remaining savings. By the time he won his court 
case, the offender had liquidated all of his assets and he was 
left empty-handed. 
224 

THE ADVANTAGE OF PLAYING THE FOOL 
Countless small and large battles are fought in life. We all 
have to learn to choose wisely in which battle to fight, and in 
which one to accept defeat graciously and subsequently endure 
the humiliation of that defeat. Sometimes the price of ultimate-
ly winning can be so costly, you end up being the real loser. 
As Lee Iacocca said, "If competitiveness is reduced to simply 
'who can produce it the cheapest,' then the biggest winner will 
be the guy who's willing to be the biggest loser." 
Do Not Cross Those Who Can Hurt You 
Mr. Wong is a talented artist in Taiwan. He used to make a 
limited number of pottery objects and then would sell them by 
word-of-mouth to his friends. He was making a meager 
living. By chance, Mr. Liu, an artist promoter, saw Mr. 
Wong's work, recognized Wong's potential and agreed to 
promote him. 
Liu gathered 1,000 sponsors. Each sponsor paid a member-
ship fee equivalent to U.S. $1,000. With a total of one million 
dollars, Liu began his promotional campaign, including private 
gallery showings, press exposure, and much more. Three years 
later, Wong's work became one of the most collectable of any 
contemporary artist in Hong Kong. His work now commands 
as much as $100,000. 
Mr. Wong began to think, why should I pay Liu over half 
of my income? Furthermore, Liu is a dominating individual. 
Maybe it is better to get rid of Liu and go on my own. Wong 
discussed this with a distant relative, Mrs. Lam, a successful 
business woman. 
Mrs. Lam's sincere advice was, "There are certain people 
you should never cross. Liu is one of them. Whatever your 
discontentment is with Mr. Liu, you should endure. Liu is a 
very powerful individual in the art community of Taiwan. As 
fast as he made you, he can break you even faster. You, as a 
225 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
rising artist, should never be on the wrong side of Mr. Liu. 
Through catering to Liu, you have obtained recognition 
beyond your wildest dreams. The world of art is purely about 
preserving values. You need Liu on your team." Mrs. Lam's 
advice was most prudent. 
A struggling Hong Kong artist arrived in San Francisco and 
began to search for a gallery to represent his work—oil 
paintings portraying the lives of fishermen in his homeland. 
He labored without success before finding someone who 
recognized his talent. A prestigious gallery owner loved his 
work and vigorously promoted the artist through numerous 
showings. The owner published colorful coffee-table books 
displaying the pieces and he invested tremendous capital in 
positioning the artist as the gallery's main showpiece. Through 
the gallery's efforts, his first painting sold for $20,000 and the 
second for $80,000. The artist, the gallery, and the collectors 
all profited. 
However, a few years down the road the artist was con-
vinced by his friends that it was in his best interest to go out 
on his own. The end result was: the gallery went out of 
business, the artist has a small shop selling nothing but his 
paintings, and his paintings have no tradeable value for the 
collectors. The artist did not gross anywhere near the amount 
he did when the gallery handled his work. Worse yet, all the 
people who invested in his paintings have lost money and I 
am one of them. 
The Advantages of Playing the Fool 
Not long ago a Taiwanese client of mine suggested I contact 
Mr. Taro, a Japanese businessman, in Tokyo. Mr. Taro was 
looking for assistance with his wholesale produce operation. 
I flew to Tokyo and met with Mr. Taro. 
226 

THE ADVANTAGE OF PLAYING THE FOOL 
According to Mr. Taro, too much of what was shipped to 
him turned out to be inferior or spoiled because it was 
improperly handled at the source of production. This caused 
great concern since he paid 10% duty on goods arriving in 
Japan whether or not he sold them. Furthermore, he had to 
hire additional help to sort through the shipment and he was 
losing money. What he wanted, he said, was somebody at the 
point of shipment to ensure quality. He was willing to pay 
15% above his present cost for superior goods. To prepare me 
for my new role, I toured his warehouses and listened to him 
while he explained his needs. The man was polite and 
thorough. Before my departure, Mr. Taro stressed the impor-
tance of providing him with current U.S. agriculture informa-
tion. 
As the faxes began to fly across the ocean, there was a 
curious lack of actual commitment on the part of my new 
client. He declined to place orders while at the same time 
requesting more information on U.S. agriculture market. 
Now, I don't mind giving information. The transfer of 
information is part of any business arrangement. However, that 
implies that there is a business arrangement in the first place 
and the transfer of information is an element in the deal. Thus 
far I had received nothing much of value from the Japanese 
businessman, yet I was faxing information by the faxload. If 
I was to be an information service, I thought I should charge 
accordingly. 
I decided to push the man: I asked him for a commitment. 
The Japanese dislike saying "no" as it disrupts a critical 
harmony implied in the Japanese way of doing business. 
When Mr. Taro faxed me back to tell me that at present he 
was not yet ready to commit, at least not without even more 
information, I suspected that I might have been taken for a 
ride. 
It did not surprise me that Mr. Taro used me to gather 
information for him. It is a common practice among Asian 
businesses. What I found interesting was my response to being 
227 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
used. In the past, I might have seen two options: Either I 
could chalk it up to experience, cut my losses and move on to 
other things; or I could write the man to tell him that I was 
aware of his intentions and found them distasteful. The first 
option was practical, although a dead end. The second option, 
although also a dead end, would make my ego feel better. 
I decided on a third option: Adopt the spirit of endurance, 
play the fool and do nothing. Since I had invested my time 
and goodwill, it seemed that I ought to find some advantage 
in the situation. I would accept him at his word—that he was 
an honorable man whose intentions to do business with me 
were bona fide, but that at present he had no use for my 
company's services. I would endure my humiliation of being 
outsmarted by Mr. Taro and divorce my ego from the situa-
tion, leaving open the future possibility of his business or 
assistance. 
On the surface, the third option had the practical result of 
the first option. Both of them implied resignation and accep-
tance, but the third option in fact produced an additional 
result: suddenly I was in control. No longer had I been simply 
used unfairly and resigned to the role of "victim." 
The moment I took the third option, I created an internal 
environment in which I was not only prepared to succeed, I 
had already succeeded. With the exception of possible material 
gain should Mr. Taro come back to me, nothing remained to 
be accomplished. 
In this sense, I was not even truly waiting, because 
"waiting" implies "waiting for something," an outcome either 
good or bad. No, I was simply "available" should something 
good come along. Inversely, I was unavailable for anything 
bad to happen, the possibility of which I had already banished 
from my reality. 
A year later, Mr. Taro called on me in the United States, 
and the end result of his visit was that he placed a sizeable 
order which also led to other business ventures. My tactic of 
"playing the fool," paid off 
228 

THE ADVANTAGE OF PLAYING THE FOOL 
Summary Of Key Points 
• Victory through submission: If one is able and strong, 
then one should disguise oneself in order to appear 
inept and weak. 
'"'• It is a fact of life that no matter how strong or tough 
you are, there will always be someone stronger and 
tougher than you. 
• It is important to cultivate the sensitivity to recognize 
when you should fight back and when you should 
submit. 
• It is even more important to develop the strength able 
to endure the period of submission. 
• When it comes to achieving your objectives, submis-
sion sometimes can be even more effective than 
fighting back. 
• When you win, you lose. When we fight a battle that 
we shouldn't, even if we win, we lose. 
• We all have to learn to choose wisely which battle to 
fight, and in which one to accept defeat and subse-
quently endure the humiliation of that defeat. 
229 

Great spirits 
have always encountered 
violent opposition 
from mediocre minds. 
—Albert Einstein 
m

Thriving 
Among the 
Cunning & 
Ruthless 
A Saint, A Wallet and A Thief 
E
ach one of us in our normal state of living at-
tempts to insure our personal interest and survival. 
The reality of living is that if you live your life 
with your heart and your wallet exposed, you have to be 
willing and prepared to be hurt, and lose your wallet as well. 
A saint walks on the street with a wallet. The thief sees no 
saint, but a wallet. To a thief the wallet is essential for his 
survival. To whom the wallet belongs is inconsequential. 
11 
231 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Protect Your Esteem 
The reality of this world is that thieves and robbers exist. In 
your world and mine, they don't just take your wallet. Worse 
yet, they will rob you of your faith and belief in the goodness 
of mankind, and leave you bitter inside. Thus, it is essential to 
acknowledge the existence of brutality and shield yourself 
from harm with Thick Face, and use the spear of Black Heart 
to wage the unavoidable battles. 
What Have You Done for Me Lately? 
We Americans entered into the 1990s and found ourselves no 
better off in our national economy and in our individual 
spending power than before. We have fallen from the world's 
economic giant to the world's largest debtor nation. An 
increasing number of people feel frustrated about their 
financial condition. As their frustration grows, some people 
become more difficult to deal with. The fact that President 
Bush is compelled to promote a new image of a kinder and 
gentler America tells us we are in fact going in the opposite 
direction, away from these graceful qualities. 
In day to day interactions, the silent refrain of "What have 
you done for me lately?" echoes. To the cunning and ruthless, 
gratitude for past kindnesses does not exist. Any past good 
deed is of little consequence. The only thing that matters to 
them is the question, "What have you done for me lately?" 
President Bush speaks of a gentler America and tries to 
alter the nation's psyche. In the meantime, the Thick Face, 
Black Heart practitioners should get acquainted with the 
following essential principles in preparation for mastering the 
232 

THRIVING AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
art of thriving among the cunning and ruthless for the purpose 
of self-preservation. 
Guarding Your Interest 
Jim a retired Northrop executive, once told me, "If you feel 
you are getting screwed, generally you are." In this world, 
most people experience that the nice guys always seem to be 
getting the short end of the stick. When we are too concerned 
with pleasing others and are being too agreeable, we might be 
giving others an open invitation to take advantage of us. 
If you don't stand up for what is rightfully yours, nobody 
else will. Even when you do stand up for your rights, many 
people will attempt to intimidate you. They will wish to take 
you down a notch and deflate you, so that you don't obstruct 
their forward motion. 
Barbara is a news anchor person for a network television 
station. She has been working with the station for over five 
years and her news program is currently getting number one 
ratings locally. But those five years getting to the top were not 
always smooth and easy. 
Three years ago, when she had to negotiate to renew her 
contract with the station, she ran up against some serious 
resistance. The station management adopted the attitude that 
Barbara was barely pulling her weight and that she should 
consider herself lucky even to be offered another contract. She 
could hear the undertones quite clearly, "You are a girl; girls 
should not be aggressive." 
When she requested changes in the contract, the manage-
ment was furious. Her convictions about her own self-worth 
were strong; she refused to compromise. Every day the news 
director called her into his office, excoriated her for her work 
^d ended each session by saying, "Sign this contract." Four 
Months passed and she still would not budge. Finally, the 
233 
Hk,

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
management granted Barbara every change that she had asked 
for. 
However, before she went ahead and signed the contract 
she took it to an attorney. The attorney suggested a few minor 
alterations in the wording. When she went back to the station 
and told them about this, they were shocked and infuriated 
once again. Her superiors made it clear that they considered 
her actions selfish and immoral. Even then Barbara did not 
back down. Eventually the contract was reworded to reflect a 
settlement that both parties could agree upon. 
Barbara has recently signed another three-year contract at 
the same television station, and this time it was much easier. 
As she said, "Now they know how I work and that I mean 
what I say. A lot of people I work with told me I should have 
asked for more changes than what I really wanted in order to 
let them feel they had won something. But I don't believe in 
that. I asked them to change only the terms that I really 
couldn't live with. The changes I could do without I refused 
to ask for." 
The point of this story is not about Barbara's negotiating 
tactics. There are no rules dictating whether you should ask 
for more than what you want or only for what you cannot live 
without. It's more important to notice and analyze the spirit 
that makes Barbara so strong. Day after day, she had to 
withstand the management's intimidation in the form of 
threats, abuse, and insults. Simultaneously, she had to get in 
front of the camera and announce the news cheerfully, with 
the professionalism of a seasoned journalist. She never let the 
emotions involved with the negotiations affect her work. 
Barbara had a strong sense of her own self-worth. She em-
ployed Thick Face which shielded her from abuse and allowed 
her to fight for what she deserved. She used Black Heart to 
give her the toughness to stick to her convictions. 
234 

THRIVING AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
Know Your Value 
Martha is an attractive real estate developer and a former film 
producer. She wrote a letter to one of the most prestigious 
industrial designers in the world about her real estate projects. 
The designer came to visit her in California to discuss the 
possibility of acquiring her projects. 
When I first met Martha during a professional conference, 
she accompanied the designer and five of his entourage. At 
that time, I had thought she was one of his paid staff as she 
was interviewing me on camera for my impression of his latest 
project. A couple of years later, Martha became a close friend. 
She told me then she had been so ignorant and felt she had 
been exploited and abused by this designer. 
She told me the designer gave her the impression that he 
was very interested in her real estate projects and had wished 
to develop a long term working relationship. Soon after, he 
asked her instead to help him produce and conduct interviews 
for a documentary video about himself, and he implied that 
she was privileged to associate herself with him. Additionally, 
she had to go to bed with him to sweeten the deal. After one 
year, Martha walked away empty handed. 
She told me, "I did not know my own value. A whore at 
least gets paid for her services. Worse yet, I knew he was a 
married man." 
235 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
others of their free will. However, the key is they act upon 
their "free will" instead of being taken advantage of involun-
tarily. 
My friend, J. J. is a wealthy lady in Taiwan. On her recent 
trip to the United States, she shopped for a new Volvo for her 
seventeen-year-old son who attends high school in the U.S. 
She telephoned every dealer in town and finally paid cash for 
the car from the dealer who offered her the best discount. It 
was not so much she needed to save the money, rather it was 
a matter of her personal style. When I accompanied her to 
pick up the new car, the salesman, a fifteen-year veteran of 
his trade, told me that it's easier selling a car for its full 
sticker price to those who can afford it the least. 
During the whole process of shopping and bargaining for 
the car, she had her son participate at all times. She told me, 
"He must learn from a young age the importance of striving 
for the best deal." 
George has a consistent pattern in his life. He always gets 
taken. Although he is a chronic entrepreneur, in the past he 
also has been a chronic loser. Once he told me a very intrigu-
ing story. When he was six years old, he set up a stand in 
front of his house and sold food from his mother's refrigera-
tor. He took the vegetables, fruits, and eggs and arranged each 
with a price tag. He sold eggs at one penny each when his 
mother had bought them for three cents. He quickly sold the 
eggs and vegetables at a loss. His doting mother thought it 
was so cute. She never mentioned to him that the objective of 
doing business was to make a profit. 
Years later came the turning point of his bad deal making. 
George was working at a flea market with his wife, Mary. One 
day at the market, he bartered with another exhibiting mer-
chant and exchanged a product with a retail value of $25 for 
a $5 item. Mary had originally purchased this item at cost for 
$14. After he told Mary about the incident a red light popped 
up in her mind. George had again allowed himself to be taken. 
240 

THRIVING AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
Mary told George that the money difference was a small 
matter. However, what was important was that George had to 
stop his pattern of making bad deals. At that moment some-
thing extraordinary happened within him. For the first time he 
saw how ludicrous he had been in the past. 
He said to Mary, "I am going to break this losing pattern. 
I want to go back tomorrow and tell that merchant I made a 
bad deal and ask him what he is going to do about it." Mary 
told him not to worry about it. Mary knew it would be 
difficult for George to go back, especially as the amount of 
money involved in the transaction was so small. For the first 
time in his life, George was determined to learn how to correct 
his past behavior. George said to Mary, "I realize I truly have 
nothing to lose but everything to gain. The worst thing he will 
say to me is 'No,' and I can observe and learn from him how 
to handle a confrontation like this." George went back and 
renegotiated the deal successfully. He obtained additional 
items to make up the difference in the dollar amount. 
All these stories may sound small and insignificant. 
However, whether we deal with the intricate corporate 
negotiations or daily mundane encounters, we always operate 
out of the same place—our strong or weak state of mind. The 
manifestations may be different, but the sources of motivation 
are always the same. 
Beat Ten Men in Combat by 
Using Your Spirit 
The only way not to be a victim is to be tough and ruthless 
along with the rest of the world." If this is your conclusion, 
then you have missed the subtle points I have endeavored to 
make. As I have mentioned before, the world of business is 
like the animal kingdom and each one of us transmits our state 
241 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
of mind to others. We say either, "I am available for you to 
take advantage of me," or "Don't tread on me." 
When contemplating the essence of Thick Face, Black 
Heart, in time you will transform your spirit. The important 
thing to remember is, it is not whether your words or actions 
are tough or gentle; it is the spirit behind your actions and 
words that announces your inner state. The sixteenth century 
Japanese sword master, Miyomoto Musashi said, "You must 
contemplate the Way of the warrior's skill so you will be able 
to beat a man in combat by the use of your eye. With diligent 
training, you will be able to beat ten men in combat by using 
your spirit." 
Thick Face, Black Heart 101 
For the beginning Thick Face, Black Heart practitioners, it is 
most important to master the power of yielding. I have 
mentioned this before, but restate it here because it is an 
essential, potent concept that is unfamiliar to Western culture. 
A mistake people may make when first studying Thick 
Face, Black Heart is that they become aware that in the past 
they have often been the victim of the cunning and the 
ruthless and instantly desire justice and seek to fight back. 
Through studying this book, you will come to realize you have 
the power to make trouble and get your revenge. You will 
become eager and aggressive in confrontation while preparing 
to engage in combat. It is as if the clock's pendulum swings 
one way all your life and then you attempt to adjust its course 
with an opposite swing. As you begin to put your tough 
attitudes into practice, there are many good-hearted people 
who will be offended by your manner. In the process, you 
may turn yourself into a monster and offend everyone else 
along the way. Those who did not intend to take advantage of 
242 

THRIVING AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
you will make you a target for the sake of self-defense. In this 
way, you will be victimized once again. 
In order to protect yourself as you practice Thick Face, 
Black Heart, first acquire the power of yielding. Your outward 
action may seem to be submissive and non-threatening, but 
inwardly, never lose sight of your objectives. When you can 
win a battle by maneuvering obliquely, why go for a frontal 
assault? When your opponent perceives you as no threat, he 
may not be moved to pull out his biggest guns when dealing 
with you. But, if you forewarn him and over exaggerate your 
strength, he will be obligated to use his most effective 
weapons on you. 
If You Don't Have to Trust Him, 
Then You Can Always Trust Him 
A few years ago, I was riding the train between Rome and 
Venice. On the train I ran into Roger, an American tourist. 
Roger was in his mid-forties. He had just lost a small fortune 
from his business due to his partner's embezzling $3 million, 
leaving him with a huge debt. He was touring Europe, trying 
to get his head together to figure out what he should be doing 
next. 
As our journey progressed, Roger became more comfort-
able talking about himself He confided to me, "When I was 
in my early twenties, in San Francisco during the late sixties, 
I had a very small drug-dealing operation. I acted as the 
middle man and after each deal was made, I would get paid 
for my share of the commission. I never got cheated, because 
I never trusted any of the people I dealt with. I followed a 
golden rule of mine: if you don't have to trust him, then you 
can always trust him. I had not considered my ex-partner as 
a threat and therefore I ignored my golden rule." He further 
commented, "It is very difficult and frustrating to know where 
243 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
to draw the fine line of protecting your own interests versus 
trusting the higher and noble nature of another human being." 
Do Not Underestimate Your Counterpart 
All business relationships begin when people wish to combine 
their efforts to achieve mutually beneficial objectives. Howev-
er, as time and events unfold, the conflict of interest within the 
original unity may begin to surface. 
When a new venture begins, initially, all parties are 
friendly and act noble. Because of this friendly atmosphere, 
many have a tendency to expose too much of their private 
selves. However, the seemingly harmless information provided 
can come back to haunt them and they will find themselves in 
a potentially vulnerable position. 
Barbara and Jerry were respected professionals in the same 
line of work. They decided to get together and develop a 
project related to their field in their spare time. As they spent 
most of their free evenings working on this project, they got 
to know each other and their respective families quite well. 
A year and half later, near the culmination of the project, 
Jerry decided he wanted to be sole owner of the project. 
However, he had a signed partnership agreement with Barbara. 
Jerry sought to break their contract. After consulting with an 
attorney, the conclusion was that it would be almost impossi-
ble to break the contract. Jerry had to find other alternatives. 
Through family social gatherings, Jerry learned about 
Barbara's marijuana smoking habit. He also found out that her 
son was her supplier and was well connected with illegal 
distributors. Jerry told Barbara that she should volunteer to 
abandon her project interest, otherwise, he would make public 
Barbara's secret. Barbara quickly gave up her entitled interest. 
She could not afford the scandal, especially since she was a 
well respected clinical psychologist. 
244 

THRIVING AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
Barbara made two big mistakes. The first is obvious; she 
shouldn't have smoked illegal substances. The second mistake 
was that she grossly underestimated Jerry. She carelessly 
disclosed too much information about herself and consequently 
was made to pay for it. 
The Thief of Peace and the 
Serenity Stealer 
Keep a respectful distance from those who would steal your 
peace and serenity. In your daily life, you will run into this 
type of person around every comer. These people are not 
necessarily cunning or ruthless, nor are they a real threat to 
your career and personal objectives but they are eternally 
annoying. 
They operate by thriving on their own inferiority. Their 
actions and words are very cutting, even though people are 
nice to them. They also are gutless. On the one hand, they 
play up to the ruthless and cunning types who treat them like 
dirt and yet, they are mean to people who are decent and kind 
to them. These serenity stealers are people to be avoided. Life 
put them in a place which they resent because they feel it is 
beneath them. To get even with life, they react by attacking 
those who are nice to them while being very agreeable to 
those who abuse them. 
They cannot help themselves; their actions are involuntary. 
The serenity stealers steal into your heart and confidence with 
their sweet, charming exteriors. But after you allow them to 
get close to you, they will snap at you in order to diminish 
you in their eyes. They try to temporarily elevate their own 
Utter power and feel good for a moment, but are usually 
remorseful afterwards. They can't help themselves and so the 
Pattern continues. 
245 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
However, it is important not to interact with them in a 
similar manner. If you do, they will make a lifetime career of 
attacking you. These people are masters of "death by a 1,000 
cuts." You should always keep them at arm's length. Then 
they will eternally respect you and solicit your friendship. 
They will then transfer this troublesome energy to someone 
else. 
You Don't Need to Win Them All 
Human beings are very complex. You never know when your 
words and actions will be considered deeply offensive. 
Whether your intention is to offend or flatter, it will always be 
interpreted according to each person's private perception of 
themselves and your intention has very little consequence in 
their reality. 
Mary Ann is a forty-five-year old single lady. She grew up 
with a dominating mother and an abusive father. After twenty 
years of university schooling, she obtained three masters 
degrees in the areas of Urban Development, Asian studies, and 
Business Administration. However, she had difficulty in 
applying her schooling to the professional job market. She 
showed no interest in entering any profession for which she 
had studied. As a result, she worked as a part-time word 
processing clerk in an attorney's office for fifteen dollars per 
hour. Whenever I saw her she would complain about how 
tough her life was, how much she needed more money, and 
how awful her living conditions were. I always encouraged her 
by praising her ability to obtain three masters degrees while 
others were having difficulty earning one. I told her everything 
would work out. It seemed my words always brightened her 
day. 
On one occasion, while walking on the street with a friend 
of mine, we met Mary Ann. After the formality of introduc-
246 

THRIVING AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
tions I had the idea that my friend might be able to use Mary 
Ann in his office. Since Mary Ann only worked twenty hours 
weekly, she would be able to increase her income, thereby 
solving some of her financial problems. 
With Mary Ann standing there, I proceeded to promote her 
abilities and encourage my friend to use her in his office. That 
evening when I arrived home, Mary Ann telephoned me. She 
was shaking with anger. She was totally insulted by my telling 
my friend that she was a skillful word processor. Never had it 
entered my mind that Mary Ann felt so deeply inferior about 
the job she had been doing for the past ten years that she had 
to hide it from others. 
I didn't realize at the time that due to Mary Ann's lack of 
professional accomplishments, she harbored deep feelings of 
inferiority. She did not know how to alter her present circum-
stances and had consequently grown bitter. For people like 
Mary Ann, praise and acknowledgment are the only rewards 
that make life worth living. If anything is said or done to 
make them feel inferior, their sweet, gentle nature will 
instantly disappear into furious anger. 
In the realm of Human behavior you can't win them all. In 
fact, you don't need to win them all. Utilize Thick Face, Black 
Heart to protect yourself from such insults and press on with 
your life. 
The Theory of Polarity 
We would like everyone we meet to love us, praise and 
support our work, and share our point of view. The reality is 
that no matter how holy or noble your task or point of view 
may be, you will never get everyone to agree with you. The 
secret is not to convince everyone but rather to understand 
how to have the world polarize it's concept of you and learn 
10 use this force for your benefit. 
247 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
One of the most powerful and popular fundamental 
Christian ministers openly promotes polarization between 
different Christian sects and other religions that he considers 
pagan. Instead of having the controversies he has stirred up 
diminish his following, his ministry has grown by leaps and 
bounds through the utilization of his polarization theory. Even 
after a well-publicized scandal, he is still thriving and expand-
ing. His secret power is to convince his followers to despise 
the other churches and religions so self righteously that they 
become, by default, his eternal followers. 
A former grand wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, David Duke, 
rapidly climbed the political ladder and became a serious 
contender for the Louisiana governor's seat by utilizing the 
power of racial polarization. Although his political point of 
view is abhorrent to most Americans, he still drew the 
attention of the entire nation and an astounding number of 
Louisiana voters. 
As long as prejudice and bigotry exist in our society, 
polarization will be a powerful tool. By utilizing the dark side 
of the human spirit and dividing people against one another, 
you can effectively generate a support base to promote your 
objectives. 
Although the concept of polarization is usually frowned 
upon, in reality this venerated power is used by all levels of 
society. Therefore we do not have the luxury of being ignorant 
of this force. It is important for us to learn the art of polariza-
tion in order to recognize it and avoid falling victim to it. 
Mastering this force will enable us to accomplish our worthy 
objectives. 
The reality is that you can not win over everyone's heart 
and mind. If you can get half of the population to support 
your cause, even if the other half despises it, you are assured 
of being on the path to victory. 
248 

THRIVING AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
The Unity of Violence and Non-Violence 
The great apostle of non-violence, Mahatma Gandhi, was a 
student of the Bhagavad Gita, which he studied daily. He once 
remarked that his five years in prison were not fruitless 
because they gave him the time to study and contemplate the 
Bhagavad Gita. 
He followed the path of Krishna's instruction to Arjuna 
which was to perform his duty with neither desire nor passion. 
Through such discipline, he gained an immovable, unshakable, 
and detached inner state. Gandhi was then able to formulate a 
non-violent philosophy and a means of effective action against 
great adversity. 
In the face of British domination he led the Indian people 
in the practice of non-violence in the form of sit-ins, marches, 
and other acts of civil disobedience. This precipitated barba-
rous acts of violence from the British which enraged the world 
against their imperialism. 
His detachment and dispassion enabled Gandhi to endure 
the violence inflicted on him and his people by the British 
while remaining true to his belief in non-violence. To those 
who thought him passive or a coward, he said, "Most think 
non-violence is not to fight. On the contrary, non-violence is 
the strongest power. It conquers the power of violence... My 
creed of non-violence is an extremely active force. It has no 
room for cowardice or even weakness. There is hope for a 
violent man to someday become non-violent, but there is no 
hope for a coward." 
If Gandhi's adversary had been Hitler instead of the 
honorable British, he said he would have employed a different 
strategy. Gandhi said, "I make no hobgoblin of consistency. If 
I am true to myself from moment to moment, I do not mind 
all the inconsistencies that may be flung in my face. There is 
249 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
a consistency that is wise and a consistency that is foolish. A 
man who, in order to be consistent, would go bare-bodied in 
the hot sun of India or the sunless mid-winter of Norway 
would be considered a fool and would lose his life in the 
bargain." 
Mahatma Gandhi was a master of Thick Face, Black Heart 
at every level in its highest sense. 
Harmony of the Lover and the Warrior 
Recently, I began to have wonderful dreams in which every-
one was full of love and compassion. No one had any evil 
intent to harm anyone else; all the people I met in my dreams 
were open and unpretentious. Money and social acceptance 
were irrelevant concerns. No one worried about abuse or harsh 
judgments because these concepts did not exist. We were all 
so open and free. 
A female friend of mine appeared in my dream. In real life, 
she thrives on two emotions—envy and jealousy. She thrives 
on the envy from those who have less than her and she feeds 
on the jealousy towards those who have more than her. But, 
in my dream she didn't care who had the most or the best, and 
she no longer cared about her possessions. All she wanted to 
do was to love. 
Then, in this dreamy Utopia, I came upon a male friend of 
mine who had enjoyed powerful social status. He told me, "I 
cannot live without love; I want to leave my wife. I can no 
longer be bothered by society and politics which have given 
me my status and wealth. I want to give up everything. I want 
to love and be loved." 
In my dream everyone's heart was exposed and burning 
with the flame of love. When I woke up, I also felt my heart 
tender and sweet, full of love for everything and everyone. I 
didn't want to be a warrior wearing armor and carrying a 
250 

THRIVING AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
spear. I only wanted to be naked in my emotion, without 
defense. I wanted to be a lover. Yet in the reality of the world, 
as Gandhi put it, "Violence is an inherent necessity for life in 
the body." 
In our world, if a nation desires peace they must arm 
themselves. Without sufficient self-defense, peace is nothing 
but a non-attainable dream. 
Similarly, a lover cannot love others unless he or she feels 
secure enough to love themselves first. If your life is full of 
the devastating emotions of anger and defeat because you have 
left yourself wide open for the taking, then it will be very 
difficult to have positive emotions towards others. You will 
begin to resent all people because, in your eyes, they are 
vicious and they are all thieves. 
While the world may not have a shortage of the cunning 
and ruthless, there are also, as we can all attest, many noble 
and worthy beings. Protecting yourself from unnecessary harm 
allows you to cultivate that tender spirit of love. If you walk 
on the path of life armed with Thick Face, Black Heart, you 
can protect and nurture your noble emotions deep within. 
Thriving on the Cunning 
and the Ruthless 
Jim Brown, one of the greatest running backs in the history of 
American football, once said during an interview, "A lot of 
time when people try to hurt me, it just makes me stronger. I 
take in that negative energy, run it through my system, and 
throw it back at them." 
I am certain, if we think back, each one of us has accom-
plished things that we ordinarily could not accomplish if there 
°ad not been a strong oppositional force to challenge and 
stimulate us. 
251 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
If we are strong within ourselves, do not accept defeat, and 
instead, utilize the force of the cunning and ruthless to bring 
forth our hidden strengths and creativity, we will achieve the 
seemingly impossible. 
Richard and Sam were working as software engineers in 
the same company. Richard's objective at work was to support 
his employer by producing excellent work in a timely manner. 
Sam, on the other hand, spent half his days doing what he was 
hired to do—writing software—and the rest of the time 
reading every software publication available. Richard observed 
silently to himself that it is good to absorb new information 
but this should be done privately and not on company time. 
Sam's study would be of benefit only to himself and his next 
employer. Since the company was so behind with its project 
commitments, most of their present customers were anxious 
and threatening to cancel their contracts if the work was not 
delivered within a reasonable time. Richard was quietly 
working a regular 50-65 hour week. Sam, on the other hand, 
was a social animal. He frequently made the rounds in the 
office showing off how much he knew and, jealously, would 
drop a few destructive words about Richard. 
Recently, Richard's project partner, Joe, left the company 
leaving Richard to clean up all the unfinished work. To make 
matters worse, Richard's original work was custom tailored for 
a specific job. His work was now being adapted for a different 
project which required complete re-customization. The new 
project was due in seven weeks. Everyone in the office 
thought Richard could not pull it off Even Richard had his 
doubts. It looked like a new deadline would need to be re-
negotiated. 
Richard silently began to study Joe's work and discovered 
that Joe's approach was incompatible with the way he would 
approach the project. The only hope to integrate the two 
software designs would be to junk most of Joe's software and 
start over which meant that over six month's of Joe's work 
was useless. 
252 

THRIVING AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
Richard's determination was strong. He would not give 
Sam the satisfaction of seeing him fail. Richard strived to 
achieve the impossible. As Jim Brown said, "I take in that 
negative energy, run it through my system, and throw it back 
at them." Richard's determination to overcome an impossible 
situation flared like a fire within him. He poured forth his 
creative energy and in two weeks, he completed 70% of the 
project. There were five weeks left for the remainder of the 
work. Richard then leisurely finished the "impossible" task in 
a total of three weeks and delivered it to the satisfied custom-
er. 
The customer was delighted and remarked to the President 
of the company, "I didn't think that seven weeks was possible. 
I knew the software was complicated and I was fully prepared 
to extend the deadline." 
It is truly said, "Success is the sweetest revenge." I myself 
have lists of people that I have to give credit to for motivating 
me along the path to success through their ruthless actions 
towards me. Now that I have left them behind in the dust of 
my victory, they are no longer a threat to me. 
The battle with the cunning and ruthless often is not about 
conducting a battle with outside forces. Encountering the 
cunning and ruthless stimulates the dormant strengths within 
us and allows us to bring forth extraordinary abilities that we 
are not in touch with under normal circumstances. 
The Big Fish and Small Fish 
" you swim with the sharks, sometimes they'll take a bite out 
of you. In life, you can choose to stay at the safe small pond or take your chances in 
The discovery of oil in the North Sea attracted the interest 
° many oil companies. Independent oil man, T. Boone 
Pickens Jr., also was looking at the prospects. After careful 
253 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
evaluation, he decided to take a chance, because as he 
recalled, "The British government was peddling its culls, and 
this prospect looked like a cull to me." 
After signing an agreement with the United Kingdom's 
Department of Energy to explore two sites, Pickens' costly 
drilling operations began. 
Two years later, Pickens had a well operating on each site. 
One site was bone dry, while the other yielded oil. But shortly 
after the North Sea discovery, Britain's new Labor government 
aggressively tried to get its hands on the oil reserves in an 
attempt to save Britain's failing economy. In short, they 
wanted to throw the foreign oil companies out, after the 
companies already had paid for the drilling rights. The 
government was asking for all the profit, even though the 
foreign companies risked their money on costly exploration. 
The government first passed a law requiring Pickens and 
his partner companies to relinquish 20% of the producing oil 
field profits to the British National Oil Company (a national 
corporation formed by the government). BNOC got the profits, 
but didn't have to share any of the financial risks or develop-
ment costs. 
The BNOC instituted another regulation that made the 
companies pump the oil from the off-shore rigs all the way to 
storage tanks on land before pumping it back into tankers. 
Pickens contended that the use of buoys to pump the oil 
directly into the tankers at the off-shore site was environmen-
tally safer and of course, cheaper. The inefficient transport 
system eventually would cost the companies $300 million. 
Finally, Pickens had to sell the North Sea field, his biggest 
discovery ever, to the British for a meager profit. He even had 
to bluff and threaten the chairman of the BNOC to sell his 
contract. The British Department of Energy would have 
preferred that he just walk away from the field like a good 
boy. 
Beneath the regal image of the British, which Americans 
hold so dear to their hearts, Pickens found nothing but 
254 

THRIVE AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
common robbers. He remarked to Lord Kearton, BNOC 
chairman, "You guys are like Jesse James." 
Then Comes A Honest Man 
In a village of only naive men, if suddenly a deceitful, 
cunning, and ruthless man shows up, he is assured of victory. 
He will make victims of everyone. All will adopt his methods 
and will attempt to outdo each other. Then if an honest man 
who performs his duty honestly comes into this village, he is 
like a bream of fresh spring air blowing into a polluted, foul-
smelling room. People recognize his work and embrace him. 
He out-does and out-performs all the cunning and the 
ruthless. 
After a decade of foul air, driven purely by greed and 
selfish gains, we just may be ready for a breath of fresh air; 
liberation through honest, hard work. 
Label Me "Cunning and Ruthless" 
I remember over 15 years ago, there was a popular book by 
Robert Ringer, Winning through Intimidation, in which he said 
there are basically three kinds of people to look out for: the 
first kind—those who know they are out to get you and say 
so; the second kind—those who are nice people and due to 
their ineptitude cannot help themselves from victimizing you; 
and the third kind—those who act like nice people but under 
their kind exterior, are ruthless and cunning. 
Whether you consider yourself to be one of the above or 
none of the above, I can assure you, you have been labeled so 
at one time or another by certain people who have crossed 
your path. These people, through their association with you 
have set imaginary, unrealistic expectations as to what they 
255 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
would gain from your relationship. When the final results fall 
short, no matter how noble your motives may have been, you 
will not escape being labeled as a cunning and ruthless one 
who has heartlessly made them the victim. 
In the past, whenever I have been labeled unfavorably, I 
was bothered a great deal because I hold dear my image of 
myself as a just individual. Now, if I were to be labeled as 
cunning and ruthless, so be it. 
Human beings create their reality according to their own 
individual perceptions. The reality does not change, but the 
perception is altered. As I previously stated, "If you feel you 
are getting screwed, you probably are." However, this state-
ment should be qualified: you must be objective in order to 
reflect upon your experience properly. If a mirror is perfectly 
flat, then it can reflect the image without distortion. However, 
if the mirror is warped, then the image it reflects will be 
distorted. There is no doubt in my mind, most of us reflect our 
reality through a rather warped mirror. Therefore very few of 
us can escape unfavorable judgement at times. 
Exercise of Disengagement 
One of the powerful tools you can use when dealing with the 
cunning and ruthless is the exercise of disengagement; refusing 
to participate. If you suspect the people you are dealing with 
have no moral boundaries in acquiring their desires, don't get 
involved. The only reason you would be unable to sever your 
involvement is your anticipated possibility of lucrative 
outcomes. When you can master detachment from your own 
greed and desires, you will eliminate much unnecessary 
heartache and loss. 
256 

THRIVE AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
Thriving In Yourself 
A simple but important element to learn before you can thrive 
among others is the ability to thrive in yourself—your physical 
self. A tough mental state follows a well-conditioned physical 
body. Hindu teachings tell that the highest Dharma of an 
individual is the care for his body. This even takes precedence 
over the spiritual quest. Without the body, nothing can be 
achieved in the physical world. Put simply, the foundation to 
a successful life is being physically fit. Through exercise and 
a good diet a sharp mental state will follow. 
Sexual Indulgence Invites Fear 
The different schools of Eastern philosophy—including the 
ancient cultures of India, China and Japan—teach that sexual 
fluid is something so precious that one should not waste it 
needlessly. The fluid is an essence of a vital force, out of 
which springs a whole human being. 
The Eastern tradition also has encouraged moderation and 
restraint of sex. When the sexual fluid is depleted, a mental 
weakness results. Creativity, vitality and the fires of life dry 
up and leave a person feeling overwhelmed. So instead of 
riding life, life begins to ride you. These theories have no 
scientific basis but have been accepted widely for thousands 
of years. 
Napoleon Hill, in his book Think and Grow Rich, relates a 
study which shows that die majority of men do not succeed in 
their early years because they tend to dissipate their sexual 
energies through overindulgence in me physical expression of 
sex. 
257 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The sexual energy, when not being utilized, can be 
rechanneled and transformed into a power that supports your 
business ventures and other worthy pursuits. A close link 
exists, according to Eastern thinking, between physical well-
being, mental well-being, and sexual behavior. The relation-
ship between them has been observed for thousands of years. 
And after twenty years of my own observation, I too hold 
these relationships to be true. The proper channeling of sexual 
energy can give you just the edge you need to succeed in this 
fish-eat-fish world. 
Conclusion 
You are unable to stop others from attempting to take unfair 
advantage of you. You will, therefore, have to be ready to 
defend your interests at any time against the ruthless and 
cunning with all of your faculties. As one strives to be a just 
and noble individual, it is necessary to master the art of self-
defense. A perfect lover is also a perfect warrior. 
A Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner knows that in order 
to be tough with others, first, you have to be even tougher 
with yourself and learn how to discipline your thoughts and 
your actions. Whether you are resisting or yielding, in pain or 
pleasure, in relaxation or effort, you must never lose sight of 
your intended target. 
258 

THRIVING AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
Summary Of Key Points 
• If you don't stand up for what is rightfully yours, 
nobody else will. Even when you do stand up for your 
rights, many will attempt to intimidate you. 
• Human beings thrive on competition and the rule of 
the competition is winner takes all. 
• Only the strong will survive. 
• Those who are naturally cunning and ruthless can 
always identify those sweet and trusting individuals. 
Just as in the kingdom of animals, the strong lion can 
always single out a sick or weak-spirited wildebeest 
among a herd of thousands. 
• Respect a biting dog from a distance. 
• Safeguard insignificant and significant advantages. 
• It is not whether your words or actions are tough or 
gentle; it is the spirit behind your actions and words 
that announces your inner state. 
• For the beginning Thick Face, Black Heart practitio-
ners, it is most important to master the power of 
yielding. 
• While outwardly you may seems to be submissive and 
non-threatening; inwardly, never lose sight of your 
objectives. 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
• When you can win a battle by maneuvering obliquely, 
why go for a frontal assault? 
• If you don't have to trust him, then you can always 
trust him. 
• All business relationships begin when people wish to 
combine their efforts in achieving mutually beneficial 
objectives. However, as time and events unfold, the 
conflict of interest within the original unity may begin 
to surface. 
• Any seemingly harmless information provided to your 
counterpart can come back to haunt you and this will 
place you in a potentially vulnerable position. 
• Keep the thief of peace and the serenity stealer at 
arm's length. These people are masters of "death by a 
1,000 cuts." 
• The secret is not to convince everyone to agree with 
you, rather to understand how to have the world 
polarize its concept of you and learn to use this force 
for your benefit. 
• Mahatma Gandhi said, "Most think non-violence is not 
to fight. On the contrary, non-violence is the strongest 
power...my creed of non-violence is an extremely 
active force. It has no room for cowardice or even 
weakness. There is hope for a violent man to someday 
become non-violent, but there is no hope for a cow-
ard." 
• In our world, if a nation desires peace they must arm 
themselves. Without sufficient self-defence, peace is 
nothing but a non-attainable dream. 
260 

THRIVING AMONG THE CUNNING AND RUTHLESS 
• Similarly, a lover cannot love others unless he or she 
feels secure enough to love themselves first. If your 
life is full of the devastating emotions of anger and 
defeat it will be very difficult to have positive emotion 
toward others. 
• Jim Brown, one of the greatest running backs in the 
history of American football said,"A lot of time when 
people try to hurt me, it just makes me stronger. I take 
in that negative energy, run it through my system, and 
throw it back at them." 
• Then comes a honest man: After a decade of foul air, 
driven purely by greed and selfish gains, the American 
people just may be ready for a breath of fresh air; 
liberation through honest, hard work. 
• People, through their association with you, have set 
imaginary, unrealistic expectations as to what they 
would gain from your relationship. When the final 
results fall short, no matter how noble your motives 
may have been, you will not escape being labeled as 
a cunning and ruthless one who has heartlessly made 
them the victim. 
• Human beings perceive their reality according to their 
own individual perceptions. The reality does not 
change but the perception is altered. 
• A Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner knows that in 
order to be tough with others, first you have to be 
even tougher with yourself and learn how to discipline 
your thoughts and your actions. 
261 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Whether you are resisting or yielding, in pain or 
pleasure, in relaxation or effort, you must never lose 
sight of your intended target. 
262 
A 

The killer instinct is not solely 
reserved for the vicious and cunning; 
it can benefit the virtuous and righteous 
as well. 
—Chin-Ning Chu 

Acquiring 
the Killer 
Instinct 
the Killer Instinct? 
I
n today's world, to succeed in life, you must have 
the will and tenacity to finish the job. Among bull-
fighters, there are many who can work close to the 
horns, displaying great bravery and brilliant technique, but the 
great ones are recognized by how they handle themselves in 
the moment of truth, killing quickly and cleanly. 
The courage to finish the job quickly and cleanly—that is 
the killer instinct, the root of Black Heart. Every great man 
and every great villain has it. This killer instinct can help an 
^dividual accomplish great tasks to benefit mankind, and it 
can propel an individual to bring destruction on earth. A knife 
as great utility value and without it, life would be extremely 
^convenient, yet a knife is also a deadly weapon. 
265 
12 
What Is 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The killer instinct is another aspect of the Thick Face, 
Black Heart. It has ensured man's survival against the hostile 
elements of nature as well as from one another since the time 
of the cave-man. In today's civilized societies, the cruder 
elements of human behavior have been polished and refined. 
The killer instinct has undergone an outward transformation, 
but in some parts of the world, even today, the animal nature 
of the killer instinct remains intact. The application has varied, 
but the essence remains. 
In this chapter we will examine the efficacy of the killer 
instinct in action, rather than judge its moral value. Understand 
however, that I am in no way endorsing violent behavior. The 
killer instinct that I am addressing here is not an outward 
action. Rather, it is the inward state that guides your will to 
direct your actions to accomplish your objectives. If we have 
any hope of correcting our timid nature, we must not turn our 
face away from the dark side of reality. If our enemies are 
incorporating the killer instinct and victimizing us, then we do 
not have the luxury of avoiding the topic. As the great military 
strategist Sun Tzu said, "Know yourself, know your opponent, 
one hundred battles, one hundred victories." 
The Asian Perspective of Killer Instinct 
To sacrifice the smaller for the larger is natural in Asian 
culture, whereas to Westerners this is barbaric and inhumane. 
From the Asian point-of-view, it is a natural course of action. 
This is why the Japanese never had any problems recruiting 
sufficient kamikaze pilots for their suicide missions during the 
latter part of World War II. Japan's only problem was that 
there were not enough airplanes. 
Represented in China's 5,000 years of recorded history are 
gigantic numbers of individuals who struggled endlessly for 
power and glory. The Chinese history books have become 
266 

ACQUIRING THE KILLER INSTINCT 
textbooks for learning and developing the art of the killer 
instinct. These books have been widely studied by the Koreans 
and Japanese, not for their historical value, but as guides to 
human behavior. They learned how the ancient Chinese heroes 
formulated their intricate strategies and, most importantly, how 
they executed these ruthless strategies to achieve their goals. 
The heroes of Asia have for the most part, been men who 
possessed the perfect killer instinct. At times these killer 
instincts were utilized justly. At other times, however, they 
were abused. The following are stories from ancient China 
which demonstrate the application of the killer instinct to 
obtain specific objectives. 
Liu Bang 
One of the most documented rivalries in Chinese history was 
between Liu Bang and Xiang Yu. After the fall of the Chin 
Dynasty in the second century B.C., they battled each other 
for the control of China. Xiang Yu began with every advan-
tage. He had the best troops, most of China was already under 
his control, and he was a great warrior and a brilliant strate-
gist. 
During the three-year struggle, Xiang Yu fought countless 
battles and lost only one. But in losing one, he ultimately lost 
China to a man who was his inferior in every way except in 
the practice of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
In one of his early victories, Xiang Yu captured Liu Bang. 
The throne was within Xiang Yu's grasp, yet he let it slip 
away. In acknowledgement of his admiration for Liu Bang as 
a great warrior, and according to his own sense of a soldier's 
honor, Xiang Yu honored his defeated foe by granting him 
living quarters instead of executing him. This misguided act 
provided Liu Bang the opportunity for escape, and he subse-
267 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
quently regrouped his forces and returned to conquer Xiang 
Yu's army. 
On the surface, Xiang Yu's mercy might seem to have been 
a noble action, but true nobility would have caused Xiang Yu 
to strike down Liu Bang when he had the opportunity. If he 
had done so, he would have ended years of chaos in China 
and untold misery suffered by millions of the common people. 
Xiang Yu had personally taken on the destiny of becoming 
the ruler of China. It was for this purpose that he had 
launched the bloody civil war in the first place. He already 
had the blood of over 100,000 men on his hands; the blood of 
Liu Bang was merely one more. It was improper of him to 
forsake his objective at such a moment. The Chinese people 
just wanted to see one of them die quickly. They did not care 
who ruled China, they only wanted an end to this miserable 
war. 
After Xiang Yu's one and only defeat, it was this same 
soldier's honor that prevented him from returning to his 
province to regroup. He could not face his people after losing 
so many of their sons. Instead, he took his own life. 
Liu Bang's military commander, Han Xin, characterized 
Xiang Yu's weaknesses by saying that he had the benevolence 
of a woman and the valor of a peasant. Xiang Yu killed 
people ruthlessly on the battlefield, yet at the moment of truth 
when he stood before his defeated foe, he abandoned his 
objective and took refuge in a false image of his own nobility, 
masking his weakness as the "noblesse oblige" of one great 
warrior to another. 
Liu Bang did not have Xiang Yu's accomplishments, but 
neither was he encumbered by any of Xiang Yu's concept of 
honor. During the years of their conflict, Liu Bang repeatedly 
lost battles to Xiang Yu, but he was never ashamed to return 
to his province to conscript another army. His heart was also 
blacker than Xiang Yu's. He could do whatever was required 
to fulfill his ambition without regard to the cost to others. 
268 

ACQUIRING THE KILLER INSTINCT 
When Xiang Yu felt victory slipping away in their final 
battle, he ordered that Liu Bang's father, who had been his 
prisoner for many years, be brought out and tied in front of a 
pot of boiling oil. Liu Bang was commanded to retreat with all 
his forces or see his father boiled alive. Liu rode to the front 
of his troops and shouted, "You and I were blood brothers at 
one time, General Xiang. My father is also yours. If you wish 
to cook our father, please share a cup of the broth with me." 
Liu Bang's Thick Face, Black Heart was not reserved for 
his enemies. His closest companions also became victims. 
During his struggle with Xiang Yu, Liu Bang was assisted by 
three very able advisors: Han Xin, Hsiao Hei, and Zhang 
Liang. It was largely through the efforts of these men that the 
Han Dynasty, the ruling family of China for four centuries, 
was established. 
As the first commoner in the history of China to ascend to 
the position of the Son of Heaven, Liu Bang was determined 
that other ambitious men not get the idea that anyone could 
make himself the Emperor of China. In order to secure his 
position, Liu Bang found it necessary to rid himself of his 
former comrades-in-arms. 
Zhang Liang had an in-depth understanding of human 
nature. After the final victory over Xiang Yu, he wisely took 
his leave of the Emperor and retired to a life as a reclusive 
monk in the forest. He knew that the very abilities that made 
him valuable to Liu Bang during his years of struggle would 
now guarantee his death if he remained at court. 
Liu Bang's military commander, Han Xin, was the same 
man who had been disgraced as a young man by being forced 
to crawl through the legs of the ruffian. Despite Han's 
reputation, Liu Bang had taken him into his service and Han 
had served him faithfully all the days of his life. After the 
defeat of Xiang Yu and Liu Bang's ascension to the throne, 
Han became the second most powerful man in China. His 
troops had placed Liu Bang on the throne; they could as easily 
depose him. But Han Xin could not forget that Liu Bang had 
269 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
lifted him from disgrace and given him an opportunity to 
become a great general. He did not wish to believe that he was 
locked in a life-or-death struggle with his longtime patron. 
Meanwhile, Han Xin was approached by other members of the 
court who were plotting to overthrow Liu Bang. 
When Liu Bang invited Han Xin to court for a banquet, 
Han Xin thrust his doubts aside and left the safety of his 
military camp. The result of this gesture of trust was that, 
upon Han's arrival at court, the Emperor had his old compan-
ion minced up into a meat sauce. 
During the years of warfare, it was Hsiao Hei's job to 
follow behind the army and see to the administration of the 
conquered territories. After his final victory, Liu Bang made 
him Prime Minister. Hsiao Hei was a brilliant administrator. 
He created the concept of managing the affairs of government 
through a systematic delegation of authority and responsibility. 
This bureaucratic management system is still used today by 
governments worldwide. 
Because of the efficiency and fairness of his administration, 
Hsiao Hei became so popular with the people that Liu Bang 
became fearful. The Emperor found a pretext to imprison 
Hsiao Hei until he was an old, broken man who no longer 
posed any threat. 
In successfully accomplishing your life's objectives and 
ambitions, there is a direct relationship between the scope of 
your ambition and your ability to tap deep into your killer 
instinct. The greater your ambition, the more able and willing 
you must be to exercise your killer instinct. If your aim is to 
be the Emperor of China, then you must be totally willing to 
kill or to be killed. Chinese history has proven that only those 
willing to go the distance in exercising their killer instinct see 
the final victory. The following story demonstrates this point. 
270 

ACQUIRING THE KILLER INSTINCT 
The First Emperor of the Ming Dynasty 
In 1368, Chu Yuan Zhang, a beggar from a peasant family, 
led the Chinese people in the overthrow of the mighty Yuang 
Dynasty, which was established by the Mongols after then-
return from their victorious conquering of Europe. Chu 
established the Ming Dynasty which ruled China for three 
hundred years. 
The peasants who had followed Chu in the revolution now 
expected proper rewards. If Chu had kept them in court and 
placed them in distinguished positions, these people would 
have shown him no respect, because they still saw him as 
what he had been before, just another fellow peasant. There-
fore, he would not have been able to rule with absolute 
authority. 
However, if Chu sent them home with monetary rewards, 
and did not grant them titles and positions, they would become 
discontented and possibly plot to overthrow him. So Chu 
decided to take action with the objective of securing his 
empire. 
Chu invited all of his peasant friends from the war to join 
him in a great celebration of the establishment of the Ming 
dynasty. He set the date and carefully chose an isolated 
building. He ensured an abundance of food and an unceasing 
flow of wine to be provided there. At the height of the 
celebration, he secretly left, locked every exit, and lit a fire 
which killed everyone inside. 
Leadership of Kung Ming 
he killer instinct is not solely reserved for the vicious and 
cunning; it can benefit the virtuous and righteous as well. 
271 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Kung Ming, a great military strategist and benevolent 
leader, lived around 200 A.D. He has been praised by some 
Chinese historians as possibly being the wisest man to have 
lived during the five thousand years of Chinese history. 
Kung Ming was very fond of General Ma, who was one of 
his talented young generals. Kung Ming recognized Ma's 
potential as a great military leader, and hoped to cultivate Ma 
as his successor. With talent like Ma's, Kung Ming felt hope 
for his task of defeating his strong enemies and reestablishing 
the glory of the Han Dynasty for the overly young Emperor. 
In one of the decisive campaigns, Kung Ming ordered 
General Ma to a battle and repeatedly instructed him to 
occupy a specific small town to act as a decoy in order to tie 
up the enemy troops there. Kung Ming knew the brilliant, 
young, and arrogant Ma was like a highly spirited pony that 
needed time to be broken in. Kung Ming assigned General Ma 
two of his best advisers to ensure Ma a speedy victory with no 
unexpected surprises. 
When General Ma engaged in battle with the enemy, he 
totally ignored Kung Ming's instructions. Despite objections 
from his advisors, General Ma led his troops to the top of the 
mountain. The enemy cut off General Ma's food and water 
supplies from below. He was quickly defeated, thus rendering 
Kung Ming unable to execute his overall battle plan. 
Upon General Ma's return, Kung Ming ordered his 
execution. One of the respected old generals begged Kung 
Ming to spare Ma's life. He said, "Our nation is surrounded 
by strong, multi-national troops, it is a shame to waste a 
talented general." But Kung Ming replied, "Law and order 
must be adhered to. In order to keep the discipline of the 
troops, I must set an example." 
While weeping, Kung Ming beheaded General Ma. 
272 

ACQUIRING THE KILLER INSTINCT 
The Bankable Commodity 
Those who possessed a healthy dose of ambition in ancient 
China, coupled with the freedom to exercise their well-
developed killer instinct, were often rewarded. 
Not so long ago, Middle Eastern terrorists took Russian 
personnel hostage. KGB agents responded swiftly by kidnap-
ping close relatives of the responsible terrorist leaders. The 
KGB cut off body parts of these relatives, and sent them along 
with notes warning that the terrorists' wives and children 
would be the next targets of retribution if the Russian prison-
ers were not immediately released. The hostages were quickly 
released, and no Russian has been taken hostage since. 
In our civilized world, most of us do not kill anyone in 
order to secure our personal interests. The tools for achieving 
one's goals have changed, but the guiding spirit remains the 
same, and the outcome on the victims is equally as deadly. 
In the last decade, the American financial world has 
become the ideal incubator, nurturing those who possess some 
degree of the natural killer instinct and eventually cultivating 
them into perfect killers in the world of high finance. Some of 
these people are motivated solely by greed. Armed with a 
perfected killer instinct and impeccable social standing, this 
combination of elements renders them almost unbeatable. Even 
though a few are caught, many escape the hammer of justice. 
A Wall Street friend of mine told me privately that for every 
one caught, there are ten more who weren't. 
In this country, wealth bestows a halo of dignity to those 
who possess it and they are placed in the esteemed company 
of the most respectable entrepreneurs and dignitaries. Even 
though they may acquire this wealth by unconscionably 
robbing millions from the faceless public and leading many to 
273 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
their financial death, as long as they appear respectable and 
are not caught in the process, we Americans deify them. 
It is sad but true that one who possesses and is willing to 
use a perfect killer instinct is, was, and always will be a 
bankable commodity. 
The Secret of Asking for Money 
While a healthy and well-developed killer instinct can aid the 
greedy, it can also assist us in accomplishing our worthy tasks, 
or help us overcome unexpected obstacles in life. Therefore, 
it is essential for us to explore the elements and the state of 
mind behind that perfect killer instinct. 
The best way to examine this subtle state of mind is by 
looking at a particular experience mat many of us have in 
common. A difficult thing for many sensitive people is to ask 
for money from others. Whenever we have to do so, there are 
conflicts of feeling mat arise from within. 
The large corporation can easily raise money compared 
with the small, starting business. Small entrepreneurs wishing 
to generate the necessary working capital often find it is 
difficult to open their mouth and ask for money. Yet the 
ability to raise money is an essential skill for any entrepreneur. 
Mr. T. Boone Pickens recalls in his biography that his jobs 
were mostly centered around raising money. In his early years 
he was raising money either for land leases, or for oil well 
drilling funds. He acknowledged that it is a never-ending task. 
Don is the master when it comes to asking others for money. 
I have never met Don, yet through a friend of mine, Edward, 
Don has become a living entity in my mind. 
In the mid-1960s Edward met Don. At the time, Don was 
wanted in thirteen states for fraud and embezzlement. Despite 
Don's moral shortcomings, you have to give him credit for his 
274 

ACQUIRING THE KILLER INSTINCT 
ability to "raise money." Without emulating his motives and 
moral standards, we can learn from him his perfect execution 
of that killer instinct in raising money. 
Confucius said, "Whenever I walk among two other people, 
it does not matter their social status and accomplishments; at 
least one of them will be able to teach me the knowledge that 
I do not possess." 
Don sometimes raised money for projects which did not 
exist. Occasionally, he delivered what he promised. One time, 
Don asked for fifty thousand dollars for a "wonderful" venture 
from a group of people who had connections with the under-
ground. Immediately after he obtained the fifty thousand 
dollars, he took the money and hit the nearest bar. He bought 
drinks for everyone and blew over a thousand dollars. The 
next day, he invited Edward to Reno and gambled away the 
remaining money. 
When his "investors" caught up with him, in front of 
Edward, they pointed a pistol at him and demanded their 
money back. Don told the gangsters, in a composed, collected, 
and detached manner, that a rival gang had stolen their 
merchandise. Then he smoothly proceeded to state that the 
only chance to recuperate the lost money was for them to 
provide him with additional five thousand dollars. Don was 
like a skilled bull-fighter standing calmly in front of the angry 
bull and skillfully delivering the final kill. Edward could not 
believe his eyes—these toughies actually lowered their guns 
and gave him another five thousand dollars. 
One time Edward asked Don, "What is your secret of 
asking for money." Don replied, "You ask by asking." Edward 
said, "But, I have difficulties opening my mouth; my mind has 
many considerations that leave me unable to open my month." 
Don looked straight into Edward's eyes and said, "You cannot 
worry about that. You have to ignore totally whatever your mind is telling you, and wha
whole-heartedly on your task: asking for the money." 
275 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
This is the state behind the spirit of that killer instinct. The 
sixteenth century Japanese sword master, Miyamoto Musashi 
said: "Whatever state of mind you are in, ignore it. Think only 
of cutting." 
Don possesses this killer instinct naturally. It is part of who 
he is. However, his talent is terribly misguided. If he devoted 
his talent to fund-raising for worthy causes, he would be an 
invaluable asset to himself and others. Nevertheless, his words 
are profound. He described a state of mind that is totally 
detached from all considerations except the completion of the 
immediate objective. This totally focused state of mind is the 
essential driving force behind that perfect killer instinct. 
Without it, your actions and words are powerless and ineffec-
tive. 
Never Go to Bed Without 
Collecting First 
At one time I worked for an American company on a retainer 
basis to develop their market in China, Hong Kong, and 
Taiwan. Wally and I reached an oral agreement that his 
company would pay me a monthly fee plus a percentage of the 
sales. 
Shortly after I began working with Wally, I presented my 
regular working contract to him. We worked together on some 
minor wording problems, and Wally promised to have the 
contract retyped. As I got to know Wally better, I was 
charmed by his integrity and professionalism. Because of this 
I neglected to follow up on the unfinished contract. If there 
was one person I could trust, Wally was the one. Before I 
even noticed, three years passed by and the contract had not 
been signed. However, I wasn't worried. 
Then Wally sold his fifty percent interest to his German 
partner. I was still not concerned about my unsigned contract. 
276 

ACQUIRING THE KILLER INSTINCT 
After all, Wally's son-in-law, Peter, was staying on as the 
president of the company, and Peter knew how hard I had 
worked for my money. Besides, I was good friends with 
Peter's wife and in-laws. 
After Peter took over the Asian project, I mentioned my 
unsigned contract to him. He repeatedly told me he would take 
a look at it, and that he didn't see any problem. 
After working with Peter for one year, I decided I would 
like to resign from my responsibility and unload some of my 
professional burdens. I told Peter that I would like the contract 
signed so I could continue to receive the entitled percentage. 
Peter said, "Well, we have to look at how many years you will 
continue to receive this commission, it may be three years, or 
five years." I reminded him that the original agreement had no 
termination. 
After six months, my negotiations were getting nowhere. 
The problem was, I had no leverage with which to bargain. I 
was at his mercy, and he would rather keep his money than be 
merciful. He was demonstrating his new found power and 
trying to prove to himself what an excellent deal maker he 
was. 
Peter acted like a high spirited bull standing in front of a 
bullfighter with a broken sword. I felt powerless, angry, and 
humiliated. Then I remembered the words of Japanese sword 
master, Musashi, "Whatever state of mind you are in, ignore 
it. Think only of cutting." I thought to myself: "Peter is acting 
tough, but if I can find his jugular vein, I can come in for the 
kill even with my broken sword." 
I telephoned him and made it quite clear that if he did not 
settle this matter with me in a timely manner, I would have no 
choice but to inform all of the Asian customers I had intro-
duced him to that he was trying to cheat me out of my entitled 
financial interests. I assured him that this was not an idle 
threat, rather a measure of desperation. I delivered my punch 
^d then proceeded to speak to his sense of honor, because 
Peter valued himself as a devoted Christian. 
277 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
"Peter, I am in a totally powerless situation and am at your 
mercy; somewhat like the prostitute who doesn't collect her 
money before she goes to bed with the customer. When all is 
finished, she wants her money. If the customer does not honor 
their agreement, there is nothing she can do about it. The 
customer already has what he wanted. I am in the same 
situation as that prostitute, asking you to honor an agreement 
from which you have already reaped the benefits. I am 
threatening you because I have no other alternative; I have no 
other cards to play. When you corner a dog and give him no 
way out, he will jump over the wall, whether he wants to or 
not." 
Well, it worked. Peter realized that my humiliation was so 
great that I might do anything to take my revenge. The 
possibility of destroying his personal reputation and that of his 
company among the Asians was very real. We worked out a 
compromise that he would pay my commission for an addi-
tional 21 years. 
At the end of our conversation, he asked me, "What is the 
topic of the book that you are working on?" 
I told him, "How not to get screwed by others." 
He laughed and said "You haven't lost your sense of 
humor." In fact he didn't know how literal my statement was. 
I Must be Cruel, Only to be Kind 
The next element I want to discuss digresses slightly from the 
focus of this chapter, but the chapter is not complete without 
it. The question is, while we are dealing with the topic of 
killer instinct, when do we stop exercising the killer instinct 
and express our inborn human compassion. 
As William Shakespeare said in Hamlet, "I must be cruel, 
only to be kind." You should never stop exercising you1 
278 

ACQUIRING THE KILLER INSTINCT 
compassion. Have love in your heart, but be smart, express 
your compassion with restraint and detachment. 
Every human being has the desire to be abundantly 
generous and to give freely. This includes love, compassion, 
respect, and material possessions. Deep down, as a child of 
our Divine Maker, we all wish to perform our labor free of 
charge, solely as an expression of love. At the same time, we 
wish to reward others with an abundance beyond their possible 
expectations. Yet, the reality of daily survival causes too many 
to feel contracted and fearful. Nevertheless, at one time or the 
other, we have shared our resources with the needy beyond 
our reasonable capability. 
In time, we notice, it is much easier to be compassionate 
and provide for the nameless and faceless needy person than 
for those we consider to be our special "ones." This is 
because, through experience, we see our compassionate 
generosity often abused. It seems to some, the more you give, 
the more you should give. These people act as if you owe 
them. Out of your desire to be kind, you expose yourself 
without a protective shield. 
Strange but true, we often abuse those who support and 
love us the most. 
Beth and Lisa have known each other more than twenty 
years. Lisa is a divorced woman and has lived alone for over 
ten years. Recently Beth was informed by her husband that he 
wants out of their marriage. Beth moved in with Lisa, while 
her house was being sold. 
Lisa was sympathetic to Beth and wanted to help her all 
she could. She let Beth stay with her free of charge, in order 
to cut down Bern's living expenses. Lisa opened her arms and 
heart to a wounded friend. She catered to Beth's every need. 
Beth moved out six months later, and the two of them have 
not spoken since. Lisa feels hurt and abused by this incident. 
She told me, "I opened my heart and my wallet too quickly 
^d without reserve. I gave everything up front. I could not 
279 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
top my own performance, but Bern's expectations were ever-
rising." 
In order to be kind, we have to be cruel. A Thick Face, 
Black Heart practitioner learns the necessity of restraint, and 
controls his desire to be overly expressive of his compassion. 
Compassion is a state of mind, not a blind competition of how 
much you can do for others. Often, in order to be kind, we 
have to control our desire to do too much. Along the same 
lines, good parents learn the importance of controlling their 
urge to overly indulge and pamper their children knowing: I 
must be cruel, only to be kind. 
Acquiring the Killer Instinct 
The killer instinct is one aspect of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
Without it, Thick Face, Black Heart would be nothing but 
good intentions without the power and ability to act. 
The killer instinct is the power that propels us to take 
proper actions in spite of ourselves, keeping us on the path to 
our objectives. This killer instinct is within each one of us as 
part of our genetic coding. Due to our social programming, the 
idea of an inborn killer instinct is repugnant and we have 
suppressed it. Because this instinct is within us, we merely 
have to reacquaint ourselves with it. 
Remember when you first learned to flip a pancake in a 
frying pan? You started by rocking the pan to create a 
momentum that allowed the pancake to slide up and down 
inside the frying pan. Then with one throw into the air, the 
pancake turned and you caught it with the pan. 
When you are too timid and concerned about whether the 
pancake will fly too high and miss the pan, the result is your 
pancake will go up in the air few inches, but won't have the 
height to turn. When it lands, you'll have a mess inside the 
pan. On the other hand, when you are too concerned that the 
280 

ACQUIRING THE KILLER INSTINCT 
pancake will not turn over, you use too much force, and the 
result is your pancake will probably land on the stove, outside 
of the pan. 
When you learn to flip a pancake, you need to explore your 
own inner realm, to be in touch with that state of mind which 
gives you the perfect strength, perfect control, and the perfect 
detached courage. Carefully observe your inner state. Watch 
for the moment, just before you throw the pancake high in the 
air and make that perfect landing. When you find that state of 
mind, recreate it often. It will help you to cultivate your 
perfect killer instinct. 
Learning to flip a pancake seems easy and not particularly 
profound. Yet, the truth of life is hidden everywhere equally. 
The lesson of acquiring the perfect killer instinct is not only 
in the drama of bullfights, and the high finance of the business 
world, it also exists in its entirety in the flipping of a pancake. 
The state of mind which aids us in performing the mundane 
task of flipping the pancake is the same state of mind which 
executes the perfect killer instinct. When I speak of flipping 
a pancake, it is not about the pancake; it is about being in 
touch with that something inside of you that provides you with 
the courage to overcome your inner timidity and consider-
ations. It is about tapping into that state of perfect strength, 
perfect control, and perfect detachment in fulfilling your 
worthy objectives. 
The Surgeon's Strength 
I once spoke with a young surgeon who had served in 
Vietnam. He told me, "Medical school ill prepared me for the 
horrors of war and mutilations that human beings are capable 
of inflicting on one another. During my time of Vietnam, I 
performed my duty only because my devotion for my fellow 
men and sense of loyalty to my duty were stronger than my 
281 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
fear. That loyalty transformed my fear into pure courage and 
strength in spite of myself." 
Recently, I underwent a minor operation to have a benign 
tumor removed from my breast. The doctor gave me only a 
local anesthetic, so I was conscious during the whole proce-
dure. Although I couldn't feel any pain, I could feel my breast 
being pulled very strongly from every direction as if the 
surgeon were cutting up a rubber doll. She performed her 
work with dispassion and detachment, but this attitude did not 
disturb me. 
On the contrary, I found great comfort in it. While she was 
working, I felt a tremendous affection pouring out from her 
hands. This affection that I experienced came from her 
dedicated detachment in accomplishing the objective. Just like 
a child who has a thorn in his hand, what would be the greater 
kindness, to pick gingerly at the thorn so that it remains in the 
wound and festers or to remove it with assurance even though 
you may cause the child a moment of pain? 
The circumstances that brought forth the inner strength of 
both surgeons were different, yet both were true to their 
professional objectives. Within this detached strength lies a 
signpost to the mystery of the killer instinct—the root of Thick 
Face, Black Heart. 
282 

ACQUIRING THE KILLER INSTINCT 
Summary Of Key Points 
• To succeed in life, you must have the will and tenacity 
to finish the job. 
• The courage to finish the job quickly and cleanly— 
that is the killer instinct, the root of Black Heart. 
Every great man and every great villain has it. 
• This killer instinct can help an individual accomplish 
great tasks to benefit mankind, and it can propel an 
individual to bring destruction upon the earth. 
• A knife has great utility value and without it, life 
would be extremely inconvenient, yet a knife is also a 
deadly weapon. 
• The killer instinct is another aspect of the Thick Face, 
Black Heart. It has ensured man's survival against the 
hostile elements of nature, as well as from one anoth-
er, since the time of the cave-man. 
• If we have any hope of correcting our timid nature, we 
must not turn our faces away from the dark side of 
reality. 
• If our enemies are incorporating the killer instinct and 
victimizing us, we do not have the luxury of avoiding 
the topic. As the great military strategist Sun Tzu said, 
"Know yourself, know your opponent, one hundred 
battles, one hundred victories." 
283 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
• It is sad but true that one who possesses and is willing 
to use a perfect killer instinct is, was, and always will 
be a bankable commodity. 
• I must be cruel, only to be kind. You should never 
stop exercising your compassion. Have love in your 
heart, but be smart, express your compassion with 
restraint and detachment. 
• The killer instinct is one aspect of Thick Face, Black 
Heart. Without it, Thick Face, Black Heart would be 
nothing but good intentions without the power and 
ability to act. 
• The killer instinct is the power that propels us to take 
proper actions in spite of ourselves, keeping us on the 
path to our objectives. This killer instinct is within 
each one of us as part of our genetic coding. 
• Acquiring the killer instinct. The truth of life is hidden 
everywhere equally. The lesson of acquiring the 
perfect killer instinct is not only in the drama of 
bullfights, and the high finance of the business world, 
it also exists in its entirety in the flipping of a pan-
cake. 
• The state of mind which aids us in performing the 
mundane task of flipping the pancake is the same state 
of mind which executes the perfect killer instinct. 
• Flipping a pancake is not about the pancake; it is 
about being in touch with that something inside you 
that provides you with the courage to overcome your 
inner timidity and considerations. It is about tapping 
into that state of perfect strength, perfect control, and 
perfect detachment in fulfilling your worthy objectives. 
284 


You don't manage people, 
you manage things. 
You lead people. 
—Grace Hopper, 
U.S. Navy Admiral, retired 

Thick Face, 
Black Heart 
Leadership 
Leadership: An Essential 
Element of Survival 
E
ach one of us, in large or small ways, are leaders. 
Some have an official title for their roles as 
leaders, while others may lead their brothers, 
sisters or friends on the playground. Leadership is a state of 
mind—what you do to yourself, not what you do to others. 
Recently, many Americans have been voicing discontent 
about our present political system. The problem is not so 
much that the system needs reform (although it does), but 
more importantly, we desperately need to overhaul the 
standards of integrity among our political leaders. A nation, a 
corporation, a small business or a family's well being is 
^htly intertwined with the quality of its leaders. 
13 
287 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The ancient Chinese were convinced that the quality of 
their leaders was directly related to national survival. In many 
ancient art of war books the code of leadership has been 
addressed. 
Among these books, Kung Ming's Art of War most 
extensively deals with the question of leadership. Kung Ming, 
who was mentioned in an earlier chapter, is considered to be 
the greatest leader to have lived during the 5,000 years of 
recorded Chinese history. His book, which is relatively 
unknown to Western readers, defines in detail what constitutes 
a great leader and a poor leader. 
Kung Ming's description of a great leader shows a great 
deal of similarity to a Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner. 
The ancient Chinese always placed tremendous value on their 
leaders' spiritual and philosophical merit. Even today, the 
Chinese place virtue over technical ability when evaluating a 
corporation employee or government official. 
A person with great abilities who lacks of spiritual depth 
will not be a benefit to his organization, but will be a threat to 
himself and others. People will naturally follow a person who 
possesses strong spiritual qualities in addition to his profes-
sional aptitude. As the Chinese are fond of saying, "For a 
worthy leader, one will walk across boiling oil and raging fire 
to support his leaders' objective." 
Kung Ming's book is intended for military use; however, 
the principles which guided the ancient military leaders are 
interchangeable with those that guide today's political or 
business leaders. 
I have provided a literal translation from Kung Ming's Art of 
War so that you may see the unique flavor of his writing. 
288 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART LEADERSHIP 
Kung Ming said: 
A. Power and Responsibility 
Power and Responsibility are the two faces that share one 
physical body and they cannot be separated. A leader who is 
the central power of a nation must at the same time be fully 
responsible for the success and failure of that nation. Power is 
the force that supports one to command and lead. This force 
communicates its presence by the manner in which that 
individual carries himself. A leader who is skilled in command 
is like a strong tiger who possesses wings. He possesses total 
freedom in expressing himself and his action meets no 
obstacles. A leader who is inept in command is like a fish out 
of water. Although he wishes to ride the force of the waves, 
he is unable. 
B. Uproot the Wicked 
The reasons for the failure of any organization is rooted in the 
following people. 
1. He who is fond of creating clusters among the mediocre-
minded people so he may focus the group's objective to 
annihilate the proficient individuals. 
2. He who is enslaved by his extravagant spending habits. 
3- He who devotes all of his attention to fault finding, thus 
stimulating the group's discontent, all for the benefit of his 
selfish aims. 
289 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
4. He who only focuses on his personal losses and gains, and 
whose actions are solely based on the principle of winning at 
all costs. 
The above-mentioned are malicious, hypocritical, and wicked. 
One must keep away from them. 
C. Methods to Recognize the 
Individual's True Character 
The most difficult thing is to detect someone's true nature. 
One can be kind outwardly, yet vicious inside. Others seem 
sincere, yet evasive. Some are brave in expression, yet 
cowardly. Others are hardworking, yet untrustworthy. 
The following are seven methods to detect an individual's 
character. 
1. Debate with him to know his viewpoints on life. 
2. Challenge him verbally to watch the changes of his inner 
state. 
3. Discuss strategies with him in order to observe his wisdom. 
4. Enlighten him as to the difficulties and dangers ahead, thus 
to know his courage. 
5. Cause him to be drunk, then observe his real nature. 
6. Make him handle money, then know his virtue. 
7. Assign work to him, then discover his competence. 
290 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART LEADERSHIP 
In addition to these, the following are additional methods 
provided from other ancient books. 
1. During the time of his misfortune, observe whom he 
befriends. 
2. During the time of his prosperity, observe who receives his 
charity. 
3. During the time he is holding high offices, observe whom 
he employs. 
4. During the time of difficulties, does he act unethically? 
5. During the time of poverty, can he be bribed? 
6. Tempting him with lustful sex, observe his steadiness. 
D. Six Different Types of Leaders 
1. The compassionate leader: He guides his troops with a 
virtuous heart and supervises them with strict standards. He 
knows his troop's difficulties and appreciates their devotion. 
2. The virtuous leader: He who does not reject responsibilities. 
He is never concerned about his personal interest. To him, 
there is only the glory of death, not the shame of living. 
3. The wise leader: In good times, he is self-restrained. In 
victory, he is not self-satisfied. He is wise, yet yielding in 
expression. He is strong, yet humble in manner. 
291 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
4. The strategic leader: In planning, he is creative and original. 
In action, he is resourceful and imaginative. He is able to turn 
disadvantage into advantage and defeat into victory. 
5. The courageous leader: Place him in an ordinary situation 
and he seems unimpressive. However, the bigger the chal-
lenge, the more courageous he becomes. 
6. The great leader: When he meets a proficient individual, he 
treats him with great respect. He has the capacity to accept 
criticism and suggestions. He is tolerant, yet firm. He is 
courageous and brave, and also skilled in strategies. 
E. The Eight Character Flaws 
Among Leaders 
1. Greed. 
2. Jealousy of others' competency and proficiency. 
3. Those who are easily influenced by others' gossip and 
opinions and take delight in praise. 
4. He who focuses only on understanding others, yet knows 
nothing about himself. 
5. Indecision. 
6. He who is enslaved by the sense pleasures. 
7. Malevolence and cowardice. 
8. He who is evasive and deceitful, only paying lip service; a 
lack of sincerity. 
292 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART LEADERSHIP 
The following are additional points presented in other military 
books, which I think are important to include. 
1. He who lacks competence, yet possesses a great sense of 
self-importance. 
2. He who takes action hastily. 
3. Inertia and laziness. 
4. He who lacks courage. 
5. He who is competent, but lacks the physical well-being a n d 
strength to carry out his ideas. 
6. Cruelty. 
7. Lack of charisma. 
F. The Nine Essential Abilities of a 
Leader 
1. The ability to recognize the situation of his opponents. 
2. The ability to recognize the methods of advance and retreat. 
3. The ability to know the limitations of his resources. 
4. The ability to recognize favorable timing for actions. 
-)- The ability to utilize the natural geographic elements, and 
understand the advantages and disadvantages inherent in any 
given situation. 
293 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
6. The ability to exhibit originality in strategic planning and 
provide his enemy with total surprise. 
7. The ability to hold his plans in total secrecy. 
8. The ability to create harmony among his troops. 
9. The ability to generate common objectives among his 
troops. 
G. Yielding and Overcoming 
A good leader is strong, but not brittle. He is flexible, but not 
indecisive. He understands the principle of the fragile over-
coming the strong, of the delicate conquering the forceful. He 
knows that if one's character is genuinely weak, he will 
perish. When one's character is overly forceful, destruction is 
waiting for him. A good leader should be neither forceful nor 
fragile; this is the Tao of leadership. 
H. The Two Standards of 
Good Leadership 
1. A good leader should not be arrogant. Arrogance will lead 
him to forget his manners. Due to his lack of manners, he will 
lose the respect of his troops, who then will reject him and 
cause his army to disband. 
2. A good leader should not be miserly. This will cause him 
not to reward deserving individuals properly. When the 
soldiers have not been rewarded accordingly, they will not 
devote themselves to the cause wholeheartedly. This will 
eventually lead to the threat of national security. (In ancient 
294 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART LEADERSHIP 
China, switching allegiance from one nation to another was 
done as easily as we change jobs today.) 
I. One Who is Skilled in Defeat 
Will Not See Destruction 
This point we have addressed extensively in a previous 
chapter. 
J. A Nation Well Prepared in 
Self-defense Will Have No Worry of 
Invasion by Others 
Self-defense is essential for national survival, just as the bee 
and scorpion have been equipped by nature with poison for the 
protection of their survival. 
K. The Five Assets and Eight Liabilities 
of a Leader 
Five Assets: 
1- He possesses a majestic air and ability to motivate others. 
2- He respects his elders and is benevolent to his brothers. 
3 • He is faithful and loyal to his friends. 
4- He is tolerant towards the masses. 
295 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
5. He is diligent in the execution of his duties to accomplish 
his objectives. 
Eight Liabilities: 
1. He is unable to judge right from wrong. 
2. He does not employ proficient individuals. 
3. He does not strictly execute the laws. 
4. He does not perform charitable works for the needy. 
5. He is unable to project the future outcome. 
6. He is unable to prevent the leaking of top secret informa-
tion. 
7. He does not or is unable to recommend deserving individu-
als for appropriate promotion. 
8. He is unable to take full responsibility for his defeat. 
L. The Three Must-haves for 
a Proficient Leader 
1. Heart and stomach: The heart and stomach are the most 
essential part of our physical body. They are dear and close to 
us. A proficient leader must surround himself with wise and 
trustworthy counselors. He needs them as he needs his own 
heart and stomach. Without these people it would be as if he 
were walking in the dark of night without proper directions. 
296 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART LEADERSHIP 
2 Ears and eyes: A proficient leader must have additional 
pairs of ears and eyes who are devoted to him. Without these 
people, he would be in the dark and isolated. Knowing is 
power. 
3. Claws and teeth: The claws and teeth are essential when 
you need to scratch and to bite others. A proficient leader 
needs to have people who are specialized in executing his 
killer instincts. Sometimes it is necessary to do some biting 
and scratching in order to accomplish one's just objectives, 
and these people are also useful for his own self-defense. 
Without these people, he would be like a hungry man who has 
eaten poison: his death is certain. 
M. The Organization of the Troops 
According to Each Individual's 
Natural Abilities 
Each individual should be placed where their talents are 
utilized best. An individual who can move swiftly and 
skillfully should be assigned to a regiment carrying out a 
sneak attack, while a slow, but strong warrior might be suited 
best for a long-bow regiment. 
N. Fifteen Codes of Leadership 
1- Understand the importance of espionage. 
• Be diligent in obtaining the enemy's information. 
• Be fearless when facing superior enemy forces. 
297 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
4. Be not tempted by bribes. 
5. Display absolute fairness. 
6. Show endurance. 
7. Exhibit big-heartedness. 
8. Be trustworthy. 
9. Respect competent individuals. 
10. Do not allow personal judgement of people to be affected 
by others' criticism and gossip. 
11. Be truthful and sincere. 
12. Show benevolence to the troops. 
13. Be loyal and faithful. 
14. Understand personal limitations. 
15. "Know thyself and thy enemy." 
O. The Four Fundamental Rules of 
Leadership 
1. Be very clear that your troops know your expectations of 
them. Make sure they understand what is expected of them 
when you ask them to march, and what is expected of them 
when you ask them to retreat, and what constitutes disobeying 
an order. 
298 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART LEADERSHIP 
2 Guide them with benevolence and virtue, and they will 
adapt the concept of proper conduct. 
3. Promote competency and inspire the capable, thus motivat-
ing the troops to their peak performance. 
4. Be faithful to your standards of punishments and decora-
tions. Let your troops know that you mean what you say. 
Establish the trust that your word is golden. 
P. The Omens of Victory and Defeat 
The Omen of Victory: 
1. The proficient are exalted and the incompetent are removed. 
2. The troops enthusiastically carry out the commands. 
3. The troops are motivated and high in spirit. 
4. Punishments and decorations are carried out in strict 
manners. 
The Omen of Defeat: 
L The troops' spirits are low and they are listless in carrying 
out their daily duties. 
2- The troops feel insecure about their position. The slightest 
rumor causes great uneasiness. 
*• The leader overestimates or underestimates the enemy's 
strength. 
299 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
4. The troops are overly concerned with their physical 
comfort. 
5. The leader betrays his duty by obtaining secret profits. 
Q. The Proper Attitude of a Leader 
Towards His Troops 
In ancient times, a great leader was the one who treated his 
troops as if they were his children. When danger and difficul-
ties arose, the leader marched forward in an attempt to solve 
the problems. 
When there are rewards, the leader steps aside and lets the 
troops enjoy them. He comforts the wounded, and buries the 
dead with utmost respect. He shares his food with the hungry 
and removes his clothing to clothe the needy. He invites the 
wise ones to serve him with greatest respect and rewards the 
brave ones with decorations and awards. 
R. The Five Formulas to 
Motivate Your Troops 
1. Attract the extraordinary talents by assuring them presti-
gious titles and generous salaries. 
2. Treat your people with respect and trust their ability to 
perform. 
3. Set clear standards of expectations for their performance, 
and praise or reprimand them accordingly. 
4. Inspire your people by setting performance standards. 
300 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART LEADERSHIP 
5. Notice all the "little right things" they have done, then 
praise them. Acknowledge their outstanding performance with 
bonuses or promotions. 
Thus, your troops will work enthusiastically to reach for their 
personal best. 
301 

The wise man hears of the Tao 
and practices it diligently. 
The average man hears of the Tao 
and gives it thought now and then. 
The foolish man hears of the Tao 
and laughs aloud. 
If there were no laughter, 
the Tao would not be Tao. 
—Lao Tzu, Tao Te Ching 

14Thick 
Within, 
Black 
Within 
You Can Not Obtain What You 
Already Have 
T
he secret of how to obtain the state of Thick Face, 
Black Heart is that there is nothing to obtain 
because Thick Face, Black Heart is your natural 
state. You cannot obtain anything that you already have. You 
merely have to remove the barriers and discover that which 
you already possess. 
As a tiger need not learn how to be fierce, the ocean need 
not learn to be oceanic, and the fire burns the forest without 
asking, "How do I burn?" So, human beings need not take 
303 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
lessons on how to be natural beings. Our Maker has implanted 
the perfect intelligence inherently within the essence of all 
things. 
Through our "proper" social upbringing, we have disfigured 
the intuitive understanding of the natural law of winning that 
is within each one of us. We have distorted the natural ability 
of Thick Face, Black Heart, which was intended to support our 
spiritual and material growth. Now our task is to rediscover 
and recover what we already possess. 
The Blessing and the Curse of Free Will 
i am able to love my God 
Because He gives me freedom to deny Him. 
—Rabindraneth Tagore 
Each human being is fully embodied with free will—a total 
and complete divine intelligence imparted by our Maker to use 
as we see fit in fulfilling our highest good. Through our free 
will, topped with a healthy dose of ignorance and confusion, 
we often handle our lives like a blind man driving an automo-
bile. The only way we manage to stop is by crashing. 
The gift of free will that our Maker has bestowed upon 
each of us is the greatest blessing, as well as the greatest 
curse. 
Seven Stages of Unfolding 
The degree to which you understand the universe in which you 
live is in direct proportion to the degree of understanding you 
have of your true self. Additionally, the degree of your 
304 

THICK WITHIN, BLACK WITHIN 
accomplishments is in direct proportion to your ability to 
overcome the obstacles along the path of your life's journey. 
In order to discover your natural state of being, you must 
undo the wrongs that have been imposed upon you since your 
birth. The first step is self-reflection and self-discovery. 
Following are the seven stages of self-unfoldment in the 
state of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
1. The Desire to Do Right 
You feel the intense desire to do good, to do the right thing. 
At this stage, you also feel helpless. Your life is filled with 
conflicts within and without. In your experience, good people 
and good actions may be rewarded spiritually, but in the real 
world, they always seem to be getting the short end. You see 
the only reward for being good is good itself. Because of this 
you feel desperate, dejected and disheartened. 
At this stage, you have no tolerance for Thick Face, Black 
Heart. You think that it is only for sinister-minded people. 
2. Confusion and Negativity 
Eventually you begin to gain insight. Up to this point you 
think you have been making a noble sacrifice, when in fact 
you have not been sacrificing at all. Rather, you have been 
denying and depriving yourself, afraid to acknowledge your 
needs. 
Before you are a son, daughter, husband, wife, employee, 
executive, politician, entrepreneur, lawyer, policeman, you are 
a human who possesses natural and basic human needs. By 
ignoring your individual needs and totally catering to the 
needs of others in accordance to the role you are playing, you 
have betrayed your inner nature and sacrificed your well 
305 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
being. In fact, you have victimized yourself through self-
denial. This was done under the noble pretense of self-
sacrifice. 
You begin to feel anger and resentment, and at the same 
time you feel guilty about these despicable emotions, which 
are unfit for people of your character. 
At this stage, you are confused. You begin to re-evaluate 
all of your previous concepts of repulsion towards Thick Face, 
Black Heart. 
3. The Battle for Surrender 
You finally reach the conclusion that it is too painful to live 
your life without the liberty of self-expression and self-
nurturing. You cannot contribute to anyone if you cannot 
contribute to yourself. The pain of living under others' 
standards has become intolerable. 
By now you are persuading yourself to accept your 
"despicable" emotions. Anger and guilt fill you, and are part 
of you for the time being. You have reached the conclusion 
that life is just as painful whether you practice self-denial by 
living up to others' expectations or practice self-expression 
and feel guilty about it. At least, you feel, the latter option 
creates the opportunity for movement within you. 
4. Acceptance of Your Imperfect Perfection 
You are evolving to the point where you are less judgmental 
about your anger and resentment. You start to see yourself as 
imperfectly perfect. You experience love for your perfection 
and your imperfections. You begin to be aware that a great 
courage exists within you, the power of courage that enables 
you to acknowledge your own existence and your own needs. 
306 

THICK WITHIN, BLACK WITHIN 
Your need for self-nurturing is more important than the 
expectations others have set for you. 
You begin to break new ground and set new standards for 
yourself. At this point, all the people who know you will 
realize you are changing, certainly for the worse. They will 
think you have become totally self-centered and inconsiderate 
of others. You break all the expectations of the old and 
familiar. You are responding to the screams from within, "If 
I have one life to live, I want to live as me." 
You are in ecstacy over the possible new realms that await 
you, but also in agony over the abandonment of the old. Just 
like the moment before parachuting from an airplane, you are 
full of fear and excited anticipation. 
Yet during this transition period, it will be painful at times. 
This is the stage when Arjuna is confused and overcome with 
grief about waging battle against his beloved people. Most of 
all, he is forced to uproot his limited concept of goodness and 
embrace the expanded virtue. 
5. The New Possibilities 
Eventually, the old and unworthy will fall by the wayside. 
They will drop from your life. Like a magnet, you will draw 
new and exciting events and people because like attracts like. 
At this stage, you have begun to develop the natural power 
of Thick Face, Black Heart. This power gives you the strength 
to stand up against your automatic, habitual actions and 
thoughts and venture into the new frontier. As each event 
crosses your path, you will not react automatically according 
t0 your old ways. You will take a moment to reach within 
yourself for guidance and discover the best course of action. 
At first, this is a slow process, and often your habitual 
response gets ahead of your conscious effort. Through 
Practice, you are more aware of this inner state of Thick Face, 
307 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Black Heart. In your business and personal encounters, you 
become steadier and more centered. 
6. The Inner Harmony 
By breaking through your notion of others' standards and 
expectations, you find a new surge of inner harmony; the 
unfamiliar emotion of peace and tranquility. 
You begin to experience genuine compassion for others. 
Not because you are supposed to, or because you feel guilty 
if you don't, but rather through your own love for yourself. 
You recognize that the flame of love burning within you is 
equally present in others, even though they may not perceive 
it themselves. 
At this stage, when others slap you in the face, you no 
longer feel like a victim of your sense of morality. Y o u have 
a choice: to slap back twice, or turn the other cheek. The 
decision of how to react will be in accord with the result that 
you are looking for. Thick Face, Black Heart has become the 
constant companion of your thoughts. Through practice and 
contemplation, Thick Face, Black Heart transcends from an 
indefinite idea to an integral part of your natural state. 
7. Detachment: The Power Source of Magnetism 
The highest code of living is detachment. There is no power 
higher then the power of detachment. When one masters the 
state of detachment, he becomes the embodiment of dispassion 
and fearlessness. At this stage, nothing he possesses will 
possess him. He becomes the master of his possessions, rather 
than being possessed by them. He becomes the master of his 
universe. 
308 

THICK WITHIN, BLACK WITHIN 
Detachment is the secret key to obtaining everything you 
"want." Have you ever noticed when you stop wanting 
something, the object of your desire comes to you naturally? 
You cannot keep it away from you. This is the mystery of 
how the world works. This mysterious principle somehow 
works for material objects as well as with people. 
At this stage, you are to the world as the lotus blossom is 
to the mud pond. Though it has grown from the mud pond, it 
is yet untouched by the mud. In terms of material possessions, 
have and have not are no longer so different; they look more 
the same to you. You are in the world, but you also transcend 
the world. At this stage, your state of mind regarding material 
success is that of satisfied dissatisfaction. You will challenge 
your limitations for the pure joy of challenge, for continued 
expansion is the natural expression of your own divinity. 
Man's Three Qualities 
According to Eastern thought, human nature can be divided 
into three qualities. Everyone possesses all three in different 
degrees. However, each individual is dominated by one of the 
three that influences his character and directs his behavior the 
most. 
These three qualities are called "the three gunas" in 
Sanskrit. Although all human beings are created equal, their 
accomplishments in life are different. The reason is due to 
their natural temperament and their proficiency in self effort 
in relationship to the three gunas, tamas (inertia), rajas 
(activity), and sattva (wisdom). The source of these gunas is 
from the karmic impression (impressions left by past actions) 
^d various kinds of understanding we have acquired through 
our life. 
309 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Tamas 
The qualities of tamas include inertia, obstruction, ignorance 
and ego domination. When one is in this state, one feels 
physically sluggish, lethargic and inactive; mentally foggy; 
dull and heavy, with a tendency to procrastinate; spiritually 
unenthusiastic, unresponsive and bored. In this state, when one 
does act, the guiding force for action is dominated by solid 
ignorance. 
The thirteenth century prophet Jnaneshware described the 
state when tamas guna predominates our psyche: 
The body decays, there is little desire for work, 
and a person yawns continuously; 
as a falling stone cannot turn itself over, 
he remains unable to change in his posture. 
Even if the earth were to descend into the nether regions, 
or the sky fall down on him, it would not occur to him to 
rise. 
He would like to sleep for as long as the earth exists, 
for he has no other desire. 
This state was also described in The Philokalia, a prose 
anthology of Greek-Christian monastic texts, compiled during 
the 18th century: "Physical weakness and heaviness enter the 
soul through laziness and negligence and bring faintness of 
soul." When one is in this state, one is in a state of "living 
death." 
310 

THICK WITHIN, BLACK WITHIN 
Rajas 
Rajas represents activity and struggle, influenced by the ego. 
In this state one is actively performing his tasks. The mind is 
agitated, excited, struggling, and sometimes in pain. The spirit 
is often restless. Activities may bring momentary pleasure, yet 
the nature of this pleasure is fickle. 
Rajastic people are go-getters. They aggressively partici-
pate in the process of making money. They thrive on the 
excitement of activities. Their actions may lead to the results 
they seek; however, the pleasure of success may not last 
because the motivational source of the action is ego-centered 
and self-serving. Most of the activities in today's business 
world are centered around rajas gunas. 
Through the actions of the rajas guna, money follows and 
pleasures are purchased, but rajas do not provide inner 
satisfaction because the nature of rajas is not satisfaction, 
rather pain and struggle. When you have no satisfaction, you 
feel you need to do more in order to make more money so 
you can buy more satisfaction. The cycle goes on. You 
become enslaved by the need to act in order to sustain your 
life. The driving force of the rajas guna is the same force 
which motivates us and causes us to land in places where we 
do not belong. 
This is the reason, from the ancient to present, that true 
teachers do not teach the quick method of hyping one's 
enthusiasm as a solution to human development. They take the 
solid path of guiding us, and delve deeply into the source of 
our Divine enthusiasm. The objective of many human motiva-
tional books, tapes, and seminars is to inspire their participants 
0 be enthusiastic about their lives, and move them from a 
state of inertia into a state of activity. These tools are useful, 
but incomplete. 
311 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
A sick soul is the source of a weary mind, which leads to 
feeble performance. These motivational techniques are 
inadequate to move you to the state of sattva, the divine 
satisfaction. They may move you from the tamasic state 
(inertia) to the rajastic state (activity), but the fruit of your 
work provides no nectar. When you move from inertia to 
activity in any focused area, there will be visible improvement 
in the quality of your life. For many, it is enough to have 
moved from the state of "living death" to the state of active 
living. However, because these activities are influenced 
partially by the ignorant human ego, their success is often 
short-lived or mixed with pain and struggle. Your hard work 
and activity ultimately become the source of your misery. 
Even your work is divinely ordained; however, due to your 
lack of understanding the art of detachment while performing 
your work, your work engulfs you, and that very work will be 
the source of your betrayal. 
The example of a few great successes of our recent times 
will make it clear that action alone may bring success and 
pleasure, but the ultimate result often leaves you disillusioned 
and dissatisfied. 
President Lyndon Johnson, after he devoted his whole life 
to diligent public service as a champion for the poor and the 
needy, was "voluntarily" retired from the White House. After 
his retirement, according to his close friends, he felt so 
disheartened that he literally drank himself to death. 
President Nixon's ego-oriented actions led him to fall at 
the peak of his political career. 
Former British Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, who 
struggled all of her life and held the seat of Prime Minister 
longer then any one else in the history of Britain, was re-
moved from office by her own party in the middle of her 
elected term. 
The power of rajas is dynamic. It provides riches and glory, 
yet its fruits are fickle and not without pain and disillusion-
ment. 
312 

THICK WITHIN, BLACK WITHIN 
Sattva 
The nature of sattva is expansion, pleasure, knowledge, and 
wisdom. One acts by being in tune with the guidance of that 
inner wisdom. In public, he is energetic and purposeful. In 
private, he is humbly cautious. He questions whether his 
actions are in line with the law of Dharma. Thus, the results 
of these actions are always beneficial for the greater good, as 
well as in fulfilling his personal destiny. 
The state of sattva is pleasure dictated by actions that are 
guided by wisdom and knowledge. One acts with purpose and 
detachment. He understands that the essential reward of action 
is the joy of action itself. The material reward is frosting on 
the cake. 
Although he welcomes all the glory the world has to offer, 
he has transcended the ego-driving expectations. The possibili-
ty of failure does not crush him. He is indifferent to pain and 
struggle. The situation might be devastating, but he is not 
devastated. He graciously rides the waves of life through glory 
and disgrace. 
Shakespeare's Hamlet is considered a play of human 
tragedy. Yet I see it as a celebration of the human spirit 
triumphing over itself, victory over the struggle between man's 
lower nature and his higher nature. Hamlet goes through the 
transformation from the tamas (ignorance) to rajas (participa-
tion), then dies in the state of sattva (expansion). 
A Thick Face, Black Heart practitioner is dominated either 
by the qualities of rajas or sattva, depending upon the person's 
natural temperament. However, the state of sattva is the 
aspiration of each individual. 
313 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Mimic the Virtues of the Four Forces 
"There's nothing," 
and we think there's nothing at all; 
but listen, that echo really answers. 
—Japanese Zen Saying 
The state of sattva exists in its entirety within the manifesta-
tion of nature, and it is the ultimate state of Thick Face, Black 
Heart. By observing and meditating upon nature, we catch a 
glimpse of this state, as did the greatest Catholic saint, Francis 
of Assisi, in his most moving prayer, The Canticle of the 
Creature, in which he praises the natural working of God's 
world. 
...Praise be to Thee my Lord for Brother Wind, for air and 
clouds, clear sky and all the weathers through which Thou 
sustainest all Thy creatures. 
Praise be to Thee my Lord for Sister Water. She is useful 
and humble, precious, and pure. 
Praise be to Thee my Lord for Brother Fire, through him 
our night Thou dost enlighten, and his is fair and merry, 
boisterous, and strong. 
Praise be to Thee my Lord for our Mother Earth, who 
nourishes and sustains us all, bringing forth diverse fruits 
and many-colored flowers and herbs.... 
Nature follows the perfect law. This law manifests itself as the 
perfect discipline, perfect justice, perfect strength, perfect 
surrender, perfect detachment, perfect giving, perfect sacrifice, 
314 

THICK WITHIN, BLACK WITHIN 
perfect conquest, perfect harmony, and perfect ruthlessness. 
Nature is the embodiment of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
The law of nature is the state of sattva and the perfect 
expression of Thick Face, Black Heart. By contemplation upon 
natural forces, one obtains the state of Thick Face, Black 
Heart. 
The elements of nature are indifferent to human judge-
ments. They are non-compromising with human standards. 
They possess freedom and the courage of action. This action 
can be submissive or aggressive, ruthless or gentle, compas-
sionate or dispassionate, yet it always remains vigorous, 
active, and disciplined. It always remains true to its Dharma, 
and it is ever detached. 
Developing God-like Ego and 
God-like Humility 
Ego is considered by the Eastern philosophies to be a human's 
worst enemy. Western psychologists credit it for all the 
achievements of mankind. The Easterner wants to get rid of 
the ego; the Westerner wishes to nurture it. 
God-Like Ego 
Recently an associate of mine asked me: "You do a lot of 
speaking publicly, what do you do not to be intimidated?" 
I replied, "I was never intimidated. I don't know why, 
maybe because I have an extraordinarily arrogant spirit." 
The question of ego is not whether we should kill it or 
keep it, whether it is good or bad for us. The real problem is that we do not have the
^80 worthy of contemplation is the kind of ego that our 
creator possesses: absolute, ultimate, gigantic, and huge. Once 
315 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
this God-like ego enters your consciousness, it naturally 
destroys petty-mindedness and expands awareness. Your 
ability to obtain the state of Thick Face, Black Heart has a 
direct relationship with your ability to incorporate this God-
like ego state into your awareness. 
God-like ego is not something I can describe to you, just 
as I can't describe a piece of exotic fruit I once ate in Thai-
land. It can only be obtained through direct experience. 
Possessing a God-like ego is the result of our small human 
ego touching the Divine. 
God-like Humility 
Lately, when I have run into friends, the words "getting out of 
the way" have kept popping up in different circumstances. One 
thing these friends all have in common is the way they use 
these words in the context of getting their small ego out of the 
way so their life will work. If you can detach yourself from 
your "small ego," your pettiness, and instead understand the 
nature of your relation to The Divine then you can allow your 
life to unfold naturally. You free yourself from trivial concerns 
and find the peace you seek in the "bigger picture." 
The other side of a God-like ego is God-like humility. 
This is also an objective of a Thick Face, Black Heart 
practitioner: to be able to get petty-mindedness out of the way 
and simultaneously master ultimate humility and frailty. In 
strength, he is unconquerable; when frail, he is invincible. 
I have often thought to myself how humble God truly is-
This is particularly apparent whenever I have a late meal then 
want to sleep, or whenever I shove too much food into my 
stomach and demand that my stomach do its job. My stomach 
may feel pain and discomfort, but it never refuses to perform 
its duty to the best of its ability. If our Creator had not 
implanted His humility within our organs to serve us uncondi-
tionally, our organs certainly would have the right to go on 
316 

THICK WITHIN, BLACK WITHIN 
strike and refuse to function unless we treat them with more 
respect. 
Although the East and West may not agree on the terminol-
ogy and definition of the word "ego," they both agree on the 
importance of developing that awareness which supports our 
sense of connection to our Maker and assists us in manifesting 
a strong sense of who we are in achieving our highest good. 
At the same time, they also agree that we should uproot our 
inferior and unworthy qualities from the depths of our soul. 
The Universality of Thick Face, 
Black Heart 
Thick Face, Black Heart is the intangible weapon of one's 
inner strength, which defends, supports, and protects us in our 
business encounters and daily life. The source of this strength 
and the mental toughness of Thick Face, Black Heart lies 
within that unshakable center deep within our spirit. 
The quest for Thick Face, Black Heart is a spiritual matter. 
Once we locate the source of Thick Face, Black Heart, we 
may freely apply the concept to every aspect of our lives. 
During my studies I have seen no diversity, only unity 
among the teachings of the East and West. East and West may 
have different metaphors and symbols, but the differences are 
only in the wrapping, not in the essence. 
The works of the sixteenth century Spanish mystics such as 
St. John of the Cross and St. Teresa of Avila, as well as the 
thirteenth century mystic, St. Francis of Assisi, all speak of the 
same divine state as found in the recordings of the Hindu and 
Buddhist doctrines. The description of the seven stages of 
spiritual progress by St. Teresa of Avila, in her book Interior 
Castle, are identical in detail to the Hindu recordings of the 
spiritual journey through the seven chakras (spiritual centers 
within one's body) toward the goal of Divine Union. 
317 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
I have repeatedly demonstrated, both at practical and 
mundane levels, the universality of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
Lao Tzu, President Abraham Lincoln, Mahatma Gandhi; these 
people all speak of Thick Face, Black Heart. Although these 
people were divided by culture, time, space and nationality, 
their state of mind is one. The world manifests itself through 
infinite forms; we are all, in essence, the children of One 
Maker. 
318 

THICK WITHIN, BLACK WITHIN 
Summary Of Key Points 
• Thick is within, Black is within. We cannot obtain 
what we already have. 
• Through our "proper" social upbringing, we have 
disfigured the intuitive understanding of the natural 
law of winning which is within each one of us. We 
have distorted the natural gift of Thick Face, Black 
Heart, which was intended to support our spiritual and 
material growth. Now our task is to rediscover what 
we already possess. 
• Seven Stages of Self-unfoldment: 
1. The Desire to Do Right. The intense desire to be 
good, to do the right thing. At this stage, you have 
no tolerance for Thick Face, Black Heart. 
Confusion and Negativity. The realization that you 
have been victimizing yourself through self-denial 
and the pretence of self-sacrifice arouses anger and 
resentment within you. You are confused by the 
despicable emotions you are experiencing. 
The Battle for Surrender. By now you are trying to 
persuade yourself to accept your despicable emo-
tions. 
4. Acceptance of Your Imperfect Perfection. You 
begin to see yourself as imperfectly perfect. You 
319 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
begin to break new ground and set new standards 
for yourself. 
5. The New Possibilities. At this stage, you have 
begun to develop the natural power of Thick Face, 
Black Heart. This power gives you the strength to 
stand up to your automatic, habitual actions and 
thoughts and venture into the new frontier. 
The Inner Harmony. By breaking through your 
notion of others' standards and expectations, you 
find a new surge of inner harmony; the unfamiliar 
emotion of peace and tranquility. 
Detachment: The Power Source of Magnetism. The 
highest code of living is detachment. At this stage, 
nothing you possess, possesses you. You become 
the master of your possessions, rather than being 
possessed by them. 
Detachment is the secret key to obtain everything 
you "want." Have you ever noticed when you stop 
wanting something, the object of your desire comes 
to you naturally? 
At this stage, you are to the world as the lotus 
blossom to the mud pond. Though it has outgrown 
the mud pond, it is untouched by the mud. 
• Man's Three Qualities: 
1. Tamas: inertia, obstruction, ignorance, ego domina-
tion. When one is in this state, one feels physically 
sluggish, lethargic and inactive; mental fogginess, 
dull, heavy, with a tendency to procrastinate; 
spiritually unenthusiastic, unresponsive, bored. 1° 
320 

THICK WITHIN, BLACK WITHIN 
this state, the guiding force for action is dominated 
by ignorance. 
2. Rajas: activity, struggle, influenced by ego. In this 
state, one is actively performing his tasks. His mind 
is agitated, excited, struggling, and sometimes in 
pain. His spirit is often restless. His activities may 
bring momentary pleasure, yet the nature of this 
pleasure is fickle. 
Sattva: expansion, pleasure, knowledge, and wis-
dom. One acts by being in tune with the guidance 
of that inner wisdom. In public, he is energetic and 
purposeful. In private, he is humbly cautious. He 
questions whether his actions are in line with the 
law of Dharma. Thus, the results of his actions are 
always beneficial for the greater good, as well as in 
fulfilling the good of his own destiny. 
• Learning the Virtues of the Four Forces. Nature 
follows the perfect law. Nature is the embodiment of 
Thick Face, Black Heart. Through contemplation of 
the natural forces, one obtains the state of Thick Face, 
Black Heart. 
1. Sister Water: gentle, submissive, humble, and 
ruthless. 
2. Brother Fire: useful, strong, fierce, destructive, 
purifying. 
3. Brother Wind: formless, strong, fierce. 
4. Mother Earth: giving, sacrificing, and sustaining. 
321 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
• God-like Ego: The only kind of ego worthy of con-
templation is the kind of ego that our Creator possess-
es: absolute, ultimate, gigantic, huge. Once this God-
like ego enters your consciousness, it naturally de-
stroys petty-mindedness and expands awareness. 
• God-like Humility: When you get your "small ego" 
out of the way, your life can unfold naturally. The 
other side of a God-like ego is God-like humility. 
This is also the objective of a Thick Face, Black Heart 
practitioner: to be able to get petty-mindedness out of 
the way and simultaneously master ultimate humility 
and frailty. 
• Although the East and West may not agree with the 
terminology and definition of the word of ego, they 
both agree with the importance of developing that 
awareness which supports your sense of connection to 
your Divine Maker and assists you in manifesting a 
strong sense of who you are in achieving your highest 
good. At the same time, they also agree that we should 
uproot the inferior and unworthy qualities from the 
depths of our souls. 
• During my spiritual studies, I have seen no diversity, 
only unity among the teachings of the East and West. 
East and West may have different metaphors and 
symbols, but the differences are only in wrapping, not 
in the essence. 
322 


Most of our efforts are in vain 
while we try to satisfy the 
unquenchable thirst for life. 
—Chin-Ning Chu 

Paths to 
Thick Face, 
Black Heart 
Oh man, the jewel is in your bosom; 
why look for it everywhere else? 
—Japanese Zen poem 
The Genetic Connection 
I
n January 1991, I spent six weeks in Australia, 
enjoying a magnificent winter, sunbathing under 
Sidney's summer sun. Besides reading books and 
Watching the waves, I often fell into a natural meditative state. 
In one of these states, I had a glorious vision. I saw the 
whole universe filled with golden sparks of energy. These 
golden sparks came from every direction, rushing down with 
325 
15 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
immense force into a tiny, tube-like hole. Inside this hole was 
a mighty gravity that nothing could escape. Every golden 
spark was genetically programmed to rush into this tiny hole. 
When I came out of this state, I realized that the small hole 
was the center of my being, the Divine origin of my soul and 
the source of all strength and all joy. I understood that we 
alone, as human beings among all the creatures of the uni-
verse, were genetically coded to be drawn to this Divine force. 
When we violate this natural human state, all elements in the 
universe including ourselves, work against us. 
Everything in life—whether it be starting a business, 
making money, getting married, having children, getting 
divorced, changing jobs, finding a new girlfriend or boyfriend, 
drinking, smoking, or taking drugs—is motivated by our basic 
desire to "feel good," to experience the connection with that 
Divine source within each of us. 
Although our actions may be guided either by ignorance or 
wisdom, producing positive or negative results, our motivation 
is always noble: the constant desire to be immersed in that 
God-like, blissful state. 
Most of us use the only method that we know to be in 
touch with this inner joy; our outward activities. If falling in 
love or getting a new spouse would satisfy our craving for this 
state, then we would change our mates often. If changing jobs 
would bring that new and exciting feeling, then we would 
change jobs often. The ignorant chase after this inner bliss, as 
a dog chases after its own tail. They are always in action and 
never satisfied. 
Where is Life's Operating Manual? 
How does one go about finding this inner bliss? Some people 
hold our Maker responsible for the way we have mishandled 
our lives because they believe our Maker has forgotten to 
326 

PATHS TO THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
deliver them a copy of the operation manual. I used to feel 
this way, but now I see it differently. Our Maker did not leave 
his children without a manual; rather, we simply do not know 
where to find this manual or how to read it. 
When we discover where this manual is located and how 
to read it, then we will attain the state of Thick Face, Black 
Heart. 
This mysterious operating manual is written without paper 
or ink. It is ever within you and without you. There is no 
place or time in which this manual is not present. 
The Business Manual vs. Life's Manual 
Business is a major part of our life. One who has the requisite 
skills for life will also be skillful in business. This is because 
business is based on interaction with people—all people, even 
ourselves. Life is about relating to people, others and our-
selves. The foundation for acquiring the skill of relating to 
other people is rooted in the degree to which we are able to 
understand and relate to ourselves. 
I have spoken of the practical value in adapting the power 
of Thick Face, Black Heart when we cross paths with others 
in the world of business or casual relationships. I have 
emphasized repeatedly that the source of Thick Face, Black 
Heart is within us as the natural state of our soul. Now we are 
ready to embark upon a journey that will allow us to directly 
experience the source that supports the dynamic of Thick 
Face, Black Heart. 
327 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The Dynamic Force Behind Thick Face, 
Black Heart 
The power source of Thick Face, Black Heart is also equally 
present elsewhere in the universe. This force, towards which 
all existence rushes, is also the source that brings about the 
reality of creation. 
After the Theory of Relativity, Albert Einstein devoted 
most of his life to working on proving the Unified Field 
Theory. He was convinced there is a single force in the 
universe that binds all the diverse elements of creation 
together. Many scientists, then and now, have criticized 
Einstein's "simple" view of the universe. Einstein may not 
have been able prove his theory prior to his death, but his 
intuition about a Unified Field Theory is in harmony with all 
the oriental views of the universe. 
The Merit of Unlearning 
A Zen monk lived in sixteenth-century Japan under a bridge. 
He expressed the simplistic principle of life in a few profound 
words. "Most people try to know more to become more clever 
every day, whereas I attempt to become more simple and 
uncomplicated every day." 
The story exemplifies the burdens we place on ourselves in 
everyday life. At the moment of birth we are born naked, but 
possess a natural dynamic force—the root of Thick Face, 
Black Heart. As we grow older, we deplete this natural force 
by conforming to man-made virtues, ideals and principles. 
These artificial standards encumber and distract us, so in 
order to obtain Thick Face, Black Heart, there is not so much 
to learn as there is to unlearn. 
328 

PATHS TO THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Live the Knowledge 
We are shaped by our thoughts; 
we become what we think. 
When the mind is pure, joy follows, 
like a shadow that never leaves. 
—Buddha, the Dharmapada 
It took me over a year and half to finish writing this book. In 
the beginning, this book was a notion in my mind and a 
feeling in my heart. As I kept on clarifying this "feeling" and 
putting it on paper, I became clearer about my own state of 
mind regarding Thick Face, Black Heart. After living with the 
information every waking and sleeping moment, I experienced 
a great transformation within me. 
I am no longer the same person who started the book. My 
spirit is more centered, my mind is more focused on my 
objectives, my execution is more effective, and my emotions 
are more controlled. As I occasionally travel through the 
valley of the shadow of death in the competitive game called 
"making a living," I focus myself and recall the information in 
this book from which I find great strength. Words are not 
words, they are the embodiment of power. 
The ideas communicated in this book are genuine and 
truthful. I promise that you will arrive at a different dimension 
as you unceasingly contemplate the principle of Thick Face, 
Black Heart and let it support your every professional and 
Personal endeavor. 
329 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The Seven Centering Techniques 
Man goes to great trouble 
to acquire knowledge of the material world. 
He learns all branches of mundane science. 
He explores the earth, 
and even travels to the moon. 
Yet he never tries to find out 
what exists within himself. 
Because he is unaware of the enormous power 
which lies hidden within him, 
he looks for support in the outer world. 
—Ancient Hindu Text 
On January 6 1992, Newsweek magazine's cover story was 
about how Americans pray to God. The report revealed that 91 
percent of women pray, as do 85 percent of men. More than 
78 percent of all Americans pray at least once a week, and 
more than 57 percent pray at least once a day. Just about all 
Americans, regardless of their religious denomination, agree 
that the source of all power, knowledge, creativity and wealth 
lies within our mighty Maker. By being in touch with His 
power, we are empowered and renewed. 
Through prayer, we bring forth the spirit of the Almighty 
and He lives within us. As the Bible says, "The kingdom of 
heaven is within." God does not reside in the marble structures 
of the church or temple. He lives within the human heart. 
In order to talk to God, we need to listen for God. We need 
to learn His language; the language of silence. 
The following are techniques to center and calm ones 
mind. The aim of introducing these techniques is not a 
religious one. Calming the mind allows us to behold the power 
within, the root of Thick Face, Black Heart. When the mind 
330 

PATHS TO THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
is calm, all mysteries are revealed and God's hidden power 
within us naturally radiates forth. 
Depending upon each person's nature and beliefs, one 
method may be more suitable than another. These techniques 
are not so mysterious; they are practical and have proved 
effective for thousands of years. For example, have you ever 
wondered why a rocking chair enjoys such popularity? The 
secret is not in the chair, but in the motion of rocking. As the 
chair rocks, the human mind becomes calmer and the spirit 
feels more serene. 
The ancient Hindu scripture Vijnanabhairava describes 112 
different methods to calm the mind. One describes swinging 
one's body slowly while sitting in a vehicle, or practicing a 
self-induced swinging motion, which results in a tranquil 
mental state. 
The following techniques are useful for anyone, especially 
busy workers living a hectic life. The techniques are simple, 
yet potent. 
I. Practice the Presence of God 
Rejoice evermore, 
praying without ceasing. 
—First Thessalonians V, 16-17 
Practicing the presence of God and invoking the power of the 
Divine inspires you to identify with your Creator. To practice 
his presence, simply repeat the name of the Divine unceasing-
|y- Among all the methods of calming the mind and recharg-
ing it with vitality, this is the easiest for the present age. 
Repetition of God's name is not only practiced in Eastern 
traditions; it is also common among Western spiritual seekers, 
^t- Francis of Assisi, for example, promoted this practice 
^ong his followers. 
331 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
The mind is easily distracted; it loses its focus and becomes 
restless. If it is not directed positively, its power will be 
diffused. 
While we feed the body, we often starve our mind. By not 
providing the proper diet and discipline to the mind, it 
becomes irritated and increasingly restless. Because of our 
natural genetic coding, our mind will not cease to trouble us 
until we provide it with what it craves; to be touched by it's 
Creator. By uttering the name of the Divine continuously, you 
will touch Him and He will touch you back. 
When you initially practice this repetition, your mind might 
resist. You will be unaccustomed to the practice, but with time 
and experience you will learn to immerse your mind in the 
pool of the Divine presence. You will float in ecstasy, while 
your heart bursts with joy. Through the repetition of the 
Divine name your intellect will sharpen and your mental 
strength will toughen. 
Practicing the presence of God can be done silently while 
you are going about your worldly duties. Counting rosary 
beads also can be beneficial, since holding the rosary will act 
as a reminder to the mind to focus on the Divine. When 
Gandhi was assassinated, he was uttering the Divine name of 
"Ram, Ram." Even at the moment of sudden death by gunshot, 
Gandhi's mind was absorbed totally in the nectar of the 
Divine. 
II. The Art of Breathing 
In Sanskrit, breath is called prana, die vital force. In Chinese 
it is called chi. Breath is closely connected to the well-being 
of the mind. Watch your breath. You will discover that when 
your breathing is short and shallow, your mind is restless. 
When you breathe deeply, your mind will become calm and 
tranquil and your intellect sharp and focused. 
332 

PATHS TO THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
In the Essene Gospel of Peace, Book Two, Jesus said, "We 
worship the Holy Breath which is placed higher than all the 
other things created. For lo, the eternal and sovereign lumi-
nous space, where rule the unnumbered stars, is the air we 
breathe in and the air we breathe out. And in the moment 
betwixt the breathing in and breathing out is hidden all the 
mysteries of the Infinite Garden." 
The same thing is recorded in Vijnanabhairava (24): "The 
exhalation goes out and the inhalation goes in. By steady 
fixation of the mind at the two spaces between the breaths, 
one may experience the full nature of God." 
Today, Catholic Trappist monks commonly adopt a breath-
ing technique to center their mind and focus on God. 
The following are a few simple steps for practicing the art 
of breathing: 
1. Select a quiet, serene place in your home, preferably a 
room dedicated for prayer and meditation. If that's not 
possible, assign a corner used for this purpose only. 
2. Wear natural fabric when meditating: silk, cotton and 
wool are recommended. 
3. Wear the same set of clothes during your regular 
breathing and meditation session. 
4. Establish an altar and if you prefer worship of a specific 
form, place the image of your chosen deity there to inspire 
your devotion. 
5. Candles or fragrance can also be used to create a serene, 
mood. It is advisable to select the same fragrance each time, 
So you associate the fragrance with your meditation. 
333 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
6. Sit quietly on a wool mat on the floor, or on a chair 
covered with a wool mat, with your back erect, body relaxed 
and stomach empty or not too full, (using the same wool mat 
will help you associate it with meditation.) 
7. Close your eyes. Bring your attention to your breathing. 
8. Watch your breath naturally go in and out of your body. 
9. Listen to the sound of you breath. When your breath 
comes in, it makes the natural sound ham and as the breath 
goes out, it makes the sound sa. Humans breathe in and out 
21,600 times a day and each time the breath repeats hamsa. 
Jesus said, "The Holy Breath is placed higher than all the 
other things created." Listen to your breath silently as you 
breath in, and out, watching the space between the inhalation 
and the exhalation. 
10. With your mind, follow the breath within you and 
observe the space where inhalation meets exhalation, approxi-
mately twelve fingers distance from the nostril. Behold the 
space between the breaths, for it is the gate to the mystery of 
this universe and beyond. 
11. At first, sit for five minutes each day. As your mind 
becomes calmer, prolong the sitting time to a half hour or 
longer. 
III. Invoking the Inner Music 
At any stage of the above meditation process while the mind 
is calm and serene, you may naturally drop the effort of 
attempting to harmonize your breathing. As the mind gets 
calmer through diligent practice of sitting peacefully, one will 
hear an inner music, sounds that may ring different for each 
334 

PATHS TO THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
individual: buzzing bees, gurgling water, the whisper of a 
celestial flute, the chime of distant gongs, the blowing of a 
horn, or a mixture of all of them in a tranquil and harmonious 
arrangement. Just sink into the ecstacy of the inner music. But 
do not force it. If you don't hear anything, just sit and enjoy 
the silent void. 
Years ago, in the middle of a working day, I stopped at a 
church, just to sit. As my mind gradually calmed, I heard the 
ring of the most beautiful Zen bell. The sound of the bell 
ringing through me was as though the fresh spring rain had 
washed away all of my day's fatigue and bathed me in the 
pool of exhilaration and jubilation. 
After I left the church, I told my partner, who was sitting 
next to me in the church, how beautifully the bell rang. My 
partner told me there was no Zen bell ringing whatsoever. 
Then I realized the bell I heard was my inner music of Divine 
delight. I had heard the inner music often before, but never 
had it been so loud. 
In fact, the Zen Buddhist and Christian bells, the Tibetan 
long horn, the Hindu conch, and all other spiritual ceremonial 
instruments are an attempt to recreate the inner music that is 
heard during meditation. 
IV. Unlocking the Inner Vision 
As you practice the breathing centering technique, you might 
see divine visions in the form of shimmering white light, or 
blue lights, even stars, or galaxies. 
Be very careful. The goal of meditation is not to hear and 
see the phenomena. These are merely road signs to indicate 
that you are on the right track. The spiritual experience will 
unfold as it is right for you, depending upon your tempera-
went, so do not worry if your meditative experiences are not 
similar to those of others. Simply enjoy the presence of the 
Divine in a blissful and expanded state. 
335 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
For the meditator, the experience during meditation is 
private. One does not make it public without good reason. I 
have been sharing some of my experiences in order to assure 
you that the effort you put forth will not be wasted. 
Five years ago, I spent over six months at my mountain 
property in Mosier, Oregon. The land is nearly four thousand 
feet high and my closest neighbor is forty acres away. I spent 
a great deal of time in deep meditation. The longer I was 
alone, the more my inner and outer states merged. It came to 
the point where I could Uterally see my mind working, see it 
pulsating and sparking with energy. 
Sometimes at night I traveled to the center of the Milky 
Way. The stars were dazzlingly white, some glowing individu-
ally against black space, others clustered so that their light 
bled into one another and formed a brilliant tableaux. 
On other nights, though, the stars shifted to a red color. I 
did not know exactly how or what signaled the change. Since 
it is a fact that spiritual states are closely tied to physical 
reality, I looked for an explanation for the change of colors in 
nature. I asked around and learned that in astrophysics there 
is a phenomenon known as the red shift, which is a lengthen-
ing of the wavelength of a star as it diverges from another 
body, causing its visible light to shift from white to red. On 
those nights when the stars appeared red, I was moving ever 
inward to new, unexplored states. 
V. Contemplating the Vast, Open Space 
When you are gazing into the sky, the open desert, or the 
ocean, imagine these vast spaces as expressions of the Divine 
and then let this image dissolve in your head. As your mind 
merges with the vast open space, the reality of outer and inner 
becomes one. At that moment, you will experience the whole 
Universe bathed in the Light of the Divine. 
336 

PATHS TO THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
v 
— 
Everyone is familiar with the feelings brought about by 
gazing into the sky or the ocean; a sense of tranquility rushes 
over us. Even though you do not experience the ultimate state 
immediately, the benefit to the mind is obvious. 
The following two techniques are unconventional, but I listed 
them specifically for the benefit of the unconventional. 
VI. Courting the Blissful Oblivion 
The euphoria of sex mirrors the bliss of the Divine. What I am 
about to reveal is not a statement to encourage indulging in 
carnal pleasure. It merely points out that God's bliss is present 
everywhere and we can gain a glimpse of it during our sexual 
encounters. 
1. While locked in an embrace with a lover, one is totally 
dissolved in the feeling of oneness (unity) and one loses all 
sense of anything external or internal. Similarly, when the 
mind is dissolved in the Divine Energy, one loses all sense of 
duality and experiences the delight of unity-consciousness. At 
the time of sexual intercourse, an absorption into your partner 
is brought about by excitement, and the final rapture that 
ensues at orgasm betokens the delight of the Divine. This 
delight, in reality, is your own Divine bliss. This sexual 
absorption is only symbolic of your absorption in the Divine 
Energy. 
2. During the time of orgasm, instead of focusing on the 
joy of the orgasm, focus on the source of that orgasm. By 
tracing it back to the source, one discovers the source of all 
delight is the delight of the Divine. This delight does not come 
from an external source. The lover is only a catalyst for the 
"manifestation of the delight. 
337 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
3. Even in the absence of a lover, there is a flood of 
euphoria, simply by the intensity of the memory of sexual 
pleasure. Since sexual pleasure can be obtained by memory, 
even in the absence of a lover, it is evident that the elation is 
inherent within. 
4. On the occasion of joy arising from seeing a friend or 
relative after a long time, one should meditate on the joy itself 
and become absorbed in it. The mind will then identify with 
the source of the joy. 
VII. Soliciting Joy From the Pleasure of Eating 
When one's joy swells at the prospect of savoring a good 
meal, one should meditate on the condition of this joy itself. 
Supreme delight then will follow. 
Once a student asked his teacher, "What is the state of 
Buddha?" 
The teacher answered, "When you eat, you eat; when you 
sleep, you sleep; when you work, you work." This is a similar 
concept to one Mahatma Gandhi expressed, "No matter where 
you are, make sure you are there." Whenever your mind is 
totally absorbed in whatever activities you are performing, 
your mind will remain calm and content, and the bliss of God 
will reveal itself. 
The Two Wheels of Thick Face, 
Black Heart 
The two wheels of Thick Face, Black Heart are the knowledge 
of spiritual matters along with an awareness of the practical 
sciences of survival. 
338 

PATHS TO THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Spiritual contemplation benefits one's spiritual life as well 
as one's capacity to handle the mundane world. Such contem-
plation sharpens and polishes the mind and makes it fit to 
accomplish objectives; it improves the ability to concentrate; 
it makes one indifferent to outside judgments and influences; 
it grants the power for compassion as well as divine ven-
geance. All of these traits, combined with pragmatic worldly 
skills, are what enable one to operate efficiently in our shrewd 
and competitive world. Together these form the complete 
dimension of Thick Face, Black Heart. 
339 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Summary Of Key Points 
• Our Divine Maker did not leave his children without 
an operation manual; however, we do not know where 
to find this manual or how to read it. This mysterious 
operating manual is located within as well as without 
each one of us. 
• Everything we do in life is motivated by our basic 
desire to "feel good," to experience the connection 
with the Divine power within each one of us. Because 
our actions are guided by either ignorance or wisdom, 
the consequences produced are either positive or 
negative. Nevertheless, our motivation is a noble one: 
the desire constantly to be immersed in that blissful 
state. 
• Man goes to great trouble to acquire knowledge of the 
material world, yet he never tries to find out what 
exists within himself. Because he is unaware of the 
enormous power which lies hidden within him, he 
looks for support in the outer world. 
• Seven Centering Techniques 
1. Practice the presence of God: Invoking the power 
of the name of the Divine inspires identification 
with the Divine. Among all the methods of spiritual 
practice, this is the easiest for the busy people. 
340 

PATHS TO THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
2. Prana Yama, The Art of Breathing: Breath is 
closely connected to the well-being of the mind. 
When we master our minds, we master our world. 
a. Sit quietly on a wool mat on the floor, or on a 
chair with your back erect, body relaxed, and 
stomach empty. 
b. Close your eyes. Bring your attention to your 
breathing. 
c. Watch your breath naturally go in and out of 
your body. 
d. Listen to the sound of hamsa as you breath. 
When your breath comes in, you hear the natu-
ral sound ham and as the breath goes out, sa. 
Watching the space between the inhalation and 
the exhalation. 
With your mind, follow the breath, observe the 
space where inhalation meets exhalation, ap-
proximately twelve fingers distance from the 
nostril. Behold the space between the breaths, 
for it is the gate to the mystery of this universe 
and beyond. 
3. Invoking the Inner Music: While the mind is calm 
and serene, sit quietly and listen for the inner 
music. One may hear the sounds of buzzing bees, 
running waters, the celestial flute, the hitting of 
gongs, the blowing of a horn, or a mixture of all of 
them in a tranquil and harmonious arrangement. 
Just absorb yourself in that inner bliss. 
341 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
4. Unlocking the Inner Vision: As your mind becomes 
calm, you may see Divine visions, such as white 
light, blue light, stars, or galaxies. 
5. Contemplating the Vast Open Space: When you are 
gazing into the sky, open desert, or the ocean, 
imagine these vast spaces as expressions of the 
Divine. Then let this image dissolve in your head. 
As your mind merges with the vast open space, the 
reality of outer and inner become one. At that 
moment, you will experience the whole Universe 
bathed in the Light of the Divine. 
6. Courting the Blissful Oblivion: The bliss of sex 
mirrors the bliss of the Divine. God's bliss is 
present everywhere, and we can gain a gleam into 
the source of His divine bliss during our sexual 
encounters. 
a. At the time of sexual intercourse, an absorption 
into your partner brought about by excitement 
and the final delight that ensues at orgasm 
betokens the delight of the Divine. 
b. During the time of orgasm, instead of focusing 
on the joy of the orgasm, focus on the source of 
that orgasm. By following the source of the 
orgasm, one discovers the source of all delight: 
the delight of the Divine. 
c. Even in the absence of a lover, there is a flood 
of delight, simply by the intensity of the memo-
ry of sexual pleasure. 
d. On the occasion of great delight being obtained, 
or on the occasion of delight arising from seeing 
342 

PATHS TO THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
a friend or relative after a long time, one should 
meditate on the delight itself and become ab-
sorbed in it. One's mind will then identify with 
the source of the delight. 
7. Soliciting Joy From the Pleasure of Eating: When 
one experiences the expansion of joy, or savors the 
pleasure arising from eating or drinking, one should 
meditate on the perfect condition of this joy. Then 
there will be supreme delight. 
• The two wheels of Thick Face, Black Heart are the 
knowledge and experience of spiritual matter com-
bined with the awareness of the practical sciences of 
survival. 
343 


How a 
Piranha 
Eats the 
Shark 
A Salute to the American Entrepreneur 
A
ccording to some economists, the standard of 
living in America has not improved for the last 
three decades. In fact, it has deteriorated. The 
reasons seem mysteriously elusive to most experts. It is my 
opinion that in order to reverse this dilemma, each one of us 
needs "to turn ourselves around." In general, a transformation 
of any kind begins with a single entity. We as Americans need 
0 get back to the basic elements that originally made America 
great. 
In this book, I have repeatedly pointed out the value of 
Thick Face, Black Heart, which each one of us embodies and 
16 
345 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
our founding fathers, the early pioneers, also possessed. We 
have not lost this source of inner strength, we simply need to 
rediscover it as part of our transformation. 
Arnold Schoenberg, the great twentieth century composer, 
once stated that the problem with modern man is that he has 
no tolerance for discomfort. Schoenberg would have been 
appalled to see the extravagance of the 1980's. 
In light of the shortcomings of our present society, Thank 
God for the American entrepreneur. When others are indul-
gently extravagant, these individuals are obsessively bent on 
manifesting their visions into material reality. 
A friend of mine once said, the entrepreneur is a person 
who, in order to avoid working eight hours a day, works 
sixteen hours a day. As I see it, the solution to American 
growth is a simple one. Our system should support and 
encourage our greatest natural resource; the American entre-
preneurial spirit. These entrepreneurs fight with great strength 
and determination against all odds, risking their financial 
security and their family's well-being, while swimming in a 
vast, shark-infested ocean, yet never losing heart and sight of 
their objectives. 
Recently I received a phone call from a reader, a young 
entrepreneur who is developing a device which would dispense 
natural fragrance into buildings to enhance the quality of the 
air. He told me how much he had enjoyed my previous books 
and wondered if I had thought of writing a new book dealing 
with ways in which small entrepreneurs might effectively 
compete with the bigger and more powerful companies. I told 
him Thick Face, Black Heart would provide the necessary 
tools needed to accomplish his objectives and that I would 
also add a chapter entitled; "How a Piranha Eats the Shark, 
to provide additional practical strategies applicable to the 
world of "Big fish eats little fish." 
346 

HOW A PIRANHA EATS THE SHARK 
I. The Fox Borrows the 
Tiger's Presence 
The Fox is a very intelligent creature, who due to his lack of 
physical strength and size, is placed at a disadvantage. The fox 
receives no respect in the woods and no one really takes the 
fox seriously. In order to overcome this, one of the solutions 
for the fox is to convince a tiger to be his friend. By closely 
associating himself with a strong and respectable tiger, the fox 
can walk next to this great cat through the jungle and enjoy 
the same fearful respect accorded the tiger. Even when the 
tiger is not next to the fox, the knowledge that the fox is 
closely related to the tiger is enough to ensure this fox's 
survival in the wild. 
If a fox is unable to befriend a tiger, then the fox should 
create an illusion of close association with the tiger by 
carefully trailing behind the cat while boasting of the deep 
friendship they share. In this way he creates an impression that 
his well-being is of great concern to the tiger. 
The fox and tiger are merely metaphors and in reality can 
represent many things. The following are some possibilities. 
1. The tiger is a powerful and influential individual who 
shares your vision and is willing to aid your cause. 
2. The tiger could be a powerful individual willing to lend 
his hand for purposes of mutual benefit. In a similar vein, 
have you ever noticed that multitudes of birds ride on the 
backs of huge water buffaloes. They provide relief for the 
buffaloes by eating the ticks and mosquitoes from their backs 
while the buffaloes provide shelter and protection for the 
birds. 
347 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
3. The tiger could be an organization or association that 
shares your vision and point of view. By joining forces with 
others, you can create the necessary presence of a tiger. 
4. The tiger could be your political connection. By support-
ing the "right" candidate you can create a powerful partner. 
For this reason, the rich often generously donate large sums of 
money to have their own "pet tiger." 
5. The tiger could be your position or job title. A single 
individual is often unimpressive. However, if you are working 
for a powerful and influential employer, you are no longer just 
a powerless, single entity. 
People in government service understand this concept well. 
When you are representing a state or federal govemment 
during a visit to a foreign country, you will be treated quite 
differently than if you are travelling as a private citizen. You 
have automatically empowered yourself through your associa-
tion with the American government. A CEO from a giant 
corporation receives special treatment wherever he goes due 
to the fact that his authority extends over the resources of his 
entire company. 
Senators, congressmen and Presidents of the United States 
glow with special importance during their terms in office. 
After they are out of their respective offices, this glow 
diminishes. 
6. The tiger could be your talent or your work. If Isaac 
Stern had never played the violin, he would never have 
become the Isaac Stern we know today. Through his ability to 
master the instrument, Isaac Stern became world renowned. By 
the same token, whatever your field of expertise, your work 
can be your "tiger." 
348 

HOW A PIRANHA EATS THE SHARK 
7. By marrying the "right" person, you will have your tiger. 
This is the oldest tactic to achieve instant recognition and 
power. 
II. Before Hitting a Dog, 
First Identify the Owner 
In ancient China, a dog in the street was an unwelcome sight 
because many citizens were bitten. If you saw a suspicious 
dog looking unfriendly, you would take off your shoes or find 
a stick to hit the dog, causing it to flee. Before you did so 
however, you would ask around and discern to whom this dog 
belonged. If the dog belonged to a wealthy and powerful 
family, beating such a dog could be an unwise. If the dog 
belonged to a poor man or the dog was homeless, then you 
could freely hit the dog. This Chinese maxim is used to 
describe the way humans operate. If you don't want to be 
bitten, then associate yourself with the rich and powerful. 
The essence of this story is similar to that of the tiger and 
fox. Understanding this concept is vitally important. This is 
the reason people learn to "name drop." One time a publisher 
asked my agent who my clients were and who I knew. This 
publisher did not mean he wanted to know how many John 
Does and Joe Blows I had for clients, he was looking for 
recognizable names. 
III. Collect the Small Forces 
Expand your forces from singular to multiple. One piranha 
alone might not have any impact, however; hundreds of 
piranhas will surely overcome the shark. Mothers Against 
Drunk Drivers was created through a single mother's grass 
roots effort. One mother was able to organize all the other 
349 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
mothers who shared her view. Utilizing collective force, 
MADD was strong enough to overturn the out-dated drunk 
driving laws. 
IV. Deception is the Essential Element 
In the world of nature, deceiving a predator by employing 
camouflage is vital for survival in the animal kingdom. As I 
have mentioned before, when facing a strong opponent, why 
attempt a frontal assault, when you can utilize manipulative 
warfare. 
The following are popular Asian concepts of business: "The 
market place is a battle field...The essence of war is decep-
tion... When you are ready to attack, you must create the 
impression that you will not attack...Keep plans as dark and 
impenetrable as night...The highest form of victory is to 
conquer by strategy..." 
Japan has adopted these concepts in their economic warfare 
with the United States. Japan appeared to be "no threat" and 
pretended to be a docile pig, (as previously referred to in The 
36 Strategies), in the 60's, 70's and 80's. Now in the 90's, 
they are feasting on the "tiger"; the American government and 
taxpayers. 
Japan, along with Asia's four newly risen dragons; Taiwan, 
Hong Kong, Korea, and Singapore, all utilize these basic 
strategies. The concept of "deception" is the essential element 
when the small need to compete with the large and strong. As 
Sun Tzu said, "If one is able and strong, then one should 
disguise oneself in order to appear inept and weak." After 
attempting military supremacy in World War II and failing, 
Japan has now chosen to conquer the world economically- If 
she had made this intention clear, her victory would never 
have been possible. The secret of Asian economic success is 
worthy of America's respect and fear. Most of all, we should 
350 

HOW A PIRANHA EATS THE SHARK 
learn to adopt their winning strategies to enhance our own 
victory. 
V. Hitching a Free Ride to Success 
Once there was a hare and a crab in the woods. The hare 
challenged the crab to a race and the crab accepted. When the 
race began, the hare swiftly bolted away. As the hare took off, 
the crab jumped up and grabbed onto the hare's furry tail. The 
hare ran furiously toward the other end of the woods, not 
knowing the crab was getting a free ride. A few steps before 
the hare reached the end zone, he stopped and thought, wait 
a minute, I am running against a crab. Why am I running so 
fast. He looked back and saw that the crab was nowhere in 
sight. Suddenly the hare heard the crab shouting, "I won, I 
won." He turned around, and a few steps away, saw the crab 
standing on the finish line. 
Again, for one of the classic examples in our time of how 
a piranha eats the shark, we can examine Japan's economic 
success. Japan, like the crab, is riding on the tail of America's 
industrial research and development efforts and is beating 
America at the finish line of economic competition. Without 
detection, the Japanese have been reaping the benefits of 
America's ingenuity. In the past decade, Japan has accumulat-
ed half a trillion dollars of trade surplus from the American 
consumers. Along the way, Japan has totally wiped out the 
American consumer electronics and computer memory chip 
industries and is presently threatening to wipe out another; the 
automobile industry. 
351 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
VI. Attack the Vulnerability 
of Your Opponent 
According to Sun Tzu's Art of War, the most essential factor 
in determining victory is to know yourself and know your 
opponent. Sun Tzu did not mention that the size of the army 
is the deciding factor for victory, nor did he claim that the 
most well-equipped army will ensure victory. If either had 
been the case, America would have been the indisputable 
victor in the Vietnam War. 
It is especially important to know how to identify and 
attack the vulnerability of your superior opponent while you 
protect yourself from exposing your own weakness. Some 
popular Asian strategies were: 
1. Remove the Firewood from 
Under the Cooking Pot 
When you are facing a pot of boiling water, the force of the 
boiling water is fierce and unmanageable. Instead of dealing 
with the hot water, you should step back and discover the real 
source of the water's force; the firewood. Once the source is 
discovered, you can easily remove the firewood from under 
the cooking pot and the water will lose all its might. Remem-
ber, what may appear to be the source of one's strength can 
often also be the source of one's weakness. 
I employ this strategy when the situation becomes "unman-
ageable" and it becomes necessary to remove the "firewood. 
One time I represented an American client who was 
marketing their product in China. I was facing one strong 
352 

HOW A PIRANHA EATS THE SHARK 
competitor who had a special log burning under his boiling 
water. 
My competition's president, Mr. Jones (a fictitious name) 
was serving as international director for his respective 
industry's association. He was spending sizeable sums of 
money providing many fringe benefits to the Chinese through 
the association's international marketing budget. However, he 
never made clear to the Chinese that the money he spent 
derived from a public fund. All the Chinese officials thought 
Mr. Jones was a man of great vision to be willing to invest 
such sums of money hoping to build a solid relationship for 
the future. They believed no reasonable businessman would 
"throw his money away" as Mr. Jones did. 
As I have mentioned, strength is often vulnerability in 
disguise. This may not always be the case, but certainly it was 
true in this incident. 
During one of my visits to China, it became necessary to 
divulge the fact that the money Mr. Jones was doling out did 
not derive from his company's marketing fund. The money he 
used was supposed to promote the industry as a whole, not 
benefit any particular individual company. Mr. Jones misled 
the Chinese. Furthermore, Mr. Jones' term as the international 
director would soon end. Since this position is rotated in a 
yearly election, it would not be a wise move for the Chinese 
to favor Mr. Jones' company, especially when many American 
companies were discontent with his unorthodox handling of 
public funds. These considerations led the Chinese to believe 
it was in their best interest to keep a respectable distance from 
Mr. Jones, especially since the Chinese had already reaped the 
benefits. 
353 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
2. Display Your Forces in the East and 
Attack in the West 
When you discover that your opponents' vulnerable defense is 
at the west side of the city wall, you should openly display 
your forces at the east wall making ready for a frontal assault, 
while secretly attacking the west. 
V. Master the Art of Retreat 
If you are small and wish to take on the big, the first step you 
need to plan before you wage your challenge, is your path of 
escape. Unlike the Japanese, who believe death in combat is 
a great honor, the Chinese prefer to survive by retreating, 
thereby living to fight another day. In fact, the Chinese see 
retreat merely as another form of advance. 
VI. Effective Execution 
When you are small and face overwhelming opposition, you 
must find a way to spend half the effort to obtain twice the 
result. The following are several effective ancient Chinese 
strategies. 
1. Sails Follow the Wind 
In every success story, there are many winds to contend with. 
Before your journey, observe the wind carefully, detect its 
354 

HOW A PIRANHA EATS THE SHARK 
direction and then follow it. You will get to your destination 
twice as fast with half the effort. 
Asian marshal arts are all based on this strategy. The art of 
defense is not about force against force but rather the idea that 
you flow with the force of your opponent. When he delivers 
a punch, you should avoid his blow, causing him to fall from 
his own force. While he is off balance, you can quickly and 
effortlessly deliver your blow. In essence, you will learn to 
tune in with the situation, and learn to react instead of to act. 
In this book I have revealed many small strategies which 
I have "designed" to gain certain advantages during my 
business encounters. The truth is, however; I never really sit 
down and plot out the strategies. I merely flow with the 
situation and then react accordingly. 
2. One Arrow, Two Birds 
You only have one chance to shoot into a group of birds 
clustering in a tree top. If you miss, you will frighten all the 
birds away. Before you shoot, you need to calculate your 
angle and your aim carefully, so your one shot will yield two 
birds. 
Logan is a business psychologist who provides consultation 
to businesses involved in solving their internal personnel 
conflicts and increasing productivity. Logan was planning to 
expand his client base through the traditional avenues of direct 
mailing and advertisements in regional business publications. 
While contemplating the effort and costs of such an enterprise, 
a sudden inspiration came to him. Rather then sending out 
mailers to his targeted potential customers, he contacted the 
local television stations and presented them with his idea for 
a three minute segment on business psychology to be inserted 
into their news program. 
Eventually Logan's concept was accepted by a network 
affiliated morning news show. Now, instead of Logan having 
355 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
to chase down his clients, they have started to contact him 
Furthermore, this exposure enabled him to set himself apart 
from the rest of his competitors as a renowned authority (after 
all, he was on television!) and also saved him a sizeable sum 
of money in marketing and promotional expenditures. 
VII. Beware the Smallest 
Success in Life comes often from accumulating a stronghold 
of small victories. Failure is often caused by overlooking 
insignificant events. 
One time during a lengthy business encounter with a 
Korean company, negotiations were not going very well. 
Every time we thought we had an "understanding," everything 
would fall apart. After investigating, I discovered the source 
of the problem lay with the Korean company's translator. He 
was unwilling to admit he couldn't understand the subtleties 
of the English language for fear he would be demoted to a less 
prestigious position. Whenever he was not clear about the 
intent of the American company, he would make things up. 
This action had created a tremendous misunderstanding and it 
appeared that both companies had irreconcilable differences. 
Later, I spoke to both the boss and the translator on two 
separate occasions. I explained that the English language is 
full of subtle nuances and if a translator must ask for clarifica-
tion, it does not reflect on his competency. Both were satisfied 
and the companies reached an agreement. 
\ 
VIII. The New Leap-frog Theory 
If you have a large, perfect diamond and you take it to the 
village marketplace, you will have a tremendously hard time 
trying to convince the junk peddler to give you five dollars tor 
356 

HOW A PIRANHA EATS THE SHARK 
it. However, if you circumvent the village peddlers and the 
small town shopkeepers, and go directly to the most reputable 
diamond dealer in the nation, you would not have to waste 
your energy attempting to convince him. Your merchandise 
would speak for itself. You wouldn't even need to open your 
mouth and he might offer you five hundred thousand dollars 
for it. 
If you are a true gem, then do not waste your energy trying 
to undersell yourself to the common village peddlers. You will 
annoy the peddler and waste your time. It is much easier to 
sell valuable goods to those who recognize the value then to 
those who do not. 
In 1985, shortly after I took up residence in Portland, 
Oregon, I was appointed to assist the Oregon State govern-
ment in hosting a group delegation from China. I was not 
aware that there had been numerous contenders for this 
assignment. Whoever was chosen would quickly get to know 
these officials well through three weeks of extensive statewide 
traveling, thus leading to many lucrative business ventures. 
Many of the influential Oregon business organizations and 
individuals strongly supported their consultants and were 
resentful when I was chosen. My dramatic entrance to the 
Oregon political and business circles unknowingly created 
some strong enemies. 
I quickly grew tired of playing petty games with these self-
proclaimed enemies. Instead of continuing to battle with my 
opposition, I decided to adopt the "leap-frog theory." 
I started to write books. Due to the enthusiastically positive 
reviews of the London Financial Times, USA Today and many 
other papers and magazines, I was placed in the position of an 
undisputed authority in Asian business culture. I no longer had 
to prove myself to those annoying "small" people who 
constantly undermined my effort. 
When you are dealing with ignorant people, don't attempt 
to convince them of anything. Instead, leap to the top, gain 
endorsement from established authorities and ally yourself 
357 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
with the powerful and the wise. The "leap-frog theory" only 
works if the direction of your "leap" is towards your associa-
tion with the "tiger." 
IX. Altered Reality 
We measure our reality according to our experience. As our 
experience expands, our reality is also altered. 
When I was in Taiwan, I remember that my elementary 
school and high school were enormous and had large playing 
fields. In a recent visit, I went back to both schools. What I 
had remembered as huge grounds, were actually very small 
schoolyards. My impressive schools had suddenly shrunk. In 
reality, the schools and their playgrounds have not changed, 
but I have. My perceptions have changed; I have seen the 
world. 
In the same way, your opponents seem big, while you feel 
small within. As you grow bigger inside, suddenly, those huge, 
powerful "sharks" shrink. As a matter of fact, they were not 
really sharks at all but rather normal-sized fish who are 
making a huge disturbance in the water. 
X. From Victim to Victor 
Everyone understands the importance of not being a victim; 
how being a victim leave you powerless. For some, it doesn't 
matter how many books they read and how much they 
understand the importance of being in charge of their emo-
tions. These people just cannot help thinking that somehow 
their state of mind has a direct relationship to the fact that 
others are able to hurt them physically or emotionally. They 
can read and understand a thousand times, but the idea never 
really becomes a part of them. 
358 

HOW A PIRANHA EATS THE SHARK 
After your unceasing struggle, somehow, out of nowhere, 
mysteriously, the concept of not being a victim transforms 
from an idea to a conviction. 
Recently, I felt betrayed by a close associate and was hurt 
by the experience. I felt that my inferior state of mind had a 
direct connection to the incident and the person who caused it. 
As I lay in bed, mindlessly watching the television, my mind 
frantically attempted to seek a harmonious resolution. Al-
though I had no power to change the incident, I was hoping 
somehow I could view this dreadful experience from a 
different perspective. However, I did not know exactly what 
I was looking for. I had always understood that I shouldn't be 
a victim of my emotions and outer circumstances, but convinc-
ing your heart with your head can be difficult. Suddenly, in an 
instant, I saw that there were three separate elements; myself, 
my emotions and the incident. I had thought that these three 
elements were connected, but in reality, I am the one who 
controls how I wish to feel within. A never before experienced 
sense of freedom engulfed me. 
This transformation was not caused by any particular 
thought. My transformation was not a change of attitude, but 
rather a realization. A spark had been ignited within. Instantly, 
everything lit up within me and I didn't know how it had 
happened. Something deep inside me just switched on. I 
remembered something I had read one time in an ancient text 
which held the secret of such transformations; "struggling, 
struggling, one day, behold, the great goal." 
Immediately, I attempted to capture that "moment." What 
element had ignited that transformation? What thoughts within 
me triggered that sudden burst of light? I was unable to 
identify the cause. 
Thick Face, Black Heart practitioners strive unceasingly for 
the transformation from victim to victor. When the piranha 
experienced such a self-transformation, he brought forth his 
inherent attributes of which he was never aware. At that 
instant, he realized that all the time he thought he was small 
359 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
and insignificant, in fact, he was as mighty as the mightiest. 
This is an indescribable transformation, yet those who experi-
ence the phenomenon know it is real. 
360 

Epilogue 
T
he applications of Thick Face, Black Heart are 
infinite. The only limitation is your ability to 
translate and adapt these principles in your daily 
endeavors. 
Throughout this book, I have analyzed the different 
components of Thick Face, Black Heart. These individual and 
seemingly separate components are like the facets within a 
diamond. Without the facets, a diamond is merely a rock. It's 
important to remember that without the specific attributes of 
each component, there is no Thick Face, Black Heart. 
The wisdom of Thick Face, Black Heart is not my creation. 
I am merely a vehicle, bearing the concept to you. These 
doctrines are from the timeless wisdom of natural law. 
Who I am, the life I have lived and the knowledge that I 
have been able to absorb have all contributed to my realization 
of the wisdom of the Thick Face, Black Heart. Like most 
people, some aspects of Thick Face, Black Heart come to me 
as second nature, some are learned easily, and yet there are 
those that I have to ceaselessly struggle with to master. 
Writing this book has been difficult as well as easy. The 
difficulty was that Thick Face, Black Heart is an abstract 
concept that exists within each of us. The challenge of 
dividing this idea into chapters and paragraphs has been a 
soul-searching experience with countless false starts. 
( 
363 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Once the work was finally on course, the topics of each 
chapter seemed to appear miraculously in my life or the lives 
of my close associates. These experiences were directly 
relevant to what I wrote each day. Many times, people would 
come out of nowhere to tell me dynamic stories about 
themselves and then vanish from my life. Each time I needed 
a quote, I would effortlessly reach for just the right book and 
turn immediately to the page I wanted. Even casual conversa-
tions with friends would end up supplying me with the 
missing piece needed for a chapter. 
So I salute the Universal Will. Through His providence this 
book has been realized. As the great composer Johann 
Sebastian Bach said, "Soli Deo Gloria;" only to God, the 
glory. 
364 

Appendix: 
Thick Black 
Theory 
The Unlikely Machiavelli 
L
ee Zhong Chang was a social philosopher and 
critic. He did not set out to teach a method of 
achieving one's goals. His purpose in writing 
Thick Black Theory was to describe the symptoms of an illness 
in Chinese society. In the course of his inquiry, he described 
the methods by which men obtain and hold on to power; how 
they use their power and wealth to accumulate more power 
and wealth. He analyzed the methods they used and the 
lengths which they would go to for achieving their own ends. 
The methods he described in such detail were offered 
without apology as they were descriptions of the way people 
interacted in the real world. Lee did not initially propose these 
methods as principles to be followed in achieving one's own 
ends. He only wished to make people aware of their existence. 
Lee was intrigued about the idea of translating his work into 
other languages; however, his close associates were concerned 
367 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
that the hostile Western power in China would combine two 
radical Chinese inventions: gunpowder and Lee's Thick Black 
Theory to further victimize China. They did not want it in the 
hands of non-Chinese. 
Though he understood the principles of accumulating 
wealth and power, Lee was an inept practitioner. He was a 
poor man and a life-long failure by common standards of 
measurement. Though he wrote a treatise on how to obtain an 
appointment to an official post, and anomer on how to keep 
the post and use it to one's best advantage, he was dismissed 
from the only official position he ever held. He emphasized in 
his essays that the primary reason to strive for an important 
appointment was to be in a position to accumulate wealth 
through bribery and corruption. At the time of his dismissal he 
was so destitute that his friends had to take up a collection to 
pay his fare home. During his tenure in office, his most 
notable acts involved drastically reducing his own salary and 
then closing down his own office because he felt there was no 
real need for it. 
One of Lee's close friends characterized him as a monk 
who carried his monastery within. Though his body lived in 
the world, his heart renounced the worldly life. Lee himself, 
when chided about his inability to use the Thick Black Theory 
to improve his own life, replied that he was the explorer, the 
one who spent his time on uncharted ground. Like Moses, 
Lee's destiny was to point the way but never to live in the 
promised land. It was only natural that diose who followed 
would be able to refine and make better use of his discoveries. 
But Lee was not truly a failure, nor had he truly renounced 
the use of Thick Black Theory. He simply had a different 
agenda. Lee could not have written as he did, nor persisted in 
the face of die furor stirred up by his writing if he did not 
have Thick Face. He was convinced of the value and the truth 
in what he wrote, and he did not care if the whole world 
thought him mad. Lee thought of himself as a great teacher 
368 

APPENDIX 
like Confucius and this self-image carried him through the 
years of scorn and public condemnation unscathed. 
Lee successfully practiced a form of Thick Face, Black 
Heart that was primarily concerned with self-discovery and 
was bound up with his sense of mission. 
The Publication of Thick Black Theory 
Thick Black Theory first was intended to be published as a 
series of essays in The Chengdu Daily in 1911, but the violent 
reaction to the publication of the first installment caused his 
publisher to cancel the series. It was instead published in a 
single slim volume by friends of Lee in Beijing. It went 
through several printings before being banned by the govern-
ment. 
It was banned because too many people were made 
uncomfortable by the truth in Lee's observations. They were 
not used to seeing the ruthlessness and hypocrisy underlying 
many Chinese institutions laid bare. They felt that by merely 
mentioning these things, Lee was at best muckraking; at worst, 
they felt he was advocating the immorality he depicted. 
It did not help that Lee was an outspoken critic of the new 
revolutionary government, The Republic of China. Although 
Lee had been an early follower of Dr. Sun Yat-Sen, the 
guiding force of the revolutionary struggle in China, he 
quickly became disillusioned with the new government. He 
maintained that the only difference between the barbaric ways 
of the Ching Empire and the enlightened government of the 
Republic was the use of euphemisms to excuse the excesses 
of power. He explained that in the old days when you ran 
afoul of a powerful official, he would simply send his thugs 
to beat you and drag you off to prison. In the new Republic of 
China, if you ran afoul of a powerful official, he would first 
369 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
accuse you of disturbing the social order, then he would send 
his thugs to beat you and drag you off to prison. 
As a consequence of having been banned for so long, Thick 
Black Theory is largely unknown to the current generation of 
Chinese. In Taiwan, it was banned during the 38 years of 
martial law from 1949 to 1987 and has not been widely read 
there even since the lifting of martial law. In Hong Kong, 
however, it has been continuously available and is somewhat 
more generally known. Despite the fact that most contempo-
rary Chinese are not aware of Lee's work, the phraseology of 
"Thick Black Theory" has become part of the Chinese 
language. The Chinese use Thick Black Theory when referring 
to ruthless behavior without attributing the source of this 
information to Lee Zhong Chang. 
The Eyes of Lee Zhong Chang 
The writings of Lee Zhong Chang are obscure. His examples 
are drawn from the world of provincial China at the turn of 
the last century. In many ways they are not relevant or even 
completely understandable to the modern western reader. 
Placed in the body of this work, they would have served no 
purpose. Still Lee's observations are touched by genius, even 
if it is a genius that is difficult to convey across the twin 
barriers of language and culture. 
In this appendix, I will attempt to give the interested reader 
the flavor of Lee's thought by discussing a few of his writ-
ings. 
Six Ways to Obtain an Official Position 
In Chinese society, holding a position in the government 
bureaucracy is the only prestigious occupation. A high-ranking 
370 

APPENDIX 
government bureaucrat is at the top of the social and economic 
order. Consequently, almost everyone is constantly trying to 
obtain an appointment to some official position. Lee discusses 
the six steps involved in getting appointed to an official 
government position as an example of the practical application 
of Thick Black Theory. His discussion is set in the context of 
Imperial China, but human nature has not changed since then, 
and the same principles apply today. 
1. Emptiness 
The first requirement is to empty your mind of everything that 
does not pertain to your appointment to the position you seek. 
You must have no other goals, no other thoughts. You must 
concentrate on the desired appointment and meditate on it 
daily. 
Your time must also be empty. You must have the ability 
to wait however long it takes. You must see yourself in the 
post you desire and nowhere else. You are not going to take 
another job. If the appointment does not come today, you will 
wait until tomorrow. If you don't get the position this year, 
you will wait until next year. 
2. Boring In 
You must seize every little opportunity to advance your 
prospects. When you find such an opportunity you must try to 
enlarge it. If there are no opportunities, you must focus your 
thoughts on creating an opportunity. The image Lee uses is of 
some hard object pushing, probing and boring away relentless-
ly. 
371 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
3. Self-praise 
You must constantly seek to bring your qualifications and 
importance to the attention of those who are in a position to 
help you. 
4. Flattery 
You must ingratiate yourself to those who can help you. 
Flatter them to their faces. Praise them to others who will 
carry your words back to them. 
5. Threats 
You must be very subtle with your threats, because you may 
unknowingly threaten people with a great ability to do you 
harm. The threats should develop naturally out of your self-
praise. 
Let your listener draw the conclusion that if you are so 
talented, it would be unfortunate if you were to end up in a 
rival ministry or even be appointed to a position of authority 
over him. If you are so well-connected to important people, 
you might have the ability to make trouble for him if you are 
not accommodated. 
6. Bribery 
There are two kinds of bribery. The first involves small gifts, 
meals, drinks. Often these small gifts create a sense of 
372 

APPENDIX 
obligation far exceeding their cost. They should be given not 
only to the man who has the power to appoint you, but also to 
his relatives and friends. 
Large bribes are used to seal the appointment. They should 
also be given to those who have great influence with the 
official who has the power to appoint you. 
Six Ways to Keep an Official Position 
If your objective is to be a government official, then you need 
to act virtuously (according to the standards of your time). 
You should smear yourself with a layer of false benevolence 
and pretend to be a religious, moral man. You should walk 
around with a pious book under your arm that exhibits your 
lily-white inner state—a book such as The Thin White Theory. 
Lee also discusses the six ways to keep your position and 
to profit from it. 
1. Emptiness 
You should say and do nothing. Talk about everything, but say 
nothing. Make an appearance of being very active, but do 
nothing. You should never take a definite position because it 
might turn out to be wrong or might offend some powerful 
person. Never do anything for which you could be held 
accountable. Hold yourself apart from action, but in a position 
where you can claim credit for anything that might go well 
and disown responsibility for anything that might go wrong. 
373 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
2. Be Obsequious 
You must bow and scrape before your superiors. The word 
that Lee uses means to be loose-jointed, a reference to all the 
bending, bowing and nodding you must do. You must seek 
every opportunity to ingratiate yourself, not only to your 
superiors but to their relatives and friends. Lee notes especial-
ly that if your boss has a mistress, or "second wife," you must 
take great care that she likes you because she will have the 
greatest influence over your boss. 
3. Be Imperious 
You must cultivate a haughty and disdainful attitude toward 
your inferiors. You must seem unapproachable. This attitude 
is also manifested in two ways. The first is the outer appear-
ance. You must carry yourself with self-importance, dis-
couraging anyone from offending you. The second is to show 
off your learning in your speech and writing. 
4. Be Ruthless 
You must be ruthless in pursuing your objectives. But, in 
order to make others more vulnerable to your will, you must 
maintain a virtuous image. The words of Confucius must 
always be on your lips. You must join organizations that have 
virtuous purposes so that people will not believe you capable 
of ruthless actions. 
374 

APPENDIX 
5. Be Deaf and Blind 
You must not hear criticism. You must not see the disapprov-
ing looks of others. Reproaches should pass by you like "the 
Spring wind blowing across a mule's ear." The mule does not 
care about the Spring wind. He is a stubborn, self-centered 
creature who is concerned only with his own interests. 
6. Harvest 
The dragon undertakes a journey of a thousand miles only 
to make his nest right here. 
—Chinese Proverb 
Now you have come to the last step. Everything that has gone 
before has been just to help you attain a worthy position. The 
purpose of getting your post in the first place was to put you 
into a situation where others would pay for your favors, just 
as you previously paid for the favors of others. You did not 
expend all this effort simply to acquire a job; you did it to 
enable you to sell your influence. 
In discussing Emptiness, the first step toward keeping your 
post, Lee briefly touched on the importance of avoiding 
accountability for your actions and making your actions seem 
much more important than they really were. Lee later elaborat-
ed on this and illustrated his point with two stories. The first 
concerned avoiding responsibility for your actions, the second 
was about making your actions seem more impressive than 
they actually are. 
375 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Two Methods of 
Taking Care of Business 
Sawing Off the Arrow 
Chinese medicine is divided into two domains; Outer Practice 
and Inner Practice. They roughly correspond to the divisions 
between surgery and internal medicine in the West. 
A man who had been hit by an arrow was brought to a 
doctor of Outer Practice. The doctor sawed off the arrow's 
shaft but did not remove the arrowhead. Nevertheless, he told 
the patient that he was done. The startled patient asked the 
doctor, "Why don't you remove the arrowhead inside my 
body?" The doctor replied, "Because that is a job for a doctor 
of Inner Practice." 
Many people defer accountability by sawing off the arrow. 
They do as little as possible and always try to leave someone 
else to finish the job. They do not care if something goes 
wrong, so long as the blame can be laid on whoever gave the 
final approval or finished the job. 
Patching U p the W o k 
When a housewife discovered that her wok had developed a 
crack, she summoned a repairman. The repairman asked the 
woman to go build a fire so that he could burn off the soot 
and examine the wok more closely. After she had left the 
room, the repairman took his hammer and tapped the wok 
lightly until the crack had enlarged almost to the point where 
376 

APPENDIX 
it could not be repaired. When the soot had been burned off, 
the woman said,"The crack is much worse than I thought." 
The repairman agreed, "It will be a difficult job. You're lucky 
that I am such an excellent craftsman." 
"You are right," she said. "It probably would be impossible 
to repair if it got any worse." 
Oftentimes it is necessary to make the situation a little 
worse than it actually is in order to insure the proper level of 
appreciation for your efforts. But you must be very careful not 
to make the problem so bad that you can't remedy it. 
Hitting the wok is an art. If it is hit too softly, the crack 
will not increase. It is hit too hard, the crack will become too 
large for repair. It the wok is made of clay, the whole thing 
might break into pieces. 
Two Types of Foreign Policy: 
The Thug and the Prostitute 
Lee discussed the two guises under which nations conduct 
their foreign policy: the mug and the prostitute. The prostitute 
has a thick face. The thug has a black heart. 
In the Orient, when a man is with a prostitute, she flatters 
him. She tells him how handsome he is; what a great lover he 
is. She swears before the moon and the stars that her love for 
him will endure to eternity. Of course she does not mean any 
of it. 
By example, Lee said that Japanese foreign policy prior to 
World War II was based on the principles of Thick Face, 
Black Heart. Japanese diplomats took on the role of the 
prostitute in their negotiations with other countries. They 
flattered the leaders. They extolled the friendship that existed 
between them. They rhapsodized about how powerful a force 
the two nations could be as allies. They did not necessarily 
mean what they said any more than the prostitute does. 
377 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Whenever it became expedient for them to do so, they would 
break their treaties and make the same promises to another 
country. 
The thug is a brute without a conscience who will use 
whatever weapons are available to him in order to beat his 
victims into submission. The Japanese Imperial Army behaved 
as a common thug, beating and robbing its neighbors after 
their suspicions were disarmed by the sweet lies of the 
prostitute. 
Lee Zhong Chang died in 1943 with the Japanese army still 
in control of much of his homeland. Lee's theory of foreign 
policy still rings true today. 
A more recent example is George Bush's Japan visit in 
January of 1992. In the Japanese's eyes George Bush and his 
team are behaving like thugs in demanding that Japan open its 
market. In reality, the Japanese are practicing prostitute foreign 
policy with the Americans as a counter strategy. Meanwhile, 
the Japanese government keeps on reassuring the bond of 
friendship between the U.S. and Japan, even stating that Japan 
is indebted to the U.S. because of their generous aid after the 
World War II. However, the words "friendship" and "compas-
sion" expressed by the Japanese bear a strong resemblance to 
the prostitute's oath of eternal love to their paying clients. 
In a less dramatic, subtle manner, all nations utilize a 
combination of strategies—both as a prostitute and a thug— 
during their sophisticated international negotiations. 
378 

APPENDIX 
Wife Fearing 
A husband's fear of his wife is as natural as the 
heavens and the earth. It is the Universal Truth. 
— L e e Zhong Chang 
In Korea, Japan and many Asian countries, it is the woman's 
fate to be subservient to her husband. Among the Chinese 
peasants it is also true that a woman is treated as an inferior 
being, but among the educated classes in China it has always 
been understood that men of real worth respect and fear their 
wives. It is also true that the higher you go in the social order, 
the more prevalent is this attitude. 
Lee maintains that this no accident. He says that a man 
rises in the world exactly to the same degree that he fears his 
wife. The peasant treats his wife like a dog or a horse. As a 
consequence he is little more than a beast himself. A man who 
fears his wife will conduct his life properly in order to please 
her. By conducting his life properly, he will rise in the world. 
To such a man, his wife becomes a source of strength and a 
refuge to him from the misfortunes of the world. 
Lee attaches an almost mystical significance to wife 
fearing. A man's wife is the person to whom he entrusts his 
whole life. Out of love for her and fear of her, he goes out 
into the world to make a name for himself. Lee maintains that 
fear of one's wife is the greatest virtue. He believed that if 
everyone were afraid of his wife, a truly beneficent social 
order would once more come about and the virtue of the 
Chinese nation would be restored. 
379 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
Chin-Ning's Note 
Lee was a man with unique insight into human nature. He 
possessed the ability to totally disregard others' criticism, and 
therefore was able to proclaim Thick Black Theory a religion 
and himself as the pope of this religion. 
As the founder of a new religion, he claimed he was equal 
to the Catholic Pope in Rome. This assertion alone brought 
strong opposition, especially in religious circles, from many 
Chinese at the turn of the twentieth century. I am not quite 
sure how serious Lee was about his Popeship. However he 
was deadly serious about his Thick Black Theory. Against all 
odds, he dedicated his life in promoting this theory. I salute 
Lee for his courage and willingness to march to the beat of a 
different drum in a time and a place when nothing was valued 
higher than conformity. 
380 

THICK FACE, BLACK HEART 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Gandhi: Mohan-Mala, Navajivan Publishing House. 
Muktananda: I Am That, South Fallsburg, N.Y., SYDA 
Foundation. 
Muktananda: Reflections of the Self, SYDA Foundation. 
Jnaneshvari: Bhagavad-Gita, translated by V.G. Pradhan, 
edited by H. M. Lambert. 
The Bhagavad-Gita, Volume I and Volume II, D. R. Bhagi for 
Blackie & Son Publishers Pvd. Ltd. 
Radhakrishnan: The Bhagavadgita, Arun Bhagi for Blackie & 
Son Publishers Pvd. Ltd. 
Singh: Vijnanabhairava, Motilal Banarsidass. 
Tagore: Fireflies, Collier Books, Macmillan Publishing 
Company. 
T. Boone Pickens Jr., Boone, Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, 
1987. 

