Ijaaz Jackaria 
A Critique of Stephen Gould’s Non-Overlapping 
Magisteria 
In the article entitled Non-overlapping magisteria (hereafter NOM1) , Gould argues that 
there is no conflict between science and religion, more specifically that evolution and 
creationism are compatible with each other. He explains that since 1) science is only 
concerned about the empirical universe and that 2) religion focuses on values and 
morality, it follows that 3) their respective domains do not overlap and therefore there is 
no conflict between the two. In this paper, I begin by unpacking GouldȂs non-overlapping 
magisteria argument and then proceed to criticize it. In particular, I think that the domain 
of religion and that of science do overlap sometimes, depending on which religious creed 
one is referring to. It is worth noting that Gould is a Jewish agnostic – as he himself 
proclaims – and an evolutionist, that the debate between evolution and creationism has 
distinctively Christian overtones and that I am writing this paper as a Muslim agnostic 
who is influenced by Islamic gnosticism and is sympathetic to evolution. This means that 
each key terms – even the most basic – like ȁreligionȂ will carefully be defined or put into 
a confined context so as to minimize the confusion that the different connotations of the 
                                                 
1 I am using NOM to mean Non-overlapping magisteria as GouldȂs article; not to confuse with NOMA, the 
abbreviation that Gould uses, which means Non-overlapping magisteria as a concept. 

term might cause. I will use throughout this paper the term ȁreligionȂ in the broadest 
sense to mean the monotheistic Abrahamic religions. 
 
To begin, let me elaborate on GouldȂs non-overlapping magisteria. First, a 
magisterium is the Latin term to mean ȁa domain of teaching authorityȂ. For example, the 
PopeȂs magisterium is what pertains to the Catholic beliefs and GouldȂs magisterium, 
insofar as he is an evolutionist, is about the field of evolutionary biology. About the non-
overlapping relation between science and religion, Gould writes, ȃThe lack of conflict 
between science and religion arises from a lack of overlap between their respective 
domains of professional expertise – science in the empirical constitution of the universe, 
and religion in the search for proper ethical values and the spiritual meaning of our lives.Ȅ 
(NOM, pp. 2). He gives the example that the soul falls exclusively into the magisterium 
of religion and not into that of science since the latter cannot prove or disprove its 
existence. 
 
To defend his position against the populist debate of creationism versus evolution, 
Gould argues that creationism as an ideology stems from Protestant fundamentalistsȂ 
discourses in America and is an intrinsic part of its sociocultural history; his point is that 
creationism is not from the Catholic faith per se. These fundamentalist Protestants take 
the Bible to be literally true and thus believe that all organisms were created during six 
days of twenty-four hours and that the earth is merely a couple thousand years old; these 
literal interpretations eventually lead them to oppose the theory of evolution which 

claims that the earth has been here for millions of years and that species appear 
throughout its history and are still evolving into new ones. As far as Catholics are 
concerned, Gould implies that they simply understand these Biblical passages 
metaphorically and should be concerned with the ethical values only and not the 
scientific accuracy thereof. He goes on to quote Pope Pius XII and Pope John Paul II to 
support his point that science and religion actually do not conflict since they each has 
distinct non-overlapping magisterium. For example, Gould mentions that Pope Pius XII, 
in his Humani Generis, allowed ȃCatholics to entertain the evolution of the human body 
so long as they accept the divine creation and infusion of the soul.Ȅ (NOM, pp. 4). 
Having explained GouldȂs argument, I now proceed to evaluate whether it is 
sound or not. I agree with his first premise that science is concerned with the empirical 
universe only and that its magisterium does not include spiritual and ethical concerns. 
Science does not tell us what is good or bad but it merely explains our physical universe. 
Concerning the second premise which is that religion is simply about values and 
morality, I would disagree with that. This is where I think we need to explicitly state what 
ȁreligionȂ we are talking about or even what specific religious creeds this includes. Gould 
claims he is speaking for ȃmajor western religionsȄ (NOM, pp. 2). This denomination in 
itself is quite confusing since all three Abrahamic religions originate in the Middle East 
and what is properly western is ambiguous. It is certainly not true that ȁreligionȂ here 
means the monotheistic Abrahamic religions. For example, Muslims would certainly not 

agree that Islam is simply about morals and ethics; they take the Quran to be the word of 
God and that it encompasses all magisteria including that of science. If we take ȁreligionȂ 
to include Christianity only, then premise two still does not hold. I assume that those 
fundamentalist Protestants consider themselves Christians and since they disagree with 
premise two the term ȁreligionȂ that Gould is using cannot mean Christianity broadly. 
What ȁreligionȂ is Gould talking about then in premise two? From the way he 
presents his arguments, I take it he is implying that it is Catholicism only which falls 
under premise two and he is then generalizing the whole thing to ȁreligionȂ which is 
obviously a lame move. I think he is also making normative claims about Christianity 
generally and is not very accurate about what Christians actually believe. For example, I 
got the impression that he is considering the fundamentalist Protestants as non-
Christians and is making normative claims about them, i.e. that they should not interpret 
the Bible literally. Arguing over who is Christian or not falls beyond the scope of 
philosophy but what we can firmly ascertain is that premise two as it is – ȁreligion is about 
values and moralityȂ – is obviously false. 
“nother flaw in GouldȂs argument is about his use of Pope John Paul IIȂs claim 
that Catholics ought to believe that the theory of evolution is true based on the evidence 
over the past fifty years. Being super pedantic about the philosophy of science, I would 
argue, drawing from PopperȂs falcificationism, that even science cannot make such a 
truth statement. The argument is that science cannot claim anything to be true but can 

merely hypothesize about it and disprove it. In the case of the theory of evolution, 
however much evidence tally with the theory, they do not prove it to be true. It could be 
that tomorrow somebody discovers a fossil that refutes the whole theory and that will 
lead to a scientific revolution and a paradigm shift to use KuhnȂs terminologies, i.e. 
evolutionary biologists will have to develop a new model to include that particular fossil 
and explain all previous discoveries in the field of evolution. Coming back to GouldȂs 
argument, the fact that the PopeȂs statement, ȁthe theory of evolution is trueȂ is actually 
indeterminate undermines GouldȂs claim of a non-overlapping magisteria. To adopt a 
radical standpoint, it could be, at least in theory, that the theory of evolution is proven 
false in the future and maybe the Bible was literally right all along. Therefore, it is not 
necessarily true that religion should be confined to values and morals while science 
claims dominion over the entire physical world. 
To conclude this paper, we can without doubt claim that GouldȂs non-overlapping 
magisteria argument is flawed. His second premise that religion is merely about values 
and morals is simply not true if we consider the case of Islam and fundamentalist 
Protestantism. Gould is making an overly bold statement that he does not end up proving 
when he claims that science and religion do not conflict since their domains do not 
overlap. What he actually argued for is that Catholicism, as professed by Pope Pius XII 
in his Humani Generis and Pope John Paul II in his Truth Cannot Contradict Truth, is 
consistent with the theory of evolution provided Catholics acknowledge divine creation 

and the infusion of the soul. Only under these very narrow sets of conditions does the 
non-overlapping magisteria argument holds. 

