Customer Service Combining Human Operators and Virtual Agents: A Call for
Multidisciplinary AI Research
Sarit Kraus, Yaniv Oshrat, Yonatan Aumann, Tal Hollander, Oleg Maksimov, Anita Ostroumov,
Natali Shechtman
Department of Computer Science, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel
(sarit@cs.biu.ac.il)
Abstract
The use of virtual agents (bots) has become essential for pro-
viding online assistance to customers. However, even though
a lot of effort has been dedicated to the research, devel-
opment, and deployment of such virtual agents, customers
are frequently frustrated with the interaction with the virtual
agent and require a human instead. We suggest that a holis-
tic approach, combining virtual agents and human operators
working together, is the path to providing satisfactory service.
However, implementing such a holistic customer service sys-
tem will not, and cannot, be achieved using any single AI
technology or branch. Rather, such a system will inevitably
require the integration of multiple and diverse AI technolo-
gies, including natural language processing, multi-agent sys-
tems, machine learning, reinforcement learning, and behav-
ioral cloning; in addition to integration with other disciplines
such as psychology, business, sociology, economics, opera-
tion research, informatics, computer-human interaction, and
more. As such, we believe this customer service application
offers a rich domain for experimentation and application of
multidisciplinary AI. In this paper, we introduce the holis-
tic customer service application and discuss the key AI tech-
nologies and disciplines required for a successful AI solution
for this setting. For each of these AI technologies, we outline
the key scientific questions and research avenues stemming
from this setting. We demonstrate that integrating technolo-
gies from different fields can lead to a cost-effective success-
ful customer service center. The challenge is that there is a
need for several communities, each with its own language and
modeling techniques, different problem-solving methods, and
different evaluation methodologies, all of which need to work
together. Real cooperation will require the formation of joint
methodologies and techniques that could improve the service
to customers, but, more importantly, open new directions in
cooperation of diverse communities toward solving joint dif-
ficult tasks.
Introduction
Virtual agents (bots) are increasingly used for providing on-
line assistance to customers, even for complex or moderately
complex tasks. However, even though a lot of effort is ded-
icated to the research (Luo et al. 2022), development, and
deployment of these virtual agents, customers are frequently
frustrated when the virtual agent is not capable of providing
Copyright © 2023, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
an appropriate service (Ashfaq et al. 2020) and would like to
interact with humans (Panko 2019; Press 2019). It reached
the point where some organizations advertise their services
by announcing that their customers will be able to interact
with humans rather than virtual agents. A hybrid customer-
service system where virtual agents work along with human
operators could address this difficulty.
The second difficulty is the cost and domain knowledge
required when initially deploying the agent and the constant
need for its update (BluePrint 2020; Carr 2020). Without
constant updates of the virtual agents, they become non-
relevant. A hybrid customer-service system provides many
opportunities for addressing this second difficulty as well.
We propose a holistic approach of virtual agents and hu-
man operators working together to provide satisfactory ser-
vice. The goal is that the virtual agents will incrementally
learn from human operators and be able to handle the ma-
jority of the requests quickly and efficiently, while the hu-
man operators are employed for those requests that cannot
be attended to in this way, and for cases where clients specif-
ically seek human assistance. Implementing this configura-
tion can provide a speedy, inexpensive service, attending to
more clients with fewer human operators, and providing sat-
isfactory service without the extensive need for explicit do-
main knowledge acquisition and integration.
The development of such a holistic approach yields many
challenges, partially and separately addressed in different
communities within Artificial Intelligence, as well as other
domains of Computer Science, Operations Research and the
Social Sciences. However, solving each of these challenges
separately will not lead to the desired goal. Rather, true in-
tegration of methods from the different fields is needed. We
will elaborate on this need throughout the paper and espe-
cially in Section .
HoCuS: A Meeting of Disciplines.
There are four entities
that participate in such a Holistic Customer Service system
(HOCUS): the customer, the virtual agent, the human op-
erator, and the management of the entire operation of the
customer service center.
The virtual agent consists of several modules, most com-
monly built using NLP and ML/DL techniques but also
using knowledge sciences techniques, social sciences, and
Computer-Human Interactions (CHI) methodologies.

The customer interaction with the virtual agents and
the human operators is studied using technologies of CHI,
knowledge sciences including data mining, ML, GUI/UI, so-
cial sciences and Operation Research methodologies. The
performance of the human operators and their interaction
with the customers have been studied in CHI, GUI/UI,
knowledge sciences, ML and OR communities. Supporting
human operators in their pressing situations has been studied
in MAS. Finally, customer service center management has
been studied extensively in Operations Research, theoretical
CS, and MAS. Problems such as handoffs between virtual
agents and human operators, evaluation of the operators and
the overall system have been studied in social sciences, CHI
and ML.
Paper Outline.
In this paper, we first discuss relevant
work that was done in each of the respective research fields,
and outline the key scientific questions and research avenues
we identify as stemming from the HOCUS setting. Unfortu-
nately, it is not possible to review here all the relevant ap-
proaches and related works. Indeed, the associated virtual
agents’ literature alone is already too large to fully review
(see, for example, the (Allouch, Azaria, and Azoulay 2021)
survey on conversational agents, consisting of 48 pages and
citing 252 references). Therefore, the discussion will be fo-
cused on a setting of a service center that provides help to
clients who are engaged in performing a complex activity
that consists of a list of tasks. The tasks are sequential and
may depend on each other, i.e., to be able to perform a cer-
tain task, there may be a need to perform a previous task(s)
successfully. In this context, we will refer to a relatively sim-
ple hybrid customer-service system where a Q&A virtual
agent collaborates with human operators.
After demonstrating the interdisciplinary nature of the
HOCUS setting, we present a methodology to develop such
a system, focusing on the development of the virtual agent
in a manner that requires little domain expertise and adopts
techniques from various research disciplines. We show that
such an agent, though relatively easy to develop, can signif-
icantly improve the service (measured by both customers’
waiting times and the number of human operators required
to operate the service) while maintaining customer satisfac-
tion.
We conclude the paper by discussing the challenges of
adopting such a multidisciplinary approach. Currently, dif-
ferent research communities often use different terminolo-
gies for the same or similar concepts, methods, techniques,
and evaluation methodologies. Our experience and those of
others indicate that overcoming these differences will not be
easy. However, we believe that the customer service applica-
tion is a fitting platform and goal for mobilizing collabora-
tion: It is an important application, cooperation is necessary,
and success criteria are easy to agree upon.
Multi-discipline Relevant Research for
HOCUS
In this section, we will review the four entities that partic-
ipate in HOCUS, the main issues regarding each entity in
the context of the HOCUS design, and the scientific do-
mains in which they are dealt with. We also detail the main
research questions that should be considered when imple-
menting such a system. As mentioned in the introduction,
the review and discussion of this paper are mostly focused
on HOCUS for Q&A virtual agent collaborations with hu-
man operators to support clients who are engaged in per-
forming a complex activity that consists of a list of tasks.
In this context, we wish to demonstrate the wide range of
academic and commercial domains related to HOCUS and
conversational agents. Therefore, after each citation and re-
search question, we denote in brackets the domain in which
this item is investigated. The domains are:
(NLP) – natural language processing,
(MAS) – multi-agent systems and intelligent systems,
(CHI) – computer-human interaction,
(ML/DL) – machine learning / deep learning,
(RL/BC) – reinforcement learning / behavioral cloning,
(UI/GUI) – user interface / graphic user interface,
(OR) – operation research,
(social science) – psychology/marketing / sociology/eco-
nomics / business, and
(knowledge science) / (informatics) / (data mining).
We also present (review) papers and (commercial) websites
that shed light on relevant issues. We focus on the meth-
ods and components of the Q&A virtual agent collaborations
with human operators to support clients, but we also mention
other methods and components in the domain of conversa-
tional agents in order to demonstrate the multidisciplinary
effort that is being made and should be made to encircle the
many aspects of the domain.
Virtual Agent
The goals of the virtual agent in HOCUS are to attend to
customers and to be able to answer most of their questions
satisfactorily. It also has to sense the customers’ content
regarding its answers and identify when its performance is
unsatisfactory, hence the conversation should be transferred
to a human operator. The handoff process, transferring
the control from the virtual agent to a human operator, is
discussed in Section .
In order to provide an answer, the agent first needs to un-
derstand the client’s question. A major issue is acquiring
a sufficient number of examples to train the virtual agent.
Several works discuss domain adaptation and transfer learn-
ing (Li 2012) (review) – taking a framework or a model
that was built upon a specific domain and implementing it
in another domain. One such example is a domain adapta-
tion framework based on curriculum learning and domain-
discriminative data selection (Ma et al. 2019) (NLP). Other
works were stimulated by the COVID-19 pandemic to cope
with the lack of COVID-19-related data sets when there was
a great need to provide information to the crowd. One such
case is in (Sun and Sedoc 2020) (NLP).
Another approach, implemented for the sake of the same
COVID-19 distress, is matching current customers’ ques-
tions to previously stored questions in order to use the lat-
ter’s answers (McCreery et al. 2020) (Knowledge Science/-
Data Mining). This approach is often based on the ability

to rapidly find similarity between sentences and/or ques-
tions, a topic that was researched extensively in recent years,
and produced efficient models such as BERT (Devlin et al.
2019) (NLP), RoBERTa (Liu et al. 2019) (NLP) and SBERT
(Reimers and Gurevych 2019) (NLP). After understanding
the question, the virtual agent needs to generate a proper an-
swer (Fu and Feng 2018; Wei and Zhang 2019) (NLP), (Gao
et al. 2021; Deng et al. 2022) (informatics). In this model,
which we espoused in our work, the question is taken from
the DB of previous questions-and-answers. Thus, finding the
right question also indicates the correct answer. Neverthe-
less, a single question in the DB might have more than one
existing answer, and there is still a need to find the most ad-
equate one to give to the client.
It should be noted that the traditional method of rule-
based conversational agents, which was first introduced
during the 1960’s (Weizenbaum 1966) (ML), is still very
common today in academic research (Singh, Joesph, and
Jabbar 2019) (NLP), (Thorat and Jadhav 2020) (review),
commercial applications (Franceschi 2020; LandBot 2022;
Zab´oj 2022) (commercial) and user guides (Kalinin
2020; Shahid 2020) (commercial). Indeed, these imple-
mentations usually do not contain learning abilities and
self-development of the model during its work, but in many
cases they provide sufficient solutions to the practical need
(Leah 2022) (commercial).
In the context of our model of HOCUS, the main research
questions regarding the virtual agent are:
1. At the beginning of the process of collecting pairs of
question-and-answer and filling up the DB, there is in-
sufficient data for the agent to offer any practical help to
customers, and they should be routed directly to a human
operator. As the DB is populated, the ability of the agent
to provide answers gradually increases. When is the right
point (in terms of DB readiness) at which to start routing
clients to the virtual agent, knowing that its ability to pro-
vide answers is good enough to be worth the bother to the
clients? (CHI, social science)
2. How to estimate the match between the customer’s in-
tention and questions in the DB? Is it acceptable to ask
the customer whether this was their intention? If it is ac-
ceptable on the first attempt, is it still so on the following
ones? (NLP, CHI, social science)
3. How many attempts to match the customer’s question
with a previous question can we make before transferring
the control to a human operator? Is it possible to track
signals (voice, prosody etc.) with which the customer is
about to lose patience? (social science, CHI, ML)
4. How to choose the best answer from a set of previous
answers given to a certain question? Is it necessary to
choose, or can we offer more than one answer and let the
client decide? (NLP, social science)
Customer
The customers of HOCUS are both a part of the system
and its end user. Therefore, we should investigate the cus-
tomers’ behavior during the interaction with other parts of
the system (in terms of efficiency, effectiveness etc.), and
their satisfaction with the system as its clients. Note that
these two aspects may contradict one another: It may be that
a certain feature is effective in the performance of the sys-
tem (e.g., time-saving), but at the same time annoying to the
clients. In the former aspect, there is much research regard-
ing customer services in general and virtual agent-assisted
customer service in particular. Major issues related to HO-
CUS are the user interface (Angga et al. 2015) (knowl-
edge science/data-mining), (Liu and Dong 2019) (CHI),
waiting time habits and preferences (Wintersberger, Klotz,
and Riener 2020) (CHI), (Olivares, Musalem, and Yung
2020) (social science), difference between various types
of customers (Molina-Castillo, L´opez-Nicol´as, and Bouw-
man 2008) (knowledge science/informatics/data-mining),
(Fotheringham and Wiles 2022) (social science) and various
customers’ emotional states and intents (Pawlik et al. 2022)
(CHI), (Crolic et al. 2022) (social science), (Xu et al. 2020)
(knowledge science/informatics), (Chen et al. 2019) (ML),
(Bojani´c, Deli´c, and Karpov 2020) (CHI, ML).
In the latter aspect, it is crucial to measure customers’ sat-
isfaction. Satisfaction may be examined as the general atti-
tude towards the technology, such as evaluating the maturity
of the service (Ashktorab et al. 2019), (CHI), studying or-
ganizational factors affecting the successful implementation
of virtual agents for customer service (Zhang, Følstad, and
Bjørkli 2021) (social science), or investigation of drivers of
users’ satisfaction and continuance intention toward agent-
based customer service (Ashfaq et al. 2020) (social science).
Satisfaction is also investigated in the system-specific con-
text: There is a plethora of work regarding customer satisfac-
tion from concrete virtual agent services (experimental and
commercial). To mention a few, there is a case of a women’s
intimate apparel manufacturing firm (Ngai et al. 2021) (so-
cial science), a case of a software company (Nguyen et al.
2019) (OR), an agent for citizen services (Kotsuka, Mu-
rakami, and Arima 2019) (CHI) and many more.
Questions regarding the client that should be investigated
in the context of building better HOCUS systems include:
1. What parameters affect the willingness of clients to be
served by virtual agents, and how do they affect it? (CHI,
social science, OR)
(a) Personality characteristics.
(b) The urgency or immediacy of the call.
(c) The domain of reality with which the service
deals (e.g., the difference between technology-related,
health-related, and recreation-related services).
2. Would it be effective to sense the mood and mental state
of the client (e.g., by making them speak and collecting
voice samples) and consider this parameter in the deci-
sion whether to route the call directly to a human opera-
tor or to try a virtual agent first? (social science, OR)
3. What is clients’ tolerance to multiple attempts by the vir-
tual agent to assist? Should we transfer the client to a
human operator after a single failed attempt by the vir-
tual agent, or is it better to try a second or even a third
time? (OR)

4. Is a graphic user interface sufficient, or should we add
other components (maybe vocal)? (GUI/UI)
5. What is the reaction of different types of clients to idle
waiting for service? Would they prefer long waiting for a
human operator over getting an immediate response from
a virtual agent? Would it be helpful to ask them about
their preference explicitly? (CHI, social science, OR)
6. How should the satisfaction of the clients of the service
be measured? What other parameters should be mea-
sured? (CHI, OR)
Human Operator
There is a lot of research regarding human operators in call
centers. One of the main reasons for this special interest is
the high rates of turnover in this profession, as has been re-
ported by many employers and market-observers for years
(Holman, Batt, and Holtgrewe 2007; Reynolds 2015; My-
WorkPlace 2020) (commercial). There are works that try to
isolate the factors that influence this phenomenon using real-
world case studies from various countries (Ballard 2012;
Kim and Choi 2015; Zito et al. 2018; Griffin 2021) (social
science), (Valle, Ruz, and Mas´ıas 2017) (ML), (Reissov´a
and Papay 2021) (social science, informatics). In (Brown
et al. 2022) (social science), the role of professional pride is
studied, and this perspective is especially interesting in the
case of HOCUS because of the change in the framing of the
human operator in such systems (as also discussed in Sec-
tion ). Other works try to predict the turnover (Valle and Ruz
2015) (ML), (Rodrigo and Ratnayake 2021) (informatics).
Besides the turnover issue, there is naturally a wide se-
lection of works regarding the operators in call centers, their
influence on quality of service (Chicu et al. 2019) (social
science) and their perception of it (Ramseook Munhurrun,
Naidoo, and Lukea-Bhiwajee 2010) (social science), their
performance (Castilla 2005) (social science) and how to
measure and predict it (de Oliveira 2019) (ML). Intelli-
gent agents that support operators working on complex tasks
were studied in several domains, including call centers. In-
telligent agents that support humans in their complex activ-
ities need to be able to predict the user’s behavior and deci-
sions (Aviv et al. 2021; Azaria et al. 2016; Rosenfeld et al.
2016; Kraus 2016; Rosenfeld and Kraus 2018) (MAS).
Questions regarding the human operator that should be in-
vestigated in the context of building better HOCUS systems:
1. The use of virtual agents to answer easy questions lib-
erates the human operator from the need to answer such
questions themselves and leaves only questions that the
virtual agents could not answer. This situation may be
either good or bad for the operators, with opposite argu-
ments: On one hand, the issues that the operators deal
with are less routine, therefore the work might be more
interesting and with a lower rate of attrition. On the other
hand, there are no easy questions that the operators can
answer “automatically”. They have to make a consider-
able effort in each case. The issue is which parameter has
a stronger influence on the operators and whether it de-
pends on the personality characteristics of the operators
(CHI, social science).
2. In the sequence of HOCUS, in which the call is primar-
ily transferred to a virtual agent, and only if it fails it is
transferred to the human operator, the clients are likely
to be more irritated and less patient once they encounter
the operator. Some of them were skeptical from the be-
ginning, and others were frustrated by the failure of the
agent and the need to “start all over again”. This situation
requires the human operator to be more aware and under-
standing and to use pre-fetched information instead of
asking it from the client (again). This situation should be
investigated from the operator’s point of view, as well as
its consequences on the whole system and its managers
(as elaborated on in Section ) (social science, OR).
Customer Service Center Management
This section deals with the system as a whole and with the
aspects of managing a hybrid service center.
A basic question that should be answered by the managers
of such a service when thinking of adopting a new technol-
ogy or method is what is the target function of this change.
Often, clients’ satisfaction is stated as the main goal, but
other goals may be considered, and they might overshadow
the former one. Such considerations are, for example, re-
ducing the human resources needed to supply the service
or solving the great difficulties in the constant need to re-
cruit employees due to the high turnover rates in the busi-
ness (Devi and Panchanatham 2010; Mwendwa 2017; Flood
2021) (social science). The balance between these and other
(sometimes clashing) goals is widely investigated in (Ander-
son, Fornell, and Rust 1997; Kantsperger and Kunz 2005;
Rekil¨a et al. 2013) (social science) and many others.
Another issue in HOCUS that evolves from the partic-
ipation of many different players in the process is the re-
lationships and collaborations between the various entities
combining the system. The trust between customers and
the virtual agents, and the factors that affect this trust, are
considered in an interview study in (Følstad, Nordheim,
and Bjørkli 2018) (CHI). The combinations of both vir-
tual agents and human operators and the interaction/collab-
oration between these two entities are investigated in (Le,
Sajtos, and Fernandez 2022) (social science). The handoff
process – transferring the control from a virtual agent to a
human operator, and maybe also vice versa, is researched
in (Wintersberger, Klotz, and Riener 2020) (CHI), (Rozga
2018) (NLP).
The issue of task allocation and staff allocation (some-
times called workforce management) is of great importance
to call centers. It was approached with methods of queu-
ing theory in (Bouchentouf, Cherfaoui, and Boualem 2021)
(OR), with deep neural networks and reinforcement learning
in (Kumwilaisak et al. 2022) (RL), and various other meth-
ods (Cohen, Reis, and Amorim 2020) (OR), (Horng and Lin
2020) (informatics, social science). Allocation of tasks in
cases where there are operators with two levels of expertise,
as our model may be described, is discussed in (Stepanov,
Stepanov, and Zhurko 2019) (OR).
Questions regarding the HOCUS as a whole system are:
1. In the traditional call center business, there are known
and well-studied parameters of performance. Introducing

a new operation model changes the service’s characteris-
tics and requires adjustment of these parameters. Specif-
ically, the change in the amount and the difficulty of the
question routed to operators (as mentioned in Section )
affects:
(a) The ratio of needed operators per customer in order to
provide good service (CHI, social science).
(b) The performance measurement systems and their pa-
rameters (such as calls per hour, average call times,
time between calls, etc.) (OR).
(c) The personal characteristics of the operators – the task
is different now, and it is reasonable that new abilities
and skills will be needed (social science).
2. Employment models – changes in the personality char-
acteristics of the operators and rates of attrition have
considerable influence on the ways companies employ
these workers. For example, the position of an“operator
for hard questions” may affect the social status of this
job, hence the age of employees, the length of the ex-
pected employment, and many other parameters (social
science).
3. The handoff process – the ways to perform the transfer
of control from the virtual agent to the human operator
(and/or vice versa):
(a) Should the handoff be unidirectional (from agent to
human only) or bidirectional? (CHI, Knowledge sci-
ence)
(b) How many such handoffs can be done without irritat-
ing the client? (CHI, social science)
(c) How to transfer information collected in early phases
to later ones, to avoid the clients having to chant the
same details repeatedly? (CHI, knowledge science)
Implementing the Holistic Approach
We decided to test the holistic approach and implement a
call center service that combines virtual agents with hu-
man operators. The process and its results are described here
concisely, emphasizing the interdisciplinary approach. A de-
tailed review can be found in (Oshrat et al. 2022).
Theoretical Basis – Queuing Theory
The basis for the work was a comparison between a call
service with human operators only (“pure human environ-
ment”) and a call service combining humans and virtual
agents (“hybrid environment”).
We showed, using queuing theory-based analysis that, by
a cautious choice of parameters, the hybrid system can ser-
vice more clients than the purely human one, while simul-
taneously also reducing the expected waiting times of the
clients. The analysis yielded the ranges of values for the pa-
rameters to achieve this result, but at this stage, without in-
troducing additional techniques from other communities, it
was not clear whether these ranges are realistic and can be
implemented by humans and by agents. The main parame-
ters of the process were the number of clients in the system,
the rate of arrival of the questions, and the service times for
a human operator and for a virtual agent (represented by av-
erage and standard deviation values).
Experimenting with Human Subjects and Building
a Q&A DB
In the next phase, we performed an experiment with human
subjects. The goal of the experiment was twofold: to investi-
gate the ability to build a virtual agent based only on Q&As
between clients and operators, without any other domain
knowledge, and to extract actual parameter values regard-
ing clients, questions, and communications in a call center.
To this end, we used a simulation-strategy video game. The
players – our clients – were asked to perform diverse tasks
in order to build and fix PCs. In each session, there were
up to 107 steps that the client should have performed. We
recruited 41 human subjects to play the game and provided
them with a textual chat channel via the Internet through
which they could communicate to get help. When they en-
countered difficulties understanding or performing the tasks,
the clients could send a question via the textual channel. The
question was routed to a virtual agent that tried to match it
with questions in the agent’s DB, and if a matching question
was found, then its answer was passed to the client. If the
agent could not find a matching question, or if the answer
did not satisfy the client, the question was routed to an expe-
rienced human operator who answered it. The only source of
information for the virtual agent was previous questions that
clients had asked and the answers that the human operators
provided. We collected full data regarding the communica-
tion between the clients, the agent, and the operators.
After performing 41 sessions and accumulating data, we
applied several pre-trained LM models to explore their abil-
ity to identify the cluster of questions in the DB for a
given question. Using the paraphrase-MiniLML6-v2 model
(Reimers and Gurevych 2019) with the raw clusters we
achieved 70% accuracy, and using the clusters after short
manual processing (e.g., adding short natural language ques-
tions) we reached 76% accuracy. The experiment’s results
show that it is feasible to build an effective virtual agent in
a short time using real-world existing processes (such as an
existing pure human service center).
We also achieved the second goal of acquiring actual val-
ues for the various parameters of our theoretical model.
These values were very helpful in the next phase.
Simulation
In order to test the model and the relations between parame-
ters, we built a simulator that implements the system as de-
scribed in the theoretical model. The input parameters are:
• n – the number of clients in the system
• α – the fraction of questions that the virtual agent knows
how to answer (out of the total number of questions)
• sα, sβ – the distributions of avg. service time by humans
or by virtual agent, respectively, for hard questions
• ¯λ – the distributions of arrival rate of questions per client
• ϵ – the distributions of the time it takes for a virtual agent
to notice that it cannot answer a question

Figure 1: The number of clients a human operator can attend
to in a hybrid environment, relative to the number of clients
that a human operator attends to in a pure human environ-
ment without increasing the waiting time. In all three condi-
tions, sα ∼N(1, 0.2), ϵ ∼N(0.5, 0.1), ¯λ ∼Pois(0.1).
Cond1: α = 0.2, sβ ∼N(3.5, 1). Cond2: α = 0.5,
sβ ∼N(3.15, 1). Cond3: α = 0.7, sβ ∼N(2.8, 1).
We studied the behavior of the system with different val-
ues of parameters and tried to understand the possible op-
timizations that can be made. There were many interest-
ing ideas that we lack the space here to detail, but we will
demonstrate one finding: In Section we claimed that it is
possible to adjust the hybrid environment’s parameters to
provide a win-win situation, where a single operator can
serve more clients, and at the same time, the clients will
experience shorter waiting times. Figure 1 presents simula-
tions of 3 conditions and compares the number of clients that
can be attended in a pure human environment to the num-
ber of clients that can be attended in a hybrid environment.
For every value of no. of clients in a pure human environ-
ment on the x-axis, we matched the number of clients that
can be attended to in a hybrid environment with a lower ex-
pected waiting time per client. The results seem to support
our claim.
Second Experiment: Combining Human Subjects
and Agent-based Simulation
The first experiment’s results (Section ) show that it is fea-
sible to build an effective virtual agent in a short amount of
time using real-world existing processes. Nevertheless, the
quality of service, and specifically the clients’ experience of
the hybrid configuration, could not be measured in this ex-
periment design. To this end, we designed a second exper-
iment, which aimed to compare clients’ satisfaction in two
conditions: (1) Pure human service, in which a single hu-
man operator attends to 11 clients; and (2) Hybrid service,
in which a single human operator, assisted by virtual agents,
attends to 18 clients. In both conditions, one of the clients
was played by a human recruit and the other clients were
virtual, i.e., they were placeholders that waited in the queue
and took the human operator’s attention in order to make the
experience of the real human client authentic. The time each
virtual client needed to be ”served” was generated using the
real-world data we collected in the first experiment and the
simulations of Section . Similarly, the values of 11/18 clients
Figure 2: Results of the user satisfaction study.
for the different conditions were chosen according to our ex-
perience in the first experiment, in order to produce similar
waiting times in the queue for the human operator: Obvi-
ously, in the second condition, some of the clients’ questions
are answered by the virtual agents, thus easing the load on
the human operator. We wanted the clients in the experiment
to experience equal waiting times for the human operator in
both conditions, in order to measure the clients’ satisfaction
not as a result of shorter waiting times in Condition 1, but in
relatively equal situations. 20 recruits took part in the exper-
iment as clients. At the end of each session, as commonly
done in CHI projects, the human clients were asked to grade
their satisfaction with the service they received in three cat-
egories: The waiting times, the quality of service in general,
and the quality of information they received from the help
desk.
The results of the second experiment are presented in Fig-
ure 2. It can be seen that although the number of simultane-
ous clients was higher in Condition 1 (18 ”with agent” vs.
11 ”without agent”), the average waiting time for a human
operator was similar in both conditions (61.8 vs 63.3), and
the quality of service was higher in Condition 1: Clients re-
ceived answers to their questions significantly faster (51.2
vs 90.7), finished the game-steps sooner and reported higher
satisfaction grades.
Discussion
We have demonstrated that the HOCUS setting offers an ap-
plication domain necessitating a rich multidisciplinary ap-
proach. However, cooperation and collaboration amongst
different (academic) disciplines can also be challenging. The
lack of acquaintance and information exchange between re-
searchers is the easy part. Deeper difficulties stem from the
inherent gaps in terminology, concepts, methods, and stan-
dards. Indeed, even basic scientific terms such as “correla-
tions” and “significance” have different meanings in differ-
ent faculties of academia, let alone agreement about what
constitutes a “proof” or “evidence”, and what is “reason-
able”.
That said, we suggest that the HOCUS application is a
fitting platform and goal for mobilizing collaboration:
• it is an important domain with wide practical applica-
tions,
• cooperation is necessary (as we have demonstrated), and
• clear success criteria can be defined.
We hope that work in this setting will result in methodolo-
gies and techniques that could improve customer service,
but more importantly, open new directions for cooperation
amongst diverse AI communities (and beyond) toward solv-
ing joint difficult tasks.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded in part by JPMorgan Chase &
Co and by the IBM Global University Program Academic
Award. Any views or opinions expressed herein are solely
those of the authors listed, and may differ from the views and
opinions expressed by JPMorgan Chase & Co. or its affili-
ates. This material is not a product of the Research Depart-
ment of J.P. Morgan Securities LLC. This material should
not be construed as an individual recommendation for any
particular client and is not intended as a recommendation of
particular securities, financial instruments or strategies for a
particular client. This material does not constitute a solicita-
tion or offer in any jurisdiction.
References
Allouch, M.; Azaria, A.; and Azoulay, R. 2021. Conversa-
tional Agents: Goals, Technologies, Vision and Challenges.
Sensors, 21(24): 8448.
Anderson, E. W.; Fornell, C.; and Rust, R. T. 1997. Cus-
tomer satisfaction, productivity, and profitability: Differ-
ences between goods and services.
Marketing science,
16(2): 129–145.
Angga, P. A.; Fachri, W. E.; Elevanita, A.; Agushinta, R. D.;
et al. 2015. Design of chatbot with 3D avatar, voice inter-
face, and facial expression. In 2015 international conference
on science in information technology (ICSITech), 326–330.
IEEE.
Ashfaq, M.; Yun, J.; Yu, S.; and Loureiro, S. M. C. 2020.
Chatbot: Modeling the determinants of users’ satisfaction
and continuance intention of AI-powered service agents.
Telematics and Informatics, 54: 101473.
Ashktorab, Z.; Jain, M.; Liao, Q. V.; and Weisz, J. D. 2019.
Resilient chatbots: Repair strategy preferences for conversa-
tional breakdowns. In CHI-19.
Aviv, A.; Oshrat, Y.; Assefa, S. A.; Mustapha, T.; Bor-
rajo, D.; Veloso, M.; and Kraus, S. 2021. Advising Agent
for Service-Providing Live-Chat Operators. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2105.03986.
Azaria, A.; Gal, Y.; Kraus, S.; and Goldman, C. V. 2016.
Strategic advice provision in repeated human-agent interac-
tions. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 30(1):
4–29.
Ballard, J. K. 2012. Call center turnover: A study of the
relationships between leadership style, burnout, engagement
and intention to quit. Ph.D. thesis, Capella University.
BluePrint.
2020.
How
to
Reduce
the
Ris-
ing
Costs
of
RPA
Maintenance
and
Support.
https://www.blueprintsys.com/blog/rpa/reduce-rising-
costs-rpa-maintenance-and-support.
Online, Accessed:
31.8.2022.
Bojani´c, M.; Deli´c, V.; and Karpov, A. 2020. Call redistribu-
tion for a call center based on speech emotion recognition.
Applied Sciences, 10(13): 4653.
Bouchentouf, A. A.; Cherfaoui, M.; and Boualem, M. 2021.
Analysis and performance evaluation of Markovian feed-
back multi-server queueing model with vacation and impa-
tience. American Journal of Mathematical and Management
Sciences, 40(3): 261–282.
Brown, E. S.; Palka, J.; Helm, S. V.; and Kulikova, A. 2022.
The relative importance of reputation and pride as predictors
of employee turnover in an academic medical center. Health
Care Management Review, 47(1): 66–77.
Carr,
D.
F.
2020.
When
Robotic
Process
Au-
tomation
(RPA)
bots
break:
3
things
to
know.
https://enterprisersproject.com/article/2020/2/when-
robotic-process-automation-rpa-bots-break-3-tips. Online,
Accessed: 2/1/2022.
Castilla, E. J. 2005.
Social networks and employee per-
formance in a call center. American journal of sociology,
110(5): 1243–1283.
Chen, C.; Zhang, X.; Ju, S.; Fu, C.; Tang, C.; Zhou, J.; and
Li, X. 2019. AntProphet: an Intention Mining System be-
hind Alipay’s Intelligent Customer Service Bot. In IJCAI,
volume 8, 6497–6499.
Chicu, D.; del Mar P`amies, M.; Ryan, G.; and Cross, C.
2019. Exploring the influence of the human factor on cus-
tomer satisfaction in call centres. BRQ Business Research
Quarterly, 22(2): 83–95.
Cohen, Y.; Reis, J.; and Amorim, M. 2020. Empirical Anal-
ysis of Call Center Load & Service Level for Shift Planning.
In International Conference on Exploring Services Science,
79–91. Springer.
Crolic, C.; Thomaz, F.; Hadi, R.; and Stephen, A. T. 2022.
Blame the bot: anthropomorphism and anger in customer–
chatbot interactions. Journal of Marketing, 86(1): 132–148.
de Oliveira, E. L. 2019. Machine learning techniques ap-
plied to predict the performance of contact centers opera-
tors. In 2019 14th Iberian Conference on Information Sys-
tems and Technologies (CISTI), 1–4. IEEE.
Deng, Y.; Li, Y.; Zhang, W.; Ding, B.; and Lam, W. 2022.
Toward Personalized Answer Generation in E-Commerce
via Multi-perspective Preference Modeling. ACM Transac-
tions on Information Systems (TOIS), 40(4): 1–28.
Devi, G.; and Panchanatham, N. 2010. A Cram on Employee
Attrition in Chennai Based Call Centers: An Exploratory
Study. International Journal of Marketing & Human Re-
source Management, 1(1): 18–27.
Devlin, J.; Chang, M.-W.; Lee, K.; and Toutanova, K. 2019.
BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for
Language Understanding. arXiv:1810.04805.
Flood, T. E. 2021. Strategies for Call Center Employee Re-
tention. Ph.D. thesis, Walden University.
Følstad, A.; Nordheim, C. B.; and Bjørkli, C. A. 2018. What
makes users trust a chatbot for customer service? An ex-
ploratory interview study. In International conference on
internet science, 194–208. Springer.
Fotheringham, D.; and Wiles, M. A. 2022. The effect of
implementing chatbot customer service on stock returns: an
event study analysis. Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, 1–21.

Franceschi, C. 2020. How to make a chatbot in less than
30 minutes. https://joonbot.com/blog/guides/how-to-make-
a-chatbot/. Online, Accessed: 30.8.2022.
Fu, Y.; and Feng, Y. 2018. Natural answer generation with
heterogeneous memory. In Proceedings of the 2018 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers), 185–195.
Gao, S.; Chen, X.; Ren, Z.; Zhao, D.; and Yan, R. 2021.
Meaningful answer generation of e-commerce question-
answering.
ACM Transactions on Information Systems
(TOIS), 39(2): 1–26.
Griffin, G. 2021. Job burnout and turnover intentions among
telecommuting call center agents. Ph.D. thesis, Walden Uni-
versity.
Holman, D.; Batt, R.; and Holtgrewe, U. 2007. The global
call center report: International perspectives on management
and employment.
https://hdl.handle.net/1813/74325.
Ac-
cessed: 2022-12-12.
Horng, S.-C.; and Lin, S.-S. 2020. Staffing Optimization
of One-Period Multi-Skill Call Center. In Proceedings of
the 2020 the 3rd International Conference on Computers in
Management and Business, 89–93.
Kalinin, K. 2020.
How to Make a Chatbot from Scratch
and Grow Your Business with AI.
https://topflightapps.
com/ideas/how-to-build-a-chatbot/#3.
Online, Accessed:
30.8.2022.
Kantsperger, R.; and Kunz, W. H. 2005. Managing overall
service quality in customer care centers: Empirical findings
of a multi-perspective approach. International Journal of
Service Industry Management.
Kim, J.-I.; and Choi, B.-R. 2015.
Convergence study on
emotional labor, stress response and turnover intention of
call-center worker. Journal of the Korea Convergence Soci-
ety, 6(6): 139–146.
Kotsuka, Y.; Murakami, R.; and Arima, S. 2019.
Devel-
opment and Evaluation of Chat-bot Systems: The appli-
cations of citizen service procedures.
In 2019 8th Inter-
national Congress on Advanced Applied Informatics (IIAI-
AAI), 290–295. IEEE.
Kraus, S. 2016. Human-agent decision-making: Combining
theory and practice. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.07514.
Kumwilaisak, W.; Phikulngoen, S.; Piriyataravet, J.; That-
phithakkul, N.; and Hansakunbuntheung, C. 2022. Adap-
tive Call Center Workforce Management With Deep Neural
Network and Reinforcement Learning.
IEEE Access, 10:
35712–35724.
LandBot. 2022.
The Most Powerful No-Code Chatbot
Builder. https://landbot.io/. Online, Accessed: 30.8.2022.
Le, K. B. Q.; Sajtos, L.; and Fernandez, K. V. 2022.
Employee-(ro) bot collaboration in service: an interdepen-
dence perspective. Journal of Service Management, (ahead-
of-print).
Leah. 2022. How Rule-Based Chatbots Beat AI Chatbots
in Business. https://www.userlike.com/en/blog/rule-based-
chatbots. Online, Accessed: 30.8.2022.
Li, Q. 2012.
Literature survey: domain adaptation algo-
rithms for natural language processing. Department of Com-
puter Science The Graduate Center, The City University of
New York, 8–10.
Liu, R.; and Dong, Z. 2019.
A study of user experience
in knowledge-based QA chatbot design.
In International
Conference on Intelligent Human Systems Integration, 589–
593. Springer.
Liu, Y.; Ott, M.; Goyal, N.; Du, J.; Joshi, M.; Chen, D.;
Levy, O.; Lewis, M.; Zettlemoyer, L.; and Stoyanov, V.
2019. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Luo, B.; Lau, R. Y.; Li, C.; and Si, Y.-W. 2022. A critical
review of state-of-the-art chatbot designs and applications.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowl-
edge Discovery, 12(1): e1434.
Ma, X.; Xu, P.; Wang, Z.; Nallapati, R.; and Xiang, B. 2019.
Domain adaptation with BERT-based domain classification
and data selection. In DeepLo.
McCreery, C. H.; Katariya, N.; Kannan, A.; Chablani, M.;
and Amatriain, X. 2020.
Effective transfer learning for
identifying similar questions: matching user questions to
COVID-19 FAQs. In KDD.
Molina-Castillo, F. J.; L´opez-Nicol´as, C.; and Bouwman, H.
2008. Explaining mobile commerce services adoption by
different type of customers. Journal of Systemics, Cybernet-
ics and Informatics, 6(6): 73–79.
Mwendwa, L. 2017. Factors influencing call center agent
attrition: A case of Kenya Power call center. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Nairobi.
MyWorkPlace. 2020. What’s Causing All That Turnover in
Your Call Center? https://myworkchoice.com/blog/whats-
causing-turnover-in-your-call-center/?utm source=google.
Online, Accessed: 29.8.2022.
Ngai, E. W.; Lee, M. C.; Luo, M.; Chan, P. S.; and Liang, T.
2021. An intelligent knowledge-based chatbot for customer
service. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications,
50: 101098.
Nguyen, T.; et al. 2019. Potential effects of chatbot tech-
nology on customer support: A case study. Master’s thesis,
Aalto University School of Science.
Olivares, M.; Musalem, A.; and Yung, D. 2020. Balancing
agent retention and waiting time in service platforms. In
Proceedings of the 21st ACM Conference on Economics and
Computation, 295–313.
Oshrat, Y.; Aumann, Y.; Hollander, T.; Maksimov, O.;
Anita Ostroumov, N.; and Kraus, S. 2022. Efficient Cus-
tomer Service Combining Human Operators and Virtual
Agents.
https://biu-ai.com/agent human cooperation.pdf.
Online, Accessed: 1.9.2022.
Panko, R. 2019.
How Businesses Should Set Up
Their IVR Menu.
https://clutch.co/bpo/resources/virtual-
assistants/how-businesses-set-up-ivr-menu/.
Accessed:
2022-12-12.
Pawlik, Ł.; Płaza, M.; Deniziak, S.; and Boksa, E. 2022.
A Method for Improving Bot Effectiveness by Recognising

Implicit Customer Intent in Contact Centre Conversations.
Speech Communication.
Press,
G.
2019.
AI
Stats
News:
86%
Of
Consumers
Prefer
Humans
To
Chatbots.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2019/10/02/ai-stats-
news-86-of-consumers-prefer-to-interact-with-a-human-
agent-rather-than-a-chatbot/?sh=220aa7252d3b. Accessed:
2022-12-12.
Ramseook Munhurrun, P.; Naidoo, P.; and Lukea-Bhiwajee,
S. D. 2010. Measuring service quality: Perceptions of em-
ployees. Global journal of business research, 4(1): 47–58.
Reimers, N.; and Gurevych, I. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sen-
tence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks. In Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
Reissov´a, A.; and Papay, M. 2021.
Relationship be-
tween employee engagement, job satisfaction and potential
turnover. TEM Journal, 10(2): 847–852.
Rekil¨a, T.; et al. 2013. A study of the factors influencing
customer satisfaction and efficiency in contact centers: the
combined effect. Master’s thesis, Aalto University School of
Business.
Reynolds, P. 2015. Exploring call center turnover numbers.
Nashville: QATC. Online, Accessed: 29.8.2022.
Rodrigo, D. S.; and Ratnayake, G. S. 2021.
Employee
Turnover Prediction System: With Special Reference to Ap-
parel Industry in Sri Lanka. In 2021 6th International Con-
ference for Convergence in Technology (I2CT), 1–9. IEEE.
Rosenfeld, A.; Keshet, J.; Goldman, C. V.; and Kraus, S.
2016.
Online prediction of exponential decay time se-
ries with human-agent application. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-second European Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, 595–603. IOS Press.
Rosenfeld, A.; and Kraus, S. 2018.
Predicting human
decision-making: From prediction to action. Synthesis Lec-
tures on Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, 12(1):
1–150.
Rozga, S. 2018. Human Handoff. In Practical Bot Develop-
ment, 547–570. Springer.
Shahid, U. 2020.
Building a Rule-based Chatbot
in Python.
https://online.datasciencedojo.com/blogs/rule-
based-chatbot-in-python/. Online, Accessed: 30.8.2022.
Singh, J.; Joesph, M. H.; and Jabbar, K. B. A. 2019. Rule-
based chabot for student enquiries. In Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, volume 1228, 012060. IOP Publishing.
Stepanov, S. N.; Stepanov, M. S.; and Zhurko, H. M. 2019.
The modeling of call center functioning in case of overload.
In International Conference on Distributed Computer and
Communication Networks, 391–406. Springer.
Sun, S.; and Sedoc, J. 2020. An analysis of bert faq retrieval
models for covid-19 infobot. https://openreview.net/pdf?id=
dGOeF3y Weh. Accessed: 2022-12-13.
Thorat, S. A.; and Jadhav, V. 2020. A review on implemen-
tation issues of rule-based chatbot systems. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Innovative Computing &
Communications (ICICC).
Valle, M. A.; and Ruz, G. A. 2015.
Turnover prediction
in a call center: Behavioral evidence of loss aversion using
random forest and na¨ıve bayes algorithms. Applied Artificial
Intelligence, 29(9): 923–942.
Valle, M. A.; Ruz, G. A.; and Mas´ıas, V. H. 2017. Using
self-organizing maps to model turnover of sales agents in a
call center. Applied Soft Computing, 60: 763–774.
Wei, M.; and Zhang, Y. 2019.
Natural answer genera-
tion with attention over instances. IEEE Access, 7: 61008–
61017.
Weizenbaum, J. 1966. ELIZA—a computer program for the
study of natural language communication between man and
machine. Communications of the ACM, 9(1): 36–45.
Wintersberger, P.; Klotz, T.; and Riener, A. 2020. Tell Me
More: Transparency and Time-Fillers to Optimize Chatbots’
Waiting Time Experience. In Proceedings of the 1 Human-
Computer Interaction: Shaping Experiences, Shaping Soci-
ety.
Xu, K.; Fu, C.; Zhang, X.; Chen, C.; Zhang, Y.-L.; Rong,
W.; Wen, Z.; Zhou, J.; Li, X.; and Qiao, Y. 2020.
adm-
scn: A novel perspective for user intent prediction in cus-
tomer service bots. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Inter-
national Conference on Information & Knowledge Manage-
ment, 2853–2860.
Zab´oj,
D.
2022.
How
to
build
your
first
chat-
bot.
https://www.chatbot.com/help/build-your-chatbot/
how-to-build-your-chatbot/. Online, Accessed: 30.8.2022.
Zhang, J. J.; Følstad, A.; and Bjørkli, C. A. 2021. Organiza-
tional factors affecting successful implementation of chat-
bots for customer service. Journal of internet commerce,
1–35.
Zito, M.; Emanuel, F.; Molino, M.; Cortese, C. G.; Ghislieri,
C.; and Colombo, L. 2018.
Turnover intentions in a call
center: The role of emotional dissonance, job resources, and
job satisfaction. PloS one, 13(2): e0192126.

