Are subordinates always stressed? A comparative analysis of rank
differences in cortisol levels among primates
D.H. Abbott,a,c E.B. Keverne,d F.B. Bercovitch,e C.A. Shively,f S.P. Mendoza,g
W. Saltzman,h C.T. Snowdon,b T.E. Ziegler,b,c M. Banjevic,i
T. Garland, Jr.,h and R.M. Sapolskyj,k,*
a Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA
b Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA
c Wisconsin Primate Research Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA
d Sub-Department of Animal Behaviour, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
e Center for Reproduction of Endangered Species, Zoological Society of San Diego, San Diego, CA 92182, USA
f Department of Comparative Medicine, Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, NC 27106, USA
g Department of Psychology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
h Department of Biology, University of California, Riverside, CA 92501, USA
i Department of Statistics, Stanford University, and Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
j Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, and Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
k Institute of Primate Research, National Museums of Kenya, Nairobi, Kenya
Received 1 March 2002; revised 1 September 2002; accepted 18 September 2002
Abstract
Among primate species there is pronounced variation in the relationship between social status and measures of stress physiology. An informal
meta-analysis was designed to investigate the basis of this diversity across different primate societies. Species were included only if a substantial
amount of published information was available regarding both social behavior and rank-related differences in stress physiology. Four Old World
and three New World species met these criteria, including societies varying from small-group, singular cooperative breeders (common marmoset
and cotton top tamarin) to large-troop, multi-male, multi-female polygynous mating systems (rhesus, cynomolgus, talapoin, squirrel monkeys, and
olive baboon). A questionnaire was formulated to obtain information necessary to characterize the stress milieu for individuals in particular primate
societies. We standardized cortisol values within each species by calculating the ratio of basal cortisol concentrations of subordinates to those of
dominants in stable dominance hierarchies and expressing the ratio as a percentage (relative cortisol levels). The meta-analysis identiﬁed two
variables that signiﬁcantly predicted relative cortisol levels: subordinates exhibited higher relative cortisol levels when they (1) were subjected to
higher rates of stressors, and (2) experienced decreased opportunities for social (including close kin) support. These ﬁndings have important
implications for understanding the different physiological consequences of dominant and subordinate social status across primate societies and how
social rank may differ in its behavioral and physiological manifestations among primate societies.
© 2003 Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.
Keywords: Social dominance; Aggression; Adrenal; Comparative method; Phylogeny
Introduction
In mammals, including humans, challenges to homeosta-
sis commonly evoke a series of endocrine and neural actions
known as the stress response. While not as stereotyped as
once thought, the stress response typically involves release
of catecholamines (norepinephrine and epinephrine) from
* Corresponding author. Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford
University, Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Gilbert Lab, MC 5020, Stanford CA
94305-5020. Fax: 1-650-725-5356.
E-mail address: sapolsky@stanford.edu (R.M. Sapolsky).
R
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82
www.elsevier.com/locate/yhbeh
0018-506X/03/$ – see front matter © 2003 Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0018-506X(02)00037-5

the sympathetic nervous system and adrenal medulla, re-
lease of adrenocortical steroid hormones (glucocorticoids),
and initiation of a variety of other endocrine responses,
including suppression of hormones related to anabolism,
growth, and reproduction (Orth and Kovacs, 1998; Sapol-
sky, 2000, 2002). Collectively, the stress response aids in
adapting an individual to an acute stressor by stimulating
hepatic glucose release and visceral lipolysis, enhancing
delivery (via enhanced cardiovascular tone) of glucose,
fatty acids, and triglycerides to skeletal muscle and brain,
triaging processes nonessential to immediate survival (such
as growth, digestion, reproduction, and tissue repair), and
constraining inﬂammatory and immune responses. Despite
these adaptive functions, it has long been recognized that
chronic or prolonged activation of the stress response can
have deleterious physiological effects, including the induc-
tion or worsening of hypertension, insulin-resistant (type II)
diabetes, ulceration in the gastrointestinal tract, anovulation,
impotence, osteoporosis, psychogenic dwarﬁsm, and immu-
nosuppression (Sapolsky, 2002).
Because of the pathological consequences of a prolonged
stress response, much attention has focused on individual
differences in patterns of secretion of stress response hor-
mones. These can include differences in blood hormone
levels prior to and during the stress response, the speed of
physiological recovery of homeostasis after the stress re-
sponse abates, or the ease with which different types of
stressors differentially provoke separate components of the
stress response. As examples of such differences, a number
of psychiatric disorders and personality types have been
associated with what can arguably be termed a maladaptive
and overactive stress response. These include major depres-
sion (Holsboer, 1999), repressive personality (Brandtstadter
et al., 1991), and Type A personality (Williams, 1989).
Differential fetal programming (Seckl, 2001) and endocrine
disruption of pre- and perinatal environments (Clarke et al.,
1994) can result in further exaggeration of adult stress
responses.
Another branch of psychoneuroendocrine research has
focused on ways in which individual differences in the
stress response can reﬂect differences in dominance status
among social animals. In some species, subordinance has
been reported to be associated with a chronically overactive
stress response (as assessed by hypersecretion of glucocor-
ticoids or catecholamines, higher blood pressure, and
greater incidences of stress-related pathologies). This pat-
tern is thought to reﬂect the classical picture of dominance
hierarchies as linear “pecking orders” in which resources
are
unevenly
distributed,
inequalities
are
maintained
through aggression and intimidation, and subordinates are
subject to the most severe resource limitations, the fewest
opportunities for coping, and the greatest physical and so-
cial stressors (Albeck et al., 1997).
The relationship between social rank and patterns of the
stress response is not consistent among primates in that
there is no monolithic relationship between social status and
any aspect of stress physiology (Abbott et al., 1997; Clarke
and Boinski, 1995; Sapolsky, 1993). This diversity appears
to reﬂect, among other things, the extraordinary variety of
primate social systems, which often constitute striking ex-
ceptions to hierarchical pecking orders (Dunbar, 1988;
Strier, 1996; de Waal, 1989) and include complex, afﬁlia-
tive relationships that ameliorate responses to stressors,
such as through reconciliation (de Waal, 1993, 2000), pro-
viding different forms of coping mechanisms to individuals
(Bercovitch, 1991).
The purpose of the meta-analysis performed in this study
is to identify the social variables that predict primate soci-
eties in which (1) subordinates have overactive stress re-
sponses, (2) subordinates have diminished stress responses,
or (3) stress responses do not vary with social rank. More
broadly, we are attempting to understand the social roles of
individuals, in terms of their rank, sex, and species, and the
relationship of such roles in different primate species to
differences in the stress response.
Likely variables contributing to individual differences in
the stress response
In order to identify primate societies that give rise to
differing relationships between rank and physiology, it is
important to ﬁrst review factors that stimulate or ameliorate
the stress response.
One factor is the frequency at which an individual is
exposed to physical stressors. As such, it is important to
consider rank-related differences in (1) availability of food
and the effort needed to acquire it, (2) exposure to patho-
gens, (3) likelihood of being threatened by a predator, and
(4) the incidence of aggressive challenge and injury.
Of at least equal importance is the rate at which an
individual is exposed to psychological stressors. An exten-
sive and elegant literature has demonstrated that psycholog-
ical variables can stimulate the stress response outright and
can dramatically modulate the response to physical stressors
(Bakshi and Kalin, 2000; Levine et al., 1989; Lui et al.,
1997; McEwen, 2001; Sapolsky et al., 2000). Broadly, for
the same physical insult, individuals are far more likely to
have a stress response and a stress-related disease if they
lack a sense of control or lack predictive information about
the timing, severity, or duration of the stressor. It thus
becomes important to understand whether there are rank-
related differences in the extent to which individuals (1) can
control access to resources, (2) are subject to aggression,
and (3) can establish stable and predictable social relations.
Finally, the response to physical or social stressors is
considerably blunted by the availability of coping re-
sponses, such as social outlets for frustration or social sup-
port (Sapolsky, 2002). Thus, rank-related differences in the
availability of social contact, social grooming, sexual be-
havior, and frustration displacement of aggression become
as relevant as low rank and the degree of accompanying
stressors.
68
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

Methods
Questionnaire
Based upon the known physical and psychological mod-
ulators of the stress response, the ﬁrst and last authors
formulated a questionnaire containing key questions that
were designed to obtain information necessary to character-
ize the stress milieu for individuals in particular primate
societies. More broadly, we attempted to ask questions that
would formalize the characteristics of subordinate and dom-
inant individuals—what stressors and what sources of cop-
ing are available—for each primate species. We considered
these questions only in the handful of monkey species for
which substantial amounts of published data are available
regarding both social behavior and rank-related differences
in stress physiology (Table 1).
The most frequently studied physiological endpoint of
Table 1
Primate species and sex included in both methods of statistical analyses, illustrating the social/mating system and
group structure/physical environment for each
Species
Relative
cortisol
levels
(%)
Social/mating system
Group structure/ physical environment
1. Common marmoset
(Callithrix jacchus),
female
[New World]
45
Small groups, singular cooperative
breedersa
Captive, mixed sex groups of 3–6 unrelated adults in cages
0.6  0.9 m  1.8 m highb
2. Cotton top tamarin
(Saguinus oedipus),
female [New World]
80
Small groups, singular cooperative
breedersa
Captive, families of parents and offspring in cages 0.8 
1.5 m  2.3 m highc
3. Cotton top tamarin (S.
oedipus), male [New
World]
82
Small groups, singular cooperative
breedersa
Captive, families of parents and offspring in cages 0.8 
1.5 m  2.3 m highc
4. Squirrel monkey (Saimiri
scurieus), female [New
World]
98
Large groups, multi- male, multi-
female, polygynousa
Captive, single or mixed sex groups of 3–4 un related
adults in cages 1.0  1.0 m  2.3 m highe
5. Rhesus monkey (Macaca
mulatta), male [Old
World]
99
Large groups, multi- male, multi-
female, polygynousf
Captive, troops of 150 related and unrelated rhesus in
0.3-ha outdoor enclosure, Sebana Seca Field Station,
Puerto Ricog
6. Talapoin monkey
(Miopithecus talapoin),
female [Old World]
105
Large groups, but multi-male,
multi- female only in the breeding
season, polygynousd
Captive, mixed sex groups of 7–11 unrelated adults in
cages 3.5  1.5 m  1.7 m highh
7. Cynomolgus monkey
(Macaca fascicularis),
female [Old World]
127
Large groups, multi- male, multi-
female, polygynousf
Captive, mixed sex groups of 5–7 unrelated adults in
outdoor pens 1.7  3.3 mi
8. Squirrel monkey (S.
scurieus), male [New
World]
145
Large groups, multi- male, multi-
female, polygynousd
Captive, single, or mixed sex groups of 3–4 un related
adults in cages 1.0  1.0 m  2.3 m highe
9. Olive baboon (Papio
anubis), male [Old World]
147
Large groups, multi- male, multi-
female, polygynousi
Free-ranging, troops of 40–50 related and un related
baboons, in Masai Mara National Reserve, Kenyak
10. Talapoin monkey (M.
talapoin, female [Old
World]
154
Large groups, but multi-male,
multi- female only in the breeding
season, polygynousd
Captive, mixed sex groups of 7–11 unrelated adults in
cages 3.5  1.5m  1.7 m highh
Note. “Relative cortisol levels” indicate basal cortisol concentrations in the subordinates expressed as a percentage of basal cortisol concentrations in
dominants. Data on olive baboons were derived from free living troops in East Africa, while all other data came from captive populations.
Relevant citations for social/mating system:
a French, 1997,
d Rowell and Dixson, 1975,
f Caldecott, 1986,
i Smuts, 1986.
Relevant citations for group structure/physical environment:
b Saltzman et al., 1998,
c Snowdon et al., 1985,
e Mendoza and Mason, 1991,
g Bercovitch and Clarke, 1995,
h Yodyingyuad et al., 1985,
j Kaplan et al., 1986,
k Sapolsky, 1983.
69
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

the stress response is the circulating or urinary concentra-
tion of cortisol. Cortisol is the predominant circulating glu-
cocorticoid in primates and it became our variable of choice
for consideration in the meta-analysis. We standardized
cortisol values within each species by calculating the ratio
of basal cortisol concentrations in subordinates to those in
dominants in stable social groups and expressing the ratio as
a percentage (relative cortisol levels; Table 1). Determina-
tion of relative cortisol levels eliminated between-species
differences in circulating cortisol levels, particularly the
10-fold difference in circulating levels between small-
bodied, New World primates and Old World primates, in-
cluding humans (Coe et al., 1992).
Cortisol concentrations, however, are also modulated by
many behavioral and physiological variables in addition to
the stress response, including physical activity (Girard and
Garland, 2002), immune function (Hermus and Sweep,
1990), food intake or nutritional status (Ausman et al.,
1989) and reproductive function (Kime et al., 1980; Saltz-
man et al., 1998). Consequently, we focused on circulating
or urinary cortisol concentrations obtained under basal con-
ditions (i.e., rapidly, from undisturbed animals) in studies in
which the dominance hierarchy was stable (Table 1). Uri-
nary cortisol concentrations reﬂect circulating concentra-
tions of cortisol that are “free” or not bound to corticoste-
roid binding globulin (CBG), the glucocorticoid-speciﬁc
circulating
binding
protein
(Robinson
et
al.,
1985;
Yamamoto et al., 1977). New World primates, however,
including squirrel monkeys, common marmosets, and cot-
ton top tamarins in this study, have little or no circulating
CBG, so that cortisol circulates unbound to a speciﬁc cir-
culating binding protein or only loosely bound to albumin
(Klosterman et al., 1986; Pugeat et al., 1984; Robinson et
al., 1985). The apparent resistance to the extremely high
basal levels of free cortisol in New World primates is not
due to poor afﬁnity of glucocortocoid receptors (GR) for
glucocorticoids (Scammell et al., 2001). Instead, there is
overexpression of an intracellular, cytosolic binding protein
for
glucocorticoids,
FK-506
binding
immunophilin
(FKBP51; Reynolds et al., 1999), that speciﬁcally inhibits
binding of glucocorticoids to GR (Denny et al., 2000; Scam-
mell et al., 2001) and accounts for the absence of hypercor-
tisolemic pathology. The degree of HPA activation in New
World primates, nevertheless, appears similar to that in Old
World primates, as exempliﬁed by the utilization of New
World primates as models for human HPA function, stress,
and psychopathology (e.g., Cilia and Piper, 1997; Johnson
et al., 1996).
For squirrel monkeys, rhesus monkeys, and cynomolgus
monkeys, social rank was based on outcomes of contested
resources or approach-avoidance interactions (Table 1). In
marmosets, tamarins, talapoins, and olive baboons, ranking
was based on the outcome of agonistic interactions, identi-
ﬁable from submissive gestures, behaviors, vocalizations,
and withdrawals, because outcomes of contested resources
have proven unreliable in these monkeys. All co-authors,
except our statisticians (M.B. and T.G.), completed the
questionnaire regarding stressors and sources of coping in
primate species that we have studied in depth (Table 1). In
all cases, these individuals are experts in the social behavior
of their particular primate species and are often the primary
generators of the relevant cortisol data used in this meta-
analysis (Table 1). Individual co-authors ﬁlled out the ques-
tionnaire only for the species about which they are expert:
female marmosets (D.H.A. and W.S.), male and female
talapoins (E.B.K.), male rhesus (F.B.B.), female cynomol-
gus (C.A.S.), female and male squirrel monkeys (S.P.M.),
female and male tamarin (C.T.S. and T.E.Z.), and male
olive baboons (R.M.S.). All but the ﬁrst and last authors
were kept unaware of how the data were to be analyzed until
they had returned the completed questionnaire.
Rationale for speciﬁc questions in the questionnaire
The six following contributing factors were identiﬁed as
the factors most likely to be germane to the effects of rank
on circulating or urinary cortisol concentrations. We subdi-
vided each contributing factor into one or more speciﬁc
questions (totaling 17) to obtain more detailed information
about a particular contributing factor and its relationship to
cortisol levels (Table 2). The questions are not mutually
exclusive and there is clear overlap in some cases, e.g.,
Question 2F with Questions 2A–2E in Table 2, and adjust-
ments were made for these potential redundancies (follow-
ing receipt and analyses of the answers) in Results.
Contributing factor 1: What is it like to be a dominant
individual in each primate society surveyed?
Question 1A: How much of a role does aggression play in
the attainment of dominance? In some primate societies,
dominance is attained through overt, dyadic aggression (ba-
boons: Sapolsky, 1990; mandrills: Wickings and Dixson,
1992), while in others, it can involve the formation of
coalitional alliances (macaques: Bercovitch, 1988; langurs:
Sommer, 1988; chimpanzees: de Waal, 1982) combined
with overt aggression, or can be inherited (common mar-
moset: Abbott, 1984; Lazaro-Perea et al., 2000; cotton top
tamarin: Savage et al., 1997). These different scenarios
seem likely to carry very different consequences for the
qualities of the stressors encountered during attainment of
high rank and individuals’ responses to these stressors.
Question 1B: How much of a role does aggression play in
the maintenance of dominance? In some societies, domi-
nance is maintained through intimidation, psychological
harassment, or alliances, rather than through direct, dyadic
aggression (for reviews see Dunbar, 1988; Harcourt, 1987;
de Waal, 1982). Again, each of these different situations is
likely to have different consequences for responses to stres-
sors encountered by a dominant individual.
70
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

Question 1C: How disproportionate are the physical and
psychological rewards of dominance? Dominant individuals
in different primate societies have very different degrees of
control over resources [e.g., food; Harcourt, 1987 (various
primate species)] or reproductive activity (common marmo-
sets: Abbott, 1987; cotton top tamarins: Ziegler et al., 1987;
baboons: Sapolsky, 1992), and very different degrees of pre-
dictability of social situations and their control over them. Such
differences will obviously translate into differences in the need
for coping outlets in subordinates.
Table 2
Numerical value answers to the questionnaire in relation to relative cortisol levels and to the coefﬁcients generated from the correlations between the
responses to a question and the relative cortisol levels
Basal cortisol levels in subordinates (relative to dominant animals):
45–82%
98–105%
127–154%
Correlation with
Cortisol Valuesa
Fem
mar
Fem
tam
Male
tam
Fem
sqr
Male
rhe
Fem
tal
Fem
cyn
Male
sqr
Male
bab
Male
tal
I. What is it like to be a dominant individual in this society?
(1A)How much of a role does aggression play in the attainment
of dominance?
3
0
0
3
2
2
1
0
3
2
0.47
(1B) How much of a role does aggression play in the
maintenance of dominance?
1
0
0
3
1
1
0
1
1
1
0.39
(1C) How disproportionately does dominance carry physical and
psychological rewards?
3
3
3
0
3
3
3
1
3
3
0.02
II. What is it like to be a subordinate individual in this society?
(2A) How frequently are subordinates subject to stressors?
1
0
0
1
2
2
3
1
3
3
0.57b
(2B) How available is social support for subordinates?
2
1
1
1
1
2
1
0
1
1
0.82b
(2C) Do subordinates have alternatives to overt competition?
1
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
0.08
(2D) How likely is a subordinate to be caught at such covert
behaviors?
2
0
0
3
1
2
—
3
1
2
—
(2E) If caught, how likely is the animal to be aggressively
punished?
1
—
—
0
2
2
2
0
2
3
—
(2F) Overall, how much should subordinate status be thought of
as a undesirable state actively imposed by more dominant
animals?
1
0
0
0
3
2
2
1
3
3
0.43
III. What are the typical routes by which ranks change?
(3A) Do animals rise in the hierarchy through strenuous
challenge of the status quo?
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
3
1
0.42
(3B) How labile is the dominance system?
1
1
1
3
1
1
0
1
2
1
0.30
IV. What is the nature of revolutionary change in hierarchies?
(4A) How often do such “revolutions” occur, in which there are
rapid and dramatic changes throughout the hierarchy?
1
0
0
2
0
0
1
1
2
1
0.29
(4B) When such revolutions occur, do rates of aggression among
dominant animals increase?
1
—
—
3
—
—
3
3
3
3
—
(4C) When such revolutions occur, do rates of aggression among
subordinates increase?
0
—
—
2
—
—
1.5
3
0
0
—
(4D) When such revolutions occur, do rates at which
subordinate animals suffer displaced aggression from dominant
animals increase?
0
—
—
2
—
—
2
3
3
3
—
V. The role of kinship.
(5A) How important is kinship in understanding interactions
among these animals?
3
3
3
1
1
3
3
0
0
0
0.61
VI. Non-agonistic factors relevant to the stress-response.
(6A) Are there circumstances in which one has to invoke a
physiological explanation, rather than a response to agonistic
behavior, to make sense of the proﬁle of a particular stress
hormone?
2
2
2
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0.61
Note. “0” applies minimally or not at all in the particular species/sex; “1,” “2,” “3,” indicate mildly, moderately, and strongly relevant to the particular
species/sex, respectively. “—” indicates no reliable data available. Species and designated number from Table 1: mar (common marmoset; 1), tam (cotton
top tamarin; 2 and 3), sqr (squirrel monkey; 4 and 8), rhe (rhesus monkey; 5), tal (talapoin monkey; 6 and 10), cyn (cynomolgus monkey; 7), bab (olive
baboon; 9).
a Bivariate correlation based on phylogenetically independent contrasts.
b Indicates ﬁnal variables resulting from stepwise forward multiple regression analysis using phylogenetically independent contrasts, following the
elimination of several variables, as described in the text.
71
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

Contributing factor 2: What is it like to be a subordinate
individual in each primate society surveyed?
Question 2A: How frequently are subordinates subject to
stressors? The answers should reﬂect whether subordinates
are disproportionately victims of aggression (particularly
unpredictable, third-party, displacement aggression that el-
evates cortisol in recipients, e.g., baboons: Ray and Sapol-
sky, 1992; Sapolsky and Ray, 1989; Sapolsky et al., 1997;
Virgin and Sapolsky, 1997), predatory attack, disruption of
feeding, disruption of mating, and so on.
Question
2B:
How
available
is
social
support
for
subordinates? Subordinate animals can have reduced ac-
cess to grooming, social contact, or formation of alliances
(baboons: Ray and Sapolsky, 1992; Sapolsky and Ray,
1989; Sapolsky et al., 1997; Virgin and Sapolsky, 1997;
talapoins: Keverne et al., 1984).
Question 2C: Do subordinates have alternatives to overt
competition? In some primate societies, subordinates can
disperse to a different group (e.g., macaques: Sauermann et
al., 2001), can safely and temporarily become peripheral to
the group [Harcourt, 1987 (various primate species)], or can
form intersexual alliances that result in covert matings in
out-of-the-way places — often called “stolen copulations”
(Digby, 1999; Lazaro-Perea, 2001; Smuts, 1986). These
different scenarios may lead to quite different physiological
consequences when stressors are encountered by subordi-
nate individuals.
Question 2D: How likely is a subordinate to be caught at
such covert behaviors?
Question 2E: If caught, how likely is the animal to be
aggressively punished?
Question 2F: Overall, how much should subordinate status
be thought of as an undesirable state actively imposed by
more dominant animals? While this is typically the case in
some primate systems, in others, subordinate status is a
stable and compliant state. Question 2F represents a com-
posite of Questions 2A–2E and seeks to clarify the general
character of subordinate status in each primate society in-
volved in this analysis.
Contributing factor 3: What are the typical routes by
which ranks change?
Question 3A: Do animals rise in the hierarchy through
strenuous challenge of the status quo? While this can be the
case (e.g., male olive baboon; Sapolsky, 1993), dominance
may instead be obtained by passively waiting one’s turn, or
by inheriting a higher rank due to the death or departure of
a more dominant individual (e.g., female common marmo-
set; Lazaro-Parea et al., 2000). These differing routes of
ascension may present differing degrees of stressors.
Question 3B: How labile is the dominance system? The
extent of dominance lability will translate into a measure of
the likelihood of a subordinate animal moving out of the
subordinate cohort. Primate systems differ dramatically
both in the degree to which one or both sexes typically
display hierarchies and in the plasticity of hierarchies (Dun-
bar, 1988; Strier, 1996).
Contributing factor 4: What is the nature of revolutionary
change in hierarchies?
Question 4A: How often do such “revolutions” occur?
In some primate societies, there are rapid changes in rank
throughout the hierarchy that can be more dramatic than a
mere shift to the adjacent rank. “Revolutions” can occur
relatively frequently in labile systems, or can be nonexistent
in “hereditary” hierarchies.
Question 4B: When revolutions occur, do rates of aggres-
sion among dominant animals increase?
Question 4C: When revolutions occur, do rates of aggres-
sion among subordinate animals increase?
Question 4D: When revolutions occur, do rates at which
subordinate animals suffer displaced aggression from dom-
inant animals increase? The frequency and stressfulness of
such revolutions (as assessed in these questions) may have
an impact on stress-sensitive physiology.
Contributing factor 5: What role does kinship play in
attaining dominance?
Question 5A: How important is kinship in understanding
interactions among these animals? This variable was in-
cluded because of the potential buffering effects of kin
against social stress. In some primate species (e.g., at least
olive baboons and talapoin, rhesus, and cynomolgus mon-
keys in this study: Table 1) hierarchies of adults in one sex
comprise unrelated individuals, if the individuals of that sex
disperse over a sufﬁcient distance (Pusey and Packer, 1987).
Contributing factor 6: Are there nonagonistic factors
relevant to the stress response?
Many nonagonistic factors can affect the stress response
in primates, including ovarian function (Saltzman et al.,
1998, 2000; Smith and Norman, 1997). We will, however,
only focus on physiological adaptations to subordinate sta-
tus that can occur because subordinates in certain societies,
such as those of cooperatively breeding species (Abbott et
al., 1998), do not experience a high degree of harassment
and HPA activation (Abbott et al., 1997; Saltzman et al.,
1998).
Question 6A: Are there circumstances in which one has to
invoke a physiological adaptation to subordinate status,
rather than a response to agonistic behavior, to make sense
72
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

of the proﬁle of a particular stress hormone? One striking
example of this will be considered below in discussing
hypocortisolism in subordinate female common marmosets
(Abbott et al., 1997, 1998).
Data analysis
Four Old World and three New World species were
included in the analyses, and because of the sometimes
dramatic differences between the sexes within the same
primate society, males and females were treated as separate
data points. This generated a total of 10 observations from
the literature (Table 1), including societies varying from
small-group, singular cooperative breeders (common mar-
moset and cotton top tamarin) to large-troop, multi-male,
multi-female polygynous mating systems (rhesus and cyno-
molgus monkeys, and olive baboon). The questionnaire
comprised questions 1A–6A described above. Respondents
(all authors, except M.B. and T.G.) answered on a scale of
0–3, in which the social state described in the particular
question was not at all (0), mildly (1), moderately (2), or
highly applicable (3) to the species and sex under consid-
eration. Answers were correlated with only a single physi-
ological parameter: relative basal cortisol levels. The latter
were derived from basal cortisol concentrations (in blood or
urine collected by the same methods and at the same time of
day within a species) in subordinate animals of a particular
species and sex that were expressed as a percentage of basal
cortisol values in dominant animals of that species and sex.
Answers to the questionnaire also provided a degree of
standardization for between-species behavioral data analo-
gous to that derived from using relative basal cortisol levels.
Quantitative behavioral data per se were not used because of
a lack of comparability between species, such as the differ-
ent agonistic behaviors displayed by different species, the
different behaviors actually scored in the various studies,
and the different units of measure employed (e.g., fre-
quency, duration, or scan).
This analytical design produced 17 predictor variables
(questions 1A–6A in Table 2) with four possible answers
for each, one response variable, and 10 observations. Data
were ﬁrst analyzed by multiple regression (through the
origin) with phylogenetically independent contrasts (Felsen-
stein, 1985; Garland et al., 1992, 1999). These analyses take
into account the general nonindependence of values for
species, i.e., the general phenomenon that closely related
species will tend to resemble each other for many aspects of
their biology, including social systems and cortisol re-
sponses (Blomberg and Garland, 2002). The estimate of
phylogenetic relationships was taken from Purvis (1995), as
follows: (((Callithrix, Saguinus)Saimiri)(((Macaca mulatta,
Macaca fascicularis)Papio)Miopithecus)). As the data set
includes males and females within each of three species, sex
was treated as a bifurcation in the analyses within each
species concerned. Independent contrasts were computed
with the PDTREE program (Garland et al., 1999), with
branch lengths set according to Pagel’s (1992) arbitrary
method. Thus, bifurcations within species had branch
lengths of one unit, as did bifurcations between species,
with the constraint that all tips of the tree were contempo-
raneous in height.
How to incorporate between-sex variation into a phylo-
genetically based statistical analysis has not been examined
in the literature. Our approach to placement of the sexes and
to setting of branch lengths assumes that the expected
amount of between-sex variation is similar in magnitude to
the amount of between-species variation. We checked the
adequacy of this assumption by examining a diagnostic plot
of the absolute values of the standardized contrasts in rela-
tive cortisol values against their standard deviations (square
roots of sums of corrected branch lengths; Garland et al.,
1992). This plot indicated no signiﬁcant correlation (r 
0.26, df.  7, two-tailed P  0.50) and demonstrated that
the three between-sex contrasts were similar in magnitude
to the ﬁve between-species contrasts. Thus, the branch
lengths used seem to be statistically adequate.
Because there were only 10 observations and 17 predic-
tor variables, it was appropriate to include no more than
three predictors in any resulting regression equation, in
order to reduce bias (Venebles and Ripley, 1999). There-
fore, before performing multiple regression analyses, we
eliminated several potential predictors, based on various
criteria. Five variables (2D, 2E, 4B, 4C, and 4D) were
excluded because of missing values. Four more were then
excluded either because of their signiﬁcant correlation with
other variables (Table 2: 1B and 3B; correlated with 1A as
r  0.86 and r  0.78, respectively; correlated with each
other as r  0.90) or because of their poor correlation
(Table 2: 1C and 2C) with relative cortisol levels (Table 1).
For completeness, however, we report all of the simple
pairwise correlations between each independent variable
and cortisol ratio (except for the ﬁve variables excluded
because of missing data) in Table 2. The eight remaining
variables (1A, 2A, 2B, 2F, 3A, 4A, 5A, and 6A) were
subjected to multiple regression analyses with phylogeneti-
cally independent contrasts and a stepwise forward selection
procedure (P to enter  0.05, P to remove  0.10).
Because of the clustered nature of the response variables,
we also analyzed the data using a tree-based method (Hastie
and Tibshirani, 1990; Venebles and Ripley, 1999). In this
approach, there is a single response variable (e.g., relative
basal cortisol levels) and an array of predictors (17 vari-
ables; questions 1A–6A in Table 2) that enable construction
of a “tree” to serve as a decision/classiﬁcation algorithm.
This second round of statistical analysis is unrelated to the
phylogenetic tree used with the independent contrasts in the
ﬁrst round of analysis. Rather, this tree-based method is a
conventional statistical analysis that does not attempt to
account for phylogenetic relationships or sex. The data
points are, however, not entirely independent of one an-
other; e.g., New World primates comprise three species, but
two are represented twice in separate male and female data
73
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

points, and Old World primates comprise four species, but
one is represented twice as separate male and female data
points (Tables 1 and 2). While such lack of discrimination
in the tree-based method might give the appearance of
inﬂated degrees of freedom and probabilities of signiﬁ-
cance, the tree analysis focuses on the selection of the
number of variables that provide the greatest amount of
information, by forward selection at each branch of the tree
(Fig. 2).
As with the phylogenetically based analysis, not all vari-
ables were submitted to the tree algorithm for analysis. This
elimination of variables was derived independently from
that performed prior to the phylogenetic analysis. Answers
to Questions 1A, 1B, 1C, 2C, 2D, 3B, 4A, 4C, and 4D were
omitted for having either very low correlations (by tree
regression analysis) with the relative basal cortisol levels or
missing values. Answers to Questions 2E and 2F were
omitted for being highly correlated with those to 2A; an-
swers to Questions 4B and 6A were similarly omitted for
correlation with answers to 4D and 5A, respectively. An-
swers to the remaining questions (2A, 2B, 3A, and 5A) were
carried through the tree regression analysis. These are four
of the eight variables ﬁnally selected for the phylogeneti-
cally based analysis, above. The best-ﬁt regression coefﬁ-
cients obtained by the tree analysis for these four questions
are not shown in Table 2, as the tree analysis was performed
as supplemental to the phylogenetic analysis, and provided
independent partial conﬁrmation of the validity of the ﬁnd-
ings by selecting four of the same variables and predicting
similar results.
In the tree-based method, should the response variability
be signiﬁcantly attributable to answers from one question,
this would form a decision tree with a single branch point.
For example:
(1) If the answer to Question 1A is X, then this pre-
dicts relative cortisol levels  Y1% (branch 1).
(2) If the answer to Question 1A, however, is X, then
this predicts relative cortisol levels  Y2% (branch
2).
In contrast, if the response variability is entirely attrib-
utable to answers from two questions (e.g., Questions 2A
and 2B), this would form a decision tree with two layers of
branch points:
(1) If the answer to Question 2A is X, then relative
cortisol levels are Y% (branch 1). Given this out-
come, if the answer to Question 2B is Z, then
relative cortisol levels  Y11% (branch 1.1), while if
the answer to Question 2B is Z, then relative cor-
tisol levels  Y12% (branch 1.2).
(2) If the answer to Question 2A, however, is X, then
relative cortisol levels are Y% (branch 2). Given
this outcome, if the answer to Question 2B is W,
then relative cortisol levels  Y21% (branch 2.1),
while if the answer to Question 2B is W, then
relative cortisol levels  Y22% (branch 2.2).
The tree-based analysis incorporates the minimal number
of decision branch points that yield the maximal predict-
ability of response variance (i.e., construction of a decision
tree predicting relative cortisol levels from answers to ques-
tions in Table 2 that maximizes the variance explained by
the model, e.g., Fig. 2). Branch points are determined as the
points that most effectively minimize within-branch varia-
tion while providing the greatest possible separation be-
tween branches (Hastie and Tibshirani, 1990; Venebles and
Ripley, 1999).
Results
Basal cortisol concentrations of subordinate individuals
in stable dominance hierarchies, as compared to those of
their dominant counterparts, show considerable variability
among primate species, with relative cortisol levels ranging
from 45% (subordinates lower than dominants) to 154%
(subordinates higher than dominants; Table 1). Species in
which cortisol concentrations in subordinates are lower than
those of dominants (relative cortisol levels  45–82%)
include female common marmosets (Abbott et al., 1997,
1998; Saltzman et al., 1994, 1996, 1998) and female and
male cotton top tamarins (Ginther et al., 2001; Ziegler et al.,
1995). Those in which cortisol levels are approximately
equal in dominants and subordinates (relative cortisol levels
 95–105%) include female squirrel monkeys (Saltzman et
al., 1991; Vogt et al., 1980), male rhesus monkeys (Berco-
vitch and Clarke, 1995; Suomi et al., 1989). and female
talapoins (Keverne et al., 1984; Yodyingyuad et al., 1985),
and those in which cortisol levels are greater in subordinates
than in dominants (relative cortisol levels  127–154%)
include female cynomolgus monkeys (Shively et al., 1997;
Shively, 1998), male squirrel monkeys (Coe et al., 1979;
Manogue et al., 1975; Steklis et al., 1986; Vogt et al., 1980).
male olive baboons (Sapolsky, 1982, 1990; Sapolsky et al.,
1997), and male talapoins (Eberhart et al., 1983, 1985;
Keverne et al., 1984; Yodyingyuad et al., 1985).
This diversity in relative cortisol levels is not random: it
can be explained by the different social environments ex-
perienced by individuals in their different societies. For
example, adult male olive baboons (in which basal cortisol
concentrations in subordinates are nearly 50% higher than
in dominants) experience an overtly aggressive society in
which violent action is key to attaining dominance, and
threat and intimidation are necessary to maintain it (refer-
ences given in Table 1). In comparison, at the other end of
the social spectrum, female common marmosets (in which
basal cortisol concentrations in subordinates are approxi-
mately 50% lower than those in dominants) experience a
74
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

relatively nonaggressive society in which the attainment of
dominance mostly depends on rare instances of aggression
at times of vacated dominant positions and the maintenance
of dominance requires little threat or intimidation (French,
1997; Lazero-Perea et al., 2000). Social structure within a
primate species may not be completely uniform across all
habitats occupied (Dunbar, 1988), but the descriptions and
references provided in Table 1 are typical for the species
considered.
Answers generated by the questionnaire allowed us to
examine the relationship between (a) the quality of life for
dominant and subordinate animals and (b) the relative basal
cortisol level. Answers to the questionnaire are summarized
in Table 2. For each question, phylogenetically independent
contrast analysis was performed on the numeric values of
the answers to the questionnaire (Table 2) and on the rela-
tive basal cortisol value (Table 1). The resulting correlation
coefﬁcients are shown in Table 2. The multiple regression
analysis produced two signiﬁcantly predictive questions, 2A
(partial regression slope  20.1, P  0.010) and 2B (partial
regression slope  40.5, P  0.001; residual standard
error: 8.77 on 2 and 7 degrees of freedom; multiple R2 
0.88). For illustrative purposes, the relationship between the
answers to these two questions and relative basal cortisol
values are shown in Figs. 1a and 1b (produced from graph-
ing answers to Questions 2A, “How frequently are subor-
dinates subject to stressors?” and 2B “How available is
social support for subordinates?”, respectively, against rel-
ative basal cortisol values). Thus, across the primate species
studied (Table 1), subordinate individuals have increasingly
higher relative basal cortisol levels as: (a) subordinates are
subject to more frequent stressors (Question 2A; Fig. 1a),
and (b) subordinate animals have fewer available sources of
social support (Question 2B; Fig. 1b).
The nonphylogenetic, tree-based method found that an-
swers to the same two questions (2A and 2B, Table 2),
together with answers to Question 5A, generated a highly
predictive decision tree for relative cortisol values (overall
P  0.001; Fig. 2). Clearly the degree to which subordinates
experience stressors and the amount of available social
support both play important roles in determining relative
cortisol levels. The tree-based analysis also suggests that
increased relatedness among group members may amelio-
rate relative cortisol levels.
At the top of the decision tree (Fig. 2), independent of
any other question, if the answer to Question 5A is “0”
(male talapoin monkeys, male olive baboons, and male
squirrel monkeys), the tree analysis predicts a relative cor-
tisol value of 149%. If the answer is greater than “0,” then
answers to Question 2A (Table 2) provide the next signif-
icant (P  0.001) predictor for the remaining species and
sexes (Fig. 2), and so on. The tree analysis thus indicates
that the degree to which subordinates are related to domi-
nant animals provides a clear distinction between those
individuals with high relative cortisol levels (male talapoin
monkeys, male olive baboons, and male squirrel monkeys;
Table 1) and all others included in this study (Fig. 2). Those
that exhibit the minimum rating for kinship (or relatedness)
exhibit the greatest relative cortisol levels. Interestingly, all
the data points in this ﬁrst branch of the tree analysis are
from males. For the species and sex in Table 2 that do not
exhibit the minimum rating for kinship, the degree to which
subordinates are subject to stressors provides the next sig-
niﬁcant branching point in the tree analysis (Fig. 2).
Subordinates that experience the highest (“3”) or second-
highest (“2”) ratings (Table 2) for being subject to stressors
are predicted to have relative cortisol levels of 127% (e.g.,
female cynomolgus, female talapoin, and male rhesus mon-
keys Table 1), respectively. Subordinates that are rated as
experiencing few or no stressors (“0” or “1” on Question
2A; Table 2) are distinguished only by the answers to
Question 2B (Fig. 2). Those that have a higher rating for
social support of “2” (none rated “3”; Table 2) are predicted
to have relative cortisol levels of 45% (e.g., female common
marmosets; Fig. 2). Those that have little (“1”) or no (“0”)
social support (e.g., female cotton top tamarin, female squir-
rel monkey, male cotton top tamarin, and male rhesus mon-
keys; Table 2) are only ﬁnally distinguished at this stage by
answers to Question 2A regarding the degree of exposure to
stressors (Fig. 2). Those that rate as “0” for this question are
predicted to have relative cortisol levels of 81% (e.g., male
and female cotton top tamarins; Table 2), while those that
rate greater than “0” are predicted to have relative cortisol
levels of 98% (e.g., female squirrel and male rhesus mon-
keys; Fig. 2). Interestingly, subordinate male and female
cotton top tamarins have a very similar relationship between
their relative cortisol levels and the low levels of social
support and stressors experienced, suggesting a lack of sex
difference in this regard in cotton top tamarins. The majority
of outcomes from the tree-based analysis, nevertheless, sug-
gest that the more subordinates are subjected to stressors,
the greater their relative cortisol levels become. The relative
cortisol level is diminished, however, when social support is
available (Fig. 2).
Discussion
In some species, social subordinance is associated with a
more pathologic, hypercortisolemic proﬁle than in dominant
animals (e.g., Blanchard et al., 1993; Fuchs and Flugge,
2002). There is no consistent relationship, however, be-
tween social rank and stress response among primates (Ab-
bott et al., 1997; Sapolsky, 1993). Results from the present
study suggest that the different relationships between social
rank and stress response among primate species may be
explained by crucial differences in social behavior and or-
ganization between primate societies. Our meta-analysis of
selected primate species examines how the same social rank
can involve very different qualities of life in different pri-
mate societies. Most broadly, we ﬁnd that basal hypercor-
75
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

tisolism occurs among subordinate animals only in species
in which subordinate status carries the highest rates of
physical and/or psychological stressors, in which subordi-
nates have fewer available sources of social support, and in
which subordinates are minimally related to other members
of their social group. In other words, a life ﬁlled with
frequent stressors, little social support, and few kin pro-
duces frequent incidences of adrenocortical activation.
Answers to questions that were predictive of relative
cortisol levels
Using two different analytical approaches (phylogenetic
independent contrasts and tree-based analysis), we consis-
tently identiﬁed two variables that, together, are signiﬁ-
cantly predictive of cortisol levels in subordinate animals
relative to those found in dominants across the primate
Fig. 1. Demonstration of (a) the positive relationship (partial regression slope  20.1, P  0.010; as derived from phylogenetically independent contrast
analysis) between relative cortisol levels and the degree to which subordinate animals are exposed to social stressors (estimated as values: 0–3, Question 2A;
Table 2), and (b) the negative relationship (partial regression slope  40.5, P  0.001; as derived from phylogenetically independent contrast analysis)
between relative cortisol levels and the degree to which social support is available to subordinates (estimated as values: 0–3, Question 2B; Table 2). The
relative cortisol values for individual species and sex are numbered as shown in Table 1.
76
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

species studied. As a ﬁrst variable, higher relative cortisol
concentrations are found among subordinate animals, as
they are subject to higher rates of stressors (Question 2A).
This is logical, given the ability of both physical and social/
psychological stressors to stimulate cortisol secretion (Sap-
losky, 2000, 2002). In such cases of exposure of subordi-
nates to high rates of stressors, even basal cortisol levels are
elevated in subordinates because an ostensive “basal” state
involves a certain degree of ongoing stress (Blanchard et al.,
1993). In addition, such relative basal hypercortisolism can
reﬂect a change in the setpoint in the neuroendocrine reg-
ulation of the adrenocortical axis. Repeated elevations of
glucocorticoid concentrations into the range seen for major
stressors can lead to downregulation of corticosteroid re-
ceptors in brain regions that mediate glucocorticoid nega-
tive feedback (Sapolsky et al., 1984). The result of such
receptor downregulation is impaired negative feedback sen-
sitivity at the level of the brain, resulting in diminished
neuroendocrine restraint on the adrenocortical axis and el-
evated basal glucocorticoid levels. Evidence for such feed-
back resistance has been observed among subordinate pri-
mates in species with high rates of stressors, such as
subordinate male olive baboons (Sapolsky, 1990). In this
regard, there is evidence in the tree analysis that subordinate
male talapoin and cynomolgus monkeys, as well as subor-
dinate male olive baboons, experience particularly elevated
ratings for both displacement aggression and relative corti-
sol levels and thus may all be at risk for developing feed-
back resistance to glucocorticoids.
Second, we observed higher relative cortisol concentra-
tions as subordinates experienced decreased opportunities
for social support (Question 2B). An extensive literature
demonstrates that having an outlet available for frustration
decreases the glucocorticoid response to various stressors
(Levine et al., 1989; Sapolsky et al., 2000). For example,
allowing rats access to a running wheel decreases the mag-
nitude of the glucocorticoid response to shock (Levine et al.,
1989). Social outlets can be particularly efﬁcacious at re-
ducing the stress response; among primates, these include
social grooming (e.g., dominants grooming subordinate fe-
male common marmosets: Lazero-Perea et al., in press),
social contact, and, as noted, engagement in displacement
aggression (Ray and Sapolsky, 1992; Sapolsky and Ray,
1989; Sapolsky et al., 1997; Virgin and Sapolsky, 1997).
Thus, it is logical that among species in which subordinates
lack ready access to such coping outlets, subordinate ani-
mals are more likely to exhibit hypercortisolism.
In addition to the two variables identiﬁed by the phylo-
genetic independent contrast analyses, the tree-based anal-
ysis indicated a further variable that played a predictive role,
namely the degree of kinship (Question 5A: although not
included in the multiple regression, this was also among the
three most predictive variables based on pairwise correla-
tions determined by phylogenetically based analysis; Table
2). Higher relative cortisol levels in subordinates were as-
sociated with societies in which behavioral interactions
were unlikely to involve close kin. This variable was at the
ﬁrst branch point in the tree analysis (Fig. 2). This implies
that regardless of the answers to Questions 2A and 2B, high
relative cortisol levels may be predicted among subordi-
nates if they do not have the opportunities to interact with
close kin. It is reasonable that this variable should play a
predictive role, insofar as the degree of kinship (Question
5A) was among the three most predictive variables (Table
2). Kin selection is an important component of natural
selection theory (Hamilton, 1964) and a key variable in
understanding social dynamics in primate societies (e.g.,
Gouzoules and Gouzoules, 1987): degrees of aggression
and of cooperation co-vary as a function of degree of relat-
edness. Having kin available is likely to ameliorate stress in
at least two broad ways. First, close relatives are particularly
likely to supply coalitional support, thereby decreasing the
rate at which social stressors are generated. Second, close
relatives are a readily available means of coping outlets
such as social grooming. These points are perhaps best
Fig. 2. The decision tree produced by tree-based statistical analyses of
answers to Questions 2A, 2B, 3A, and 5A (Table 2; see text for rationale
behind exclusion of variables). In this approach, there is a single response
variable (relative basal cortisol levels) and an array of predictors (Ques-
tions 2A, 2B, 3A, and 5A; Table 2) that enabled construction of the
decision tree to serve as a decision/classiﬁcation algorithm. The answers to
Questions 5A, 2A, and 2B provide the key branch points that predict
relative cortisol levels in such a way as to maximize the variance explained
by this tree compared to any other answer combination (see text).
77
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

appreciated when contrasting the highly kin-based lives of
female marmosets with the very different, non-kin-based
lives of male baboons and male talapoins (Table 1). In this
regard, males were identiﬁed as being signiﬁcantly at risk
for hypercortisolism in non-kin situations, suggesting that
infrequent behavioral interactions with close kin may have
greater implications for long-term changes in the male HPA
axis than is found in females.
Interestingly, in the highly kin-based societies of mar-
mosets and tamarins, in which subordinate females have the
poorest fecundity and the highest incidence of anovulation
of the primate species considered in this paper (Abbott et
al., 1997; Ziegler et al., 1990), physiological factors other
than the stress response may inﬂuence the cortisol levels
found in subordinates. Subordinate female marmosets and
tamarins exhibit lower basal cortisol concentrations than
dominant females, with female marmosets exhibiting the
more pronounced diminution (Table 1). Impaired ovarian
function in subordinate female common marmosets, at least,
contributes to a state of hypoestrogenism, and the latter has
been associated with a reduction in circulating cortisol lev-
els in females of several primate species (common marmo-
set: Abbott et al., 1997; Saltzman et al., 1998; squirrel
monkey: Coe et al., 1986; rhesus monkey: Smith and Nor-
man, 1987). In female marmosets, at least, social subordi-
nation also results in a further degree of hypocortisolism
that cannot be mimicked by experimentally induced hy-
poestrogenic states (e.g., ovariectomy: Abbott et al., 1997;
Saltzman et al., 1998; unpublished data). The low cortisol
levels in subordinates are also not due to reduced circulating
levels of adrenocorticotropin (Abbott et al., 1998; Johnson
et al., 1996; Saltzman et al., in review), but are, instead, at
least partly due to reduced adrenocortical responsiveness to
adrenocorticotropin (Saltzman et al., 2000). Such hypocor-
tisolism may be considered as a beneﬁcial adaptation to a
hypoestrogenic, nonbreeding adult state (Abbott et al.,
1998), rather than as an impaired or dysfunctional stress
response, and may aid in protecting subordinate female
marmosets from typical pathophysiological consequences
of low estrogen, such as osteoporosis (Colman et al., 1997).
Answers to questions that were not predictive of relative
cortisol levels
It is of interest to consider brieﬂy the answers to the
remaining questions that did not contribute to the ﬁnal
regression equation or tree analysis. First, it is not sur-
prising that the degree of competition for attainment of
dominance among high-ranking individuals fails to pre-
dict relative cortisol levels (Question 1A). Such compe-
tition typically not only generates stressors for those
participants, but translates into increased rates of dis-
placement stressors for subordinates as well (Sapolsky,
1993). In Question 1B, aggression played a minimal role
in maintaining dominance in most of the species consid-
ered (Table 2), thereby distorting any correlational anal-
ysis. In Question 1C, the rewards of dominance were too
uniform across species to reﬂect societal variation (Table
2). Apparently, among the primate species studied, the
experiences of dominant animals are fairly consistent
across the different societies. Thus, the variation in rel-
ative cortisol levels found in this study (Table 1; Fig. 1)
may be due to differences in the quality of life parameters
for subordinate animals and not for dominants. As there
were few between-species differences in the answers to
Questions 2C–2F related to the quality of life for subor-
dinates,
alternatives
to
competition
with
dominants
(Question 2C; Table 2) appear to represent only a minor
factor in the social life of subordinate primates in many
of the species studied.
The next two questions examined the ways in which
ranks shift within hierarchies that are generally stable. One
was concerned with whether a rise in the hierarchy arose
from strenuous efforts on the part of the individual, or
occurred as a less stressful default (Question 3A). The lack
of predictability of this variable is understandable as ex-
treme likely stressfulness of rank transition is only found in
male baboons (Table 2). The other question concerned the
frequency with which ranks change (Question 3B). This was
only minimally predictive, possibly because there was little
variability in the answers to this question for the primate
species studied.
A number of questions concerned periods of hierarchical
instability (Contributing Factor 4; Table 2). Hypercorti-
solism among subordinate animals tended to be predicted
when such hierarchical instabilities involved high rates of
aggression among dominant animals (Question 4B; Table
2). This, however, appeared to be merely a surrogate marker
for Question 4D, insofar as high rates of aggression among
dominant animals readily translate into the more salient
measure, subsequent displacement of aggression onto sub-
ordinates. Data regarding the frequency of hierarchial rev-
olutions (Question 4A) and the extent of aggression among
subordinates at such times (Question 4C) did not have
sufﬁcient variability to predict relative cortisol values. It is
reasonable that these variables should play a predictive role,
insofar as hierarchical instability can generate severe phys-
ical and psychological stressors for subordinates, as well as
greatly curtail their access to coping outlets (Sapolsky,
1993). Moreover, displacement represents a source of cop-
ing for the dominant individual, which is likely to reduce
cortisol levels in dominants (Levine et al., 1989). Such
revolutions were relatively uncommon among these species
(Question 4A; Table 2), but their occurrence and outcome,
as well as frequency, may reﬂect the nature of the data used
in this meta-analysis. We focused on stable social groups,
and thus potentially minimized the likelihood of revolution-
ary change. Most of our data were also obtained from social
groups maintained in captivity (Table 1). Management prac-
tices employed to maintain stable captive groups may there-
fore further minimize the likelihood of revolutionary change
in the hierarchy. However, the increased population density
78
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

found in captive versus free-living primate social groups
may encourage increased levels of interindividual aggres-
sion, depending on sex and species (Judge and de Waal,
1997). It remains to be determined whether social groups in
captivity consistently exhibit different rates of revolutionary
change in their social hierarchy than groups living in the
wild.
Conclusion
We have identiﬁed two social variables in primate soci-
eties (Questions 2A and 2B; Table 2) that consistently
predict whether subordinate or dominant animals exhibit
elevated basal cortisol levels (hypercortisolism). Our ﬁnd-
ings have important implications for understanding the dif-
ferent physiological consequences of low social rank in
different primate societies:
(1) “Rank” is not uniform in its social meaning across
different primate species, and some investigators
have questioned the utility of the rank concept in
some cases (Rowell, 1966). Insofar as rank is not a
consistent construct, the physiological correlates of
rank follow suit. This is likely to extend beyond
comparisons among primate species, as in the
present study, to (a) between a variety of nonprimate
species, and (b) between different populations within
the same species.
(2) These studies were carried out on populations of
primates living in captivity (and thus, well-fed and
under veterinary care) or in a particularly benign
ecosystem in the wild (in this case, the Serengeti and
including only male olive baboons; Table 1). As
such, the individuals assessed in all study popula-
tions were probably subject to few or no stressors
attributable to hunger, illness, or predation, and
probably had particularly high densities of poten-
tially stressful social interactions, given their close
proximities. Thus, much as with many present-day
human societies, the physiology of stress in our
study populations of nonhuman primates can mostly
be understood in the context of social and psycho-
logical stressors generated between conspeciﬁcs
within their social environment.
(3) The extent to which social stress has physiological or
pathophysiological consequences is not merely a
function of the frequency or severity with which an
individual is exposed to stressors. This represents
only half the equation. Of equal importance is the
availability and efﬁcacy of coping responses (and
possibly close kin) to offset the physiological impact
of social stressors, indicating that subordination
leads to not one, but a variety of social consequences
across the different primate societies. Our compara-
tive meta-analysis of selected nonhuman primate
species identiﬁed components signiﬁcantly involved
in both of these aspects of the stress response.
Acknowledgments
This paper was written with support from the follow-
ing: NSF Grants IBN-9604321 (D.H.A. and W.S.), DEB-
0196384 (T.G.); NIH Grants RR00167 (D.H.A. and W.S.),
MH60728 (W.S. and D.H.A.), MH53709 and HD07678
(W.S.), RR03640 (F.B.B.), MH35215 (C.T.S. and T.E.Z.);
an MRC Programme Grant (E.B.K.); The Harry Frank
Guggenheim Foundation (F.B.B. and R.M.S.); and The
Templeton Foundation (R.M.S.). This is publication No.
42–007 of the Wisconsin Primate Research Center.
References
Abbott, D.H., 1984. Behavioral and physiological suppression of fertility in
subordinate marmoset monkeys. Am. J. Primatol. 6, 169–186.
Abbott, D.H., 1987. Behaviorally mediated suppression of reproduction in
female primates. J. Zool. (Lond.) 213, 455–470.
Abbott, D.H., Saltzman, W., Schultz-Darken, N.J., Smith, T.E., 1997.
Speciﬁc neuro-endocrine mechanisms not involving generalized stress
mediate social regulation of female reproduction in cooperatively
breeding marmoset monkeys. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 807, 219–238.
Abbott, D.H., Saltzman, W., Schultz-Darken, N.J., Tannenbaum, P.L.,
1998. Adaptations to subordinate status in female marmoset monkeys.
Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C. 119, 261–274.
Albeck, D.S., McKittrick, C.R., Blanchard, D.C., Blanchard, R.J., Niku-
lina, J., McEwen, B.S., Sakai, R.R., 1997. Chronic social stress alters
levels of corticotropin-releasing factor and arginine vasopressin mRNA
in rat brain. J. Neurosci. 17, 4895–4903.
Ausman, L.M., Gallina, D.L., Hegsted, D.M., 1989. Protein-calorie mal-
nutrition in squirrel monkeys: adaptive response to calorie deﬁciency.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 50, 19–29.
Bakshi, V.P., Kalin, N.H., 2000. Corticotropin-releasing hormone and
animal models of anxiety: Gene–environment interactions. Biol. Psy-
chiatry 48, 1175–1198.
Baker, A.J., Dietz, J.M., 1996. Immigration in wild groups of golden lion
tamarins (Leontopithecus rosalia). Am. J. Primatol. 38, 47–56.
Bercovitch, F.B., 1988. Coalitions, cooperation and reproductive tactics in
adult male savannah baboons. Anim. Behav. 36, 1198–1209.
Bercovitch, F.B., 1991. Social stratiﬁcation, social strategies and reproduc-
tive success in primates. Ethol. Sociobiol. 12, 315–333.
Bercovitch, F.B., Clarke, A.S., 1995. Dominance rank, cortisol concentra-
tions, and reproductive maturation in male rhesus macaques. Physiol.
Behav. 58, 215–221.
Blanchard, D.C., Sakai, R.R., McEwen, B., Weiss, S.M., Blanchard, R.J.,
1993. Subordination stress: behavioral, brain, and neuroendocrine cor-
relates. Behav. Brain Res. 58, 113–121.
Blomberg, S.P., Garland Jr., T., 2002. Tempo and mode in evolution:
phylogenetic inertia, adaptation, and comparative methods. J. Evol.
Biol. in press.
Boinski, S., 1999. Geographic variation in behavior of a primate taxon:
stress responses as a proximate mechanism in the evolution of social
behavior, in: Foster, S.A., Endler, J.A. (Eds.), Geographic Variation in
Behavior: Perspectives on Evolutionary Mechanisms, Oxford Univer-
sity Press, New York, pp. 95–120.
Brandon, D.D., Markwick, A.J., Chrousos, G.P., Loriaux, D.L., 1989.
Glucocorticoid resistance in humans and nonhuman primates. Cancer
Res. 49 (Suppl.), 2203s–2213s.
79
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

Brandtstadter, J., Baltes-Goetz, B., Kirschbaum, C., Helhammer, D., 1991.
Developmental and personality correlates of adrenocortical activity as
indexed by salivary cortisol: observations in the age range of 35 to 65
years. J. Psychsom. Res. 35, 173–185.
Caldecott, J.O., 1986. Mating patterns, societies and the ecogeography of
macaques. Anim. Behav. 34, 208–220.
Cilia, J., Piper, D.C., 1997. Marmoset conspeciﬁc confrontation: an etho-
logically-based model of anxiety. Pharm. Biochem. Behav. 58, 85–91.
Clarke, A.S., Boinski, S., 1995. Temperament in nonhuman primates.
Am. J. Primatol. 37, 103–115.
Clarke, A.S., Wittwer, D.J., Abbott, D.H., Schneider, M.L., 1994. Long-
term effects of prenatal stress on HPA axis activity in juvenile rhesus
monkeys. Dev. Psychobiol. 27, 257–269.
Coe, C.L., Mendoza, S.P., Levine, S., 1979. Social status constrains the
stress response in the squirrel monkey. Physiol. Behav. 23, 633–638.
Coe, C.L., Murai, J.T., Wiener, S.G., Levine, S., Siiteri, P.K., 1986. Rapid
cortisol and corticosteroid-binding globulin responses during preg-
nancy and after estrogen administration in the squirrel monkey. J.
Endocrinol. 118, 435–440.
Coe, C.L., Savage, A., Bromley, L.J., 1992. Phylogenetic inﬂuences on
hormone levels across the Primate order. Am. J. Primatol. 28,
81–100.
Colman, R.J., Saltzman, W., Abbott, D.H., Kemnitz, J.W., Binkley, N.,
1997. Absence of estrogen depletion bone loss in female common
marmosets. J. Bone Mineral Res. 12, 466.
Denny, W.B., Valentine, D.L., Reynolds, P.D., Smith, D.F., Scammell,
J.G., 2000. Squirrel monkey immunophilin FKBP51 is a potent inhib-
itor of glucocorticoid receptor binding. Endocrinology 141, 4107–
4113.
Digby, L.J., 1999. Sexual behavior and extragroup copulations in a wild
population of common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus). Folia Primatol
70, 136–145.
Dunbar, R.I.M., 1988. Chapman and Hall, London.
Eberhart, J.A., Keverne, E.B., Meller, R.E., 1983. Social inﬂuences on
circulating levels of cortisol and prolactin in male talapoin monkeys.
Physiol. Behav. 30, 361–369.
Eberhart, J.A., Yodyingyuad, U., Keverne, E.B., 1985. Subordination in
male talapoin monkeys lowers sexual behaviour in the absence of
dominants. Physiol. Behav. 35, 673–677.
Felsenstein, J., 1985. Phyologenies and the comparative method. Am.
Naturalist 125, 1–15.
Ferrari, S.F., Digby, L.J., 1996. Wild Callithrix groups: stable extended
families? Am. J. Primatol. 38, 19–27.
Fuchs, E., Flugge, G., 2002. Social stress in tree shrews: Effects on
physiology, brain function, and behavior of subordinate individuals.
Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 73, 247–258.
Gacad, M.A., Adams, J.S., 1998. Proteins in the heat shock-70 family
speciﬁcally bind 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 and 17beta-estradiol. J. Clin.
Endocrinol. Metab. 83, 1264–1267.
Garland, T., Jr., Harvey, P.H., Ives, A.R., 1992. Procedures for the analysis
of comparative data using phylogenetically independent contrasts. Sys-
tem. Biol. 41, 18–32.
Garland, T., Jr., Midford, P.E., Ives, A.R., 1999. An introduction to
phylogenetically based statistical methods, with a new method for
conﬁdence intervals on ancestral values. Am. Zool. 39, 374–388.
Ginther, A.J., Ziegler, T.E., Snowdon, C.T., 2001. Reproductive biology of
captive male cottontop tamarin monkeys as a function of social envi-
ronment. Anim. Behav. 61, 65–78.
Girard, I., Garland, T., Jr., 2002. Plasma corticosterone response to acute
and chronic voluntary exercise in female house mice. J. Appl. Physiol.
92, 1553–1561.
Golub, M.S., Sassenrath, E.N., Goo, G.P., 1979. Plasma cortisol levels and
dominance in peer groups of rhesus monkey weanlings. Horm. Behav.
12, 50–59.
Gouzoules, S., Gouzoules, H., 1987. Kinship, in: Smuts, B.B., Cheney,
D.L., Seyfarth, R.M., Wrangham, R.W., Struhsaker, T.T. (Eds.), Pri-
mate Societies, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 299–305.
Hamilton, W.D., 1964. The genetical evolution of social behavior. I, II. J
Theor. Biol. 7, 1–52.
Harcourt, A.H., 1987. Dominance and fertility among female primates. J.
Zool. (Lond.) 213, 471–487.
Hastie, T.J., Tibshirani, R.J., 1990. Generalized Additive Models. Chap-
man and Hall, New York.
Hermus, A.R., Sweep, C.G., 1990. Cytokines and the hypothalamic–pitu-
itary–adrenal axis. J. Steroid Biochem. Mol. Biol. 37, 867–871.
Holsboer, F., 1999. Clinical neuroendocrinology, in: Charney, D., Nestler,
E., Bunney, B. (Eds.), Neurobiology of Mental Illness, Oxford Univer-
sity Press, New York, pp. 149–156.
Johnson, E.O., Kamilaris, T.C., Carter, C.S., Calogero, A.E., Gold, P.W.,
Chrousos, G.P., 1996. The biobehavioral consequences of psychogenic
stress in a small, social primate (Callithrix jacchus jacchus). Biol.
Psychiatry 40, 317–337.
Judge, P.G., De Waal, F.B.M., 1997. Rhesus monkey behaviour under
diverse population densities: coping with long-term crowding. Anim.
Behav. 54, 643–662.
Kaplan, J.R., Adams, M.R., Koritnik, D.R., Rose, J.C., Manuck, S.B.,
1986. Adrenal responsiveness and social status in intact and ovariec-
tomized Macaca fascicularis. Am. J. Primatol. 11, 181–193.
Keverne, E.B., Eberhart, J.A., Yodyingyuad, U., Abbott, D.H., 1984.
Social inﬂuences on sex differences in the behavior and endocrine state
of talapoin monkeys. Prog. Brain Res. 61, 331–347.
Kime, D.E., Vinson, G.P., Major, P.W., Kirkpatrick, R., 1980. Adrenal-
gonad relationships, in: Jones, C., Henderson, I.W. (Eds.), General
Comparative and Clinical Endocrinology of the Adrenal Cortex, Vol. I.
Academic Press, New York, pp. 183–264.
Klosterman, L.L., Murai, J.T., Siiteri, P.K., 1986. Cortisol levels, binding,
and properties of corticosteroid-binding globulin in the serum of pri-
mates. Endocrinology 118, 424–434.
Lazaro-Perea, C., Arruda, M.F., Snowdon, C.T., Grooming as a reward?
Social function of grooming in cooperatively breeding marmosets.
Animal Behav., in press.
Lazaro-Perea, C., Castro, C.S.S., Harrison, R., Araujo, A., Arruda, M.F.,
Snowdon, C.T., 2000. Behavioral and demographic changes following
the loss of the breeding female in cooperatively breeding marmosets.
Behav. Ecol. Sociobiol. 48, 137–146.
Lazaro-Perea, C., 2001. Intergroup interactions in wild common marmo-
sets Callithrix jacchus: territorial defence and assessment of neigh-
bours. Anim. Behav. 62, 11–21.
Levine, S., Coe, C., Wiener, S., 1989. The psychoneuroendocrinology of
stress: a psychobiological perspective, in: Levine, S., Brush, R. (Eds.),
Psychoendocrinology, Academic Press, New York, pp. 15–31.
Liu, D., Diorio, J., Tannenbaum, B., Caldji, C., Francis, D., Freedman, A.,
Sharma, S., Pearson, D., Plotsky, P.M., Meaney, M.J., 1997. Maternal
care, hippocampal glucocorticoid receptors, and hypothalamic–pitu-
itary–adrenal responses to stress. Science 277, 1659–1662.
McEwen, B.S., 2001. From molecules to mind. Stress, individual differ-
ences, and the social environment. Ann. NY Acad Sci. 935, 42–49.
Mendoza, S.P., Mason, W.A., 1991. Breeding readiness in squirrel mon-
keys: female-primed females are triggered by males. Physiol. Behav.
49, 471–479.
Nievergelt, C.M., Digby, L.J., Ramakrishnanand, U., Woodruff, D.S.,
2000. Genetic analysis of group composition and breeding system in a
wild common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) population. Int. J. Prima-
tol. 21, 1–20.
Orth, D.N., Kovacs, W.J., 1998. The adrenal cortex, in: Wilson, I.L.,
Foster, D.W., Kronenberg, H.M., Larsen, P.R. (Eds.), Williams Text-
book of Endocrinology, 9th edition. Saunders, Philadelphia, pp. 517–
664.
Pagel, M.D., 1992. A method for the analysis of comparative data. J.
Theor. Biol. 156, 431–442.
Pugeat, M.M., Chrousos, G.P., Nisula, B.C., Loriaux, D.L., Brandon, D.,
Lipsett, M.B., 1984. Plasma cortisol transport and primate evolution.
Endocrinology 115, 357–361.
80
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

Purvis, A., 1995. A composite estimate of primate phylogeny. Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. Lond. B 348, 405–421.
Pusey, A.E., Packer, C., 1987. Dispersal and philopatry, in: Smuts, B.B.,
Cheney, D.L., Seyfarth, R.M., Wrangham, R.W., Struhsaker, T.T.
(Eds.), Primate Societies. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp.
250–266.
Ray, J.C., Sapolsky, R.M., 1992. Styles of male social behavior and their
endocrine correlates among high-ranking baboons. Am. J. Primatol. 28,
231–250.
Reynolds, P.D., Ruan, Y., Smith, D.F., Scammell, J.G., 1999. Glucocorti-
coid resistance in the squirrel monkey is associated with overexpres-
sion of the immunophilin FKBP51. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 84,
663–669.
Robinson, P.A., Hawkey, C., Hammond, G.L., 1985. A phylogenetic study
of the structural and functional characteristics of corticosteroid binding
globulin in primates. J. Endocrinol. 104, 251–257.
Rowell, T.E., 1966. Forest living baboons in Uganda. J. Zool. (Lond.) 147,
344–365.
Rowell, T.E., Dixson, A.F., 1975. Changes in social organization during
the breeding season of wild talapoin monkeys. J. Reprod. Fertil. 43,
419–434.
Saltzman, W., Mendoza, S.P., Mason, W.A., 1991. Sociophysiology of
relationships in squirrel monkeys I. Formation of female dyads.
Physiol. Behav. 50, 271–280.
Saltzman, W., Schultz-Darken, N.J., Schefﬂer, G., Wegner, F.H., Abbott,
D.H., 1994. Social and reproductive inﬂuences on plasma cortisol in
female marmoset monkeys. Physiol. Behav. 56, 801–810.
Saltzman, W., Schultz-Darken, N.J., Abbott, D.H., 1996. Behavioural and
endocrine predictors of dominance and tolerance among female com-
mon marmosets (Callithrix jacchus). Anim. Behav. 51, 657–674.
Saltzman, W., Schultz-Darken, N.J., Wegner, F.H., Wittwer, D.J., Abbott,
D.H., 1998. Suppression of cortisol levels in subordinate female mar-
mosets: reproductive and social contributions. Horm. Behav. 33, 58–
74.
Saltzman, W., Schultz-Darken, N.J., Abbott, D.H., 2000. Reduced adreno-
cortical responsiveness to ACTH stimulation in female marmoset mon-
keys: inﬂuences of social rank and reproductive hormones. Psychoneu-
roendocrinology 25, 463–477.
Saltzman, W., Prudom, S.L., Schultz-Darken, N.J., Wittwer, D.J., Abbott,
D.H., Social suppression of cortisol in female marmoset monkeys: role
of circulating ACTH levels and glucocorticoid negative feedback. Psy-
choneuroendocrinology, in press.
Sapolsky, R.M., 1982. The endocrine stress-response and social status in
the wild baboon. Horm. Behav. 15, 279–292.
Sapolsky, R.M., 1983. Endocrine aspects of social instability in the olive
baboon (Papio anubis). Am. J. Primatol. 5, 365–379.
Sapolsky, R.M., 1990. Adrenocortical function, social rank and personality
among wild baboons.. Biol. Psychiatry 28, 862–878.
Sapolsky, R.M., 1993. The physiology of dominance in stable versus
unstable social hierarchies, in: Mason, W.A., Mendoza, S.P. (Eds.),
Primate Social Conﬂict. State University of New York Press, New
York, pp. 171–204.
Sapolsky, R.M., Romero, L.M., Munck, A.U., 2000. How do glucocorti-
coids inﬂuence stress responses? Integrating permissive, suppressive,
stimulatory, and preparative actions. Endocr. Rev. 21, 55–89.
Sapolsky, R.M., 2002. Endocrinology of the stress-response, in: Becker, J.,
Breedlove, S., Crews, D., McCarthy, M. (Eds.), Behavioral Endocri-
nology, 2nd edition. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 409–450.
Sapolsky, R.M., Alberts, S., Altmann, J., 1997. Hypercortisolism associ-
ated with social subordinance or social isolation among wild baboons.
Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 54, 1137–1143.
Sapolsky, R.M., Krey, L., McEwen, B., 1984. Stress down-regulates cor-
ticosterone receptors in a site-speciﬁc manner in the brain. Endocrinol-
ogy 114, 287–292.
Sapolsky, R.M., Ray, J., 1989. Styles of dominance and their physiological
correlates among wild baboons. Am. J. Primatol. 18, 1–13.
Sauermann, U., Nurnberg, P., Bercovitch, F.B., Berard, J.D., Treﬁlov, A.,
Widdig, A., Kessler, M., Schmidtke, J., Krawczak, M., 2001. Increased
reproductive success of MHC class II heterozygous males among
free-ranging rhesus macaques. Hum. Genet. 108, 249–254.
Savage, A., Shideler, S.E., Soto, L.H., Causado, J., Giraldo, L.H., Lasley,
B.L., Snowdon, C.T., 1997. Reproductive events of wild cotton-top
tamarins (Saguinus oedipus) in Colombia. Am. J. Primatol. 43, 329–
337.
Scammell, J.G., Denny, W.B., Valentine, D.L., Smith, D.F., 2001. Over-
expression of the FK506-binding immunophilin FKBP51 is the com-
mon cause of glucocorticoid resistance in three New World primates.
Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 124, 152–165.
Seckl, J.R., 2001. Glucocorticoid programming of the fetus; adult pheno-
types and molecular mechanisms. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 185, 61–71.
Shively, C.A., Laber-Laird, K., Anton, R.F., 1997. Behavior and physiol-
ogy of social stress and depression in female cynomolgus monkeys.
Biol. Psychiatry 41, 871–882.
Shively, C.A., 1998. Social subordination stress, behavior, and central
monoaminergic function in female cynomolgus monkeys. Biol. Psy-
chiatry 44, 882–891.
Smith, C.J., Norman, R.L., 1987. Inﬂuence of the gonads on cortisol
secretion in female rhesus macaques. Endocrinology 121, 2192–2198.
Smuts, B.B., 1986. Sex and Friendship in Baboons. Aldine Press, Haw-
thorne.
Snowdon, C.T., Savage, A., McConnell, P.B., 1985. A breeding colony of
cotton-top tamarins (Saguinus oedipus). Lab. Anim. Sci. 35, 477–480.
Sommer, V., 1988. Male competition and coalitions in langurs (Presbytis
entellus) at Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India. Hum. Evol. 3, 261–278.
Soumi, S.J., Scanlan, J.M., Rasmussen, K.L.R., Davidson, M., Boinski, S.,
Higley, J.D., Marriott, B.M., 1989. Pituitary–adrenal response to cap-
ture in Cayo Santiago-derived rhesus monkeys. Puerto Rico Health Sci.
J. 8, 171–176.
Strier, K.B., 1996. Myth of the typical primate. Yearbook Phys. Anthropol.
37, 233–271.
Venebles, W.N., Ripley, B., 1994. Modern and Applied Statistics with
5-Plus. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Virgin, C.E., Sapolsky, R., 1997. Styles of male social behavior and their
endocrine correlates among low-ranking baboons. Am. J. Primatol. 42,
25–39.
de Waal, F.B.M., 1982. Chimpanzee Politics. Jonathan Cape, London.
de Waal, F.B.M., 1989. Peacemaking Among Primates. Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA.
de Waal, F.B.M., 1993. Reconciliation among primates: a review of em-
pirical evidence and unresolved issues, in: Mason, W.A., Mendoza,
S.P. (Eds.), Primate Social Conﬂict. State University of New York
Press, New York, pp. 111–144.
de Waal, F.B.M., 2000. Primates—a natural heritage of conﬂict resolution.
Science 289, 586–590.
Wickings, E.J., Dixson, A.F., 1992. Testicular function, secondary sexual
development, and social status in male mandrills (Mandrillus sphinx).
Physiol Behav. 52, 909–916.
Williams, R., 1989. The Trusting Heart: Great News about Type A Be-
havior. Random House, New York.
Yamamoto, S., Utsu, S., Tanioka, Y., Ohsawa, N., 1977. Extremely high
levels of corticosteroids and low levels of corticosteroid binding mac-
romolecule in plasma of marmoset monkeys. Acta Endocrinol.
(Copenh). 85, 398–405.
Yodyingyuad, U., de la Riva, C., Abbott, D.H., Herbert, J., Keverne, E.B.,
1985. Relationship between dominance hierarchy, cerebrospinal ﬂuid
levels of amine transmitter metabolites (5-hydroxyindole acetic acid
and homovanillic acid) and plasma cortisol in monkeys. Neuroscience
16, 851–858.
81
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

Ziegler, T.E., Savage, A., Schefﬂer, G., Snowdon, C.T., 1987. The endo-
crinology of puberty and reproductive functioning in female cotton-top
tamarins (Saguinus oedipus) under varying social conditions. Biol.
Reprod. 37, 618–627.
Ziegler, T.E., Snowdon, C.T., Uno, H., 1990. Social interactions and
determinants of ovulation in tamarins (Saguinus), in: Ziegler, T.E.,
Bercovitch, F.B. (Eds.), Socioendocrinology of Primate Reproduction,
Wiley-Liss, New York, pp. 113–133.
Ziegler, T.E., Schefﬂer, G., Snowdon, C.T., 1995. The relationship of
cortisol levels to social environment and reproductive functioning in
female cotton-top tamarins, Saguinus oedipus.. Horm. Behav. 29,
407–424.
82
D.H. Abbott et al. / Hormones and Behavior 43 (2003) 67–82

