1

Acting and 
Character Animation


Acting and 
Character Animation
The Art of Animated Films, 
Acting, and Visualizing
Rolf Giesen and Anna Khan

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2018 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-7863-3 (Paperback)
978-1-138-06981-7 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reason­
able efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and pub­
lisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their 
use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material 
reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this 
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write 
and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, repro­
duced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.
copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
(CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organi­
zation that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have 
been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at 
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at 
http://www.crcpress.com

v
Contents
Acknowledgments	
ix
Authors	
xi
Introduction: Neverland or No End to Childhood	
xiii
Part I  The Story of Actors & Acting in Animation
	 1	 Time for Creation: Homunculi	
3
	 2	 Chalk-Talking on a Vaudeville Stage	
5
	 3	 Magicians and Masquerades	
9
	 4	 An Actor’s Vision of Optical Poetry	
11
	 5	 Shadow Plays and Silhouette Films: The Adventures of 
Prince Achmed	
13
	 6	 Rotoscoping: Dave Fleischer as Ko-Ko the Clown	
17
	 7	 The Peak of Character Animation: Walt Disney	
21
	 8	 Shamanism and Totemism	
25
	 9	 Famous Cartoon Animals	
29

vi
Contents
	10	 Animators to Become Actors and Actresses (Sort of)?	
35
	 11	 The Flintstones and the Age of Television	
41
	12	 Reason & Emotion	
45
	13	 Theories of Acting	
49
	14	 Voice Actors	
53
	15	 Pixilation: Animating Actors or Becoming Animation	
59
	16	 Dancing with Animation	
65
	 17	 Acting with Animated Characters	
69
	18	 The Puppet Masters	
75
	19	 Animated Characters around the World	
91
	20	 Of Heroes, Antiheroes, Villains, and Men	
99
	21	 Comedy and Comedians	
103
	22	 Acting Against the Odds of Visual Effects and Animation	
109
	23	 Avatar and Beyond: The Idiosyncrasies of 3D Animation 
and the Art of Performance Capture	
113
	24	 A Nod to Computer Games	
123
Part II  Creativity Training for Writers, Producers, 
and Animators—A Practical Guide
	25	 Surprise Me!	
131
	26	 Writing Animation: Role Profiles	
135
	27	 Contradictions: The Key to Great Characters and Stories	
143
	28	 Intercultural Differences between East and West	
147
	29	 Preconceived Characters	
157
	30	 Animals and Anthropomorphism	
163

vii
Contents
	31	 Animation, Toys, and Merchandising	
167
	32	 Design, Posing, and Facial Expression	
171
	33	 Understanding Body Language	
177
	34	 The Eyes Have It!	
185
	35	 It’s Personality That Wins	
189
	36	 The Score	
193
	37	 Psychological Projection	
197
	38	 The Role of Producer and Director	
205
	39	 Feel at Ease While Animating	
207
	40	 Computer Graphic Characters, Performance Capture 
Techniques, and the Future of Acting in Animation	
211
	41	 Perceptions Exercises	
217
	42	 Game of Imagination	
219
	43	 Visualization Techniques: Creatures of the Mind	
221
Part III Q & A
	44	 The Animation Film Historian: Giannalberto Bendazzi	
235
	45	 The VFX Artist: Robert Blalack	
237
	46	 The Creator from Italy: Bruno Bozzetto	
241
	47	 The Replacement Animators from Argentina: Alberto 
Couceiro and Alejandra Tomei	
245
	48	 The Spanish Animation Producer: Manuel Cristóbal	
253
	49	 The Stop-Motion Animator and VFX Director: Jim Danforth	 259
	50	 The Belgian Animation Director: Piet De Rycker	
263
	51	 The Game Expert: Thomas Dlugaiczyk	
269

viii
Contents
	52	 The Artist from the Zagreb School of Animation: Borivoj 
Dovnikovic’ -Bordo	
273
	53	 The Animation Scholar from Hong Kong: Daisy Yan Du	
279
	54	 The Disney Expert: Didier Ghez	
285
	55	 The 3D Animator from Germany: Felix Goennert	
289
	56	 The European Producer: Gerhard Hahn	
295
	57	 The Stop-Motion Historian: Mike Hankin	
301
	58	 The Late Stop-Motion Legend Himself: Ray Harryhausen	
305
	59	 The World’s Leading Performance Capture Expert: Joe 
Letteri	
317
	60	 The German Animation Producer: Tony Loeser	
321
	61	 The American Expert in 3D Scans: Karl Meyer	
325
	62	 The Managing Director from Hungary: Ferenc Mikulás	
327
	63	 The German Puppet Animator: Heinrich Sabl	
331
	64	 The Animation Student from Romania: Veronica Solomon	 339
	65	 The Czech 3D Producer: Jan Tománek	
343
	66	 The Experimental Stop-Frame Animator: Grigori Zurkan	
347
Selected Filmography	
353
Bibliography	
363
Index	
369

ix
Acknowledgments
In researching the topic of this book, the authors had the chance to talk to and 
interview at various times Forrest J. Ackerman, Ray Bradbury, Linwood G. 
Dunn, John Halas, Ray Harryhausen, Dr. Ronald Holloway, Antonín Horák, 
Paul Christian Hubschmid, Nathan Juran, Sir Christopher Lee, Stanisław Lem, 
Per Lygum, Dr. William Moritz, Lester Novros, Hal Roach, Curt Siodmak, 
Dušan Vukotić, Albert Whitlock, Ferdinand Diehl, Gerhard Fieber, Wolf 
Gerlach, Gerhard Huttula, Heinz Kaskeline, Dieter Parnitzke, Thilo Rothkirch, 
Karl Ludwig Ruppel, Ernst Joachim Schienke, Herbert K. Schulz, H[ugo] O[tto] 
Schulze, Professor Bernd Willim, Jürgen Wohlrabe who sadly are no longer 
with us, directors Luigi Cozzi, Roland Emmerich, Terry Gilliam, Peter Jackson, 
John Landis, Steven Lisberger, actors Martine Beswick, Caroline Munro, Andy 
Serkis, VFX supervisors and assistants Volker Engel, Dave Gougé, Joe Letteri 
(Weta Digital), Richard Taylor (Weta Workshop), Karl Meyer (Gentle Giant 
Studios), Dennis Muren, John Nelson, Douglas Trumbull, FX make-up artist 
Rick Baker, 3D FX animators Frank Petzold, Phil Tippett, animation execu­
tives, producers, directors and artists Hans Bacher, Peter Bluemel, Bruno 
Bozzetto, Heinz Busert, Alberto Couceiro and Alejandra Tomei (Animas 
Film Animations), Manuel Cristóbal (Dragoia Media), Jim Danforth, Piet 
De Rycker, Pete Docter, Borivoj Dovniković (Bordo), Robi Engler, Dr. Hans 
Michael Fischerkoesen, Ari Folman, Frank Geiger (brave new work film pro­
ductions/Little Dream Entertainment), Professor Gerhard Hahn, Herbert 
Gehr and Neschet Al-Zubaidi (Hahn Film), Rolf Herken, Werner Hierl, Jeffrey 
Katzenberg (CEO, DreamWorks SKG), Professor Barbara Kirchner, Raimund 
Krumme, Ralf Kukula (Balance Film GmbH), Tony Loeser (MotionWorks), 
Richard Lutterbeck (Trickstudio Lutterbeck), Ferenc Mikulás (Kecskemétfilm), 
Mark Osborne, Maya Rothkirch (Rothkirch Cartoon Film), Dr. Michael 
Schoemann (Benchmark Entertainment), Georges Schwitzgebel, Nelson Shin 

x
Acknowledgments
(Akom Production Co., Ltd.), Rainer Soehnlein, Stefan Thies (nfp animation), 
Jan Tománek (Art And Animation Studio), Wolfgang Urchs, Aygün & Peter 
Voelker, Tony White, Richard Williams, Juan Pablo Zaramella, our Chinese 
colleagues Cai Zhijun (CCTV Animation, Inc.), Chang Guangxi, Dong Hang, 
Wang Borong, Wang Liuyi, Zheng Liguo (President, Jilin Animation Institute), 
Daisy Yan Du, Gavin Liu, Juan Zaft, Professor R.P.C. Janaka Rajapakse 
(motion capture specialist, Associate Professor, Tainan National University of 
the Arts), voice artists Peter Krause (Germany’s Donald Duck voice), Oliver 
Rohrbeck, fellow writers and scholars Klaus Baumgart, Giannalberto Bendazzi, 
Bob Burns, Dr. Michael Flintrop (Cineways Festival Braunschweig), Dr. Ralf 
Forster, Joseph Garncarz, Didier Ghez, Jeanpaul Goergen, Mike Hankin, 
Ed Hooks, Daniel Kothenschulte, Dr. Arnold Kunert, Carsten Laqua, Peter 
Maenz (Deutsche Kinemathek/German Cinematheque Berlin), Annick Maes 
and Gerardo Michelin (Cartoon Brussels), Raymond Pettigrew, Dr. Volker 
Petzold, Nadja Rademacher (Deutsches Institut für Animationsfilm Dresden), 
Florian Schmidlechner, J. P. Storm, Caroline Hagen-Hall and Christel Strobel 
(who granted access to the estate of late silhouette film artist Lotte Reiniger), 
Professor Ulrich Wegenast (International Trickfilm Festival Stuttgart), Thomas 
Dlugaiczyk (Games Academy), Professor Ulrich Weinberg (Hasso Plattner 
Institute), Jutta Diebel, Professor Frank Gessner, Professor Felix Gönnert, Dr. 
Veit Quack, Veronica Solomon, Professor Christina Schindler, Benedikt Toniolo 
(Film University Konrad Wolf Potsdam-Babelsberg), and Ulrike Bliefert.
Images courtesy of Animas Film (Alberto Couceiro and Alejandra Tomei); 
Little Dream Entertainment (Frank Geiger); Manuel Cristóbal; Jim Danforth; 
Deutsches Institut für Animationsfilm (Nadja Rademacher); Film University 
Babelsberg; Felix Goennert; Hahn Film (Gerhard Hahn and Herbert Gehr); 
The Ray & Diana Harryhausen Foundation (Vanessa Harryhausen and Connor 
Heaney—www.rayharryhausen.com); Jilin Animation Institute (Gavin Liu); 
MotionWorks (Tony Loeser and Jana Wernicke); Primrose Productions Ltd. 
(Caroline Hagen-Hall and Christel Strobel); Sabl-Film (Heinrich Sabl): J. P. Storm 
Collection; Benedikt Toniolo; Weta Digital (Dave Gougé); and Grigori Zurkan.
Special thanks are due to Rainer M. Engel, Schrift-Bilder GmbH Berlin, who 
assisted with formatting images and stills.

xi
Authors
Rolf Giesen  Berlin-based screenwriter who specialized in animated feature 
films and film historian. For more than 20 years curated the stop-motion col­
lection of the late Ray Harryhausen, worked with directors and artists such as 
Roland Emmerich and Albert Whitlock.
Anna Khan  Took acting classes and enrolled in dramatics at Free University 
Berlin. Experienced actress and director who later got specialized in acting for 
animation.
Both authors were invited to lecture in universities and academies in China and 
Taiwan and prepare exhibitions devoted to animation.


xiii
Introduction
Neverland or No End to 
Childhood
Animators should focus on the acting… make the characters think and act… start 
with the body first, next focus on the eyes, and last focus on the mouth. When review­
ing reels we look at the acting first.
John Lasseter*
A mosquito flies into the picture. It looks like an insect and at the same time 
like a human although it wears only a human hat and carries a bag, with big 
eyes that are neither human nor beastly but are part of the world of caricature. 
Interestingly enough, the character on screen, like many great cartoon stars, was 
based on a comic strip where it looked less human, had no hat, no bag: completely 
insect-like. “Its” or “his” cinematically changed personality is created by the way 
of acting, lifting the hat with one leg to introduce itself to the spectators, look­
ing around gleefully for a victim that appears in the person of a well-clad, fat, 
tired, not really likeable gentleman. In anticipation of our spitefulness, we know 
that what’s going to happen serves this man right. The insect follows him to his 
apartment and gets inside an open door window to the man’s bedroom. While 
the unknowing man sleeps, the mosquito goes to work, sharpens its needle. The 
man snores. The mosquito sucks blood. Half-sleeping the man tries to catch it 
but the mosquito is persistent and escapes the man’s hand. Finally, the mosquito 
*	 John Lasseter, Pixar Lecture at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in Los Angeles 
on November 4, 1996.

xiv
Introduction
is sucked full of blood, its body a balloon. But it hasn’t had its fill of body fluid. 
It’s still greedy, sucking more right under the man’s nose, scratching its head. 
The balloon circles above the man’s head, landing again, doing a handstand 
on the man’s nose, boisterously performing its antics for the audience expect­
ing applause, sucking again and—exploding: boom!, having overdone its job. 
The whole animation industry as we know it today is based on that little picture 
because it’s the first time that not the novelty of movement and metamorphosis 
counts but the unique character itself.
Not done by a computer but by ink and paint: consisting of more than 8000 
drawings. Five minutes of first-class animation, more than a 100 years old and 
surpassing most of nowadays’ standardized animation. While the few animators 
in other countries, like Émile Cohl in France, were satisfied to have their sim­
ple Fantoche characters just moving around, pleased just by movement, Winsor 
McCay, the creator of Little Nemo (New York Herald, October 15, 1905) who 
did the mosquito in 1912, aimed for good caricatures, drawn in perspective, and 
above all personality. How a Mosquito Operates, a little silent film, nothing else 
than pencil and ink, never misses its effect on the audience up till today.
The art of acting through animated characters lies in detail, in gesture, in 
little unexpected things that make a character memorable even after 100 years, 
maybe not so much the acting itself but rather personality. And these tiny ges­
tures and unexpected movements reflect the personality of the animator as well. 
Let us quote the late Darlyne O’Brien, widow of the animator who brought King 
Kong to eternal screen life: Willis O’Brien. She told that she would recognize 
her husband in every gesture of the famous giant gorilla. Having been close to 
O’Brien’s protégé, stop-motion artist Ray Harryhausen, we only can confirm this 
sentiment. Having known Harryhausen for 35 years, we watched him mimic in 
a church in Bologna, Italy, and pounding against the huge gate like mighty Kong 
against the entrance of the native village of Skull Island. It was imitative behavior 
inspired by an unforgettable childhood experience. Sometimes, in very private 
moments, this great animator showed an infecting sense of humor and copied 
people. He was a fan of comedian Stan Laurel and revealed that at one time he 
and his lifelong friend and buddy Ray Bradbury planned a pilgrimage to Laurel’s 
home in Santa Monica.
Germany lost a fantastic Hungarian actor in 1933 when the Nazis came to 
power. His name was Peter Lorre (1904–1964). He was the child murderer in Fritz 
Lang’s M and toward the end of his life acted in Edgar Allan Poe films directed 
by Roger Corman. Colleagues described him as a brilliant scene stealer. When he 
would walk over a bridge in the comedy version of The Raven (1963), accompa­
nied by two other old timers, Boris Karloff and Vincent Price, all eyes would be 
on him, not on the fellows.
Lorre was born with a face. It was director Howard Hawks who once said 
those actors make the best stars who are easily to be caricatured. Just see the cari­
catured star portraits (even in animation) of Clark Gable, complete with over­
sized ears, Katharine Hepburn or Peter Lorre who, alongside Bugs and Daffy, 

xv
Introduction
became a mad scientist character in Warner Bros. cartoons Hair-Raising Hare 
and Birth of a Notion.
Character animation is about personality, no matter if it’s human, animal or, 
well, unearthly demon. Monsters, the bigger they are, remain uniquely memo­
rable just for their proportion: Kong, The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms, the Ymir 
from 20 Million Miles to Earth, the intimidating, eye-rolling, nightmarish bug­
bear of a Cyclops in The 7th Voyage of Sinbad, Suffer the Little Children as Stephen 
King would put it: an extraordinary hybrid creature, goat-legged, lips of a camel, 
jagged teeth of a boar, nails of a lion, the horn of a unicorn.
Doing research on a Walt Disney favorite, Fantasia, John Culhane inter­
viewed master animator Vladimir “Bill” Tytla, called by his associate Lester 
Novros the animator, and asked him how he approached the animation of 
Chernabog, the powerful monstrous Devil on Bald Mountain. According to 
Culhane, Tytla would build himself up, like an actor getting back into an old 
role: “I imagined that I was as big as a mountain and made of rock and yet I was 
feeling and moving.”*
Although he doesn’t do any evil in his scenes, the horned, giant Chernabog 
acts like evil supreme. He unfolds his enormous wings, stretches, summons fire, 
demons, and harpies. His eyes reflect satanic pleasure, but like Lugosi’s vampire 
the light of the rising sun forces him to retreat.
In Culhane’s view, Bill Tytla shared with Disney an overwhelming empathy 
with all creation that was almost Franciscan. He once said that they approached 
things with a great deal of emotion. You have to feel yourself to make others 
feel the same. As an animator, you have to be an emotional character. Tytla was 
emotional and made us feel with the seven dwarfs, with Stromboli, Pinocchio’s 
puppet master, Dumbo the flying elephant, or Chernabog’s predecessor, the giant 
who rolled a cigarette from a haystack, used the roof of a house as a seat and was 
conquered by Mickey Mouse, the Brave Little Tailor.
The greatest of animators, like Tytla, commanded two skills still highly 
important, particularly in the digital age: the skill of imagination and the skill 
to visualize this imagination. Actors act, according to their imagination, visual 
artists of course visualize it.
Although being no professional actor, Tytla became the character, he felt 
and grasped the character and enthusiastically filled in, like diminutive Haruo 
Nakajima became a giant creature inside a Godzilla rubber suit at Toho Studios 
in Tokyo.
Tytla maybe belonged to the first who truly understood the importance of 
acting in animation, sort of an heir to Winsor McCay’s legacy because it was 
one of McCay’s films, Gertie the Dinosaur, that inspired and started him on 
the road. Like McCay, Tytla did his job instinctively by balancing motion and 
emotion.
*	 John Culhane, Walt Disney’s Fantasia. New York: Abradale Press/Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 
Publishers, 1999, p. 194.

xvi
Introduction
Another of Disney’s master animators was even more aware of that art. His 
name: Milt (Milton Erwin) Kahl—and to many he was the best right after Tytla. 
To Kahl, who animated Pinocchio and Bambi, animation was a very difficult 
medium that requires pretty good craftsmen who are able to draw well enough to 
turn things at every angle. One has to understand movement and, Kahl adds, one 
has to be an actor, put on a performance, and be a showman.
Animation has to do with acting, at least to some degree. But there is no true 
acting involved, of course not, as animators do not enter the stage themselves, 
but rather animate the character that acts, and if they are lucky they are able 
to avoid the standardized, mechanical mass production that Richard Williams 
once called just animating matches (but even cheap animation needs a certain 
amount of characterization). In the best case, actors as well as animators explore 
and develop characters thoroughly and become one with them. So both, acting as 
well as animation, is a highly creative process. This is what they have in common. 
And they have, as we will see, the same origins.
But contrary to film stars who shine on the silver screen (and art that is exhib­
ited in galleries and museums worldwide and sometimes sells to astronomical 
prices), animators in most cases remain in the dark. Their names are only known 
to insiders, and in the early years many spectators would naively speculate if Walt 
Disney was the artist who drew all his animated films himself.
The same is true for actors used in motion or performance capture. Andy 
Serkis, an exceptional actor, may be the only one whose name is known to bigger 
audiences thanks to his performances as Gollum in the Lord of the Rings trilogy 
or as Supreme Leader Snoke in Star Wars: The Force Awakens.
Vice versa, live actors who share the screen with animated characters have 
problems, too, to win the “competition.” In many cases, they won’t. A live actor 
simply cannot win against animals, kids, or cartoons. They just might catch up 
as the late Bob Hoskins did in Who Framed Roger Rabbit.
This book is divided into two parts: From film history we learn about the 
importance of actors and the range of personalities and related arts that goes into 
animation. Then we will turn to the animator’s, the writer’s, and actor’s point of 
view to describe the various techniques involved.
There might be doubts about mixing history and technical guidance. Some 
might call the project too academic (don’t worry, it’s not), more appealing to 
film historians than animators themselves. Who is this book being written 
for? Is it for historians, film buffs, and fans? Is it for character animators? Is 
it for screenwriters? Is it for actresses and actors who might look to animation 
as an additional source of income? It seems to fall between all these stools. 
It is no history book in the proper meaning of the word. It is no manual. It 
is more like a brainstorm of facts and ideas that demonstrate the variety of 
animation.
The reason for this kind of confusion has mainly to do with our relation to 
the science of history. Our fast-paced society considers it superfluous to look 
back to understand what we are doing today. To many viewers, everything that 

xvii
Introduction
precedes Avatar doesn’t simply exist. It is predigital, isn’t it? Black-and-white film 
and silent, in the worst case. They forget that animation techniques themselves 
do depend on neither film nor digital media. So past, present, and future have the 
same purpose in recording movement. We wouldn’t be able to judge and classify 
what we are doing without the knowledge of the history of moving images. If we 
don’t know where they come from, we don’t know where they go to. This preju­
dice against history transferred to the stage would mean that Shakespeare has no 
significance in theatre today.
Animated images surround us since a Stone Age artist drew a wild boar 
with eight legs on a wall in the Cave of Altamira in nowadays Cantabria, 
Spain. Why did he do so? Because the very idea of animation is in our head, 
therefore, not necessarily tied to the silver or the computer screen: mentally 
saving, reconstructing, and re-enacting movement is the objective target. And 
by re-enacting telling a story. While we talked about the effect the shine of fire 
would have on these, thanks to stone protrusion, almost 3D cave paintings, 
Tommy Lee Jones, on a visit to Berlin’s Museum of Film and Television to 
promote Men in Black, all of a sudden gave a private performance and dem­
onstrated to us how a Stone Age storyteller’s shadow would act while speak­
ing and spinning yarns in the shine of fire. One can say that this was the first 
motion-picture theater.
Since then the field is not exclusively reserved to professional cartoonists and 
animators (of course not), but in the digital age, in the realm of synthetic media 
where even acting is artificial, they come closest to the domain of actor-storytell­
ers: from Stone Age right into the future of virtuality.
Animators must bring drawn, sculpted, or digitally created figures to life. 
Actors must develop characters as well, but they draw on their physical body 
shape and their gender (although not in every culture: when male actors imper­
sonate females). Animators can portray anything from plant life (Walt Disney’s 
Technicolor Silly Symphony Flowers and Trees) to animals, from humans to 
robots and non-humanoid aliens. For humans it’s rather difficult to portray 
goat-legged satyrs or multi-armed, sword-wielding horrors. When Hollywood 
planned to film Edgar Rice Burroughs’ John Carter of Mars stories in the 1960s, 
stop-motion artist Jim Danforth naturally pleaded for animation to portray the 
four-armed green giant barbarians who are part of Burroughs’ universe, but 
the VFX supervisor-to-be, Larry Butler, wouldn’t sympathize with that idea and 
would have handled the effect by tying two large basketball players for each 
giant and having a special headpiece made. The multi-armed silver maid from 
the 1940-Thief of Bagdad was choreographed in a similar way by the same Butler. 
(Ray Harryhausen would eventually animate the six-armed Kali in a sword­
fight sequence from The Golden Voyage of Sinbad.) Decades later, when John 
Carter of Mars was eventually produced by Disney, the computer would take 
over. Animation had become a major ingredient of most American blockbusters 
with a strong report to VFX. Genuine live-action scenes that hadn’t been pixel 
touched became scarce. Before the digital age, however, VFX and design people 

xviii
Introduction
antagonized animation, particularly stop motion, for being jerky. MGM’s chief 
production designer Cedric Gibbons despised the studio’s decision to have 
Willis O’Brien come down to Culver City to try a stop-motion adventure titled 
War Eagles, an epic that consequently never was. Of course, there was misun­
derstanding on both parts. Gibbons’ associate A. Arnold Gillespie, for many 
years in charge of models, ships, planes, and special effects at Metro studios, 
described the movement of the hanging miniature dolls that filled the stadium 
to watch the 1925 Ben Hur chariot race and were arranged like the tiny players 
of table soccer as—animation. There was not much love lost between live action 
and animated films. The heads of international film festivals would prefer to 
walk alongside live stars over the red carpet rather than present themselves with 
cartoon characters in silly costumes. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and 
Sciences rarely would acknowledge animated effects in live-action films up to 
the 1960s and only would award Mighty Joe Young in 1950. Ray Harryhausen, 
assistant to Willis O’Brien who received the Oscar, was present during the cer­
emony and felt the tension of the nominated O’Brien. But Ray himself had to 
wait a long time for his well-deserved Oscar. That signals that animation is dif­
ferent from all other cinematic experiences. Jim Danforth recalls that, in those 
days, even members of the VFX Academy Award committee didn’t understand 
the intricate Harryhausen process.
The process of animation begins in preproduction with developing the char­
acter, a joint effort of specialized writers and skilled artists supervised not exactly 
by the director but by the producer who in most cases is the project’s driving 
force, in Europe (as we sadly had to learn) with a lot of unwelcome interference 
from TV editors and distributors, and with devising the model sheets that show 
posing and facial expression of the respective character. The livelier a single pose 
is the better. On stage there are art directors, set designers, costume makers, and 
make-up men who support actors in their performances. The actor himself will 
contribute what we call emotional expression, using his mimic art, voice, and 
body movement. But in animation everything depends on the animator provided 
he is going to work with a solid design of the character that means something to 
him, that inspires him. In TV mass production, the design is even more impor­
tant as there is no ambitious detailed animation possible for budgetary reasons 
and time constraints.
Actors have learned to express emotion by facial expression, gestures, breath­
ing, and voice. The tools actors and animators use are basically the same: body 
talk, mood, and movement—with the exception that to them this kind of per­
forming is an out-of-body experience.
Animators and actors have at least one thing in common. Animators, like 
actors, are avid watchers. They carefully observe and study animals as well as 
humans. For Bambi, the popular cartoon version of Felix Salten’s 1923-book, 
Disney got real deer, two fawns, christened Bambi and Faline, to his old Hyperion 
Studios as reference for the animators where they could be studied. The same 
approach these writers noticed at the animation department of Beijing Film 

xix
Introduction
Academy where they animated a feature about a dog and had a tiny puppy caged 
in the studio.
Certainly both, animators as well as actors, have to watch. In fact, Augusto 
Fernandes, Argentine stage director, sent his actors to the zoo to study animal 
behavior. Animals and nature play an important part in the life of many anima­
tors in every country of the world, in every culture. Before animating Mighty Joe 
Young, Harryhausen did just that: going to the zoo and studying live gorillas. 
“I even became a vegetarian for some time,” Harryhausen would say.
But contrary to the actor on stage, an animator is not only copying nature. 
He can change it. He is almost free from it and the limits of physics. In the world 
of animated characters, Béla Balázs wrote, nothing is impossible as miracles are 
part of the daily routine. The drawn lines function in accordance with the shape 
they assume. Saying that he referred to the antics of Felix the Cat, the screen’s 
first cartoon star that, by the way, was modeled after Charles Chaplin’s little 
tramp with certain characteristics that later were borrowed from and paid for by 
Buster Keaton. To a creature made of lines, Balázs observed, everything should 
be achievable. Felix the Cat, for instance, can roll his tail into a wheel and ride off 
on it as if it were a bicycle. In another case, Felix loses his tail. He wonders what 
to do and while he ponders, a question mark grows out of his head. Felix seizes 
it and sticks it on his rump. There you go. These images are absolute. There is no 
difference between appearance and reality.*
With an uncertain nod to the future, Balázs wonders himself, what would be 
gained if this was to become reality?
Above all technique, however, we must play. Play like children. That is being 
curious and imaginative and having fun doing so.
As children we have looked up to the sky and imagined the clouds to be 
animals, giants, pirates, adventurers, cowboys, and Indians riding horses. The 
source of all inspiration is childlike imagination, and Pixar even devoted one 
of its shorts to simply that, Partly Cloudy, creating an anthropomorphic cloud 
character from pixel animation. It was Max Reinhardt, Germany’s great pioneer 
of the stage, who once said, “I believe in the immortality of the theatre, it is a most 
joyous place to hide, for all those who have secretly put their childhood in their 
pockets and run off and away with it, to play on to the end of their days.”
The same should be true for animators. Children and animators are not nec­
essarily acting. To them it’s all like truly playing. Playing is also dreaming: great 
dreams, wishful dreams, and occasionally, as part of the game, nightmares. 
Playing staggers the imagination.
Hayao Miyazaki, the great Japanimator, echoes Reinhardt’s sentiments when 
he says that children aren’t interested in logic; to them, all is pure imagination.†
It’s a dream that is best expressed in Peter Pan, James Matthew Barrie’s story 
of a mischievous boy who never grows up, who never will become an adult. He is 
*	 Béla Balázs, Early Film Theory. New York/Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2010, p. 174.
†	 Anime Interviews. San Francisco, California: Cadence Books, 1997, p. 31.

xx
Introduction
the leader of a gang of lost boys and flies to a place behind the clouds: the island of 
Neverland with lots of imaginary characters like pirates, fairies, and mermaids. 
In Greek mythology, the god Pan, who idles in the countryside of Arkadia play­
ing panpipes and chasing Nymphs, represents natural life that Barrie contrasts 
with the effects of civilization.
Therefore, this book is more about Playing than about Acting in Animation. At 
least it should be. It’s about imagination and about the Pan-like figures that come 
out of those dreams and begin to live.
It was Ray Bradbury, author and fantasist, who once remarked that Charles 
Laughton, the Hunchback of Notre Dame, Nero, Dr. Moreau, Captain Bligh and 
the Canterville Ghost in one and the same person, was the biggest child of them all.

Part I
The Story of 
Actors & Acting 
in Animation


3
1
Time for Creation
Homunculi
Acting and animating are arts of simulation and reproduction: the dream of cre­
ating animal and human life by means other than natural reproduction.
The so-called Homunculus was the realm of Doctor Faustus, the legendary 
necromancer and astrologer who became a durable character in the literature 
where he sold his soul to the devil, a predecessor of Frankenstein, and it was the 
realm of the Swiss alchemist Theophrastus Bombast von Hohenheim, otherwise 
known as Paracelsus, a sixteenth century master of holistic medicine and natural 
healing, who is said to have been interested in artificially made human beings, a 
concern that in those days came close to black magic.
In Universal’s The Bride of Frankenstein (1935), VFX experts John P. Fulton 
and David Stanley Horsley created such homunculi optically by miniaturiz­
ing live actors while an artist like Ray Harryhausen even animated a (winged) 
homunculus stop-frame, as an evil magician’s aid in his “super-spectacle” The 
Golden Voyage of Sinbad.
Today’s alchemists who call themselves scientists create artificial life through 
genetic engineering and human cloning. Animators, however, accomplish the 
process in a much simpler way. They create their little men (this is what homun­
culi means translated from Latin) by using digital imagery or simply a pen.

4
Acting and Character Animation
Facing auspicious occasions, animators will have a chance of not only acting 
but also creating. In some early animation, as in the Out of the Inkwell series by 
Max Fleischer, the hand of the animator appears and it looks as if the drawn 
character was touched by the hand of God. Animators invent characters that vir­
tually do not exist. In such cases, some of them actually might feel like being 
God and say so. “Now I know what it feels like to be God!” Colin Clive screamed 
when portraying Frankenstein in front of James Whale’s camera. This attitude 
was parodied in Chuck Jones’ short cartoon Duck Amuck (1953) in which Daffy 
Duck fights the malicious hand of a mischievous animator who turns out to be 
Bugs Bunny. But sometimes the creations might be more powerful than the cre­
ator itself. They seem to develop a life of their own like Pinocchio did.
In 1965, famed Czech stop-motion producer Jiří Trnka (1912–1969) wrote and 
directed an 18-minute short film, a parable titled Ruka (The Hand) that dealt 
with personality cult: A harlequin potter is happy to create his daily output of 
flower vases, but then a huge Stalinist hand appears that threatens and manipu­
lates him to sculpt nothing else than memorials of a giant hand.

5
2
Chalk-Talking on a 
Vaudeville Stage
At the turn of the century, in vaudeville, caricaturists and show-and-swift car­
toonists had to have acting ability as they presented their creations live on stage. 
They were in direct touch with the audience. They were true animateurs.
The master certainly was Winsor McCay (c. 1867–1934), “America’s greatest 
cartoonist,” the famed creator of the strip Little Nemo in Slumberland and an 
accomplished entertainer. When he entered the art of animation, it was intended 
to become part of his live act on stage presenting his animation and interacting 
with it by giving a Brontosaurus lady named Gertie on screen commands that she 
would follow or not.
This was one of the rare cases that a cartoonist and animator became a true 
stage actor.
McCay had drawn his Gertie the Dinosaur in 1913, accordingly over a period 
of six months, starting with the key frames and filling in the “in-betweens.” He 
had brought the series of drawings to the Vitagraph Company of America in 
January 1914 to have them photographed frame by frame. The next month the 
film was premiered at the Palace Theatre in Chicago where McCay entered the 
stage, armed with chalk, and began sketching on a blackboard. Personal appear­
ances of cartoonists on stage were part of many vaudeville acts. This was followed 

6
Acting and Character Animation
by a screening of How a Mosquito Operates, Gertie’s predecessor. Then McCay 
returned to the stage, cracking a bullwhip like an animal trainer to introduce 
Gertie, “the only dinosaur in captivity.”
Gertie on screen would do, at least sometimes, what McCay ordered her on 
“tricks” to do on stage. “Gertie—yes, her name is Gertie,” McCay addressed 
his audience, “will come out of that cave and do everything I tell her to do.” 
Then, armed with his whip, he would turn to Gertie: “Come out, Gertie, and 
make a pretty bow. Be a good girl and bow to the audience. Thanks! Now raise 
your right foot. That’s good! Now raise your left foot.” A sea serpent rears its 
ugly head out of the water. “Never mind that sea serpent! Gertie, raise your left 
foot.” But Gertie is distracted. “You’re a bad girl, shame on you!” When scolded 
Gertie begins to weep bitterly. “Oh, don’t cry. Here, catch this pumpkin.” For 
the first time in imagery live action becomes an interactive part of an animated 
cartoon. Gertie opens her mouth to catch the pumpkin. “Now will you raise 
your left foot?” Gertie devours a tree and shrieks when a mammoth passes by. 
“Gertie, don’t hurt Jumbo.” Gertie tosses the mammoth in the lake. “Gertie loves 
music. Play for her and she’ll dance.” While Gertie dances to the music, stand­
ing upright on her hind legs, she gets sprayed with water by Jumbo and hurls 
a boulder at the vengeful mammoth that escapes. After such action, Gertie is 
tired and takes some rest until a flying reptile turns up. “Did you see that four-
winged lizard?” Gertie nods. “Sure? Are you in the habit of seeing things?” Gertie 
shakes her head. “Are you fibbing to me? Will you have a little drink? There’s a 
lake. Take a little drink if you want it.” McCay doesn’t have to tell her twice. 
Gertie cleans up the whole lake. At the end of the show, McCay goes one step 
further. He walks offstage and returns in drawn form: “Gertie will now show 
that she isn’t afraid of me and take me for a ride.” Gertie would open her mouth 
and the McCay cartoon character would step in to be lifted on her back swing­
ing his whip while she exits.
McCay’s Mosquito and McCay’s Gertie—they are both animals and they act 
that way. Gertie, however, is more animal than the Mosquito that is unnamed 
but, although it follows its instincts, has a human personality. It loves to be at the 
center of attention, and while Gertie bows to the audience at McCay’s command, 
the Mosquito pulls off a feat for the audience at his own request. Gertie is a show­
case: the first animated stage personality, the Mosquito’s stage is man’s daily life. 
His natural goal: to make this life miserable by his blood-sucking antics. Humans 
have empathy for Gertie as you would have for an overgrown pet. The Mosquito is 
no pet, never will be, but we like that critter too. He—and it’s certainly him, not 
It!—behaves mischievously like a brat and has fun. We feel sorry for him when he 
explodes having sucked too much blood. We don’t feel sorry for the sleeper who 
lost a few drops of blood. The Mosquito is the first screen animal in animation 
history that evokes human feelings and true empathy.
With the end of vaudeville personal appearances like those of McCay would 
become rare, and personalities like Walt Disney had to be prerecorded to appear 

7
2. Chalk-Talking on a Vaudeville Stage
as a host on screen or television together with their cartoon characters. In these 
recordings you see, however, that Disney had enormous acting abilities. And that 
his animals, like McCay’s, make themselves understood by communicating on a 
wavelength with the audience. Not only their performances, it’s their personality 
that captures the audience.


9
3
Magicians and 
Masquerades
Besides the vaudevillian actor, early trickfilm refers to magic as an extension of 
similar stage presentations. The illusion to let persons and things appear and 
disappear could be easily accomplished cinematographically.
Trickfilm pioneer Georges Méliès (1861–1938) was a proprietor of the Théâtre 
Robert-Houdin in Paris, where he developed and presented many stage illusions 
before he turned to filmmaking. In 1896, he used the stop trick (or substitution 
splice) to create the illusion of the Vanishing Lady (Escamotage d’une dame chez 
Robert-Houdin) on film. The Edison Manufacturing Company used the same trick 
one year earlier to substitute an actress’ head with a dummy to reconstruct The 
Execution of Mary Queen of Scots. It was more than just stopping the camera. The 
illusion was based on a seamless match cut that linked two separately staged shots.
James Stuart Blackton (1875–1941), co-founder of the Vitagraph Company of 
America, started as a cartoonist and a chalk-talker like his client Winsor McCay. 
He seemed to have been one of the firsts to use the stop trick in combination with 
drawings: in The Enchanted Drawing (1900) and particularly Humorous Phases of 
Funny Faces (1906), where he did a lot of stop-framed transformation.
The crude Gaumont-produced metamorphoses created by Émile Cohl 
(1857–1938), a French pioneer of animation and contemporary, even forerunner 

10
Acting and Character Animation
of Winsor McCay, showing faces that transformed from young to old, from beau­
tiful to old hag, from human to animal, from 2D to 3D puppet, and from human 
to object to surreal hybrids, are certainly the prototype of the morphing tech­
niques of the digital age, up to The Mask. To Scott Squires of Dream Quest, this 
show was another big step in CGI development. The Abyss, Terminator 2, Jurassic 
Park, and then The Mask took CGI another step the evolutionary ladder. Finally, 
he said, they were able to take surreal cartoon concepts and apply them to the 
real world. He was right but only partly. The concept of applying metamorphoses 
onto human faces is as old as cartooning itself. It’s not that revolutionary. It’s a 
magician’s illusion: just playing around with the novelty. And so even The Mask, 
although CG was used to transform Jim Carrey into that cartoon face, was only 
a step ahead in digital infancy.
Masks are a key element in the art of performing. Two masks, dating back to 
the Greek theatre, symbolize the art of the stage: a comedy mask that was associ­
ated with Thalia, the muse of comedy and bucolic poetry, and the tragedy mask 
associated with Melpomene, the muse of tragedy.
Stage and film director Peter Brook talks about a mask that is life giving. It 
affects a wearer and an observer in a positive way. On the other hand, he claims 
that there is a mask that can be put on the face of a distorted person and make 
him appear even more deformed. Watching this it creates the impression of a 
reality more distorted than the one seen ordinarily. Both go under the same 
name: “masks.” Even the everyday expression is a mask for it is either conceal­
ment or lie. In this regard, the ordinary human face might work as a mask.*
The earliest type of mask, disguise and costume, a covering to hide or guard 
the face, dates back several millennia. It might have been taken from animals, 
but the human skull as found in skeletons must have been an inspiration too. The 
maybe oldest stone mask found so far dates to 7000 bc and resembles just that, a 
human skull.
There are many ritual masks from all over the world that confirm that acting 
has a lot to do with religion, that it was kind of a ceremony. Theatre came in later.
Right from the beginning, cinema loved the masquerade. Just think of the 
Alexandre Dumas’ novel Le Vicomte de Bragelonne, repeatedly filmed as The 
Man in the Iron Mask. Think of Fantomas and the ancestor of The Shadow: Judex, 
silent serials that were directed by Louis Feuillade for Gaumont in Paris, and of 
all those ugly horror masks: Frankenstein, Mummy, Wolf Man, and Creature 
from the Black Lagoon. Think of Zorro, Batman, and of Stan Lee’s menagerie of 
Marvel superheroes.
The Golem of Jewish folklore, with a mask created by sculptor Rudolf Belling, 
became Paul Wegener’s most famous screen part in movies made in 1914 and 
1920, respectively.
*	 Peter Brook, The Shifting Point: Theatre, Film, Opera 1946–1987. New York: Theatre 
Communications Group, 1987.

11
4
An Actor’s Vision of 
Optical Poetry
In a 1915 lecture, Paul Wegener (1874–1948) was the first Berlin stage actor 
to dream of new developments in animation and an entirely new universe of 
synthetically created images. The fact that actors reflected synthetic images is 
unique. Georges Méliès found it easier to star himself in his films instead of hir­
ing a comedian or an actor. These pictures seemed to be too tricky for actors. 
Wegener, on the other hand, became interested in trickfilm. He played a key role 
in German silent cinematography and he wasn’t even interested in the acting, just 
in technique and aesthetics:
You have all seen films in which suddenly a line appears, curves, and changes its 
form. Out of it grow faces and the line disappears. To me the impression seems highly 
remarkable. But such things are always shown as an intermezzo and nobody has ever 
thought of the colossal possibilities of this technique. I think the film as art should 
be based—as in the case of music—on tones, on rhythm. In these changeable planes, 
events unreel which are partly identified with natural pattern, yet partly beyond real 
lines and forms. Imagine one of [Arnold] Böcklin’s sea paintings with all the fabu­
lous tritons and nereids. And imagine an artist duplicating this work in hundreds of 
copies but with each copy having small displacements so that all copies revealed in 
succession would result in continuous movement. Suddenly we would see before our 

12
Acting and Character Animation
very eyes a world of pure fantasy come to life. Such effects can also be achieved with 
specially constructed little models animated like marionettes—in this field there are 
great achievements nowadays. One also can change the pace of different movements 
by shooting too slow or too fast, developing a fantastic vision which will produce 
entirely new associations of ideas. We are entering a new pictorial fantasy world as 
we would enter a magic forest. We are setting foot in the field of pure kinetics—or 
optical lyric as I call it. This field will perhaps be of major importance and will open 
new beautiful sights. This eventually is the final objective of each art, and so cinema 
would gain an autonomous aesthetic domain for itself. A movie could be created 
which would become an experience of art—an optical vision, a great symphonic fan­
tasy! That it will happen one day, I am sure—and beyond that, I am certain, later 
generations will look upon our early efforts as upon childish stuttering.*
This is a vision of a true parallel world created by the manipulation of a 
sequence of moving images, an illusion put together by the dream machine and 
mechanics of the cinema projecting a light beam, perceived by the human eye 
and transferred to the brain. Wegener foresaw a magic forest of optical lyric as he 
called it. All this was imagined, however, not by an engineering wizard or a tech­
nical visionary but by an actor coming from the legitimate stage. Paul Wegener 
had joined Max Reinhardt’s acting troupe in 1906 and got interested in the mov­
ies right before World War I. He understood that the movies were more than 
a novelty, more than an amusement attraction. It was a new art form and the 
manipulation of images was to be a part of it. With the end of the Great War, 
cinema hit puberty and was acknowledged as a new art. It was cinematographer 
Guido Seeber’s trick photography that enabled Wegener to act with his own dop­
pelganger on screen in The Student of Prague in 1913 and transforming into the 
Golem in 1915, but it still was Wegener’s vision.
The doppelganger topic seems to be quite important for understanding acting 
in animation. The character you are going to animate is not exactly you. It is like 
your doppelganger. Ray Harryhausen once said when asked how he would master 
stop motion art technically: It becomes your second nature.
Once, on the quiet, an old-time animation producer told us: The ones who 
work behind the camera hate those who star in front of the camera. This type of 
envy shouldn’t be daily fare. Both can learn from each other. Both are filmmak­
ers. Actors are no cattle. Neither are the drawn or digitized actors on screen. Paul 
Wegener and Walt Disney (with Fantasia) had similar dreams. Today, thanks to 
digital technology, these dreams come true, at least in terms of technology.
*	 Rolf Giesen, Der Trickfilm: A Survey of German Special Effects. Cinefex number 25, February 1986.

13
5
Shadow Plays and 
Silhouette Films
The Adventures of Prince 
Achmed
Another actress, who was encouraged and supported by the same Wegener, was 
Lotte Reiniger (1899–1981). She created the most wonderful silhouette films like 
the feature-length Adventures of Prince Achmed (Die Abenteuer des Prinzen 
Achmed), which premiered in Berlin and Paris in 1926. Lotte adored actors and 
dancers, particularly dancers with whom she spent many hours watching them 
in their performances. She even had access to the private box of Wassily de Basil 
for the performances of his Ballets Russe de Monte Carlo. At a young age, Lotte 
had entered the Theatre School of Max Reinhardt, but only wanted to join the 
classes for the boys, because they did gymnastics. It was in Reinhardt’s school 
that she developed her paper cutting skills, producing tiny portrait figures with 
great accuracy, most notably the stars in order to attract their attention. Lotte 
Reiniger was the first-ever actress to turn her back on acting and become an 
animator.
During Germany’s financial crisis, Louis Hagen, a banker acquaintance, had 
invested in a large quantity of raw film stock as a shelter from inflation, but the 
gamble hadn’t paid off—and so Lotte was allowed to use it to make Die Abenteuer 
des Prinzen Achmed, a Thousand and One Night Fantasy, in the magnificent tra­
dition of the Shadow Theatre that originated from Asia, from China, India, and 

14
Acting and Character Animation
Indonesia, which in fact is one of the founding stones of intercultural synergy 
between the East and West.
Shadow puppetry may be as old as the discovery of shadows themselves. Folk 
tales, fables, and legends are favorite topics on the shadow screen in any culture 
and time period.
Shadow puppets were first made of paper sculpture, and later on from the hides 
of donkeys or oxen. That’s why their Chinese name is pi ying, which means shad­
ows of hides. Shadow puppetry was quite successful during the Tang and Song 
dynasties. Under the rule of Kangxi, the fourth emperor of the Qing dynasty, this 
folk art became so popular that there were eight generously paid puppeteers in 
one prince’s mansion. When the Manchu emperors spread their rule to various 
parts of China, they brought the puppet show with them to make up for the fact 
that they could not appreciate local entertainment due to language barriers. Only 
for a few years, the art of puppetry hit hard times in the Middle Kingdom. From 
1796 to 1800, the government forbade the public presentation of puppet shows to 
prevent the spreading of peasant uprising at the time. It was not until 1821 that 
shadow puppet shows gained vigor again.
Shadow puppets can be animals, heroes, or clowns. They can involve full 
orchestras and detailed settings or tell a story with only one or two props. 
Puppets can be moved with strings, rods, bamboo, or animal horns. And they 
can be smaller than the palm of your hand or larger than life. The stage for the 
show is a white cloth screen on which the shadows of flat puppets are projected. 
The Adventures of Prince Achmed (1926). (Courtesy of Primrose Film Productions 
Ltd. [Caroline Hagen-Hall and Christel Strobel.])

15
5. Shadow Plays and Silhouette Films
In shadow plays of the past, a candle or an oil lamp cast a soft golden but unpre­
dictable light. Shadow puppets look similar to paper-cut except that their joints 
are connected by thread so that they can be operated freely. The scene is basic, 
simple, and almost primitive; it is the consummate performance that wins the 
spectators’ hearts.
Nicknamed the business of the five, a traditional shadow puppet troupe is 
made up of five people. One operates the puppets, one plays a horn, a suo-na 
horn, and a yu-kin, one plays banhu fiddle, one is in charge of percussion instru­
ments, and one sings. The singer not only assumes all the roles in the play but also 
has to play some of the instruments as well.
In Germany, at the further end of the Silk Road, the art of the shadow play got 
from stage straight to the moving picture screen.
The technique of this type of film is very simple. As with cartoon drawings, 
the silhouette films are photographed movement by movement. But instead of 
using drawings, silhouette marionettes are used. These marionettes are cut out of 
a black cardboard and thin lead, every limb being cut separately and joined with 
wire hinges. A study of natural movement is very important, so that the little 
figures appear to move just as men and women and animals do. But this is not a 
Lotte Reiniger and assistants working on The Adventures of Prince Achmed (1926). 
(Courtesy of Primrose Film Productions Ltd. [Caroline Hagen-Hall and Christel 
Strobel.])

16
Acting and Character Animation
technical problem. The backgrounds for the characters are cut out with scissors 
as well, and designed to give a unified style to the whole picture.
Describing the process of animation, Lotte Reiniger explained that before any 
acting there is a lot of technique involved to move the flat silhouette puppets 
around:
When you are going to play with your figure seriously, make sure that you are seated 
comfortably. The shooting will take up a long time and you will have to keep yourself 
as alert as possible. Don’t wear any bulgy sleeves; they might touch your figure unex­
pectedly and disturb its position. If possible arrange to place an iron or wooden bar 
5 in. above the set along your field of action and let your arms rest on it, so that you 
touch your figure only with the finger-tips, or with your scissors. […]
The most cautiously executed movements must be the slow ones, where you have 
to alter the position only the fraction of an inch. A steady, slow walk is one of the most 
tricky movements to execute. Here the most frequent mistake at the beginning is to 
let the body lag behind the legs, so that they seem to be running away from under the 
body. If you touch the centre of the body first and move it forward, holding the legs 
in the initial position, you will notice that they fall into the next position almost by 
themselves.
Tall, lean figures are more prone to these errors than round, short ones, which 
roll along easily, whilst the balance of the long ones is more difficult to establish. 
[…]
If a figure is to turn round it had best to do so in a quick motion. If you want the 
movement slower you might partly hide it in a convenient piece of the setting.*
Lotte’s interest in silhouette films matched perfectly with the fascination with 
shadows that she shared with Expressionist filmmakers like Fritz Lang, Robert 
Wiene, Friedrich Wilhelm Murnau, and Albin Grau who had designed both 
Nosferatu and Schatten (Shadows). Yet she pointed out that there is a difference 
between a shadow and a silhouette:
From the early days of mankind shadows seemed to men to be something magic. The 
spirits of the dead were called shadows, and the underworld was named the Kingdom 
of Shadows and was looked upon with awe and horror. […]
The essential difference between a shadow and a silhouette is that the latter 
cannot be distorted. A silhouette can cast a shadow. When you see trees or figures 
against an evening sky, you would say, not that they are shadowed against the sky, 
but silhouetted against it. The silhouette exists in its own right.†
*	 Lotte Reiniger, Shadow Theatres and Shadow Films. London and New York: B. T. Batsford Ltd. and 
Watson-Guptill, 1970, p. 105–108.
†	 Lotte Reiniger, ibid., p. 11–13.

17
6
Rotoscoping
Dave Fleischer as Ko-Ko the 
Clown
Most often, however, actors have become important for animation not as vision­
aries like Paul Wegener but for acting it out for animators to give them a real-
life reference. The technique, originally developed by Max Fleischer (1883–1972), 
is basically known as rotoscoping. Fleischer who was Art Editor for the Popular 
Science Magazine felt intrigued by the new process of animation but thought that 
he could improve on the jerky movements of the early entries in this field. So he 
filmed his younger brother Dave in a clown’s costume, rear-projected the footage 
onto an easel covered by glass, and with a pen and some ink traced the photo­
graphed images frame by frame onto paper to capture the movement and action 
of the live actor. Out of Dave Fleischer’s vivid performance, a cartoon character 
named Ko-Ko the Clown evolved Out of the Inkwell.
Fleischer first experimented with the technique in 1914–1915. On December 
6, 1915, a patent was filed. Dave’s clown suit was chosen because the high con­
trast between the black cloth and the white buttons would be easy to trace. 
Dave owned that costume. For him a dream came true, although by a devi­
ous route, as he always had longed to be a clown. Now he was used in anima­
tion to answer his desire. For this early experiment, Max photographed Dave 

18
Acting and Character Animation
silhouetted against a white sheet, on the roof outside of his apartment. For 
the first time, animated movements were smooth, fluid, and absolutely lifelike. 
The premier film took over a year to make although it run only a minute but 
it was a breakthrough in naturalist animation (as was Eadweard Muybridge’s 
chronophotography).
Fleischer’s cartoons were marvels of invention and imagination. His son 
Richard, who became a famous live-action film director and would later do 
20,000 Leagues Under the Sea for his father’s old rival Walt Disney, pointed 
out that Ko-Ko made his entrance in an almost infinite variety of brilliantly 
conceived ways: in one cartoon, a drop of ink would transform into the fig­
ure of the clown; in another, the clown, only half-finished, would grab Max’s 
pen and draw the rest of himself. Morphing was the key to this type of screen 
comedy.*
For many years, rotoscoping was also used as a VFX tool in film series like 
the Star Wars saga. Today’s rotoscope is called motion or performance capture 
and is completely digitized, but the objective is still the same: to make humans 
animated actors and make cartoons more human.
But even traditional 2D rotoscoping has been resurrected recently, for 
instance, in Alois Nebel, a 2011-Czech black-and-white film based on a shad­
owy Graphic Novel by Jaroslav Rudiš and Jaromír Švejdík: At the end of the 
Communist era, a train dispatcher somewhere at the Czech–Polish border 
encounters a mute stranger who confronts him with his own past and a murder 
that happened right after World War II. Alois Nebel was awarded a European 
Film Prize as Best Animated Film in 2012 but wasn’t selected for Academy 
Awards consideration.
Low-budget filmmakers also used the process in the new film genre of 
­animated documentaries and semidocumentaries. One who belongs to this group 
of animators is Ali Soozandeh who was born in Iran. His Tehran Taboo (2017), 
an evocative animated feature film, touches grave issues like self-determination, 
sexual fulfillment, loyalty, and the desire for freedom in a fresh view on Iran’s 
restrictive society. The picture centers on the lives of young Iran people—lives, in 
which breaking taboos is part of personal emancipation. All characters act on an 
awkward level of imprudence that may come as a surprise to Western audiences 
but is part of everyday life.
Pari (32 years) is a single mother. She lives together with her mute little son 
Elias in a high-rise building in the center of Tehran. To pay her rent and to be able 
to divorce from her husband who is a convicted drug dealer, she offers sex against 
money. To keep up appearances, she pretends to be a hospital nurse.
Pari’s neighbor Sara (28 years) is pregnant. She lives obediently together with 
her husband Mohsen and his parents. Patronized by her mother-in-law, she 
*	 Richard Fleischer, Out of the Inkwell: Max Fleischer and the Animation Revolution. Lexington, 
Kentucky: The University Press of Kentucky, 2005, p. 26.

19
6. Rotoscoping
Live actors photographed in front of a green screen and rotoscoped for Tehran 
Taboo (2017). (Courtesy of Little Dream Entertainment.)

20
Acting and Character Animation
neglects her own desires. Bored by her life and haunted by a secret, she makes 
friends with Pari.
In the same area lives Babak (22 years). He studies music and scratches a living 
by giving music lessons while dreaming of a career as a musician. Because of a 
one-night stand with young Donya (20 years), he is in big trouble. Donya needs 
her virginity to be restored prior to her upcoming marriage and Babak has to pay 
for the illegal operation. Together with his best friend Amir, he tries everything 
to raise the necessary money.
To peek behind the curtain of Iran’s split society, Soozandeh uses the sty­
listic devices of graphic novels and rotoscope: The fascinating imagery started 
with shooting real actors in a green screen studio. Then, in one year of hard 
work, backgrounds were generated and both characters and backgrounds were 
thoroughly sketched and painted. Finally, all layers were assembled and camera 
movements were applied in the process of compositing.
But, historically speaking, we are ahead of time and have to return to more 
conventional, nevertheless highly entertaining cartoons.

21
7
The Peak of Character 
Animation
Walt Disney
Like Max Fleischer, Disney’s animators traced also directly over previously 
recorded live-action footage of actors and actresses thanks to the camera magic 
of Leonard Pickley—although they came to the conclusion that direct tracing 
as done in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (a young dancer named Marjorie 
Celeste Belcher, daughter of choreographer Ernest Belcher, who later would 
marry animator Art Babbitt, served as live-action model for Snow White, and 
Margie Bell volunteered to become the Blue Fairy for Pinocchio) looked stiff and 
unappealing, realizing that the action of the cartoon characters needed to be car­
icatured. So in the future, they solely referenced from but didn’t trace live-action 
footage one-to-one as Max Fleischer did.
Disney’s animators would run live film sequences at half-speed in their action 
analysis classes to understand weight, thrusts, and counter thrusts, then for Snow 
White brought in burlesque actors like Eddie Collins who would do Dopey for 
them. They even started to act themselves.
Art Babbitt would use fellow animator Dick Lundy as a role model for Goofy, 
film his antics with a 16 mm camera, and use the footage as a reference for his 
animation.

22
Acting and Character Animation
For the sequence that featured Chernobog, the devil on Bald Mountain of 
Fantasia fame, Disney animation director Wilfred Jackson shot live action of 
Bela Lugosi, the screen’s famous Dracula, so that Tytla could study the move-
ments of the devil, the same way Fleischer did with his brother Dave. But the way 
that Lugosi unfolded his “wings,” grimaced and gesticulated was not the way that 
the master animator imagined these movements. So after Lugosi left, Tytla had 
Jackson, who in comparison with the tall Hungarian actor was a skinny person, 
bare his chest and gesture the way that Tytla directed him. Tytla’s imagination 
transferred these movements to the monumental evil.
Sure, the nightmarish devil was no game for kids. Walt Disney once said he 
didn’t make films for kids. He very well made kid’s films, but he succeeded in 
charming adults to become children again and go and see these films. And he 
wouldn’t be afraid to scare their pants off.
The same is true for Jeffrey Katzenberg (who in 2016 left his position as CEO 
of DreamWorks Animation):
…we make our movies for adults and for the adult who exists in every child.*
Although he never took acting lessons, Walt Disney was an actor from early 
childhood on. Interviewed by David Smith, former Disney chief archivist, his 
cousin Alice Disney Allen recalled that young Walt, without permission, bor-
rowed Brother Roy’s blue serge suit and did a Chaplin act in a local theater. 
Animator Les Clark said that Mickey was Walt: the laugh, the nervous character-
istics at times. Walt would act it out for the animators by pantomime.†
Disney was the only cartoon producer who was not only in animation but 
also, as we know, in live action too. It made no difference to him. If he could 
Walt Disney would prefer to do live action which, thanks to popular stars, was 
more prestigious and less time consuming in production. The proudest moment 
of his cinematic career might have been Mary Poppins (1963) that contained only 
a short animated segment.
Jules Verne’s 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea (1954) was first considered as ani-
mated feature before it became a live-action CinemaScope picture directed, as 
we have seen, by Max Fleischer’s son Richard. Except for James Mason’s Captain 
Nemo, all the other characters, however, Kirk Douglas as Ned Land, Paul Lukas 
as Professor Aronnax, and Peter Lorre as Conseil remain cartoons. The liveliest 
actor was a giant squid prop that didn’t work from the beginning but when they 
decided to place it in a storm sequence, it performed terrifically and stuck in 
audience’s memory as the highlight of the picture.
*	 Joanna Moorhead, Jeffrey Katzenberg: How to Make a Perfect Family Film. The Guardian, 
Saturday March 12, 2016, London. https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/12/
jeffrey-katzenberg-how-to-make-a-perfect-family-film.
†	 Didier Ghez, ed., Walt’s People—Volume 12: Talking Disney with the Artists Who Knew Him. 
Bloomington: Xlibris, 2012.

23
7. The Peak of Character Animation
Disney’s forays into live feature and TV films included Guy Williams as 
Zorro, Fred MacMurray as The Absent-Minded Professor, and Peter Ustinov, 
signed right before Walt’s death, as Captain Blackbeard. (In September 1959, 
during the Cold War, when he visited Hollywood, Nikita Khrushchev eagerly 
hoped to go to see Disneyland but much to the Soviet Premier’s annoyance he 
was turned down for safety reasons. Ustinov, a thoroughbred comedian, sug­
gested to Disney he would like to play Krushchev in a film and would use dif­
ferent disguises just to get into Disneyland. Alas, that movie was never made. It 
would have been a hilarious comedy.) Fess Parker a.k.a. Davy Crockett, who was 
the first actor signed to a long-term contract by Disney, however, was unhappy 
on the lot. He said that Disney treasured his great animators who were in effect 
the actors in his animated films but that it was baffling to him that Disney 
wouldn’t have had some of the same feeling about the most important actors in 
his live-action films.*
*	 Fess Parker interviewed by Michael Barrier. http://www.michaelbarrier.com. December 23, 2004.


25
8
Shamanism and 
Totemism
What made people think that Disney produced shows for kids were not only 
his fairy tales but was his constant use of cute animals: mice, cats, dogs, horses, 
chicken, pigs… you name them: the whole barnyard ensemble up and down. 
Walt Disney was sort of a barnyard kid himself: A genuine country boy. His boy­
hood hometown was Marceline, Missouri.
Some of his most famous cartoons are a mix of fairy tales with all kinds of 
rodents and farm animals on board, and a mix of European style with American 
rusticity. On his European trips, especially in 1935, Disney would buy all kind of 
reference books and ask one of his artists, Albert Hurter, who was born in Zurich, 
to do inspirationals that were authentic to the respective background.
In the process of “(type) casting,” Donald Duck would be introduced to The 
Wise Little Hen (which was basically a Russian story), Mickey Mouse would star 
in The Barn Dance before he climbed the ladder of success and was cast as The 
Brave Little Tailor and The Sorcerer’s Apprentice, a cricket would co-star with 
Pinocchio, and Cinderella’s helpers would consist of a gang of mice.
For regular actors, it is quite difficult to portray an animal. They need cos­
tumes but usually their anatomy is not built the way animals are and the result 
looks like Bert Lahr’s Cowardly Lion costume in The Wizard of Oz that was made 

26
Acting and Character Animation
by British taxidermist George Lofgren who came to America when he was 9 years 
old and would work with Willis O’Brien and Ray Harryhausen and for Alfred 
Hitchcock on The Birds. Some quadruped dinosaurs like Anguirus (Angirasu), 
the mutated ankylosaurus from Toho’s Gojira no gyakushu (Gigantis, the Fire 
Monster/Godzilla Raids Again, 1955), forced the bit players inside the rubber 
suits shamefully down on all fours, but what they did was more crawling than 
walking. Special makeup artists Charlie Gemora and Rick Baker came nearest 
to nature building the best gorillas in film business before the digital age for pics 
like Murders in the Rue Morgue and Phantom of the Rue Morgue, Gorillas in the 
Mist or Greystoke: The Legend of Tarzan, Lord of the Apes.
We know that shamans often disguised as animals too and looked like the 
hybrids of mythology.
It was Ed Hooks who pointed out in his lecture tours that actors as well as ani­
mators might have the same ancestor: the shaman. A true priest, said Constantin 
Stanislavsky (also spelled Stanislavski), is aware of the presence of the altar all the 
time and the same way a true artist should react to the stage.
Insiders say that to Eiji Tsuburaya, a technical creator of the Japanese Godzilla 
films, the movie studio was a sacred place.
A shaman is a person who enters an altered state of consciousness to travel in 
a kind of parallel universe, similar of nowadays digital, virtual world. Their heal­
ing “shows” are regarded as a source of acting and storytelling. They used to sing, 
pray, drum, and dance. Animal spirits were their constant companions. As part 
of their animal worship they believed in the Power Animals that are around us all 
the time, that take pity on us when we are born, and protect us. Power Animals 
represent the ties of man with nature and document the human/animal dualism. 
Often the objective of early cultures was to lock horns with, say, a bull to kill the 
strongest or fastest animal of the country and drink the victim’s blood to absorb 
its strength and abilities: bear, deer, wolf, and snake.
This mimesis and shamanistic transmutation that involved imitation of ani­
mals extended animal concepts into the social domain and is part of totemism 
that we find in traditional economies that rely on hunting and gathering. What 
you had killed you showed respect to because it was a living being and it feeds 
us. To a shaman everything is living, even a stone—and that is true for the ani­
mator too.
The Power Animal becomes a protective spirit. In the Western film genre, 
although we notice it only subconsciously, the horse becomes the Power Animal 
of the Cowboy, for instance, Lucky Luke’s horse, Jolly Jumper.
Actors are the direct heirs to shamanism while artists and painters are the 
ones to record what they did and, more important: what they saw. German 
anthropologist Andreas Lommel mentioned the man–animal picture known as 
“the Sorcerer” located at the Les Trois Frères cave in the Ariege. To him it is the 
oldest known portrayal of a shaman, maybe a shaman disguised in an animal 
suit. Thus, for the first time, the animal was humanized.

27
8. Shamanism and Totemism
A shaman acts as a bridge between different worlds, just like an actor and 
an artist who guide audiences and spectators to another dimension, a dimen­
sion between life and death: to see, explore, and experience the things behind. 
Today, we have the media to revive and re-animate the souls of the dead. It is 
little surprise that the spiritists of the late nineteenth century, the heirs of the 
shamans, used man-made technology such as telegraphic and telephonic contact 
and photographic effects to establish a communication with the world beyond. 
Hayao Miyazaki’s Spirited Away (Sen to Chihiro no kamikakushi, 2001) is a truly 
Shamanic film. It shows us the things and ghosts that are behind reality. In the 
rational world of today, we are not allowed to do so. In children’s tales, films, and 
animation, and in video games where we actually take part in role games we are 
allowed. Humans are irrational. They need to believe in this other dimension.
A shamanic play is like a healing ritual. After seeing a good movie or a good 
play, we feel cured too.
Isn’t the Walt Disney Company, one of the world’s self-proclaimed leading 
producers and providers of entertainment, based on ancient animism and totem­
ism: founded on the myth of a mouse? By definition totemism is a mystical rela­
tionship with a spirit being, with a powerful animal. Disney, however, is totemism 
that has lost its meaning. We experience it in the Magic Kingdom of Disneyland. 
In the Internet, we have found a fascinating little Japanese import, a totem pole 
mug set with Mickey, Minnie, and Pluto, and another one with Humphrey the 
Bear, Donald, Goofy, and Mickey.
Soviet director Sergei Eisenstein wrote an essay about Disney in which he 
called the very idea of an animated cartoon a direct manifestation of the method 
of animism. In that regard, he said, what Disney does is connected with one of 
the deepest features of the early human psyche. So it is no wonder that Power 
Animals would early on transform into cartoon stars, with one exception, how­
ever: The strong animals of Shamanic visions and journeys, the mighty eagle, for 
instance, that took the visionary in his trance high above mountains and coun­
tryside, are merely supporting players in cartoons while the tiny ones, especially 
the mice, became the ones audiences would sympathize with.
Occasionally, some animals are even used explicitly in the shamanic way as 
Power Animals in cartoon series and animated feature films:
Sure Rémy the Rat of Ratatouille fame acts as such a power animal* to an 
aspiring young cook named Alfredo Linguini. More on Ratatouille, one of the 
best and most emotional cartoon films ever, later. Earlier Disney used the con­
cept when he attributed a cricket conscience to marionette-to-become-a-real-boy 
Pinocchio.
Disney heroines favorably respond to animal “sidekicks:” Cinderella befriends 
a gang of mice, Pocahontas has a pet raccoon named Meeko, Jasmine (Aladdin) 
*	 Not a classic power animal but thanks to cunning the rat finished in first in the Chinese zodiac and 
appeared on the back of a buffalo in front of Buddha.

28
Acting and Character Animation
is seen in the company of Rajah the tiger, Rapunzel (Tangled) has Pascal, a cha­
meleon, as her best friend and confidante, and Mulan has a weird but tiny dragon 
called Mushu.
In a recent series that premiered on Disney Channel in the summer of 2016, 
Elena of Avalor, the fox Zuzu—which acts as a link between the world of humans 
and ghosts and only can be seen by the heroine princess—is described as a power 
or a spirit animal by the series’ creator and executive producer, Craig Gerber.

29
9
Famous Cartoon Animals
Animism and animation have the same root.
Let’s have a look at all those famous anthropomorphic cartoon animals that 
are indeed a reflection on shamanism and animism. Very often in the cartoons, 
humans are compared to animals, same as in the Shamanic vision.
American cartoons most often used cute animals and upended nature to have 
sheep-loving little David win over the carnivorous barbarian, Goliath.
Mickey Mouse has become a trademark although there are cartoon stars that 
are more popular. The mouse is seen as a wise animal: quiet, shy, understand­
ing, invisible, stealthy, neat, meek and humble, scrutinizing, and paying atten­
tion even to the tiniest detail. In storytelling, the mouse reflects favorably the 
David and Goliath principle: In small we trust. Be faithful to the little things. 
In the great American tales, it’s quite often the underdog who is the hero while 
in real life we would consider him beneath contempt. And like Chaplin’s tramp, 
the early Mickey Mouse started out as an underdog but his optimism became a 
symbol of hope in the time of the Great Depression.
One of the reasons is that Mickey came first, well, not exactly, not even in 
sound. Even Disney had another character before Mickey (and lost it to Universal): 
Oswald the Lucky Rabbit. But it was Mickey that fit the bill. Ub Iwerks was the 

30
Acting and Character Animation
first to draw him, construct him out of simple black circles and rubber tube arms 
and legs, but the personality was invented by Disney himself. Although Iwerks, 
for a while lured away from the Disney Studio by Pat Powers, tried on his own 
and invented Flip the Frog and Willie Whopper, he failed because, although these 
characters were equally simple, they lacked Mickey’s personality. But we shouldn’t 
belittle Iwerks’ part. Mickey’s sometimes raucous behavior—being very abusive 
to other animals, being an anarchist—seemed to have been a part of Iwerks’ 
character. Mickey started as an actor, as a parodist. In his first films, he paro­
died Charles Lindbergh (Plane Crazy), Douglas Fairbanks (Gallopin’ Gaucho), 
Al Jolson, and absorbed a little bit from everyone to fill his character. Acting and 
parodying was his forte because Mickey himself was a shy character haunted by 
the psychological problems of everyday America. One Walther Schneider would 
even go so far as to describe Mickey as mentally disordered:
The chronic movie image of Mickey Mouse displays unmistakable streaks of a para­
noid mental illness of its originator. A diagnosis of the spindle-shanked, hydroce­
phalic, astigmatic and neurasthenic Mickey Mouse reveals particularly disorders in 
the sphere of face and hearing (commonly called mental delusions). On closer exami­
nation, concerning these “pathologically changed perceptions of real objects”, one 
has to decide if this is a manic or paranoid case. […]
Basically, this preposterous behavior (in kitchen, ice boxes, fortresses and deserts) 
is a kind of paranoia that is characterized by right logic under wrong prerequisites. 
The “distortion of space, time and causal connections” (in the film plot), the “blurred 
blending of various objects” (the car that transforms into a living being, the dancing 
piano stool), the “permanently erroneous repetition of perceptions” (multiplications 
of young Mickey Mouses) is indicative of youth madness.
  A psychiatric surveillance of Mickey Mouse that lasted over several screenings 
leaves no doubt of a serious case of paraphrenia as described by [Emil] Kraepelin 
(related to Dementia paranoids). The world of Mickey Mouse ideas, voluptuously 
equipped with fantasy and narrative streaks, represents a marginal case of lunacy 
psychoses that often leads to severe temper tantrums.*
This revealing “analysis” was published in 1931 in a respected Berlin magazine. 
Although it seems quite certain that it was maybe satirically meant, there are 
some words of truth. Even Disney, when he became saturated and conservative, 
had doubts about Mickey’s “mental disorder” and had the character change from 
sturm und drang, storm and stress to petit bourgeois. More and more, Mickey lost 
popularity and simply became a trademark. He had become a suburban citizen 
like so many of us. Like the viewers changed socially, a number of cartoon char­
acters changed psychologically. In his early films, Mickey was a funny chap and 
sort of an adventurer, even a slob and rebel. But Disney realized that Mickey was 
primitive in animation and that made him order to re-design the character and 
make him more charming, not the animated stick he was in his first pictures. 
*	 Walther Schneider, Micky Maus ist geisteskrank. Der Querschnitt #10, Berlin 1931, p. 679. Printed 
with permission of J. P. Storm Collection.

31
9. Famous Cartoon Animals
Clothes made the mouse. The early Mickey was almost completely naked except 
for red shorts and big shoes. The later version was meticulously dressed. Some 
pictures even show Mickey in a tail coat.
The pursuit of charm and personality, however, for anatomical correctness 
over cartoony action would change Mickey’s character completely and put him in 
the background. So Mickey became this uninteresting character, a shadow of his 
early popular self, with his dog Pluto destined to do all the funny things, provide 
the gags and bring Mr. Mouse in trouble.
Disney story artist and director Jack Kinney called Mickey a bastard to work 
with: a Boy Scout but what the hell to do with a Boy Scout?
Although simply constructed, the late Mickey was not easy to draw and cer­
tainly became boring to act. His formerly rebellious mind was projected onto a 
gang of sidekicks, like Donald Duck, that became more popular than the original 
creature.
Disney didn’t exactly realize that the figurative simplicity was the key to suc­
cess, but he had to change the caricature the more he was striving for naturalism. 
(As many actors were: for different reasons as we will see.) Just consider changing 
the design of the Simpsons or South Park kids of today’s television.
Nevertheless, many cartoon characters, contemporaries of Mickey, remained 
zany and crazy. They are like bad-boy avatars of those who enjoy the movies and 
want to break out of their petty bourgeois existence but are unable to do so.
Woody Woodpecker was nuts when he started out in a supporting part in a 
1940 Andy Panda cartoon, Knock Knock. Producer Walter Lantz claimed that 
the crazy bird was based on a real woodpecker that was pecking holes in a cot­
tage. The bird was so disruptive that Lantz’ wife suggested to turn him into a 
cartoon character. It was not Lantz who finished the job but one of his employ­
ees, story man Ben “Bugs” Hardaway, fresh from Warners, where he had worked 
on Bugs Bunny that was originally Bugs’ Bunny. Woody was terrible. He was 
rambunctious, highly aggressive, and had a crazy laugh that was adopted from 
Happy Rabbit, a predecessor of Bugs. In 1944, this hundred-percent insane char­
acter was transferred from the forest right into opera where he did The Barber of 
Seville. This was the first Woody Woodpecker cartoon to feature a refined version 
of the woodpecker that was designed by Emery Hawkins and layout artist Art 
Heinemann. The red belly had been altered to white.
Then, however, a change occurred initiated by a shorts director who came 
straight from less anarchic or no-anarchic-at-all Disney, Dick Lundy, who would 
make the character more sympathetic. Out went the early day madness. Woody 
became rational, small, cute, and likeable in a complete turn-around of personal­
ity change.
Each cartoon character seems to have two souls: an assimilated and an unas­
similated. Cartoon aficionados seem to sympathize with the unassimilated, 
while cartoon producers usually will go for the assimilated.
Bugs Bunny, on the other hand, was smart aleck, a pain in the ass to his adver­
saries like Elmer Fudd and Yosemite Sam: This means war. According to Frank 

32
Acting and Character Animation
Tashlin, one of his early directors, all of Bugs came from a 1934 Disney Silly 
Symphony, The Tortoise and the Hare. With one major difference, we might say: 
The Disney hare is incredibly vain and therefore not at all sympathetic. He is 
no role model at all. His antics are disgusting. Ten years later, Warners made a 
spoof of The Tortoise and the Hare called Tortoise Wins by a Hare, and one sees 
that Bugs doesn’t work very well in that context: being outsmarted by a turtle. 
Bugs works better as an avenger to those who interrupt his peaceful life. And that 
would mean that his personality was based on the witty dialogue.
But even a character like him can vary from film to film and from director 
to director. Just compare the Bugs Bunny of Tex Avery to the one supervised by 
Chuck Jones, Robert Clampett, or Friz Freleng.
Chuck Jones considered his Bugs quite different from that directed by Bob 
Clampett who resembled Woody Woodpecker or Friz Freleng. Freleng’s car­
toons, like Sahara Hare (1955), were more physical, with things happening 
quickly. Jones’ version tended to think out his problems and solve them intel­
lectually. But Jones saw his Bugs never as a revolutionary. He understood him as 
a counterrevolutionary.
One of the best creations conceived by Chuck Jones and his main storyboard 
artist Michael Maltese was Wile E. Coyote. This character is its own worst enemy. 
He’d never ever catch the Road Runner. The more frustrated, the more wildly 
inventive he becomes. Santayana said that a fanatic is one who redoubles his 
efforts when he’s forgotten his aim. Wile E. is that kind of fanatic.
The Coyote is a character not so much by acting but by definition as a com­
plete loser who wouldn’t surrender and give up losing (as gamblers don’t give up 
gambling while they lose), enriched by the quality of accidents and Fast & Furry-
ous gags. This is why we always identify with the pains the Coyote suffers. It is 
the same as in daily life: No matter how hard we work, no matter how clever our 
schemes, we invariably seem to get out-run by someone who hardly tries at all 
like Gladstone Gander, Donald Duck’s comic book nemesis.
Upon leaving Warner Bros., Michael Maltese and Chuck Jones got a hold of 
Tom & Jerry after MGM had closed down their own cartoon department. Both 
decided to change the original design particularly of Tom Cat and out came a 
completely different character. Style changed personality and performance, not 
to the likes of outspoken Tom & Jerry fans. The facial expression, especially the 
eyes, produced a totally different cat. The same happened to Mickey Mouse, as 
we have seen, when he was completely clothed like a petit bourgeois and to the 
domesticated Woody Woodpecker.
Daffy Duck was different than Donald, the proverbial black duck among the 
animated duck community: literally daffy, speaking in a lisping, spitting form, 
schizophrenic, considering himself witty to no end, and trying to outsmart smart 
aleck Bugs Bunny but failing constantly. But the same as with Bunny, his person­
ality would change from director to director. Best he was portraying an anarchist.
The Pink Panther started out as title character for Blake Edwards’ comedies to 
become a cartoon star in his own right. In pantomime, he equals Felix the Cat 

33
9. Famous Cartoon Animals
but, named after a jewel, he is more elegant. Dignified, cool, and most important: 
pink he is sure a ladies’ man. The Panther developed into a successful series char­
acter in television, one of the last famous cartoon animals.
There is one single quality that many cartoon animals have. Regardless of 
whether they try to kill each other with sticks of dynamite or have themselves 
steamrolled, they always resurrect as if nothing had happened. They are cartoons 
and so they are immortal like Gods. They are shining stars and so we admire and 
envy them.


35
10
Animators to Become 
Actors and Actresses 
(Sort of)?
An animator has to have not only acting and dubbing reference, but inwardly 
he has to have certain acting qualities himself. In the old days, animators had a 
mirror in front of their drawing board to study their own facial expression and 
grimaces.
But when they call an animator an actor with a pen, it’s a misnomer. 
Inwardly, yes, as he might use techniques to put feelings into a character, but 
never ever will he equal a professional actor. There are young aspiring ani­
mators who say that they are afraid to act. They don’t have to. They never 
will be actors. They never should be. They are like puppeteers, remaining 
in the dark. Always will. They have to know about acting (as they have to 
know about film theory and film history) because they have to judge it. But they 
are certainly no actresses or actors themselves. They don’t have to be afraid; 
they don’t have to enter a stage. Vice versa actors won’t become animators. We 
only know about one Tom Holland, an actor who in the early 1960s would do 
some stop motion work for a Hollywood company named Project Unlimited, 
animating a boy and a caveman riding a Brontosaurus in Dinosaurus! (1960), 
Cormoran in a dance miniature (for reference he had himself filmed doing 
Cormoran’s dance steps),  and some scenes with a two-headed giant and a 

36
Acting and Character Animation
harpy for Jack the Giant Killer  (1962). In 2D animation we don’t know any, 
only ­directors who would move from animation to live action: Gregory La 
Cava, Frank Tashlin, Brad Bird, Andrew Adamson, Tim Burton, and Marjane 
Satrapi who went from co-directing Persepolis (2007) to Chicken with Plums 
(2011).
However, the animator must become one with the image he creates. The image 
will absorb him mentally:
According to a Chinese legend, there was an old painter who had painted a 
landscape that depicted a beautiful valley, with mountains in the distance. The 
painter liked the valley so much that he walked right inside the painting and 
disappeared into the mountains, never to be seen again.
The issue here is very simple. The old Chinaman had simply used his brush to 
create reality. For that was the belief at the time: things are just as they appear to 
be. A picture is no longer a picture; it is a reality that can be entered into, some­
thing definitive and fixed.
By using pencil, paint, clay, or pixels, the animator has to make an audience 
emphatically believe in a creation that was voiced for him by a professional 
actress or actor. Believable acting means that the audience will feel that the char­
acter’s actions are the result of his own inner emotions and not what the animator 
might pretend. It means that the character has personality and reflects, even in 
the tiniest gesture, mood.
If the people could watch the faces of the best animators when caught up in the 
act of drawing an emotional scene, said Brad Bird, they would see artists as fully 
invested in the moment as the best live actors:
The difference is that an animator stays in that moment, often working for weeks to 
express an emotion his or her character takes only seconds to convey on screen.*
The menagerie of anthropomorphized animals in animation based on the 
work of the great storytellers in history from Aesop to Jean de La Fontaine is 
impressive as we have seen: all these animal characters require from the anima­
tors the combined knowledge of human and animal behavior to express them in 
the great art of character animation.
For actors, and particularly for animators, it is useful to develop a kinesthetic 
sense and a thorough understanding of music and rhythm. Frank Gladstone, 
the former Director of Training at DreamWorks SKG and CEO of his own 
­company, Gladstone Film, feels that an animator is responsible for creating 
characters that not only fit their own voices but can perform without vocal cues 
as well. The more keenly developed a kinesthetic sense an actor, dancer, or ani­
mator has, the more capacity that artist has to portray various characters and 
exhibit organic nuances and gestures appropriate to that character.
*	 Brad Bird, foreword to Ed Hooks, Acting for Animators: A Complete Guide to Performance 
Animation. Revised Edition. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann Drama, 2003, pp. vi–vii.

37
10. Animators to Become Actors and Actresses (Sort of)?
It’s mandatory that above good movement and fluid animation you feel per­
sonality. Therefore, in the old days, animators were often cast according to char­
acters. At least that was Disney’s principle. Like actors particular animators can 
handle certain parts better than others. In most productions it is not possible to 
follow this principle, which means that one character might be handled by differ­
ent persons. In such cases, there never will be outstanding character animation.
First comes movement, then personality, and out of personality comes 
emotion.
Animator Art Babbitt reminds a memorable scene from Disney’s Dumbo 
drawn by the great Bill Tytla, where he comes to visit his mother who is locked 
up in a cage. Babbitt recalls to have seen this picture in several places around the 
world and each time people in the audience would weep:
It could have been so crude and maudlin but instead it was done with great sensitiv­
ity and taste. It’s assumed you can make somebody laugh with funny little drawings, 
but to be able to use these funny little drawings and to make a person feel so deeply 
that he weeps—in my estimation, that is true artistry.*
From Tytla we know that he had read Polish actor-director Richard 
Boleslavsky’s book, Acting: The First Six Lessons (1933), and used the book’s prin­
ciples in animation: concentration, memory of emotion, dramatic action, char­
acterization, observation, and rhythm.
Walt Disney said that their most important aim was to develop definite 
personalities, not just shadows, but something that would provoke emotional 
response from the public. They didn’t want them to parallel or assume the aspects 
of human beings or human actions. Instead they endowed them with human 
weaknesses, which they exaggerated in a humorous way. Rather than a caricature 
of individuals, their work was supposed to be a caricature of life.
Disney was one of the first to enter television. Other animators would follow 
his example when the production of theatrical shorts became limited. William 
Hanna and Joseph Barbera had made the Tom & Jerry Cartoons for MGM. 
Now they had to confine to low budgets offered by Screen Gems, the TV arm 
of Columbia Pictures. They had to change the characters figuratively. Barbera 
recalled that it cost $40,000 to $65,000 to make one of the classic MGM Tom & 
Jerry cartoons. Screen Gems offered no more than $2700 for 5 minutes. Their 
secret weapon was the “limited” or “planned” animation technique that they had 
already used to create full-length trial runs of each MGM cartoon. A limited 
animation test required only about 1800 drawings instead of the 20,000 or 30,000 
thousand for the finished product. For television, they needed to refine the tech­
nique and developed working procedures that used about 3000 drawings for a 
5-minute cartoon.
*	 Ed Hooks, Acting for Animators: A Complete Guide to Performance Animation. Revised Edition. 
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann Drama 2003, p. 86. 

38
Acting and Character Animation
Television was just based on the arithmetic.
In the early days, animation was designed on bodily motion and gestures as 
way to express individual personality. Even in the early sound films, there was 
only little dialogue. The tempo was defined by sound effects and music score. 
That happened at a time when even silent comedians had to tune into dialogue or 
have been reduced to become bit players.
Some say that character and acting came in anyway by dialogue and that hap­
pened even before the feature films. It happened in one of Disney’s most beloved 
short films that became a highlight among the Silly Symphonies, in front of the 
background of Depression and New Deal: In the 1933 Three Little Pigs they had 
three characters that looked alike. So they had to differentiate them by the way 
they moved, by the way they acted, and the way they spoke and sang. Otherwise, 
the three of them would have been equal.
Disney didn’t want his characters to be just something moving around on the 
screen and doing funny things, cartoon director Wilfred Jackson said. He would 
go for more and wanted the audience to care what happened to the characters, 
and to believe them as real, not just as a bunch of funny drawings.
That was the time when several animators at the Disney studio even enrolled 
in acting classes.
Generally, at that time, cartoon characters were stereotypes:
Like for instance when they did The Tortoise and the Hare. It was clearly laid out 
to have the hare act the way he did, bombastic and boastful, yet talented. That was 
good, clear characterization. The tortoise was definitely staged as a stupid guy who 
could good-naturedly be taken advantage of. Actually he won by default. This was 
the kind of strong characterization that Walt always insisted on. If anybody else had 
done The Tortoise and the Hare it would have been a series of assorted gags about 
running, one after another.
They often wondered, Dick Huemer would add, if Disney could have been 
a great actor or a comedian. The acting in them was what made his pictures so 
great.*
Most of his fellow students at Folkwang School in Essen, Germany, looked 
down on Andreas Deja. The young graphic designer was not interested in abstract 
animation but fascinated by Disney’s character animation, which he had literally 
inhaled studying Hans Bacher’s Super 8- and 16-mm prints of Disney animation 
frame by frame. Deja was insistent and applied to Disney. Everybody was flab­
bergasted when Deja was eventually hired on the strength of some pencil test 
animation that showed a witch having problems starting a broom and riding off. 
That means he was hired on the strength of his cartoon acting. During his long 
stay, he was lucky enough to animate some of the great 2D Disney characters: 
Roger Rabbit, Gaston in Beauty and the Beast, Jafar in Aladdin, Scar in The Lion 
*	 Joe Adamson, With Disney on Olympus. An Interview with Dick Huemer. Funnyworld No. 17, 
1977, p. 38.

39
10. Animators to Become Actors and Actresses (Sort of)?
King, and Lilo Pelekai in Lilo & Stitch. Deja was convinced that a sure feeling for 
acting is a vital prerequisite for outstanding animation. He knows that there are 
good animators around who do nice, polished drawings, but there is no emo­
tion to come over. Some might need to attend acting classes, he says, others, him 
included, work intuitively. They watch people live and on screen.
In television, however, with the zany action gone, there was no need for 
nuances in acting. Figures were characterized by more and more dialogue until 
it became illustrated radio. The classic cartoons had no or not much dialogue. 
They were based on the variations of a chase like that of a cat and a mouse. But 
with television, it had to be a human story because it would require dialogue to 
save action.


41
11
The Flintstones and the 
Age of Television
With the advent of television, animals gradually disappeared from cartoons and 
were substituted by rough human caricatures. The reason is that TV cartoons 
had to use more dialogue and less action for budgetary reasons. With the classic 
cartoon animals, like Tom & Jerry and Coyote & Roadrunner, it was vice versa 
of course.
The Flintstones are genuine offspring of television. William Hanna and Joseph 
Barbera, their creators (of Tom & Jerry fame), designed them not only for televi­
sion, they designed them from television, from the series of family sitcoms that 
were popular in the 1950s such as I Love Lucy, Father Knows Best, and in par­
ticular The Honeymooners. Looking for the right environment, Hanna-Barbera 
passed family Pilgrims, Romans, Eskimos, and Cowboys until they hit hard 
stones and rocked them. The show, starring Fred, Barney, and their wives, started 
on September 30, 1960, and despite some negative reviews became an instant hit, 
not so much by character animation but by witty dialogue and a modernized 
Stone Age that resembled typical American suburbs. The Flintstones were the 
direct ancestors, Stone Age predecessors so to speak of the Simpsons, an ani­
mated sitcom favorite that, like the Flintstones, only works in dialogue, not in 
animation that was inexpensively executed in South Korea. Homer Simpson’s 

42
Acting and Character Animation 
design is that simplistic that inspired animation is almost impossible. But when 
it came to the colors, one of the animators suggested to render him and his family 
yellow, and to Matt Groening that looked right. Yellow worked like a signal when 
people were flipping through the channels. Just by a quick look viewers could 
see that the Simpsons were on. Neither the color nor the characters themselves 
seemed to be very original: In the late 1940s, Oscar Jacobsson (1889–1945), a 
Swedish cartoonist, created a character named Adamson that was well known in 
Europe and looked exactly like Homer.
Now, with so simple animation around thanks to television, the Europeans 
were finally able to compete with American animation.
Signor Rossi is typically Italian. He was created by Bruno Bozzetto as a cipher 
for the Italian Everyman. By then, as a result of UPA (United Productions of 
America), National Film Board of Canada and Zagreb product, audiences’ taste 
had shifted toward mechanomorphic humans who, according to Chaplin’s 
Modern Times, have qualities that are similar to those of machines and move that 
way (which of course makes the process of animation really simple and absolutely 
limited). They are still 2D but they seem to forebode the digital age when charac­
ters and technology would become a standardized one.
Most of the more or less famous European cartoon stars are human, except for 
André Franquin’s Marsupilami, a black-spotted yellow monkey, and Aardman’s 
Plasticine Gromit and Shaun the Sheep with not many animals around.
Europeans seem to be more interested in history than Americans. They simply 
have the option to refer to a bigger cultural memory while compared to it America 
is a rather young country. For some time, Asterix was the leading European car­
toon character, both in books and animated films. Asterix was a shrewd, cunning 
little Gaul warrior living in a small village that opposes the Roman occupants. 
Thanks to a magic potion that was secretly prepared by village druid Miraculix 
(or. Panoramix), Asterix gets superhuman strength. The diminutive character 
itself would not mean much if not in tandem with his sidekick, Obelix. A menhir 
delivery-man by trade, he is addicted to wild boar. As a child, he fell into the 
cauldron of magic potion and since then wants to drink more but isn’t allowed. 
Obelix is fat and bulky, while Asterix is small and fast. As with so many comedy 
teams, they complement each other perfectly.
The Romans, although this fact was denied by their creators, René Goscinny 
and artist Albert Uderzo, are clear caricatures of the Nazi Germans, the Boche, 
who occupied parts of France in World War II. Interestingly enough, the Asterix 
comic books and films were more popular in Germany than in the country of 
origin.
Then there is Tintin, a juvenile reporter created in the late 1920s by Belgian 
artist Hergé (Georges Prosper Remi), who, travelling through Belgian Congo and 
other exotic places, is clearly a product of European colonialism. Steven Spielberg 
was so enthusiastic about Hergé’s comics that he filmed one of the Adventures of 
Tintin with performance capture technology.

43
11. The Flintstones and the Age of Television
Most famous abroad, however, are the Smurfs. Their prototypes had been 
created by another Belgian artist, Peyo (Pierre Culliford), in an animation stu­
dio in Brussels during German occupation in 1944 and were refined in 1957 
as Schtroumpfs. At first glance, they all look alike, and all are blue (while the 
Simpsons are yellow) but on closer inspection we recognize how individual they 
are, quite similar to the Seven Dwarfs. Besides Papa Smurf, the head of the com­
munity, there are, named after their character attributes, Brainy, Greedy, Vanity, 
Lazy, Clumsy, Hefty, Harmony, and many more.
Marsupilami, Asterix, Tintin, Lucky Luke, and the Smurfs—they all owe their 
lives to the rich tradition of Franco-Belgian comic books.


45
12
Reason & Emotion
Reason & Emotion was the title of one out of a trio of anti-Fascist short films Walt 
Disney produced in 1943, telling of two little guys in the head of each person 
that symbolize the person’s emotions, one of which was brutal and tended to 
Nazi ideology while reason was rejecting this. The message: Americans should 
control these emotions inside their head so that the Nazis will have no chance to 
infiltrate it by means of brainwashing. Pixar director Pete Docter had seen the 
picture and used the basic premise for the feature-length Inside Out. Five little 
guys symbolize the basic emotions sitting in little Riley’s brain, sans reason, and 
get her into trouble.
Actually, there are seven of them.
The word emotion comes from the Latin emovere, meaning “disturb.” These 
disturbances are universal and always tell the truth.
Infants only know two emotions:
••
Anger: upper lids pulled up, eyes bulging, margins of lips rolled in and 
pressed firmly
	
and
••
Joy: muscle around the eyes tightened, “crows feet” wrinkles around the 
eyes, cheeks raised, lip corners raised diagonally

46
Acting and Character Animation
Older persons have five more basic emotions:
••
Fear: eyebrows pulled up and together, upper eyelids pulled up, eyes 
open, lips stretch horizontally
••
Disgust: eyebrows pulled down, nose wrinkled, upper lip pulled up, lips 
loose
••
Sadness: inner corners of eyebrows raised, eyelids loose, lip corners 
pulled down
••
Surprise: entire eyebrow pulled up, eyelids pulled up, eyes open wide, 
mouth hangs open, jaw drops slightly
The final one splits the human face:
••
Contempt: lip corner pulled up on one side and back on the other. Half of 
the upper lip tightens up.
Audiences empathize with character’s emotions. Therefore, Antonin Artaud 
was right when he said that actors are athletes of the heart. The stronger the 
human element, the better are the chances of audience identification.
What they act has been written.
Reason is the field of writing. But there is more to emotion. The written situ­
ation becomes the criterion for the emotional development of a character, but to 
empathize with its emotions, there are more elements needed: Spectators must 
like the design of the character, either a hero or a villain, the score evokes emo­
tion too.
If you have a movie like the ill-conceived Oooops! Noah Is Gone (2015), how­
ever, also known as Two by Two or All Creatures Big and Small, a German–Irish–
Luxembourg co-production and survival tale about two imaginary animal kids 
that get lost from the ark, it is easy to like the universal appeal of the story but 
difficult to empathize with characters that are designed like Asian-manufactured 
cheap fur fabric toys that nobody wants to have, trashy things you might win at 
the funfair and then throw away. It comes like a miracle to rescue the life of such 
miserably ugly guys with too large heads and too small bodies.
Reason brings us values to apply to emotions, and these are different from 
culture to culture.
Once, at the Berlin Museum of Film and Television, we did an experiment 
and invited about 150 pupils from a trade school to a screening of Veit Harlan’s 
anti-Semitic Jud Süss (Jew Suss) made in 1940 on commission by the German 
Minister of the so-called Enlightenment and Propaganda, Dr. Joseph Goebbels. 
Although 2 of the 150 young people would declare themselves being anti-Semites 
(which caused some discussion in the school afterwards), nobody seemed to be 
interested in the stagy Nazi chamber play propaganda. They weren’t emotionally 
touched by the elite of old-fashioned character actors who would recite their lines 
with an eye-roll. We also screened Disney’s Story of one of “Hitler’s Children” as 

47
12. Reason & Emotion
adapted from Education for Death: The Making of the Nazi by Gregor Ziemer, one 
of Disney’s anti-Fascist short films, showing the socialization of Hans, a young, 
very shy German boy in the Third Reich:
Listen to the fanatic cry: “Heute gehört uns Deutschland, morgen die ganze Welt.” 
- “Today we own Germany, tomorrow the whole world.” Hans is now ready for the 
higher education as decreed by the Fuehrer.
We see the youth marching, all armed with torches, burning books by Voltaire 
and Einstein, scores written by Mendelssohn, transforming the Holy Bible into 
Hitler’s Mein Kampf, substituting the crucifix with a sword and a swastika.
Marching and hailing, hailing and marching Hans grows up. In him is planted 
no seed of laughter, hope, tolerance or mercy. For him only hailing and marching, 
marching and hailing as the years grind on. Manhood finds him still hailing and 
marching for the grim years of regimentation have done their work. Now he is a good 
Nazi. He sees no more than the Party wants him to. He says nothing than the party 
wants him to say, and he does nothing but what the Party wants him to do. And so he 
marches on, with millions of comrades, trampling on the rights of others for now his 
education is complete. His education for—death.
We see lines of soldiers chained and muzzled like dogs wandering into war 
graves.
This did it. This touched them all and evoked emotions, decades after the film 
had been made.


49
13
Theories of Acting
Theatrical reality is the opposite from regular, mundane reality. It is compressed 
in time and space and has a dramatic structure missing from everyday life. To 
Shakespeare, the whole world was a stage. Reality becomes dream. So far, anima­
tion has a lot to do with theatre. And there was another thing that Shakespeare 
added to drama: His figures were characters that were able to change, and this 
was what made dramas interesting. In a way, with him we also enter the lan­
guage of the cinema claims Terry Curtis Fox, an Arts Professor and Chair of the 
Goldberg Department of Dramatic Writing in the Tisch School of Acting.
Centuries ago, actors and actresses were not well respected.
In the European theatre, tragedy as well as comedy had its origin in the 
Dionysian Rites of Ancient Greece. Dionysos is the god of fertility, wine, and 
ecstasy and is associated with disguise and transformation. He would break 
down boundaries and surround himself with maenads (mad women) and satyrs.
In The Republic, Plato banished actors from his ideal city. The reason: they cre­
ate appearances rather than reality. Actors masquerade as imitators. This duplic­
ity, if executed succinctly, endangers our perceptions and undermines truth. 
Acting is synonymous to deception, exploits our weakness for appearances over 

50
Acting and Character Animation
reality. To him, Plato let Socrates say, all the imitative arts seem ruinous to the 
mental powers of all their hearers.
In Rome, thespians were part of the slave system. Even those actors who 
became favorites of the Emperor were denied freedman status. In old Japan, the 
original all-female form of the Kabuki Theatre was tied to prostitution. In China, 
actors were considered lower class too. In the thirteenth century, Chinese acting 
troops were semi-nuclear families that travelled together. They lived hand-to-
mouth. In the Early Middle Ages, action troupes were viewed with distrust and 
disgust. In the seventeenth century, theatre in France and England was consid­
ered an institution that acted against God. Actors were imposters and jugglers. 
They were a travelling circus of buffoons. They were fake fire-eaters. It needed 
time and a change of mind and society to have these people respected.
The attitude changed in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, when the­
atre became more and more leisure pastime for the new bourgeois upper class. 
That was when they began to speak about the legitimate stage.
At the same time, with the rise of naturalism, the postulate of a more natural 
way of acting was issued. The bourgeoisie had replaced the outgoing feudal aris­
tocracy and favored a new inwardness. Previously, on stage they applauded the 
declamation, the louder the better. There was no director around to hold actors 
back. Actors did as they pleased. They ad-libbed and extemporized.
Now the audience that fancied itself asked for naturalness and hoped to be 
touched by the actor’s art. To supervise this art, a new profession, a dramaturge, 
was needed.
All drama theory dwells on the relationship between actor, role, and charac­
ter. One group says that actors have to be taken up in and empathize with their 
parts, the other demands a distance of the actor from his part.
The ones who placed the director’s view in the center of attention were Bert 
Brecht and Vsevolod Meyerhold. What Meyerhold implemented in theatre is 
known as biomechania. This biomechania transformed the actor merely into 
material. His acting theory was therefore very physical. He emphasized danc­
ing and athletic skills. His colleague Brecht wasn’t interested in empathy but 
wanted a play staged and received intellectually. Brecht’s plays were meant as 
teaching plays.
The opposite is what Constantin Stanislavsky, co-founder of the Moscow Art 
Theatre, said. He preferred to explore the players and grant them enough space. 
The actors should behave naturally, not acting toward an audience but as if there 
would be a wall between actors and spectators. Actors should be motivated by 
their personal biography and experiences to express authentic emotion. It’s an 
elaborate process and expensive, but for acting in the movies it is quite helpful. 
Actors question their parts and bring their characters to life: Where do I come 
from? Where do I go to? What is my background? What is my personal data 
sheet? In which situation am I? What is my network of relationships? What are 
my subject matters?
All these questions are important not only for actors but also for animators.

51
13. Theories of Acting
The Actors Studio in New York was based on Stanislavsky’s theory of method 
acting. The school was founded in October 1947 by Elia Kazan, Cheryl Crawford, 
and Robert Lewis but the main protagonist was Lee Strasberg. He trained a whole 
new bunch of actors: Anne Bancroft, Marlon Brando, James Dean, Robert De 
Niro, Jane Fonda, Dustin Hoffman, Martin Landau, Steve McQueen, Marilyn 
Monroe, Paul Newman, Sidney Poitier, and Rod Steiger. The list of alumni is long 
and illustrious.
After they separated from Lee Strasberg and his Group Theatre, Sanford 
Meisner and fellow actor Stella Adler chose to use imagination to stimulate emo­
tion and involvement in a play’s imaginary circumstances. Self-consciousness 
and self-censorship are enemies to the free expression every actor needs. Sanford 
Meisner postulated truthful behavior under imaginary circumstances.
If we talk about theatre, there is, of course, a big difference between stage and 
film/TV. There are no close-ups in the theatre unless you sit in the first row. In 
the old days actresses and actors tended to overact just to make sure that people 
in the last row will see what they were doing. These actors had problems in front 
of the camera. Their way of acting was considered old fashioned and hammy.
Actually, in the early days of the cinema, most legitimate actresses and actors 
were reluctant to appear on screen. World War I (and the money offered) changed 
their mind.
On the screen, with a lot of close-ups, the camera decides whom it loves and 
whom not. You can’t explain why some good-looking actors are disliked by the 
camera while others, not so beautiful, are adored by the mystery of photography. 
Anyway, in the movies it’s all about looks and being photogenic.
Production-wise animation has less connection to the legitimate stage than 
live-action films. But the production process of live action and animated films is 
based on a similar premise. While a play is staged from beginning to end, films, 
live action, and animation are organized in scenes. Actors work so to speak out 
of synch, from scene to scene, not chronologically. They might start with the 
end and finish with the beginning, depending on the schedule set up by the pro­
duction. In animation, the situation is even “worse.” If you weren’t working at 
Disney’s in the Golden Age of (American) Animation but at one of the poverty 
row companies, you wouldn’t begin or finish with a single character but would 
be commissioned to handle certain scenes of different characters. No place for 
method acting.
A real film actor has to be authentic. To him acting is like breathing. This is 
what you hear from professional actors. Al Pacino said that. Others repeated it.
In animation, there is seldom authenticity. In animation, very often memo­
rable characters come out expressively ugly:
Goofy, Popeye, and the ugliest of them all, Spongue Bob (“I’m ugly and I’m 
PROUD”), have certainly no cute features.
Here are some of Art Babbitt’s thoughts concerning an equally ugly charac­
ter he would often animate for Disney trying to find inside the cartoon figure: 
a Character Analysis of the Goof who started out as one of Mickey’s sidekicks 

52
Acting and Character Animation
(dated June 1934). Babbitt thought of the Goof as a composite of an everlasting 
optimist, a gullible Good Samaritan, a half-wit, a shiftless, good-natured colored 
boy, and a hick. He describes him as loose-jointed and gangly, but not rubbery. 
A bashful dumbbell who thinks he is pretty smart, laughing at his own jokes 
because he can’t understand any others.*
*	 Gerald Peary and Danny Peary, The American Animated Cartoon: A Critical Anthology. New York: 
E. P. Dutton, 1980, pp. 235–236.

53
14
Voice Actors
The closest regular actors could come with a cartoon character is voice char­
acterization. There is even one cartoon character that was solely built around a 
voice. It was Donald Duck’s personality that was created by the quack of Clarence 
Charles Nash (1904–1985):
Nash said in an interview with The Times (1984)* that his interest in becoming 
an entertainer started in his native Oklahoma, where he had learned to imitate 
a billy goat. When he left, the goat would bleat in dismay. The sound fascinated 
young Nash and he tried to convert it to a monologue: “Mary Had A Little Lamb.” 
When he moved from Chicago to California, he tried unsuccessfully as a vocalist, 
animal imitator, and mandolin player but nobody would buy “Mary Had A Little 
Lamb.” Nobody—except Walt Disney. Disney was a farm body, same as Nash.
Nash introduced himself to cartoon director Wilfred Jackson as bird imitator. 
Jackson said: “We can use them. What else can you do?” So Nash did his whole act, 
all the farm animal sounds and “Mary Had A Little Lamb.” Right in the middle 
of the recitation, Jackson secretly switched on the intercom. The sound went into 
*	 Burt A. Folkart, 50-Year Career: Clarence Nash, Donald Duck’s Voice, Dies. Los Angeles Times, 
February 21, 1985.

54
Acting and Character Animation
Walt Disney’s office. Disney came down, looked at the director and said, “That’s 
our talking duck! That’s the duck we’ve been looking for.”*
So a goat became a duck.
Originally, Donald Duck was only a member in Mickey’s gang but by the late 
1930s, when audiences lost interest in the saturated Mickey, he would become a 
star of his own in his own series.
Clarence Nash said that the Duck’s personality was the exact opposite of 
Mickey’s. Mickey was basically a happy fellow, even tempered, and a good buddy. 
We would call him 1D. Donald was more versatile. His tantrums were his trade­
mark. He was always determined to get his own way. If not he would lose self-
control. There were a lot of gag possibilities in such a character. He has problems 
with everybody and everything. After a short while he would get frustrated and 
even explode. He likes to bother others but when someone bothers him he gets 
very angry. In short: while they lost interest in Mickey, Donald was welcomed 
with open arms by the animators.
The only problem with Donald’s voice was that nobody understood the 
squawking so that other characters had to repeat the important parts of his 
dialogue.
Other famous cartoon voices:
William “Billy” Bletcher (1894–1979), a diminutive comedian with a big, very 
strong voice, became Peg Leg Pete and the Big Bad Wolf: In the old days there 
were not that many actors who would care to do cartoon voices. Bletcher was a 
regular in slapstick comedies, from Our Gang to The Three Stooges comedies. One 
day he was told by Pinto Colvig (who was the original voice of Goofy) that Disney 
was looking for a voice that would fill the bill of a wolf in the upcoming Three 
Little Pigs. “Why don’t you go over and do this thing for Walt,” Colvig said. “They 
want a guy who can huff and puff and blow your house in.” So Bletcher would start 
to work for Disney’s short department, sometimes alongside Walt himself who 
would do Mickey’s voice. There is a famous behind-the-scenes clip with Walt 
as Mickey and to his right Billy as Pete. Sometimes he would do two or three 
voices at the same time which was not an uncommon habit back then. When he 
dubbed The Golden Touch, a 1935 Silly Symphony that told the classic story of 
King Midas, they would put white on his lips and photographed him that way, as 
reference for the animators to animate the mouth movements.
Charles Dawson “Daws” Butler (1916–1988) was in his own words a shy young 
man who began imitating voices: While in high school at Oark Park, a Chicago 
suburb, he forced himself to appear before groups at amateur contests. His reper­
toire consisted of a Ford starting on a cold day and included the voices of President 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt and bandleader-entertainer Rudy Vallée. This self-
inflicted therapy worked for him quite well and soon he entered show business. He 
did radio shows and after World War II, in 1948, joined forces with Stan Freberg to 
do the TV puppet show Time for Beany created by Bob Clampett and also worked 
*	 Gregory J. M. Catson, Clarence “Ducky” Nash. Filmfax, No. 26, April/May 1991, p. 38.

55
14. Voice Actors
for Tex Avery (he did the wolf character in Little Rural Riding Hood). Since the 
advent of television cartoons, he performed—a record!—the voices of more than 
200 animated characters, mostly for Hanna-Barbera for whom he did Reddy of 
Ruff and Reddy, Huckleberry Hound, Mr. Jinks and Dixie and Yogi Bear.
Sterling Holloway (1905–1992), who appeared in 150 films and television shows, 
became one of Disney’s most popular voices: the adult Flower in Bambi, the narra­
tor in Peter and the Wolf, The Cheshire Cat in Alice in Wonderland, and Kaa in The 
Jungle Book, the last animated feature Disney personally was involved with before 
his death. Holloway said that his favorite Disney part was Winnie the Pooh.
June Foray (born in 1917), a radio voice, created Lucifer for Disney’s Cinderella 
as well as Rocky the Flying Squirrel, Granny (owner of Tweety & Sylvester, taking 
over for Bea Benaderet), and Witch Hazel.
Angela Lansbury came to New York to record Mrs. Potts’ songs for Beauty 
and the Beast, particularly the title ballad. She thought Tale as Old as Time was 
a lovely ballad but when she heard it she was afraid that she couldn’t sing that, 
that she didn’t have that kind of vocal equipment. She wasn’t a singer, she said: 
She was an actress who sings. That’s a difference. Luckily, the late lyricist Howard 
Ashman wasn’t going for the sound, he wanted all emotion and the drama behind 
it, and this demand Angela Lansbury was highly able to deliver.
The most famous of them all, however, was Melvin Jerome “Mel” Blanc 
(1908–1989) who did the voices for Warner’s cartoon stars, all of them: Porky 
Pig, Daffy Duck, Elmer Fudd, Yosemite Sam, Tweety & Sylvester, Marvin the 
Martian, Pepe Le Pew, Speedy Gonzales, Wile E. Coyote, Foghorn Leghorn, 
The Tasmanian Devil—as well as the original Woody Woodpecker for Walter 
Lantz (that was continued by Lantz’s wife Grace Stafford) and Barney Rubble 
for Hanna-Barbera’s Flintstones show. When he started doing cartoon voices, in 
1937, he wasn’t first choice at Warners.
Blanc had debuted on radio in 1927 and later became a regular on the Jack 
Benny Show, but he had to wait a whole year and a half until he got an audition 
at Leon Schlesinger’s cartoon unit at Warners. Constantly he was told that they 
got all the voices they needed. When the casting director, a guy named Spencer, 
passed away, Blanc approached Treg Brown, the man who succeeded him: “Look, 
I’ve been trying to get to Spencer and tell him about my voices, but he’s gone now 
and I wanted to audition for him.” So Brown invited him and guffawed when Blanc 
auditioned. He called the directors in and they liked what they heard too. One of 
the directors asked him if he could do “a drunken bull, crocked on sour mash.” 
Blanc answered in drunken voice, “I’d be - hic - very happy to do a - hic - drunken 
bull.” *
Blanc’s most famous voice was Bugs Bunny:
They showed him sketches of Master Hare and told him that this character 
was supposed to be a tough little stinker who wouldn’t take guff from anybody. 
Blanc thought of a tough voice that would fit this type of character. The toughest 
*	 Mel Blanc. Interviewed by Mike Barrier. Funnyworld No. 18, 1978, p. 28.

56
Acting and Character Animation
voices he would find were the accents from Brooklyn and Bronx. So he combined 
the two and out came Bugs Bunny.
During recording sessions, he actually chewed on a carrot. He had tried apples 
and celery, but that didn’t sound right. But when he got a mouthful of carrot, he 
couldn’t chew it and swallow all of it in time. So they had to stop recording while 
he would spit the carrot out in the waste basket. When it came to the famous 
“What’s up, doc?”, a phrase that was brought up by Tex Avery, he suggested that 
they have Bugs say, “Eh!” first. After that “Eh!” he would chew on a carrot. Then 
they would stop recording so that he could spit out the carrot after which he 
would add, “What’s up, doc?”
Some source called Blanc an intuitive method actor. That is a little overstated 
but else wise you couldn’t praise this man high enough.
“Incidentally, (so Blanc in a 1981 TV interview), they do the voice first and the 
cartoon after the voice is done. They draw to the voice. Most people don’t know 
that.” Such a voice can be highly inspiring to animators, including the crucial 
issue of timing.
One of Blanc’s best characters was the hysterical Yosemite Sam, a caricature of 
its director, Isadore “Friz” Freleng. Christopher Lee, a friend of Mel Blanc’s: “Sam 
was a very small guy but he had that real loud voice.” In this case, the voice makes 
the whole character. The animation has to follow the voice acting faithfully.
Not to forget, Walt Disney who dubbed, as we have mentioned, his own best 
creation, Mickey Mouse’s shy, falsetto voice, from Steamboat Willie up to 1946 
when his chain-smoking habits prevented him from going on. Disney certainly 
was the one who established acting in animation.
UPA’s nearsighted Mr. Magoo would have been a perfect choice for W. C. 
Fields although Quincy Magoo, a wealthy retiree, was much more Victorian, not 
as rough as Fields but there was something both characters had in common. At 
the time, however, Magoo was conceived Fields had passed away. So actor Jerry 
Hausner who voiced Magoo’s nephew Waldo introduced Jim Backus (1913–1989) 
to animation director John Hubley (1914–1977). Backus was already fairly well 
known from the Alan Young Show on NBC Radio as the voice of Hubert Updyke, 
a man so rich he had one chauffeur for left-hand turns and another driver for 
right-hand turns. Hausner arranged a luncheon at the Smoke House Restaurant, 
next door to the UPA studio in Burbank. Hubley spoke of this new character he 
was trying to find a voice for. He didn’t want to have to ask Backus to audition 
for him because it might be an affront to an actor as well established as Backus. 
At the studio Hubley showed him sketches of the character and mentioned that 
Magoo was nearsighted and lived in his own little world. All of a sudden Backus 
said, “My father lives in his own little world, too, never quite seeing things the way 
they really are. It isn’t that he is nearsighted, but his whole attitude toward life is a 
kind of personal isolation toward the rest of the world.”*
*	 Gerald Peary and Danny Peary, The American Animated Cartoon: A Critical Anthology. New York: 
E. P. Dutton, 1980, p. 245.

57
14. Voice Actors
The legacy continues with comedian Daniel Louis “Dan” Castellaneta (born in 
1957) as Homer Simpson, Grampa Simpson, Krusty the Clown, Mayor Quimby, 
and Julie Deborah Kavner (born in 1950) as Marge Simpson in Matt Groening’s 
The Simpsons, supported by celebrity guest stars like Danny DeVito, Ringo Starr, 
Paul  McCartney (who decades ago were in Yellow Submarine), Sting, Dustin 
Hoffman, Michael Jackson, Leonard Nimoy, Elizabeth Taylor, Hugh Hefner, Bette 
Midler, Conan O’Brien, James Earl Jones, Larry King, Meryl Streep, Dick Cavett, 
Mickey Rooney, Tony Blair, Paul Anka, Glenn Close, Donald Sutherland, Kirk 
Douglas, Jack Lemmon, John Waters, Willem Dafoe, Helen Hunt, Rod Steiger, 
Bob Denver, Tom Hanks, Rupert Murdoch (whose empire controls Fox), Stephen 
Hawking, Buzz Aldrin, Patrick Stewart, and German film director Werner Herzog.
Nowadays they spend a lot of money to hire big actors to use their names in 
promotion although we don’t know of any movie audiences that would go and buy 
tickets at the box office just to hear a certain star’s voice and justify this nonsense 
type of name-dropping. Very often it is name above competence. It doesn’t add 
to the quality of a film. These big stars are no Mel Blancs and no Billy Bletchers.
Today’s cartoon producers not only record but also film voice actors’ dubbing 
sessions to study the mimic art and facial expressions.
Rocky the Rooster of Chicken Run (2000) fame was voiced by one of those big 
name stars, the contested Mel Gibson. Some of Gibson’s characteristics would be 
used. They had some footage of Mel taken at the recording session, recounts Peter 
Lord, who co-directed with Nick Park, but he wasn’t performing for the camera, and 
so they found themselves referring most often not to that footage but to Maverick, 
a 1994 Western comedy directed by Richard Donner, in which Gibson played a 
similar character: “the classic lovable rogue who’s never quite straight or honest, but 
remains likeable nonetheless because in the end he proves himself trustworthy. It’s 
very difficult to translate live-action into what we do, but aspects of Mel’s unique 
facial mannerisms, such as how he flares his eyes wide to great effect, were used for 
Rocky on occasion. But for the most part we just drew from his vocal performance.”*
With Kung Fu Panda the method of filming an actor worked much better 
because Jack Black who was cast as the title character at least tried some method 
voice acting and did the utmost to put himself in the fur of the panda and asking 
himself, What’s the panda going through? What’s his emotional state? He would 
take a minute. Said that he didn’t like to be rushed. Sometimes he went, Hold on 
a second. Let me just imagine it for a while. And he did some little guided imagery 
of his own sort of self-hypnosis.
Black was joined by Angelina Jolie (Tigress), Jackie Chan (Monkey), and 
Dustin Hoffman (Shifu):
For the last several years, I’ve had the privilege of voicing the character of Shifu in 
the Kung Fu Panda f﻿ilms. The process has been one of the most interesting and chal­
lenging of my career. (…)
*	 Kevin H. Martin, Poultry in Motion. Cinefex 82, July 2000, p. 126.

58
Acting and Character Animation
Each time I stepped into the sound booth, I found inspiration in the dynamic 
storyboards and detailed character designs achieved by the artists at DreamWorks 
Animation. These illustrations were microcosms of information. (…)
This communal and imaginative vision helped me to interpret the character more 
fully, and to say that I am greatly impressed by their talent, drive, and creativity 
would be an understatement.*
We wonder if Hoffman has written these lines himself or if a ghostwriter was 
used. Nevertheless, voice acting is a tough job.
Some cartoon producers are pretty selective even with recording foreign ver­
sions. Disney was. In those days dubbing was almost a science.
In one case, not a voice but sound fx made a character: Gerald McBoing-Boing, 
the boy who expresses himself by imitating sounds, was invented by Dr. Seuss 
(Theodor Seuss Geisel) and put into cartoons by John Hubley and UPA.
In special cases dialogue can change a whole character. There was that movie 
about a girl who befriended a tiny star that had fallen from the nightly sky. 
Originally the filmmakers wanted to introduce the girl as a cranky and not as 
an upbeat character. She was upset because her family had moved to a new place 
although she had felt so comfortable at their former home. This version turned 
out highly unpleasant and annoying. A solution was found to try and change her 
dialogue in the exposition counting and substituting syllables. But when you care­
fully watch the animation, you will see that dialogue and acting do not match.
Bruno Ganz’ Hitler in The Downfall (Der Untergang, 2004), which describes 
the Fuehrer’s end in the bunker under the Reich Chancellery in 1945, introduces 
Adolf Hitler in an earlier situation as a benevolent old man who even helps a 
nervous newcomer secretary and puts her at ease. From then on, to the audience 
Hitler would remain a “human” monster.
Apropos of Hitler and cartoon voices: The Nazi dictator who was an outspo­
ken Disney admirer had three different 35mm prints of Disney’s Snow White and 
the Seven Dwarfs, the original version, a Swedish print and a German-dubbed 
one (that was screened in German film theatres after the war). He didn’t know 
that the German dubbing was done in Amsterdam by Jewish émigrés. Dora 
Gerson loaned her voice to the Queen who was after Snow White’s blood, Kurt 
Gerron was one of the dwarfs and directed the dubbing. Both were murdered 
in Auschwitz: Dora (Dorothea) Gerson on February 14, 1943 and Gerron on 
October 28, 1944. Only Frieda van Hessen who was Snow White’s German sing­
ing voice survived the concentration camp.
*	 Foreword in: The Art of Kung Fu Panda 2, San Rafael, California; Ensight Editions, 2011, p. 7.

59
15
Pixilation
Animating Actors or 
Becoming Animation
Pixilation means that actors are transforming into animation, even more so than 
in rotoscoping, by actually acting frame by frame. Here actors and animators are 
sharing the performance. Because most actors have no experience in animation, 
it’s a perfect training ground for animators to become animation themselves and 
do things physically.
Pixilation is a stop-frame technique by which live actors are animated 
exactly like stop-motion puppets, a variation of object animation that was 
known since the early days of trick cinematography when Georges Méliès, 
Segundo de Chomón, Émile Cohl, and others, as if by an invisible hand, 
moved tables, chairs, and furniture around.
One of the undisputed masters of the process was Norman McLaren (1914–
1987) who used it to a great advantage in the Academy Award winning sat­
ire Neighbours produced in 1952, while the Korean War was going on, by the 
National Film Board of Canada (and A Chairy Tale made in 1957 that shows a 
young man battling for control over a chair).
McLaren discovered that one not only can animate objects frame by frame 
at low camera speeds but real people too. He and his colleague Grant Munro 
started to experiment with the idea. For 3 days they shot a series of technical 

60
Acting and Character Animation
tests that involved 20 seconds of animation of two men fighting. When they 
viewed the rushes, they saw that the process worked for humans. Even more, 
McLaren felt that the fighting scene contained a whole story. Two animators, 
Munro and Jean-Paul Ladouceur, would star as peaceful Neighbours who come 
into conflict with each other over a flower that would bloom between their 
adjacent cardboard houses. Wolf Koenig handled the photography, McLaren 
directed but it would be Munro who termed the process Pixilation (from 
pixilated).
Persons shot in this way move in a strange, jerky, stilted, almost surreal way 
as if they were puppets manipulated by an unseen force. The physical laws and 
forces of weight and gravity seem to be neutralized.
One of the gems of the genre is a tour-de-force pixilation starring animator 
Mike Jittlov that became part of the feature film The Wizard of Speed and Time. 
Pixilation, although done frame by frame, seems to be absolutely spontaneous 
and grows in action like a slapstick comedy while doing it in front as well as 
behind the camera. The film was intended as a calling card for Jittlov and his 
friends and just grew from there.
Even in the days of digital animation, this technique is not forgotten. In 2011, 
Juan Pablo Zaramella, a filmmaker from Buenos Aires, used the technique for 
his short film Luminaris that won 327 international awards and imagines a 
world controlled by light: A young man (Gustavo Cornillón who co-wrote the 
script) who works in a factory that produces light bulbs tries to break out from 
this slave system.
Peter Pauli in a pixilation/stop-motion scene from Café d’Amour (2015). (Courtesy 
of Benedikt Toniolo and Film University Babelsberg.)

61
15.  Pixilation
Another short was released in 2016, Café d’Amour, which is a magic place 
that tries hard to bring two people together: Lewis, a street artist, and Coco, a 
chubby lady. The film was the graduate work of Benedikt Toniolo, a student of 
Film University Babelsberg.
Coco was played by Ulrike Bliefert. We asked her:
Q:	Have you seen a pixilation film before or have you worked already 
in VFX and trickfilm? What is your background? Why did they 
cast you?
A:	I have been working as an actress for film, television and theatre since 
the early seventies, but I had never before seen a pixilation movie and I 
didn’t even know the technical term. Nevertheless I knew about the so-
called “stop trick” technique, and—in my second job as a writer of youth 
literature—I have produced a ­5-minute short with Playmobile figurines 
for the online Advent calendar of my editor (https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=W_ly_4RdWVA) in 2014. So I knew that precision and patience 
would be the overall needs on set.
	
  I don’t know why I have been casted, but I think it was mandatory that 
“Coco” was overweight—in contrast to the spindly male character. As 
there are very few overweight actresses in movies and TV I guess there 
were very few competitors for this role. Anyway: You should ask Benedikt 
Toniolo why he chose me. Maybe there is a more flattering reason for cast­
ing me as “Coco…”
Q:	While making the movie you as actress had to work under totally dif­
ferent conditions of time and had to subordinate to the requirements 
of the animation film. Did you have difficulty thinking “single frame?” 
Did it handicap your performance? Did you feel “mechanical?”
A:	I really enjoyed to split my actions and facial expressions into bits and 
pieces! In doing so, you become aware of every detail of your performance, 
and you learn to omit unnecessary arabesques. It was a great experience to 
focus on even the smallest moves and then learn to blow them up in order 
to achieve the silent movie effect.
Q:	What prerequisites should an actor have for this type of film? How did 
the director support you?
A:	Well, after we had finished shooting, I needed a cane (for several weeks!), 
as my knees hurt like hell. So I think the main requirement is physical 
health! Imagine standing up from a chair in five or more stages and being 
forced to freeze in every single position for minutes! In addition to that, 

62
Acting and Character Animation
you need patience: The shooting of one little sip from a teacup may take 
an hour, and walking through the room and back may take a whole after­
noon. So above all you need to keep up a good mood, and you will never 
succeed to stay good-humored and motivated without the support of the 
director and his team!
Peter Pauli as street artist and tramp and Ulrike Bliefert as Coco the chubby lady 
meet in the Café d’Amour (2015) that tries to set them up. (Courtesy of Benedikt 
Toniolo and Film University Babelsberg.)
Director Benedikt Toniolo instructs actress Ulrike Bliefert on the set of Café d’Amour 
(2015). (Courtesy of Benedikt Toniolo and Film University Babelsberg.)

63
15.  Pixilation
Q:	Do you regard this technique as a gimmick or do you think that it 
opened a new aesthetic dimension to this little love story?
A:	I think nowadays people are overrun and jaded by the everyday flood of 
images. So anything special, anything that breaks the rules of the average 
TV show, movie or adverts will be welcome and appreciated. Pixilation 
may not revolutionize film and television, but it offers ways to be playful 
(!) and inventive and simply have—and offer—fun.
Casting actors carefully for Pixilation projects is mandatory. Body control is 
the premier prerequisite. Sometimes they have to hold a position up to 5 min­
utes. So do the utmost to comfort your actors. Dancers and persons who have 
martial arts experience belong to those who are specially qualified for the job. 
Actors also should have gestural capacities. They should be patient and con­
centrated. Before shooting, better test ideas with yourself and prepare a clear 
shooting plan.
In Pixilation you can create and fill a physical universe of the impossible with 
its own logic, rich in visual metaphors. And above all, you can master and change 
space and time.


65
16
Dancing with Animation
Gene Kelly danced twice with animated characters, in a brief sequence of Anchors 
Aweigh (1945) and in a main sequence of the episodic film Invitation to the Dance 
(1956).
Kelly wanted to create something on film that hadn’t been done before. He and 
Stanley Donen, the director of Anchors Aweigh, sat around for days to think of 
something that would be new. It was Donen who suggested, “How about doing a 
dance with a cartoon?”
The MGM brass was not convinced but Joe Pasternak, the producer, went to 
bat for them and got an additional budget of $100,000.
Naturally Donen and Kelly went first to Walt Disney, by then the patriarch 
of animation, to ask for advice and hopefully get some of his artists released to 
work for them. Disney at that time was experimenting too with animation and 
live action. In 1944, he had done The Three Caballeros, starring the cartoon char-
acters Donald Duck, José Carioca, and Panchito alongside live actors, and would 
have cartoon sequences in Song of the South that was released in 1946. (Afro-
American actor James Baskett who played Uncle Remus [Zip-a-Dee-Doo-Dah] 
would sadly be denied to attend the picture’s Atlanta premiere but, he was the 
first male African-American actor to receive an Honorary Academy Award.)

66
Acting and Character Animation
So technically, Disney had no objections and considered the idea feasible 
but he had no artists available for them as he was busy with his own projects. 
But his blessings helped to convince MGM’s cartoon department to use Jerry 
Mouse (of Tom & Jerry fame) as Kelly’s cartoon partner and the optical depart­
ment (under Irving G. Ries) to handle the task of compositing the shots. Donen 
worked it all out jointly with the Director of Photography who would be asked 
to light and shoot something that wasn’t there and would be added later in 
post-production.
Ray Patterson was one of the MGM animators working on Anchors Aweigh 
under cartoon directors William Hanna (who had a special feeling for music) 
and Joseph Barbera making Kelly dance with Jerry Mouse. He recalled that they 
took a rotoscope and that Gene Kelly would take too big steps while the mouse 
had little feet and problems to follow him. Patterson was afraid and asking him­
self how the hell this was going to work. Jerry would kind of slide but in the end it 
all went well. Kelly was going this far, the mouse was only going this far.
Gene Kelly returned to the MGM cartoon unit headed by Hanna and Barbera 
some years later for the even more ambitious Invitation to the Dance, where they 
would do the elaborate 20-minute long Sinbad the Sailor sequence to the music 
of Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov’s Scheherazade in which U.S. Navy sailor Kelly on 
shore leave purchases an oil lamp in the casbah of an unnamed Middle Eastern 
country that turns out to be a magic lamp and, rubbing it, summons a genie who 
materializes in the shape of 10-year-old David Kasday (this might have been a 
springboard of ideas for producer Charles H. Schneer and Ray Harryhausen for 
their own juvenile genie Barani in 7th Voyage of Sinbad played by Richard Eyer 
who was 12 at the time when the picture was released although Harryhausen 
himself never mentioned Kelly’s picture):
Kelly and Kasday enter the over-dimensional story-book pages of the Arabian 
Nights and encounter people and animals that are complete 2D animation. In a 
fabulous valley of diamonds (that indeed is part of the Sinbad folklore), Kelly is 
threatened by a giant snake but the genie’s flute comes to his rescue and makes 
the jive-loving monster dance. When Kelly takes a gem, two mean looking palace 
guards wielding swords grab him by the stacking swivel and deport him to the 
sultan’s palace where he out-dances the two and falls in love with a beautiful 
harem girl that at the end is put into a Women’s Naval Uniform (which of course 
was not part of the Arabian Nights tales).
As guidance for director and camera crew, there was a sketch book at hand 
that was prepared by artists in the MGM cartoon department illustrating the 
movements that the animated characters would make in their dance routines.
Carol Haney, credited as one of Kelly’s assistant choreographers, would not 
only appear as Scheherazade but would pose and model as a harem girl day after 
day on the roof of the cartoon studio. After finishing the show, Haney would 
go to Broadway and choreograph The Pajama Game. She died 6 weeks after the 
opening of Funny Girl at age 39 in 1964.

67
16. Dancing with Animation
Unfortunately, Invitation to the Dance was too ambitious and flopped at 
the box office but would win the Golden Bear for Best Film at the 6th Berlin 
International Film Festival.
Nobody would touch animation and dancing again until Walt Disney him­
self took a chance. In a famous fantasy sequence of Mary Poppins (1963), Dick 
Van Dyke plays a screever who would invite the titular nanny (Julie Andrews) 
and two kids to enter the fantasy world of his painting and dance with a com­
edy quartet of 2D penguin waiters, which was animated by Ollie Johnston and 
became one of the highlights of the picture.
Dancing itself also became a topic in animation: In Ballerina (2016), a French-
Canadian 3D fantasy directed by Eric Summer and Éric Warin, an orphan girl 
named Félicie has the dream of becoming a dance student at the Paris Opera. She 
flees her orphanage in rural Brittany to follow this passion and succeeds against 
all odds. The filmmakers worked 4 years on the project and had a budget of 28 
million euros. The simple story needs much time to develop emotionally and one 
might ask why they did it in animation and not used live action. Luckily in the 
last third of the movie, the audience begins to feel the urge of the protagonist and 
understands why this story was told in animation.


69
17
Acting with Animated 
Characters
The technique to have a live actor appear with animation was already part of the 
Out of the Inkwell series, with Max Fleischer himself appearing with Ko-Ko the 
Clown. Walt Disney copied that and extended the concept. Virginia Davis was 
just 4 years old when she became Disney’s Alice in Cartoonland, supposed to 
act on-screen with animated characters that would be matted in throughout the 
length of a short film.
As an old lady, Virginia still had fresh memories about the shooting of Disney’s 
series. Sometimes they would film in a vacant lot. Walt Disney would have her 
act out a scene in front of a white tarp that was draped over a billboard to make a 
pure white background to fill in with animation later on:
Walt was an excellent storyteller and actor. He would act out the character, so I could 
see the kind of performance he wanted. He’d say, “Let’s pretend there’s a lion chasing 
you. Here it comes! You’re frightened! Now, scream!” Or he’d pretend to be a wolf, 
and roar, ‘Aaarrrggghhh!’ Because they were silent films, he could direct me out loud 
while the camera was rolling.*
*	 Pat Williams with Jim Denney, How To Be Like Walt: Capturing the Disney Magic Every Day of 
Your Life. Deerfield Beach, FL: Health Communications, Inc., 2004, p. 26.

70
Acting and Character Animation
There is a lot of talent needed to make a little girl see and believe in ferocious 
jungle animals. Walt and his company would continue to mix live action and 
2D animation occasionally but with 3D model animation, it became a regular 
feature.
Producer-Director Merian C. Cooper had approached Fay Wray with the 
news that he had chosen her to be the leading lady in a film about “a discovery 
of gigantic proportions” and that she would play opposite “the tallest, darkest 
leading man in Hollywood” who turned out to be not the Gary Cooper or Clark 
Gable type of star but the O’Brien-animated King Kong.
Confronted with the difficult task of opposing a giant monster that was not 
being seen during live-action shooting, Robert Armstrong, who played Carl 
Denham, was puzzled and asked Merian Cooper if he really understood him 
correctly when he said that he would react to a fifty-foot ape. Cooper affirmed, 
“Yes, that’s right, Bob. Why?” “Well, I’ve been in this business a great many years,” 
Armstrong answered, “but you tell me how to take a fifty-foot ape big!”*
Part of the challenge of appearing in those stop motion monster movies would 
have been to act opposite nothing—to cower in front of a giant that’s not there, 
said actor Kerwin Mathews (1926–2007).
Although he wasn’t particularly fond of the genre, Mathews was among the 
most experienced actors in that type of film having worked with Ray Harryhausen 
twice (and in a Harryhausen rip-off, Jack the Giant Killer, 1962). Originally, he 
was groomed to stardom by Columbia tycoon Harry Cohn himself and inherit 
the title role in a big-budget biblical epic, Joseph and His Brethren, but female 
co-star Rita Hayworth wasn’t pleased with the prospect as she would have pre­
ferred another partner and withdrew from the project. When Harry Cohn died 
in February 1958, the project was shelved entirely. In 1957, with nothing else to 
do, a disappointed Mathews accompanied Charles Schneer, one of Columbia’s 
B-movie producers, to Spain where they would use the elaborate costumes that 
had been made for Joseph to enhance the realms of low budget and where he had 
to fence with an imaginary skeleton in The 7th Voyage of Sinbad that was added 
by stop-frame animation months later in a small shop in Los Angeles. To do so, 
Harryhausen had taken fencing lessons himself.
That sword fight was shot in a cave in Majorca. They started filming one night 
at sundown and worked straight through for 24 hours, because they could only 
afford the cave for one night.
Olympic fencing master Enzo Musumeci Greco (1911–1994), an Italian 
Maestro d’Armi, who was in films since 1939 and who did all the big movies 
(The Crimson Pirate, Ben-Hur, El Cid), was put on the payroll on the insistence 
of Sinbad director Nathan “Jerry” Juran, who had worked with him before (on 
Le imprese di una spada leggendaria), and joined the crew in Spain. It wasn’t 
that easy to get him. Juran had asked Charles Schneer explicitly for Greco but 
*	 Orville Goldner and George E. Turner: The Making of King Kong. New York: Ballantine Books, 
1975, p. 6.

71
17. Acting with Animated Characters
the always penny-conscious producer turned him down first because he didn’t 
want to pay the extra transportation. Juran said he couldn’t do without him and 
when Musumeci finally showed up, he was asking for more money than Charles 
Schneer was willing to pay. Juran offered to pay the balance out of his own pocket. 
Schneer was so embarrassed by that offer that he okayed Musumeci’s claim. 
Enzo Musumeci Greco proved a real asset. He laid out the complete swordfight 
and instructed Kerwin Mathews (and Ray Harryhausen). They worked all night 
in those in caves Arta. During rehearsals, the Italian sword master took the 
place of the skeleton, and they printed that for Ray Harryhausen. Projecting 
the scene, Harryhausen would use Musumeci as a guide and copy his move­
ments onto the puppet of the skeleton. Then, for the actual plate, they just left 
Musumeci Greco out and had Kerwin Mathews fight thin air.
Nathan Juran admired Mathews who never complained, like Todd Armstrong, 
the star in another Harryhausen epic, Jason and the Argonauts (1963), did: When 
they finally finished the sequence, Juran noticed that Mathews’ sword hand 
was bloody. The actor had worked so hard that he had scraped off the skin. He 
always called Kerwin Mathews the epitome of a professional. He gave a hell of a 
performance.
In a way, the skeleton sequence was achieved by sort of rotoscoping. Only that 
Ray was not tracing an image but using it as a reference for his model animation 
(same as Disney).
Harryhausen topped his work in Jason and the Argonauts by animating not 
one but seven skeletons fighting three Greek warriors. One of them was played 
by Andrew Faulds:
We were told that we were going to have to rehearse this skeleton fight, but I didn’t 
realize what that meant. Over three Sundays, we did rehearsals. The first Sunday we 
were given the movements, as in a ballet, but more realistic strokes than delicately 
dancing around. We rehearsed this until we had got the run of the routine of the 
skeleton fight with some Italian fencers, who had come down from Rome to teach us 
about how the fight was going to be. On the second Sunday, we did the fight again 
with the same men, but this time they all were numbered jerseys. They filmed it this 
time [in black and white] with these men playing the skeletons. Then, on the third 
and final Sunday, we fought it for real, fighting thin air, following the movements 
exactly that we had practiced with the men in the numbered shirts. Then it was up to 
the skill of Mr. Harryhausen to fill in the skeletons where the men in the numbered 
shirts had been. I had never experienced this in filming before and I thought this was 
never going to work. I was staggered when I saw the film for the first time.*
In an interview conducted by Mark Hamill and Anne Wyndham, Kerwin 
Mathews recalled his work on The 7th Voyage of Sinbad as acting with little ref­
erence. To represent the cyclops and other creatures, they only had “monster 
*	 Mike Hankin, Ray Harryhausen: Master of the Majicks. Volume 3: The British Films. Los Angeles: 
Archive Editions: 2010, p. 119. Reprinted by permission of the author.

72
Acting and Character Animation
sticks,” about 30-feet long, tiring to manipulate because they were very heavy. 
Ray moved those by himself.*
Others used this technique too. Among them was Jim Danforth who animated 
and directed the visual effects for Hammer Films’ “sequel” to Harryhausen’s One 
Million Years B.C. titled When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth (1970):
To establish the size of a dinosaur in a shot, I used dinosaur sticks. These were 2” × 
2” wood poles cut to a length equal to the height the particular dinosaur would be if it 
existed as a live, full-size creature - two poles for each dinosaur. A piece of lightweight 
rope, equal to the length of the dinosaur, connected the two poles.
At the beginning of each take of a dinosaur background ‘plate’, I had grips stand in 
the set, and hold the poles, with the ropes stretched tight between them. The positions 
of the two poles were adjusted to indicate the angle at which the dinosaur would be 
standing relative to the camera - profile, head-on, forty-five degrees, etc. The slate for 
the scene would be filmed. Then the slate would be removed, and the dinosaur sticks 
would be filmed. After one or two seconds, Carlos [Gil, assistant director] would 
shout, in Spanish, “Remove the poles,” and the grips would run out of the shot, while 
the camera continued to run. When the set was clear, we would start the action.†
This type of direction and actor’s work was rather technical and had to be so.
*	 Mark Hamill and Anne Wyndham, Exclusive Interview with Kerwin Mathews, FXRH 1, no. 4 
(Spring 1974).
†	 Jim Danforth, Dinosaurs, Dragons, and Drama: The Odyssey of a Trickfilmmaker. Vol. 1. Archive 
Editions: Los Angeles, CA, 2012, p. 665. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Italian stuntmen substitute for the animated models and rehearse skeleton fight for 
Ray Harryhausen’s Jason and the Argonauts while shooting the live-action plates. 
(Courtesy of The Ray & Diana Harryhausen Foundation.)

73
17. Acting with Animated Characters
Necessarily Danforth was allowed to direct the second unit too that would 
shoot the process plates for the animation but found the director of the first unit, 
in this case Val Guest, not always attentive to his needs. While the first unit helmed 
by Guest took its time, Danforth occasionally was rushed and had to content him­
self with sometimes not acceptable time and working conditions shooting a scene 
that shows Stone Age Tribesmen capturing a long-necked plesiosaur:
I had two hours and twelve minutes to make my set-ups, rehearse the actors, then film 
the complicated scenes of the Sand Tribesman pulling on a rope to the plesiosaur’s 
neck, plus the scene of the Sand Tribesmen throwing spears at the plesiosaur, plus the 
background action for the scenes of the plesiosaur being staked down. If I didn’t get 
the rope-pulling mechanism correctly positioned we would get unusable footage, so I 
worked slowly and deliberately on this part of the procedure. Aida [Young, the pro­
ducer] paced nervously up and down the edge of the sand set, pointing to her watch 
and saying “Time, Jim. Time!” I had to ignore Aida - for the good of the production.
Once the mechanism was correctly in place, we could position the large boulder 
that would form the stationary-matte area for a Sand Tribesman who would appear 
to be in front of the plesiosaur’s immobilized body. Farther away, I positioned the 
other Sand Tribe people who would appear to be beyond the plesiosaur, watching or 
pounding on stakes. Once that was accomplished, I could begin rehearsing the stunt 
actor who would be seen pulling on the rope attached to the plesiosaur’s head. Grips 
operated the teeter-totter device that raised and lowered like the plesiosaur’s head, 
and to which was attached the vine rope held by the stunt actor. A band of white 
tape on the vine rope made an easily-seen mark to which I could align the animated 
miniature rope later. This was important because the forward and backward motion 
of the plesiosaur’s head had to match the corresponding pulls of the teeter totter and 
the stunt actor. When all was working correctly, I filmed several takes of this action.
Quickly we removed the teeter-totter device and the boulder, then set up a target 
for the spear-throwing scene. All the actors had to do was get their spears close to the 
target, and I would later make it appear that the spears had buried themselves in the 
flesh of the plesiosaur.
When those shots were completed I moved on to the final set-up - the background 
action that would appear behind the previously-filmed blue-backing foregrounds of 
Sand Tribe men pulling on ropes wrapped around snubbing posts, to cinch the head 
of the plesiosaur against the ground. […]
When we started this set-up it was just after eight o’clock - I had about ten min­
utes remaining in which to finish all the live action for the plesiosaur sequence. We 
got the set-up made with about three minutes to spare, and I shot the scene as though 
I were making a silent movie - talking the actors through the action as the camera 
ran. “Continue pounding on the stakes - now, on the count of three, I want you all to 
look to your right… one… two… three. Everyone looking right… Keep rolling… All 
right… Cut.” The camera crew checked the camera gate to be sure there were no hairs 
in the aperture. The gate was clean. It was a “Print and a Wrap”; we were finished.*
*	 Jim Danforth, Dinosaurs, Dragons, and Drama: The Odyssey of a Trickfilmmaker. Vol. 1. Archive 
Editions: Los Angeles, CA, 2012, pp. 689–690.

74
Acting and Character Animation
Note that neither Harryhausen nor Danforth, who were both pretty knowl­
edgeable about dinosaurs—Danforth’s father was a paleontologist—had any 
problems showing people and dinosaurs live besides each other at the same time.
Usually, films like these are not an actor’s favorite dish. It’s no big challenge 
to stand in front of a process, a blue or green screen and react to invisible giant 
forces. This certainly was true for Robert Armstrong who played Carl Denham 
in King Kong and Son of Kong. Armstrong hated to become identified just with 
that single part. When Kong was shot down and fell from top of the Empire 
State Building he had that classic line, “It was Beauty killed the Beast.” He begged 
Ernest “Monty” Schoedsack, the co-director, to change that line, “I’ll do anything, 
Monty, but don’t make me say that line.”
One of the beauties who confronted beasts was British actress Caroline 
Munro. Well, she wasn’t exactly an actress. She was a model and cover girl and 
did occasional bit parts in movies. Writer Brian Clemens, who knew Munro 
from The Avengers, recommended her to Schneer and Harryhausen for the part 
of Margiana, the slave girl in The Golden Voyage of Sinbad (1973), who is sacri­
ficed to a one-eyed underground centaur on the lost continent of Lemuria, like 
Fay Wray was offered sacrifice to Kong on Skull Island. It shows that Munro is no 
actress but the camera likes her because she is such a beauty. She doesn’t have to 
do anything. Just being beautiful and looking at you with these fascinating eyes 
seems to be enough “acting” for this type of movie.

75
18
The Puppet Masters
Ray Harryhausen (1920–2013), the late king of stop-motion animators, took act­
ing lessons in the 1940s, which taught him about movement and building charac­
ter, and even went out to the zoos to study for hours animals, among them a huge 
gorilla, for his work on Mighty Joe Young. Ray always said: Being an animator 
you have to be totally dedicated. When he animated Joe Young, he even lived on 
vegetables and couldn’t eat meat.
On Mighty Joe, Harryhausen was chosen to assist his mentor, Willis O’Brien, 
who had pioneered the art of dimensional animation in King Kong.
We mentioned earlier that Darlyne O’Brien, the widow of the animator, later 
claimed that she could recognize her husband’s personality and characteristics 
in every tiny gesture of the creature. (Actually, OBie had voted for a slightly more 
human version of Kong.) Harryhausen:
Possibly, Mrs. O’Brien says that a lot of OBie came out in Kong’s mannerisms. 
Undoubtedly, a lot of my idiosyncrasies—the way I look at things—do come out. I 
have a rather macabre way of bringing statues to life, and I suppose that dates back to 
a silent film that frightened me as a child when it showed a gigantic sculpture falling 
on the sculptor. You could say that I am acting out some things, I suppose, but I don’t 
come home and tear my wife apart after having done a violent swordfight between 

76
Acting and Character Animation
Kali and Sinbad. Actually, with animation you are acting through another medium. 
I wanted to be an actor in my early days. I studied drama and was in junior and 
senior high school plays. But I always had the terrors on opening night, and I couldn’t 
see the rest of my life with lumps constantly forming in my throat. So I found a way to 
act through animated figures. You have to act and react to the live action: so I have, 
in essence, found a way to be in acting without actually being an actor.*
Harryhausen did everything he could to study human and animal movement. 
He watched his pet dog named Kong. He would go out to see ballet and study 
famous movie actors. He was particularly interested in Stan Laurel, one-half of 
the team of Laurel & Hardy. Laurel’s facial expression and slight body movement 
would speak volumes.
The Black Scorpion (1957) is another proof of O’Brien’s insight into animal 
behavior. There is a scene where one of the giant scorpions (there were three 
stop-motion models, one king-size and two smaller ones) that are unearthed by 
*	 Vic Cox, Ray Harryhausen—Acting Without the Lumps. Cinefex 5, July 1981, p. 18. In another 
interview, Harryhausen (Man Behind Monsters Makes Mighty Scenes. In: The Animal World. Movie 
Pressbook. New York: Warner Bros., 1956) said that he often had to act (!) the role of a dinosaur, or 
an ape, or a flying saucer to feel how to move the models in portraying a certain kind of scene.
Armature (one leg missing and used for another model) from The 7th Voyage of 
Sinbad crafted by Fred Harryhausen. (Author’s Collection.)

77
18. The Puppet Masters
volcanic eruption tries to sting a huge metal bucket to death that had been low­
ered on a long cable into an eerie underground cavern.
Harryhausen could animate anything. He had a set of small flying saucers 
made by his father, Fred Harryhausen, from aluminum. He animated them on a 
special rig in front of the process screen, and the animation made those saucers 
as vibrant and lively like insects.
Interestingly, Ray Harryhausen only covered a niche in animation although 
basically he was an animator. He always was acknowledged as a master of visual 
effects, a term that since his screen credit in The 7th Voyage of Sinbad was con­
nected with his name. As an animator he was only credited once: for the dino­
saurs in The Animal World (1956). In 1999, we were going to prepare a series 
with him, Ray Harryhausen’s World of Myth and Legend that was going to have 
introductions filmed with him and feature a legendary tale such as Ilya Muromets 
or Theseus and the Minotaur (written by Jim Danforth) entirely in stop motion. 
Harryhausen wouldn’t go for stop motion by and large but with that so-called 
reality sandwich he was known for: live action with an animated character 
inserted. In his days, he did the blend by a clever way, with miniature background 
projection and a split screen matte that would put the animated character, say 
six-armed Kali in The Golden Voyage of Sinbad, right into the live action.
Ray avoided to use the term puppet or puppet animation and preferred to call 
it model animation as he was once asked by a man if he wasn’t too old to play with 
dolls. Our intention, however, was to work with puppets. Finally, the project was 
vetoed by Harryhausen himself.
Actually, Hero of Alexandria in the second century wrote manuals on how 
to fabricate images of god that would move. He would rotate statues and design 
a miniature puppet theatre—not for entertainment’s sake but for religious pur­
poses. To create a god was to perform theurgy to attract divine engines: giving 
life to inanimate objects. The tradition of gods animated carried on in the fasci­
nation with puppets.
“Never have a model standing still,” Ray said. “Have something move all time even 
if the character stands still.”* If you watch the reptilian Ymir from 20 Million Miles 
to Earth (1957), you will notice that even if it stands still at least its tail is moving.
The most interesting Ymir scenes are those showing him little, before growing 
to giant size, on a table blinded by light. He’s reptilian but cute and innocent: a 
poor, tormented soul as Harryhausen called him. Bill Warren, a film historian 
devoted to sci-fi and fantasy epics, acknowledged that this maybe was Ray’s best 
animation but then he began to criticize the design as too slender, with hands too 
large and clumsy. Harryhausen repeatedly has animated creatures, says Warren, 
that lean slightly forward from the waist, thrusting out the head, and pulling 
back the arms at the elbows.
To the best of our knowledge, there are only two Harryhausen creatures that 
act that way: the Ymir, the strange Venusian creature from 20 million miles away 
*	 Harryhausen, personal communication.

78
Acting and Character Animation
that stranded on Earth and grew to gargantuan proportions in the atmosphere of 
Earth, and the Cyclopes from The 7th Voyage of Sinbad. Actually, one of the two, 
the smaller one that had two horns, was made re-using the Ymir armature as a 
puppet skeleton.
But in one point Warren is right. The Ymir might be the best animation con­
cerning stop-motion techniques but Kong, not that good animation, is the better 
character, memorable and touching. So it is not always the technical quality of 
the animation itself which decides about the emotional acceptance of an artificial 
character.
There is a classic German fantasy tale titled The Sandman written by E. T. 
A. Hoffmann in 1816 that describes a girl a man falls in love with until he real­
izes that she is not human: The man’s name is Nathanael. He has abandoned 
Klara, his down-to-earth fiancée, for a beautiful girl he has seen from his room 
in a neighboring building where the girl, Olimpia, does nothing else than sit­
ting motionless in her bedroom. She plays however, as Nathanel learns, piano 
and dances with perfunctory precision. When Nathanael talks to her she only 
responds with a gentle “Ah, ah!” To our horror, we realize that Olimpia is a life-
size mechanical doll fabricated by Spallanzani, Nathanael’s physics professor. 
Olimpia’s eyes are made of glass. Inside her body is a clockwork mechanism that 
controls her movements and dancing.
The episode is an interesting forerunner to the age of psychoanalysis. It tells of 
a case of narcissistic love. Nathanael rejects the love of Klara who is spirited and 
highly cultivated and has only eyes for an artificial creature, which is a reflec­
tion of him. Because she has no soul herself, Olimpia mirrors the movements of 
Nathanael’s soul.
Many performers are narcissists and self-obsessed. They want people to look 
at them, love and adore them. It’s part of their personality. In a certain way, this 
literary analysis describes pretty much the sentiment of an animator toward his 
creation too. The relationship with the puppet is narcissistic. I (RG) once met 
a famous female marionette maker who carved hundreds of puppets for stage 
and TV shows. Suddenly I realized the similarity between this old lady and her 
puppets, particularly the wooden noses, and told her that sculptors in a way 
always portray themselves. She was not amused, and our conversation came to 
a sudden end.
Same is true with Harryhausen, a man with a great sense of humor. Everybody 
who has ever met him will describe the man as modest and humble which he 
certainly was unless it came to his art and recognition and his screen credits. 
Starting with The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms (1953), he was always credited on 
screen and on posters. He told me how furious he became when Sam Katzman, 
the notorious executive producer of It Came from Beneath the Sea (1954), was 
going to deny him his well-deserved screen credit. In such a case, he was not a 
person to be trifled with. It was Technical Effects Created by Ray Harryhausen or 
it was not. Ray Harryhausen was a man who had to have his way. Sure, he was able 
to compromise—to a certain degree.

79
18. The Puppet Masters
Bust from Clash of the Titans, the largest of Harryhausen’s animation models. 
(Author’s Collection.)
From Jason and the Argonauts. (Author’s Collection.)

80
Acting and Character Animation
Harryhausen was not that much interested in his models although they were 
highly insured when they went on display somewhere. Otherwise he seemed to 
be proud only of his bronzes that would survive him and his decaying models. 
In his vast Kensington home in London that once belonged to director Michael 
Powell and after his death was sold for a high sum, he had this tiny workroom 
under the roof with two wall closets and a cabinet in which he stored the rest of 
his lifetime achievement of original models. Like a magician, for some years, he 
had become pretty secretive about his work, at least until his retirement. In his 
own Film Fantasy Scrapbook that saw several editions, he didn’t reveal that much. 
What was important to him was only the process of life-giving, of animation 
itself. Then he could be self-critical too.
He shuddered when he saw the Cyclops making his first entrance in The 7th 
Voyage of Sinbad and lamented: “If only I would have had more time….”* The one-
eyed creature, with a single horn on his head (the original sculpt was more like 
a devil with two horns), had satyr’s goat-legs, an old favorite of Ray’s, and so the 
acting was based on his strange walk. He would stride out, stop, roar, and proceed. 
“It’s all in his walk,” Harryhausen would say. Later, Ray would reject his own gro­
tesque design and say that Cyclopes are no more than overgrown people. He drew 
one for me: “Don’t make him a Devil Demon.”* I (RG) don’t have the little pencil 
drawing anymore, that the giant face with a half-bald head resembled Ray himself.
In a way, in his darkroom, where he walked for miles back and forth between 
camera and stop-motion setup in his active days, he felt creating like god and 
always spoke of his “Zeus complex.” It was more than a joke. (Remember the 
early 2D animation that we mentioned where you see the animator’s hand hold­
ing a pen like the hand of a giant god.)
*	 Harryhausen, personal communication.
Holger Delfs (left) and Giesen (right) arrange a Harryhausen display at 
Filmmuseum Berlin. (Author’s Collection.)

81
18. The Puppet Masters
Many of the younger generation of VFX artists were heavily influenced as 
kids by Harryhausen and so tried to copy him. One of those youngsters, Dennis 
Muren, who went to see The 7th Voyage of Sinbad eight times during its first 
week in 1958, wasn’t very fond of his own experiments with stop motion. He 
became a cameraman and had to photograph the stop-motion animation of other 
youngsters like David Allen and Phil Tippett which must have been depressing. 
Eventually, Dennis found a way to substitute the frame-by-frame stop-motion 
animation by more lifelike, kinetic GC animation.
Originally they intended to use stop motion in Jurassic Park (1993). But then 
they decided that stop motion, even the Go Motion process they had used in 
Dragonslayer (1981), was not lifelike enough to put into use in Spielberg’s film.
When Ray Harryhausen first saw scenes from Disney’s Dinosaurs (2000), it 
was not the lifelike animation or the creatures’ textures he noticed but the sheer 
number of dinosaurs involved in certain scenes while he himself had only four 
of them in the Valley of Gwangi (1969). Concerning the movements, however, 
he didn’t notice that many differences to his own approach from previous days. 
Nevertheless, these Dinosaurs, as typical for Disney, were humanized—what 
Harryhausen wouldn’t have dared. King Kong yes, but dinosaurs? (Humanized 
dinosaur kids appeared already in Spielberg’s The Land Before Time series that 
was started in 1988 by Don Bluth.)
Contrary to Harryhausen, his mentor Willis O’Brien did funny dinosaurs in 
his early slapstick silents, and Jim Danforth would design some for Caveman 
(1981) starring Ringo Starr and Dennis Quaid, particularly a sluggish tyranno­
saurus that was totally different from any previous version:
I sculpted it, painted it, put the eyes in it—everything. When you’re designing some­
thing in this vein, you don’t necessarily want to take your subject too seriously. You 
don’t want to be rigid and say: ‘Well, gee. A tyrannosaurus is scary, it’s always been 
scary and I’m not about to do one that isn’t.’ So I decided to make him kind of sleepy-
eyed and snaggle-toothed. And fat so maybe he can’t run quite as fast. But he’s still 
big and he can always fall on you. Dangerous, but… What I wanted was an old, fat, 
degenerate tyrannosaurus. And I got it, I think. So I was real happy with it. Strangely 
enough, when I showed a photograph of it to Ray Harryhausen he didn’t like it at 
all—not at all. He kept saying, ‘Looks like it’s pregnant!’ *
Nevertheless, the puppet spoke to the animators. Once you had seen it, you 
knew how to move it. There would be no different way. This tyrannosaurus was 
a caricature.
But Danforth wouldn’t go for lifelike images. This is the difference between 
him and Harryhausen. In fact, he compared stop motion with ballet. And he was 
the one to truly acknowledge the art of Czech puppetry and Jiři Trnka.
*	 Scott Vanderbilt, Caveman—The Real Stars. Cinefex 5, 1981, p. 56.

82
Acting and Character Animation
While puppets are not likely to become Stanislavsky method-actors, the motivations 
for what they do and how they conduct themselves are derived from the situations in 
which they are depicted. Trnka’s cowboy in Song of the Prairie (1949) behaves in an 
exaggeratedly heroic manner because it has been established that he is a caricature 
of a Hollywood western hero in a parody of that genre. Occasionally he may be stupid 
and require rescue by his horse, but he is always in character.*
In the films made by O’Brien or Harryhausen, puppets were merely used as 
special effects devices. It was the clear objective of their makers to let them appear 
like creatures of nature. Trnka and his predecessor Ladislas Starevich, however, 
would aim for sheer puppetry, instead of using the strings that manipulate their 
marionettes frame-wise.
Puppets and puppet films, as Trnka saw them, would stand on their own feet 
only when they don’t mingle with live-action films. He pleaded for stylization 
of the scenery, the artificially heroic look of the human actors, and the lyrical 
content of the theme.
Trnka’s ambition was moving 3D figures of puppets in space, in contradistinc­
tion to the heroes of 2D cartoons. From the beginning, he said, he had his own 
conception of how puppets could be handled. Each of them should have an indi­
vidual but static facial expression, as compared with the puppets that by means of 
various technical devices can change their mien in an attempt to achieve a more 
*	 L. Bruce Holman, Puppet Animation in the Cinema: History and Technique. South Brunswick and 
New York: A. S. Barnes and Company. London: The Tantivy Press, 1975, p. 73.
Jim Danforth sculpts Siegfried model for a proposed stop-motion project. 
(Courtesy of Jim Danforth.)

83
18. The Puppet Masters
life-like aspect. In practice, this hasn’t enhanced realism, but rather conduced to 
naturalism.
The puppet faces in Trnka films would remain mostly static. The puppet would 
act just by movement and body stance. George Pal’s replacement animation was 
totally different. It was like squash and stretch with these puppets. While Trnka 
wanted to get away from cartoons, Pal, who started out as a 2D animator in his 
native Hungary and in Germany, aimed for wacky cartooniness. Everything, 
every step was preplanned and carved in wood before it got to the animators:
Every animator was given a detailed cue sheet, prepared by Pal, with each move­
ment laboriously illustrated and synchronized to previously recorded music and dia­
logue. This setup meant that when the foot of a model touched the floor or a facial 
reaction occurred, the action was perfectly timed to the music. The model builders 
constructed sectioned boxes holding the various parts of every character, all coded to 
match the cue sheet. According to the cue sheet, the animator would replace parts of 
the model in sequence to produce movement.
Pal’s meticulous planning was to allow several animators to work on the same 
sequence without any noticeable variation in style. Hence, the animators were given lit­
tle room for individual expression, with each move worked out to the smallest detail on 
the precise cue sheets. The system only occasionally allowed “ freehand” animation […] *
Pal switched to model animation when he was commissioned a commercial 
for Oberst Cigarettes in 1932. A heavily damaged print was recently found in the 
vaults of the Berlin Cinematheque:
A cigarette tobacco leaf standing on two legs, complete with Plasticine mouth 
movements, is going to introduce the process of cigarette production that is 
shown in live-action documentary scenes.
Not by drinking (from a small milk bottle), they are kept moist the humanized 
lead tells us. They generate moisture from the air to keep themselves smooth.
We see female workers sort out leaves.
From the process of shredding, the leaf returns, from the netherworld so to 
speak, in ghostly 2D animation, to continue its narration. Then it is rolled into 
the paper.
Finally, we have a humanoid cigarette, with wire legs and arms and clods for 
feet and hands.
This stop-motion cigarette takes over as Oberst, i.e., Colonel, and, with paper 
mouth movements and a small paper hat as helmet, proceeds to command a 
small army:
Stand at attention!
Eyes front!
Count off!
*	 Mike Hankin, Ray Harryhausen: Master of the Majicks, Volume 1: Beginnings and Endings. Los 
Angeles: Archive Editions, 2013, p. 199. Reprinted by permission of the author.

84
Acting and Character Animation
Gold filter soldiers count off and form a marching column:
Six cigarettes in front, six in the middle, and two behind, with the colonel 
marching ahead to Prussian and Bavarian march music.
In 1933, Pal who was Jewish was forced to leave Germany and founded 
a new production facility in the Netherlands. In one of his early Gasparcolor 
Puppetoons, made for Philips Radio in Eindhoven, he had two airplanes front 
up and used cock’s cries to underline that they were enemies. Ray Harryhausen 
Replacement puppets by Alberto Couceiro and Alejandra Tomei: Automatic 
Fitness (2015). (Courtesy of Animas Film, Berlin.)

85
18. The Puppet Masters
worked for Pal in Hollywood in the early 1940s, but to him it lacked individual­
ity. It was more like a small manufacture. Everything was predetermined and 
choreographed to even the tiniest step and move.
Harryhausen tried his hand on fairy tales after the war: Mother Goose Stories, 
Little Red Riding Hood, Hansel and Gretel, Rapunzel for which he would have 
less replacement faces than Pal but just change facial expression by dissolves and 
would animate the body completely instead of substituting it frame by frame. In 
one of these shorts, The Story of King Midas, he copied his favorite actor, Conrad 
Veidt, whom he had admired as Jaffar, the sinister grand vizier in The Thief of 
Bagdad (1940).
George Pal, as we have seen, came from drawing and cartoons. His goal was to 
transform puppetry into cartooning. This was the reason why he chose replace­
ment animation. He wouldn’t go for anatomically correct armatures. He would 
have prepared a different puppet or puppet part for each frame.
Ladislas Starevich (1882–1965), on the other hand, came from natural science. 
In the early days of cinematography, he started to animate insects to film the fight 
of stag beetles.
A film creator like Starevich can afford what no man of the industry can afford: He 
can wait for inspiration. He can play with his figures and thoughts. Although com­
pletely playful on the other hand he builds up his films strictly logical. He is natural 
scientist but one who observes nature with the eyes of a poet and with the perception 
of the fairy tale: at the same time real and symbolic, concrete and transcendental. 
The development of a film happens with him as kind of a process of crystalliza­
tion. He makes an observation while he goes for a walk or observes a community of 
insects which hits him, infiltrates his mind and moves his imagination. This obser­
vation or the thoughts deduced from it he will enrich by new ideas. […]
He is the actor of all his characters. If he is in the right mood he carefully can start 
and freely follow his imagination: the elastic, malleable material that provides the 
“sculptures animées” as he likes to call them and allows any nuance of mimic and 
gesture. It allows him to remain in the mood and to immediately realize each idea. 
[…]
Of these enchanting effects of images one can assume what Starevich says: that 
he can make entirely visual pictures. Occasionally he animates advertising films to 
make some money. But this is not his ideal “because there is no heart in it.” He wants 
to touch emotionally—children and adults alike—, to make them sad or happy. 
Although he esteems Disney and doesn’t minimalize him he dislikes hand-drawn 
films. They are not to his taste. Drawings in a film, he says, will remain caricatures: 
with all amusing characteristics, yet caricatures. They are not living entities who 
touch the soul. The flatness doesn’t allow expression of soul. The drawing cannot have 
a soul, therefore you need a body. The body alone is bearer of the soul, it necessitates 
three dimensions. In a hand-drawn animated film a man’s head can be ripped off 
and moved back again, and the audience will laugh. To living sculptures you cannot 
do that: “On sent de la peine,” one will feel pain. Contrary to Disney, the animals are 
no little machines but living entities, almost human.
Who has seen [Starevich’s feature-length] Renard the Fox and who knows Disney 
will find this differentiation very affecting. Starevich’s film, compared to Walt Disney’s 

86
Acting and Character Animation
animal grotesqueness, has the advantage of an unlikely higher level of liveliness and 
naturalism. In his finer, tender, saturated tone of fairy tale, he is nearer to our feel­
ing. Against the saucy, clean step of civilisation of the American, the Pole [Starevich 
was born in Poland, worked in Russia and after the revolution emigrated to France] 
represents convincingly the old Europe with its culture grown in emotion and so rich 
in tradition. About Disney one can laugh and marvel but Starevich one has to love.*
Maybe this was one of the reasons why Disney strived for 3D realism in his 2D 
cartoons. Disney himself tried to introduce a stop-motion unit once but, accord­
ing to Jim Danforth, he ignored how to set up puppet animation correctly and 
make the puppets stand (!).
Jürgen Clausen, who remained managing director at the Gasparcolor plant in 
Berlin after the Brothers Gaspar, like George Pal, had fled anti-Semitism, agreed 
with Starevich’s sentiments and unsuccessfully tried to establish a color puppet 
film production in Nazi Germany with technicians and artists who had previ­
ously worked with Pal in the Netherlands:
There are two ways to see pictures: the “flat” and the “dimensional” kind. Instead 
of “flat” in this case we might better term it: “plakatig” [graphic, poster-like], and 
instead of “dimensional”: “in depth.” As far as I enjoy poster-like (hand-drawn) 
trickfilm I am regarded more an intellectual-witty kind of man without the right 
sense of humor, also superficial (this is no rating). As far as I am going to enjoy 
puppet or dimensional trickfilm I am a spiritually sensual man and have humor. 
Everybody who has the ability to watch himself will agree to this. Hand-drawn ani­
mation addresses more the intellect. The ideas or improvisations (the American calls 
them “gags”) have only little to do with humor but more with its brilliant superficial­
ity, the joke. Hand-drawn animation most often deals with malicious caricatures 
and likes to parody (the cheap kind to get a feeling of superiority). It is not childlike 
but more childish. For this reason, notabene, as long as hand-drawn animation will 
remain poster-like it will provide an awkward situation to retell German fairy tale 
content in this particular style (see Snow White by Disney!). It doesn’t seem advisable 
at all to film fairy tales, legends and also novels in this way for each content is tied to 
a certain expression, on its form.
Hand-drawn animation has more to do with distortion than with grotesque, it 
invites more to bemusement than guiding us to bonhomie which is reflected in the 
smile (actually about oneself, i.e. about the own humanness which steps out of the 
mirror of artwork). […]
Americans have transferred the idea of moving posters hand-drawn animation to 
its highest degree. This style comes from feuilletonistic comic drawings. […]
Now what is the puppet trickfilm?
Here the matter is totally different. Like feature film, as “photographed theatre”, 
has a tradition that dates back to old-age cultural spaces (tragedy, mystery or miracle 
play, cult dances and so on) the dimensional trick is tied to everything that has to do 
with moving puppets. A cultural value so far which is as old as culture itself. If we 
*	 Frank Maraun, “Poet am Tricktisch” Besuch bei Starewitsch. In: Der deutsche Film, September 
1938. Collection of J. P. Storm.

87
18. The Puppet Masters
think of the wooden Egyptian crocodile with its movable mouth—from the second mil­
lennium, or the Turkish and East-Asian shadow plays or the mechanical playworks of 
the 16th century (Peter Döpfer, Daniel Bertel for instance), the Kasperle hand puppets 
and marionettes (about these Kleist has made a final statement) and last but not least 
about the masks of South German Perchten Runs, yes—the nativity plays, gargoyles, 
chimes figures up to the truly world-dominating German toys—all this lives in us, 
excites us and binds us when we start to think about making color puppet trickfilms.*
Then Clausen, who was a member of the National Socialist Party, proceeded 
to spread kind of racial ideology:
The puppet or dimensional trick is located in European cultural space and no other 
country can be its more natural home than Germany. The German is deeply dimen­
sional-romantic, profoundly imaginative, he is dreamy and contemplative. None other 
succeeds that well in humorous grotesque (see Wilhelm Busch) so definitely that one 
can count it almost into classic art—classic in a sense of perfection of expression. All of 
this means a splendid, not to say decisive predestination for the dimensional trickfilm 
and—an obligation. Dimension and depth oblige the German-Nordic identity.*
Besides Starevich and Pal, there were the Brothers Ferdinand and Hermann 
Diehl in Munich. The Diehls focused their attention on puppet films using realis­
tic human figures. Their style was backward: homage to the Biedermeier period. 
Hermann designed the puppets and carved the heads, while Ferdinand animated 
and directed. For Ferdinand Diehl, the work required a combination of artistry, 
technique, and concentration in the extreme:
The stop-motion animator must train himself to be entirely consumed by his work, 
as every artist must do, he said. He must have a sympathetic understanding of the 
puppet’s character to animate it correctly. His concentration must be absolute. The 
puppet animator has to memorize each preceding frame in his mind. (Back then 
they had no monitors for checking the effect of the animation immediately.) I 
have placed myself in front of each puppet and got mentally inside of each puppet 
to memorize exactly what I had done and what I had to do now. You see, with real­
istic puppets it isn’t sufficient for example to just move the foot to have the puppet 
make a step. For if the left foot and the leg move forward then at the same time the 
right shoulder has to move backwards and the head has to look straightforward. 
But if the right shoulder of a puppet is moved backwards the head doesn’t stand still 
straightforward but moves to the right side too and has to be moved carefully into its 
original straightforward position so that the step would be natural. Walking natu­
rally the whole puppet experiences a movement in itself. The animator must know 
this angular, pivotal motion, this angular momentum exactly and must memorize 
exactly what he has done on the puppet in the previous frame. This is the difficult 
part of each stop motion.†
*	 Jürgen Clausen/Herbert Pohris, Memorandum: Color Puppet Trickfilm, 1941. Collection of J. P. 
Storm.
†	 Files: Diehl Film, Munich-Gräfelfing.

88
Acting and Character Animation
Once, Diehl recalled, he had to work with sixty puppets simultaneously on 
a puppet documentary Assault on a Medieval Town (Die Erstürmung einer mit­
telalterlichen Stadt), produced in 1943: To him, this work was very fine and very 
healthy. Here one learns best to concentrate truly. “Usually, though, they had to 
hold me fast between exposures, because several times I walked right into the shot. 
My concentration on the animation was so intense that I had forgotten all about 
the shooting technique.”
The Diehl Bros. Films were presented regularly for soldiers in World War II 
front cinemas and seemed to have left an impact on the troops fighting for Hitler’s 
perfidious cause:
In our front cinema which regularly screens cine-films from local film rentals at first 
we have seen two films from the German fairy tale world: Tischlein deck dich [Table-
Be-Set] and Stadtmaus und Feldmaus [The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse]. 
At the beginning my comrades smiled a little bit. But then there was evidence that the 
fairy-tale pictures had to offer a lot more for the soldier. Not only was it an hour of 
entertainment, forgetting all sorrows and trouble of our battle. Many thought deeper. 
Since the days of our childhood for the first time something plastically rose before 
our very eyes. We recalled the long forgotten days of our childhood and youth. Our 
comrades who are family fathers thought about the content of the pictures and at 
the same time were reminded of their wives and children at home. Because of that 
the fairy-tale films moved anybody notwithstanding the deeper meaning behind the 
plot. We said to ourselves that these too are cultural treasures of our people which we 
must preserve for a future generation by defending our native country, even by risk­
ing our life. War last not least is fought not only for material but for cultural goods. 
And therefore these films have conveyed to the soldiers the meaning of their present 
life task and have awakened their enthusiasm…*
Not alone the soldiers at the front, also the Hitler Youth found something in 
these fairy tales that got a timely meaning. A pupil of eighth grade who saw the 
Diehls’ version of Tischlein deck dich wrote a school essay:
Yesterday to much laughter of the undergraduate class we saw the picture Tischlein 
deck dich [Table-Be-Set]. For us grown-ups the fairy tale, however, provided more 
than entertainment and joy. For in every fairy tale there is a deeper meaning. Today 
we discussed with our teacher the deeper meaning of this fairy tale.
Two tailor’s sons acquired, according to the fairy tale, by hard work prosperity 
and wealth, one in the form of a “Tischlein deck dich” [Table-Be-Set], the other in 
the form of an “Eselein streck dich” [Gold-Donkey]. Happily they returned home. But 
the evil and envious landlord robbed them of prosperity and wealth. Luck seemed to 
have deserted them.
The third brother, however, put an abrupt end to the fraud of the host through the 
“Knüppel aus dem Sack” [Cudgel-out-of-the-sack]. This demonstrates that for the 
maintenance and security of prosperity and wealth a strong Wehrmacht [German 
*	 Märchenfilme bei den Soldaten. In Film und Bild, Reichsanstalt für Film und Bild in Wissenschaft 
und Unterricht, Issue 4/5, 1 May 1942. Collection of J. P. Storm.

89
18. The Puppet Masters
military] is necessary, just a Cudgel-out-of-the-sack. It alone is able to regain for the 
others the lost treasures.
The three sons of the tailor come, as the fairy tale tells us, from Dingsda [Dingbat]. 
Dingda, however, is somewhere in Germany, it can be anywhere. So the three broth­
ers represent our whole German nation which has to master life as the three appren­
tices do. The little goblin, however, that lives in fairy-tale land and gives the brothers 
work and pay, represents the luck that everybody needs. For a time it seemed as if 
luck had abandoned the good three brothers; but then it returns to them forever.
The treacherous host, who hoped to get rich by employing swindle and mean­
ness, faced the fate of punishment. He resembles the eternal Jew who wants to profit 
from the work of the diligent and capable without moving a single finger. He is a 
Schmarotzer [parasite] who only wants to suck the others and exploit them. In spite 
of his smartness he can’t escape punishment; for there is the Cudgel-out-of-the-sack.
So at the end of our review we have come to the conclusion:
	
1.	 By work German people acquire prosperity and wealth.
	
2.	 The evil Jew wants to rob the German people of prosperity and wealth.
	
3.	 German people, however, secures its prosperity and wealth by a strong army.
	
4.	 Only a hard-working nation is lucky in the long run.
So this fairy tale strengthens and invigorates us in our unruly belief in the Endsieg 
[final victory] of Germany in this war. Its “Cudgel-out-of-the-sack” drums heavily on 
the back of our enemies until all who have called upon the cudgel will buckle like the 
malicious host did.*
There are valuable lessons children can learn from fairy tales, but there is 
always the danger that different interpretations of these popular tales are abused 
to indoctrinate the young generation.
*	 “Knüppel aus dem Sack” School essay—recorded by Ferdinand Josef Holzer. Deutscher 
Kulturdienst, July 4, 1941. Collection of J. P. Storm.
Wedding ceremony from Memory Hotel, a feature-length stop-motion project that 
takes place right after World War II. (Courtesy of Heinrich Sabl.)


91
19
Animated Characters 
around the World
Most of the classic cartoons star anthropomorphic animals that are in some way 
influenced by Aesop’s Fables, a collection of stories credited to Aesop, a slave who 
lived in ancient Greece between 620 and 564 BCE. These stories, later known 
under titles like The Town Mouse and the Country Mouse or The Ant and the 
Grasshopper, connected modest incidents that happened in flora and fauna with 
great truth in human life. Quite often Aesop’s animals have human characteris­
tics. There was even an early cartoon series under that title (sugar-coated pills of 
wisdom) suggested by actor-turned-writer Howard Estabrook and produced by 
Paul Terry that was launched in 1921 with The Goose That Laid the Golden Eggs.
Besides the habit of quoting Aesop, however, there are big differences concern­
ing various cultures and time periods. Animated characters can vary from stu­
dio to studio: The product of Disney differed from the Looney Tunes or Woody 
Woodpecker. Not only is European animation different from U.S. output but 
different from country to country too: the tradition of Franco-Belgian comics, 
Italy and Spain, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Croatia, Germany, Denmark, 
and Sweden. Although early Chinese animation copied heavily from Russian and 
Japanese productions, it has its own cultural background, following the require­
ments of the so-called Cultural Industries, while artists like Hayao Miyazaki are 

92
Acting and Character Animation
Japanese in style but story-wise sometimes rely on European culture (TV series 
Heidi, Girl of the Alps; animated features Kiki’s Delivery Service, Porco Rosso, 
Ponyo, and The Secret World of Arrietty based on a series of novels titled The 
Borrowers and written by English author Mary Norton).
Osamu Tezuka (1928–1989) was a great Japanese master without whose efforts 
there certainly would be no anime, at least not the way we know and appreciate 
them. In spite of the passion he had for Disney and other American works, Tezuka 
was not completely satisfied with their “slapstick” approach, with musical com­
edies, or fairy tales. He was convinced that animation needed a type of story con­
struction and staging that are inevitably necessary for live action dramas as well.
He wanted to get rid of the clichés that had been accepted until then in anima­
tion. Consequently, he began to adapt his series Tetsuwan Atom (Astro Boy) that 
was published from 1952 on as manga and premiered in anime format on Fuji 
TV on New Year’s Eve 1966. Astro Boy is created by the head of the Ministry of 
Science, Doctor Tenma, with the intent to replace his son Tobio who died in a car 
accident. Astro is the predecessor of Ghost in the Shell (1995) that linked the tra­
dition of Asian ghost stories (Japan has a complex history of yurei= ghosts that 
took shape in woodblock prints, the ukiyo-e genre of art) with the sci-fi idea of 
cyborgs and cyberbrains. The diversity of the camera angle became a trademark 
of Tezuka’s Mushi Productions and nowadays is to be found in all Japanese anime 
productions. So the evolution of Japanese anime was different from American 
productions. Ralph Bakshi told Tezuka that he had been stimulated by seeing this 
type of staging when he was just starting out.
Japanese didn’t handle their cartoons like cartoons but like live action dramas. 
Some artists said that they didn’t have budgets that would have been sufficient to 
produce live action. They eagerly would have welcomed live action but had to 
content with drawing live action in manga publications as well as in anime. It 
wasn’t meant to be animation.
One can see, however, that Japanese and other Asian artists are more inter­
ested in style and design than in characters. This helped to overcome the limi­
tations and transform long takes, slow motion, only partial animation of body 
parts, and freeze frame into aesthetic expression. Some of their characters are 
as static as robots. They really like robots as they resemble so much the armored 
samurai of their own history. Human characters they copied very often from 
foreign feature films starring Errol Flynn or Steve McQueen. He had always liked 
Steve McQueen from the time he was in the Wanted: Dead or Alive series, says 
Ryosuke Takahashi who started with Tezuka’s Mushi Productions.* These char­
acters for sure didn’t come from a real life. They came from screen and TV.
This is true for Chiyoko Fujiwara too, the female protagonist of Satoshi 
Kon’s Millennium Actress, a Studio Madhouse production released in 2001 that 
*	 Ryosuke Takahashi interviewed by Takayuki Karahashi (1996) in Anime Interviews: The First Five 
Years of Animerica Anime & Manga Monthly (1992–97). San Francisco, CA: Cadence Books, 1997, 
p. 166.

93
19. Animated Characters around the World
followed the sex thriller Perfect Blue. Chiyoko, who is said to have been a once 
famous star of a prestigious but bankrupt film studio, was modeled after two 
screen goddesses, Setsuko Hara, well-known from her roles in films directed by 
Yasujiro Ozu, and Hideko Takamine, favored by director Mikio Naruse, in her 
youth billed as Japan’s Shirley Temple. The picture opens with a TV interviewer 
and his cameraman who let Chiyoko travel through her memories. It is a sad pic­
ture projecting Kon’s sentiments. The director made no more than four feature 
films. He died of cancer in 2010. He was only 46 years old.
When it came to technical detail and design, the art of the anime was flawless. 
When Hayao Miyazaki recalled his early steps, he said that it wasn’t mecha so 
much. It was military that appealed to the offspring of this once very militaristic 
nation back then. Miyazaki who described himself as a shy boy found a way to 
express his boyish yearning for power and strength in drawing tanks and war­
ships. Today, he says, it would take the form of air guns, video games, remote-
controlled craft, and the like. Not to forget motorbikes. But growing up it’s the 
capabilities and shape of the machines that are fascinating. Luckily Miyazaki’s 
interest shifted to the dramas of the people who build them and made use of them, 
particularly in The Wind Rises (2013) that tells the life story of a dreamer who 
becomes chief engineer of many Japanese fighter designs of World War II, includ­
ing the Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighter: Dr. Jiro Horikoshi who passed away in 1982.
Considering drama, Miyazaki interviewed by Roger Ebert mentioned the 
poetic “stillness” in some movies: not to advance the story but only to give the 
sense of time and place, in contrast to nonstop action with no breathing space at 
all. Miyazaki said that they had a word for it in Japanese. It is called ma: empti­
ness, gap, the space between two structural parts—an idea that might have been 
inspired by the practice of Zen meditation that was developed to give insight into 
the emptiness of inherent existence and open the path to a liberated way of living. 
What really matters are the underlying emotions.*
If you watch closely, there is more posing than character movement in many 
anime, including Miyazaki’s, which seems to be part of a different “stillness” that 
might have to do with low budgets that didn’t allow full animation. So every­
thing, facial expression, emotion, and so on, is defined in a still or key frame, not 
part of fluid movements. Yes, it sure helps save money but on the other hand adds 
a softness and thoughtfulness to animated characters.
There even is some “stillness” in Disney’s action-filled Snow White and the 
Seven Dwarfs: The sequence that showed the dwarfs crying besides Snow White’s 
bier was critical. It was solved by the decision to have the characters, with watery 
eyes, move as little as possible. Frank Churchill’s music carried the scene.
“Stillness” was also an issue in the films of Japan’s greatest stop-motion ani­
mator, Kihachiro Kawamoto. In a great example of intercultural inspiration, 
he travelled to Prague in 1963 to study puppet animation under the master Jiří 
*	 Roger Ebert, Hayao Miyazaki Interview. http://www.rogerebert.com. September 12, 2002.

94
Acting and Character Animation
Trnka. Trnka wisely advised Kawamoto to focus on Japan’s own cultural heritage 
(what an American producer never would have done).
In the Soviet Union, Soyuzmultfilm started the series Nu Pogodi! (Just You 
Wait) starring a wolf (Volk) who constantly fails trying to capture a hare (Zayats):
The series was originated in 1969 by three artists, one of whom, Felix Kandel, 
later immigrated to Israel. According to Kandel one higher official in the state-
run film studio tried to give the series an ideological slant, by making the rabbit 
into a brave young Pioneer with the red neckerchief and the wolf into some sym­
bol of evil capitalism. Luckily, the series was successful enough to beat off any 
unwelcome fun-killing change.
Children might have seen in the rabbit the young pioneer but that made him 
clearly the boring part of the duo. All the young viewers identified with the vil­
lain Kandel said.* Well, this Volk, this wolf stole cars, chain-smoked, bullied little 
furry characters, and tried his hand in vandalism. Nevertheless, kids adored him.
The interesting future market for animation is China. In 2006, while promot­
ing Flushed Away, Jeffrey Katzenberg was asked by this writer (RG) if he ever 
would consider working in China. Although at that time he had Kung Fu Panda 
in preparation, he denied any ambition of cooperating: Never ever would he work 
in China. Chinese, he said, are repetitive, they like to imitate, don’t speak English, 
and what else. Since then, he has changed his mind and did a 180. In 2012, des­
ignated general secretary and president of the People’s Republic Xi Jinping met 
with Katzenberg in Glendale, California. Business in mind, Katzenberg changed 
from Saul to Paul and became a partner of Oriental DreamWorks based in 
Shanghai. Externally trying to find a balance between Eastern and Western car­
toon characters it seemed to be more about outsourcing and cheap labor and—
after Katzenberg left the “parent company”—will definitely need a restructure.
DreamWorks, Disney, and Universal—they all line up in China producing 
toys and merchandize, co-producing, and opening theme parks without paying 
respect to Chinese culture, however. It’s all over the same kind of global stan­
dardization, even in China.
The situation was different when former premier Wen Jiabao found his grand­
son watching Japanese animation and sensed, to cite the late political scientist 
Samuel P. Huntington, a clash of civilization. During a visit to the South Chinese 
Jiantong Animation Studio, he complained and demanded a change: “There are 
times when I watch TV anime with my grandchild but all he ever watches are for­
eign works like Ultraman and the like. He should watch more Chinese cartoons. We 
should be cultivating a domestic anime industry.” Then he advised the assembled 
animators: “Your work is meaningful. You should play a leading role in bringing 
Chinese culture to the world. Let Chinese children watch more of their own history 
and their own country’s animation.”†
*	 David Shipler, Russia: Broken Idols, Solemn Drama. New York: Crown, 1983.
†	 Rolf Giesen, Chinese Animation: A History and Filmography, 1922–2012. Jefferson, NC: McFarland 
& Company, Inc., Publishers, 2015.

95
19. Animated Characters around the World
Following the Premier’s advice, the whole industry went ahead and expanded 
to gigantic proportions. Chinese animation focuses on preschool and young 
audiences in general. There are so far 370 million kids—a clear target group 
for the biggest toy manufacturer in the world. Above all, Chinese government 
wanted to create a situation for the manufacturers to save the high license fees 
from being paid to Disney and other American or Japanese cartoon suppliers and 
create their own brands. But up till now, in spite of all protectionism, no true car­
toon star has emerged that could compete with Mickey Mouse, the Simpsons, or 
Garfield. In television, they were going for mass-produced, long-running series 
like Blue Cat, sort of a blue version of Felix the Cat but the Chinese feline was 
lacking character and suffered from ill-conceived stories.
There was, of course, once a great tradition in Chinese animation. Some of it 
wasn’t based so much on animation and characters but mainly on style. A politi­
cal caricaturist who wasn’t interested in frame-by-frame animation at all and left 
that part to his assistants, Te Wei (1915–2010), was chosen to head the Shanghai 
Animation Film Studios. Again it was a politician, Vice-President Chen Yi, who, 
while visiting an exhibition dedicated to film animation in 1960, encouraged 
animators and suggested to animate the work of painter Qi Baishi (1864–1957), 
famous for the illustration of fish and shrimps. Te Wei went on to do a little film 
in the traditional form of brush-painting and started a trend of ink animation: 
Where Is Momma? The picture begins with simple and elegant Chinese paintings 
on screen, just like opening a book. The audience is led into a beautifully lyrical 
inking world. There are small watercolored tadpoles that have been just born and 
are curious to find their mother. They meet and ask a goldfish, the white belly of a 
crab, a tortoise, and even a large catfish until they find their mother—a frog. It’s a 
well-known Chinese Aesop-style story. The tadpoles are lively and lovely moving 
in the water, just like a bunch of innocent kids. So each culture has its own way to 
approach to the beauty of movement.
The most dangerous fiend to cultural differences is globalization because global­
ization is the big equalizer: globalization plus available technology. (At the moment, 
we register a strong countermovement that manifests itself in different kinds of fun­
damentalism, from America and Europe to the Near, Middle, and Far East.)
When we went to visit Disney’s Shanghai branch, they told us that they had just 
purchased the international distribution rights to a Chinese hit series Pleasant 
Goat and Big Big Wolf, the only real animated success on Chinese TV, but they 
didn’t know how to release it because it was not only cheap and too Chinese 
but the humor was astonishingly naive. The perennial but vain attempt of a gray 
loser wolf (Wolfy) who lives with his narcissistic tyrant wife queen, known as 
Red Wolf or Wolnie, in the ruins of an old castle tower to catch a flock of sheep 
that happily lives in their village on pastoral Greengrass Land: Pleasant Goat 
or Happy who wears a small bell on his neck is the witty main character of the 
series. His friends include Slow Goat (Slowly), the Mayor of the village, who also 
is their teacher; Lazy Goat (Fatty); Pretty Goat (Beauty); Fit Goat (Fitty); Warm 
Goat (Gently); and Soft Goat, the ancestor of the goat family. The Wolf Queen 

96
Acting and Character Animation
who constantly commands her husband to go after these lovely goats resembles 
certain Chinese wives and, being over-demanding and abusive, gets some laughs 
at least in Asia.
In China, the brand is titled Xi Yang Yang Yu Huitai and was created by Huang 
Weiming, Lin Yuting, and Luo Yinggeng.
Technically, the series is simple Flash Animation. It was never mentioned 
but besides being a bizarre, cheaply animated series imitating elements from the 
Coyote and Roadrunner series as well as the Three Little Pigs, the whole thing being 
a poor copy of the aforementioned Belgian Smurfs, with the tiny blue dwarves 
who live in mushroom-shaped houses in the forest replaced by sheep and their 
nemesis, Gargamel the magician, by the wolf couple. That would have been a 
solution for marketing the series outside China but Disney gave up right from the 
beginning. They weren’t interested in the series at all. For them it was just a try to 
strengthen ties with the economically more and more powerful China.
Examples of Chinese animation: Fei Tian (top image) and Chicken Wants to Fly 
(bottom image). (Courtesy of Jilin Animation Institute, Changchun.)

97
19. Animated Characters around the World
Disney’s first try to fraternize with Chinese culture was Mulan, a 1998 ani­
mated feature film, based on the Chinese legend of Hua Mulan, a female war­
rior who lived in Han Dynasty. Chinese audiences, however, disliked what they 
saw. Mulan’s design was considered by them not Chinese but Korean! In the 
meantime, Disney has learned his lesson and by offering a Disney Princess series 
transforms little Chinese girls into Western princesses. We will talk about this 
idea later.
A great example of successfully depicting a different culture is The Book of 
Life (2014). Directed and co-written by Jorge R. Gutierrez, who had studied at 
CalArts, and exec-produced by Guillermo del Toro, this fantasy that makes us 
feel what La Muerte, the Day of the Dead, means to Mexicans: not only grief and 
mourning but an exercise in high spirits.
Examples of Chinese animation—Chicken Wants to Fly (top image) and Frog 
Kingdom (2013, bottom image). (Courtesy of Jilin Animation Institute, Changchun.)


99
20
Of Heroes, Antiheroes, 
Villains, and Men
Heroes might be in conflict with themselves. This is the case in new superhero mov­
ies, as a matter of course in all superhero comics of the Marvel generation, the gen­
eration after World War II. Spider-Man is an ordinary teenager bitten by an atomic 
spider. Before World War II, the attitude was different. To the new antiheroes their 
special qualities come like God-given fate: by accident. In Greek tragedy, fates are 
decided by the pleasure of the Olympian gods. The first antihero of Greek tragedy 
was Prometheus, a Titan who antagonized Zeus and sided with the humans by 
stealing the power of fire from the immortals and bringing it to the mortals.
There is a song by The Stranglers, an English rock band, titled “No More Heroes.”
If we watch the news media reports, it’s mostly bad news. To the media, we 
are a deeply pessimistic society. Instinctively, we don’t believe in the good of peo­
ple and, after World War II, we don’t believe in heroes anymore as mythologist 
Joseph Campbell described them: A hero is someone who has given his or her life 
to a bigger cause. Heroes’ last stand is the fantasy world of Star Wars. Even movie 
stars that we worship turn out to be drug-addicted and alcoholics and are thrown 
in jail. If something really good happens we doubt it immediately and tell our­
selves, “It seems too good to be true they must be hiding something.” There must 
be a lot of skeletons buried in people’s closets, especially in Tinseltown.

100
Acting and Character Animation
Kenneth Anger has devoted a whole albeit in terms of research rather super­
ficial book to the history of virtual film heroes and called it aptly Hollywood 
Babylon.*
In a world of global economics, multinational corporations, and shifting moral, 
there seems to be more space for the antihero. And Francis Ford Coppola’s Don 
Vito Corleone of The Godfather, portrayed by Marlon Brando, became an admired 
character bigger than life.
Nevertheless, there are new-type heroes. They need a well-defined social sur­
rounding to have audiences identify with them. In Japan, they have succeeded in 
doing so. Manga and anime seem to be an exception. Here we find heroes who 
are human and quite ordinary and even flawed. Their heroism is defined by the 
dedication to their cause although even that one might be suspect. To fight for the 
wrong cause does not damage their noble mindset.
Sure a good hero needs an adequate villain. But the villain should be con­
structed along the same lines. A villain considers himself not the bad one. To him 
the reasons he has for acting this way are absolutely justified and good.
There is a habit, at least in Europe, to tell animation stories destined for pre­
school kids without antagonism, which is being considered harmful to the chil­
dren’s mind. This would be the same as if to tell classic fairy tales and eliminate 
all opposition, magicians, witches, or dragons. When he created the evil witch for 
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, Disney deliberately scared kids and created a 
long-term nightmare.
Not only did Disney have virgin-like heroines, he also had some of the most 
memorable, almost misogynic villainesses that were all flamboyant and eccen­
tric: Lady Tremaine, Cinderella’s wicked stepmother, and Maleficent, Sleeping 
Beauty’s evil fairy, both voiced by Eleanor Audley, as well as Cruella De Vil who 
plans to have One Hundred and One Dalmatians skinned. She was voiced by 
Betty Lou Gerson and rivaled, as Thomas and Johnston would put it in their 
book, Donald Duck for emotional outbursts and temperamental tantrums.†
Mohammed Atta and the other suicide assassins believed in Allah and 
thought themselves heroes out of religious motives when they committed what 
everybody else called one of the biggest crimes of the century: 9/11. There even 
was a Telegate commercial produced and broadcast in Germany shortly before 
9/11 that showed an airplane crashing into a skyscraper but nothing happened to 
people as everything was “meant for fun.” The commercial was stopped immedi­
ately and nobody could explain the reason for its production. They just wanted to 
create a big bang to get a lot of attention and thought they had a hit in their hands. 
Obviously, there was something in the air. Certainly, the producers of the spot 
*	 Kenneth Anger, Hollywood Babylon. San Francisco: Straight Arrow Press (distributed by Simon & 
Schuster), 1975.
†	 Frank Thomas & Ollie Johnston, Disney Animation: The Illusion of Life. New York, 1981: Abbeville 
Press Publishers, p. 506.

101
20. Of Heroes, Antiheroes, Villains, and Men
didn’t consider themselves evildoers and don’t think to this day. Their violence 
was simply “meant for fun” but exploded into a terrorist firestorm.
Again, an actor as well as a person who works in animation has to defend his 
or her character. Actors long to play Richard III. There are always motives for 
what turns out evil. Only in 1D, highly naïve tales there are super villains who 
rise in the morning and think about what evil they can do today. Of course, this 
is a dilemma that cannot be solved by the actors. It is the duty of the playwrights 
to create empathy for the victims and expose the evildoers.
Ed Hooks and Edwin Rutsch discussed this matter on YouTube. Hooks 
claimed that an actor even would have to defend Adolf Hitler if he would be cast 
in the part. Yet nobody would like to empathize with that devil of a man. Hooks 
mentioned Swiss actor Bruno Ganz who played the dictator in a 2004 German 
movie titled The Downfall (Der Untergang). To render the monster human, the 
scenarist used a trick. In the exposition, he introduced a friendly Hitler who com­
forts overly nervous Traudl Junge who is applying for a job as Hitler’s secretary.
Hooks’ perspective on this matter is: Unless we feel empathy, we won’t know 
anything. We won’t recognize the next Hitler who might already wait around 
the corner. No, although he is gone we have to worry about the potential Hitler 
imitators in the world. Hooks would rather portray Hitler as a man who had a 
dream: a dream that turned out a nightmare for millions.* The writers of The 
Downfall, however, cut out the suffering of millions to focus on what became the 
Passion of Hitler on screen. There was nothing the actor could do about that. He 
followed the rules of his craft. Tennesse Williams, the great playwright, claimed 
that there should be no painful people, at least not on stage. All cruel people, he 
said, describe themselves as paragons of frankness.
But there is not only the archetype of the supervillain, there are ratbags in 
everyday life as well. Just take Pixar’s Ratatouille. France’s top restaurant critic, 
Anton Ego, modeled after French actor Louis Jouvet and voiced by Peter O’Toole, 
isn’t a sympathetic character, but when he asks they should surprise him and 
tastes what has been prepared by an unknown rat cook, he has a flashback and 
transforms into the boy he once was when his beloved mother served him just 
that, Ratatouille. All of a sudden, we understand him. The negative character 
transforms into a positive human being. If a villain at all, Ego is a comedy villain.
*	 Empathy for Actors and Animators: Ed Hooks and Edwin Rutsch. www.youtube.com, 2015.


103
21
Comedy and Comedians
Remember Leonardo di Caprio standing on the bow of the Titanic yelling, “I am 
king of the world”?
That’s drama.
Now imagine he would lose his pants.
Then the same scene would transform into comedy.
Comedy is drama heightened, oxygenated, says Ed Hooks, and it can even 
include death as we know from the work of Woody Allen.
Well, in Mexico they ridicule death (children included who are shielded from 
the impression of death in the big industrial countries).
Jim Danforth remembers that while animating the dragon from MGM-
Cinerama’s The Wonderful of the Brothers Grimm (1962), he was told by Gene 
Warren, his boss at the animation studio Project Unlimited, to animate the 
pathetic death scene in a funny way because it should be a comic dragon. Then in 
came producer George Pal and Danforth told him how funny the dragon’s death 
scene would turn out. Pal remained calm and disappeared in Warren’s office but 
when he left, Warren was pissed off. The death scene was executed differently 
then, in a most dramatic way.
There were two masters of movie comedy.

104
Acting and Character Animation
Charles Chaplin came from British music hall tradition.
The other, Buster Keaton, was trained in American vaudeville.
Keaton was illiterate. He was a child born and conditioned backstage. At 
young age, his father used him on the vaudeville stage, threw him around, hurt 
him, and told him to show no emotion to the ill-treatment. That might have been 
child abuse. No, it might not have been, it sure was. Keaton became deadpan 
and a poker face. His screen image was created by early childhood trauma. It 
was laughter created at a child’s mistreatment and the art of self-control. Keaton 
“excused” it by calling his old man an “eccentric.” It all was, as he said, the result 
of a series of “interesting experiments” conducted by his “Pop.” Joe Keaton began 
his vaudeville act by carrying him out on the stage and dropping him on the 
floor. Next he started wiping up the floor with the little “Human Mop.” When 
Buster gave no sign of minding, “Pop” began throwing him through the scenery, 
out into the wings, and dropping him down on the bass drum in the orchestra 
pit. The audience was amazed that the little boy didn’t cry. In his autobiography, 
Keaton claimed that he didn’t cry because he wasn’t hurt. He even enjoyed him­
self. All little boys, he says, like to be roughhoused by their fathers. To support 
the act, little Buster would look miserable, humiliated, hounded, and haunted, 
bedeviled, bewildered, and at his wit’s end.*
What Keaton is doing here is whitewashing his childhood experiences. He 
certainly was humiliated and became a heavy drinker, same as Lon Chaney, Jr., 
who, according to late writer Curt Siodmak, was tormented by his famous father, 
the Hunchback of Notre Dame and Phantom of the Opera.
Chaplin, on the other hand, brought emotion to superficial slapstick: Other 
comedians might have stumbled into a bucket and just shove it away, but Chaplin, 
ashamed, would try to hide foot and bucket and turn not so much the mishap but 
the following embarrassment into fun and laughter.
Chaplin was looking for empathy and Keaton for sympathy.
Of course, there are other great comedians to study. Harry Langdon, a slow-
paced, baby-faced actor (and caricaturist), who would do things in an innocent 
way so that only God could help him as Frank Capra, one of his writer-directors, 
would remark. When sound came in, they tried to make him faster and that 
completely spoiled his comedy timing. Some characters are fast. Some are slow. 
Comedy always is a question of timing. Most cartoon characters are fast. Some 
are too fast. But the biggest laugh in Disney’s highly successful Zootopia (2016) 
gets a sloth named Flash (!) that works at the Department of Motor Vehicles 
where customers usually have to wait in long lines. Flash reacts to a joke in super-
slow-motion, his eyes widening, his mouth opening until after what felt like an 
eternity he finally bursts into laughter. It’s not so much the quality of the anima­
tion (which is quite good, of course, but it could be cheap as well and the gag 
would still work) that makes the character a hit but the identification of a slow, 
*	 Buster Keaton & Charles Samuels, My Wonderful World of Slapstick. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 
1960, pp. 12–13.

105
21. Comedy and Comedians
single-minded person with a very slow animal. It works on a satirical level. It’s 
a social comment. Being slow can be funny, very funny. You don’t have to rush 
characters.
Harold Lloyd was no natural comedian. Keystone’s Mack Sennett didn’t con­
sider him funny at all. But Lloyd was a great doer and, above all, passionate actor 
and therefore immensely popular with audiences in the 1920s. His comedy was 
based on challenge and acting abilities. To stand out from other comedians, he 
abandoned the trademark of the moustache. To transform, he just needed a pair 
of glasses. The rest was proper acting. Lloyd’s forte was dangerous comedy situa­
tion such as climbing a skyscraper in Safety Last.
By the way, Sennett as well as his main competitor Hal Roach, Harold Lloyd’s 
producer, occasionally would use cartoon effects animated by Walter Lantz, 
Pinto Colvig, or Roy Seawright to enhance slapstick action.
In modern days, there is Rowan Atkinson as Mr. Bean, like Lloyd an actor who 
gets into funny situations, also no natural comedian and in Europe more popular 
than in the United States.
As a comedian you have to create a character that fits you: Chaplin started 
to create his screen personality by looking for the right clothes that made him a 
tramp and adopting a walk.
Cartoon characters have a lot in common with these great clowns and come­
dians as we know from Ko-Ko the Clown.
Animation pioneer Pat Sullivan (1887–1933) was able to contract with Charles 
Chaplin for a cartoon series based on his screen character released in 1916. 
Chaplin himself was delighted with the results and realized the value of the pro­
motion. He had sent them three dozen photographs of himself in different poses.
When they went on with a cartoon star of their own, Felix the Cat, they would 
still use Chaplin and copy his moves: the walk, the subtle gestures. Otto Messmer 
(1892–1983), who would work with Sullivan on both, the Chaplin films and the 
Felix series, did most of the animation, he even designed the cat, made it all black 
so he didn’t have to worry about outlines. He recalled (most likely a legend) that 
after seeing one of Chaplin’s films he went straight home, sat down, and drew an 
angular black cat with big wide eyes to fill the white screen. Under the impres­
sion of Chaplin, he patterned the cat’s facial expressions and funny movements 
after the little tramp. Audiences adored Felix the same way they loved Chaplin. 
But there was a big difference between Felix and Charlie besides that one was a 
human, the other a feline stray: The animated character did things that Chaplin 
couldn’t do. In Felix in Hollywood (1923), the cat detaches its tail and uses it like 
Chaplin his cane. Felix develops a moustache and keeps on walking like Chaplin 
offering his service to a film producer—until the real Charlie (as animated char­
acter, of course) intervenes and stops the cat, Stealing my stuff, eh?! (As we have 
seen, Chaplin himself felt flattered when his mannerisms were projected onto an 
animated cat.)
Entrepreneur and marketing expert Lawrence Weiss (1925–2008), better 
known by the stage name Larry Harmon and through Bozo the Clown franchise 

106
Acting and Character Animation
(Bozo was later caricatured as Krusty in the Simpsons show), purchased the rights 
to the Laurel & Hardy characters from Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy’s widow 
and used them in an Hanna-Barbera animated TV series run of 156 episodes 
and in comic books that were started in 1969. In 2015, Gaumont Animation 
in France decided to produce and distribute an all-new 2D animated series for 
kids based on the icon characters and purchased the rights from Larry Harmon 
Pictures Corporation. Another famous comedy team that became animation 
was Abbott & Costello: first as two dumb cats named Babbit and Catstello that 
encounter the prototype of Tweety Bird in Bob Clampett’s A Tale of Two Kitties 
(1942), later in the half-hour animated TV Abbott and Costello Cartoon Show 
(1967–1968) by Hanna and Barbera.
After a while, early American animation became metonymic with slapstick 
comedy. Comedy action was on a similar level. Of course the humans were sub­
stituted by all kinds of animals, including a Coyote chasing a Roadrunner. Chuck 
Jones, the director, admitted that he learned a lot from Keaton who was the most 
inventive among silent comedy’s physical gag specialists, for instance, the little 
eye-flicks toward the camera, which he would use whenever the Coyote real­
izes that something is inevitably going to fall on him and the action stops for a 
moment. Or Keaton’s footwork: As Keaton wouldn’t act with his face that was 
frozen he would act with his feet, Jones said.
The main difference, however, was that you couldn’t get Chaplin in a milk 
bottle as Tex Avery put it once. That was the reason why cartoons survived and 
the old slapsticks didn’t. Cartoons are fast and furious.
But same as comedians Bug Bunny or Daffy Duck weren’t particularly funny 
to watch as characters. Neither are they that original. Disney had similar charac­
ters on the screen. If you see Woody Allen, Chaplin, or Laurel, they are not funny 
to look at. They are funny by the way they move. That is, Jones would emphasize, 
the whole point about character animation. It’s how they move what makes them 
special.
That’s important when it comes to create comedy out of a character’s personal­
ity. A slow burn, an exasperated facial expression, performed deliberately, can be 
funnier than the gag that has gone before. Comedian Edgar Kennedy was a slow 
burn master.
Cartoonist Charles R. Bowers (1887–1946) who was involved in the early 
Mutt & Jeff series adapted from Bud Fisher’s comic strip even became a silent 
film comedian himself filling his shorts with cleverly, surreal animated dimen­
sional gags. In Egged On (1926), for instance, he played an eccentric inventor 
who has an unbreakable egg in mind. When his machine is finished and has laid 
the hoped-for eggs, he transports the eggs in the hood of a Model T Ford—and 
out of the eggs roll miniature Fords. Bowers used animation for transformation 
and metamorphosis and also played with strange stop-motion characters such 
as a metal eating bird (It’s a Bird). In Believe It or Don’t (1934), he had a lobster 
playing xylophone until he is blown up by dynamite, with the body parts spell­
ing out the end title.

107
21. Comedy and Comedians
Sylvain Chomet, who did the Triplets of Belleville (2003), bowed to another 
grandmaster of comedy, Jacques Tati, and animated a script that Tati had left 
behind: The Illusionist (2010).
Comedy is more than just a handful of gags. Comedy is a narrative structure. 
There are different types of comedy that follow certain rules and all became part 
of animated films:
••
Slapstick (the field of Keaton et al.)
••
Parody (West and Soda)
••
Spoof and Mockery
••
Satire (Animal Farm)
••
Irony (they say kids don’t understand irony)
••
Sarcasm (Terkel in Trouble)
••
Farce
••
Black comedy (Hell and Back)
••
Surrealism
Essential is the comedy timing and what Stan Laurel called the magic of the 
first moment.
According to actor Henry Brandon (born Heinrich von Kleinbach), who was 
with Laurel & Hardy in Babes in Toyland (1934), the comedy team would rehearse 
but then the first take was it. Chaplin, on the other hand, was a perfectionist who 
would need sometimes up to 60 takes until he found that the scene and his acting 
were right. (Most of this footage has been destroyed on Chaplin’s demand later by 
his cameraman Rollie Totheroh although he kept some footage that proves that 
some of the earlier takes were more emotional and therefore funnier.)


109
22
Acting against the Odds 
of Visual Effects and 
Animation
In the history of VFX movies, there rarely was great, memorable acting. In many 
of those films, we just saw the “pointers.” They would look and point at a marvel­
ous effect and just say, Hey, look at that! Then there were the guys running away 
from a monster on the loose. That wasn’t a challenge for the actors either.
There are only a few cases when VFX and acting merge in a symbiotic way. 
One might recall Disney’s classic live-action feature Darby O’Gill and the Little 
People (1959) that had Irish Albert Sharpe’s character acting with leprechauns 
thanks to forced perspective, special lenses, an enormous amount of lighting 
equipment, and the Shuftan mirror process. In 2016, made possible by elabo­
rate green screen shots, French actor Jean Dujardin became a person of rather 
restricted height, just 4 ft 5 in, who fell in love with normal-sized Virginia Efira 
in Laurent Tirard’s Up for Love (Un homme à la hauteur). What is fun on screen, 
however, is a nightmare to actors while shooting. (Some critics, however, sug­
gested it would have been better if the filmmakers would have hired a diminutive 
actor. They were wrong. It wouldn’t have been that funny.)
Occasionally, a live actor becomes an animated effect too.
In The Invisible Ray (1936) and Man Made Monster (1941), two entries of 
Universal’s classic series of horror films, female animators under the supervision 

110
Acting and Character Animation
of John P. Fulton would have to create painstakingly a glowing halo frame by 
frame round the bodies of Boris Karloff (as Dr. Janos Rukh exposed to “Radium 
X,” the radiation of a meteor) and Lon Chaney, Jr. (as Dynamo Dan, the Electric 
Man), respectively.
Modern-day films like Spider-Man (2002) starring Tobey Maguire resemble 
digital and mechanical bits and pieces, with the star only partly involved in the 
virtual environment.
The film was shot on soundstages in Los Angeles, where the air-bearing wall 
rigs mostly became the props for Chris Daniels who doubled Maquire in three 
pictures. A special harness was what helped him to swing through the air in 
his special superhero costume. The straps went around his legs, waist, and chest 
while clips attached the harness to a cable. Daniels moved his arms and legs as if 
swinging from a spider web. The wires were removed digitally in post-production 
creating the illusion the performer was supporting his own weight. According 
to Daniels, the scariest moment came when he had to jump off a building about 
200 ft and trusting that the rig was going to work.
More or less, Tobey Maguire contributed only his face for close-up green 
screen elements. The wire from Tobey’s shoulder occasionally crossed his face 
so that they had to rebuild it using Adobe After Effects and Pinnacle System’s 
Commotion, sampling textures from the other side of his face, replicating his 
surprised expression and animating wind moving his hair. Sony Pictures 
Imageworks would then create the final composite of Maguire swinging against 
a rushing background of digital buildings.
British actor Bob Hoskins was driven to the brink of insanity by his part in 
Disney’s Who Framed Roger Rabbit:
I think I went a bit mad while working on that. Lost my mind. The voice of the rabbit 
was there just behind the camera all the time, you just had to know where the rabbit 
Actors in front of green screen shooting Tehran Taboo (2017) by Ali Soozandeh. 
(Courtesy of Little Dream Entertainment.)

111
22. Acting against the Odds of Visual Effects and Animation
would be at all times, and Jessica Rabbit and all these weasels. The trouble was: I 
had learnt how to hallucinate. If you do that for eight months it becomes hard to get 
rid of. *
Despite a thunderstorm of VFX, the blockbuster that the Warner Bros. mon­
eymakers made out of J. K. Rowling’s Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them 
(2016) was disappointing. There are enough stars, including Eddie Redmayne, 
Johnny Depp, Colin Farrell, Ron Perlman, and Jon Voight, but only supporting 
roles, no true main protagonist, and no Harry Potter on board. The result was 
confusing.
Doctor Strange, a former neurosurgeon and the Sorcerer Supreme who pro­
tects the Earth from magical and mystical fantasy threats, is another of the legion 
of comic book superheroes created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko in 1963. The film 
Doctor Strange, released the same year as Warner’s Fantastic Beasts, although 
naïve and completely trivial, is nevertheless highly entertaining, not only thanks 
to extraordinary VFX but to the actor who portrays the title hero, a well-defined 
protagonist: Benedict Cumberbatch, who trained in a Sherlock Holmes TV series, 
is intelligent and witty enough to play an intellectual and also acts with under­
statement. That makes the movie much more entertaining than the usual stupid 
superhero rough-and-tumble. And Mads Mikkelsen sure is an equal adversary. 
This entry proves that actors and actresses indeed can master VFX and are not 
necessarily squeezed against the (green) wall.
*	 Hoskins: “Roger Rabbit Drove Me Mad.” WENN, October 27, 2009.


113
23
Avatar and Beyond
The Idiosyncrasies of 3D 
Animation and the Art of 
Performance Capture
Many 2D animators remained skeptical when computers were introduced. 
Decades ago, Tony White wrote:
Without the varied idiosyncrasies of a human personality, the computer is incapable 
of giving a living spirit to its creations, and this is the secret ingredient of all great 
animation. As long as audiences continue to want subtle, sophisticated, and enter­
taining character animation—where we actually believe that the drawings we see are 
alive and real—then the role of drawn animation in filmmaking is assured.*
We know, of course, that he was proven wrong over the years. To the great 
disappointment of fundamentalist 2D animators, 3D has become the standard. 
There still is a lot of 2D, particularly in Japan, but the mass has transformed 
three dimensionally. We are literally swamped by it. Unlike 2D, 3D animation is 
never individual. 2D is more individual. It isn’t changed that much after the artist 
has done a scene. 3D, on the other hand, is easily to be changed during produc­
tion: details, gestures, facial expressions, and so on is based on the committee 
decisions.
*	 Tony White, The Animator’s Workbook. Oxford: Phaidon Press Limited, 1986, p. 158.

114
Acting and Character Animation
Above all, there is a main difference between traditional film and computer-
generated imagery (CGI): For film the content was decisive, the content of pho­
tography, or the play, which is depicted in moving images.
With CGI, it’s not the content, it’s (to quote Marshall McLuhan) the medium 
itself. The content is less important than the fascination with the technological 
medium itself that sometimes absorbs and “devours” the viewer.
Visually 3D or computer animation is related to stop-motion animation 
because it’s dimensional. But in its execution and possibilities to overcome grav­
ity it’s next to 2D. There are still animated caricatures but, other than Felix the Cat 
and his heirs, they are not subjected to a world of drawn lines on a piece of paper. 
Thanks to nonlinear interpolation, 3D animation is fluid, smooth, and flowing. 
It’s not so much stylized animation, it is realistic simulation. Concerning the 
characters, there is a lot of building and rigging to be done, but imagery, camera 
angles and movement, and editing certainly have the quality of live action. The 
characters resemble us. We accept them as equals, as “people” like us.
The digital media transform the simulation of nonexisting realistic worlds to 
a daily affair. What digital simulation has achieved is not so much realism, it is 
photo-realism. It’s an incredible world of make-believe. The objective is not to 
copy our sensuous and physical experience but the image of it. Eventually, it will 
become the world dominion of imagery.
This is a dilemma because particularly American 3D animation strives for 
the utmost in naturalism. So there is no distance anymore to fantasy content. 
Fantasy isn’t any more special. It’s down-to-earth and plain, like a daydream.
Everything has to become “lifelike.” That was the main goal right from the 
beginning. It was not about good acting, it was about capturing the image as 
naturalistic as possible. The first actor to get a digital doppelganger in a feature 
film, Futureworld (1976), was Peter Fonda. They projected a raster onto Fonda’s 
white painted face that was photographed from two angles. The result was used 
as a reference for the computer model to get a rotating robot head that trans­
forms from a simple polygon model into a plastic-like shining actor’s head. The 
image was created by Triple-I in cooperation with computer graphics pioneer 
John Whitney, Jr. Similarly, not only the head but the complete body of actress 
Susan Day was remodeled for an appearance in Looker (1981).
The process to depict real people at that time for more than a few seconds as 
in Futureworld, however, proved too difficult. There were some late film stars res­
urrected thanks to the business acumen of their heirs. W. C. Fields and Marlene 
Dietrich were among the firsts to become “immortal” that way. But even the 
proprietors of the Berlin Film Museum that covered much of Marlene’s career, 
costumes, and memorabilia rejected the Dietrich clone for their shrine. The digi­
tal face was awkward, totally artificial, and bore no resemblance to the movie 
star. So the virtual Dreamsmiths took appropriate steps and turned to different 
breeds of characters that were easier to cast digitally. Even God didn’t start his 
creation process with man. If there were to be human shapes at that time, the 

115
 23. Avatar and Beyond
digital artists had to content with robots (Robert Abel’s 1985 Sexy Robot TV com­
mercial) or toys.
Just let’s look back at the advance of computer technology (which isn’t too far 
ago): After Steven Spielberg’s and Dennis Muren’s digitally created dinosaurs in 
the 1993 Jurassic Park (the first, as Gertie the Dinosaur, came to us in 2D anima­
tion), after John Lasseter’s Toy Story 2 years later, after Ice Age (2002) mammals 
and Scrat, the acom-obsessed saber-toothed squirrel, and after Finding Nemo 
(2003) and other fish, the evolution of animation brought caricatures of human 
beings and eventually “lifelike” people. In their striving for photo-realism, 
Americans still seem to have problems to reproduce believable human beings 
but in the long run synthetic actors are unavoidable as we all need those ghostly 
avatars representing us in the world wide web of digital images. That is where live 
actors come in again.
Frank Petzold worked as a visual effects supervisor for the Tippett Studio. 
One of his early tasks was to render Kevin Bacon transparent in Paul Verhoeven’s 
Hollow Man (2000) by using digital means:
To realize every aspect of the idea, Computer Graphics lends itself as perfect tool. 
We were aware right from the beginning how difficult it would be to show something 
that is invisible. In the storyboards the Invisible Man would get visible solely through 
elements like water, fire, rain, blood and dust.
One from a technical point of view particularly difficult scene was the death 
of a general who drowns in his swimming pool after an underwater fight with the 
Invisible Man.
But what does an Invisible Man look like underwater?
In the preliminary discussions with Phil Tippett and with my colleague Craig 
Hayes we decided to do some extensive test shots as a first step to learn more about 
transparent bodies. After an endless series of underwater experiments with bubbles, 
chemicals and a transparent plastic human we were able to get an idea of Hollow 
Man and could define the assignment and discuss the VFX we wished to realize in 
preproduction with the director.
Shortly afterwards, the final underwater fight with both actors, Kevin Bacon 
as Invisible Man and William Devane as General, was shot in a specially for these 
scenes constructed swimming pool inside Sony Studios in Hollywood. An enormous 
expenditure of water-protected computer technique and VFX cameras was neces­
sary, not to mention the five days I had to spend in a diving suit to photograph motion 
references of the actors. During the shoot back at Tippet Studio they worked on fur­
ther layouts and project-related software to offer Paul Verhoeven suggestions how to 
solve certain scenes.
The idea to develop an invisible human required the production of an artificial 
human model for Computer Graphics. Kevin Bacon had to be scanned from head to 
toe with a laser system and had to perform 250 different facial expressions in a photo 
studio in New York. Meanwhile Tom Gibbons, our animation supervisor, and his 
crew had instructed the CG character how to walk and released the first animation 
for virtual lighting in the computer.
Soon we registered that our Hollow Man didn’t fit easily into the background. 
To solve the problem I turned to traditional film technique and shot additional 

116
Acting and Character Animation
elements in our studio. In front of a green screen we filmed bubbles, blood splatter 
and smoke elements for compositing. After wrapping the shot we couldn’t use this 
studio for weeks because everywhere stuck film blood. We had to clean our hardware 
repeatedly.
Now I could focus on the character animation, virtual lighting and the composit­
ing of the effects with the background. The insert of the CG character into the original 
background required a trained eye for color and contrast so that the final product 
was still watchable after numerous film and video prints.*
In the history of animated films, we had Max Fleischer’s rotoscoping process 
that allowed artists to copy human movements exactly on drawings, a technique 
that found a new domain in digital imagery. In digital animation, we got from 
biomechanics to what we now call motion analysis and motion capture.
Biomechanics organizations monitored and tracked the human body’s 
motions for medical research. Multiple cameras were synced to a computer to 
monitor and register the body’s motions for medical research. Reflective or bright 
markers placed on the body’s main points of motion (elbows, wrists, and knees) 
could help track movements.
The video game industry was among the first to introduce this system to the 
entertainment industry, and John Dykstra used it for creating a digital double of 
Val Kilmer in Batman Forever (1995), produced by Tim Burton and directed by 
Joel Schumacher.
Jeff Kleiser was among those who spearheaded the process. In 1986, while 
working at Omnibus Computer Graphics, he used an optical system from 
Motion Analysis to encode martial arts movement for a test for Marvel Comics 
but back then the result was disappointing. When Omnibus closed down, Kleiser 
joined forces with Diana Walcazk, an expert in sculpting human bodies, and 
together they founded Kleiser–Walczak Construction Company with the clear 
objective to build and animate Synthespians including the digital stunt doubles 
for Sylvester Stallone, Rob Schneider, and others in Judge Dredd (1995). They also 
created Jet Li’s evil double from a parallel universe in The One (2001). This is 
when motion capture came in.
There were digital extras on board of James Cameron’s Titanic (1997) and in 
Ridley Scott’s Gladiator (2000). Then they applied the technique to fantasy crea­
tures: Ahmed Best, the actor digitized for Jar JarBinks, acted on the set of the Star 
Wars prequels in front of a blue screen opposite the other performers. He wore a 
special suit with markers and a Jar Jar headpiece.
Sinbad: Beyond the Veil of Mists, a not too successful and meanwhile com­
pletely forgotten co-production between India and the United States, used the 
technology in 2000 for a completely 3D-animated picture. They had two sets: one 
for the mo-cap performers and one for the voiceovers. It was a little bit like the 
*	 Frank Petzold cited in Rolf Giesen/Claudia Meglin, ed., Künstliche Welten. Hamburg and Vienna: 
Europa Verlag, 2001, pp. 199–202.

117
 23. Avatar and Beyond
early days of sound film when they did different language versions with foreign 
actors behind the set to speak the lines.
The breakthrough of CGI came with director Peter Jackson, Andy Serkis, and 
the Lord of the Rings trilogy.
The process of evolution brought this technique then from the background to 
the foreground.
It reminds of a story written by Jack Finney in 1954: The Body Snatchers. It 
was four times filmed, the first version Invasion of the Body Snatchers directed 
by Don Siegel, and also inspired a bunch of dopier imitations like Invasion of the 
Pod People. Back then, in Cold War McCarthyism, the Pod People were meant to 
represent the “Communist Menace.” But there is a deeper meaning.
Finney’s “pod people” you will find everywhere in society: Unspeakable 
“Demons” who are going to take possession of friends, parents, relatives, and 
neighbors. According to Finney, even lovers turn inexplicably cold, succumb to 
depression, or become victims of dementia—and we fear that we are next in line 
to lose our mind and soul!
Mo-cap is the magic word. Mo-cap absorbs totally.
Mocap actor. (Courtesy of Weta Digital. All rights reserved.)

118
Acting and Character Animation
Motion capture records facial expression and movement of actors such as 
Andy Serkis playing Gollum in Peter Jackson’s superior Lord of the Rings and 
Hobbit saga and the chimp hero in Rise of the Planet of the Apes.
Serkis was born and brought up in Ruislip, West London. He studied visual 
arts at Lancaster University and became heavily involved with the theatre studies 
department, which had a broad-based approach including design, lighting, staging, 
as well as history and acting theory. In 1985 he appeared at the Dukes Playhouse in 
Lancaster in plays such as Volpone, The Good Person of Szechwan (Brecht), and A 
Midsummer Night’s Dream, followed by work in touring companies. Eventually he 
was associated with the Royal Exchange Theatre in Manchester, the Royal Court 
Theatre in London, and the prestigious Old Vic. Film and television work followed 
until, in 1999, he was offered the performance capture part of Gollum: “Gollum is 
an incredibly physical role. And it’s a combination of physicality and of course vocal. 
They’re so entwined with each other, so meshed with each other. […] You don’t sud­
denly change the type of acting you do. You’re playing a character. You’re embodying 
that role in the way that you would if it was a live action character. It’s just that it 
happens to be a different set of technology that records the performance.”*
Ralph Bakshi’s version of J. R. R. Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings (1978) came too 
early, technologically speaking. Jackson did the same, but he had a better, more 
*	 James Rocch; Interview: Andy Serkis of “The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey.” MSN Entertainment, 
December 17, 2012.
Mocap actors check performance. (Courtesy of Weta Digital. All rights reserved.)

119
 23. Avatar and Beyond
refined technology at his disposal than Bakshi who would rely heavily on over­
worked 2D rotoscoping although the promotion for the film tooted its own horn 
and termed it an “entirely new technique in filmmaking:” the first movie paint­
ing. To Bakshi it was like making two pictures for a relatively modest budget of 
$4 million.
Nevertheless, Bakshi had scenes rotoscoped for the same purpose as Jackson. 
In the past the rotoscope was used to exaggerate live action, to render live action 
cartoony. Bakshi (and Jackson) strived for bloody realism in the battle scenes. But 
Jackson’s Lord of the Rings trilogy (2001–2003) had the advantage of 3D realism 
that pulled out all stops and used, impossible to do in 2D, a custom-built artifi­
cial intelligence animation system called “Massive” with up to 220,000 Humans, 
Orcs, and Elves in some scenes following a complex set of rules how to move, 
fight, and die. The crowds alone were justification enough to use the 3D process.
For the crucial scenes involving Gollum, Jackson used a three-stage process. 
First, Serkis would play the scenes with the regular actors, then those actors 
would perform without Serkis, and finally, Serkis would act all by himself wear­
ing his motion-capture suit.
A total of 25 CCD video cameras would be placed throughout the stage. 
Infrared lights would shine onto Serkis’ markers that were attached to all key 
joints, small plastic balls that were covered in a highly reflective material, which 
would reflect the light back to the cameras, syncing his motions into the com­
puter. These result in black images with a big number of moving white dots. Out 
Group of Mocap actors simulating a ride. (Courtesy of Weta Digital. All rights 
reserved.)

120
Acting and Character Animation
of the dots of several camera angles, the computer has to triangulate the data 
to determine the exact position in a 3D space. Eventually, no markers would 
be placed on Serkis’ face so that the animators would have to study the actor’s 
facial expressions. (Usually, the actor has to wear hundreds of markers.) In Peter 
Jackson’s King Kong remake (2005), however, markers were added to Serkis’ face 
to track the muscle movements.
Each marker of the live performer needs to be mapped onto the respective part 
of the body of a digitally created character that generally absorbs up to 80 percent 
of the actor’s performance.
The evolution of digital actors include steps like Final Fantasy: The Spirits 
Within (2001); The Polar Express (2004) starring the virtual doppelganger of Tom 
Hanks and A Christmas Carol (2009) starring former The Mask Jim Carrey as 
Scrooge and the Charles Dickens ghosts that “torment” him, both films directed 
by Robert Zemeckis. I, Robot (2004); The Adventures of Tintin (2011); Jack the 
Giant Slayer (2013); and Man of Steel (2013) are milestones in this technique 
as was British actor Bill Nighy’s performance as Davy Jones in Pirates of the 
Caribbean: Dead Man’s Chest:
Davy Jones FAR surpassed Gollum as a CGI character. Now I know what many of 
you are saying “But John, Davy Jones wasn’t a CGI character.” While it’s true that 
the CGI in Pirates was BUILT ON TOP of the actor instead of REPLACING the actor 
as they did with Gollum, the former is actually more difficult to pull off, and the end 
results were mind blowing!*
Synthetic actors, Synthespians, might not only absorb our physical identity 
and movements but even will command artificial intelligence someday that 
would make their appearance in an interactive scenario much more interesting 
and unpredictable. In interactive environments that are by now more successful 
than the story-wise analog, linear product of the movie industry one better works 
with digital actors, as they most easily transfer from one medium to another.
A phalanx of actresses and actors so far was scanned and digitized by Karl Meyer’s 
Los Angeles-based company Gentle Giant. And even Willem Dafoe did appear in an 
interactive drama action-adventure titled Beyond: Two Souls (2013) although he is 
coming out not that well in an otherwise sophisticated and well-designed game.
Out of once primitive video and computer games, true parallel worlds will 
evolve one day, brought to life by digital actors.
When we speculated about that science fact on German radio, people felt inse­
cure and filled Facebook pages: “There is nothing better than the old Planet of the 
Apes films, they wrote. If this is the type of digital superiority actors don’t have any­
thing to fear.—They never will surpass live actors.—There are always actors behind 
the digitized characters, it’s only something like digital make up.—Why should a 
*	 John Campea, Visual Effects Oscar Should Be Pirates Booty. The Movie Blog, www.themovieblog.
com. November 16, 2006.

121
 23. Avatar and Beyond
digital character portray a human being better than a human being?” Well, that’s 
not the question. The question is not about quality, it’s about standardization of 
products, which includes the standardization of humans too. Some airlines use 
these incredibly bad digital characters to promote safety rules. Why don’t they 
use real people?
Avatar (2009) was the peak of performance capture. Over the next years, 
the saga will continue. Sequels are announced. The technology will be refined. 
Director James Cameron used performance capture extensively for Avatar. He 
used wraparound cameras to better record facial expression and what they call a 
“virtual camera,” which streamed the actors’ motions in CGI.
A picture like Avatar wouldn’t have been possible at the time when it was 
actually written. They had to push the technology over a year and a half until 
they reached the point where Avatar, partly inspired by the shelved Merian C. 
Cooper/Willis O’Brien/MGM project War Eagles (1939) of which Cameron as 
former stop-motion buff sure was aware, was finally possible to make.
They had enhanced the size of the performance capture stage, called The 
Volume, to six times the size previously used and incorporated a real-time vir­
tual camera, which allowed Cameron to direct the CGI scenes as he would doing 
live-action scenes. He could see his actors performing in real time, and he could 
move his camera to adjust their performances.
In conjunction with Weta Digital in New Zealand, Avatar also pioneered 
facial expression capture, which would spare the actors the discomfort to spend 
hours in makeup chairs. In the beginning of the process, actors would have glued 
hundreds of tiny spherical makers to their faces and so couldn’t touch their own 
faces throughout the shooting day. With the new system, a lightweight head-rig 
could be donned minutes before shooting.
This rig consisted of a small skull cap, made from a cast of the actor’s head, 
as a base for a strut, which resembled a concert microphone. Instead of a mike 
in front, however, it had a tiny camera to record the actor’s facial expression and 
mimic art.
Cameron assured that actors needn’t to feel threatened by this development 
and said it wouldn’t replace acting. On the contrary, it was designed to empower 
acting and directing and give it a niche in a new age, support the actor against 
traditional computer-generated animation, which uses only the actor’s voice, and 
in which a committee of animators performs the character, operates the camera, 
and does the lighting.
On the other hand, we got the concept of blending motion that allows you to 
use the movements of an actor to create a completely different digital character. 
It’s the same as in photography. Photos are no more the exclusive work of photog­
raphers. They are more or less digitally enhanced. Acting is being used in digital 
disguise.
Absolutely astonishing, nothing short than a quantum jump technically 
speaking, are the animals in Disney’s The Jungle Book 3D (2016). They are incred­
ibly naturalistic and lifelike, with eyes that reflect human emotion, although 

122
Acting and Character Animation
sometimes this illusion is destroyed by mostly unimaginatively used human 
voices that do not sound like animals. They are even better than Neel Sethi, the 
boy actor they got as Mowgli successor to Indian boy Sabu in the 1942-live action 
Jungle Book. (Sethi got puppets for interaction supplied by Jim Henson’s Creature 
Shop.) Director Jon Favreau and his team that included VFX supervisor Rob 
Legato and mo-cap expert Mike Stassi did their homework and studied animals. 
Yet scenario-wise there is not much to laugh. The creatures are so photo-realistic 
that they forgot the funny tale and the gags. Most of the action is played straight 
and humorlessly. All the comedy and songs that made the 2D Jungle Book (1967) 
so memorable are gone.
3D has become standard but it’s only technology. It creates texture and lifelike 
performances but isn’t sufficient to create better performances or design better 
characters. In the world of computer games, however, it is indispensable.

123
24
A Nod to Computer 
Games
Computer games create characters that define themselves through action and 
challenge the gamer. It’s a lucrative field handled by an industry on the way up.
Name actors we know from the cinema screen don’t hesitate to turn and rush 
to the games to loan their vocal talents.
Gary Oldman and Kiefer Sutherland were in Call of Duty: World at War, 
Sean Benn and Patrick Stewart in The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion, Seth Green and 
Martin Sheen in Mass Effect, Charles Dance was in The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt, 
Ron Perlman in Halo 2 & 3, Fallout, Malcolm McDowell and Liam Neeson in 
Fallout 3, Mickey Rourke was the Rogue Warrior, James Woods and Samuel L. 
Jackson voiced Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas, the late Dennis Hopper was in 
Deadly Creatures, Christopher Walken in True Crime: Streets of LA, and John 
Rhys-Davies in Dune 2000.
Of course, that’s only name dropping to sell the games (that became a bigger 
industry than movies or television) and spend some of the big money on stars.
The main problem with computer games is not so much that they are narrated 
against all rules of Western scenario tradition: in a nonlinear way, not straight 
storytelling but round the corner so to speak. Many kids seem to have problems 
thinking in straightforward, logical manner likewise. They are more attached 

124
Acting and Character Animation
to all kind of details than an overall view. They are constantly distracted. An 
incredible amount of images and impressions crosses their mind daily.
In a TV conversation that the late Norman Mailer had with French philoso­
pher and journalist Régis Debray, the author of The Naked and the Dead, com­
plained about modern-day kids who have problems to finish even watching a 
TV show. They are frustrated to no end, Mailer said, because they don’t carry 
through even such trivial things. This, he concluded, would make them aggres­
sive: an eccentric but interesting statement.
We once discussed the topic of a frustrated, disillusioned youth with a police 
officer, an expert in teen crime. He said that films, TV, or games will not stimu­
late people who are already socially displeased, bored, and aggressive but will 
influence and inspire them, give them ideas how to commit aggressive acts at 
the peak of society’s rise. Many of them seem to be aggressive for no special rea­
son. It’s just a matter of undetermined cultural anxiety. He mentioned two girls, 
maybe 15 or 16 year old, who tormented a younger girl and brutally stubbed out 
cigarettes on her skin. When interrogated why they did such an atrocious act, 
they claimed the victim talked crap!
Besides television that even runs the most brutish, inhuman crime films on 
Christmas, cultural pessimists suspiciously eye first-person shooters. These 
games are only one part of computer games but certainly the most prominent. 
The watershed moment for the violent video game debate was the 1999 Columbine 
massacre. Most times suicidal teenage killers that appear the media tell us that 
they were avid gamers.
Psychologists maintain that violent video games negatively affect kids when 
played consistently. They might desensitize gamers because the mind is condi­
tioned and violent acts become the most natural thing in the world to get atten­
tion and recognition in the mass media and in social media. But you won’t 
become a little bit more of a jerk each time you shoot yourself through a video 
game—unless you already have the antisocial seed in you.
And believe it or else: What might be called antisocial today might become 
part of the world of tomorrow. There are institutions and groups that need insen­
sitive persons. Interestingly some of the top gamers and hackers are meanwhile 
beguiled by the armies of the world. They are not touched by emotion but by 
affects.
Titles like Halo: Combat Evolved, Modern Warfare or Call of Duty signal that 
a goodly portion of these games is about war. Remember John Badham’s War 
Games (1983) which appeared at a time when most of us didn’t foresee personal 
computers. A year later, in July 1984, one of the first big CG movies was released: 
The Last Starfighter. Written by Jonathan R. Betuel it starred Lance Guest as a 
teenager who becomes a crack in playing the computer game Starfighter, the 
highest-scoring player, and is recruited to become a fighter in a moronic extra­
terrestrial war.
In the meantime, Hollywood has rediscovered The Last Starfighter, and there 
is a rumor that everybody, including Spielberg, wants to remake it. If this is true, 

125
24. A Nod to Computer Games
the subject matter of the movie is up to date: Gamers and hackers are wooed for 
the war and cyber games to come.
First-shooter games are flickering projections of militant ghost images and 
defy the rules of scenario tradition. Gamers sure don’t need what storytellers 
regard essential: empathy. It would be a burden to them. Why should they show 
empathy with the enemy?
Soldiers wear uniforms. Members of paramilitary troops in Africa and the 
Middle East present themselves hooded. They look equal. You can’t have warm 
feelings for these guys. They are all equal, just numbers on your hit list.
Under such circumstances, the players might lose devotion of their own mor­
tality because in the game they remain immortal. They might feel like demigods. 
Even if they are going to lose the game, there always will be a next chance to stay 
alive. So they are conquering death a thousand times.
Above all, computer games are fast. There is no time to think about the motives 
of the enemy, about his childhood, and his family—it’s just him or you!
The gamer cannot even empathize with his own image, his own avatar. 
Nevertheless, there are such things as empathy games.
Interactive empathy games focus on everything from being depressed to com­
ing out. But can a 15-minute flash game provoke feelings of understanding and 
compassion?
What is Empathy All About?
Obviously there is intellectual empathy that makes you feel what response another 
person needs. And there is emotional empathy that focuses on an affective 
response to an emotional stimulus. According to Dr. Mark Davis, a behavioral 
scientist and empathy expert, face-to-face contact can be a powerful empathy 
stimulus, “It’s not that far a step to go to a virtual reality game where you’d see and 
hear what the target you’re evoking empathy for would see or feel.” So can empathy 
games make players more compassionate? One of these games is called Syria, 
an immersive virtual reality experience that mediates the fights and screams of 
injured children in Aleppo. The creator, Nonny de la Pena, the “Godmother of 
Virtual Reality,” claims that this one makes people cry as they directly connect 
to Syrian refugee kids.
Well, alliances are based on reason, not emotion. There are not many proso­
cial games commercially available, but there is a lot of aggression to buy. And it 
doesn’t need even good virtual acting, only efficient weapons.
Maybe in the future they will simulate empathy artificially, when brain–com­
puter interfaces will be the rule of brainwash. The same could be said for violence.
But we should see the positive effects of computer games too.
Remember the words of stage impresario Max Reinhardt: that acting should 
be a process to return to childhood. Computer games can be a wonderful play­
ground. In 1938, Johan Huizinga, a Dutch cultural theorist, published a book 
about the Homo Ludens that focused on the importance of the play as one 

126
Acting and Character Animation
necessary module for the creative development of culture and society. To him, 
Homo Ludens: Man the Player is next to Homo Faber: Man the Maker. His “Play 
Theory” was echoed by Roger Caillois, a French intellectual and sociologist. In 
his book Man, Play and Games, first published in 1958 as Les Jeux et Les Hommes, 
he built (critically) upon Huizinga’s writings and described six core character­
istics of the play: that it is free (voluntary, as Huizinga puts it); occupies its own 
time and space; that it is uncertain; unproductive, and different from ordinary 
activities and not interested in material values; governed by rules that suspend 
ordinary laws, and, most importantly, creates imagined realities that stagger 
the imagination (which to many sounds escapist of course). Huizinga adverts to 
secrecy and disguising which is a main part of acting. Caillois distinguishes a 
number of games: one of which is mimicry where the player tries to escape from 
himself and become another. This is one of the reasons why superheroes are so 
popular with younger audiences. But what can we tell about social media? We 
know that they create a digitized parallel society. On Facebook you may have 
one thousand and more friends, but you still will be lonesome. Social network­
ing occupies a lot of time but the way how it contributes to human society is 
serpentine.
The main difference is to be found in the terms play and game. Games maybe 
stimulate but do not liberate the human mind.
Homo Ludens, however, needs complete freedom of mind to play and be 
creative.

Part II
Creativity Training 
for Writers, 
Producers, and 
Animators—A 
Practical Guide

128
Creativity Training for Writers, Producers, and Animators—A Practical Guide
A book called “The Legend of Centopia” allows Mia, the young heroine of an 
Italian/German/Canadian TV series titled Mia and me to enter a world of magic 
and animation. The key to this world is made of imagination plus creativity.

129
Creativity Training for Writers, Producers, and Animators—A Practical Guide

130
Creativity Training for Writers, Producers, and Animators—A Practical Guide
Fantasy character development and design at different stages. Mia and me is 
a German-Italian-Canadian TV series created by Gerhard Hahn that opens a 
­fantasy world of winged elves, pans, unicorns, and dragons for Mia, a teenage 
girl. (Courtesy of Hahn Film/m4e Productions GmbH.)

131
25
Surprise Me!
The difference between actors and animators: Actors do, while animators 
describe. Animators have to project their acting like a puppeteer would do but 
there is, other than stop motion, no physical puppet they act with but pencil 
drawings or digits, bits and bytes. So they need to visualize their feelings and 
emotions frame by frame, with their brain constantly focused on motion analysis.
The character on screen is not the animator. Nevertheless, the animator has 
to see the character with the audience’s eyes. An animator should cooperate with 
the character, says Ed Hooks, not dictate to him. The best animators allow their 
figures to be independent. Then they will be surprised of what cartoon characters 
are able to do.
This is the key. An animator might take some acting classes but he is a visual 
artist. He will not have enrolled a drama school. But in the best case, the charac­
ter will speak to him/her and he/she will be able, just by communicating with the 
character, to find out about it.
No, animators are no actors. Animation is not acting. However, it is serv­
ing an animated character that will be explored with a pen in hand or a mouse 
click.

132
Acting and Character Animation
Storyboard sketches for proposed Siegfried project. (Courtesy of Jim Danforth.)

133
25. Surprise Me!
Ed Hooks, who wrote one of the most important books about Acting for 
Animators*, is no animator himself. He started out being an actor and offered act­
ing classes. Once, in San Francisco, he was approached by one of his pupils if he 
wouldn’t be interested to come down and talk to some animation folks who were 
doing their first movie. This was in 1996. Hooks agreed and when he got there 
he realized that the company was DreamWorks. The animators sat around and 
listened to him. But he couldn’t help much as he didn’t understand the process of 
animation back then. They tried again and he told them that they have to show 
him what they were doing and then, maybe, he could comment and give advice. 
He knew about acting but had to learn the basics of animation. And after a while, 
this worked. He began to understand their needs. Finally, they were on the same 
wavelength. The main difference between actors and animators, he realized, is 
time. Actors are in the present moment while on stage (well, film actors also play 
in present moment but divided in hundreds of takes) while animators are not. 
They need a long time for a small moment that lasts on the screen maybe only a 
few seconds.
If you visit one of Ed’s classes (highly recommended because of the entertain­
ment value), you see that he is acting it out for hours and has an immediate audi­
ence feeling. Audiences love him.
As animation is teamwork, there are many parties contributing to it. And this 
happens, with big pictures as well as cheap series, starting with preproduction. 
This is the time of exploration, in some cases too short and in others sufficient to 
provide a superior result.
In all cases, animated characters are basically developed in preproduction and 
refined in the process of animation. There can be real good, inventive characters 
in cheap animation too. An important part of the preproduction process is the 
writing although, in a way, there is more drawing than writing.
And with the preproduction, the storyboard and animatics completed the pic­
ture itself if timed and finished even before actual production is started.
*	 Ed Hooks, Acting for Animators: A Complete Guide to Performance Animation. Revised Edition. 
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann Drama, 2003.


135
26
Writing Animation 
Role Profiles
Case Studies
Acting is first and foremost storytelling. And mankind is a storytelling species. 
We are primates with a storytelling mind. We are homo fictus, the fiction man. 
Stories are vital to train our survival skills. Stories make our life from childhood 
on: stories to warn kids of misuse of fire. Stories might even tell of huge floods: 
Noah and his predecessor Utnapishtim, a character in the Epic of Gilgamesh. 
Plato’s tale of the doomed Atlantis. Stories of past, present, and future. Science 
Fiction stories about the conquest of space. Star Trek and Star Wars transform 
future into mythology like Homer did with the Trojan War. We empathize not 
only with each other but share emotions with totally fictional characters.
In ancient times, the shaman was both storyteller and actor. Early on, there 
was a cave artist around to illustrate the shaman’s stories.
In a modern society, except for the fundamentalist faith communities, the 
shaman’s healing powers have passed over to medical practitioners and psycholo­
gists, the doctors of the soul, the storytelling part has become the privilege of 
actors and writers vice versa. And the cave paintings are alive on the cinema 
screen, in TV, and on the internet.

136
Acting and Character Animation
In animation, the archaic animistic tradition continues and reunites the sha-
manic purpose of acting, art, and foremost storytelling. Storytelling is the main 
ingredient of both expensive and cheap animation.
Particularly digitally standardized, limited TV animation is rushed into pro-
duction and cannot rely on intricate character animation. These series rely on mov-
ing caricatures like Bruno Bozzetto’s Signor Rossi. Nobody can claim that South 
Park is a miracle of animation. Animation-wise this series is a shame. Cutout-style 
animation was digitized. Here were (stereo) types animated, no true characters. 
What did it was the basic idea, was the saucy dialogue. So these characters have to 
be established mainly by writing and dialogue and by the memorable simplicity of 
the caricature. Good animation has become a secondary feature on TV.
One of the first to realize this was David H. DePatie, who ran a cartoon stu-
dio with Friz Freleng. He said that a lot more creativity is nowadays going into 
scripting, a lot of thoughts. He and Freleng didn’t need it. They were working on 
the animated TV series The Pink Panther, a popular series that was done without 
dialogue and simply based on gags.
One of the early limited cartoon characters, UPA’s Mister Magoo, created in 
1949, got his funny background from being nearsighted, which made him to out-
siders act like a lunatic. It’s all in the writing and the dialogue, not so much in 
subtle movement and animation, which was impossible to do considering the low 
budget.
There are different methods how to do story work for animation, different 
from country to country and different from studio to studio. There are really no 
writers in animation. In many cases, concepts are developed visually by story-
board artists, not by the writers. There is no single formula that works.
Derek Hayes and Chris Webster tell of a visit while Shrek was in preproduction 
and they had problems, almost thinking of canning the whole project. But then 
a new storyboard artist came in who did a sequence in which Lord Farquaard 
tortures the Gingerbread man. The new approach obviously changed the mind of 
DreamWorks CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg.
Working as a screenplay consultant on an animated feature film in Germany, 
I (RG) asked the producer to see their role profiles. There were four characters 
in the film, two main and two secondary characters. What they sent me was 
one single page, one single page for four characters, estimated for a budget of 
millions!
Very often the character descriptions are 1D. In Europe, they often make the 
mistake not to aim their animation at family audiences but preschool kids who, 
they say, don’t understand irony and shouldn’t be harmed by antagonism and 
violence. (The morals enforcers were shocked when Porky Pig and Bugs Bunny 
entered European TV screens in the early 1970s.)
Over a period of several years we attended the Cartoon Forum, a European TV 
pitching event organized on a yearly basis by Cartoon Media Brussels. Most of it 
consists of preschool projects, mainly 2D or 3D computer, introducing characters 

137
26. Writing Animation
such as Caiman, an inquisitive 5-year-old crocodile, Charly Vet, who wants to 
become a veterinarian, same as his father, Baba, Dada, and Boo, three undefin­
able kids who are shaping and coloring their world and re-inventing their own 
universe, or the humanized dragons of Dragon Troubles, a bizarre entry from 
Bulgaria: …the adventures of an odd dragon family in the conservative city of 
Dragonville. The main idea of the project is to show, with lots of humor and no 
drama, how hard it is to stay good and polite, despite the fact that you are different, 
even gifted, but not accepted by the society….*
I (RG) asked the author of favorite children’s book fare that became an ani­
mation series to name the Dad and Mom characters of his stories. He looked me 
straight in the eyes, smiled and said, “Mom and Dad.” He didn’t know. He didn’t 
care. He might be successful but his series never will be truly great. It is difficult 
to work as a writer under such circumstances.
Role profiles, however, should be biographies. We need to know all about the 
character. We need to know even things that won’t make it into the movie. Actors 
work the same way to find into their parts.
There is outstanding writing. There is writing so imaginative that you see 
the images while reading, for instance King Kong’s tragic end at the top of the 
Empire State Building as described by Edgar Wallace in his first draft script dated 
January 25, 1932, submitted 2 weeks before his untimely death:
CLOSE SHOT of Kong. He closes his eyes, sinks down on his knees, down and down 
until he is crouching right against the flagstaff. With an effort he rises again. Blood is 
now showing on his left breast. He stands up erect, beats his breast in one last defiant 
gesture and collapses. […]
CLOSE SHOT of Kong, with his head against the wall. Kong opens his eyes, picks the 
girl up, holds her to his breast like a doll, closes his eyes, and drops his head.†
Such is even more the case when animators themselves do the writing, as 
Jim Danforth did when he wrote Theseus and the Minotaur, based on one of 
the most famous mythological tales of ancient times, written on spec for a pro­
posed but, alas, never made series of all-puppet films exploring the world of 
myth and legend. Danforth animated a lot of fight scenes in his career such as 
the encounter of a two-headed giant Galligantua and a tentacled sea monster in 
Jack the Giant Killer or Buddy Hackett slaying a dragon in MGM-Cinerama’s 
The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm. We quote from the description 
of the nothing but spectacular Theseus vs. Minotaur scenes with Jim’s kind 
permission:
*	 Cartoon Forum, September 13–16, 2016, Toulouse e-catalogue edited by Cartoon Media Brussels.
†	 Kong by Edgar Wallace (alternatively titled The Beast). First Draft Script Copied by RKO 
Stenographic Dept. Corrected as of January 25, 1932. In Mike Hankin: Ray Harryhausen: Master 
of the Majicks. Volume 1: Beginnings and Endings. Los Angeles: Archive Editions, 2013. p. 327.

138
Acting and Character Animation
ENTRANCE TO THE CENTRAL ATRIUM—THE LAIR OF THE MINOTAUR
The CAMERA slows from its rapid progress and comes to rest at the entrance of the 
Minotaur’s lair.
A shaft of daylight stabs down through an opening in the ceiling of the atrium. 
The corners of the large, rectangular room fall away into shadow. An indistinct 
form can be seen in the center of the room.
The Minotaur raises its head and sniffs the air. It emits a growl and then rises to 
its feet behind a pile of straw and human bones. The head is the head of a bull—the 
torso that of a powerful man. The Minotaur steps out from behind the pile of bones, 
revealing that the legs of the monster are those of a bull. The MINOTAUR roars a 
challenge to the foe he senses is approaching.
AT THE ENTRANCE OF THE ATRIUM
Theseus stands in the doorway. The CAMERA moves to a close shot.
THE MINOTAUR
Fixing his gaze on Theseus.
THESEUS ENTERS THE ATRIUM
THE MINOTAUR WATCHES THESEUS WARILY
THESEUS AND THE MINOTAUR CIRCLE ONE ANOTHER
Theseus gives the Minotaur a jab to the jaw… and another. The Minotaur grabs for 
Theseus. Theseus ducks—leaps back.
Jim Danforth animates puppet of ancient sky god Wotan for a test. (Courtesy of 
Jim Danforth.)

139
26. Writing Animation
ANGLE ON THESEUS
He picks up a thigh bone from the pile.
WIDER
Theseus and the Monster circle. Theseus flings himself at the Minotaur and beats 
at him with the bone.
THESEUS & THE MINOTAUR
They struggle. The bone weapon breaks.
WIDER
The Minotaur flings Theseus against the wall of the atrium. Theseus leaps up and 
dives at the Minotaur, catching him off balance and knocking him down.
ANOTHER ANGLE
Theseus grabs a shoulder blade from the bone pile and attempts to hamstring the 
Minotaur. The bone is not sharp enough. The Minotaur kicks Theseus back. Theseus 
gets to his feet and leaps at the Minotaur, knocking him down.
WIDER—THESEUS & THE MINOTAUR
The antagonists roll over and over as each tries to get on top of the other. They roll 
into the shadow of the unlit portion of the atrium. After a moment, Theseus is 
hurled back into the light.
ANGLE ON THESEUS
He lands near a pillar, then quickly leaps to his feet.
FULL SHOT—ATRIUM—THESEUS & THE MINOTAUR
The Minotaur comes charging back into the light and dives toward Theseus.
THESEUS—DOLLY IN
He leaps aside and the Minotaur crashes into the column.
FULL SHOT—ATRIUM
The Minotaur is stunned. Some chunks of stone fall from the ceiling.
THE MINOTAUR
Starting to get up.
THESEUS
He picks up one of the chunks of stone and smashes it down on the Minotaur.
WIDER—THESEUS & THE MINOTAUR
The Minotaur kicks out at Theseus—knocks him back.
As the Minotaur groggily tries to stand, Theseus leaps past the Minotaur and runs 
to the door of the atrium.
THESEUS
He pauses for an instant, looks at the Minotaur, and then runs into the corridor, 
disappearing from sight.

140
Acting and Character Animation
ANGLE TOWARD THE MINOTAUR
He staggers to his feet and roars, then starts after Theseus.
TOWARD THE DOOR
The Minotaur heads toward the door, following Theseus.
IN THE CORRIDOR—LOOKING BACK TOWARD THE ATRIUM
The Minotaur bursts into the corridor and stops just outside the atrium. He stands, 
silhouetted in the doorway, looking for Theseus.
WIDER
Theseus is perched above the entrance to the atrium, standing on the corbels of the 
arch. The Minotaur starts to move farther into the corridor. Theseus leaps onto the 
Minotaur’s back and grabs his horns.
CLOSE ON THESEUS & THE MINOTAUR
Theseus tries to twist the Minotaur’s head to break his neck.
[This clearly is a quote from the Kong/tyrannosaurus fight in the original King 
Kong.]
WIDER
The Minotaur tries to scrape Theseus off his back by smashing him into the walls 
of the corridor.
SEVERAL REPEATED INTERCUT SHOTS OF:
(a) Theseus trying to break the Minotaur’s neck.
(b) The Minotaur trying to dislodge Theseus.
ANGLE ALONG THE CORRIDOR
Ariadne hurries forward, toward the sound of the struggle. She stops as she sees:
POV—THESEUS ON THE MINOTAUR’S BACK
Finally, the Minotaur succeeds in dislodging Theseus.
THESEUS
Lands on the ground.
THE MINOTAUR
Turning toward Theseus.
THESEUS
Rolling aside.
THE MINOTAUR & THESEUS
The bull-man overshoots his target.
THESEUS
Scrambles back, trying to get to his feet.
ARIADNE
As she runs forward, she raises the sword of Daedalus.

141
26. Writing Animation
THE MINOTAUR & THESEUS
The Minotaur turns to charge again. Theseus runs back into the Atrium.
INSIDE THE ATRIUM
Theseus runs toward the bone pile and picks up a skull. The Minotaur enters the 
atrium. Theseus flings a skull at him, then another.
THE MINOTAUR
Momentarily distracted as the skulls bounce and shatter against his head.
FULL SHOT—INTERIOR OF ATRIUM
Theseus runs to one side as the Minotaur, temporarily blinded by the skull frag­
ments, lunges forward with a bellow.
CLOSE ON THE DOOR OF THE ATRIUM
Ariadne appears in the doorway.
THESEUS
He sees Ariadne and turns toward her.
ARIADNE
Ariadne flings the sword, hilt first, toward Theseus.
THE SWORD
Flying through the air—soft-focus Minotaur beyond.
THESEUS
He catches the sword and follows its momentum, pivoting around, as the Minotaur 
charges past.
WIDER—THESEUS & THE MINOTAUR
Theseus continues his arc and brings the sword down on the bull leg of the Minotaur. 
The Minotaur tries to take another step, but collapses, hamstrung.
INTERCUT: CLOSE ON THE MINOTAUR’S HEAD
A scream of pain.
THESEUS & THE MINOTAUR
Theseus leaps onto the fallen Minotaur and plunges the sword into its chest.
ARIADNE
She turns away from the grisly sight.
THESEUS
He rises into the frame as he stands up, triumphant.*
*	 Theseus and the Minotaur. An animated puppet-film scenario by Jim Danforth. A speculative sub­
mission for Dr. Rolf Giesen’s proposed series of heroic myths & legends of the world to be hosted 
by Ray Harryhausen. 1998.

142
Acting and Character Animation
This exciting piece of writing leaves you breathless. It sure is animated writing 
that defines each move of the animation. Like a protocol of something that has to 
be made yet. While reading it one might recall David and Goliath. Some scenes 
are quite gruesome and of the horror caliber.
As this is a producers-driven medium, many producers regard themselves 
heirs to Walt Disney’s throne. One European producer started a project on a sub­
ject matter that dealt with fear, which held some little children in its grip. A big 
topic but the producer succeeded in making it a small one. He reduced a little 
boy’s fright and suggested as reason the fear of some bullies who participate in a 
soccer game and a janitor who took away the boy’s ball and hid it in a cellar. That 
evokes dream monsters in the boy’s mind that lie in wait for him down there. The 
producer, a soccer fan himself, didn’t care for the boy and didn’t take any to study 
and fully explore him. A confiscated ball as reason for nightmares?
A better method is to study the possibilities and develop the story out of a 
character. This takes some time but it works.
A good exercise is to have a drawing and invent some story around the char­
acter drawn on paper.

143
27
Contradictions
The Key to Great Characters 
and Stories
Animators love to work around contradictions. So characters, if intended to be 
memorable and able to carry a whole series, should have two sides: one that cor­
responds with the expectations of viewers and one that doesn’t, that comes as a 
surprise.
While working for the Terrytoons Studio in New Rochelle, New York City, 
in 1942, with the sensational Superman comics a hot topic but Spider Man way 
ahead, story artist Isadore Klein came up with a concept that was quite interest­
ing at that time.
In the story department, they were putting up ideas for a new cartoon they 
were going to do. Then and there Superman crossed Klein’s mind. As most of 
the animated cartoon characters of that period were humanized animals and 
insects, Klein decided to use a fly as a substitute for Superman. He had read that 
a fly, for its size, had super strength and that strength, in the imaginary world 
of cartoons, could be multiplied many times over. He started to sketch a fly 
wearing a Superman type of cape holding up with one arm an enormous pole, 
which, related to its size, seemed like a telegraph pole but actually was an ordi­
nary pencil. In a second sketch the Super-Fly was flying against the front of an 
automobile, causing the radiator to buckle, and bringing the car to a forced halt.

144
Acting and Character Animation
When studio head Paul Terry entered the room and looked at the drawings, 
a little bit puzzled but interested, Klein talked about the Superman comics and 
explained his idea. Terry looked impressed, but he wouldn’t agree to make a 
super-creature a fly. He turned the innovative idea of a super-fly into a commer­
cial one that would combine Superman with Mickey Mouse.
So out of Super-fly grew Supermouse and because they couldn’t name it 
Supermouse (for the “Super” in those days belonged exclusively to Superman), 
they named the character Mighty Mouse.*
The strangest choice of an animal whose avid desire was to enter the stage 
(!) was the whale who wanted to sing at the Met. Willie the Operatic Whale, a 
segment of Disney’s Make Mine Music (1946), is about a whale that truly sings 
opera’s greatest arias (voiced by Nelson Eddy) but is killed with a spear gun by a 
misunderstanding impresario who thinks that the giant of the sea has swallowed 
an opera singer. But Willie’s singing spirit lives on in heaven. In 1955, Chuck 
Jones made a parody that some called the Citizen Kane of Cartoons: One Froggy 
Evening. Inside a cornerstone, a construction worker finds an amazingly dancing 
and singing frog, but each time he wants to present it in public, with dollar signs 
in his eyes, the frog stops dead.
Nobody likes rats in the kitchen for reasons of health and hygiene. Exactly that 
taboo was broken with Disney-Pixar’s Ratatouille (2007): A living rat not only in 
the kitchen where it shouldn’t be but cooking there the most delicious meals! And 
audiences didn’t hate, they adored that little rat, Rémy, voiced by stand-up come­
dian Patton Oswalt, with the magnificent, lovely background of Paris, which plays 
a part in contributing to a really charming story. There is a scene with Rémy on 
the roof overlooking the nightly city that wins the heart of audiences all over the 
world: a little creature that sets out to whet the Parisian gourmet scene’s appetite.
Ed Hooks considers interspecies communication a fascinating challenge for 
animation: The first try of communication between Rémy the Rat and Linguini 
the red-haired boy is rather tentative. At first, they do not know how to proceed 
and establish their relationship as this is the first human–rat communication 
both have experienced. They have to find a mutual like and that is: cooking (not 
killing as in those infamous horror thrillers, Willard and Ben).
Humans are at the top of the food chain, Ed Hooks argues, so with animals 
and humans in the same story, the humans must remain at the top of the food 
chain. Although Rémy is on par with or even better than human cooks, the natu­
ral barrier between animal and human world is kept. Communication between 
them is something of a hat trick. The rats are no humans. They remain rats.
Linguini and Rémy cannot talk to each other. They pantomime, use sign lan­
guage and speak with the eyes, contrary to DreamWorks’ Bee Movie. Here bees 
and humans talk to each other and therefore ruin the whole project with super­
fluous, stupid rubbish dialogue:
*	Danny Peary & Gerald Peary, The American Animated Cartoon: A Critical Anthology. New York: 
E. P. Dutton, 1980, p. 176.

145
27. Contradictions
You have got
to start thinking bee, my friend.
- Thinking bee?!
Me?
Dialogue can build up but also slow down and destroy a lot. Why must humans 
and bees talk to each other and then such crap?
The purpose of dialogue is to move a story forward and make a character 
understood not to deliver idle chitchat and boring formalities (provided the 
character in question is not particularly wooden). On TV, to save and economize 
visual gags, they often go for funny dialogue. Well, that’s okay—if, yes, if the spo­
ken word is really funny. (In many cases, it is supposed to be but it isn’t.)
Actors as well as animators must understand and fully absorb their characters: 
their incentive and motivation, their personality and logic. (And the dialogue 
should match their sentiment and way of thinking. Very often it is important how 
a person talks and not what.)
Actors must find a reason for each step, every action, and even if they trans­
form into an animal in a children’s play. Their personality must flow into that 
character. Theatre people say: You have to defend your character. This means one 
has to understand the personality of the character completely. One has to make 
that character to his or her own. You have to like the character and identify with 
him, even if he is awkward or stupid or evil as we have seen when we talked about 
screen villains. A criminal sure has a reason why he became that way. Maybe 
his parents didn’t have time for him while he was a child, and so he did every­
thing to gain their attention. And by being mischievous, he succeeded and stayed 
that way. By completely identifying with that character and discovering how one 
would act as he does, one eliminates the barrier between actor and character. One 
is supposed to “be,” not to “act.”
Actors have to wear mask and special makeup to become ugly. An Animator 
will use the pencil to design an ugly character. He or she has to have the skills of a 
makeup artist. But the real transformation, as in The Hunchback of Notre Dame, 
is part of the story construction. Rango is a chameleon that is constantly faking 
his character and suddenly finds himself lost in a desert town pretending to be a 
great gunman when he is not.
There never ever was a character uglier than this chameleon that found himself 
in an exceptional situation. The story sounds good but the character is even better. 
They really have worked on that role profile. The character experiences the story, 
not the other way round. The character is a bundle of contradiction: torn between 
Wile E. Coyote and Carlos Castaneda. The Western setting is not new, the charac­
ter is modeled clearly after Clint Eastwood in Sergio Leone’s Dollars Trilogy with 
the difference that Eastwood was, at least back then, quite handsome.
Contradiction makes the character, and it makes the story.
Usually, however, series that feature cartoon characters are not created in an 
ideal atmosphere. There are many cooks around, too many. Once there was a 

146
Acting and Character Animation
story about a little monkey that found a violin in the jungle and started to exer­
cise producing sounds and eventually music. No monkey would play music. That 
was a good premise. (Disney’s TV producers call the first draft outline, which is 
no more than a brief synopsis a premise. If it doesn’t work, well, forget it. Go to 
work on another premise.) We thought it would be a great topic for a little series: 
having a monkey with a musical background right in the jungle. We hoped some 
of Disney’s Jungle Book would rub off on us, but then the TV editor turned up 
and prescribed slapstick, not music. Out went the melodies and songs and with 
them the whole reason why these series should have been made. A strong-willed 
producer would have objected, but there are not too many cartoon producers 
who are strong willed. They go for the money and the easiest way to get it and 
won’t fight for a good idea.
And above all, people don’t like apes as movie stars, excepting King Kong, 
Planet of the Apes, and China’s Monkey King.
Selecting the right characters is a difficult task. The Chinese wanted to do 
a different version of the American Kung Fu Panda celebrating the Year of the 
Rabbit and decided on Kung Fu Rabbit, directed by the head of the Animation 
School of the prestigious Beijing Film Academy, Sun Li Jun. Yet the rip-off was 
ill-designed and boring to watch from the first minute, an overgrown, cumber­
some, horribly uninteresting rabbit in a dry story. If you miscast the hero, you 
can’t save the story anyway. And if you have a great hero, as Howard Hawks had 
when casting Humphrey Bogart as Philip Marlowe in The Big Sleep, there is no 
need to chop your way through the undergrowth of Raymond Chandler’s some­
what confused story construction.
Today, there is a tendency to cast plastic faces in feature films and rather sur­
real characters in animation.
Some of the strangest cartoon characters, besides SpongeBob, are the 
3D-animated sausages and vegetables of a rather odd and sexist, but also exis­
tentialist tale titled Sausage Party (2016). They all believe that customers will take 
them out of the store to the wonderful Great Beyond, the paradise for food and 
cuisine, but eventually one sausage named Frank finds out that there is no such 
thing as eternal life, least of all for hot dogs and potato chips, but that they are 
being eaten and consumed. The result is a revolution in the supermarket. The 
movie is by no means any good but it is irritating and annoying, very down on 
overconsumption and the American Way of Life, and completely different from 
anything Disney-Pixar would do. It marks the end of the American Dream.
There are contradictions too that do not work. A very expensive example was 
The Good Dinosaur (2015) that proved disastrous for Disney-Pixar. A talking 
apatosaurus (brontosaurus) named Arlo that looks like rubber in front of almost 
natural backgrounds befriends a boy called Spot. The dinosaur is the cultivated, 
almost human creature, the boy the wild one with no speech. That sure is contra­
diction, but it doesn’t help to make the characters likeable. Both are completely 
out of character in a way that you won’t go to spend an afternoon with them.

147
28
Intercultural Differences 
between East and West
Contradictions work very well in an intercultural context. An animator must not 
be afraid of contradictions.
Po is the best example. Po, DreamWorks’ Kung Fu Panda, usually appears 
lazy, undisciplined, and drugged-up, a naive teenage boy: sure a cool role model 
for young audiences because eventually he proves the opposite, developing 
unconventional ideas and longing to become the fastest martial arts hero that 
ever lived. A lot of his dynamics comes from the acting input of voice actor Jack 
Black who was chosen to become the vocal godfather of this character.
Kung Fu Panda went a long way through many hands, from Asia to America 
and back. Originally, in the 1990s, the forerunner was to become a sweet Chinese 
cartoon character, Panda Jing Jing, a poor man’s Andy Panda, one Walter Lantz 
character that only achieved some prominence in the late 1930s because a panda 
hadn’t been used before and seemed to be fresh.
When we asked Wang Borong, a former deputy of Shanghai Animation Film 
Studios, why Chinese animation hadn’t come up with anything like Kung Fu 
Panda itself, he told us that they already had started work on Jing Jing, but at that 
time Jing Jing was supposed to be a panda that had escaped from an American (!) 
zoo and crossed the Pacific Ocean on board of a freighter to return to his beloved 

148
Acting and Character Animation
bamboo home. While Mr. Wang wanted to show the ancient evolutionary power 
of a heroic animal character, co-producers in the United States understandably 
weren’t pleased with a slightly anti-American prospect and not willing to invest 
in what they considered political propaganda that demonstrated the strength 
and patriotism of a Chinese animal. They were going for a cute Disney-like pet. 
Production on the revised project was begun but eventually stopped when the 
Chinese backed out. Some Hong Kong partners tried to improve the pile of frag­
ments. They had the bright idea to combine the little cute panda with their most 
favorite screen goods, martial arts and kung fu, and so Jing Jing would trans­
form into Kung Fu Panda. But he was still a nice boyish smart aleck. It needed 
more thought and DreamWorks to step in, to create a clumsy version of a panda 
that under all circumstances wanted to become the fastest and do kung fu fight­
ing. And to add to contradictions, a gander became his father with him think­
ing he hatched from an egg. This absurd idea kept many people busy trying to 
correct the situation biologically and made a topic in Kung Fu Panda 2 and 3. 
(We all felt sorry to see this wonderfully absurd idea go by being explained ratio­
nally.) Although Po was an Americanized panda, the makers had done so much 
research on Asian customs and philosophy that Chinese audiences accepted Po 
immediately as one of their own and, by setting up Oriental DreamWorks in 
Shanghai, made him one of their own.
Teenage kids are the same all over the world. They oppose to rules and want to 
break them. So the way of acting them out is universal.
Teaching at the Animation Institute of the Communication University of 
China in Beijing, I (RG) asked the students: What is it that Chinese and people 
anywhere in the world interests most—besides food? The answer came imme­
diately: cars. Cars are a universal topic and a topic dear to the heart of many 
Chinese. So I tried to create together with my Chinese students a character that 
is a driver but has problems with his way of driving all around town: a man of 
contradictions.
We gave him a name, inspired from Jackie Chan: Charley Zhang. A character 
should have a name so that one can communicate with him. (The students really 
came alive when finding names for the figures.)
Charley Zhang (a.k.a. Zhang Fei, his Chinese name), Beijing Cab Driver No. 
123456. And, 1 year before the big games, we had a setting that was truly interna­
tional and intercultural: the Beijing Olympics. Our trademark would have been: 
Five Car Tires arranged as Olympic Rings. Painted in capital letters on the door 
of his cab: English speaking taxi. Mr. Zhang greatly improves his English during 
the Olympics and since then fails to master it. Incidentally, Charley Zhang has 
a secret identity. In his wildest dreams, he and his fictitious “Fellali” (known 
throughout the world as Ferrari) join the daring Formula 1 and mostly win. Sadly, 
more than once, however, this likeable man confuses daydreams and reality.
His main disadvantage—and here we hit the proverbial nail on the head and 
found a disaccord that would be a challenge for any driver: Charley, like Mr. 
Magoo, has an insignificant eye defect, which only causes trouble when he is 

149
28.  Intercultural Differences between East and West
upset or hits heavy traffic. That is at least once a day. Then he transforms into a 
cross-eyed madman. His pupils dilate and wander around wildly.
We sure recognize in Charley Zhang a Chinese version of Homer Simpson.
Family is most important in China. So we got him a Chinese Simpson family, 
for the Chinese students even more important than Zhang himself.
Although he understands himself as a Jack of all trades (and master of none), 
Mr. Zhang’s monthly income is modest. This is where Mrs. Zhang—Song Mei Li 
(Singsong Zhang to her friends)—takes over. She changes her professions like 
other people their shirts and blouses: Episode per episode we might see her in a 
new job. One time she owns a small restaurant: The House of Flying Chopsticks. 
Charley Zhang and wife Singsong: pencil designs for Chinese students’ project The 
Misadventures of Charley Zhang (2007). (Author’s collection.)

150
Acting and Character Animation
But most time she likes to deal: with cosmetics, then with umbrellas, house­
hold appliances, toys and other kind of merchandise, and during the Summer 
Olympics with all kinds of winter sports articles. Her business method consists 
of asking her husband to present the respective fares the latest of her low-quality 
products. What she does not sell ends up in her store and that’s a lot. The Zhang 
family flat is filled up to the ceiling with all kinds of junk and rubbish.
Zhang Xiao Mei (Mei-Mei), the Zhang’s daughter is about 8 years old (and 
clearly ideal for identification purposes of young audiences). Not only does she 
have an English pen friend who is much older than her (in fact he doesn’t know 
how young she is), she is also familiar with all things that are mechanical. Charley 
Zhang always claims she got it from him, but in fact he is the one to watch Mei-
Mei practice and repair his poor battered, broken car more than once.
The Zhangs have a pet as well. Instead of paying high taxes for an ordinary dog, 
the Zhangs have a wheeled robotic pet, an unfortunate left-over from Singsong’s 
big business activities: Dian Dong No. 68 (short: No. 68), which only works part-
time, mostly produces strange noises but occasionally (preferably at night) funny 
songs too: “The Moon Represents My Heart.” At time transforms into different 
shapes. (Transformers was the first American TV series being broadcast in China, 
so the Chinese love it.) Mei-Mei constantly has to repair it.
In a different course at the Communication University of China, we wanted to 
know from the students if they liked superheroes. All nodded. Sure they said. I 
became interested and wanted to know if they had any modern-day superheroes 
of their own in China. Alas, no, they replied.
So why shouldn’t we create our own Chinese type of Spider-Man, our Captain 
China (instead of Captain America)?
We invented a good title, Shanghai Super Kids. Ordinary kids from Shanghai 
should perform in capes and even clean outer space from waste. But it wasn’t right.
Then, in Zurich, we told Swiss students about the title and that the students’ 
project wasn’t going to performing right.
The Swiss students suggested a topic that was not about super-guys flying 
around with super-speed in funny outfits but dealing with water and environ­
ment. Both topics are popular and seriously discussed by young people who are 
aware of climate change. Chinese teenagers are environmentally conscious, and 
everything that has to do with fish, especially in Asia, is considered synonymous 
to sexual interest. We have realized that Chinese animation students often use the 
symbol of fish unconscientiously to express their sentiment that they are outgrow­
ing childhood. So the combination of both had a personal and political meaning.
Shanghai, the Pacific Ocean, and the environmental dangers should be the 
main topic.
The world’s oceans, including the Pacific Ocean, were under assault and we 
were the guilty party.
From this premise, we went on not to story construction but to think about 
the main characters. These kids should be aware of the dangers and engage them­
selves against pollution of the Pacific Ocean by using certain powers that would 

151
28.  Intercultural Differences between East and West
make them superhuman. Immediately the students started to draw Western 
characters. I told them that what they had drawn were not Chinese kids, particu­
larly not the females. They had designed blondes right out of the world of fashion 
and advertisement. Next try: Suddenly the Chinese looked like characters from 
Japanese manga or anime. But we didn’t give up. I suggested that they study photo 
books with the faces of ordinary Chinese kids that would meet our role profiles.
These were the three “S” that made the Shanghai Super Kids:
Sue Ling: She is stubborn but also a true companion, a good sport. Once you 
know her, once you penetrate her armor, her shell, you will find her a very warm 
and a romantic character. She likes to play piano and distastes hip-hop or rap. 
Also claims not to be interested in fashion. But behind her glasses shines beauty, 
at least for those who have eyes to see. Sue Ling’s father is specialized in aquacul­
tural engineering. Her mother is in the environmental protection office and often 
leaves the country to attend congresses abroad. At school Sue Ling is very good at 
natural sciences. Her parents’ job has made her aware of ecology, pollution, and 
the dangers to marine life.
Nobody Song: Nobody Song’s trademark is a cap (“No Fish”). He is a lazy char­
acter that occasionally seeks a feud but otherwise remains mostly nonverbal. He 
warms up only to hot music. Chinese rapper. He constantly tries to leave a cool 
impression but inwards is highly sensitive.
Song’s father is an official in the fishing industry while his mother runs a small 
seafood restaurant. But the parents are in a state of getting divorced and indirectly 
Sue Ling from Chinese students’ project Shanghai Super Kids. (Author’s collection.)

152
Acting and Character Animation
blame their son. For Song this is unforgettable. He has this predicament. In a way, 
that’s part of the reason why he prefers to keep his mouth shut when not rapping. 
Out of protest he wears a T-shirt: “I hate Fish.” Prefers beef noodles to fish.
Both characters detest each other at the beginning. They both crept from dif­
ferent molds. But they get together while fulfilling their mission.
There was a third character inserted:
Sheng “S. T.” Tao: Addicted to Manga and comic books, he is a dreamer and 
sense-of-wonder kid who is wonderfully creative. Some nickname him Monkey 
King because of his looks and movements (a mix of Sun Wukong and the Japanese 
Astro Boy), but he himself prefers to be called S. T. His favorite book is almost 
a collector’s item, Jules Verne’s 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, with some tre­
mendous illustrations of the deep sea and its bizarre creatures that fire the boy’s 
imagination. He is not bad at drawing and likes to draw comics himself. The 
nightmares of the boy who is water-shy are haunted by water-breathing Gill Men 
who populate the ocean floor and by Aquamen with extreme comic super power. 
Today, with all digital tools around, we would make him game-addicted but back 
then comic books were still attractive.
The premise had Nobody Song organize a fishing trawler to have a swimming 
contest out there. S. T. almost drowns but suddenly becomes part of a huge jelly­
fish swarm mysteriously approaching the shore. Sue and Nobody rescue him and 
are infected themselves by some strange chemicals in the water.
While Peter Parker was bitten by an irradiated spider in its death throes, these 
three kids are transformed by jellyfish and strange chemicals. Gradually they 
begin to change and mutate until they realize that they are able to get absorbed 
by different species of marine life mentally and telepathically. For them it is like 
acting in an interactive game of second life nature. For a moment, they feel like 
shaman’s apprentices who will enter other species spiritually, not by super power 
Nobody Song with bowl of noodles: Shanghai Super Kids. (Author’s collection.)

153
28.  Intercultural Differences between East and West
but by sheer mental power in a state of trance. And they find out that the marine 
life is a more powerful weapon than any superpower.
Superheroes always are contradictory characters. They have a secret identity 
to hide. Now the Shanghai kids have their secret too.
By using 5-foot-long battery-powered robo fish and mini subs, they explore 
the Pacific Ocean to fight (and here come the stories) specters from the deep sea, 
oil spill, nuclear waste, the great dying, the great Pacific garbage patch, or the 
Pacific Ring of Fire.
Man is a land animal, but he is also closely tied to the sea. The hero kids may 
be among the first in the evolution of future mankind who are willing to return 
to live on the Ocean Floor with environment on earth’s surface polluted and 
destroyed. In 2009, Shanghai Super Kids would have been China’s first ecologi­
cally motivated animated series but, alas, it was just students’ work and, like The 
Misadventures of Charley Zhang, a students’ exercise.
While working on it, we found that there is more to cultural differences than 
costumes and the color of the skin.
French sociologist Marcel Mauss who spoke of “techniques of the body” 
observed that differences in walking and swimming are cultural. While hospi­
talized in New York, he noticed nurses and girls walking in distinctive ways. He 
divined its origin. At last Mauss realized that they adopted this walk from seeing 
movies. After repatriation, he recognized the same phenomenon in France and 
realized that this “technique” had spread through cultural contact and “presti­
gious instruction,” learning from a trusted authority.*
*	 “Trusted authorities” also may be family members who dominate others in the family with the 
sound of their voice that is then being imitated by the others.
Sheng Tao: Shanghai Super Kids project. (Author’s collection.)

154
Acting and Character Animation
Returning to France, I noticed how common this gait was, especially in Paris; 
the girls were French and they too were walking in this way. In fact, American 
walking fashions had begun to arrive over here, thanks to the cinema.*
A good albeit sometimes rather didactic example of a very interesting inter­
cultural project is the animated German-Irish-Canadian TV series The Travels of 
Young Marco Polo (2013): Marco Jr., by way of the Silk Road, on the track of his 
famous father, accompanied by his faithful friend Luigi and a Chinese princess 
named Shi La Won.
There are, however, not only differences between the West and East but East 
and East as well.
In the 1960s, the most ambitious project of Chinese animation was Havoc 
in Heaven by the Wan Brothers, which was based on the prologue of one of the 
Four Great Classic Novels of Chinese literature, Journey to the West, written in 
sixteenth century Ming Dynasty by Wu Cheng’en.
The reason for this production might have been a Japanese animated feature 
film produced by Toei Company and released in 1960 as Saiyu-ki, a year later by 
American International Pictures under the impossible title Alakazam the Great 
as one of the first anime movies that hit the United States.
In the Japanese feature made from Osamu Tezuka’s manga version Sun Wu Kong, 
the Monkey, is a young, cute, and brave monkey, more American than Chinese.
*	 Marcel Mauss, Techniques of the Body (1935). Techniques, Technology and Civilization, ed. Nathan 
Schlanger. New York: Berghahn Books, 2006, p. 80.
The Travels of Young Marco Polo (2013). (Courtesy of MotionWorks.)

155
28.  Intercultural Differences between East and West
This the Chinese could not tolerate. Why should the Japanese touch Chinese 
national heritage? They needed their own version and show the world. Their 
Monkey King is an acrobat, a witty revolutionary and fighter, no cute Disney 
animal. Jin Guoping, later to become the formal head of Shanghai Animation 
Film Studio, describes him as a vivid and attractive being.
The Chinese version was produced between 1960 and 1964, initially to be dis­
tributed in two parts although back then the second part could not be released 
due to a change in the politics of art and culture that led to the so-called Cultural 
Revolution. During this period, the Shanghai Animation Film Studio was among 
the institutions criticized. Havoc in Heaven was accused to shake Chairman Mao 
Zedong’s throne. The Monkey King was seen as a rebel not only against Heaven 
but against Mao’s supreme authority leading a Cultural Revolution himself. He 
was independent, witty, and a free spirit.
Only a few of the tens of thousands of animation drawings survived the 
raid of the Red Guards. The artists did not escape persecution either. Wan Lei-
Ming, the director, was detained. The co-directors, Ms. Tang Cheng and Yan 
Dingxian, were sent to the countryside for re-education and reform through 
hard labor. As a complete feature, Havoc in Heaven was released not before 
Mao’s death.
Chinese producers still copy foreign product and don’t rely too much on 
their own cultural history (except for kung fu). Japan, on the other hand, has 
exported samurai culture in a way that the world couldn’t ignore but copy. Akira 
Kurosawa’s Seven Samurai became The Magnificent Seven, Toshiro Mifune trans­
formed into Clint Eastwood, and Godzilla toys belong to the inventory of many 
children’s rooms around the world.
Well, it isn’t easy but there are people from the West who take time to under­
stand Asian culture. One of the more recent releases of renowned 3D stop motion 
producer Laika Entertainment, Kubo and the Two Strings (2016), certainly does 
Asian culture more justice than Disney’s Mulan did two decades ago because it 
truly captures the Japanese spirit. Thanks to his witch mother, Kubo, a young 
magic boy, is able to perform charming miracles with origami figures and tell 
fantastic stories about the adventures of his late father, a samurai warrior, who 
fought all kind of evil. But his grandfather, the ghostly Moon King, is vengeful 
because his daughter fell in love with a mortal. He tries to get the boy’s right 
eye (the left eye he stole when Kubo was still an infant) and make the boy forget 
his human roots. So he sends his two other daughters to kill their sister and get 
hold of Kubo. Dying Kubo’s mother uses her remaining magic skills to trans­
form her son’s talisman into a monkey who would protect him and, together 
with a samurai beetle, the spirit of his father, indeed two power animals, and a 
tiny origami warrior, locate his father’s magical suit of armor. On the skull of a 
giant skeleton there is the Sword Unbreakable, on the ground of the sea they find 
the Armor Impenetrable and finally the Helmet Invulnerable. The samurai war­
rior was certainly modeled after Mifune but Kubo himself is different. He sum­
mons the magic of a shaman to recruit the spirits of the dead to demonstrate that 

156
Acting and Character Animation
human memories are the strongest magic of them all and change the dreaded 
Moon Beast into a benevolent human.
The fact alone that all this wasn’t done by using a computer but with traditional, 
hand-made stop-motion puppets and replacement heads is amazing. Sure Kubo 
and the Two Strings is one of the best animated feature films ever: sheer wizardry 
with stunning performances that are as good as live action albeit stylized. Above 
all, Kubo is the proof that intercultural topoi still have a chance on the big screen: 
A picture with a deeply humanist message that will be understood universally.

157
29
Preconceived Characters
Many producers who don’t have the time or the money to work from scratch and 
create entirely new characters go for well-known characters and titles, some of 
which are in public domain. Yet even then they might slip on a banana skin.
Regarding its 3D product, nWave is known particularly for the stereoscopic 
quality of its product, like Fly Me to the Moon or Sammy’s Adventure. Even 
Dennis Muren mentioned it when he had seen Fly Me to the Moon. Looking for a 
safe harbor, an American writer got nWave’s attention to Daniel Defoe’s Robinson 
Crusoe. So they made it in 3D (2016) and it turned out to be, story-wise, a disaster 
because they shifted their interest from the main character to secondary animals. 
Although Robinson’s name is on the posters, he has not much screen time and 
when he appears he proves a 1D character. Instead they had some animals fight 
around. On the island there is one animal of each species (so they are damned to 
extinction) and greedy cats from the sunken ship that multiply and mix them up. 
It became an animated feature starring sidekicks.
Many fairy tales and legends have been filmed all over dozens of times. One 
of these fairy tales would make a gorgeous background for an intercultural story 
by the way. It would add a fresh angle to an often-told tale. Studying Bruno 

158
Acting and Character Animation
Bettelheim’s famous book about the Meaning and importance of fairy tales,* 
we have found that one universal tale comes from China. Not many, neither in 
China nor in the Western world, know that the tale of Cinderella originates from 
China. This fairy-tale character is indeed known all over the world: in Europe as 
well as in India, Africa, and America… In 1697, Charles Perrault adapted it for 
French readers as Cendrillon ou La Petite Pantoufle de Verre (which contained 
all the ingredients Walt Disney needed to produce his 1950-animated feature). 
The Brothers Grimm of Germany retold it as Aschenputtel. Ludwig Bechstein, 
another German, titled it Aschenbroedel.
The Chinese version of Cinderella predates any Western version by almost 
1000 years. The story of Chinese Cinderella, Yeh-Shen (or Ye Xian), was conceived 
in the Tang dynasty and more or less offers what all versions have in common. 
It’s about the initiation of a young girl to womanhood. A girl who is living in the 
ashes and feels neglected by her (step) mother and sister will grow up and marry 
(as it is a fairy tale, the bridegroom has to be a prince or a king).
From China the tale wandered the Silk Road and so became sort of world 
cultural heritage. It is known as Ashpei, Ashpitel, The Brocaded Slipper, The 
Jewelled Slipper, The Broken Pitcher, La Cenerentola (Italy, transformed into an 
opera of the same title by Gioacchino Rossini), Cenicienta (Spain), The Cinder 
Maid, Conkiajgharma, Essy Puttle, Finette Cendron, Grattula-Beddattula, Katie 
Woodencloak, The Little Red Fish and the Clog of Gold, Papalluga, Pepelyouga, 
Rashin-Coatie, Rosina in the Oven, Sodewa Bai, and Vasilisa the Beautiful. There 
are two ballets, Aschenbroedel by Johann Strauss (1901) and Solushka, the Russian 
version of the story, by Sergei Prokofiev (1945).
Up till now there have been more than 100 movie versions, the oldest dating 
from the year 1899 (France), the most successful produced by Walt Disney (1950) 
anticipating the crowning ceremony of Elizabeth II, another one, live action with 
animated characters, by Kenneth Branagh for Disney. A modern version of the 
tale was Pretty Woman (1990) starring Julia Roberts. But so far there is only one 
minor Chinese film version atrociously animated. Most Chinese people never 
have heard about the tale neither have many people in the West: a big chance for 
producers between the United States and China. And the Chinese version even 
has the asset of an animal, a mysterious magic fish with golden eyes.
Just for educational purposes in China, we tried to adapt the tale of Yeh-Shen 
for an animated movie. We found that in the original tale, there is a fish but it is 
only a supporting character, similar to the cricket in Carlo Collodi’s Pinocchio, 
another power animal that was transformed into a major character by Disney.
So we went ahead and tried with the fish what Disney had done with the 
cricket.
There are only a few people, the blessed ones, those who are pure in heart, who 
will have close encounters with those fairy-tale power animals that might change 
*	Bruno Bettelheim: The Uses of Enchantment: The Meaning and Importance of Fairy Tales. New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1976.

159
29.  Preconceived Characters
an entire life. Please recall that fish is a strong sexual symbol, in this case in the 
emancipation of a young girl from the Middle Kingdom.
Once upon a time, there was a wise carp but he was old and tired. Before he 
was going to die he was looking for the right successor to watch over the kingdom 
of the river fish. Three carps were sent out in a contest. Two of them were evil and 
disciples of black magic, the third, however, was true and honest.
At the same time, there was a girl sitting at the river. She was sick at heart 
singing a sad song. The necklace she wore was very precious to her and became 
her lucky charm. It was shaped like a fish bone. It was all that was left to her by 
her mother who had passed away when she had given life to the baby girl. Her 
father, a cave thief named Wu, had married a new wife. They had another daugh­
ter together, and clearly the new wife preferred her.
The stepmother despised Yeh-Shen, the elder girl from her husband’s first 
marriage, because she was more beautiful and kinder than her own daughter. 
She treated her poorly and gave her impossible tasks to do.
While sitting at the riverbank she saw that out there was a fish in need. A 
carp, with scales of pure silver and big golden eyes, that was attacked by two big­
ger carps. She didn’t hesitate to save the fish that began to talk to her. She could 
understand every word that he said. So she decided to come to the river whenever 
she was in bad mood to wait for the fish. Then she would play with him, enjoy, 
and, if only for a brief time, would forget her misfortune that had clothed her in 
rags.
In Europe, the fish mutated into a fairy but we kept him the way he was and 
linked him to the tale of Little Carp That Jumped over the Dragon Gate. Gradually, 
the fish became the central character of the story that led the Prince to find the 
girl of his dreams who lost the slipper. The envious stepmother had used black 
magic to transfer Chinese Cinderella upstream behind the dragon gate where she 
was locked in eternal sleep, like Sleeping Beauty.
The Prince accompanies the fish upstream to fight all dangers and the step­
mother’s black magic. The carp jumps rapids and leaps over waterfalls till they 
reach the fearful dragon gate. The fish accomplishes the impossible and leaps over 
the dragon gate. In that moment the carp changes into a fish-dragon. The dragon 
frees the prince who is caged not by a thorny hedge but by vines from the step­
mother’s mouth that stretch for miles and swing around like gigantic tentacles, 
clutching and clinching everything (a nod to Tim Burton), and brings him to 
Yeh-Shen so that he can kiss her to life again.
Fairy-tale characters have a strong effect on the mind of children and become 
early companions in understanding the world. As we mentioned, they are initia­
tion tales to womanhood. Disney has a whole bunch of such princesses. First he 
took the classic, preconceived ones. Then, due to changing demographic data, the 
company innovatively added heroines according to ethnic groups. They pursued 
still the Cinderella type character but chose to transfer it to an Afro American (The 
Princess and the Frog: Tiana of Maldonia was patterned after Grimm Brothers’ 
The Frog Prince and Elizabeth Dawson Barker’s The Frog Princess) and Native 

160
Acting and Character Animation
American (Pocahontas) background. Now they even got a Latino Princess on 
Disney Channel: Elena of Avalor was created to please the demands of Hispanic 
and Latino Americans, the second largest ethnic group in the United States.
Fairy tales are still worthwhile in animation and will remain so. You don’t 
have to introduce them because audiences will know and love them anywhere 
in the world: cross-cultural, cross-generational. Sometimes they play it safe and 
cast a famous cartoon character in a well-known fairy tale but Mister Magoo by 
all means was miscast as Aladdin’s uncle Abdul Azziz Magoo in 1001 Arabian 
Nights (1959). The poor box office results led to the sale of UPA to entrepreneur 
Henry G. Saperstein.
Challenging as well as sometimes difficult are comic book protagonists. They 
are in a way fully developed, outward and inward, and their creators watch any 
change with envy. Robert Crumb disliked what Ralph Bakshi did to Fritz the Cat 
(1972). Yet what Bakshi, a producer–director not that well liked by animation 
buffs, did was to open the doors for X-rated animated cartoons and to oppose 
Disney not only in style (as UPA did) but also in adult content.
Vice versa it seems to be different. Carl Barks (1901–2000) was a storyboard 
artist at Disney’s before he went to work for Dell Comics and created a more 
sophisticated version of Donald Duck that was much richer and deeper than any­
thing seen in the Donald shorts directed by Jack King or Jack Hannah. There 
were great mystery and adventure stories with lots of dialogue, nothing like it in 
the Disney cartoons of the 1940s or 1950s, not even in the feature-length Three 
Caballeros (1944) but the Disneys accepted the changes and didn’t interfere as 
long as Donald looked like Donald and made money for them.
One of the most interesting animated feature films from Europe, Wrinkles 
(2011), is based on an award-winning Spanish comic book. Paco Roca’s graphic 
novel Arrugas deals with Alzheimer’s disease and portrays the friendship between 
two aged gentlemen shut away in a care home.
Paco Roca knew what he told and drew. He did his homework.
“I haven’t really made anything up. The real anecdotes are so good they couldn’t 
be outdone. Emilio is the father of a good friend of mine, Roca recalls. I also met 
a lady who spent all day sat a window convinced she was on a train and to get her 
to eat something she had to be told she was in the dining coach.”* She, too, became 
part of the comic book and its faithful screen adaptation.
Producer Manuel Cristóbal didn’t have much money: just 1.9 million Euros 
which is next to nothing. He proved that a good animated movie doesn’t neces­
sarily depend on the budget. It depends on unconventional stories and memo­
rable characters, same as in life. The animation isn’t that outstanding, but the 
characters are well designed by Roca and they are believable. You like these two 
guys because they remind you of people who meant something to you.
Emilio is a retired bank manager who suffers from Alzheimer’s disease and is 
taken to the elderly care home by his son. Confused by his new surroundings and 
*	 Publicity notes released by Perro Verde Films.

161
29.  Preconceived Characters
disorientated, he regresses to earlier stages of his life. Emilio unexpectedly finds 
support in his roommate Miguel.
Miguel is one of the care home veterans. This mischievous and brazen trick-
ster guides Emilio through the different environments within his new home. 
Having always lived without emotional ties, Miguel finds himself directly wit-
nessing his new friend’s gradual degeneration. Involved in all sorts of comical 
and absurd situations to help Emilio, Miguel now is confronted by his own fears 
and the decisions that have marked his life up until now.
Together they employ all kinds of stunts to stop the doctors noticing Emilio’s 
ongoing deterioration so that he won’t end up on the feared top floor of the care 
home, also known as the lost causes or “assisted” floor. Through their struggle to 
stay active as individuals and maintain their dignity, the pair shapes a genuine, 
strong friendship in resistance and starts a new life.
“I recall a conversation with a friend who is an animation film director,” tells 
Ignacio Ferreras, who directed the film version, who said: “you spend five or six 
years working on an animated feature film, then you watch it and think: I’ve wasted 
five years of my life on this. I’d be happy making at least one really good film that 
would make it worthwhile. I am confident that Wrinkles will be my worthwhile 
film.”*
Unfortunately, although it won awards, the movie did not make much money.
*	 Wrinkles. Movie Pressbook. La Coruna, Spain: Perro Verde Films, 2011. http://wrinkles.vhx.tv/
Wrinkles (2011) from a graphic novel by Paco Roca. (Courtesy of Manuel Cristóbal, 
Perro Verde Films.)


163
30
Animals and 
Anthropomorphism
While Arrugas introduced real people, a lot of animation plays safe and relies still 
on animal characters. The problem that many animators have is that they have 
to feel very often neither like man nor like animal but as both at the same time 
and in the same body. We are talking about anthropomorphic animals. In these 
cases, the animator has to be familiar with human and animal behavior. Human 
and animal expressions have to shine through the character. There is some help 
from the fact that human characteristics are associated with certain animals. 
One particular adjective from the human world will describe the respective ani­
mal: Smart as a fox, stupid as a donkey, cocky as a peacock, busy like a bee, and 
tired as a bear. There already is a human side projected into each animal, a like or 
a dislike. Disney used this concept even in his so-called True-Life Adventures, in 
the feature-length Perri (1958) based on Felix Salten’s book about the Youth of a 
Squirrel. In the same year, in White Wilderness that won an Academy Award for 
Best Documentary Feature, Disney’s “Cruel Camera” installed a rotating plat­
form to prove the alleged mass suicide of lemmings and push them into a river 
near downtown Calgary in the Canadian province of Alberta. Disney re-created 
nature like God to his own taste.
An animator, of course, has even more ways to approach humanized animals:

164
Acting and Character Animation
The whole physical concept might still be animal-like, however, human expres­
sions and emotions have been added.
The animals might talk while they still remain distinctly animal-like. Disney’s 
most famous characters, in this regard, are more human than animal, while Tom 
& Jerry remain more animal than human. We expect Mickey the Mouse and 
Donald the Duck to talk, but we consider it a mistake when Tom the Cat suddenly 
opens the mouth and says a word or two, as in The Million Dollar Cat (1944): 
“Gee, I’m throwing away a million dollars. But I’m happy.” Spike the Bulldog, yes, 
but Tom? One of the reasons that the feature-length Tom & Jerry Movie (1992) 
was so disappointing was the fact that both talked.
Then, with a nod to the pig characters in Halas and Batchelor’s animated 
­version of George Orwell’s Animal Farm (1954), animals might walk upright on 
two legs. They even may wear clothes and carry props.
Final step is a totally humanized behavior so that you sometimes won’t recog­
nize what animal the character was based on. Goofy, for instance, is a dog. What 
is named Tasmanian Devil in the Warner Cartoons doesn’t resemble the ­original 
animal that much. They are just metaphors for human “types,” even human 
­stereotypes that are associated with animals as we have noticed. In short, these 
animals are just humans in animal disguise living either in their natural habitat 
(Bugs Bunny, Woody Woodpecker, and Yogi Bear) or in human suburbs (Mickey 
Mouse and Donald Duck).
But what is considered varmint throughout the depths of history is often not 
so in animation: Rats and mice might become so cartoony and witty that even 
Hitler liked them who killed millions of people like vermin.
We got Mickey Mouse, Mighty Mouse, Jerry Mouse, Rémy the Rat of 
Ratatouille fame. In MGM’s Good Will to Men, a 1955 CinemaScope remake 
of their 1939 short Peace on Earth created by Hugh Harman, mice survive the 
nightmare of mankind who killed itself in terrible wars. No, the German dictator 
wouldn’t have liked that.
In real life, we use snap traps, glue boards, and zapper traps that lure mice into 
enclosures before delivering a lethal electric shock. In Disney’s 1953 Ben and Me, Amos 
a church mouse assists Benjamin Franklin in discovering the secrets of electricity.
So many people have cats but in cartoons felines very often are the baddies. 
There is evil Lucifer chasing Cinderella’s mice friends or the treacherous Siamese 
Cats from Lady and the Tramp (1955).
There is a biological grasshopper and cricket control. In cartoons, however, 
Wilbur, a tame grasshopper, proves to be Goofy’s best friend helping him to 
fish in forbidden grounds (Goofy and Wilbur, 1939). Jiminy Cricket is dubbed 
Pinocchio’s conscience by the Blue Fairy: lord high keeper of the knowledge of 
right and wrong, counselor in moments of high temptation, and guide along 
the straight and narrow path. A supporting character, which only had a cameo 
in Collodi’s book, transformed into a screen star animated by Ward Kimball. 
The  character’s name was derived from “Jiminy cricket(s)!,” an expletive 
­euphemism for Jesus Christ.

165
30. Animals and Anthropomorphism
Grasshoppers and crickets yes, but cockroaches? Why not? Even cockroaches! 
They are the heroes and best companions of Joe (Jerry O’Connell) in Joe’s 
Apartment announced in 1996 as Sex Bugs Rock’N’Roll. Under Chris Wedge’s 
supervision, Blue Sky Studios contributed CG-animated cockroaches that were 
blended with puppetry, stop motion, and live cockroaches.
Animals and insects like Jiminy make wonderful sidekicks that compensate 
sometimes for weak heroes. Even Disney heroes occasionally seem to be rather 
pedestrian, shy and boring and need a strong horse to hold audience’s attention. 
In Sleeping Beauty (1959), Prince Phillip’s horse Samson, lovable but stubborn, 
steals his master’s scenes. In French cartoons, Lucky Luke and his horse Jolly 
Jumper are equal and suit each other as do Prince Edward and his horse Destiny 
in Enchanted (2007). Winner is Maximus from Tangled (2010), a dedicated per­
sonality that not only steals scenes but the whole show.
But there are sidekicks that backfire as did a weird creature named Gurgi, 
a two-legged furry something with the face of a dog that joined Taran who is 
introduced as “assistant pig-keeper” on his quest for the Black Cauldron (1985) 
and praised away right to the animation hall of shame.
Apropos of pigs: Eating pork but loving Porky Pig?
Is it a guilt complex? An archaic ritual just to beg pardon from those we kill 
in masses?
But beware of frogs. The French regard frog legs as delicacy. But frogs rarely 
make stars. They tried to prove otherwise. Ub Iwerks was asked to sketch a few 
animals that would make potential cartoon stars. Among them were a mouse 
and a frog. Disney would take the mouse and name him Mickey. Iwerks, when 
Original animation art: Beetles in Weather-Beaten Melody (1943). (Courtesy of J. P. 
Storm Collection.)

166
Acting and Character Animation
lured away by Disney’s former distributor, Pat Powers, would be left with Flip the 
Frog. We mentioned this earlier. Disney built a kingdom upon the strength of the 
mouse. Iwerks failed as an independent and had to return ruefully as employee 
to his former partner.
He’s a secret agent with super powers… A leaping green fighting 
machine… Defending the world against the forces of evil… He’s … Freddie as 
F.R.O.7, went the movie tagline for the ill-fated 1992 parody of James Bond, 
Freddie as F.R.O.7. (retitled Freddie the Frog in the United States).
In 2013, in association with partners from the North of China, our friend 
Nelson Shin, the South Korean President of ASIFA, released Frog Kingdom, fea-
turing the characters Princess Froglegs and Freddie.
The only frog that survived so far in the media was a simple green hand pup-
pet: Jim Henson’s Kermit the Frog.
In the 1980s, another producer got a hold of a property developed by animator 
Wolfgang Urchs: Stowaways on the Ark. It told the story of a woodworm and his 
­family that would arrive on Noah’s Ark. That immediately sounds like a funny short, 
but they wanted to have it feature-length. Although the picture was only mildly suc-
cessful, the producer, a recidivist, got nuts and immovable in his decision to try a 
second time and star another woodworm, Pico, alongside Christopher Columbus in 
The Magic Voyage (1992). To make matters worse, the pathetic producer who had 
directed documentaries but no feature film, let alone an animated one, would 
claim directorial chores. Some good artists who were involved like Harold Whitaker 
and Phil Nibbelink couldn’t save it. The result was one of the biggest disasters in 
European animation film history at that time. Well, there is an animated worm 
movie that has some merits coming to our mind. The Danish-German Disco ormene 
is about Disco Worms! Sunshine Barry is an outcast rain worm that founds a band to 
get some recognition and thus provides at least a dashing soundtrack.
Snails are problematic too. They are so slow. There is only one gag possible: to 
turn the slow ones into fast ones as they did in Turbo. In this 2013 DreamWorks 
picture director David Soren got an ordinary garden snail, another outcast 
character, involved into a freak accident when sucked into the supercharger of a 
drag racer, fusing its DNA with nitrous oxide. This way the loser and underdog 
becomes Fast & Furious.
More successful at the box office than frogs, worms and snails are man’s best 
friends—no, not dogs. We mean cars! In animation, cars are sometimes human-
ized too the way animals are.
In 1952, Tex Avery made a short cartoon for MGM: One Cab’s Family (and 
Disney later made the VW Herbie films) that became the blueprint for Pixar’s 
successful Cars that would not only drive but act and even talk like humans, have 
mouth and eyes and, above all, emotions.
In Transformers, robots transform into cars and vice versa, which held a spe-
cial appeal for audiences in Asia that are fascinated by giant robots that resemble 
ancient warriors and modern cars. In China, Transformers merchandise became 
a sales hit.

167
31
Animation, Toys, and 
Merchandising
We have talked a lot about China.
This is absolutely necessary in our profession because China has become the 
biggest animation producer in the world. And not only that: China is also the 
biggest toy manufacturer. About 80 percent of worldwide toys are produced 
in China.
Chinese animation means selling toys and merchandising per se.
Asked if there would be a future for traditional water-ink animation Cai 
Zhijun, the managing director of CCTV Animation in Beijing, a former anima­
tion director himself, answered that 50 years ago audiences only had few choices 
because the yearly output wasn’t about 10 or 20 minutes. Art still had a chance 
back then. Some animation may have been great work but nowadays the yearly 
output has exceeded 2 million minutes. Screening a picture is not enough. The 
derivative products are more important.
The picture itself accounts for only one-third of the total profits. Derived 
products make more money.
In a way, Toy Story set the pattern.

168
Acting and Character Animation
For some years producers discuss new ways of funding by reversing the 
Disney merchandising method and introducing successful toys to animation that 
already have been established with customers.
One of the first to go was Barbie [full name: Barbara Millicent Roberts], a best­
selling small fashion doll created by Ruth Handler (1916–2002) and produced by 
Mattel Inc. Barbie has no character by herself. She is just a mannequin with lots 
of clothes to buy to change her outwardly. The product was introduced on March 
9, 1959 at the American Toy Fair in New York City and, as alternative to baby 
dolls, became an instant albeit costly success and collector’s item with girls. Since 
2001, more than 30 CGI Barbie films (Direct to DVD releases and TV) have been 
produced that prove unwatchable even for animation hardcore fans. The first 
video entry was Barbie in the Nutcracker directed by Owen Hurtley who came 
from TV (creative consultant and episode director, Beast Wars: Transformers; 
Re-Boot; War Planets and later with Technicolor’s Animation and Games group) 
and produced by Family Home Entertainment, a company that had specialized 
in distributing animated series and specials, and Mainframe Entertainment in 
association with Mattel Entertainment. Conventional fairy tale and ballet titles 
such as Barbie as Rapunzel (2002) and Barbie of Swan Lake (2003) followed 
until new avenues were explored with Barbie: A Fashion Fairytale (2010) and 
Rainmaker Entertainment’s Barbie in Rock ‘N Royals (2015) with the title charac­
ter switching places with Erika, a famous rock star.
DreamWorks Animation SKG belonged to those who jumped on the band­
wagon. In April 2013, it was announced that Katzenberg’s company had acquired 
the image and distribution rights of the iconic Troll dolls. This made DreamWorks 
Animation the worldwide licensor for Trolls merchandise, except of Scandinavia. 
The original Good Luck Troll was created in 1959 by Thomas Dam (1909–1986), 
a Danish fisherman-turned-woodcarver. It was intended as a Christmas present 
for his daughter. In the early 1960s, thousands of those Trolls, made of natural 
rubber and filled with wood shavings, traveled into the world. Although quite 
ugly, with long colorful hair, they became instant girl’s items, next to Barbie and 
Co. And like Barbie and the Smurfs, they became surefire stuff to animate. To top 
the choice, DreamWorks hired Justin Timberlake to produce a number of songs 
and to voice, alongside with co-star Anna Kendrick, the two Troll hero char­
acters: Branch and Princess Poppy who are setting forth to rescue some fellow 
Trolls. But the voices of the teenie stars don’t match the tiny characters. They do 
not fit into this type of movie. And even worse, DreamWorks didn’t care much 
for animation and story values. The narrative is quite odd. It tells of the Bergens. 
These are monsters that live in a kingdom of misery and cheerlessness. Their only 
joy is to devour once a year the Good Luck Trolls and experience a brief moment 
of hilarious happiness. This DreamWorks product is a pathetic mishmash. The 
characters are no real dramatis personae, they have no true personality. They are 
simply designed to make money hand over fist.
Disney reportedly continues to bank on the Princess Line and with it promotes 
more female characters but had to halt sales of Moana costumes after racism 

169
31. Animation, Toys, and Merchandising
claims. Although their Moana (2016) is no princess as such, but the daughter 
of a Polynesian chief, she certainly belongs in that category. The costume was 
based on Maui, a key figure in Polynesian oral tradition, and featured full-length 
brown trousers, a long-sleeved shirt covered in “tattoos,” and a “skirt” made of 
leaves. Chelsie Haunai Fairchild, a native Hawaiian college student, criticized the 
costume as “disgusting” as it doesn’t honor or pay homage to a culture but edu­
cates children to pretend to be another race. (Anyway, Moana, re-titled Vaiana 
in Europe to avoid confusion with Italian porno queen Moana Pozzi, would 
have been much better off in live action. It’s not the greatest choice for Disney 
animation. The few animals and creatures are not very strong and could have 
been added by VFX as well.)
Early on animated figures were starred in advertising films, which meant that 
you had to have a character that worked in less than a minute on screen. Some of 
these became legendary: the stop-frame animated, squeaky-voiced Speedy Alka-
Seltzer boy named Sparky [originally created in 1952 by Robert Watkins for a 
magazine ad and in some early commercials appearing with Buster Keaton] or 
Poppin’ Fresh, the Pillsbury Dough Boy of deceptively simple design, complete 
with replacement faces, animated by Jim Danforth, David Allen, and others, 
Frito Bandito [a Tex Avery character] and, the most famous classic one, the Esso/
Exxon Tiger [Put a Tiger in Your Tank campaign].
Even on this market there is a big competition. There simply is too much ani­
mation to gain the attention advertising characters had, say, 40 years ago. An 
enduring success story like that of Mickey Mouse today? Impossible!


171
32
Design, Posing, and 
Facial Expression
Sometimes the whole story is part of the design, part of the production bible or 
style guide. One example comes to mind: Pixar’s robot Wall-E (2008). Its story is 
defined in shape, design, and environment. (The setting tells a lot about a charac­
ter, particularly in series and sitcoms.)
Anyway, in preproduction the design of characters and the development of the 
story go hand in hand. Character design is the casting of virtual characters that 
are required by the story. The design should express life in a still image.
A driver, for instance, should look fast. Or, think in contradictions: slow. A 
slow person in a fast car would be funny, or a fast guy, but then in a slow car.
In the best case, a single character design will tell a whole life story. In the 
worst case, not even high-quality animation will save the figure or gain any inter­
est. A well-designed character will speak to the animator itself.
A strong chin, for instance, will make a person or character fearsome and 
intimidating. Just watch how many politicians have chin. It’s like being the Lion 
King.
Posing is essential to both, good feature-length and limited TV animation.
There should be only one or two major poses per scene. The model sheets 
should give a hint how to pose characters and facial expressions:

172
Acting and Character Animation
Clearly, the design decisions made when creating a character will influence the kind 
of animation possible. The more restrictive the nature of the designs, the more dif­
ficult it will be to animate. The designer must be aware of the job a character has to 
fulfill and be aware of the difficulties that animators face in the animation process 
and give them at least a fighting chance to achieve the required performance.*
The posing has a lot to do how a character will move in animation. Action 
analysis will serve as a vehicle for introducing and building the character.
Many years after he photographed animals and athletes, Eadweard 
Muybridge’s chronophotography remained the standard action analysis.
Walt Disney created his own educational program and it included action analysis. 
Don Graham was hired from Chouinard [Art Institute]† to put these classes together. 
They examined the films of artists such as Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton, frame 
by frame and discussed how the gags were set up and how they communicated with 
the audience. They looked at all kinds of films including German Expressionism, films 
by Leni Riefenstahl, sports films, Hollywood films, nature films, documentaries.‡
This is how they found German actor Emil Jannings towering as giant 
Mephistopheles over a Medieval Town in Friedrich Wilhelm Murnau’s Ufa pro­
duction Faust (1927), an image that became the inspirational source for the Devil 
on Bald Mountain in Fantasia.
Animation director David Hand:
We have been pretty stock-minded in the past. We always made a walk in the same 
way. That is one thing Don [Graham’s] action analysis classes are doing—at least did 
for me. A few years ago there were only two walks—a regular walk and a Felix walk. 
Then we began to think and now we find a walk for every different kind of person.§
One has to note that the first individual cartoon walk was that of Felix the Cat 
thinking.
What was right in silent films—overacting—certainly is not bad for anima­
tion as it lives from that kind of exaggeration. Animators should take the time 
and study the great silents: Lon Chaney as The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1923), 
Conrad Veidt as The Man Who Laughs (1928), Max Schreck as Nosferatu (1922), 
the gruesome vampire with rat teeth and pointed ears (originally director F. W. 
Murnau wanted to have Veidt for the part), the slapstick performances of Chaplin, 
Keaton, Harry Langdon, and Larry Semon.
*	 Derek Hayes and Chris Webster, Acting and Performance in Animation. Burlington, MA: Focal 
Press (Taylor & Francis Group), 2013, p. 73.
†	 In 1961, thanks to Disney, Chouinard merged with the Los Angeles Conservatory of Music to 
establish the California Institute of the Arts [Cal Arts].
‡	 John Canemaker, Performance and Acting For Animators. Animation World Magazine—Issue 
4.12—March 2000.
§	 David Hand, Action Analysis: Director’s Relationship to the Picture and to the Animator. Walt 
Disney Studios transcript. August 1, 1936.

173
32.  Design, Posing, and Facial Expression
Even Douglas Fairbanks, if allowed, could give a hilarious performance as he 
did in The Mystery of the Leaping Fish, a 1916 American short silent comedy writ­
ten by D. W. Griffith, Tod Browning, and Anita Loos. The acrobatic star played 
an addictive detective named “Coke” Ennyday who is a parody of that famous 
sleuth, Sherlock Holmes. This guy liberally helps himself to the contents of a 
hatbox-sized round container of white powder on his desk labelled “COCAINE.”
The way of acting through animated characters is not, as in modern acting, 
through understatement but by Expressionist acting, a short-lived theatrical style 
popular in Germany for some time. While the structure of Expressionist theatre 
consisted of static scenes, the antithesis of a well-made play, the characters bore 
many similarities to cartoon figures: They were stereotypes, grotesque carica­
tures, their inner psychological reality was revealed by external means, and their 
dialogue was truncated, clipped, and fragmented. This exaggerated style, sans 
dialogue, can be studied especially in German silents like the 1919 Cabinet of 
Dr. Caligari (Werner Krauss as the insane hypnotist and Conrad Veidt as Cesare 
the somnambulist) or The Golem (1920, Paul Wegener and Ernst Deutsch). The 
style of acting was supposed to match the style of the sets. Sometimes, as in long 
shots, actors moved in patterns to correspond with the settings, almost dancing 
or gliding on tiptoe along a wall as Veidt did in a famous scene in Caligari. This 
type of filmmaking was deliberately copied in early American horror films such 
as Dracula and Frankenstein that owe a lot to German Expressionism. The main 
difference to cartoons is the pace: Animation often is fast-pace while the silents, 
including their preferred way acting, are pretty slow.
It was a deliberate departure from the realism of Stanislavsky. Expressionist 
film stars endeavored to overact and adopt the stilted, mechanical movements of 
a puppet: a reversion to the world of animism and nature spirits.
A lot of animation is pretty gruesome. Many cartoon characters are what we 
may call: action figures.
The violence was graphic. It did not harm the cartoon stars because they were 
graphic entities. In Golden Age Cartoons, no blood was spilled.
The first one playing around and acting with graphic symbols and cheating 
physical laws was Felix the Cat.
Of course, there is a big difference between 2D animal caricatures and realis­
tic 3D characters and the characters in computer games. Superficial as they are, 
they are still caricatures but of 3D realism.
Besides posing, it is facial expression that is most important in the creation of 
model sheets and the design of characters.
There are comedians who literally had a face that seemed to be made of rubber. 
Jerry Lewis was easily caricatured and transformed into a cartoon.
Between cultures facial expressions might differ. In Asia, facial expressions 
are more restrained than in the Western world. But nevertheless basic mime 
seems to be universal.
It was Dr. Paul Ekman who did a lot of research in facial expression and emo­
tion. His research provided strong evidence that Charles Darwin (The Expression 

174
Acting and Character Animation
of Emotions in Man and Animal) was right when he assumed that facial expres­
sions and with them emotions—we want to add—correspond and are part of all 
cultural circles. In 1978, Dr. Ekman developed the Facial Action Coding System 
(FACS). The basic emotions are cross-cultural and genetically inherited.
We already have mentioned that there are six emotions plus one:
Anger—disgust—fear—joy—sadness—surprise plus contempt.
A 100 years after James Stuart Blackton’s Humorous Phases of Funny Faces, 
animator Chris Landreth who tried to depict the human psyche through the 
medium of Kafkaesque animation in the Academy-Award winning short of 
drug-addicted Ryan (2004) has developed a 42-hour, 4 week course program 
Making Faces: a Masterclass on Facial Animation: a complete immersion in facial 
animation, from complex musculoskeletal anatomy to rigging and animation 
that begins with the insight that every face is special and individual. Yet mimic 
art depends on 15 muscles of the face that define the six (to seven) characteristics 
of emotion that are universal across all cultures.*
*	 According to American psychologist Dr. Paul Ekman, Facial Expressions of Emotion. Palo Alto: 
Annual Reviews, 1979.
Series of facial expressions from puppet film. (Courtesy of Grigori Zurkan.)

175
32.  Design, Posing, and Facial Expression
This somewhat mechanical approach to animation doesn’t surprise as Chris 
started in Theoretical and Applied Mechanics at the University of Illinois and 
experimented in fluid mechanics research. And it shows in his films of people 
that mutate into nothingness.
In the meantime, thanks to the development of 3D computer animation, facial 
expression has become top priority. Same as in live-action movies, there are more 
close-ups in 3D than in 2D that focused more on the body. This is one of the 
qualities that 3D offers: being more cinematically.
In Hiroshi Teshigahara’s feature The Face of Another (Tanin no kao, 1966), a 
character named Okuyama (Tatsuya Nakadai), whose face was disfigured in an 
industrial accident, says that the face is the door to the soul: “When the face is 
closed off, so too is the soul. Nobody is allowed inside. The soul is left to rot, reduced 
to ruins. It becomes the soul of a monster, rotten to the core.”


177
33
Understanding Body 
Language
Body language is the nonverbal essence of a character. Actually, it is the oldest lan­
guage in the world, our native language, our mother tongue although we don’t real­
ize its existence. Mood, health, personality, age, gender as well as cultural and social 
background—all this and more can be deduced from the way individuals move 
and behave. Even if we are not aware of it, we cannot disconnect this demeanor to 
transmit messages through our body. Even if you don’t move, you communicate 
constantly and give signals by way of your body posture. Head downward or keep­
ing the chin up, arms crossed, hunched or sagging shoulders, standing with your 
knees bent—all this is part of human communication. Via body language, we emit 
our inner feelings all time even if we want to hide our emotions. Vice versa we read 
subconsciously other people’s mind by the signals transmitted through their body. 
There are people, of course, who are withdrawn and have a spare body language. 
But with a little experience, you can read their mind too.
Popular opinion, caricatures and prejudices, however, are not based on under­
standing of the emotional language of the soul. They focus on physique, disabili­
ties, and body structure and are mainly fed on stereotypes. Many people hold the 
opinion that someone who is slim is more likely an intellectual and aloof than 
a stout person who is usually said to be more down-to-earth, jovial, and funny. 

178
Acting and Character Animation
Just being fat or slender raises certain expectations in an audience. We think that 
if you are strong, you don’t need much intellect. You simply use your muscles to 
solve problems. But when you are physically weak you have to use your brain. 
This is how the Gaulish comic book heroes Asterix (slim, shrewd, and cunning) 
and Obelix (fat, always hungry, and good natured) work.
In history, personality typologies and friend–foe modes of thought were based 
on such superficial expectations. For centuries there was the belief that a character 
would be projected by physiognomy and body frame (and, sadly, color of the skin).
Greek humoral pathology although disproved still is going through countless 
people’s minds albeit in modern disguises. The classification of humans in four 
basic types—sanguine persons, phlegmatic types, cholerics, and melancholiacs—
has its origin in a theory of 400 BCE that puts the Four Humors on the same level 
with the Four Elements. The theory is ascribed to Polybos, disciple and son-in-law 
of Hippocrates. His Corpus Hippocraticum includes an essay on the nature of man.
According to this theory, air is identified with blood, warm and moist, or the 
Sanguine humor, water, cold and wet, with phlegm, or the Phlegmatic humor, 
fire, hot and dry, with yellow bile, or the Choleric humor, earth, cold and dry, 
with black bile, or the Melancholic humor. The elements of nature are projected 
onto the human metabolism. All of a sudden it’s the percentage of bile fluid that 
determines your character and humor.
All these prejudices work in animation.
The sanguine type [sanguis, Latin: blood] is highly temperamental, warm-
hearted, optimistic, and social.
This is typical of Mickey Mouse and Beavis.
The phlegmatic [phlegein, Greek: to burn] is languid and passive.
Garfield is a well-known exponent of this breed. Another one is Fry, one of the 
main characters of Matt Groening’s Futurama.
The choleric [khole, Greek: bile] suffers from too much acid (yellow) bile 
that makes him hot-tempered and irascible: a true hothead with a chip on his 
shoulders. 
Donald Duck, Yosemite Sam, and Butt-Head are typical cholerics sitting on a 
volcano of emotions.
The melancholic personality is afflicted with melainachole (Greek, black bile) 
and is a wet blanket.
If you think about it, there are more cartoon characters that belong to that 
type than you would have expected: Tex Avery’s stoic Droopy and Charlie Brown 
as well as Moe Slizack, the bartender of Simpsons fame, and SpongeBob’s antiso­
cial neighbor Squidward.
Provided you have a Gang of Four, it is almost certain that you will have a 
member of each type. The Dalton Brothers, convicts and perennial antipodes of 
Lucky Luke, have sanguine Averell, phlegmatic Jack, choleric Joe, and melan­
cholic William. A similar family background pertains to the Flintstones: Barney 
(sanguine), his wife Betty (melancholic), Fred (choleric), and Wilma (phlegmatic). 
The Penguins of Madagascar consists of Skipper (melancholic), Rico (choleric), 

179
33.  Understanding Body Language
Kowalski (phlegmatic), and Private (sanguine). Homer Simpson is choleric, 
Marge phlegmatic, Bart sanguine, and Lisa melancholic.
Medical theory defined them by temperament. At least in the black-and-white 
microcosm of comics and cartoons, nothing has changed after hundreds of years 
although no type is exclusively sanguine, melancholic, choleric, or phlegmatic.
To create a connection between physiognomy and character in real life is a 
highly doubtful and dangerous undertaking. Just take anti-Semitic caricatures 
and racist fantasies which are always cliché-ridden. A cliché works in comics and 
comic strips, but if you are going to develop a character based on real psychologi­
cal features, with a profound psychogram, you cannot resort to caricatures. You 
have to do research on real people and not stereotypes. You will have to observe 
life in everyday world and not in fiction.
Cliché characters will not develop. They will stay the same no matter what 
will happen. This is the reason why they are so popular in series. You don’t have 
to explain their personal and social background. You can go right into a story.
If you want to tell a more complex story, then you have to create equally 
complex role profiles and shouldn’t think of using stereotypes: A cook has to be 
endomorph with a beer garden physiognomy, a con man is sly, a construction 
worker sturdy, and beefy. The connection between body structure and character 
and even profession is based on stereotyped thinking. With today’s sophisticated 
audiences, you cannot go on and rely on compartmentalization but have to get 
more creative. You shouldn’t rethermalize the old (gender) stereotypes such as 
male and female. This is the twenty-first century.
So forget about prejudices. Study people. And study body language.
An animator needs to understand what the body tells. He has to watch and 
read people with the eyes, not the ears. Psychological and emotional processes 
are transformed into movement. Even tiny gestures count, such as a facial shrug 
or the drooping corner of the mouth.
Once animators and actors have understanding of body language, certain 
movements will become organic. You will have to fill a part mentally. Prejudices 
aside, there are differences between people that are objective. A slim person will 
have different movements than a coarse character. A kid differs from adult, a 
female from males. The movement doesn’t depend exclusively on individual body 
structure, skeleton, and musculature, but also on age and gender, mood, and cul­
ture. Besides that, there are conscious and subconscious gestures.
If you slouch your shoulders, with your head facing down, you signal that 
you are sad and in a depressed mood. If you are tired you won’t talk much and 
get monosyllabic. An upright position radiates freshness and alertness. There are 
trained body postures that are supposed to evoke a certain impression. One puts 
himself up strongly. Chin upward. Hand rubbing is a gesture of expectation. As 
serviceman you have to learn to stand at attention, to march and salute.
Hand gestures are culturally differentiated. Similar gestures can have differ­
ent cultural meanings. Sometimes a well-meant gesture can have a derogatory 
meaning in another culture although we are not aware of it. If you fold the hands, 

180
Acting and Character Animation
it can mean that you pray or it could be a welcome gesture as well. Some cultures 
gesticulate more with hands and fingers than others. They say for instance that 
Italians talk with their hands.
In daily life, words are given a bigger meaning in the system of communica­
tion. Information that we hear is processed in the brain and we develop a position 
to it. But at the same time, a process of subconscious, nonverbal decoding is tak­
ing place and mediates a feeling. And if the signals of the body and the informa­
tion do not match, we get suspicious.
Animator Shamus Culhane had observed that one particular politician who 
fell into the disgrace of history, Richard M. Nixon, a personal friend of Walt 
Disney, was clever enough to rehearse body language, but the gestures were out 
of sync. He emphasized his key words by strong hand movements but they were 
made without any conviction. Culhane suggested to his readers to study the ex-
president’s TV appearances as a chance to see some very bad animation in live 
action.* Even with dialogue it’s the body language that counts and will stick in the 
mind. Also, while talking people act with the body.
A person comes across authentic if body language and words correspond and 
match.
We have to consider that the visual sense is the one that is highly developed 
in most humans.
Albert Mehrabian, Professor Emeritus of Psychology, UCLA, claimed that 
only seven percent of the impression a person makes are based on words, thirty-
eight percent: vocal liking, and fifty-five percent: facial liking.
True or not—therefore, body language is more important than words and 
dialogue.
You have to study body language carefully and if you want to animate a char­
acter in motion, then you shouldn’t just imitate a superficial movement that you 
have seen or select a digital program to help you but try to imagine this move­
ment in your own body. You have to feel and explore it inside yourself. Here—and 
only here—an animator will have a real chance to truly act. Not just gestures and 
body posture but feeling and empathizing.
Imagine a situation, feel yourself into it. Feel your emotion. Where does your 
body brace? What movement does it execute following the pattern of emotions? 
Try to realize this on your own body. You become your own tool, register and 
understand body language.
Recall a situation that made you angry. Somebody had insulted you. Try to 
explore how this feeling, how this emotion worked inside your body. On the other 
hand, try to recall a feeling that made you happy. How does this feel? Don’t you 
feel lighter? Can you differentiate the impulses that move your body? If you are 
doing exercises like this always finish with positive feelings. These exercises should 
support and stagger your imagination and creativity and shouldn’t make you sad.
*	 Shamus Culhane, Animation from Script to Screen. London: Columbus Books Limited, 1989, 
p. 208–209.

181
33.  Understanding Body Language
In the past, many animators used a mirror to study their facial expression. 
Today, they can use a camcorder or simply their mobile device to study facial 
expression and record it as reference.
But try to imagine the emotion that you want to express, for instance, joy, 
not in an abstract way. It should always be part of a situation, a little story that 
you invent. Acting is always re-acting to a special situation, a so-called stimulus. 
Anger rises when something or somebody infuriates you. Joy will rise when you 
are happy about something that happened to you.
But be critical of self-observation because you might repeat the most common 
beginner’s mistake of drama students and animators: They exaggerate because 
they want to express too much simultaneously.
Reduce, focus on the essential. One step after the other.
This shouldn’t inhibit your motivation. Pleasure and joy are necessary prereq­
uisites for your work.
There are also books on anatomy, on body language. Besides watching you 
can read and learn a lot about it intellectually. This is the right way: experience 
yourself by exercises and read about it. In this context, we highly recommend a 
book by Desmond Morris: Bodytalk.*
Many of the old-time animators—including Disney and his staff—adored 
pantomime. Pantomime is a beautiful art that demonstrates what we can express 
without words. It emphasizes body posture, facial expression, movement, and 
gesture and reveals the emotional state of a person nonverbally. Masters of the 
pantomime are artists of body language.
Many animation characters, especially those that had no dialogue, moved in a 
non-natural way. It’s a synthetic type of movement. It’s not spontaneous. It’s more 
like ballet. Pantomime is a special art form of its own that has no naturalness.
In pantomime there is a lot of slowness. Interestingly, many movements are 
being done in slow motion and, with a few exceptions, would consequently slow 
down animation that basically (albeit not exclusively) is an art of fast movement.
Pantomime was hot particularly in the early days of animation when they had 
only little or no dialogue. In those days, they liked to go for pantomime. Today, 
with low-budget animation, you have to have more dialogue.
Today pantomime has to be used restrainedly in (naturalistic) animation. If 
there is pantomime, it is part of Expressionist acting. Silent film actors had to 
have certain pantomime abilities. So there is a relationship that became part of 
animation in its infancy.
There are wonderful pantomimes such as Marcel Marceau and mime artists 
like Nola Rae but you will see them rarely on the big screen.
All the big movie stars nowadays are actors, no pantomimes.
Nevertheless, both pantomimes and actors have to understand the body and 
its language but they use their experience in different ways.
*	 Desmond Morris, Bodytalk: The Meaning of Human Gestures. New York: Crown Publishers, 1995.

182
Acting and Character Animation
Usually, an actor will have years to train but an animator who isn’t an actor 
will never find the time and therefore lack the professional background knowl­
edge. If an animator will try acting, it will look clichéd.
What can a poor animator, chained inside his cubicle, do to re-enact what an 
actor has learned in 3 or 4 years? Will a crash course in body language help him? 
Or joining an amateur drama group?
If there is no time and no budget, animators will avoid body language at all, do 
what Chuck Jones called illustrated radio and animate mechanically. Characters 
have no limbs, no facial features. They become caricatures with pared-down bod­
ies. If you study inexpensive animation series, even Japanese anime, you see that 
every character has the same walk. The legs look like hinges. They move like 
jointed dolls. But nobody walks dead straight as these pathetic figures do.
Animator Cliff Nordberg trained young artists at Disney. He let them work 
with flour sack characters to create mood: anger, happiness, curiosity, fear, inde­
cision, and bashfulness. You can do it all with a flour sack.
But maybe it will look exaggerated and excessive.
The dilemma is: The instrument of actors is the body. They have to learn how 
to sense emotions. Their body will get automatically into the right position. On 
stage to determine gestures is the duty of the director, but in animation the direc­
tor isn’t present all time and certainly not trained as a stage director. The anima­
tor’s tool is the pencil or the computer or a stop-motion puppet. They don’t use 
their own bodies. An animator has to change position but basically his position 
is, contrary to the actor, not inside but outside a character.
The only way is to watch other people and get familiar with their body language. 
Real people will not wave their arms and exaggerate. You don’t have to become an 
actor but you have to use your sketch pad. Watch what they do, how they use their 
hands and feet. Thus, gradually, the understanding of body language is trained.
Don’t look excessively at animation. Watch real life.
Lucia (2004). (Courtesy of Felix Goennert and Film University Babelsberg.)

183
33.  Understanding Body Language
Acting is a profession. As actors animators are amateurs.
There are no fixed gestures. You can’t learn body language from a manual 
alone.
There are so many unemployed actors and actresses around. Why don’t ani­
mation producers and directors hire a few of them as consultants, not only as 
voice artists but to use them in active production with the animators?
They did so in the case of Ed Hooks.
Now let’s talk about animals. In most cartoons, animals do not behave like 
animals. In the best cases, they might move like animals but we know that they 
are not. We project our own body talk and way of behaving into nature and its 
creatures and subdue and Disney-ify them.
Provided you are not going to humanize animals, you have to consider that 
animals have their own body language. You can read a cat’s mood from how it 
moves ears and tail. If a cat goes ahead of you, tail up, it wants to tell you that you 
have to follow. Most likely, the animal will lead you to its feeding dish to tell you 
that it wants some food.
Pack animals have a more distinct facial expression than lone wolves that gen­
erally live or spend time alone instead with a group. Usually wolves demonstrate 
more facial play than, for instance, bears. You can’t read a bear’s face.
There are a lot of good documentaries around. Even better is a living pet which 
will teach you animal behavior.


185
34
The Eyes Have It!
This was the title of a comedy starring cross-eyed Ben Turpin. It is true for live 
action as well as animation. Just see the gallery of cartoon eyes.
With their enchantingly large eyes, two big circles, cartoon characters reflect 
the age of innocence and the purity of childhood. More, these eyes are acting. 
Sometimes, in combination with the eyebrows, they are the whole performance 
suggesting that a character is tired, surprised, shocked (with wide opened eyes), 
angered (with eyebrows angled over), and furious (with red eyes). Sometimes, 
particularly in crazy Tex Avery cartoons, the eyes pop out when the character 
flips out, when a wolf spots a beautiful girl on stage as in Red Hot Riding Hood 
(1943) or Hound Hunters (1947). Others have dollar signs in their eyes when they 
speak of money.
People’s eyes are in constant movement. They look away when not telling the 
truth. They wander if the person is thinking.
Cartoon characters are graphic symbols and so they reflect graphic symbols 
for certain expressions. The expressiveness of their eyes is based, largely, on BIG 
eyes. So cartoon characters are the proof that the eyes are really the windows of 
the soul.

186
Acting and Character Animation
Our pupils enlarge when we are sexually excited, when we are furious, or 
lying. There are even bedroom eyes.
These symbolic eye-waves are reflected in the symbolism of cartoon characters.
There are different shapes of cartoon eyes: vertically stretched, footballs, cir­
cles, or even pinpoints as in the Peanuts.
Or take Ray Harryhausen’s constantly enraged one-eyed cyclops from The 7th 
Voyage of Sinbad that inspired, albeit a completely different character, greenish 
Mike Wazowski in Pixar’s Monsters, Inc. (2001). Harryhausen used puppet eyes 
from Germany. The animators of Anomalisa (2015) put a special shine into the 
puppet eyes.
In the beginning, eyes have been a big obstacle in 3D animation. They looked 
dead. They had no shine. Just take Tom Hanks’ digital clone in Robert Zemeckis’ 
The Polar Express (2004) with his dead eyes. In an outstanding award-winning 
short film produced by the National Film Board of Canada, Madame Tutli-Putli 
(2007), the stop-motion model has realistic eyes composed from actress Laurie 
Maher onto the puppet’s face.
Hank the Octopus, one of the animated stars of Pixar’s Finding Dory (2016), 
is not so much working by his tentacles but by his eyes and eyelids. In most of 
his scenes, he is an eye creature. With the fish of Finding Nemo and Finding 
Dory it’s the same: They are all eyes.
Remember John Lasseter’s words? Pixar, in particular, cares for expressive 
eyes. That’s the main difference to other cartoons. Right after Finding Dory, we 
saw the disappointing fifth part of the Ice Age series: Collision Course. No main 
character, only supporting actors—they try to perform with the eyes but they do 
not succeed. Worse some European cartoons: Their characters are waving their 
arms, flapping lips—but their big eyes remain lifeless.
There is a lot to know about blinking and eye movement. Some of this knowl­
edge is only technical:
If you turn your head, you blink. A blink may emphasize a change of thought.
Puppet character. (Courtesy of Grigori Zurkan.)

187
34.  The Eyes Have It!
The regular blink might last in animation for six frames: two frames clos­
ing lids, one frame hold eyes closed, and three frames opening. A fast blink to 
show the character is anxious or angry lasts five frames. A long blink might last 
nine frames.
One should not forget those big eyes in Asian cartoons. They are not part of 
an inferiority complex but were introduced by Osamu Tezuka who liked Betty 
Boop so much that he copied her big eyes that became a trademark of Japanese 
and later Asian animation.
Betty Boop, designed by Grim Natwick, who later animated Disney’s 
Snow White, was the first female cartoon star. For many, her girlish voice: 
Wide-eyed CG character from Felix Goennert’s Lucia (2004). (Courtesy of Felix 
Goennert and Film University Babelsberg.)

188
Acting and Character Animation
boop-boop-a-doop, her outfits and mini-dress that revealed one gartered leg and 
her movements seemed to be a synonym for sex and sexual freedom. In 1934, 
during a copyright infringement suit initiated by actress Helen Kane who felt 
herself (rightly) copied, a judge described the broad baby face, the large round 
flirting eyes, the low placed pouting mouth, the small nose, the imperceptible chin, 
and the mature bosom: It was a unique combination of infancy and maturity, 
innocence and sophistication. It was not so much the animation. It was just the 
figure as symbol that, for a while, paid the bills: some kind of animated Lolita.
Another famous cartoon character, Superman, created by two slight kids, Jerry 
Siegel and Joe Shuster, became an animated star in Max Fleischer’s Technicolor 
series released in 1941 and 1942. To transform into an average citizen, awkward 
reporter Clark Kent, Superman only needed a suit and a prop: glasses to cover his 
X-ray eyes.
You even can freeze a character as long as you keep the eyes alive. Jim Henson 
once got to the heart of it when he said that without eyes there is no character.
Of course one can easily overdo this eye business like the producers of the 
Warner Animation Group did in their 2016 3D-animated Storks. Besides the 
stupid premise that storks are still the ones in charge to deliver the babies to 
mankind, the whole plot is acted out by characters who are constantly staring 
wide-eyed and signal that the whole show and they themselves are completely 
insane. This applies in particular to Tulip, an occasionally cross-eyed, grinning, 
hyperactive orphan girl who seems to suffer from ADHD.

189
35
It’s Personality That Wins
The elder statesmen of 2D animation, Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston, taught 
us twelve rules that they said we would have to watch:
	 1.	 Squash and stretch that defines the plasticity and flexibility of characters 
and objects, deforming and distorting figures.
	 2.	 Timing of scenes and characters.
	 3.	 Anticipation as a start of an action or movement.
	 4.	 Staging or layout of a scene.
	 5.	 Follow through/overlapping action: the slowdown of an action. When one 
movement is about to stop, another one can (overlapping) begin.
	 6.	 Straight ahead and pose-to-pose: animating straight ahead so that ideas 
can be injected by the animator.
	
7.	 Slow in/slow out: soft accelerating, soft stop.
	 8.	 Exaggeration as part of a caricature.
	
9.	 Arc: realistic curves to get smooth movements.
	 10.	 Secondary action: for instance the movement of clothes caused by a per­
son’s movements.
	 11.	 Solid drawing (not that important for 3D animators).

190
Acting and Character Animation
	 12.	 Appeal: pleasant design, colors, forms, and simplicity. (When we talk 
about personality, we shouldn’t forget that clothes make people. The vul­
gar Mickey Mouse wore red shorts. Citizen Mouse wears a suit or even 
a dress coat with top hat. The twiggy carcass of Cruella De Vil in One 
Hundred and One Dalmatians wears a heavy, a very heavy fur coat.)
Well, these are just technical terms that can be mastered with some experience.
Above all, there is a quality that is part of the appeal but is strikingly differ­
ent. It’s personality. It’s difficult to put a personality in words but you can sense it 
immediately. There is some strange magnetism working.
Jack Hannah directed many Donald Duck cartoons for Disney, then, when 
Disney ceased short film production, left for Walter Lantz. He asked himself why 
actors like Clark Gable or John Wayne became stars and said that it was not 
necessarily their great acting. It was their personality that made the difference:
Good cartoon characters are like that as well. Donald Duck had a great personality 
and the audience had a lot of fun with him. However, Donald Duck was an accident. 
Just like in real life, someone comes on as an extra and then “Boom!” Most of the pop­
ular animated characters were accidents. They just seemed to work for an audience.
But what elements does an audience want? On the surface, there seems to be 
nothing in common between a Donald Duck and a Bugs Bunny and a Woody 
The Snow Man (1944). Original animation cel. (Courtesy of J. P. Storm Collection.)

191
35.  It’s Personality That Wins
Woodpecker. To me, it means that the audience likes more than just one type of 
personality. Some like a sweeter, gentler character. Others like a rougher one. The 
audience would sometimes surprise us about which characters they really accepted.
These characters took on a life of their own. Even though some of these characters 
haven’t appeared in years, people are still interested in them.*
Jeffrey Katzenberg belongs to those who strongly believe in character. 
Finally, it’s the star, the animated character that is going to sell Katzenberg’s 
product:
The first thing you need is a great character. Whoever the protagonist is, it’s got be 
someone the whole family can connect to, identify with and relate to.†
To Katzenberg, Kung Fu Panda’s Po is one of those characters: lovable, hug­
gable, and charming: He’s got a big dilemma, a difficulty, and we have to be able to 
relate to it, so we want to be with him on his journey, so we care about him.†
When people ask him why Shrek is so popular, Katzenberg tells them that 
there’s a little ogre in all of us. At the core, Shrek wants to be loved but he has to 
learn to love before someone else can love him.
You need to celebrate the values that are the best in humanity: that’s something both 
children and adults can identify with. In the new Panda film [Kung Fu Panda 3], 
Shifu says to Po: ‘If you only do what you know how to do, you can never be better 
than you are now.’ And when you think about that, it’s an inspiring notion. Po wants 
to stand still because he’s happy with how everything is going, so why change?
But the thing is that change is life—there’s no such thing as standing still. So what 
Shifu is really saying is, you’ve got to grow up. You’ve got to be more than you are today.†
Po and even better Shrek adapt very well to a vulgar society of losers. Walt 
Disney himself would have never produced a fairy tale like Shrek. He had com­
pletely forgotten that the early Mickey Mouse stepped out as vulgar as Shrek. 
Shrek smells, picks his nose, burps, and even finds a bride who likes this and 
more. People love monsters, so the movie monsters became lovable themselves, 
as in Monsters, Inc.
In the Western world, dragons are regarded as monsters, too. They aren’t in 
Asia. And they aren’t in DreamWorks’ How to Train Your Dragon (2010) and 
the animated TV series based on the film’s success simply titled DreamWorks 
Dragons (started in 2012).
The series’ Viking kids are defined by the dragons they ride:
Self-conscious, devil-may-care Snotlout Jorgenson and fire-breathing 
Hookfang
*	 Jack Hannah, Further Foreword. John Cawley/Jim Korkis: The Encyclopedia of Cartoon Superstars. 
Las Vegas: Pioneer Books, Inc., 1990, p. 7.
†	Joanna Moorhead, Jeffrey Katzenberg: How to Make a Perfect Family Film. The Guardian, London, 
March 12, 2016.

192
Acting and Character Animation
Chubby Fishlegs Ingerman and burly Gronckle Meatlug
Truffnut and Ruffnut Thorston, a pair of twins, and their two-headed 
Hideous Zippleback with one head named Barf, the other one Belch
Astrid Hofferson and Stormfly, a female Deadly Nadder
Hiccup Horrendous Haddock III, a Viking sort of Luke Skywalker: He is 
disabled having lost the lower part of his leg but his metal leg combines 
favorably with Night Fury Toothless that has lost his left tail fin. He dem­
onstrates to the Viking youth how to successfully train dragons.
The series works thanks to effective pairing of kids and dragons.

193
36
The Score
One day gagman, trombonist and voice actor Pinto Colvig (Goofy) was called 
in to perform for a special guest who visited the Disney Studio. He improvised 
Mickey Mouse taking off in an airplane and landing in a barnyard which evoked 
a wild conglomeration of pig squeals, grunts, dog barks, rooster crows, hen cack­
les, sheep baas, and moo cows. The guest seemed very pleased with that barnyard 
orchestra. His name was Leopold Stokowski. He would go on and introduce the 
Disney people to classic music with Fantasia (1940). Fantasia was an exception, a 
single and singular excursion into that field.
Particularly in animation the score underlines emotion. Hanns Eisler, the 
great German composer, termed this technique of matching movement to music 
that we know as Mickey Mousing, an awful Wagnerian illustration technique.
Scott Bradley, the musical director of MGM’s cartoon department, showed 
film students once a Tom & Jerry cartoon without and then with music and sound 
effects to demonstrate how his work enhanced the series. The students, however, 
laughed the first time, when screened again with music the laughs weren’t as big 
because they knew all the gags.
Animation needs speed and a good soundtrack that adds music to lively sound 
effects. Disney knew about the value of musical contributions. It became the 

194
Acting and Character Animation
founding stone of the Silly Symphonies. It also helps us to empathize with the 
characters.
Some of the most famous animated films wouldn’t exist without music: 
Fantasia, the Ravel Bolero sequence in Bruno Bozzetto’s Allegro Non Troppo 
(1976), the Beatles-influenced Yellow Submarine (1968).
Big movies need big feelings. So they need a big score.
Peter Jackson’s King Kong remake (2005) had magnificent production values 
but this didn’t help. Everything was bigger, louder, and more expensive than the 
1933 original film. Instead of one they got three Tyrannosauri fighting Kong, 
they had not one but a whole swarm of Pterodactyls to multiply the action. Yet it 
left the audience cold.
There is a number of reasons. Sure, Jackson’s Kong had the better technology 
and budget and a great mocap performance by Andy Serkis, but in other depart­
ments it remained uninspired. Besides weak comedy acting by Naomi Watts and 
Jack Black, the musical score by James Newton Howard (who replaced the much 
better Howard Shore who after some argument had left the project)—except for 
a brief sequence with Kong on ice where the tunes fit—was nothing short than 
terrible. One would sadly realize the shortcoming when a few minutes worth of 
Max Steiner’s score for the original film were cut in for a change.
It was Steiner’s 1933 score, one long musical crescendo that created empathy 
for its animated main character. It’s the music that drives the picture through 
its rather episodic structure and holds audience’s attention from beginning 
to end. Ray Bradbury, a big Kong fan and Harryhausen friend, once said that 
Steiner’s music contributed 30 percent to the success of the movie. The emotional 
moments wouldn’t have been so strong without Steiner’s work and neither would 
have been the action. The same is true for the scores Bernard Herrmann created 
for some of Harryhausen’s films, including The 7th Voyage of Sinbad and Jason 
and the Argonauts. It gave the animation in otherwise low-budget pictures cer­
tain greatness and grandeur and underlined the fairy-tale character.
Jim Danforth remembers visiting Sinbad producer Charles H. Schneer on a 
1958 movie set on the “Columbia Ranch” and overheard him talk to somebody 
on the phone who wanted to see 7th Voyage. Schneer denied the request firmly 
because sound effects and music weren’t finished yet and they were too important 
to this kind of film: “No, you can’t see it without the music. Absolutely not.”
Good or bad acting techniques notwithstanding, the soundtrack is one of the 
main ingredients of animation and VFX pictures.
The greatest of animation directors knew how to time their exposure sheets 
to the score. A Taiwanese professor who once met animation director William 
Hanna who timed the old Tom & Jerry cartoons told us that the man had hands 
like those of a pianist.
The production of Luminaris, the wonderful Pixilation short by Argentine 
animator Juan Pablo Zaramella that we mentioned earlier, started with a piece of 
music by Osmar Héctor Maderna, the Chopin of the tango who died in 1951. The 
whole picture, the animation of the actors was timed to Maderna’s tango tunes.

195
36. The Score
Next to the music, there are the songs. Some of Disney’s best cartoon films are 
animated musicals and made it later to the musical stage like The Lion King, The 
Hunchback of Notre Dame, or Aladdin.
A pleasant surprise is Garth Jennings’ Sing (2016), which features a merry 
song  contest casting show arranged by a broke, desperate koala impresario 
named Buster Moon that links funny gags with some good singing voices.


197
37
Psychological Projection
There is a lot of symbolism in animation. Particularly Chinese think in symbols. 
Animals, colors—many things have a special meaning.
The same is true for Aesop’s or La Fontaine’s fables: the fox is cunning and the 
bear slow and dumb.
Many of us care for the little, cute animals. Contrary to nature—the social 
Darwinist concept of the “Survival of the Fittest” stressed in Disney’s 1943 
Education for Death: The Making of the Nazi, where little Hans who pities the 
little rabbit being devoured by the fox gets scolded by a feisty Nazi teacher ani­
mated by Bill Tytla—in picture books it is often the small one who outdoes the 
big one. It is the story of David and Goliath: The mouse outdoes the cat. Tweety 
Bird wins over Sylvester P. Pussycat.
According to Sigmund Freud, psychological projection is a psychological 
defense mechanism whereby one “projects” one’s own undesirable thoughts, 
dreams, motivations, desires, and feelings onto animals and inanimate objects. 
We might add: animated objects and characters. This includes fears of illness and 
death as well.
This is a pact between filmmakers and audience.

198
Acting and Character Animation
Not so in one Nazi cartoon that fits perfectly in the scheme portrayed 
in Education for Death. In 1941, the Germans founded their own Trickfilm 
Company, Deutsche Zeichenfilm GmbH, to compete with Disney’s productions 
that were not shown in the German Reich back then but nevertheless appreci­
ated by Reich Propaganda Minister Goebbels and Hitler. They spent millions of 
Reichsmark to set up a studio in the German capital and trained artists and tech­
nical personnel, but the output until 1945 consisted in only one single finished 
Agfacolor short film of 18 minutes: Poor Hansi [Armer Hansi]. The original idea 
was submitted in October 1941 by Hermann Krause as the story of a little canary 
that flew into freedom. In his cage, the canary named Hansi listens to the voice 
of freedom, love, and adventure. He hears the song of a chickadee and carelessly 
leaves the birdcage. The canary’s wings, however, grow weak too early. And free­
dom is dangerous. Hunger, thirst, rain, and finally an ugly street cat drive Hansi 
back to the safety of prison. In the end, it all turns out to be a dream. The parable 
of a weak canary, a typical cage bird, feeling safe only in prison was outrageously 
stupid but it seemed to please the Nazi powers-at-be who had prisoned a big part 
of Europe, at least ideologically, and send millions to the concentration camps. 
The very thought of freedom, on the other hand, certainly wouldn’t appeal to 
them. It was not part of their thinking. When the movie was finally released, in 
1943, Germany was hit by severe bomb raids.
Having read the basic idea, Horst von Möllendorff who belonged to the com­
pany’s staff of writers was one of the few who realized this matter. He suggested 
immediate changes and tried to introduce ideas of his own:
I want to comment on two important issues:
The canary who only dreams about the flight into freedom leaves an unsatisfied 
desire.
The ending leaves an unfree feeling, the cage becomes a prison as the canary 
returns because he is unable to live in freedom.
Therefore I suggest:
Leave the desire for freedom as core of the plot but give the whole another basic 
idea as follows:
The wish to swap with the life of another.
1.	 This would give a different meaning to beginning as well as the ending.
2.	 The canary wants to swap his life with a sparrow, and this not in dream but in 
real life.
After they have lived the life of the other, they are happy to become their old selfs and 
change again.*
Möllendorff’s idea was not that novel: We find it in the story of Doctor Faustus, 
who trades his soul for a younger self, or in Robert Louis Stevenson’s The Bottle 
Imp.
*	 Memo to the leaders of Deutsche Zeichenfilm GmbH. Document saved from the files of the late 
Horst von Möllendorff and made available by J. P. Storm from his collection.

199
37.  Psychological Projection
It also would have changed little because the glorious prison still lured. The 
story supervisor of the Deutsche Zeichenfilm Company, a man named Frank 
Leberecht, didn’t sympathize with Möllendorff’s suggestions and the man him­
self, but he did change the dream for reality and at the end allowed Hansi, who 
voluntarily returned to his prison cage, a consolation price in the shape of a 
female canary, Hansine.
Original animation art from Poor Hansi (1943). (Courtesy of J. P. Storm Collection.)

200
Acting and Character Animation
What he didn’t do was the only reasonable thing to do: build the character. 
Have David defeat Goliath, i.e., the hungry cat, and have him triumph in freedom. 
But letting Goliath chase David back to prison didn’t please audiences anywhere.
A tragic irony was that one of the writers who worked on the first Hansi draft, 
a woman named Libertas Schulze-Boysen, had a second identity and fought for 
freedom. She belonged to a circle of resistance, Red Chapel. She and her husband 
were sentenced to death on December 19, 1942 and executed 3 days later.
Möllendorff in the meantime had left Leberecht’s company and sold story 
ideas to animation producer Hans Fischerkoesen. In 1943, on behalf of Deutsche 
Wochenschau [German Newsreel], Fischerkoesen created The Snow Man [Der 
Schneemann] from an idea conceived by Möllendorff that pleased audiences to 
no end and one German cartoon lover in particular: Hitler’s Reich Minister Dr. 
Joseph Goebbels who still hoped to start one day feature-length film production 
that would rival Disney’s work. As in many other fields, the Nazis would fail to 
do so.
The Snow Man itself was a caricature that consisted of mainly three circles. So 
there was not that much character animation. Everything was kept very simple. 
It was tame and slow, including a dog chasing the snow man, not even an original 
because Fischerkoesen had used the same character briefly in a pre-war Coca-
Cola spot. Animation-wise the quality was below Terrytoons. But it was highly 
sentimental and worked emotionally. It was psychological projection that per­
formed miracles and made it one of the most interesting of all wartime cartoons.
With the success of that short film Horst von Möllendorff was to become 
Germany’s busiest cartoon writer at the end of the war, supervising scenarios in 
the Reich as well as in occupied Prague and the Netherlands. This all was based 
on the success of The Snow Man.
One evening Möllendorff sat in a Berlin beer garden to find a suitable topic 
for a cartoon and eventually came up with the story of a Snow Man that had a 
warm spot in his heart. He wakes up in a full moon night on a quiet market place. 
After some adventures, he creeps into a house to rest on a sofa. There he discov­
ers a calendar. The calendar page for January shows a snowman like himself, in 
a familiar winter landscape. He browses through February, March, April, May, 
June, and stops in July. For the first time he learns about the loveliest of seasons: 
summer. There is a sentimental feeling in his heart. The Germans have a word for 
it: Sehnsucht. It’s difficult to translate: desire, yearning, and longing. This Snow 
Man is sick for the sweet experience of summer. He gets himself frozen in the 
refrigerator and leaves it with the advent of summer. Everything looks exactly like 
the promising picture in the calendar. The Snow Man grins from ear to ear and is 
all smiles when he leaves the house welcoming “the summer of his lifetime.”
The Snow Man picks flowers and spreads them around. He sticks a red rose 
into his cold breast. He surprises an excited hen with an egg made up of ice and 
snow. Then the warm July sun begins to burn. Slowly the snowman starts to melt 
leaving only a top hat and his carrot nose which is picked up by a little rabbit and 
eaten.

201
37.  Psychological Projection
Möllendorff had nothing to do with the making. His contribution was the basic 
idea and the writing but that was enough to create an unforgettable character.
Technically, the Snow Man was surprising only because Fischerkoesen’s cam­
eraman Kurt Schleicher made use of Max Fleischer’s table top process that com­
bined 3D models with 2D animation. But the color short itself worked so well 
Original animation art from The Snow Man (1944). (Courtesy of J. P. Storm Collection.)

202
Acting and Character Animation
because it was a reflection of death. In some odd way, the Snow Man’s tragi­
comic death reflected the millionfold death that had become a firm part of the 
society of the German aggressor. Now the killing had returned to its breeding 
ground and transformed into a death wish. Some of the leading Nazis were sui­
cidal. Goebbels and his wife Magda took themselves and their children to death. 
Heinrich Himmler, Robert Ley, and Josef Terboven committed suicide as did 
their newly wed Führer. “At least 12 years good living,” Göring said before he 
committed suicide to prevent them from hanging him in Nuremberg. So, in a 
tragic way, the Snow Man became an image of the society of its day.
Psychological projection can be used for agitation and propaganda. Right 
after the Snow Man’s success, in 1944, Fischerkoesen, this time without the help 
of Möllendorff, did another short film, The Silly Goose. The villain is a fox. He’s 
a bad character, no question about that. And when he seduces a goose we hear a 
Yiddish tune: Bei mir bist du scheen. The 1D villain in this Nazi time cartoon isn’t 
defined by personality acting but just by race.
Dinah Gottliebová was a concentration camp prisoner in Auschwitz. She was 
an artist and recruited by the infamous KZ physician Dr. Josef Mengele to do 
portray studies. There was a children barrack and to please the doomed children 
she would paint a mural in this barrack. As she had seen Disney’s version of Snow 
White and the Seven Dwarfs at least seven times in a cinema in the Prague, she 
chose to paint the Princess and the dwarf characters, the landscape and what else. 
And in the children’s imagination, the characters began to live and gave them 
a bit of hope in their desperate situation. Gottliebová survived Auschwitz. She 
went to America and married one of the original animators of the seven dwarfs, 
Art Babbitt. She died in 2009.
Wartime is rich in such characters and even ethnic stereotypes once you con­
sider the Japanese caricatures in so many American cartoons. They certainly had 
no profile, they were just—“Japs,” but they fulfilled the objective of propaganda 
and wartime agitation.
What was true back then is true today.
When we spoke to a North Korean animation functionary who came as guest 
to a conference held at the Beijing Film Academy, we praised, well, not a film they 
had done but the animation of an eagle that pursued some small animals. We then 
were instructed by the man that it was all political: Their great supreme leader 
Kim Jong-il, back then still living, a movie buff in his own right who was mesmer­
ized that much by foreign films that he had a filmmaker kidnapped, had told this 
story to children and with the eagle he meant U.S. Imperialism! No word about 
the animators who, in a witty prologue to the Simpsons, are seen as cel-washing 
slaves in subpar sweatshops where kittens are spliced up into Bart Simpson pup­
pets and a gaunt unicorn punches holes into DVDs. (Actually, the Simpsons are 
made in South Korean high-tech workshops by producer Nelson Shin.)
In an anti-Donald Trump Simpsons election spot made in 2016, we see a vain 
Trump in bed with a book containing Hitler’s Collected Speeches lying next 
to him and with a small dog on his bald head. (So far we didn’t speak about 

203
37.  Psychological Projection
the importance of hair: The centaur from Golden Voyage of Sinbad had a David 
Bowie hairstyle—said Ray Harryhausen.)
In the days of the Cultural Revolution, the Chinese portrayed heroic young­
sters. Little Sisters of Grassland (1965) is a tale of two Mongolian teenage sisters, 
Long Mei and Yu Rong, who risk their lives to protect their commune’s flock of 
sheep during a sudden snowstorm. We fear neither the cold nor the blizzard, Yu 
Rong sings. Ah, the beacon of revolution is shining in the hearts of the little sis­
ters. To protect the property of the collective we fear neither frost bite nor hunger. 
Ah, Communist thoughts are beaming over the little heroes. And even years later, 
we still saw a soldier boy fighting nasty Japanese stereotypes as in Little Soldier 
Zhang Ga (2005).
In 2015, there was an anti-Israeli propaganda video that was released by the 
so-called Islamic Revolution Design House, a group of hardline Iranian activists. 
There is an animated CG part that shows heavily armed militants standing side 
by side, first a few, then more and more, prepared to march on Jerusalem, the 
images underlined by a martial score. The activists have no personality, they wear 
black masks. But the images suggest that they are determined to reach their goal. 
There is no big difference between a video like this and infamous Nazi propa­
ganda films like The Eternal Jew (Der ewige Jude), a 1940 semi-documentary mix 
of animated maps, falsely labeled stock footage, and newly recorded footage. It 
compared Jews with a plague of rats that, so the commentary, moved 2000 years 
from the Middle Easr to Egypt. It later flooded—the commentary claimed—the 
entire Mediterranean region, broke into Spain, France, and Southern Germany, 
followed German colonists and found a “reservoir” in Poland: “Where rats turn 
up, they spread diseases and carry extermination into the land. They are cunning, 
cowardly and cruel, they travel in large packs, exactly the way the Jews infect the 
races of the world.”
Psychological projection also supports activities in merchandising. Propaganda 
and promotion have a lot to do with each other. Both political and commercial 
indoctrination share common roots. Disney convinced his customers that little 
girls will never forget their first encounter with a Disney Princess and claimed that 
even long after they’re all grown up, they continue to pass along their love for these 
heroines, introducing them to their own daughters: a case of generation-spanning 
identification based on the faith in beauty. They found out that in every little girl 
there should be a desire to feel special and to dream into magic places where costly 
clothes are spun of silk and gold and where princes immediately come to the res­
cue as they have fallen in love at first sight. For almost every girl who believes in 
her beauty, Disney’s advertising experts announced, there is a sweet princess to 
prove that everything is possible (provided she is submissive enough to accept a 
male hero). Over decades, Disney as we know had monopolized famous fairy tale 
characters such as Snow White, Cinderella, Sleeping Beauty, or even Pocahontas 
who were in the public domain and could be re-created and coyprighted. So in 
2000, the merchandising department launched the ubiquitous Disney Princesses 
that cover virtually every product category, particularly dolls, toys and dresses, 

204
Acting and Character Animation
personal care, and consumer electronics. These characters seem to be perennial 
preschool favorites, thanks to psychological projection. In her 2011 bestseller 
Cinderella Ate My Daughter, Peggy Orenstein, a journalist, criticized this kind of 
role stereotypes and recommended to talk with kids about the influence of media.*
Preadolescent girls will like the magical girl manga-turned-anime Sailor 
Moon and teenage girls a new movement in manga and anime toward sexy hero­
ines. The artist Go (Kiyoshi) Nakai, the creator of Goldorak, the giant robot, often 
draws these nude but strong willed amazons that serve as role models for the next 
generation.
*	 Peggy Orenstein, Cinderella Ate My Daughter: Dispatches from the Front Lines of the New Girlie-
Girl Culture. New York/London/Toronto/Sydney: HarperCollins Publishers, 2011.

205
38
The Role of Producer and 
Director
All of animation is teamwork including storyboarding. Storyboarding and 
­creating animatics is always a collaborating effort and, besides that, has a lot to 
do with the performance to be seen later on screen.
The work on Disney’s Snow White was almost reminiscent of a Stanislavsky-
style rehearsal. It was very much like staging a play. Animation, as we have said, 
is a producer-driven medium. Many times the actual animation director doesn’t 
have the say. One producer told us that creating the story and storyboarding is 
the most delightful time in the process of animation, much more rewarding than 
production itself, and so he claimed all important creative decisions for himself.
Walt Disney was, as we have seen, a brilliant, naturally gifted actor. He would 
act it out for the animators while he told the story as he saw it. That’s great if 
a Disney is around. It’s a source of inspiration. It isn’t when the producer is 
less talented but still regards himself as the creative force. There are producers 
around who think that they are story-minded. If this isn’t the case and they are 
not self-critical enough, they virtually destroy preproduction. They are slow, dull, 
and stiff, and their motionless attitude transfers into the movie.

206
Acting and Character Animation
With a producer around who is not as imaginative and entertaining as Disney, 
it is sometimes a boring task. If an animated movie doesn’t work, then the reason 
is quite often the producer.
The real duty of an animation producer is to get the best artists on board and 
create an atmosphere of total freedom so that the artists can rise and find ­complete 
expression. It is no wonder that a school of creativity later came to be known as 
the Disney Method, which in turn has a lot in common with Stanislavsky.
At Pixar and other big studios the producers protect the artists, spend up to 
ten percent of the budget on preproduction. This is paradise, this is an ideal con­
dition. In most of the small cartoon factories, however, where they don’t grant 
this kind of freedom, quite the reverse is true. Here artists and writers do not 
dare to speak out what they have in mind but just bow to the producer’s verdict 
because they fear punishment. This extends to animation directors who often are 
not hired to give creative input but as workhorses that keep the schedule.
Companies like Aardman are the exception. On Chicken Run, Aardman 
producer-directors Peter Lord and Nick Park established rules how each stop-
motion character should be animated. They would lay down the action, but this 
didn’t mean that the animators had to work like robots. They just determined the 
key poses to start with and work from. This was similar to handing out model 
sheets for each character as they do in 2D animation.
Occasionally, Lord and Park would get hands-on with the puppets to 
­demonstrate their intent. Sometimes the best way, as Lord said, to show what you 
have in mind is to just move the puppet into position yourself rather than talk 
about it. They also would do a certain performance for the animators (at least 
stop-motion animators do this occasionally), recording themselves on video. 
But this was only meant as a reference. Just to give an idea about the performance 
and a sense of timing because they didn’t like them to copy from live action. 
They said that would crush creativity and encourage dependence. (The opposite 
is true, of course, for CG animation in live-action films.)
Producer Merian C. Cooper claimed that he often would have acted scenes 
out to show the animators how to move Kong. Ray Harryhausen, himself an 
­accomplished animator, had his doubts about that statement.
Contrary to live-action filmmaking, 3D animators rarely have directors 
behind them while shooting or animating. I [RG] had the chance to direct stop 
motion myself, and after I went to the set to discuss a scene with the animator he 
locked me out. He didn’t like me or anybody else around. And in 2D animation, 
we rarely see directors go through animation cubicles. If they are hired hands, 
they just turn up from time to time.
Animators are mainly left to themselves. It’s the same with stage actors. 
After a more or less extensive period of rehearsals, when the play is actually on, 
the director will leave.

207
39
Feel at Ease While 
Animating
If the producer-director doesn’t find the time to put his team at ease, the ­animator 
has to care for himself, has to find individual means to get himself in the right mood.
Imagine animators sitting at their desks in front of computer screens.
They move characters but rarely move themselves.
In the best case, an animator has a single office, in the worst, very often in 
Asia, we find him in a large office cube where you see hundreds of them: wedged 
for 8 hours, hunched like in a prison.
No doubt that this position, all day sitting, is unhealthy for your body and it is 
not optimal to develop your creative mind.
Imagination needs space to find complete expression and fresh air.
All animators should be given the chance to leave their cubicle and 
­temporarily breathe fresh air. The producer should give the animator a chance 
to relax: ping-pong, refreshments, open a balcony so that they can take time out, 
look at the sky and widen their horizon before they return to work.
Big companies like Google do this. Animation companies, too, depend on 
the creativity of their artists. Animation producers therefore should go a step 
­further: Why not have “kid’s corners” where people can play, reminders of the 
places of childhood to enhance their motivation?

208
Acting and Character Animation
Producers should respect their employees. Socially, this is particularly 
­difficult in some Asian countries where they still have sort of a caste system, with 
­producers at the top and artists working like slaves and drawing little wages. 
An artist is no graphic program. An artist is a highly sensitive individual whose 
feelings are easily hurt.
If the working conditions are miserable, then, being an animator, you have 
to plan your spare time very consciously. Don’t idle away your time but work 
on your own dreams, on your own imagination, and on your own portfolio. 
When a producer-director isn’t going to give you freedom (only very intel­
ligent producers would do that!), you have to do it yourself. Maybe the future 
prospects with a ­different employer will be better, but first you have to work 
on yourself. Otherwise you are in danger to lose your passion and interest in 
animation.
Look for a quiet place that suits your equilibrium and provides peace of mind 
and soul.
You are important—even if producers and directors don’t realize this because 
they only like to push you.
You cannot change them. They are under deadline pressure too.
Ideal would be an office with not so many people around, flowers, colors you 
like, places to rest—and, above all, good teamwork. Unless you are working for 
Pixar, this will remain a dream.
In our school time, we had to sit a lot and be attentive, but now we have to get 
rid of that behavior. We aren’t in school anymore. Physiologically, sitting like 
a pupil in school will damage your back and your head which is bent forward, 
a rather depressive position.
This way you won’t free your mind.
But you will interject that even in your spare time that should be reserved 
for recreation you depend on the computer: you have to answer e-mails and 
serve Facebook accounts, have to check Twitter, write blogs, and what else. 
The ­computer occupies a lot of human time, in business and in leisure time. 
But it is not friendly to your body. So you need to exercise.
Never mind. You don’t need much time for these exercises.
Referring to the animator’s workplace, the optimal position is:
Hands in the neck and chin a little upwards, not downwards, in a very relaxed 
position.
This is a position you will often notice when you watch stage directors during 
rehearsals.
Human positions refer not only to different physical configurations but 
to ­different states of mind: In one position you will get sad and be depressed, 
in another one you will be happy. Automatically.

209
39. Feel at Ease While Animating
Try yourself. It’s easy.
We noticed that there are many depressing short films around. Sometimes, 
not always, they are an animator’s personal cry for help. Nobody ever thought 
of that. This type of animation is quite lonesome. You have to focus on your 
­animation but you need to move too provided you are sitting all day in front of a 
computer’s cyclops eye.


211
40
Computer Graphic 
Characters, Performance 
Capture Techniques, and 
the Future of Acting in 
Animation
Fifteen years ago, Volker Engel, Academy Award winning VFX supervisor of 
Independence Day and for many years one of the closest collaborators of director 
Roland Emmerich, told us that he couldn’t imagine believable digital actresses 
and actors to take over. He claimed that physical acting in movies always would 
have a future. Robert Zemeckis tried to prove otherwise and failed. Watching a 
plastic 3D clone of Tom Hanks walk through Polar Express (2004) was pathetic. 
But Zemeckis didn’t give up. He had other name actors like Angelina Jolie and 
Anthony Hopkins capture his version of the Anglo-Saxon poem Beowulf (2007) 
and Jim Carrey mime a digital Ebenezer Scrooge in Charles Dickens’ perennial 
Christmas Carol (2009). Today, with so many real plastic faces around in our real 
world (thanks to the use of Botox), we can imagine the final triumph of future 
performers that are artificially created.
A few digitized light rings round the body, in remembrance of the Robotrix in 
Fritz Lang’s Metropolis (1926–1927), and you will magically turn from inhuman 
pixels into a human being. Hundreds of Hollywood actresses and actors have been 
already scanned and digitized.
Even with today’s technology, you still need real actors and link virtual char­
acters to performance capture because, although there are quite realistic virtual 

212
Acting and Character Animation
reproductions and simulations of humans, they cannot act. (Well, there are many 
so-called stars who cannot act too.) But it is likely that in the near future they will 
be able to develop characters purely out of our stored database. Darren Hendler, 
VFX supervisor at Digital Domain, is convinced, We are at the point where we 
can create a digital version of an actor that is indistinguishable from the real per­
son.* There are serious considerations to substitute real actors, to make virtual 
“humans” conscious of their environment and (artificially) intelligent, and to 
have them respond to direction automatically. It would be a breakthrough in 
computer games, too, to have incalculable virtual opponents.
The Cognitive Modeling group at Tübingen University, supervised by 
Professor Martin Butz, has developed software to create social skills, based on 
human thinking and behavior, to favorite video game characters such as Mario, 
Luigi, Yoshi, and Toad. These experiments show what socially intelligent game 
characters may be capable of in the future.
Just think of obvious AI agents like NPCs (nonplayer characters, false friends) 
or enemies and monsters. They will duck and roll away from gunfire and try to 
be ahead of the gamer.
In his dystopian The Congress (2013), freely adapted from a novel by the late 
Polish sci-fi writer Stanisław Lem, Ari Folman, the Israeli director of Waltz with 
Bashir (2008), tried to depict a future that features digital clones of famous actors:
An actress named Robin Wright (and played by real-life Robin Wright) is 
scanned, every move and microexpression of her. The artificial version is des­
tined to take over from her completely, being exploited eternally. In the world-
building view of the future, reality will become fiction and fiction reality.
So will there be a post-biological future to Hollywood? Walt Disney was con­
sidered an idiot when he claimed that audiences would be willing to watch ani­
mated characters for 70 minutes and more. Then came Snow White and the Seven 
Dwarfs.
So Folman’s nightmare vision is not that absurd. Canadian actress Ellen 
Page jokingly complained about one of the big gaming blockbusters of 2013, the 
action-adventure survival horror game The Last of Us developed by Naughty Dog 
and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for PlayStation 3, that she didn’t 
appreciate the (unauthorized) likeness between herself and the main character 
named Ellie: “I guess I should be flattered that they ripped off my likeness, but I 
am actually [voice] acting in a video game called Beyond Two Souls, so it was not 
appreciated.” The producers just used, deliberately or not, a digital figure that 
looked like the Inception and Juno star.
Is it an absurd thought that we are nothing more than a computer simula­
tion ourselves being run by post-humanists? This was the premise of Daniel 
Francis Galouye’s groundbreaking sci-fi novel Simulacron 3 (published in 1964) 
that became the unofficial blueprint for the Matrix trilogy. The New York Times 
*	 Cited in Lucinda Everett, When will CGI actors replace human ones? The Telegraph, August 15, 
2014.

213
40. Computer Graphic Characters, Performance Capture Techniques
devoted an article to the odd (computer) simulation hypothesis of Dr. Nick 
Bostrom, philosopher and director of the Future of Humanity Institute, Faculty 
of Philosophy, Oxford University, who assumed that the technological advances 
could produce a computer with more processing power than all the brains in 
the world, and that advanced humans, or “post humans,” could run “ancestor 
simulations” of their evolutionary history by creating virtual worlds inhabited by 
virtual people with fully developed virtual nervous systems.*
This is what Nick Bostrom speculates about:
Many works of science fiction as well as some forecasts by serious technologists and 
futurologists predict that enormous amounts of computing power will be available in 
the future. Let us suppose for a moment that these predictions are correct. One thing 
that later generations might do with their super-powerful computers is run detailed 
simulations of their forebears or of people like their forebears. Because their comput­
ers would be so powerful, they could run a great many such simulations. Suppose 
that these simulated people are conscious (as they would be if the simulations would 
be sufficiently fine-grained and if a certain quite widely accepted position in the phi­
losophy of mind is correct). Then it could be the case that the vast majority of minds 
like ours do not belong to the original race but rather to people simulated by the 
advanced descendants of an original race. It is then possible to argue that, if this were 
the case, we would be rational to think that we are likely among the simulated minds 
rather than among the original biological ones. Therefore, if we don’t think that we 
are currently living in a computer simulation, we are not entitled to believe that we 
will have descendants who will run lots of such simulations of their forebears. That 
is the basic idea.†
If outrageous ideas like these seem to be at least thinkable, why not have arti­
ficial actors who are simulations as well command artificial intelligence and live 
a virtual life of their own?
Helmut Herbst, a German scholar, filmmaker, and animation expert, specu­
lated about the volatilization of images throughout the history of imagery. Ever 
heard of Étienne-Gaspard Robert who called himself Robertson (1763–1837)? He 
was a Belgian physicist and showman who introduced black backgrounds to the 
ghostly images of the Phantasmagoria slides he projected so that they stood out 
in the darkness not having borders that would reveal that they are pictures. This 
was the beginning of what Stanisław Lem once called phantomatics: Could they 
get away today by digitally placing a Marilyn Monroe double being raped by a 
gorilla? And these phantomatics don’t need any image carrier. Ghost images, as 
Herbst claims, multiply into billions and dissolve like the dead.
In the 1980s, Professor Nadia Magnenat Thalmann, a Swiss Canadian com­
puter graphics scientist, who was obsessed by Hollywood faces, re-created her 
*	 John Tierney, Our Lives, Controlled From Some Guy’s Couch. The New York Times, August 14, 
2007.
†	 Nick Bostrom, Are You Living in a Computer Simulation? Abstract. In Philosophical Quarterly 
(2003), Vol. 53, No. 211, p. 243.

214
Acting and Character Animation
personal artificial vision of Marilyn Monroe, co-starring with a plastic-faced 
Humphrey Bogart in Rendezvous à Montreal. From then on, in her own MIRALab 
Research Laboratory at the University of Geneva, Thalmann tried to refine her 
Virtual Marilyn, as a sculptor would do, by using advanced CG technology.
When Thalmann started her project she had to digitize clay models of the 
actress’ face, hands, and so on, but then a process called Z-Brush was introduced. 
It was like having a lump of digital clay that could be sculptured right in the 
computer.
People might think that the computer makes things easier for the animator 
but that is not. Of course the artist can review, change, and refine the animation 
over and over again, but there is still the question of a good performance. But 
certainly there is one advantage: CG animation is fluid and not jerky.
In the beginning, Nadia Thalmann had peculiar ideas how this specimen of 
resurrection of the dead could be used: TV anchormen and anchorwomen or 
even politicians who don’t master foreign languages could be substituted and 
dubbed and wouldn’t have to speak themselves.
Do they want to sell the idea of having digitized not only the dead but also 
the living to get rid of the problem of migration and overpopulation? Raymond 
Kurzweil, an American computer scientist and futurist who speculated about the 
“algorithms” of the brain and how it “processes data,” believes that the Mind–
Body Problem discussed for several thousand years can be solved by simply 
eliminating the human body. Then we would be acting imprisoned in our own 
dreams and nightmares: lost in a labyrinth of Virtual Reality like Hansel and 
Gretel in the cyberwoods. In the realm of the cyberworld, we are confronted with 
our own doppelgängers and avatars. We constantly split ourselves into different 
units that exist simultaneously.
Besides niches like that occupied by Studio Ghibli, the days of frame-to-frame 
animation are over and what we get, especially in the universe of games, is a new 
type of kinetic animation in a world of mostly standardized imagination (which 
is a contradiction in itself). We cannot change the course of technological his­
tory. 3D animation will prevail and we only can hope that 2D will survive as 
memory of true art.
It seems that true childlike (not childish) imagination and big money are 
irreconcilable. The market doesn’t need imagination. It needs, as we have said, 
globalization and standardization. But we shouldn’t overlook that it also needs 
creativity: the creative human mind.
A lot of research is being devoted to the question how the mind works. They 
are discussing the developmental aspects of the mind and the highly inter­
active modulatory system found in the brain and with it the computational 
theory of mind. In the mid-1800s, Hermann von Helmholtz (1821–1894), 
a German physicist, compared the brain to a telegraph. John von Neumann 
(1903–1957), a Hungarian–American mathematician, drew a parallel between 
the com­ponents of the computing machines of the day and the components of 
the human brain.

215
40. Computer Graphic Characters, Performance Capture Techniques
The human mind, however, is more, much more than a computer. The ques­
tion is not if human mind will go cyberspace and achieve immortality through 
downloading. This was the idea behind the dystopian Transcendence (2014) with 
Johnny Depp as a scientist whose mind was downloaded to the Internet, with 
fatal results. Humans are organisms, no computers.
Yet there seems to be no way to stop the train as future already besieges present 
age. It always astonished us how conservative and less visionary the Dreamsmiths 
of today’s visual media are. They don’t like to look into the future, do not want 
to forecast. They content themselves with the vast market opportunities of the 
status quo. They forget that we set the course for what will happen the next 
decades, maybe the next centuries. If they suspect something, they silence their 
conscience: Devil-may-care. But we who do care can do something to preserve 
past and present and humanity: We have to retrieve poetry, music, empathy, not 
only as retort but spiritually. In short, we have to keep our imagination going.
Therefore we have to train our mind.
You need to be flexible in the turn of eras and self-confidence. Some day the 
technique of Brain–Computer Interfaces will be developed in a way that we can 
communicate with computing machines, the computing machine will get access 
to our mind.
So we really need to train.


217
41
Perceptions Exercises
Particularly animators should train their own eyes to watch. We have mentioned 
this primary rule repeatedly.
To foster perception and imagination, it is useful to expand the horizon. To 
do so you can stretch your arms and try to see the fingertips left and right, with 
your eyes looking straight ahead. This way you determine the scope of your view.
Perception is equally important to actors as well as animators.
You can exercise yourself or in groups (which is good for teamwork). Two 
groups of persons might sit opposite of each other. One group has covered the 
eyes. These persons will have the task to smell various ethereal oils and essences. 
The other group has to watch them carefully, to record and sketch their facial 
expression while they react to different scent. There are various olfactory stimuli, 
some smell good, others distasteful. The persons in the first group have to hold 
that expression for a moment.
Instead of essences you also can use little fruit parts, sweet or sour, salty stuff 
as well so that they combine to different tastes.
Finally the sketches the persons who are in the second group have made will 
be compared. What can you tell about eyes, eyebrows, and mouths you see in 
those sketches? What are the typical characteristics? Find out which drawing is 

218
Acting and Character Animation
the best record of what we have seen. And in which sketch does the portrayed 
person recognize himself or herself best?
Then groups will change, and the experiment is repeated vice versa. The objec­
tive is to train exact perception and to focus on extreme facial expression.
Watch eyes and eyebrows. Register different frames of mind: excited, amused, 
angry, sad, and tired.
Meet in a café or some other public place and describe to each other in a group 
what you see. Watch people closely. How are they clothed? Try to speculate about 
the people you see. In what mood are they? Can you tell what occupation the 
people have and maybe invent some stories that have to do with them? You might 
see a couple and can speculate about the persons’ relationship.
Or go to the zoo to sketch animals. Record movements of animals with a cam­
era and analyze them at home.
Watch: All pedestrians follow the same pattern, but the walking cycles are 
different from each other: No two people have the same walk. Persons differ in 
size, weight, and speed.
If a run is to be convincing, the effect of weight must be considered. Basically, 
you must always remember that the larger the character, the more weight he has 
to carry. And the more weight that must be carried, the slower the character must 
move, and the harder it is for the character to control that weight. The animator, 
therefore, has far more to consider when drawing a fat man running than a thin 
man.*
*	 Tony White, The Animator’s Workbook. Oxford: Phaidon Press Limited, 1986, p. 74.

219
42
Game of Imagination
Maybe you know Johnny Head-in-the-Air, the Struwwelpeter tale (written by 
Heinrich Hoffmann) from your own childhood:
As he trudged along to school,
It was always Johnny’s rule
To be looking at the sky
And the clouds that floated by.
You can play this game with others, even in competition, preferably in sum­
mer days.
Find yourself a pasture or go to a park. Lie down on a blanket and watch the 
clouds in the sky. Relax.
Guess what you see. If you are with friends ask each other what your imagina­
tion suggests that you see.
Do you see an object? Do you recognize an animal? Aren’t these human 
faces?
Protect your eyes. Don’t look straight at the sun.

220
Acting and Character Animation
Your friends have to guess what you see and when they are right they will 
score.
This game shall stagger your imagination and make yourself aware of your 
childhood. More than a computer, you will need these qualities to become a good 
animator.
Why don’t you invent games of your own?

221
43
Visualization Techniques
Creatures of the Mind
Even Arnold Schwarzenegger said, “It’s all in the mind. The mind is really so 
incredible. Before I won my first Mr. Universe title, I walked around the tourna­
ment like I owned it. I had won it so many times in my mind, the title was already 
mine. Then when I moved on to the movies I used the same technique. I visualized 
daily being a successful actor and earning big money.”*
You can use visualization techniques at sports or to get self-conscious but you 
also can use it in a creative way to experience what’s inside you.
We cannot deny that someday in the future the human brain will become a 
veritable interface. Until then, pencils and computers are just tools to translate 
ideas and creatures that are in your mind.
This is the most important prerequisite of any person who is going to unleash 
his or her creativity at work.
Everybody has the power of imagination. If you read a thrilling novel, you 
sure will see the persons and the scenery in your mind’s eye. If the tension and 
suspense are unbearable, then you might feel as if you are yourself in the scenery 
and have become part of the action.
*	 Cited in John Kehoe, Mind Power Into the 21st Century. New Delhi: Sterling Publishers, 1997.

222
Acting and Character Animation
If you see images of the mind at a certain distance, then you call this percep­
tual position dissociative, if you are a part of the scenery and your point of view 
is inside the scenery, then your position has become associative. If you see things 
from a distance, then your emotional participation is not as strong as if you were 
right inside the action.
For an animation designer and the animator, both perceptual positions are 
equally important. If you develop a character, you will start with the exterior 
shape: a rough sketch, an inspirational, you give it a shot. Experienced designers 
will have a prototype of the character in their mind. They have seen and studied 
so many characters that they will associate a character that appears in the script 
with something they have seen some time. In the best case, a character designer 
is a walking encyclopedia of cartoon characters. Of course, he will do research 
and will have reference maps at his disposal. The designer will know how to 
use clothes (that make people and cartoons) and props (like Sherlock Holmes’ 
pipe) and he will understand the importance of the setting and environment 
that is part of the character’s background. So he will please the expectations of 
producers and audience likewise. A two-legged mouse will always be inspired 
by Mickey. Originality is relative. Everything depends on the emotional effect 
of the character and the emotional effect is based on the writing and certain 
details which disassociate the mouse from models you have seen before. The 
detail makes the difference. Animation designers have an encyclopedia of char­
acters recorded in their mind and should know how to use effective details to 
make the character different. If you have a nice dog, then it maybe will resemble 
Tintin’s white Wire Fox Terrier Milou (or, English: Snowy), if you have a vicious 
dog then it might be an offspring of the Hound of the Baskervilles. Will a bear 
look like Baloo? You bet!
Try to dive deep into memory and see the character with your mind’s eye.
Once you got your individual Milou, you can try and communicate with the 
character and learn more about him. He can be your spirit animal guide through 
the terra incognita of your mind.
But until you have reached this level, you will have to train your imagination.
Just try yourself: Take a chair. Sit down. Relax.
Visualization is mental rehearsal. It is the creative skill to imagine. Practice it 
once a day. Five minutes should be enough.
Of course, some people have greater ability to imagine than others.
You don’t need Pokémon Go. But this game that links real and virtual world 
thanks to GPS and Google maps demonstrates how important visualiza­
tion is, but it’s designed for people who like to leave their imagination in the 
cloakroom: Get on your feet and step outside to find and catch wild Pokémon. 
Explore cities and towns around where you live and even around the globe to 
capture as many Pokémon as you can. As you move around, your smartphone 
will vibrate to let you know you’re near a Pokémon. Once you’ve encountered a 
Pokémon, take aim on your smartphone’s touch screen and throw a Poké Ball 
to catch it.

223
43. Visualization Techniques
If you try to imagine something, it is like placing it in front of you. You don’t 
need a Pokémon device. We have this mental gift from childhood. So everybody 
has this ability. It is like dreaming. Everybody dreams.
Just imagine you are lying at the beach.
Different persons will choose different perspectives. One associates, the other 
will disassociate.
One will see it from the view of the person who actually lies on the beach see­
ing the water and the sun. This viewer associates. He or she will be one with the 
person who is on the beach. The other disassociates and will see the scenery from 
outside. So everything is a question of perspective. Mind the perspective you 
prefer and try later another one.
For the animator, we will first select an outside perspective because this will be 
the position the spectator will take.
Try to imagine something else: an object in a certain environment.
Take something that you are familiar with.
Take something very simple.
Imagine a ball.
Focus on it. Don’t let anything distract you.
What is the color? Is the ball red, yellow, green, or blue? Does it have dots?
If you see it in front of you, try to turn it around. Try to see it from all angles.
Zoom in, zoom out.
You also can try an apple. Cut it in the middle. End the exercise by smelling 
and tasting the apple. Bite, take three deep breaths. Count from one to five. Then 
open your eyes.
Select a series of objects of your own choice. Once you master this, you can 
take the next step which is the important one for animators.
You might now invite an animal. Take it from your own imagination, based 
on your own criteria. Maybe you will take a white puppy and project the charac­
ter in front of you.
This might have the effect of a slide or a hologram. Just like this Pokémon, 
that is put into reality but this time not using a mobile device. How big is the 
animal? Can you try and change the distance of the projected image? As a rule, 
these imagined objects and animals have often the size of a TV screen but try 
to make it bigger. If it is small try to zoom in and then try to find out where 
the character actually is. Is it outside or inside a certain room? We got a myr­
iad of images saved in the library of our brain. When you have determined the 
location—if it is in a rural landscape or in a certain building—the images will 
develop in your imagination.
Back to our white puppy. You see him sitting in front of you. Speak softly and 
say hello to him. Unlike Pokémon, this creature of the mind is living. What does 
he do? Does he react? Does he answer? What mood he’s in? Is he happy?
How does the dog move? How is the tail? Low? Tucked away? Whipping? 
Swishing? Body language will express the dog’s sentiments and needs.
Do you see the animal in 3D? If not, switch to 3D.

224
Acting and Character Animation
Look at the character and say thank you that it appeared without raising your 
voice.
Take the character that you have invented inside yourself. And wake up.
Rub your face, move your arms, your legs. Shake your limbs.
Return slowly to daily life. Do not rush. Take your time. Take a mental break.
This was your first encounter with a character you have invented by your own 
projection.
You have to study the animal’s body language. You don’t have to use your own 
body as an animator but you have to perceive the typical expression and mood. 
You know it from your watching exercises.
You can exercise to get into a character. And you always will be as good as 
your imagination was in your childhood.
For these exercises, you need a sober mind (no alcohol, no drugs). You 
will have your head on straight and can stop the process any time. You will 
stay in the here and now. You will know that even if you are going to be 
a bird, you cannot fly in reality. You are like an actor who is taken up in 
his part. But take your time before you leave your home or do any driving. 
(The authors cannot accept any responsibility. So please be careful. Finish the 
­exercises well.)
Some rules concerning conversation with imaginary characters: Ask simple 
questions. Be patient. Don’t push. Don’t use negations. Be honest and respectful.
Potential Problems with Visualization
Visualization doesn’t work like television: Push a button and the movie starts.
You need to be prepared. You have entered a quiet room. You are com­
pletely relaxed and you are able to focus on the exercise. Your eyes are closed. 
But nothing happens. No living characters show up. You want to meet this 
little dog again. But after 10 minutes there is no dog. You have prepared an 
imaginary room just for that dog, with a bowl of delicious food. But still no 
animal.
Maybe the puppy is too shy. Ask yourself if there is a reason why the dog 
doesn’t show up. Maybe it had bad experiences resulting from encounters with 
other humans. Wait a little and if you don’t get an answer say thanks to the dog 
that he found time for you because the animal is sure nearby. You can make a 
new appointment and ask if the dog will have time for you later. If the puppy still 
doesn’t come, just imagine a different animal. Maybe there is a cat that wants to 
get your attention.
But it might be that you are not a cat’s person, that you dislike cats. In this 
case, your subconscious mind will refuse to let a cat in. Interestingly enough, 
many households have cats but in myths as well as in animation cats, as we have 
seen already, are often antagonists.
All living beings, real as well as imaginary ones, do not appear at the flick 
of a switch. They ask for your full attention. These characters have to be treated 
with utmost respect. Never ever humiliate them. There might, for instance, 

225
43. Visualization Techniques
a character be around that looks quite funny to you, but don’t ridicule him. 
Don’t laugh about, laugh with him. The friendlier you treat these imagina­
tions, the more will show up and your subconscious mind will have a ball 
calling them up.
Now invite a human. Take somebody you know well, a relative maybe.
Take other characters so that you can switch roles.
Try to get inside the various characters. Try to understand and feel them.
You will argue and say that as an animator you have to work with fixed char­
acters. So if you are able take one of those or a scene you are involved in.
Try to imagine the area where the scene is going to take place.
Maybe it’s the forest, with trees, bird song, and scents. Locate the setting on 
a mental map. Add more and more details: moisture after rain—you smell it—, 
moss—you feel it under your feet—, a small river—you hear it fleet—, a lake, 
maybe some obstacles.
After a while, you will arrive at a clearing.
Imagine you were asked to create a fox hunt which was popular in many old 
cartoons. Have you seen Donald Duck and Goofy in The Fox Hunt that was 
released in 1938?
This time, however, you will have a realistic fox hunt, no comic.
Imagine the various characters, the hunters and the hunted: the riders, the 
mixed field of horses, the hounds, and the fox.
Try to get in touch with them.
How do they feel? Try to switch roles. You have to understand both, the hunt­
ers and the hunted.
Hunting the fox, you see him as a red spot from behind. After a while, you 
might have a cut and change your point of view. You are now, so to speak, inside 
the fox. You don’t have to become a Charles Foster who wrote a book Being a 
Beast.* Foster is an eccentric British naturalist who really has been on all fours to 
become a badger, an otter, or an urban fox, and live like an animal to reconnect 
with his inner beast.
Feel hunted yourself. Feel the hunting instinct of your pursuers in your neck. 
Change of perspective is important, inwardly and outwardly.
There are questions that both, actors and animators, will ask in the beginning 
to understand a character: Where do I come from? Where do I go to? What mood 
I am in?
If you are inside the character, it becomes you.
Acting is always reacting. You are reacting to an insult or mental scars. Then 
you will have a motive for doing something. The reaction can explode into some 
action. You might try to punish, hit the person who has hurt you. I have become 
one with the character I am going to portray.
Very important: Deep respect, understanding, empathy, maybe a little love are 
absolutely essential for the creative treatment of your characters.
*	 Charles Foster, Being a Beast. London: Profile Books Ltd., 2016.

226
Acting and Character Animation
Do you realize that by visualizing you are telling a story, that you are acting 
through separate characters?
Talk to your characters and let them act on your imaginary stage.
Tricks You May Use in the Process of Visualization
Let’s suppose that you are going to imagine some particular scenery, for instance 
a child at a kitchen table eating soup. You are relaxed. But you see—nothing. 
Why? Well, maybe the whole scenery is located behind a wall in another room. 
Try to imagine you are in a theater, in the orchestra, and in front of you there is a 
curtain. Open the curtain to see the scene. If this doesn’t work and nothing is to 
be seen, turn the light on.
Sometimes a scene is hidden behind a door. Now there always is a reason why 
characters don’t show up immediately. Respect your subconscious mind, the 
location of your imagination. If you don’t feel well simply, stop the exercises and 
try again later. Maybe you regard all of this as too childish. Then stop too. There 
are other ways to find access to your characters.
Very often, these mental blocks are a result of our education. As children we 
often heard our parents tell us: Don’t dream! Of course there was a meaning to 
bring us kids back to reality because we had to focus on what we had to do in 
school. But, alas, imagination would suffer. So ask yourself if there is somebody 
who forbids you to do these exercises: Parents? Teachers? Get it straight to your 
mind that you have to get access to the full potential of your imagination to make 
your work better. There is nothing to fear but fear itself. You have made your way 
from school to a professional career to everybody’s pleasure. You can master the 
real tasks at each time. You can draw, you can operate a computer. But assure 
yourself that you don’t lose touch with reality. Differentiate between fiction and 
reality.
Fear of Your Own Imagination
Is there an anxiety to meet a certain imaginary character? Zoom out. The image 
and with it the character that has intimidated you a moment ago will get smaller. 
The fright will disappear. Now you can ask yourself what made the character so 
awkward and change him.
Many years ago, I (AK) taught drama students who were in the final year of 
their education how to lose mental blocks by means of mental training. These 
students were trained and sensitized but didn’t know about mental training. 
One of them had the problem that he spoke with a voice that rang as clear 
as a bell. His voice was so beautiful because it was excessively soft. He spoke 
stilted and clearly would have failed in a naturalistic theatre performance. The 
student and I were in a large room that was absolutely quiet. I asked him if he 
had a block and where this block was. Suddenly he saw a dwarfish creature 
jumping out of his body. For a moment he was shocked and cried, “Kill him! 
Kill him!” His visualization was so intense and specific that both of us saw 

227
43. Visualization Techniques
this gnome. I comforted the young actor, took his hand and both of us left 
the gnome. Then we compared our images and realized that the character we 
imagined looked similar. The gnome, the poor creature, was stunned himself 
about what had happened.
Of course such spectacular sessions are very rare. Particularly actors are 
trained for years concerning sensitivity and imagination. Besides his handicap, 
speaking way too beautiful, the drama student was naturally gifted. During our 
exercise, we carefully approached the gnome until the student could empathize 
with the dwarf. Playing the gnome himself, the young man could experience how 
maltreated the gnome was whom a short while ago he wanted to kill. He would 
identify with the gnome, reconcile with him and accept him as part of his own 
personality. This exercise lasted for one-and-a-half up to 2 hours. The acceptance 
of this seemingly negative part of his own self helped the student.
A psychiatrist would have asked: Where does the gnome come from? But our 
duty is to understand the mental block and to visualize it, to enter a commu­
nication with its product and re-integrate it into the own personality. (At that 
time I re-assured, however, with a psychoanalyst who wasn’t present during the 
sessions.)
After these exercises, the young actor underwent a change. He would grow 
and become more virile. He became a good actor. He dared to play ugly, not only 
beautiful parts.
He fundamentally lost his mental block.
This was an exception. But it tells us that we shouldn’t be afraid to see what 
we are seeing.
As an actor you are tied to your body and a single person that you portray, as 
an artist you have much more creative freedom (and power over different charac­
ters, like a director has). Unless you improvise or you ad-lib as an actor, you have 
a structure, you have co-players, and you have lines. Everything is fixed when 
rehearsals are finished. The artist, however, will draw and then, somehow, there 
will be a moment of magic when a character will look to you.
The animator doesn’t have to learn and know what an actor has to train for 
years: voice training, physical training, dancing, fencing, and what else. All this 
he doesn’t need.
Criticism wouldn’t harm an animator less than an actor because he can change 
and draw another character.
Artists are much more abstract. Their work consists of stylization and their 
perception of art. It’s important that an animator knows anatomy, but he doesn’t 
need to become a physician. Different from live action, you are able to stretch and 
squash your characters. You are able to do more than live actors. Much more. 
Like Phoenix out of the ashes, your characters seem to have more than one life. 
Each time they are finished off, they rise from the dead. Animation conquers 
death, overcomes it a hundred times while theatrical plays celebrate death.
This is the freedom of animation: to fool reality and see the things behind.
Now you enter the realm of fantasy, the state of the shaman.

228
Acting and Character Animation
In shamanism, trance is an antenna to have mystic experience without 
using drugs. It is similar to a natural view of the world. Trance in its extreme 
is an extra-physical experience. The spirit world is, according to one’s own 
point of view or religion, experienced as real. Trance is an ancient kind of 
spiritual experience. We follow a different pattern and see in the state of 
trance the means of supporting creativity. Trance exists on different levels. 
The daily conscience is blanked out and the subconscious will receive space. 
This is the whole potential of imagination: the material that dreams are made 
of. Animators are no necromancers. They are people of imagination. The only 
question is how to set it free. The subconscious shall be fully “exploited.” But 
how will I get into that state?
This state is between dreaming and being awake. It is a state of absolute quiet­
ness and concentration. Fade out daily routine. Past and future are irrelevant. 
You are only here and now.
Sit down on a chair or lay down on a sofa or bed and close your eyes. Focus on 
your breath. Try to relax. For creative work, deep relaxation with deep concentra­
tion at the same time is a prerequisite. This technique is used too when coaching 
athletes or actors to cure stage fright. Some actors use that technique in prepara­
tion for film scenes and in preparation of role studies. Certain film scenes are 
mentally prepared. This is a dry run.
We suggest that you use the same technique for imagination, for dreaming 
up characters. The imagination is being trained in a way that you will enter into 
straight communication with the character. You even can take a step further. 
You can have a dialogue with these characters. Although these are figures that 
come from your own imagination, they are linked to the subconscious mind. 
You have cut back everyday consciousness. In this process of visualization, it is 
important to stay relatively unprejudiced. Do not be too critical. Do not suffo­
cate imagination. Be patient and exercise to enter this state, preferably in a quiet 
room, relaxed, no mobile phones, no computer, or TV screen around. Just focus 
on yourself.
In Edgar Allan Poe’s The Masque of the Red Death (made into a 1969 short by 
Zagreb Film), Prince Prospero entrenches behind the walls of his castle. Follow 
him through rooms of different color: blue, purple, green, orange, white, violet, 
and black (illuminated by a scarlet light) where fate strikes. Each color makes you 
feel different.
Maybe you will have problems to imagine a villain, an evil character. You 
might be afraid because inside yourself you won’t feel any evil. The knowledge of 
the gallery of the biggest villains in world history will not help you. Did you ever 
meet a baddie or a corrupt person? Sure. There always is somebody who has hurt 
you? Try to remember. Well, you found the guy you love to hate. This person will 
guide you to understand villainy. And suddenly the feeling is inside me because 
I remember how angry I was. With such a feeling it will be easier to imagine 
and invent a villain. It’s not about evil in general but the individual understand­
ing of evil.

229
43. Visualization Techniques
But at the same time, being inside the villain, you have to understand his 
deeds to make him believable and not a cliché.
Well then, the character has appeared and you could watch him from all 
angles, heroes as well as villains.
You were able to establish a contact with the character.
You have given the character space to develop his own personality and have 
treated him in a friendly and polite manner.
You have given him life of his own.
Due to respectful treatment of the imagined character, you can extract more 
information out of your subconscious mind.
Imagination is given more space. The imagination is being trained. And you 
can control your imagination with this technique.
Not only will you make a figure visible, you develop a deeper understanding 
of the character.
Now you can proceed.
You may ask the imagined character to help you.
You can ask the character (silently) to support you to carry out his optimal 
creation, to describe a situation he is involved in: scenario, background, scent, 
and the whole state of mind.
You can ask the characters to cooperate with their own design.
You can ask and make a deal with the figure, while you sleep, to continue 
developing on his own character according to role profiles and a certain scene or 
given situation.
Ask the character to agree.
Then say thanks, open your arms and take the character in.
After that, return to daily life.
Don’t think about what happened. Let your subconscious mind work.
The next day you will realize that “he” has worked strongly inside you. 
Something has evolved. Maybe unusual solutions have been found. Often these 
characters show humor. They are unconventional and develop funny ideas. You 
will be astonished.
You also can ask the character to bring a friend. You will realize how your 
stage, the cinema in your head is filling.
What advantage is it to treat an imagined character like a living being?
If I grant the characters life of their own I allow them access to my whole 
knowledge, even that which is buried in my subconscious mind.
In daily life, our brain inhales incredible amounts of information. But we are 
forced to fade out big chunks of this information immediately just to master our 
daily affairs. Otherwise, our brain would overheat.
People who are suffering from the savant syndrome give us an example. 
Sometimes they have incredible abilities. Some of them are able to learn an 
unknown language in brief time. Others have mind-boggling mathemati­
cal skills. One sees briefly a location (a town) and can draw an exact map of 
the place.

230
Acting and Character Animation
These genius people, however, have problems to manage their daily affairs. To 
keep social contacts is a real problem for them.
Normal people use a big part of their brain capacities for managing their 
social life. Therefore, they eliminate other important parts. We are totally occu­
pied with the little things of daily life which absorb our mind.
In principle, this proves the great but unexplored abilities of the human brain.
The lively contact will bring the experience of new expressions. It will surprise 
you and you will not remain trapped in the narrow repertoire of standard facial 
play and gestures.
This is the problem an actor has when repeating his role for the span of a hun­
dred performances or more. Each evening anew, actors must naively immerse 
themselves into a role and certain situation. This way the character will not rust 
but remain fresh as in the first performance.
Even if you are only a small cog in the entertainment machine of show busi­
ness, you will find that your part and contribution will not develop that uninter­
esting cleanness but offer new challenges.
Art needs creative freedom.
We mentioned the Disney Method. That means that in a creative process 
all ideas should be allowed: no self-censorship. Out of hundred ideas, one 
will work. A heady critic will cut out a possibly absurd idea immediately. This 
means you will sacrifice worthwhile ideas too early, like that of having a rat in 
the kitchen.
Disney is credited with granting this mental freedom to his artists, but the 
reality in the Disney Studios was different when it became a factory with hun­
dreds of employees. The family atmosphere would slowly vanish.
The exercises mean to keep the critic inside us in check so that no flower is 
culled too early. Creativity is highly vulnerable. Persons who work in creative 
fields are highly sensitive and feel easily hurt.
By respectful and relaxed treatment of characters, we give them time to 
develop in our mind.
So producers have to be psychologists, no steamrollers. Time is money—but 
you cannot churn out good ideas. You don’t need to be rushed (as you are in many 
low-production productions and series).
Remember the words of the great Max Reinhardt who compared acting with 
mementos from the childhood. There should be no end to childhood. For a child 
it is easy to bring a toy alive in his or her imagination. If a kid has a small plas­
tic knight, he might envision a medieval fortress. Or by playing with a little toy 
horse, children might dream themselves into the Wildest West.
Good examples are the crudely animated plastic toys from the French-
language Belgian stop action A Town Called Panic (Panique au village), a series of 
5-minute shorts: the everyday events of the small figurines of three roommates, 
Cowboy, Indian and, as the main character, Horse, in a rural village. There cer­
tainly is not much animation used to move these mostly stiff figures, but they 
have character and personality. The producers, Stéphane Aubier and Vincent 

231
43. Visualization Techniques
Patar, play it out like children who have toy figures. Everything will end in a mess 
and anarchic madness, from village to inferno.
In 2009, a 75-minute Panic feature was released and amazingly it was not bor­
ing to watch the hilarious stop action:
Everybody talks like little kids. Indian and Horse are on the same scale, about 
twice as tall as Cowboy, though nobody notices this. They get around fine on their 
little platforms, even climbing stairs. Horse, who has four legs and can balance 
without a platform, takes Farmer’s kids to Madame Longree for music lessons and 
falls in love with Madame, who is also a horse and plays the piano with her hooves 
pretty well.
The most frequent line of dialogue in this enchanting world is “Oh, no!” One 
strange thing happens after another. You wouldn’t believe me if I told you how 
Horse, Indian and Cowboy all end up perched precariously on a rock slab above a 
volcano at the Earth’s Center, or how they get from there to the middle of an ocean 
and the North Pole, or how they happen upon a mad scientist and his robot, named 
Penguin, or the excuses Horse uses on his cell phone to explain to Madame Longree 
why he hasn’t turned up for his piano lessons. Or why it rains cows.*
Like children, they’ve been constructing their own absurdist, chaotic world. 
Here it’s really Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs. No computer has been used. 
The budget was comparatively low. To be fully creative, you first and foremost 
need a kid’s corner to set your imagination free.
As adults we will have to re-learn childlike imagination: what they call the 
sense of wonder.
You have to be on the same wavelength with your characters.
It is as if Pinocchio would get alive and speak to you. You sit across and 
breathe life into him. You are like mad Stromboli, the owner of the puppet the­
ater in Disney’s film, who sees his marionettes including Pinocchio dance by 
themselves.
We mentioned Argentine stop-motion filmmaker Juan Pablo Zaramella 
repeatedly in the pages of this book. In 2004, he did a lovely 17-minute stop-
motion tale titled Viaje a Marte that summarizes the whole essence of what ani­
mation should be: Watching Sci-Fi on TV, Antonio, a little boy, has the dream 
of travelling to Mars. His grandfather tells him that he knows how to get there. 
In his truck, he takes the boy to an unearthly spot (that was amazingly created 
by tabletop animation!). At school, the classmates tease the boy when he claims 
to have been on Mars with his grandpa. When he has grown up, a family man 
who has almost forgotten the adventure trip with grandpa who has passed away 
since, astronauts are finally on their way to Mars. Suddenly—miraculously—he 
finds his tow truck stranded on the same unearthly ground that he has visited as 
a child—and sees the astronauts landing in front of him: Animation to stagger 
the imagination. (Zaramella told us that the plot was based on the true story of 
*	 A Town Called Panic (2009), reviewed by Roger Ebert on January 13, 2010. Review originally pub­
lished in 2010 in Chicago Sun-Times.

232
Acting and Character Animation
a Latin American boy who dreamed of living in California and was taken by his 
grandfather to a place that looked like California.)
You are going to play with externalized characters, but they come from your 
own subconscious mind. And you are going to join these characters exploring 
strange new worlds, boldly going where no man has gone before.
This will be the future of imagination. We should be capable to create our 
own type of animation that will not be tied to a cinema or TV screen but straight 
to imagination. The human mind will create new worlds populated by colorful 
creatures mentally—and you will be part of the action.
Not today, not tomorrow but certainly the day after tomorrow.
Then our mind will become a cinema in its own right. But it shouldn’t replace, 
no, it should enhance real life. We have to be aware that there are great dan-
gers: the dangers of a virtual matrix. Yet our thoughts, experiences, and behavior 
should evolute and blossom by the power of creativity and imagination.
That it will happen one day, we are sure—and beyond that, we are certain, later 
generations will look upon our early efforts as upon childish stuttering.
Designs from Sherazade: The Untold Stories that started as a 2D project (images 
above) and was cancelled in the aftermath of 9/11. Fifteen years later it was 
revived  and made in 3D (images below). (Courtesy of Hahn Film, Germany/
Chocolate Liberation Front, Australia/Toonz Entertainment, India.)

Part III
Q & A
We have sent out questionnaires to animators, producers, directors, VFX practi­
tioners, historians, and scholars around the world not only to receive a response 
from different positions in filmmaking and film reception but also to get an 
intercultural point of view to the topic from people in the United States, New 
Zealand, China and Asia, and various European countries.


235
44
The Animation Film 
Historian
Giannalberto Bendazzi
Giannalberto Bendazzi (born in 1946 in Ravenna, raised in Milan) is a lead­
ing animation historian. In 1994, he published Cartoons: One Hundred Years 
of Cinema Animation, and in 2016, the 3-volume World History of Animation. 
In 2002, the Animafest Zagreb honored him with the Award for Outstanding 
Achievement in Animation Theory.
Q:	What is it that makes a cartoon character a personality? Is it the acting? 
Is it the writing, the design, or just the emotional tie to the audience?
A:	I would say “a star” instead of “a personality.” In my opinion, what makes 
a star out of a character are of course all the things that are listed in the 
question. PLUS special, uncontrollable charisma that radiates from that 
drawing, or that actor or that actress. Nobody ever could create a star using 
a recipe. Mr. Magoo (for instance) was born exactly by chance. In John 
Hubley’s Ragtime Bear (1949) we see an old, shortsighted and grouchy man 
with his nephew up in the mountains. He has to do with a well designed 
and psychologically appealing bear. Everybody thought that this was the 
pilot for a series on the bear. The public roared at the old pest, instead.

236
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	Are there any particular cartoon characters that have impressed you—
and why?
A:	I have a soft spot for Miyazaki Hayao’s Porco Rosso. I think it is just a per­
sonal reaction to the setting and the story and the times. As far as acting 
is concerned, I love Mickey Mouse in Brave Little Tailor. The performance 
is outstanding.*
Q:	More than any live actors, cartoon characters seem to express their feel­
ing with their eyes.
A:	Let me be horrendously down-to-earth: a live actor has much smaller 
eyes, in proportion with the rest of the body, than the average cartoon 
character!
Q:	How have cartoon characters changed from 2D to 3D?
A:	A 3D character has many more body and face muscles to move, in order to 
act. The beautiful cat of the Shrek theatrical series would have been much 
weaker in 2D.
Q:	What would you recommend animators should do to create, visualize, 
and feel themselves into cartoon characters?
A:	They should act themselves! And later, exaggerate what they have acted.
Q:	As a historian: What can a new generation of cartoon creators learn 
from animation film history?
A:	Character animation is a specifically American contribution to the 
international art of animation (I’m quoting John Canemaker). There is 
a century-long tradition for young American animators to learn and 
understand. They should behave with this tradition the way a creative 
mind should behave with any tradition: either contradict it, or renew it. 
Copying the masters is for unimaginative people.
*	 Mickey Mouse was animated by Fred Moore (1911–1952), who also redesigned Mickey for his 
appearance in The Sorcerer’s Apprentice segment in Fantasia (1940).

237
45
The VFX Artist
Robert Blalack
Robert Blalack (born in 1948 in Canal Zone, Panama) has one Academy Award 
to his credit having done the optical composites for the original George Lucas 
Star Wars (1977), using (before the advent of the digital age) an optical printer 
that was designed by another award winner, Larry Butler. Robert Blalack is now 
living in Paris.
Q:	We seem to be on the threshold to a new Virtual Age, in the stone age of 
what they call Virtual Reality which must be a challenge for animators 
and pretty tough for traditional actresses and actors. What changes 
will that bring to the movie industry?
A:	How will VR change the movie industry? The movie business model is 
rooted in the audience thirst for empathetic characters and engaging 
story. The movie audience participates via observation of and empathy 
with a condensed, focused replication of real or imagined life.
	
  VR is a technique platform that delivers an unrestricted visual and 
audio view of a real or synthetic world, presented today on a screen that 

238
Acting and Character Animation
encompasses peripheral vision, usually with goggles, wherein the VR 
audience can interact with people or objects with tactile feedback.
	
  VR needs to answer the question of what it offers to satisfy the thirst 
of the movie audience. If I’m a gamer, I may hunger to be deep up inside 
the game world and its inhabitants? If I’m a porn enthusiast, I may ache to 
imagine breaking the third wall, so I can “reach out and touch someone”?
	
  If I’m a movie lover, I wonder why VR is not just Stereo 3D on steroids, 
which I know has not enhanced the core of any movie story and smells 
like marketing perfume sprinkled on the Emperor’s funky clothes? Have I 
not been conned before by the movie marketing promises of thrills never 
delivered?
	
  VR has impacted the movie business as a tool for pre-production design 
and production, used to visually articulate a movie’s environment, actor 
performances, camera lighting and framing. VR used for this purpose 
empowers filmmakers with another iteration tool, different from the 
perennial hand-drawn storyboard but fulfilling the same role as a clarify­
ing tool. There’s enormous power in clear communication, no matter what 
the message. VR iterations can help refine a filmmaker’s interior vision, 
which lives in its own non-reality, and bring those usually hazy visions 
into the specific and concrete components that make up a movie.
	
  VR can be a creative and production cost clarifying and savings tool, 
when employed for Hollywood visual extravaganzas, so it’s going to get 
more development and use in movie production. Today’s consumers get 
a taste of this iterative visualization use of VR with Augmented Reality 
enabled smart phones, where the consumers can, in real time, place vari­
ous 3D models of IKEA furniture in their home and decide what fits. Or 
the soon to be realized business opportunity of CG models of potential 
Internet dates/mates, fit in real time into the buyer’s home or bedroom?
	
  To appeal to the movie audience, VR will need to engage and merge the 
solo headset audience into one interconnected virtual world? VR will not 
challenge the traditional movie experience until VR morphs into a com­
munal “VR Movie Theater,” where hundreds, thousands, or millions of 
people are simultaneously experiencing the same VR regardless of where 
the VR audience is.
	
  WHY I want to spend my money and my time in a VR movie is the 
question VR artists have to answer by delivering the “revolutionary” Star 
Wars of VR.
Q:	Is this new age the beginning of a new art form that is going to chal­
lenge the human brain or will it restrict the human mind because to 
most people it might be a network of social fake?
A:	Any technique becomes an art form only when worked by artists? VR art­
ists struggle with every artist’s challenge: WHY must an audience spend 

239
45.  The VFX Artist
its time and money experiencing my CONTENT? If VR artists can deliver 
compelling answers to both these enduring real world questions, VR will 
progress from a technique to an art form.
	
  VR will “challenge the human brain” in expansive or constrictive direc­
tions depending on the particular VR artist’s skill and objectives. For 
some, it may offer no more than claustrophobic nausea.


241
46
The Creator from Italy
Bruno Bozzetto
Bruno Bozzetto (born in 1938 in Milan) created his first animation short, Tapum, 
the History of Weapons in 1958 when he was 20. When only a few companies in 
Europe tried to compete with Disney on the animated feature film field, between 
1965 and 1976, he produced West and Soda, Vip, Mio Fratello Superuomo, and 
Allegro Non Troppo. In 1987, in Trouble in Paradise, he worked with live actors 
too. Today, he devotes his time to 2D as well as 3D computer animation. In 1991, 
his film Cavalette was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Animated 
Short. His most famous character is named Signor Rossi.
Q:	At the time you created Signor Rossi there was a change in animation, 
artistically: from Disney to UPA and Zagreb style, economically from 
full to limited TV animation. Did it help you cost-wise and what did it 
mean in regard to designing characters that were human, no anthropo­
morphic Disney animals?
A:	The creation of Rossi and his graphical simplicity surely helped a lot from 
the economical point of view. I can say, though, the idea to switch to human 

242
Acting and Character Animation
beings in particular is Canadian-rooted, if you think of the National Film 
Board, and was partly inspired by Zagreb Film. I got to know their festival 
films of which I grew enthusiastic. The decisive inspiration came from 
Ward Kimball (Toot, Whistle, Plunk and Boom) from Disney.
Q:	What “typical” Italian features does Signor Rossi reflect? Is he sort of a 
prototype Italian?
A:	I can’t really tell. He originated from a real story that I personally lived. In 
the beginning Rossi was supposed to be a sort of caricature of myself, of 
my friends and of my father, too. The character was the mirror of every­
body’s daily attitudes that I used to observe and that I myself at times had. 
Then, with the passing of time, he changed and, having to adapt to what 
the television demanded, he underwent a sort of transformation becom­
ing fit for the young audiences.
Q:	West and Soda, at that time one of the first big feature-length animated 
productions in Europe, parodies the genre of Italian (or Spaghetti) 
Western, even before Django came out. Did you study the work of 
Sergio Leone and how did you design the characters according to their 
counterparts in feature films?
A:	I didn’t know Sergio Leone back then. We began making parodies of the 
Western films simultaneously. My biggest inspiration was, above all, the 
movie Shane featuring Alan Ladd and Jack Palance, and the great classics 
by John Ford. Anyway, West & Soda is the result of the everlasting passion 
I, as a boy (and still now), had for the Western films as a genre.
Q:	Did comic books, as fumetti an acknowledged part of Italian culture, 
serve as a springboard when you prepared VIP, My Brother Superman 
(1968) about two brothers, the Adonis-like SuperVip and slim MiniVip?
A:	MiniVip originates from the Phantom (by Lee Falk and Ray Moore), a 
comic strip I loved as a kid.
Q:	What can you tell about the work with your voice actors and actresses?
A:	During the making of our films we had no original voices of our own. At 
the end we had them dubbed by Italian dubbers who were very famous 
back then. [Oreste Lionello, one of the founders of modern Italian cabaret, 
as MiniVip. Among those he dubbed were Chaplin, Groucho Marx, Dick 
Van Dyke, Peter Sellers, and Woody Allen.]
Q:	You also worked with live actors in front of the camera. What’s the dif­
ference between directing live and animated characters?

243
46.  The Creator from Italy
A:	I think the difference consists in the fact that it is much easier to direct 
a sketch than an actor. This is because drawing requires time and think­
ing while interacting with an actor implies immediate decisions. And for 
someone who comes from the animation industry this is very difficult.
Q:	Allegro Non Troppo had that wonderful, masterful evolutionary 
Fantasia spoof, where all living emerges from a Cola bottle. Was it dif­
ficult to time movement and action to classic music (Ravel’s famous 
Bolero)? How important is musical score to you? How important is it to 
underline action and define characters?
A:	To respect the time movement is always very difficult but it rewards you 
with great satisfaction because you have the chance to work on highly 
valuable material which grants to keep the film together within a solid 
structure. Music is very important to me and it sort of opens the way to 
both, the story and the characters.
Q:	How did 2D and 3D computer animation change your work?
A:	3D adds up more technology but sensibly increases the costs of produc­
tion. Personally, I still don’t see any change in the way a story is being told. 
The framings, the acting and the actions depend on the story and not on 
the used technique.
Q:	Animation-wise, are there any characters outside your work that you 
find interesting and worth studying?
A:	I believe that it is important and interesting to study mankind and its 
behavior. It is and will always be the biggest source of inspiration for the 
subjects and the stories.
Q:	Is there anything in particular you would like to save from the days of 
classic animation into the digital future?
A:	The direct human contact, the exchange of views and of personal informa­
tion that today we risk losing because of the impersonality and distance 
between the artists working on a project.


245
47
The Replacement 
Animators from Argentina
Alberto Couceiro and 
Alejandra Tomei
Born in Buenos Aires, the couple lives in Berlin since 1992. Alberto Couceiro 
studied animation in Potsdam-Babelsberg and specialized in stop motion, while 
Alejandra Tomei focused on directing, character design, and digital image pro­
cessing and compositing. After the great success of their stop-motion TV City at 
the Cannes Film Festival in 2003, they founded their own studio Animas Film. 
TV City was screened at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, the puppets 
were on display at the Jilin Animation Institute in Changchun, China. At the 
Berlin Film Festival in 2015, another short film, Automatic Fitness, was shown 
that won awards at film festivals round the world.
Q:	You don’t work in front of a computer screen. You still favor the tradi­
tional process of replacement puppet animation. What’s the challenge 
to work physically with puppets and not with all those digital tools?
A:	Alejandra Tomei: I like the real world most, the world of objects, a world 
that is haptic, a world that you can touch. This is the place where I feel well, 
about which I can talk most.

246
Acting and Character Animation
	
  Every man-made object has its story, an existence that talks to me. 
These objects have their own logic. The objects which we create in our stu­
dio develop by and by their own “soul” which we try to understand. The 
challenge is to share these stories through our films with other people.
	
  Alberto Couceiro: Stop motion is one of the oldest techniques in cin­
ematography. It combines various other techniques.
	
  To create armatures for instance one must gain expertise in metal 
working and for the puppet construction you need to combine a lot of 
materials. The task to build sets and models is a world of its own. Then 
there is the traditional craftsmanship like photography and lighting and 
now we got digital image processing.
	
  In all these fields we have to experiment, master each technique, we 
have to know the various materials to produce a result of high quality. This 
is one of the challenges working with puppets and working physically. It’s 
real handiwork in a world which as a result of digitalization becomes more 
and more abstract and incomprehensible.
	
  For independent artists and filmmakers it is a great obligation to main­
tain and develop all these techniques more or less under one roof.
	
  We are moving into a wide and open world of objects for which you 
need time and space, a scarce commodity in our era.
Q:	Do you consider it a niche that allows you to work as individuals?
A:	Alejandra Tomei: That was not meant to be our marketing concept. By 
experimenting we developed over the years a style of our own so that 
I know for sure how things and figures should look like and how ideas 
should be realized.
Alberto Couceiro and Alejandra Tomei.  (Courtesy of Animas Film.)

247
47.  The Replacement Animators from Argentina
	
  Alberto Couceiro: After so many projects that we did there certainly 
evolved something like an individual style. The more you build an anima­
tion studio and develop the technical infrastructure as means of creativ­
ity, the more ideas you will get and develop a way how to produce your 
individual kind of images.
Q:	How do you establish a relationship with the puppets, how do you deter­
mine their performance, not only technically speaking but mentally? 
How do you time and visualize the movements and the performance in 
advance?
A:	Alejandra Tomei: Ideas grow out of little things, out of certain situations 
that we have watched carefully. Daily life delivers lots of ideas out of which 
absurd and funny images and reflections will evolve. These impressions 
become concrete visions of film plots. This is the basic material for the 
animation.
	
  Alberto Couceiro: In our early stages we had prepared exposure sheets, 
we made notes and used other aids. Often we used a stop watch, a metro­
nome, and pantomime. We reenacted and timed scenes so that we could 
translate the structure of the plot into a series of images and make a plan. 
These were means to get confident in abstract animation.
	
  Specifically in productions we did with 35 mm cameras and analogue 
technique we needed more preparation before shooting a take than today. 
The shooting process was connected with big technical expenditure and 
high costs.
	
  The digital technique and digital photography has opened up enormous 
new possibilities for stop motion. Small and light equipment is sufficient 
to shoot high-quality images. You get the result at once. You can process 
the images in different ways and much more… We are able to work spon­
taneously and use our intuition.
	
  Usually I start animating now without much preparation and thoughts 
given to the movement.
	
  Of course the many years of experience and the new developments of 
technology are helpful.
	
  I get involved almost casually into intuitive play with animation. One 
image brings me to the next and the animation often moves by itself. 
Breaks are made where rhythm needs them, and we let the movements 
flow.
	
  If everything goes well and animation is done with the utmost concen­
tration (in a time of diversion and distraction this is a mental state that 
is not self-evident) you get a feeling for images and the length of scenes. 
You are like a sculptor who carves as if the form is already engraved in the 
stone. You take pot luck by the movements that develop frame after frame 
in front of your camera.

248
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	There are those tiny, unexpected details that seem to make up the dis­
tinctiveness of a puppet and charm the audience, right?
A:	Alejandra Tomei: Although usually everything is thought out beforehand 
it is the discovery of little details that gain our attention.
	
  Alberto Couceiro: Surprise is the fascinating and magical part about 
animation. The unexpected is what makes animation special. One cannot 
easily reproduce these moments. Puppet play and movements are being 
built in one session, a scene in a few hours, in front of the camera, frame 
by frame. It depends on many other factors. It is a “live-play” which takes 
place between animator and figure, and the whole movement can be seen 
several hours after single-frame shooting. Then it’s the details that deter­
mine beauty and charm. One is always looking for such moments. It’s a 
subtle perception. You cannot say why a certain animation scene is beau­
tiful. The reason must be that it has the certain something that is so hard 
to describe. It’s always these tiny details that make us recognize life and 
charm. This is our motivation to go on and animate and bring these fig­
ures to life: to look for a human character and find yourself.
Q:	Are there any outstanding achievements in the history of stop motion 
or more recent examples that you would like to recommend to fellow 
animators?
A:	Alejandra Tomei: I’m seeing always new animation films at festivals that 
surprise me. Often I forget the titles and names involved. Regarding stop 
motion and animation in general it’s often the short films that inspire and 
motivate me to start a film project. In this field filmmakers experiment 
a lot so that you can discover always things that you haven’t seen before. 
There are numerous animation films that you see exclusively at festivals, 
films that are really mind-blowing.
	
  In film history most names that come to my mind are not related to 
animation and stop motion. I would like to mention Murnau, Fritz Lang, 
Hitchcock, Bunuel, David Lynch. These are directors that inspired me a lot.
	
  Alberto Couceiro: I would like to mention the old films of Ray 
Harryhausen and the old Czechoslovkian films by Karel Zeman and Jiří 
Trnka. Also the 1970s and 1980s with Jan Švankmajer, the Brothers Quay, 
Barry Purves, and the cut-out animation by Terry Gilliam that had an 
influence on us. Of course names such as Nick Park and Tim Burton are 
extremely important too.
Q:	You are working in extremely confined studio spaces.
A:	Alberto Couceiro: As a beginner you always can work in small rooms and 
accomplish something working with little figures. But then the time will 
come that a room proves to be too small, but beginners will continue to 

249
47.  The Replacement Animators from Argentina
work out of small cabins, in garages, basement rooms. These are locations 
where one will begin.
	
  Alejandra Tomei: You can always do something in the room that you 
have. I have seen this by watching colleagues. Everybody must deal with 
the possibilities he got.
	
  More ideal would be larger rooms and professional studios. But small 
rooms must not be an obstacle. The ideas have to correspond with the 
conditions of limited studio space. Important are quiet workshops where 
you can work over a long time.
Q:	As stop-motion animators you are like long-distance runners. You are 
animating everything yourself, with no assistant’s helping hand. This 
affords even more time.
A:	Alberto Couceiro: Our strength is endurance and self-discipline. We work 
on our films as long as necessary, according to requirements and aspira­
tion. Sometimes the conditions are not optimal, and there is a certain kind 
of self-exploitation.
	
  I have to admit that the production conditions of our last projects were 
not always the best ones to save production time. We were forced to inter­
rupt shooting to do commissioned work which will bring in the money we 
need to finance our own productions.
	
  Alejandra Tomei: The means we had at hand were extremely low. We 
couldn’t pay a big team. There was no other choice than to produce in the 
long view and do many things yourself.
Q:	This process requires a lot of patience and humility we guess.
A:	Alberto Couceiro: Patience is a prerequisite in any technique of animation.
Q:	What can you tell about the international stop-motion scene? Is there 
something like a renaissance of stop motion thanks to films like 
Anomalisa and Kubo & the Two Strings?
A:	Alberto Couceiro: There are many new small studios that spring up like 
mushrooms, and there is a new generation of filmmakers that is very 
interested in puppet animation. At the same time we see more and more 
stop motion in advertisement and TV.
Q:	Can you describe some of your previous projects?
A:	Alberto Couceiro: Our first film, The Shirt, was more of an exercise. We 
didn’t have exaggerated ambitions. It was our first encounter with the 
medium of film. The idea was to show a shirt at breakfast. We worked with 
real objects, including live sequences. This helped us to learn more about 
objects and how to animate them and how to use 35 mm film technique. 

250
Acting and Character Animation
Out of this exercise evolved a nice six-minute film that we finished in six 
months. We submitted it to festivals where it won several awards. That 
motivated us to start something new.
	
  TV City was a big project right from the beginning [a satire about 
TV broadcasters and their audience]. It was a coproduction with Film 
University Babelsberg and became my graduate film. We built many fig­
ures and developed stories for them. We wanted a film with dialogue and 
many locations: a world of its own. We didn’t economize on ideas. We 
worked on it for a long time. We were younger than and had much time. 
We used age-old 35 mm technique and camera equipment that weighed 
50 pounds but produced beautiful images. The film got longer and longer 
and more and more elaborate. We spent a lot of time and had our fun over 
a period of six years. The film run 27 minutes and turned out a successful 
festival entry.
	
  Automatic Fitness was the first completely independent production 
we did at our studio Animas Film. We were our own writers, animators 
and producers. It’s a film about stress, optimization of work processes 
and the high pressure to perform in a fast and rapidly changing working 
environment.
Q:	Do you consider 3D computer animation a competition or an equal?
A:	Alberto Couceiro: No, I don’t consider it a competition. I think it is a com­
pletely different technique to produce moving images.
	
  Alejandra Tomei: With 3D computer animation the world of objects 
looks different than in stop motion.
 Alejandra Tomei working on TV City. (Courtesy of Animas Film.)

251
47.  The Replacement Animators from Argentina
Q:	Considering techniques like motion capture: Is it easier for CG ani­
mators to provide a naturalistic performance? You seem to work with 
exaggeration, the Expressionist way of performance, the big gesture.
A:	Alberto Couceiro: I like caricatures, expressive gestures which get the gist. 
I don’t like naturalism in animation that much. For me naturalism and 
animation is a mix that doesn’t succeed too often. I have noticed that with 
gestures and expressions done in the way of a caricature simple lines come 
off livelier and stronger so that emotions and the human factor become 
clearer.
	
  Alejandra Tomei: Our technique allows for more freedom. I have a 
preference for such techniques because they foster the imagination of the 
audience. They offer more space for association and one’s own thoughts. 
At the same time you can establish a kind of own logic without feeling a 
stranger while watching. There is more space for absurdity and humor 
which can unfold under these conditions. From a creative point of view 
there are no bounds that we are not allowed to overstep. For us animators 
this is a good feeling.
Q:	So stylization is the basis of your type of animation, not photorealism.
A:	Alberto Couceiro: In our previous projects we used photo-realism more 
in a surrealist way. Of course this depends on the idea and the creative 
choice. There are ideas that work better in other aesthetics.
	
  Alejandra Tomei: I’m not predetermined. I think that depending on the 
project we could do both. We have used stylization in preference to photo-
realism because it suited our projects.


253
48
The Spanish Animation 
Producer
Manuel Cristóbal
Manuel Cristóbal (born in 1969 in Madrid) is a producer who introduced 3D 
­animation to his country with El bosque animado (The Living Forest). He has 
won three Goya Awards in the best animation feature category. In 2012, he 
­produced one of the most memorable (but least successful) animated feature films 
of Europe: Arrugas (Wrinkles). He is a member of the European Film Academy. At 
the time of this interview, Manuel Cristóbal was preparing a Spanish–Chinese co-
production Dragonkeeper and an animated arthouse film project about Luis Bunuel.
The young Luis Bunuel in an animated biopic titled Bunuel in the Labyrinth of the 
Turtles. (Courtesy of Manuel Cristóbal.)

254
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	Not many people abroad seem to know European animation. Even 
in Europe it’s not considered a premier brand. It’s mainly American 
blockbusters that seem to conquer audiences. Is this only a question of 
marketing?
A:	I just do not think “European animation” is a needed brand, or at least I 
am not interested in that. Animation is international, animation is cinema. 
What we need are directors and studios that are a “brand” and recognized 
worldwide. There is a great example in Despicable Me. The original story 
comes from Sergio Pablos, a Spanish animator who sold it to Universal and 
Illumination, then later it was produced in France with French directors, so 
does it mean it is European? Does it even bother? It is a question of distri­
bution and finding a partner that can secure worldwide distribution. In this 
case Universal did an excellent job but you always need three ingredients: a 
great story with great writers and a great director, a solid studio to give you 
the needed quality and a distribution partner with the power to reach the 
whole world.
Q:	Nevertheless, there is a lot of support for European animation from 
Cartoon Brussels and national subsidies. Some claim the strength of 
European product is variety. Variety, however, is often a different spell­
ing for fragmentation. Do you think it would be worthwhile to find a 
handwriting in animation, to find a type of film that is identifiable—
just like anime are identified with Japan?
A:	I think certain art house projects can only come from Europe and we 
should keep that, but I also think we should use animation to entertain 
a family and mainstream audience. Balance is important, and finding 
the right dimension for each project is crucial. In a certain way family 
animation is football, a great market with great demand where you need 
big budgets plus a franchise potential and if you don’t have them don’t 
bother to show up. Art house animation is like ice skating: a much more 
reduced market but there certainly is one and it is worth it only if you 
are able to find unique stories and produce them with a very competitive 
budget.
Q:	Sometimes European productions seem to have problems of even being 
shown in Europe. Spanish films are successful in Spain, German in 
Germany, and so on but not so often vice versa. Is this the effect of what 
the Americans call “local production?”
A:	I think if a film is good it will travel. It would be helpful to support local 
distributors that want to release European animation films because distri­
bution is the key.

255
48.  The Spanish Animation Producer
Q:	How did you become a producer yourself? And what are the qualities an 
animation producer should have?
A:	I was trained as theatre and film director. I just saw I wasn’t a genius at it, 
produced some shorts and also began working as manager in a producer’s 
association in Spain. Suddenly I went from serving coffee TO the produc­
ers to having coffee WITH the producers and listening to them. One of 
the members of the association was the owner of the studio where we did 
The Living Forest. I started helping him out, and he offered me a posi­
tion as executive producer. I was 29 at the time and I think it was such a 
crazy project that no one else wanted to take it. I just saw that the one who 
puts the project together is the producer and that is something fascinat­
ing and rewarding. The training available from the MEDIA Programme 
of the European Union [a subsidized initiative designed to support the 
development and distribution of films, training activities, festivals, and 
promotion projects throughout Europe] also helped me a lot, it helped a 
great deal.
	
  An animation producer should know both worlds, animation and pro­
duction, mainly production, and should be able to listen, to believe and 
to persist. Animation is very tricky and budgets are normally higher than 
live action. Preproduction is key as we can’t make the films twice like a 
regular studio would do, therefore facing the problems far in advance is 
mandatory.
Q:	Do you prefer to buy properties for screen adaptation or to develop sto­
ries and characters from scratch?
A:	I do prefer pre-existing properties but I am not closed to original stories. 
I think that when you work with adaptations you have three great advan­
tages: first you have something that most of the times is a production value 
with readers to support you plus something that moved them emotionally, 
second is that you have something to talk with the talent (possible writers 
and possible directors) to find out if you see the same film and third, you 
have a selling tool as you can send the book even before writing the script to 
test interest from investors. When I buy something it is because I love it and 
I see how to try to make it possible. Also I know that there is a great leap of 
faith from the author to give you his or her “baby” and that for me is very 
rewarding that although the story may change, because film is a different 
medium and the director needs its space, the author is proud of the result.
Q:	How do you work as a producer with the animation director, writers, 
and animators?
A:	As a producer I work mainly with the writer and the director and they 
have to be different persons, it doesn’t mean that the director is not 

256
Acting and Character Animation
involved in the script but I think it is important to have an extraordinary 
scriptwriter. In Europe the writer-director sometimes is a good combi­
nation but many other times just hides a lousy writer. I do not write and 
I do not direct but I do choose the projects and I know what I want. If 
you have the right team and it works well my opinion is the opinion of 
the team and I fight for it. I do not work with animation directors and 
animators as I think a producer has to be very involved in development 
and just check that the studio is working ok. He should be there only if 
problems need to be solved. I am also very much involved in marketing 
and distribution. The film does not end when the animation ends, till a 
certain extent begins there.
Q:	You were the first Spanish producer to work with 3D animation. What 
were your experiences?
A:	The Living Forest (directed by Angel de la Cruz, 2001) is a very dear film 
to me, not only because it was the first CGI animation film in Europe, but 
because it was also the first success of Spanish animation in its theatrical 
market. I was hired in 1999 by the owner of Dygra Films and producer of 
the film as executive producer and enjoyed every moment. We were a very 
young team in La Coruna, north east of Spain, and for most of us it was 
our first feature, so we gave everything. I dealt with script development, 
packaging, financing, marketing and even acted as sales agent of the film. 
We were very lucky that Javier Vasallo, head of Buena Vista Spain at the 
time, was interested from very early on and I could work on the market­
ing of the film with Alvaro Curie, who was Marketing Director of Buena 
Vista.
Q:	Wrinkles, 2D-animated, was developed from a comic book. It’s about 
Alzheimer’s disease and tells its story with a lot of emotion and empa­
thy. Many animated films seem to project more empathy than any live-
action film.
A:	I already had done three family films and I saw Wrinkles as a wonderful 
new challenge. I read an article in the newspaper that this comic book got 
its author the National Comic Book Award in Spain and I thought that 
if with those ingredients (a retirement home and Alzheimer) it had been 
awarded many prizes and was selling there should be a great story, and 
with no doubt there was one. I also had met [director] Ignacio Ferreras 
and he was somebody I wanted to work with, so I bought the book for 
him as I thought he had that sensitivity for it. Animation in a certain 
extent can be more poetic than live-action film and also in animation 
they become unique films. The empathy in this case is due to Ignacio 
Ferreras, the director, who was able to make you laugh and cry with the 
characters, and it was his first film.

257
48.  The Spanish Animation Producer
Q:	You didn’t have a big budget when you made Wrinkles. Nevertheless, 
there is great character animation. How was that possible with such a 
low budget?
A:	I think Wrinkles is great storytelling and some journalists have compared 
the animation with films that cost ten times as much, just because it has 
great characters. I knew that I could raise almost two million Euros in 
Spain for a film like that. I talked to the director and we found a way to do 
it for that budget. Ignacio Ferreras did the whole animatic by himself and 
we just animated the animatic. We couldn’t afford more and it paid off.
Q:	Right now you seem to be one of the few European animation producers 
trying to cooperate with China. What can you tell about it?
A:	I am lucky to have a partner like Larry Levene who has been working with 
China for many years. Of course, it is tricky but like I heard somebody 
say, “China now is like Hollywood in the 30s, anything can happen.” It is 
crucial to go to China often, listen a lot, find the right partners and persist.
Q:	In adapting Dragonkeeper, part of a bestselling trilogy of novels, you 
deal with Chinese characters. Would you please share with us problems 
in design, acting, and research?
A:	Dragonkeeper is the first of the three novels we bought. This story takes 
place in China and was written by Carole Wilkinson, a wonderful 
Australian writer. In design we did concept art with Sergio Pablos but 
early on it was clear that we had to have a Chinese art director to have not 
only the accuracy but also the Chinese talent. We took on board BASE FX 
Wrinkles. (Courtesy of Manuel Cristóbal, Perro Verde Films.)

258
Acting and Character Animation
with a team led by Tony Zhang and the work took off. The main problem 
is getting the story right when dealing with Chinese elements and making 
them work for a Chinese audience but at the end of the day you have to 
take your chances and go for a great story.
Q:	Right now there is only one very successful Chinese animation charac­
ter on the international market and that was developed not by Chinese 
but by Americans: Kung Fu Panda. Do you think Chinese producers 
will be able to place their own product on international markets or will 
they content themselves with their own vast domestic market?
A:	I don’t know if Chinese producers would like to stay in their market. What 
I do know is that the challenge is to make something that works in China 
as well as in the rest of the world. Animation is the perfect vehicle to try 
that and also is the vehicle to aim for a franchise.

259
49
The Stop-Motion 
Animator and VFX 
Director
Jim Danforth
Jim Danforth (born in 1940) was one of the leading traditional American stop-
motion animators and visual effects directors. He animated big parts of Jack the 
Giant Killer (1961), did most of the dragon sequence in The Wonderful World 
of the Brothers Grimm (1962), the Beetle Man (and matte art) for Flesh Gordon 
(1973), and Pegasus for Ray Harryhausen’s final movie, Clash of the Titans (1981). 
He was twice nominated for an Academy Award: for Seven Faces of Dr. Lao (1964) 
and Hammer-Seven Arts’ When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth (1971).
Mike Jittlov: “Absolute genius! Boosted me out of some really low moods, he’s 
been through Hollywood hell, and shrugs off the flames like a summer’s breeze.”*
Q:	There was some short stop-motion test you once did on spec. It seemed 
to be, if we remember the footage correctly, a recreation of a situa­
tion from Norse mythology, showing a winged-helmet god or hero in 
front of a live, rear projected waterfall in a mountainous region. The 
stately, imposing figure didn’t move much, but you could recognize the 
*	 Mike Jittlov Can Do Everything! In Fantastic Films Collectors Edition #20. December, 1980.

260
Acting and Character Animation
character immediately in the 30 seconds you did. Can you describe this 
particular animation?
A:	The scene to which you are referring shows a young version of Wotan. As 
you will recall from the legend, Wotan, although a god, is not immortal, 
so I chose to show him in his younger days. In the scene he turns and 
walks up the mountain trail toward the camera. What I tried to do was 
make the animation slow and majestic. I also had to give some animation 
to Wotan’s cape.
Q:	Ray Harryhausen, when asked to explain how he would handle the task 
of animation technically, said that it becomes your second nature. Did 
he mean he did animation instinctively and not mathematically, just 
counting frames to outline the action?
A:	I know that Ray sometimes used a stop watch to time actions. I think that 
was mostly in his younger days. I tended to count seconds to myself—
one-thousand-and-one, one-thousand-and-two, etc. Then I multiplied by 
twenty four to get the number of frames. After some practice, I learned 
that some actions were predictable—eight frames for a quick puppet-like 
step, twelve frames for a more human like step; more frames for a slow 
step or for a large giant.
Wotan. (Courtesy of Jim Danforth.)

261
49.  The Stop-Motion Animator and VFX Director
Q:	Ray took acting lessons in his youth, even said that he had stage fright 
and that it was one of the reasons that he preferred to animate instead 
of appearing on stage himself. Did you do research on acting? Do you 
feel like acting it out via puppets or do you consider yourself more of 
directing a certain character?
A:	I did do research on acting, and I believed that animation was a dramatic 
performance, but I also approached the design of animation sequences 
from a directorial perspective.
Q:	How do you mentally explore a character? And how do you visualize it? 
Does the puppet become an avatar to you?
A:	I think about the character’s motivation or goals. Usually, the goals 
are simple: get from one side of the shot to the other, for example. 
Sometimes there is more drama to it. In my career, the scenes with the 
most drama were in the Art Clokey TV series Davey and Goliath. In the 
feature films with creatures, most of the drama was situational—mean­
ing that the human characters were menaced by the animated crea­
tures, so that a simple roar might seem very dramatic in context, even 
though the action might not be inherently dramatic. I tried to avoid 
bold, stylized characterizations for ‘naturalistic’ creatures, which made 
my animation seem less powerful. Ray tended to be very broad in his 
characterizations, except with the Troglodyte in Sinbad and the Eye of 
the Tiger.
Q:	By the way, we re-read your proposed script Theseus and the Minotaur 
for the ill-fated series project Ray Harryhausen’s World of Myth & 
Legend and included portions in this book. Everything was in the writ­
ing, and you could imagine and visualize the fight between the Greek 
hero and the mythological creature just from reading: every movement, 
up to the dapper wave of the hand we dare to say. If you compare these 
pages to screenwriter Kenneth Kolb’s description of the cyclops/dragon 
fight from The 7th Voyage of Sinbad, Kolb’s writing seemed uninspired 
and weak.
A:	Keep in mind that Kenneth Kolb was not directing the animation, only 
writing something for Ray to base his direction on. In my Theseus script, 
I was predirecting the filming and editing of the story. I thought the 
sequence in which Theseus fights the Minotaur was the best example of 
that, with each cut specified in the writing. By the way, I rewrote Theseus 
and the Minotaur, adding two monkey characters as pets for Ariadne—
one dyed red, the other dyed blue (there is a fresco at Knossos showing a 
blue monkey).

262
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	How did you approach the movements of extinct animals, of dinosaurs? 
In some cases, you were able to give the dinosaurs—well, character: the 
baby dinosaur from When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth, the fat tyranno­
saur from Caveman. And, on the contrary, how did you do research on 
living animals and humans to be animated? Did you study Muybridge? 
What does movement mean to you? Your animation always was so full 
of live and so imaginative.
A:	As it happens, the two examples you mentioned were largely animated 
by others. Dave Allen did some of the animation of the baby Dinosaur in 
When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth, and Randy Cook did most of the anima­
tion of the tyrannosaur in Caveman. However, I did study Muybridge—
particularly when animating Pegasus for Clash of the Titans. I’ve always 
been very interested in movement and dance, and I thought that design­
ing stop motion was like choreographing the sequences in which anima­
tion was to appear. Because some of the ‘dancers’ were actors, and only 
one or two were puppets, and because of the prohibitions of the Directors 
Guild, I was not always able to get the choreography performed according 
to my design. In pure puppet films, the choreography was easier, although 
I understand that conditions for animators are now more restrictive than 
they were in the past.
Q:	What do you think about classic, stylized Czech animation like Trnka 
and some fine Japanese stop motion?
A:	I’m a big fan of Czech animation—particularly that of Jiří Trnka (although 
I don’t know whether Trnka himself ever animated any of his puppets). 
Trnka was more a director, I believe. Some of the Japanese animator/
directors I found to be very good—particularly Kihachiro Kawamoto.

263
50
The Belgian Animation 
Director
Piet De Rycker
Piet De Rycker (born in 1957 in Antwerp) is a Belgian animator and animation 
director who worked all over Europe, animating in Ireland for Don Bluth (Rock-
A-Doodle, 1991), directing in Germany as well as in Great Britain. His most 
famous animated feature films in Europe were The Little Polar Bear (2001) and 
Laura’s Star (2004). He came from 2D animation but directed 3D as well. Thanks 
to the organizers of the Cartoon Forum, we met Mr. De Rycker in Toulouse and 
spoke to him.
Q:	Can you tell us a little bit about your background?
A:	Since age 12 I wanted to be in the animation industry. At that time I had 
no clue about the many disciplines one must master, nor did I know about 
the amount of people involved or the talents one must have. I just liked the 
idea of creating emotions through moving drawings. Those 1960s Disney 
movies could make me weep every time, over and over again. Being a 
kid that was born with a pencil in his hand it was only logical to steer 
all my studies from then on into that direction. But it was until I was in 

264
Acting and Character Animation
my early thirties that things started to turn. I had moved in the mean­
time to Ireland and worked for the Don Bluth Entertainment Studios. 
Don Bluth, being a former classical Disney animator, had left the Disney 
Studios together with half of the animation staff and had founded his own 
company wherein he wanted to prove that excellent classical animation 
combined with storytelling that went straight to the heart had still a great 
potential to move people from all over the world. In those days 3D anima­
tion was just glancing around the corner and was still an oddity and only 
used to simplify the animation of props. Character animation was still 
done as in the old days: on paper.
	
  Another input I had was through my work as a comic book artist and 
illustrator for magazines in which I could train my own way of storytelling.
	
  The combination of these two skills made me move up fast to script­
writing and directing. First in my own studios, after having returned from 
Ireland some years later, then more important for Cartoon Film, a Berlin-
based animation company that was back then only producing TV series 
but wanted to get into feature family entertainment as well. The com­
bination of Cartoon Film (being supported by Warner Bros. Germany) 
working with local talents mixed with internationally trained European 
animation artists as myself made it possible to produce movies that were 
outstanding.
Q:	You have directed a number of successful animated feature films for 
kids, mainly preschoolers. So you work around children’s imagination. 
What is the difference between children’s and adult’s animation? Did 
you do research in child psychology?
A:	In principle not much and Pixar proves this. Unfortunately, under the 
influence of TV formats, we have split up the audience in all kinds of age 
groups forgetting that a good story should be able to hold the attention of 
any spectator, being kid or adult alike.
	
  This doesn’t mean that all adult stories can be told for children, because 
their life experience is not sufficient to understand the deep content of 
it. But every children story can be told in a way that also adults can be 
touched by it. That asks, of course, for daring storytelling and not patron­
ized storytelling or parent-proof storytelling. As real life is for all ages, a 
movie should be too.
Q:	Concerning this do you realize differences in various European 
countries?
A:	From my own experience in feature animation (I leave preschool TV 
out of the discussion), there is a big difference between working for a 
German project or a British. It is all about culture and about what one 
thinks entertainment is or should be. I have the impression British culture 

265
50.  The Belgian Animation Director
understands entertainment as a challenge to explore the grandness of a 
project, not limited by predetermined ideas if it is of educational value 
or parent-proof. This state of thinking means that there are a lot of wild, 
funny, grand ideas on the table that might be hilarious, even over the top 
which makes the work process hilarious, too. Of course not all of those 
ideas make it to the screen. But somehow it influences the way how you 
look at a project. By trying to be parent-proof, however, as they do in 
Germany, educationally and politically correct, a lot of potential is cut 
already out before one starts a project. It means that there is a stop toward 
high adventure, not only by the false idea of not having the money to visu­
alize it but just because there is a certain fear to impress, to excel in enter­
taining filmmaking. This idea of social rightness I see as a self limitation. 
In Germany there seems to be an unwritten law that says we need to pro­
tect future generations from crazy irrational behavior. So we will educate 
them well and if things would go out of hand nobody can blame us. This 
doesn’t mean that German movies can’t be successful. On the contrary, 
they might be very popular, on the home market. But elsewhere, they will 
be hard to sell. Maybe because when one doesn’t go for the educational, 
one might go for the burlesque. And that is a style that has also an audi­
ence attraction in Germany. As a Belgian, I am in the middle of those two 
cultures. I understand them both, but the British tongue in cheek, laugh­
ing about your own stupid self, holds a charm that we all should embrace 
in our working life.
Q:	Can you describe the work of an animation director and the problems 
he or she has to face?
A:	Firstly, a director must have a vision. Secondly, a language that is deeply 
connected to the particular story he wants to tell. Thirdly, the courage to 
fight for his vision, because the amount of high-risk money at stake in this 
industry makes it possible that in the course of the daily work he might 
have forgotten the initial sparkle that generated the whole reason of mak­
ing the movie anyway. There are many ways a boat can sink. Fourthly, 
he must be able to stir a team, through arguments and not feelings, and 
mediate the way the story should be told. There are still too many pictures 
made in a ground soap of ideas driven by team decisions that lack a good 
view on strong and bold storytelling. Fifthly, he must be capable to listen 
very, very carefully to all what is being said by any person working on the 
project. One might be surprised by the amount of accidental input given 
for free by all those nice people at only an arm length away from you. In 
short, one must have a brain to have a vision, an eye for a view, a mouth to 
express the ideas and an ear to hold you back from making mistakes that 
your brain wasn’t able to grasp: A heart to be brave. A belly to feel. Strong 
legs and feet for emotional storms coming in from nowhere.

266
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	You worked with preconceived characters from popular children’s 
books but developed also figures of your own. Do you develop the story, 
in the best case, out of these characters, limitations included?
A:	There are two ways to tell stories. One is to narrate a tale character-driven, 
the other is story-driven or structure-driven. And in the middle you will 
find infinite options. Best is to find a combination wherein both will have 
their perfect moments. But in all cases it must be believably unique.
	
  Another approach I use is that I can’t write a story or define a character 
without having at least an idea of the visual look and feel. This means 
that during the writing process we also draw character models to see what 
would work best. Sometimes a character doesn’t come from design but is 
a pose one finds that will fill in the right personality.
	
  Once the story is storyboarded one can fine-tune the rough models into 
more precise models, but most of the time they don’t change too much, 
since everybody in the meantime got used to them.
	
  It is more or less the writer of live-action movies who writes a role with 
a specific actor in mind. If for one reason or another it is not possible to 
hire that particular actor most of the time the script has to be re-written.
Q:	Do you consider acting theories helpful for animation directors and 
animators?
A:	They are extremely important and will help you to create believable and 
unique scenes. One must become an encyclopedia of gestures in well 
defined moments of life to avoid generic fill-ins of none telling poses which 
won’t evocate an emotion in the spectator. A moment is always connected 
to the character’s behavior, its outlook and the believability of its action, 
given under these specific circumstances.
Q:	How do you create the emotional part, the empathy?
A:	I think “build” is a better word than “create.” It is a fine planning of the right 
elements that makes the audience first feel for the character, understand its 
dilemma and then hit at the right moment the string where the character 
will fall apart and lose all it was standing and hoping for. If the first part 
is poorly done, it will be hard to convince any audience to feel empathy, 
regardless of the amount of weeping violins one likes to place on top of it. 
That means if you don’t feel for the character at that crucial moment late in 
the movie, one has to do his homework again in the first and second act.
Q:	In some of your children’s films, you had to do without antagonists. 
Isn’t it difficult to develop a story without a villain?
A:	I don’t believe that it is possible to tell a story, to do a book, film, stage 
play without a villain. But if the villain should always be the Joker from 

267
50.  The Belgian Animation Director
Batman or a brutal, devilish person with a silly sidekick and a sardonic 
team member that has no connection to any reasonable human argument, 
I’m not convinced. When using this kind of villains, it becomes always 
the same kind of structured project: very hero-driven with a big party at 
the end arranged in the community that was saved. Some films are better 
off with an internal villain that one has to overcome. Or a set of combined 
evil forces, being it a sum of characters or a sum of disasters (volcano, lost 
on a wild river, a bear, a pack of wolves). Like Inside Out, or Pinocchio, 
or Laura’s Star, Princess Mononoke, Totoro, Kiki’s Delivery Service. In live 
action the range of storytelling has a much bigger spectrum than what’s 
allowed in animation. Probably because merchandising isn’t a necessity to 
recoup the invested money.
	
  This would lead to the question: Is it difficult to write a story that doesn’t 
follow the archetypical structures of a hero movie? Then the answer would 
be: Any movie is difficult to write being it a hero movie in a landscape of 
fierce competition or being it an internal conflict story in an unknown 
landscape. Personally I feel more at ease with projects where humanity is 
in the centre of storytelling instead of: I killed the beast. Although I might 
like to watch one of those, once in a while.
Q:	There is a lot of bad, standardized animation around. In spite of all the 
digital tools, some of it looks as if they have done it in the early days of 
animation. What does good character animation mean to you?
A:	Evoking emotions! Creating moments one can relate to as if you were there, 
together with the other characters, waiting to say your own lines. This 
can’t be done with poor design. This can’t be done in poor light conditions, 
but it can be done in limited animation if the type of characters is sym­
bolic archetypes, in a design as simple as the animation and backgrounds 
will be. The problem is that a lot of animation has a kind of humanized 
realistic character style without the budget to animate them believably or 
without the budget to place them properly in the background.
	
  Real art is a fine chemistry wherein all elements, such as style, color sets, 
brushstrokes, the blackness of shadows, the fluency of successive troughs 
and on and on, are combined in the right amount of values creating one 
specific visual language that could only be this one to tell this particular 
story.
	
  Another story, another style. Another style, a different kind of 
storytelling.
Q:	You directed a well-liked animated feature, Laura’s Star (2004), with 
an aesthetic bow to Japanese anime and you did a sequel, Laura’s 
Star and the Mysterious Dragon Nian (2009) that was a Sino-German 
­co-production. What about intercultural approach?

268
Acting and Character Animation
A:	Belgium is a center of comic books, a culture very open-minded toward 
visuals, from the French to the American to the Manga. All influences 
from children comic strips to graphic novels are familiar to our cultural 
background. It means we were visually raised eclectically. The range of art 
goes from copying styles to mixing styles to finding an own style. Without 
this inner path that we all somehow have to follow, one can’t come into 
his or her own bloom. I place myself for the moment on a spot between 
Miyazaki and Disney. I was brainwashed by Disney’s great movies till the 
age of 30, and all I wanted to do was to work in the classic animation 
industry. But around 40 the work of Miyazaki was introduced to me. That 
was really an eye opener. One can tell stories based on totally different 
parameters in design, animation style and story concept and still be suc­
cessful. I don’t mean necessarily in money terms but more meaningful to 
a wide audience. This has influenced my own art toward something that I 
can see now as a marriage between East and West, and maybe just because 
I’m a European filmmaker, it was possible to see the beauty of both ends 
and combine them to an own style.
Q:	Please tell us about the difficulties adapting children’s books: illustrating 
kids’ imaginary world.
A:	Animation properties are about world-building. It isn’t just enough to 
have a funny character or a story idea. One must be able to translate it 
to a world people like to wander in. The exploration of that world is part 
of the fun, and the better one can create such a world the longer you can 
hook your followers. Which means one has to make a choice at the start. 
With a lot of questions to ask oneself. Where do the characters live? Are 
they like us? Or are they timeless and ageless? Is the real world wherein 
kids dream the thing we want our audience to feel and see and explore? 
So if you enter such a project you have to be aware that the only way to 
succeed is to deliver something that is unique, believable, empathic, and, 
if possible, doesn’t resemble something that already exists. Success is not 
only guaranteed by the greatness of an idea but also by the capability to 
get imbedded in the daily life, with all its merchandising potential. One 
cannot sell if one cannot communicate. And communication is all about 
hope, dreams, wishes.
Q:	Can you name a few movies that have influenced your work considering 
role profiles and character animation?
A:	Totoro, Princess Mononoke, Kiki’s Delivery Service, Ratatouille, Pinocchio, 
Iron Giant, The Secret of NIMH, Thumbelina, Tobias Totz, Tekkonkinkreet, 
Grave of the Fireflies, Cinderella, Peter Pan, Jungle Book. As you see these 
are all well-controlled animated features, hardly any television work.

269
51
The Game Expert
Thomas Dlugaiczyk
In 1999,  Thomas Dlugaiczyk founded the Games Academy in Berlin, the first and 
foremost educational and training institution for computer game developers in 
Europe. In 2010, he co-founded the Games Academy Vancouver, Inc.
Q: For some time now computer games seem to overshadow anything that 
the movie industry has achieved commercially. And yet this is only 
the beginning. What do you think of a joint venture between games 
and film industry? We often speak about games in money terms. The 
worldwide success is that astonishing. If you would write science fic­
tion, where would you see the end?
A: There is no science fiction. George Lucas was the first Hollywood pro­
ducer and director, who played both pianos very well: games and movies. 
In 1982 he founded Lucasfilm Games to develop games, first as standalone 
projects, later more for the purpose of licensing products for his own Star 
Wars story.

270
Acting and Character Animation
	
  Lucasfilm is regarded as the most important representative of games-
related filmmakers and an impressive example for chances and boundar­
ies of the exchange from movie picture art and games.
	
  What about the money? You can’t compare apples and oranges. Movies 
stand in the long-time tradition of the theatre, whereas games are pure 
software and have a strong link to the culture of rituals because of the 
extended possibilities to play an active role in the scenes.
	
  Why make games more money? On one hand: Games are provided by 
a completely different and very complex and sometimes strange system of 
monetarization you really don’t want to have in the movie industry. On 
the other hand: Games are software and this allows the distribution of the 
products in other technical ways. More money, but an instable and more 
volatile business.
	
  The end? In the future games and movies will influence each other in 
a positive way. Many games are very cinematic today—from graphics to 
story. Many movies tend to create a multimedia product concept to find 
more investors and attract a growing audience.
	
  But I cannot see the “merge” of movies and games before Stanisław 
Lem’s or Gene Roddenberry’s vision of the holodeck will come true. And 
this is when? Which star date?
Q: The synthetic characters in computer games get more and more real­
istic. But we don’t know as much about their motivation as we do in 
movies.
A: Yes, the optical resolution on the PC and video console systems screens 
has exploded in the last decade. Is this really more “realistic?” Yes, the pro­
duction pipelines of cinematic games like L.A. Noir or Godfather II and 
CGI-animated films like Avatar are very similar. Games have genres too: 
In action movies like The Expendables and 3D-shooters happens the same, 
at least on the first look. But: One is reception and the other interaction.
Q: Do you think it might be someday possible to create synthetic charac­
ters with artificial intelligence?
A: From time to time we can read articles about artificial intelligence in 
games. Well, this is a myth. What we have are script-based engines that 
are generating interaction systems between the player and the machine. 
Okay, it feels like intelligence. But on the way the secretary of Joseph 
Weizenbaum was removing Weizenbaum from his office because she was 
talking with his brand-new computer program Eliza at MIT in 1966.
Q: Are there maybe ideas to hire the digital avatars of famous actors? They 
all are digitized already in Hollywood.
A: One of the first films that explored the possibilities of animated digital 
art was Robert Zemeckis’ Polar Express from 2004. Tom Hanks himself 

271
51.  The Game Expert
appeared in an animated movie—this was impressive, but the style was 
not my taste.
Q: What about empathy games? Do you think that empathy can have a 
part in hard competition?
A: Very often playing is confronting me with the decision between coopera­
tion and conflict. Our postmodern society is extremely competitive. But 
this has nothing to do with games or playing. This is the impact economi­
cal systems leave on mankind.
Q: What do you think about the discussion concerning first-person shoot­
ers? Many gamers are said to present addictive behavior.
A: Oh goodness! I’ve co-founded the USK, the German age ratings system 
for games and interactive media. In an age of over 50 I’m going to be 
more and more critical about new technologies, especially digital ones. 
And I have kids in the age between 20 and 30. Let me try to answer with 
Paracelsus, “All things are poison, for there is nothing without poison. 
It is only the dose which makes a thing poison or not.” Electronic games 
have no qualities to create massive addiction, no more than sugar, sports 
or very extensive movie consumption.
Q: Internationally, the military brass and intelligence services are going 
to recruit young gamers and hackers for cyberwarfare. There seems to 
be a big need.
A: Games are a kind of virtual reality. In games we can train our skills, the 
social ones for instance, but also the skill I need to become a good soldier 
to pay a visit to foreign countries and kill people over there. I have no idea 
where the main markets for those games are and how big the opportuni­
ties are.
	
  Computer and video games are just a technical extension of playing. 
And this is what man is doing from the moment he opened his eyes. 
Training is a part of the biological use of playing, of course. For what we 
will be ready to train is our personal decision.
Q: We guess it won’t take long when they will use the human brain as 
interface. Will future games take place in the human mind?
A: Yes, like today as well. If you are dreaming at night, you have a complete 
video console in your brain. In HD, full color, with super sound and very 
realistic.


273
52
The Artist from the Zagreb 
School of Animation
Borivoj Dovnikovic’ -Bordo
Borivoj Dovniković-Bordo (born in 1930 in Osijek, the fourth largest city in 
Croatia) is an animation director and animator, a cartoonist, illustrator, comic 
strip, and graphic designer who began to work for Zagreb Film, then one of the 
leading animation places in the world. He was also involved in the World Festival 
of Animated Films in Zagreb as well ASIFA, the International Association of 
Animated Films.
Q:	You were there at Zagreb Film right from the beginning. Can you talk 
a little bit about your own career?
A: After finishing high school in Osijek in 1949, I moved to Zagreb, capital of 
the Republic of Croatia, to study at the Academy of Fine Arts. At the same 
time I joined the satirical weekly Kerempuh and very soon became a profes­
sional newspaper cartoonist (on a monthly payment!). Obviously, working 
for newspapers and illustrating books interested me more than the Academy. 
When in the following year (1950) I got the offer to take part in the produc­
tion of an animated film I left the Academy and became a filmmaker, besides 
doing newspaper cartoons, illustration, comic strips and graphic design.

274
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	While most American cartoons up to the 1950s and 1960s focused on 
anthropomorphic animals UPA (United Productions of America) and 
then Zagreb preferred “mechanomorphic” humans. And while UPA 
artists were more interested in slapstick, Zagreb put the individual in 
a changing society in the foreground. Why did it happen, of all places, 
in Zagreb, in Yugoslavia? What made this place so special that an own 
school emerged from it that was acknowledged with an Academy Award 
for Dušan Vukotić (for the short film Surrogat, 1961)? Why you of all 
people?
A: After finishing the first independent art film The Big Meeting (Rally) in 
the weekly Kerempuh (1951), the Croatian Republic Government (in the 
Federative Yugoslavia) gave the financial support for the foundation of the 
new company that specialized in producing animation films (Duga Film/
Rainbow Film). The Meeting and other films of the new company were 
made, of course, in the classic Disney manner, like all animation in the 
world at that time.
	
  Already in the first year, young animators, uninfected by the Disney 
style, started to talk about new possibilities in animation—in everyday 
spontaneous discussions off-time. It was the privilege of a common work 
and life in one production house. Today, under conditions of computer 
animation, where animators are working alone in their private spaces, 
mainly at home—that wouldn’t be possible. One of our colleagues, Vlado 
Kristl, started drawing sketches for a thoughtful animated picture with 
characters in the manner of Honoré Daumier. We all thought that it was 
unusable for animation. (Nine years after that Vlado created the excep­
tional film La Peau de Chagrin in that style!)
	
  1956, in the newly formed company Zagreb Film, new authors and 
directors Nikola Kostelac, Dušan Vukotić and Vatrosvlav Mimica, 
designers Aleksandar Marks, Boris Kolar and Vjekoslav Kostanjšek, 
and animator Vladimir Jutrisa abandoned their teachers (Walter 
Neugebauer, Vladimir Delać, Borivoj Dovniković…) and moved toward 
non-Disney animation. When they found some texts with illustrations 
in an English magazine in the British Consulate Library about the 
new animation that was done at UPA, and stylized drawings in illus­
trated books by Mary Blair—they got the confirmation for their ideas. 
Foreign newspapers and books weren’t imported to the country. One 
bookshop in Zagreb and the English Library were the only places to 
find cultural news from the West. It was in the 1950s. Later, after the 
total break from Stalin’s block, Yugoslavia opened to the idea and the 
art from the Western countries. But otherwise, at that time there were 
not many books about ­animation in the world in general. We saw the 
animated films by UPA later when we already started doing films in 
non-Disney style.

275
52.  The Artist from the Zagreb School of Animation
	
  Why did it happen in Zagreb? Zagreb was a well-known cultural cen­
ter of that region, especially in comic strip, and many artists (painters, 
illustrators, musicians, architects, filmmakers…) were interested in the 
new art—animation. Except for that, animation movement was financed 
by the government and was completely free in the artistic creation. It 
resulted in fast recognition in the cinema world. At the Cannes Festival, 
in 1958, the screening of the first seven animated films from Zagreb 
got big attention and this movement was named the Zagreb School of 
Animation.
Q:	What made caricaturists who worked for that satirical magazine titled 
Kerempuh go for animation and film? Besides Walter Neugebauer 
who later went to Germany to work on comic books for a guy named 
Rolf Kauka, there weren’t many experienced artists and technicians in 
Zagreb in those days.
A: The caricaturists who responded to the call of the Kerempuh manager 
Fadil Hadžić and artist Walter Neugebauer were at the same time comic 
strip designers (Vladimir Delać and Borivoj Dovniković). They were the 
only ones who agreed to take part in the uncertain adventure of starting 
the animated film. Other colleagues (even Dušan Vukotić) considered this 
attempt not serious. After finishing The Big Meeting (Veliki Miting) and 
the foundation of the company Duga Film, many colleagues approached 
us. One of the first was Vukotić (to whom I personally introduced the 
basic secrets of animation, as he was my close friend).
	
  Walter Neugebauer revealed to me privately in the 1970s that he had 
planned the production of animated films in Zagreb as a commercial ven­
ture. In fact, he was not interested in artistic animation. Because of that 
he abandoned Zagreb and devoted himself to comic strip work in Munich, 
hoping to install his own studio for advertising animation. But he didn’t 
manage to realize his plans.
Q:	What exactly did you do at Zagreb Film?
A:	From the beginning until 1960, I worked at Zagreb Film as a designer 
and head animator working for other directors. But at that time I also 
was very active in drawing comic strips for Zagreb magazines. In early 
1960, the idea came up that designers and animators can create their 
own films. So very soon our group of designers began to work on our 
own animated pictures. We would write our own scripts, design, ani­
mate and direct. We had total control of our work, like painters control 
their pictures on linen—what is quite logical. Of course, such was pos­
sible only in independent short films. And many of the directors who 
weren’t designers and animators vanished from our animation scene 
in the next years. Only the real artists among the non-designers were 

276
Acting and Character Animation
kept working with their designers and animators. The traditional divi­
sion of functions is normal in the production of animated feature films 
even now.
Q:	In a caricature, the whole personality of a character is squeezed in the 
design. This, of course, makes animation easier and less complex. But 
how did you make the movements of a character more interesting in 
spite of this simplification?
A:	The animator’s skills are crucial here. A good animator can give soul and 
expressiveness even to the simplest character. This is where many young 
animators make mistakes these days. They think that animation means 
to move the character, but, even the direct translation from the Latin lan­
guage says that it means to give soul and life to the character, not just 
move it. The audience must trust the animated hero in all he is doing, not 
just watch him move.
Q:	Are you an avid watcher? Do you like to watch people and how do you 
find their Achilles’ heel, their weak spot?
A:	As a caricaturist, during my whole professional life, I’m watching and 
commenting people’s characters and their manners. In doing animation 
I am still the caricaturist. Many of my pictures are devoted to people’s 
and society’s weaknesses. Because of that I became known as a master of 
psychological animation.
Q:	What changes did the advent of 3D animation bring to Zagreb?
A:	It’s very interesting—the nineties were historical. At the same time it was 
the end of socialist Yugoslavia and the beginning of, the foundation of an 
independent and capitalistic Croatia, and with it the computer appeared 
in our animation. Officially, I became a retired artist. 3D animation 
brought essential changes to film animation. The computer dramatically 
depreciated and expanded animation production all over the world. And 
with it the number of animated film festivals increased. We can say that 
animation (not so much in art but in games) overflowed the globe. I have 
no relations to the new animation, not at all. My film career was finished 
with the classical cel animation. That’s it! Today the youngsters do mira­
cles in animation. I’m delighted seeing fantastic technical results in pic­
tures. But, unfortunately, very often the technical progress is not followed 
by quality of direction. Many of these films are indistinct and poorly nar­
rated. Young animators get the technical skills very quickly, but they don’t 
become artists at the same time. I would say that we have quantity but not 
the adequate quality.

277
52.  The Artist from the Zagreb School of Animation
Q:	Zagreb is still a place of art and animation. How does the Zagreb 
School of Animation survive in a world of powerful digitized giant 
corporations?
A:	I think you have to put this question to the leaders of Zagreb Film studios. 
As a retired artist in animation, I can only say what I personally think. 
Zagreb Film exists in the independent Croatia for 25 years. Croatian gov­
ernment still finances the animation film production through its film 
fund. As a state culture institution, in competition with many other new 
private animation studios, Zagreb Film is satisfied with the financial sup­
port for some art animation projects and has no aspirations for spreading 
the production, making commercial attempts—animated games, series, 
advertising films, etc. I am completely out of recent animation and I can­
not explain this case in detail. Today digitalized giant corporations in 
the world maybe remember the old Zagreb School only as a nice memory 
from the last century.
Q:	For ASIFA, you have travelled around the world and seen many places. 
Can you talk a little bit about the cultural differences in animation and 
also about the commonalities and similarities that make it a global 
community?
A:	I was travelling all over the world for ASIFA, but more as animation author 
who was part of that Zagreb School. During a 2 month tour with my films 
through the United States in 1994 I had nice experiences concerning ani­
mation. Not only the ordinary people, the students of animation, too, 
knew only American animation films, in fact mainly Disney productions. 
After screening my films at Harvard University, one student said, “After 
seeing your animated films one must think!” That is what modern (not 
only Zagreb), non-Disney animation is all about: Make one think!
	
  A good piece of art will be understood and appreciated in the whole 
world, sooner or later!


279
53
The Animation Scholar 
from Hong Kong
Daisy Yan Du
Daisy Yan Du is Associate Professor at the Division of Humanities at the Hong 
Kong University of Science and Technology. She is building an association for 
Chinese animation studies, kind of a resource center for researchers. The aim is 
to promote Chinese animation to the English-speaking world.
Q:	After more than 10 years of re-building Chinese animation and estab­
lishing literally thousands of studios all over the country, China has 
become the biggest animation-producing nation in the world. But why 
is it that we don’t know that much about Chinese animation in the 
Western world?
A: It is true that thousands of animation studios were established in con­
temporary China, but most of them are profit-driven and marked by a 
lack of originality and creativity. In order to achieve commercial success, 
Chinese animators are more than eager to be international. They emulate 
Hollywood and Japanese animation, to the extent that they lose their own 
national style and national identity. Film scripts, which are often quickly 
prepared without literary and philosophical depth, do not have a good 

280
Acting and Character Animation
quality. The stories are neither coherent nor touching. The artistic details 
are not handled well. Some companies or studios also work on projects 
outsourced from Japan and the West, which also influence the aesthetic 
taste of Chinese animators and hinder the originality and productivity of 
their own creative work. This is embarrassing because since these films 
just superficially emulate Hollywood and Japanese animation, they can­
not enjoy the same commercial success and share the international mar­
ket as Hollywood and Japanese animation have done.
	
  In sharp contrast to the large-scale and profit-driven animation compa­
nies or studios, there are many talented independent animators who still 
insist on the “art film” approach. These animators, such as Liu Jian and 
Ray Lei, are more sensitive to the artistic and thematic subtlety of anima­
tion and are more visible at international film festivals, but it is difficult for 
them to achieve commercial success and global popularity. After all, the 
number of audiences for art films is quite limited.
	
  The lack of universal theme and style, the lack of literary and humani­
tarian depth, the poverty of artistic innovation, and the lack of a market 
and mass audience for art films can explain the relatively low visibility 
of Chinese animation in the world. In addition, although the Chinese 
government attaches much importance to animation and enthusiastically 
protects and promotes Chinese animation to domestic audiences, it has 
not done much work in promoting Chinese animation to the English-
speaking world, such as cataloguing, archiving, and supporting the pro­
duction of DVDs with English subtitles. Except a few animated films, 
the majority of Chinese animation can’t be watched in English versions. 
When I taught Chinese animation in the U.S. and Hong Kong, I was really 
frustrated by the lack of English subtitles for Chinese animation. If the 
Chinese government and animation studios would do a better job with 
English subtitles, things would improve significantly. There are also gov­
ernment-sponsored animation associations and organizations in main­
land China, which are just limited to domestic animators and scholars 
and tend to be insular, conservative, and bureaucratic. Because of these 
experiences and frustrations over the years, I developed the idea of estab­
lishing the Association for Chinese Animation Studies, an open and dem­
ocratic international organization built with the aim of introducing and 
promoting Chinese animation to the English-speaking world (http:acas.
ust.hk).
	
  Despite the challenges, I still feel very positive about the future of 
Chinese animation. The Chinese government now realizes the “soft 
power” of animation on the global stage and is trying to do something, 
and the younger generation of animators is learning and maturing. With 
the decline of the Shanghai Animation Film Studio since the mid-1980s, 
people have thought that Chinese animation might have met its dead end. 
However, recent blockbuster animated films, such as Monkey King: Hero 

281
53.  The Animation Scholar from Hong Kong
Is Back (2015) and Monster Hunt (2015), had unprecedented high box 
office revenues in the domestic market, which does give us tremendous 
hope. In terms of animation technology, they are on a par with Hollywood 
and Japanese animation. If they address more universal themes and target 
an international audience, I am sure they will be as commercially success­
ful around the world as Hollywood and Japanese animation.
Q:	The Chinese box office receipts for some animated products rank among 
the highest in the world. Is it the family aspect that attracts Chinese 
audiences to animation?
A:	It may be the family reason because generally speaking animation is safe 
for all family members to watch, but I think it needs more statistics and 
research to prove the hypothesis.
Q:	Chinese animation is related to the merchandising and toy industry. 
How are they connected with each other?
A:	In my opinion, Japanese animation did a better job in terms of connect­
ing animation with the merchandising and toy industry. Think about 
Astro Boy, Doraemon, Hello Kitty, Pokémon, and many others. They have 
their own animation stars, who are promoted further with toys and other 
related cultural products.
	
  Chinese animation is now developing its merchandising and toy indus­
try, but most of it targets a domestic market. Chinese animation has few, if 
any, world-renowned animation stars like Astro Boy and Doraemon, so it 
is very difficult to reach the international market. Yet Chinese animation 
is now on the road and full of potentials and possibilities.
Q:	Pleasant Goat and Big Big Wolf, Blue Cat, Monkey King, and others 
seem to be successful in China alone. Kung Fu Panda is basically not 
a Chinese but an American brand. In the Chinese animation industry, 
there seems to be little thought given to and less time spent on prepro­
duction and development and an intercultural perspective that would 
work throughout the world. It’s mainly mass production. What is being 
done to inspire quality products? Are there companies whose work 
should be watched?
A:	The phenomenon takes place not just in animation industry, but also in 
other industrial sectors in China. Products “Made in China” are often 
associated with low price, low quality, and quantity. However, this does 
not mean that China cannot produce an animated film with good quality. 
Many famous Hollywood and Japanese animated films were actually “Made 
in China.” Hollywood and Japanese animators did the preproduction work 
and designed everything, and then outsourced the projects to Chinese 

282
Acting and Character Animation
companies for lower labor cost. The quality of these “Made in China” ani­
mated films was as good as those produced in Hollywood and Japan. There 
is no problem with animation techniques or technology in China.
	
  In my opinion, the major reason for the low quality of recent Chinese 
animation is the monetary and fast-food culture in contemporary China. 
Animation companies or studios are often profit-driven and do not want 
to spend time and resources on the preproduction work, such as film 
script, character design, stories with literary and humanitarian depth, and 
artistic sophistication. They are often jerry-built to receive fast returns. I 
think Chinese animation is now still struggling with the issue of quality.
Q:	What can you tell about Chinese animation producers and their 
motivation?
A:	There are roughly two groups of animation producers in China. The first 
group works for relatively large scale animation companies, which strive 
for commercial success in the market. The second includes independent 
animators, who strive for artistic excellence and try to win recognition 
at international film festivals. If the two groups of animators collabo­
rate with each other perfectly, the quality of Chinese animation will be 
improved significantly and they will become more visible on the global 
stage.
Q:	There is a whole new generation of animation students trained all over 
China, more than in any other country in the world. How is the social 
situation of animators and artists?
A:	They probably share the same social situation with other college students 
in contemporary China. The job market might be more challenging for 
them, because they are art students. I think animation students in other 
countries might have a similar, if not the same, social situation.
Q:	There was a great tradition in Chinese animation before the advent of 
3D. Is there anything you can save to keep the tradition alive and how 
could this be achieved? Japanese anime have a handwriting which we 
often miss in modern Chinese animation.
A:	I think the masterpieces, such as the ink-painting animated film Little 
Tadpoles Look for Mama (1960) and the cel-animated Uproar in Heaven 
(1961) produced in socialist China (1949–1976), are best representatives 
of “Chinese” animation. They were carefully made with a strong national 
and ethnic style and a high degree of artistic quality.
	
  Contemporary Chinese animation is still struggling between being 
international and being Chinese at the same time. Most of them lose their 
Chineseness in trying to be more international.

283
53.  The Animation Scholar from Hong Kong
Q:	There is the internet. There are future developments in software and 
digital media. How will animation change due to the new possibilities? 
Is this a chance for new talent?
A:	I think this will provide opportunities for animation. In the past, we have 
paper animation, cel animation, and stop motion (such as puppet) ani­
mation. I think this is good because it expands the horizon of animation 
and provides more opportunities for talented animators who are good at 
computers and software.


285
54
The Disney Expert
Didier Ghez
Didier Ghez runs the Disney History blog (http://disneybooks.blogspot.com), 
the Disney Books Network website (https://www.didierghez.com), and serves 
as managing editor of the Walt’s People book series. Books include Disneyland 
Paris:  From Sketch to Reality, Disney’s Grand Tour, and They Drew As They 
Pleased: The Hidden Art of Disney’s Golden Age. He lives in Florida.
Q:	What is it that makes a cartoon character a personality? For Disney it 
seems to have been an important question. Is it the acting? Is it the writ-
ing, the design, or just the emotional tie to the audience?
A:	Walt, as we know, saw his animators as actors. So the acting is definitely an 
important part of the mix. This is what Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston 
argue throughout their seminal book, Disney Animation: The Illusion of 
Life (Abbeville, 1981).*
*	 Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston, Disney Animation: The Illusion of Life. New York: Abbeville 
Press, 1981.

286
Acting and Character Animation
	
  But there is a lot more to it than this, as Walt well knew. The design of 
the characters is also critical since that design needs to reflect their “soul.” 
Here are two Walt quotes that illustrate this.
	
  On November 11, 1938, in a Fantasia story meeting, while talking about 
the members of a planned bug orchestra, Walt explained:
We’ve got to get characters in our bugs, and if we could get bugs that are 
sort of like people in an orchestra—you study a symphony orchestra and 
there’s a serious fellow that plays a bassoon—to me a bassoon is a funny 
instrument, yet you see a bassoon player—he wears glasses and he looks 
like he has liver trouble, a very serious guy—and the drummer, the guy that 
holds the cymbals, is always some big fat guy that should be playing the 
tuba; and the tuba player is always a little guy—you get those caricatures 
with these bugs. That’s why I am crazy about this Praying Mantis thing, 
because it’s a caricature of a harpist, with a bug. Now if we can do that 
with our other bugs some way—that’s what your spider is, a caricature of 
a guy with all his sticks in his hand—It’s why I like the bugs with the three 
arms and fiddles, that’s something that’s funny as it is. You don’t have to go 
outside to get gags. Here’s this fellow, he’s very serious and he’s playing the 
top one very slowly, and the next one down is a bouncing bow and the next 
one is pizzicato. And it’s all right there, if you went down the line—this one 
little fellow still has, while he’s playing up there, he still has one arm free to 
scratch. It’s all right because it’s right in character […] and he wouldn’t pay 
any attention to it, he would go right on playing, but with this one hand he 
could scratch his leg and get back for the other notes.
Just to have bugs, and they all look the same and they’re all sort of styl­
ized cartoon bugs, we’ll have nothing; so we’ve got to try to find bugs or little 
insects that fit these various parts.
	
  Earlier, in December 1935, he had written director Dave Hand:
We should try to develop models of the characters that express more actual 
personalities, or caricatures of personalities. I do not mean caricatures of 
prominent personalities, but bringing out a caricature of the personality we 
are trying to express…
I think we should utilize the talent of [story artist] Joe Grant for the mak­
ing of these models. A good example of what I mean is in the model of the St. 
Bernard dog to be used in the Alpine picture [Alpine Climbers]. We had prac­
tically every sketch artist try a model on the St. Bernard dog, and in my opin­
ion there were only two who achieved a real caricature of the St. Bernard. 
Joe Grant drew the face that seemed really to express the caricature that a 
St. Bernard suggests to a person, and [Ferdinand] Horvath had the feeling in 
the body that a St. Bernard seems to give the person looking at him. I think 
it will be very helpful to the animators if Joe handles most of these models. A 
different personality will be picked up from the sketch that Joe gives them.*
*	 Didier Ghez, Walt’s People—Volume 1. Talking Disney with the Artists Who Knew Him. 
Bloomington: Xlibris, 2005.

287
54.  The Disney Expert
Q:	Are there any Disney characters in particular that have impressed 
you—and why?
A:	One of my personal favorites is the Brazilian José Carioca.* Being married 
to a Brazilian, I am obviously biased.
	
  But aside from the personal connection, there is the fact that the char­
acter was animated by one of the Studio’s geniuses, Bill Tytla. In a 1967 
interview conducted by Louise Beaudet, Tytla explained:
One day, on the Disney lot they happened to have a bunch of Brazilian peo­
ple there, in an advisory capacity. At lunch we were strolling around and we 
happened to be watching several Brazilians talking to each other and they 
were very animated. They are very flexible. When they talk, they talk with 
their whole bodies. And one Brazilian happened to see another Brazilian 
that he knew and he went “AAAAH! OOOOH!” I can’t tell you the way he 
did it, but [I used this] for José Carioca when he met Donald Duck. All emo­
tion, all exuberance!†
Q:	Disney cartoons depict rather expressive acting in front of naturalistic 
backgrounds.
A:	In many ways, the naturalistic backgrounds help focus your attention on 
the characters themselves. And the “caricature” in the characters, para­
doxically, helps humanize them and make them more real.
Q:	What did Disney in his heyday do to introduce his animators to the art 
of performing? What did he do to make them feel themselves into car­
toon characters?
A:	Here is what Disney artist Marc Davis explained to historian Armand 
Eisen in 1975, in answer to this question:
We saw every ballet, we saw every film. If a film was good, we could go and 
see it five times. At one time, Walt rented a studio up in North Hollywood 
and every Wednesday night we would see a selection of films—anything 
from Chaplin to unusual subjects, anything that might produce growth that 
might be stimulating—the editing, the staging, how a group of scenes was 
put together. Everybody here was studying constantly. We had models at the 
Studio and we’d go over and draw every night…
The comedies were always marvelous—Chaplin, Edgar Kennedy with his 
slow burn, Laurel and Hardy, Fred Astaire’s dancing, from pose to pose—
animation is pretty much like that, always with an attitude. We would all 
study the acting of Charles Laughton. We all read Stanislavsky. We didn’t 
miss a trick, really. There was always someone around to bring something to 
*	 The anthropomorphized parrot from Rio de Janeiro that starred in Saludos Amigos (1943) and The 
Three Caballeros (1944) was voiced by José Oliveira.
†	 Louise Beaudet passed away in 1997. The interview was not published during her lifetime. Part of 
it was released in The Disney Blog in 2008.

288
Acting and Character Animation
your attention. We tried to understand Matisse and Picasso and others, even 
though our end result shows very little of that literally.
You have to realize the vitality of all these young men who were, for the 
first time in their lives, paid for drawing all day. They had an educational 
system where the director would come over and explain what he did; the 
story men would explain who and why, how you build a certain gag and 
why the laugh is where it is; the musicians would tell us about the musical 
end of it.*
Q:	Asking you as a historian: What can a new generation of cartoon cre­
ators learn from the evolution of animation and especially from Disney 
film history?
A:	Walt Disney and his artists invented an art form. They were not the first 
ones to animate, of course, but the Studio was the first studio to create 
characters and animated cartoons that connected deeply and universally 
with the audience.
	
  Understanding what worked and did not work in the way Disney art­
ists built stories, designed the characters, animated them and made them 
come to life is therefore critical to new generations of cartoon creators, to 
avoid making mistakes that could be avoided.
	
  In fact, studying Disney history is not only critical for new artists, it 
also makes sense if you are an animation executive. The move from the 
old Hyperion Studio to the modern Burbank Studio in 1940 in many 
ways destroyed the team spirit that existed in the cramped quarters of 
Hyperion. The new studio was a very modern and functional one but the 
artists had less chance of interacting and therefore felt isolated, which led 
to a sense of disaffection, which was part of what led to the 1941 Disney 
strike.
	
  When Michael Eisner and Jeffrey Katzenberg decided to build the new 
animation building, which opened on the Disney lot in 1995, they com­
mitted a very similar mistake by commissioning a very functional but 
impersonal space. The artists, when they moved in, felt as isolated as their 
predecessors had in 1940. John Lasseter and Ed Catmull, from Pixar, on 
the other end had designed a new building which encouraged interac­
tion and collaboration. The fact that John and Ed are both Disney history 
enthusiasts is no coincidence, of course.
*	 Walt’ People—Volume 4: Talking Disney with the Artists Who Knew Him. Marc Davis by Armand 
Eisen. Bloomington: Xlibris, 2007.

289
55
The 3D Animator from 
Germany
Felix Goennert
Felix Goennert (born in 1975 in Lüneburg, Germany) is a professor at the Film 
University in Potsdam-Babelsberg, where he has studied too. He was the lead 
character animator for the CGI-animated feature Lissi und der Wilde Kaiser 
(Lissi and the Wild Emperor, 2007). He won more than 30 awards for his 
3D-animated short films.
Q:	Your short films Lucia (2004), Apollo (2010), and Loup (2016) show 
3D-stylized children’s characters that move and behave absolutely nat­
ural and in a child way. Even the small insect in your movie BSSS (1999) 
seemed to be a child. The role profiles work 100 percent. If you plan 
animation, do you start with the characters or a situation?
A:	My stories usually develop from a character whom I have “met” before. 
These meetings start for example with sketches in notebooks or by mod­
eling a character in clay. Sometimes while doing this, ideas develop for 
situations that often already bear conflict potential. Lucia was a little girl 
who has to spend a night in a hospital, and BSSS was a fly that discovers 
an elephant in a children’s book doing a “trunk stand.”

290
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	You work around children’s imagination. In Apollo, a boy plays with a toy 
rocket and finds himself in outer space. Do you have a straight approach 
to your own childhood dreams? And if, is this helpful to animation?
A:	Animation has a lot to do with dreams. I guess this is one of its most essential 
characteristics. Besides their natural curiosity, children have a more unprej­
udiced approach to imagination than us adults. They have no problems to 
dream, any time, even daydream. In one of my school reports there is a note: 
“Felix has problems to concentrate on the class.” I preferred to look out of the 
window and imagine what I could do outside. Although it is a lot of work to 
make an animated film, the films that you mentioned opened the chance to 
return somehow to this state of mind. I am sure this attitude has helped me 
with the animation. The spaceship, by the way, is made of metal and fully 
functional, with a hatch that can be closed and little light bulbs in the panel.
Q:	Have you done research in children’s psychology or do you create your 
characters instinctively, from gut feeling?
A:	Characters are like real human beings, they have a life of their own. Of 
course one can think a lot theoretically and sometimes one has to find out 
Apollo. (Courtesy of Felix Goennert.)

291
55.  The 3D Animator from Germany
why an animation doesn’t work correctly. Basically, however, to me dur­
ing the process of animation there is no such thing as theory, more inter­
nalized insights from previous research. I have absolutely no idea about 
children’s psychology. I find it interesting to see how actors approach their 
parts. Stanislavsky’s definition of authenticity in my opinion applies the 
same to the play with a character in animation. As animators are not on 
the stage themselves this is a slightly different process. It doesn’t happen 
in real time as is the case in film and theatre. It does develop in space and 
time through a character that you bring to life. Then I really have the feel­
ing that the character determines what is going to happen. I am only the 
one who pushes the buttons or moves the pencil into a certain direction.
Q:	In your animation one notices many little details and gestures that are 
missing in standardized mass animation. Are these those details that 
are omitted in series production, those little things that bring a charac­
ter really to life?
A:	I guess with mass animation you mean commercial production? I don’t 
know if my animation differs from it so much. My working method is 
Apollo. (Courtesy of Felix Goennert.)

292
Acting and Character Animation
usually based on layered animation. For each particular scene you ani­
mate the most important parts of a character. The animation of the less 
important parts will follow. This approach forces first to abstraction and 
to reflection about how to approach timing and spacing, the elementary 
parts of animation. After that I descend in several steps to a more intui­
tive, flowing type of work which evolves into a more natural movement 
than the frame-based process would allow. Perhaps a more personal style 
develops out of that. Finally, in the productions that you have mentioned 
I intend to communicate most clearly to the audience what the characters 
think and feel and why they act that way.
Q:	One notices the large, expressive eyes of your characters.
A:	The eyes of my characters are often that large because sights tell a big chunk 
of the stories. Mostly I eschew dialogue so that it is helpful that a viewer rec­
ognizes immediately where to and why a character looks, even if it occupies 
only a small part of the frame.
Q:	The most prominent character you have animated, however, you haven’t 
developed yourself. Your short film Der Bonker [The Bunker] watched 
by millions on YouTube is a spoof about Adolf Hitler who was carica­
tured by Walter Moers showing the German dictator and “Fuehrer” 
singing in his bathtub a short time before his suicide in the bunker of 
the Reich Chancellery. How did you approach this caricature as an ani­
mator and hired hand?
A:	There were already two essentials for The Bonker when they asked me 
to do the project. On one hand there was a storyboard by Walter Moers 
himself, on the other hand there was a song by Thomas Pigor. Walter’s 
drawings often consist of cursorily sketched lines. Nevertheless, he puts 
the expression of the character straight. Therefore it was quite easy for me 
to bring the character to life, together with Carla Heinzel. Thomas’ song 
determined the rhythm and creates a catchy tune on the sound level to 
the rubber ducky theatre on the image level. The main challenge was to 
translate the charm of Walter’s drawings into the 3D world of computer 
animation. By the way, the clip remained in the drawer for one year before 
it was finally published in 2006 and one day later it was uploaded by some­
body in the internet. At that time YouTube and consorts had just started 
in Germany.
Q:	You are a teacher too. What do you recommend your students concern­
ing creation and direction of characters who should develop their own 
personality on screen? Do you talk about acting theories or are these 
not so important for animators? Is it more important to watch and 
observe humans and animals and reproduce them with digital tools?

293
55.  The 3D Animator from Germany
A:	I believe that everything that helps to understand why things work or 
maybe not should be part of the animation training. In part I introduce 
acting theories. Exact observation and feeling of the body are highly 
important. These are things that you can learn in exercises. I notice, how­
ever, that the ones who get special results command both characteristics. 
Besides the kinetic basics, for instance how to animate a walking cycle, 
it is most important how to get inside a character. While doing this one 
sometimes grimaces, screws up the face or crooks on the chair. With that 
the whole process becomes livelier and you will have fun immediately. 
Video references, too, help with more complicated movements. To get to 
satisfactory animation you need both: intuition and analysis. Only when 
I know what’s behind a movement I will be able to determine its meaning 
and have it correspond with the story that is being told. Of course, good 
character design helps with the animation. Especially as computer graph­
ics tend to photo realism and the opportunities to navigate complexity 
increase with the modern tools I recommend that you keep it clear and 
simple. To create good animation one should deduce the design from the 
story and from the resources you have at your disposal. In the best case, 
an artistically exciting and surprising performance will evolve.
Q:	Can you please name a few movies that contain role profiles and/or 
character animation that left an impression on you?
A:	It’s difficult to draw up a shortlist. Sometimes it’s only a moment that 
excites me. Many of my inspirations come from feature films, comics, art 
and photography. In the realm of computer animation I follow the output 
of Pixar since the 1980s. Two short films that have impressed me in par­
ticular were Luxo Jr. (1986) and Knick Knack (1989).


295
56
The European Producer
Gerhard Hahn
Since 1980 Gerhard Hahn (born in 1946 in Rehburg, Germany) is one of the 
leading European animation producers and directors and was one of the first in 
Europe to open an animation studio in Asia (Saigon). Consequently his studio 
Hahn Film AG, since 1986 located in Berlin, relied on series characters on TV as 
well as on the cinema screen: Werner-Beinhart (1990), Asterix Conquers America 
(1994), Bibi Blocksberg (since 1994), The Pirates of Tortuga: Under the Black Flag 
(2001), SimsalaGrimm, School for Vampires, Mia and me: Adventures in Centopia. 
In addition to TV and cinema, Hahn Film launched internationally successful 
merchandising brands such as the Worry Eaters. The company also produced 
animated advertising spots, music videos, and computer games in house and, 
with Hahn Graphics, specializes in graphic solutions for brand identity, product 
development, books, packaging design, and retail.
Q:	As one of the few important European animation studios, Hahn Film 
has consequently focused on series characters. How influential is the 
European comic strip culture and what about using tested merchandis­
ing characters in cartoons?

296
Acting and Character Animation
A:	Considering films produced by Hahn Film, there is only a minor influence 
of comic strip culture—be it European, Anglo-Saxon or Japanese—and 
this for two reasons: We attach great importance to the universality of 
characters and stories. Our productions are developed, not least because 
to get them financed, for the international market, and therefore should be 
understood by audiences in all parts of the world. That’s why our series are 
mainly inspired by characters and stories that found their way into inter­
national popular culture in the widest sense of the word: vampires from 
School for Vampires, elves, unicorns and Pans in Mia and me: Adventures 
in Centopia right up to the tales of Arabian Night in Sherazade: The Untold 
Stories. Here we have characters and stories that are comparatively easy to 
pitch internationally. This is true for other projects too that we currently 
work on: Ganesha, help! is a series that is being developed in association 
with a partner from India. In the center we have an Indian deity of the 
same name. Our approach is to shape this ancient Indian topic attractively 
in design and storytelling for the international market.
	
  The second essential reason is the age of the target groups. Depending 
on the series it’s either intended for 4 to 6 years, i.e., preschool, or for 6 to 
9 years old. In this age comic strips and their stylings play not that role as 
they do for the 10 to 12 years old—but for this age group there are no firm 
time slots on TV. We all know that kids in this age watch programs wher­
ever they are, that means online. The double-etched formula therefore 
reads: no time slots, no co-funding from broadcasters, ergo no products.
	
  Regarding the adaptation of approved merchandising characters we 
make a point developing, producing and marketing our own intellec­
tual properties. Apart from the distinctively greater creative pleasure in 
developing own properties, options in financing and re-financing play an 
important, if not the important part. Considering the funding, let’s sup­
pose we have a German broadcaster who contributes to the production of 
a series. That means that we as producers are forced to put up more than 
80 percent of the budget by ourselves. Therefore a participation in poten­
tial license agreements and merchandise receipts is almost inevitable. We 
have to keep in mind that the relatively low input of broadcasters makes it 
necessary that we have to calculate our production budgets as low as pos­
sible to obtain funding reliably. This results in the fact that an animation 
producer today cannot recoup his efforts—which in case of a series might 
extend over a period of two to three years—solely from producing. A mer­
chandising license deal as early as possible is a relevant factor. We know 
both extremes from our own work: In the early history of Hahn Film 
besides feature films such as Werner and Asterix Conquers America there 
were successful series like Benjamin the Elephant (Benjamin Bluemchen) 
and Bibi Blocksberg. This was commissioned work without shares or any 
additional revenues. 30 years ago that made sense. Today’s situation is dif­
ferent. The other extreme is our series Worry Eaters. In order to pitch the 

297
56.  The European Producer
series idea I had presented stuffed dolls some years ago—with the result 
that the dolls and related products became an instant international sales 
hit before the first screenplay was written. The relatively absurd or at least 
untypical effect is that the merchandising recoupements from marketing 
the dolls now are a significant part of series financing which in turn hope­
fully will further fuel the merchandising success.
Q:	You were actively involved in the evolutionary step from 2D to 3D ani­
mation. Your studio uses both techniques. What experiences did you 
make? What differences do you see in designing cartoon characters?
A:	Generally speaking the truth is that 2D wasn’t removed by 3D. Out of 
the projects that we currently have in development or preproduction two 
series are in 2D. Once we have developed the characteristics of certain fig­
ures and the story concept so that they sort of awaken to life one feels what 
technique is the adequate one—I shouldn’t speak of technique but rather 
call it style. The development of characters is done from an aesthetic point 
of view. The mere technical aspect is added when it comes to efficiency 
in realization which starts with the work on the screenplay in which 
one has to take into consideration the number of characters and sets in 
the respective episodes. The advantage of 3D is that characters and sets, 
once modeled, can be re-used easier from episode to episode. If I travel 
in each episode through different sets and meet new characters, then 2D 
is better—but as I say, this is only dictated by production economics. Our 
guideline, however, is: style and aesthetics come first, not the technique.
Q:	In the case of series the characters you have to work with and create 
stories for have preconceived, prefabricated role profiles. Can it be an 
advantage to tailor stories to such characters?
A:	Neither one nor the other is, taken by itself, the case; the work on the 
Design Bible and the Writer’s Bible go hand in hand and cross-fertilize. 
When we start with a topic and have, for instance, to create a children’s 
series from One Thousand and One Nights we develop the main characters 
and their antagonists and their motives and objectives first. Considering 
the adaptation of more or less famous tales we want to break of course 
with traditional role images. I have to define this primarily in the design 
of the character. And then our authors will write this character exactly 
this way. The characters, their motives and their constellations come first 
in our company. There is a simple rule of thumb that we find confirmed 
ever when we release a pitch book. At the first glimpse of the character 
designs I discover the tonality of the series (if the character design sug­
gests something completely different than the stories promise, the concept 
sure cannot be consistent).

298
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	Once you have founded a studio in Vietnam and acquired experiences 
with filmmaking in Asia early on. How does European animation pro­
duction position itself today between Asia and America? How would 
you judge the development of intercultural projects?
A:	There is a rather mundane, banal reason for the previous and still 
practiced cooperation between Europe and Asia: the labor costs. This 
simple fact implicated that our partners in Far East always were service 
producers. There was no partnership on a creative level which would 
have led to a coproduction partnership. The situation is changing 
currently. The artistic potential of companies in Asia begins to grow. 
Nevertheless, as I see it, the situation will continue for some time that 
European producers will handle the creative part, from design and 
script development to animatics, and our Asian partners will do the 
actual production.
	
  China, on the other hand, rates high alone for the size of the market. 
But one should not blend oneself by this Klondike-like hype and only have 
Yuan signs in the eyes. For some time, we are in touch with Chinese stu­
dios but haven’t found the likewise artistically and economically compel­
lent case to cooperate necessarily.
	
  The question of chances for intercultural projects can be answered 
both for and against. Culturally we are looking back at different picto­
rial and different narrative traditions. Stories and characters that answer 
a claim of interculturality run the risk of being neither fish nor fowl. 
When I watch Asian and American series then I am expecting either 
an Asian or an American series, with all their respective specifica, and 
nothing else. I think that one shouldn’t enforce artificially intercultural­
ity and drag it in by the head and shoulders—which will bring us back 
to the question of European positioning between America and Asia. 
From my standpoint the specific idiosyncrasies and individualities are 
significant and this will remain so for some time. The three cultures 
and particularly these three markets work differently. A comparison of 
the production terms and budgets in America and Europe alone doesn’t 
place, literally speaking, apples against pears but, considering the sheer 
volume, melons against lemons. We are well advised [in Europe] to 
make the best out of lemons and in the most successful case this will be 
lemonade.
Q:	You are very close to the audience. What can you say about audience 
reception? What insights did you win? Which features does the audi­
ence appreciate?
A:	This directness between us and the audience doesn’t—alas—exist com­
pletely because there are the broadcasters in between. The broadcasters 
receive the mails from the audience. If we develop characters and stories 

299
56.  The European Producer
convinced that they will please children internationally we have, pro­
vided the case of conventional funding, at first the hurdle of the editors 
of our national TV broadcasters. We have to convince them and have 
them confront us with their own insights. Pointedly expressed, it is the 
reception behavior of TV editors that we could comment on. It is similar 
when our colleagues in sales and distribution offer our productions on 
international trade fairs. The colleagues in distribution face a test audi­
ence that doesn’t consist of kids but buyers who make decisions based on 
their own insight too.
	
  The idiosyncrasies of our characters—no matter whether they are 
human or animal with humanoid behavior—are the same that we appre­
ciate at humans and particularly children: friendship, trust, affection 
but they are also allowed to make mistakes. The path is being laid by the 
design. Once a character is so well-designed that it is received as a com­
pletely autonomous entity with own idiosyncrasies we have done our job 
well.
Q:	You have successfully animated girl characters, from Bibi Blocksberg to 
Mia and me. What do you have to observe considering character devel­
opment, story concept and animation when aiming at an audience of 
young girls?
A:	As the target group of these series consists in fact of young girls the 
question is easily answered: The main characters like Bibi or Mia must 
be designed in a way and have idiosyncrasies that the young viewers can 
accept them and wish to have them as their best girl friend. And the sto­
ries that characters like Bibi or Mia experience must be told in a way that 
as a young girl you want to experience these together with the fictional 
character. That sounds trivial but must be accomplished first.
Q:	One of your most interesting projects is a series called Sherazade: The 
Untold Stories. That was developed years ago, but you had to put it on 
hold for quite some time. Why?
A:	I had the idea for Sherazade already in the late 1990s. The original work­
ing title was Arabian Nights and used themes from the Arabian Night 
tales. We had the contract with a broadcaster already in our pocket and 
had aroused international interest for license. Then came 9/11, and from 
one (terrible) day to another the word “Arabian” in the title became 
box-office poison. The project was dead. But I was still convinced of the 
basic concept—Sherazade is not the story teller of the framework plot 
but the heroine herself who experiences all adventures and then later 
projects them onto figures like Sinbad or Aladdin—and haven’t lost 
faith in the project. Over five years ago we said farewell to the (at that 
time) 12-year-old 2D designs—with a tear in our eyes and a smile—and 

300
Acting and Character Animation
reworked the project completely for a 3D series. Then we went to a local 
broadcaster and found open ears. The work on screenplays began and 
now Sherazade: The Untold Stories is in postproduction. So you see, 
we do not only tell fairy tales, sometimes we experience fairy tales 
ourselves.

301
57
The Stop-Motion Historian
Mike Hankin
Mike Hankin (born in 1948 in Morden, Surrey) is an expert on stop-motion 
films. He has written a highly acclaimed 3-volume Ray Harryhausen biography 
and is preparing another book devoted to George Pal’s Puppetoons.
Q:	Ray Harryhausen took acting lessons. Do you recognize a particular 
Harryhausen pattern of acting in his pictures?
A:	There is a wonderful story of how Ray would act out various moves of the 
gorilla model, such as thumping the ground, while working on his first 
feature film, Mighty Joe Young (1949). All animators are actors by proxy, 
whether they were trained in the art, or just transferring movement into 
their creations through their own observations. Many friends of Ray have 
been witness to naturally performed body actions, such as gestures, that 
had unconsciously found their way into his animation. Artists working 
in drawn animation would often have a mirror close by to work out facial 
expressions, so it follows that model animators would occasionally use their 
own bodies to time a movement. It is doubtful that the classic Harryhausen 

302
Acting and Character Animation
humanoid walk pattern: shoulders back, arms bent at the elbows, used in 
creations such as the Ymir and Cyclops can be directly attributed to Ray’s 
own forward movement, but that is, where imagination comes into play.
Q:	When one asked Ray about animation, he always said the way how he 
animated became his second nature but he couldn’t define his style of 
animation.
A:	It is very difficult to define Ray’s animation style. He worked very hard 
to make the manipulations of his models instinctive. We are fortunate 
to be able to view his earliest experiments and how the movements of his 
creations progressed from the stiff-legged walk of his first dinosaur figures 
to the point where his acquired knowledge of the mechanics of locomo­
tion was transferred to the anatomically correct creations in such films 
as The Valley of Gwangi (1969). This, of course, is not only attributable 
to his increased proficiency as an animator, but also as a model designer 
and builder. It is well known that Ray religiously studied the movement 
of various living entities that were close approximations to the creature he 
was working on, but the art of animation also comes from within. Maybe 
this could be termed his “style,” taking his knowledge of movement and 
coupling it with something of himself, acting out how he himself would 
react to a certain situation.
Q:	In later years, while living in Britain, he denied the certain grotesque­
ness that he had introduced himself into The 7th Voyage of Sinbad. He 
wouldn’t go anymore for his fanciful comic book Cyclops, wouldn’t 
show much sympathy for the creature, but would say that Cyclopes are 
just people like you and me, no hooves and pointed ears, only over­
grown and with a single eye. Do you feel there is a difference between 
the American and the British Ray Harryhausen?
A:	The 7th Voyage of Sinbad (1958) was the first of Ray’s films that readily lent 
itself to a parade of grotesque creatures. If you take into consideration one 
definition of the word grotesque as “extravagantly formed” then Ray certainly 
exploited this phenomenon in his later, British-made films. His first Sinbad 
film seemed to establish a template for his future cinematic adventures, which 
apart from the single animated squirrel in his next film, The 3 Worlds of 
Gulliver (1959), would feature multiple creatures. Grotesque can be aligned 
with memorable, which is why most admirers of Ray’s work retain stronger 
images of his creatures in their mind than the films in which they featured.
Q:	You interviewed many people who acted in Ray’s films. What did they 
tell you about his methods of working with actors? How would they pre­
pare to act with things that were not visible on the set but added later in 
postproduction?

303
57.  The Stop-Motion Historian
A:	Every actor I talked to agreed that Ray was an enthusiastic director of 
scenes involving his creations. He would go to great pains to show through 
his illustrations the creature they were supposed to face, so that they could 
picture it in their mind’s eye. He would also ensure that they had a visual 
reference, which actress Caroline Munro, in The Golden Voyage of Sinbad 
(1973), lovingly called a “Monster Stick”. Intrinsically, a long pole cut 
to the height of the missing creature adorned with the image of an eye 
painted at the top, which would give the actor a point of reference to main­
tain eye-line, whenever possible. Tom Pigott-Smith, Thallo in Clash of the 
Titans (1981), remembers that Ray, on occasion, would forget that he was 
dealing with actors rather than models, asking him one time to fall back­
ward, slowly, after he had been stabbed by the absent, animated character 
Calibos. Perhaps the best image to conjure up in your mind is Ray direct­
ing Raquel Welch in One Million Years B.C. (1966), when from the back of 
a truck he made the action of flapping wings to represent the Pteranodon 
that was about to snatch her up from the volcanic poolside.
Q:	Do you see an evolution from Ray’s films to present-day CGI?
A:	Many of today’s practitioners in CGI confess to being influenced and to refer­
ence Ray’s work. If there is a need to create an apparent living being, the por­
trayal of accurate movement is paramount to maintain believability. Ray was 
a master of the movement, perfected over years of careful study and count­
less experimentation. His method of creating this movement through model 
animation may now be seen as outdated, at least as far as supposedly living 
creatures are concerned, but how they moved is still a specialized skill. CGI is 
only a progression of technique. I have little doubt that the thousands of film 
industry artists in the past that built, painted, manipulated images and all the 
other skills that combine to make moving pictures would have loved to use 
today’s technology if it had been available to them. In reverse, many of the 
people who presently work in the industry yearn for the tactile satisfaction 
of creating something by hand. The sad fact is that in most cases the public 
will not accept less than perfect effects. The destruction of obvious minia­
tures, hand-painted backdrops, objects held aloft by wires and, dare I say it, 
creatures created through the use of model animation are now regarded with 
a degree of derision. The public can still enjoy and admire films made with 
physical effects in the past, but in a sort of tolerant, nostalgic way.
Q:	While Ray animated anatomically correct, George Pal, one of his early 
mentors, preferred cartooniness over anatomy. His replacement animation 
technique was like 2D-turned 3D. So he must have had an enormous influ­
ence on today’s computer-animated films, perhaps even more so than Ray.
A:	I think a line can be drawn between the influence of the George Pal pup­
pet films and the genus of film with which Ray Harryhausen is associated. 

304
Acting and Character Animation
One of the reasons that Ray came up with the name Dynamation was to 
differentiate his type of film to that of drawn or pure puppet animation. 
The characters in Pal’s Puppetoon films were never meant to be viewed 
as living entities, whereas the Harryhausen creatures were intended to be 
part of the real world. The lines did cross, with Ray producing his pure 
animated puppet fairy tale films at the beginning of his career and Pal 
using single animated figures that were meant to be living creatures, such 
as the squirrel in The Great Rupert (1949) and the Loch Ness Monster in 
7 Faces of Dr. Lao (1964), but in general they were known for differing 
types of animated figures. Shades of Pal’s Puppetoons can be seen in CGI 
films such as the Toy Story series, although the humor is vastly different. 
The influence of Harryhausen permeates everything from Jurassic Park 
(1993) to Avatar (2009) and beyond.*
Q:	Pal later turned to feature films, but some critics and reviewers say 
he handed his actors like puppets. Do you know anything about Pal’s 
approach to acting? He started out as a caricaturist.
A:	Previous to his role on Tom Thumb (1958), George Pal’s only other live-
action directorial exercise was with the actor Wam Heskes in Hoe Een 
Reclame-Affiche Ontstond (How an Advertisement Poster Came Into Being) 
(1938) and two of his Puppetoon shorts, A Date With Duke and Rhapsody 
in Wood (both 1947). His decision to direct Tom Thumb only came about 
through a mixture of economics (making the film in England brought it 
in on budget) and his connection to the project that he had been trying 
to make from as early as 1943. His involvement with all aspects of movie-
making from the very beginning of his career gave him the experience 
that a director needs, and although none of the films he directed can be 
described as breaking new ground, they all have a certain charm in execu­
tion. The Time Machine (1960), in the opening Victorian London scenes 
with the future time-traveller, George and his group of friends exudes a 
feeling of warmth and camaraderie that immediately draws you into their 
world. This shows a director in tune with his subject matter.
Q:	What can we still learn from seeing animation done by George Pal, Ray 
Harryhausen, or Jim Danforth?
A:	George Pal, Ray Harryhausen and Jim Danforth are among the few film­
makers whose diversity of skills contributed to the overall look of films 
on which they worked. These rare individuals stand apart from so many 
other gifted artists in the film industvry, because each created their own 
niche and body of work that in turn has influenced so many others.
*	 The living skeletons in Tim Burton’s Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar Children (2016).

305
58
The Late Stop-Motion 
Legend Himself
Ray Harryhausen
Ray Harryhausen (born in 1920 in Los Angeles) passed away in London in 2013, 
2 months before his 93rd birthday. For more than 30 years, I (RG) was associated 
with him while I curated the different exhibitions in Germany (where his family 
name came from: Harriehausen) that had his animation artifacts on display. A 
great deal was written about him. He was the only VFX and stop-motion art­
ist who had several books and countless articles devoted to his work. Digging 
in our files we found an extensive career interview that I had conducted for an 
exhibition of his work in the German Film Museum Frankfurt in 1988. It is vir­
tually unknown as it was published in German language.* From my notes I have 
added remarks that he made to me over the years, facts that involved his models, 
actors he worked with, and composers who were very important to enhance his 
animation.
*	 Rolf Giesen: Sagenhafte Welten. Der Trickspezialist Ray Harryhausen. Frankfurt/Main: Deutsches 
Filmmuseum, 1988.

306
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	It didn’t start with Eve, it started with Kong, right?
A:	I’ve seen King Kong in 1933. Rather innocently, I went to Grauman’s 
Chinese Theatre in Hollywood to see this picture, and I haven’t been the 
same since. The screening changed my life completely. Months, years went 
by until I had found out how King Kong was really made. The whole thing 
fascinated me. I made it my hobby and finally my profession.
Q:	The premiere of King Kong at Grauman’s Chinese in March 1933 must 
have been a big show.
A:	Of course. The Chinese and the Egyptian Theatre were two very important 
cinemas in Hollywood. They got always previews of the top movies. Sid 
Grauman who had built the theatres was a master showman. King Kong 
opened with a live on-stage prologue in the jungle: drums, acrobats and 
trapeze artists, all in full costume. That was highly impressive. The show 
went on for an hour before the movie began. Then the curtain opened, 
and Max Steiner’s great crescendo was to be heard. Before one entered 
the cinema one had to pass the atrium where the footprints of the famous 
stars are—and in this atrium they had the giant bust that was used in King 
Kong: The mouth moved, the eyes rolled, the nostrils inflated. Beneath the 
bust a group of pink flamingos stalked through the jungle scenery. Sure, it 
was a terrific sight, particularly way back in 1933. Something I will never 
forget. This is proof that a movie can change a whole life.
Q:	So it was the grandeur that impressed you as a child. Which films have 
influenced you besides King Kong?
A:	There were many movies. A very early impression was The Lost World, the 
silent version. Then Metropolis although we didn’t understand it at that time 
because someone* had butchered the American release beyond comprehen­
sion and taken out a lot of footage so that we thought it was just a German art 
movie. And some other foreign films whose titles I don’t remember. Later, 
She and The Last Days of Pompeii, both produced by Merian Cooper, come 
to mind. [In other discussions, I’ve had with him he mentioned The Golem 
starring Paul Wegener, Dracula, Frankenstein, The Bride of Frankenstein, 
Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde featuring Fredric March, and Deluge, which we saw 
together as he had an VHS tape of the print that they had found in Italy.] 
Merian Cooper was a super showman too. He knew how to stage a spec­
tacle, how to develop large-scale action and build drama, abilities he dem­
onstrated to the utmost as a producer of King Kong. I am jolly glad that it 
wasn’t Edward G. Robinson and Little Caesar who attracted my younger 
self. Otherwise I might have become a second Godfather.
*	 Channing Pollock, an American playwright.

307
58.  The Late Stop-Motion Legend Himself
Q:	Thirteen years later, right after the War, on Mighty Joe Young, you 
found yourself working with Willis O’Brien [OBie], the chief techni­
cian of The Lost World and Kong, and Merian C. Cooper himself. What 
did impress you more in your life: the birth of your daughter Vanessa 
or the day OBie called to invite you to work on Mighty Joe?
A:	[Laughs.] When OBie called. Both, Coop and OBie, were, in many ways, 
my mentors—especially Willis O’Brien since I had found out that it was 
him who was in charge of the technical side of Kong.
Q:	How did you find out?
A:	I studied souvenir books, magazines, Popular Mechanics—and always the 
name Willis O’Brien turned up.
Q:	That’s amazing that somebody studied technical credits because in 
those days, if at all, the only ones working behind the camera that peo­
ple were interested in were the directors.
A:	After all, King Kong was a highly technical movie. There were exhibitions 
devoted to the work of Willis O’Brien. So his name stuck out. Merian Cooper 
also, as producer of the film, received a good deal of publicity. It was very 
exciting to work with both of them, also with director Ernest Schoedsack. 
But he and OBie seemed to have some problems. There were days when 
OBie would return from story conferences and damn Schoedsack.
Q:	You were not the only animator on Mighty Joe.
A:	There were several people who tried animating Joe. Buzz Gibson and his 
brother [Carl] came in. They had worked on Kong. They were there for a 
month. I didn’t see what they did, but from what I heard their footage was 
unusable. Gibson said that the Joe Young models were too small compared 
to Kong. The brothers [Marcel and Victor] Delgado tried. Scott Whitaker 
[who worked as special effects animator at RKO and as story artist and 
writer at Walt Disney Studios in Burbank] tried. All to no avail. So I ended 
up doing about eighty-five percent of the animation because I seemed to 
be the fastest. Only one other guy, Peter Peterson, a grip who watched me 
animating, did succeed. He later suffered from multiple sclerosis I heard. 
There was only one of the four Joes that I felt comfortable with. As nearby 
they shot a movie with Jennifer Jones I named the model Jennifer.
Q:	You first met Willis O’Brien when he worked at MGM on a project titled 
War Eagles, which wasn’t finished. Do you remember this project? The 
protagonists were Vikings who lived in a fantasy land somewhere at 
North Pole where they hunted dinosaurs and who, riding on huge 
eagles, would save New York City from an attack of German airships.
A:	From a classmate I learned that he and Cooper worked on a new project 
at MGM in 1939. So I called him and told him about my interest in model 

308
Acting and Character Animation
animation and asked him if he would allow me to show him some of my 
models. He graciously invited me over to the studio. So I went to MGM 
and was guided into his office. He had three rooms full of artwork, paint­
ings, and drawings. I was overwhelmed. There must have been about 200 
paintings and drawings for the projected War Eagles: highly impressive. 
Eagles sitting on the areola of the Statue of Liberty. OBie’s wife, Darlyne, 
was around too. He was very interested and offered a lot of constructive 
criticism. I had brought a Stegosaurus model and he advised me to study 
anatomy. The legs of that model indeed looked like plums.
Q:	Personally, are you economically minded?
A:	Oh yes! I think that one should do anything as reasonably as possible. I 
don’t believe that it makes sense to throw big sums out of the window, just 
for an effect that is to be seen on screen only 20 seconds. Or 10 seconds. So 
I tried to find a way to make movies of this type for a reasonable budget 
without having it all look cheap.
Q:	In 1953, The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms started a cycle of films with 
monsters that were awakened and created by nuclear tests.
A:	That’s right. Sometime later the Japanese produced their Godzilla from 
practically the same concept. In America there were Them! and other 
films that warned against the elemental force of the atomic bomb, a whole 
group of films that evoked subconscious fears of what might happen if 
they would drop the bomb. The creatures just worked as personification 
of the horror that the atomic bomb could bring about the civilized world.
Q:	You, too, continued the cycle that you had begun and started a long-
term partnership with producer Charles H. Schneer who worked for 
Columbia Pictures.
A:	Charles saw The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms. A friend of mine with whom I 
was in the Army [Harryhausen served as camera assistant under Joe Biroc 
and ­others in the Signal Corps] called and said that there was a producer 
who wanted to destroy the Golden Gate Bridge in a film and introduced 
me to Charles. The idea sounded interesting—particularly as there was a 
giant octopus involved that should create all havoc. Otherwise, It Came 
from Beneath the Sea was a variation of the basic concept of Beast with 
the slight difference that the nuclear test happened under water. That led 
the octopus grow to enormous proportions. It invaded San Francisco and, 
among other horrible deeds, pulled down the Golden Gate Bridge.
Q:	Economically minded, as you are, you reduced the number of tentacles 
for animation, right?
A:	An octopus as we know has eight tentacles but we thought if it would have 
less it would reduce costs, time and construction work. My father [Fred 

309
58.  The Late Stop-Motion Legend Himself
Harryhausen] made all those armatures from my designs. So this octopus 
became a sixtopus as it had only six tentacles which, of course, nobody 
realized as it was never seen in all its tentacled glory—until someone pub­
lished it.
Q:	Someone?
A:	Someone named Forry Ackerman who edited a magazine called “Famous 
Monsters of Filmland.” Carelessly I gave away the internal secrets and 
since then it haunts me. Sam Katzman was the executive producer of 
Columbia’s B-Picture Unit. When I showed him my octopus designs, 
he was aghast and started to draw a thing that resembled a balloon with 
tentacles. “That’s what an octopus looks like,” he said. Instead it looked 
like something out of a Popeye cartoon. He also wanted me to do The 
Giant Claw [an interplanetary buzzard that was as big as a battleship], but 
I turned him down. But back to Charles: After It Came from Beneath the 
Sea we did Earth vs. the Flying Saucers, which Charles developed, inspired 
by all the headlines about Flying Saucer sightings. At that time there was 
no other chance than to make the aliens in the saucers villains. What they 
later tried in Close Encounters was almost impossible back then as nobody 
seemed to be interested in such a concept. Retrospectively, Earth vs. the 
Flying Saucers was one of those cliché concepts, which went back to H. G. 
Wells’ formula that each creature from outer space had to be aggressive.
Q:	You shot some test footage for a proposed film version of War of the 
Worlds.
A:	I did an alien with a huge head crawling on its tentacles out of a spaceship. 
I tried to get [producer] Jesse Lasky interested. Later George Pal made a 
version of his own for Paramount that didn’t have any animation [released 
in 1953].
	
  I did some concept art for Earth vs. the Flying Saucers that had the 
Venusians with bodies like snakes brainwash earthlings. On a research 
trip I even went and visited George Adamski [then a well-known, infa­
mous UFOlogist]. The second time, I saw him he was building a brick wall 
mural, a rather mundane thing to do for a man who claimed to have met 
with aliens.
	
  After this picture, looking for a new project, I took my old drawings 
for a project tentatively called The Giant Ymir out of the drawer. Charles 
was impressed, a screenwriter rewrote the treatment that I had written 
with Charlott Knight, my former acting coach, and I added new illustra­
tions. The Giant Ymir was retitled 20 Million Miles to Earth. Eventually, 
my dream became true. We went to Europe, to Rome where all second 
unit scenes were shot. I was fascinated by all those ancient relics, but 
Larry Butler, the second unit director, only called it a bunch of old stones. 
Then we returned to Hollywood, hired a director [Nathan Juran] and 

310
Acting and Character Animation
finished the production. Charles had separated in the meantime from 
Sam Katzman and founded his own company, Morningside Productions. 
20 Million Miles to Earth was his first film as independent producer.
Q:	The perennial childhood favorite, however, was The 7th Voyage of 
Sinbad in 1958.
A:	Sinbad, yes. Of course we couldn’t film the Arabian Nights in black and 
white. Something like this had to be produced in color although there were 
a lot of problems as I had to work with dupes for the effects. In spite of the 
technical difficulties, we brought the film in for less than a million dollar. I 
guess we spent 650,000 dollars. For an Arabian Nights Fairy Tale! Nowadays, 
they spent that budget on a single scene! Even at that time Sinbad was true 
low budget. Luckily, we got magnificent costumes from Columbia which, 
by the way, were left over from a cancelled Rita Hayworth project. If I recall 
correctly that project was Joseph and His Brethren. We were one of the first 
American production companies that shot in Spain. For the location shoot­
ing we had four or five weeks. Six months later we shot the interiors at the 
studio. And then I had another 4 or 5 months for the animation.
Q:	Many young people my age were as much intrigued by 7th Voyage as 
you were by Kong (and a later generation by Star Wars): John Landis, 
Dennis Muren, and many more. Even Wim Wenders seemed to have 
liked it as I once heard. What was it that made this film so unique?
A:	I don’t know. I tried to show things in The 7th Voyage of Sinbad that people 
hadn’t seen before. While we were in production on Mighty Joe, Douglas 
Fairbanks, Jr. did Sinbad the Sailor (1947) for the same company, RKO, 
but he only talked about the giant Roc. All those miracles were not on the 
screen. Dale Robertson did another one, Son of Sinbad (1955), for Howard 
Hughes, which became a girlie show. Lili St. Cyr started out as a stripper 
in night clubs. Even the first Thief of Bagdad (1924), the silent one with 
Douglas Fairbanks, Sr., wasn’t that much effects-wise. Well, they had a 
flying carpet and a few special effects sequences but nothing that really 
reproduced the fantastic world of 1001 Nights.
	
  In The 7th Voyage of Sinbad, however, we wanted to reproduce the fairy 
tale world as lively and faithful as possible on the screen. Originally I had 
a drawing done of an unnamed hero fighting a skeleton. I took it, named 
him Sinbad and added more drawings that I showed around: Sinbad 
fighting a dragon, the seamen cracking a giant egg and pulling out a two 
headed Roc chick, two Cyclopes fighting over tiny human victims, and 
another one which showed one Cyclops cowering behind his barbecue 
roasting a sailor. I showed the drawings to various producers: George 
Pal and Jesse Lasky. I think I have shown it to Merian Cooper. Edward 
Small—I couldn’t get past his secretary. But nobody was really interested. 
So I filed them. Years later, during a meeting with Charles Schneer, I took 

311
58.  The Late Stop-Motion Legend Himself
them out again. Charles became enthusiastic. I then made some changes 
to have the production less costly.
Q:	You had a drawing that showed a Cyclops armed with a club prepared to 
attack a giant snake wrapped around a tree, with little sailors hanging 
in the branches.
A:	We had to omit that. Charles hated snakes.
	
  Anyway, Charles sent me to Spain for location scouting. When that was 
finished he came himself with key members of the team. From England 
we got Wilkie Cooper as director of photography and a few technicians. 
Other members of the crew we hired in Spain. It was a truly international 
picture. The 7th Voyage of Sinbad became a sleeper and one of the biggest 
box office hits Columbia Pictures had at that time.
Q:	Incredibly enriched was the picture by Bernard Herrmann’s powerful, 
fantastic score.
A:	I was very pleased about that. When we began production I told Charles 
that we would need a good composer, somebody who would give to the 
picture what it deserves. Charles knew Bernie Herrmann and talked to 
him. Bernie came and saw the rough cut. He seemed to like what he saw 
at least so far that he didn’t turn us down. He had turned down many film 
offers. He said he could do something for the picture, and I think that he 
composed an extraordinary score for The 7th Voyage.
Q:	Technicolor, too, was important.
A:	Color was very important. When I see the film today again on a big screen, 
the film stock proves to be relatively grainy, but I don’t think that people 
go primarily to the cinema to see something technically perfect. They 
want to get thrilled and carried away by a story.
Q:	Unforgettable was Torin Thatcher’s magnificent presence as Sokurah 
the Magician.
A:	Oh, Torin! He had a lot of stage experience and gave the part what it 
needed. Kerwin [Mathews], too, was convincing as Sinbad. He offered 
a different incarnation than Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. And we had Kathy 
Grant who gave the movie a lot of charm.
Q:	Then, of course, besides the human actors, there were two wonderful 
stop-motion characters: the fire-breathing dragon and, above all, the 
horned Cyclops.
A:	Yes, most people seem to remember the Cyclops. The dragon, too, was 
unique when it appeared on screen. People hadn’t seen creatures like that 
before.

312
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	Like many others, it was the Cyclops on the Beach who took me off 
when I was a child.
A:	Really? You should have seen him. But I wished I would have had more 
time for animation back then. Well, it was the walk that made him.
Q:	A clever design idea to have him not only one-eyed but one-horned too.
A:	That was a last minute decision. Originally, he was supposed to have two 
horns. The unicorn [another mythological creature] has one.
	
  [Harryhausen showed me a black-and-white photo of an earlier clay ver­
sion of the Cyclops that looked god-awful. I’ve never seen anything so awk­
ward. He would never ever have allowed somebody to publish this picture.]
Q:	The steel armature was much bigger than your usual models, almost the 
same size as the original Kong. The second Cyclops, a roaring, bellow­
ing hulk that was killed by the dragon was smaller. I heard that he was 
constructed by using the Ymir armature.
A:	He had to be in proportion with the dragon. I should have made him dif­
ferent from the first one. Most people thought he was the same.
Q:	There was a rumor that you offered Willis O’Brien a job to be your con­
sultant on 7th Voyage.
A:	No. That’s not true. He wouldn’t have accepted it.
Q:	When did you see OBie the final time? He passed away in November 
1962.
A:	When we made The Animal World for [producer] Irwin Allen. Originally, I 
was to contribute some of my early 16-mm test footage that I had made for a 
proposed dinosaur picture named Evolution. It was blown up to 35-mm film 
and looked quite good. But there was not enough of it. So they decided to 
animate new footage and hired OBie to design the sets, the animals, and the 
armatures for the models. The armatures were made in the Warner Bros. 
Machine shop. For close-ups Irwin Allen had mechanical dinosaur heads 
built. Obie and I looked at each other and wouldn’t agree. An articulated 
stop-motion head would have been much better, but this way the director 
could yell while he manipulated it, “Roll the eyes! Do this, do that!”
Q:	Which of your models would you call memorable from the point of 
character animation?
A:	They all had their own personality. The Ymir had character, people 
remember him. The Cyclops had a very dynamic appearance. Trog in 
Sinbad and the Eye of the Tiger. I don’t know if people thought he was a 
man in a monster suit. But he was an animated figure who had individual 
characteristics and left a high impact on screen.

313
58.  The Late Stop-Motion Legend Himself
Q:	Even The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms, your first solo effort. At that time 
you and OBie had split already.
A:	Yes, at the end the Beast gained a lot of sympathy, so to speak a victim of 
circumstances. Even Gwangi the Allosaurus from The Valley of Gwangi 
earns a certain sympathy. It is difficult to embrace sympathetic features to 
a reptile. With a gorilla it’s easier because he looks more human, but with a 
lizard or an animal to which humans react with disgust it is very difficult. 
OBie always waited for the big picture. Many of his projects collapsed like 
War Eagles. When he had to move to a new, smaller house he would give 
away drawings as a present to kids in the street. And the kids would sell 
them for 10 cents a piece.
Q:	You worked together on a project called Valley of the Mist that never got 
made.
A:	After he received the Oscar for Mighty Joe people told him that now he 
could lean backwards and wait for the best offers. It never happened and I 
had to tell him that I would have to start my own business.
Q:	You have a tendency to dare intriguingly complicated animation 
sequences: the fight with the living skeleton in The 7th Voyage, the 
seven skeletons in Jason and the Argonauts in 1963.
A:	These were real milestones because something like that hadn’t been tried 
before.
Q:	A challenge for your animating skills?
A:	Oh yes! I have visualized these scenes before and listened to my inner voice 
if I could translate this vision convincingly. To me it was with great satis­
faction that the result on screen was even better than what I had imagined.
Q:	The heads of the Hydra…
A:	That’s true for the Hydra too. It had seven heads and it was a challenge to 
animate them in a certain harmony. A creature with a multitude of heads 
is so eccentric that it would appear ridiculous, if one doesn’t take care.
Q:	How would you memorize each frame while facing such complicated 
animation sequences?
A:	It becomes your second nature after having done more and more of it. You 
must have it in your blood.
Q:	But there must have been mishaps and accidents during animation. 
Maybe you forgot a certain movement or the armature wouldn’t work.
A:	Very often so. Not that I would have forgotten something, but in the midst 
of shooting a joint or a leg would break or similar things would happen. 

314
Acting and Character Animation
Sometimes you can continue after the damage has been repaired if the 
position of the figure has been registered, but most often you have to start 
from scratch.
Q:	You once said that among your films, Jason and the Argonauts is your 
personal favorite.
A:	I think it lasts. There are always scenes that you are ashamed of and you 
tell yourself: You should have spent more time. But we worked with the 
restraints of a certain budget and time pressure. With a big budget one can 
allow to test as long as everything is right. We never had the chance, how­
ever, and in 9 of 10 cases it’s the first take that we use because we don’t have 
the time and the money for a retake. All in all, we had maybe less than eight 
percent retakes of shots when the animation was too jerky or the split screen 
matte wasn’t right or the image wasn’t steady. Sometimes we were forced to 
approve results that normally wouldn’t be accepted. There are people who 
don’t compromise, but I think if you are in this business you have to.
Q:	In the mid-1960s, you did two dinosaur films, one right after the other. 
The first, One Million Years B.C., was a big success in 1966/1967, the sec­
ond, The Valley of Gwangi in 1969, from an original idea by the late Willis 
O’Brien that didn’t get made in its time, flopped. What did happen?
A:	One Million Years BC was an interesting project. A Hammer production 
that, with good marketing, became very successful.
Q:	It was Raquel Welch vs. the Dinosaurs.
A:	In a way, yes. When Charles and I started Gwangi, the management of 
the distributor, Warner Bros., approved of our concept but 2 years later 
when the movie was finished there was a changeover of power—and very 
often the new management will not agree with projects the old regime has 
approved. They were not interested in Gwangi and just released the movie 
without any big advertising.
	
  It was a shame because this film had many entertaining elements: cow­
boys, back then still popular, a western film scenery, and of course dino­
saurs that most kids like. But nobody noticed when the movie was released. 
My wife’s sister-in-law lived next to the cinema and didn’t know that they 
showed the film. The publicity was disastrous and the movie was screened 
in a double feature as second movie. Most people who see Gwangi like it 
and find it very entertaining. It had a pretty good score by Jerome Moross.
Q:	And there was the famous roping sequence when the cowboys lasso 
Gwangi (like they did in Mighty Joe Young). How was that done?
A: 	That was one of OBie’s original ideas. We had a jeep with a pole inside, and 
they would lasso it. Then we did a split screen to cut the jeep out. Parts of 
the lasso were animated frame by frame.

315
58.  The Late Stop-Motion Legend Himself
Q:	Was this the first time that you experienced the unpleasant changes in 
film industry?
A:	No, not the first time. I have made these experiences before. There was 
the problem of block booking. If you made a picture in Europe then it 
was shown automatically on the double bill as Number 2, right after an 
American film. It was disappointing to have several years invested in a 
project and to see that it played second-string after an American cowboy 
film. Problems like these we had all the time. Mysterious Island was an 
exciting picture—and was shown in 1962 as a double feature with some 
Hammer film. If I recall correctly it was The Pirates of Blood River.* Really 
disappointing because most people came to see Mysterious Island, a well-
made film with a great score again by Bernie Herrmann. Back then one 
was victim of a certain distribution style. I am convinced that Gwangi, 
with a clever PR man on board who would have had confidence in the 
picture, could have been a success for Warner Bros.
Q:	Was it your idea to return to Sinbad in the early 1970s with The Golden 
Voyage of Sinbad?
A:	Yes, we were looking for a new story and I suggested a new Sinbad story. 
I went again through 1001 Nights and wrote a 20-page treatment that I 
sold to Charles. We hired a screenwriter, Brian Clemens, with whom I 
collaborated closely—and so we developed the screenplay for The Golden 
Voyage. We tried a different Sinbad type this time. We didn’t want to repeat 
the Douglas Fairbanks type: a grinning face, two rows of full teeth, mous­
tache. Time ago it was okay but you couldn’t repeat it permanently. This 
time our Sinbad was John Phillip Law. The colors were subdued which 
made the look more realistic, not as colorful as The 7th Voyage of Sinbad.
Q:	In the mid-1970s when you made a third Sinbad, Sinbad and the Eye of 
the Tiger, you were the only special effects star. Your name was on the 
posters, in the advertisements, and program books. For some time there 
was also a fan magazine devoted exclusively to your Œuvre.† When you 
did Clash of the Titans, there was a wave of brand-new, highly expensive 
effects pictures: VFX suddenly were en vogue. They even compared the 
sounds of your mechanical owl Bubo (in Clash) with those of R2D2.
A:	Yes, there was a new wave. SFX pictures we had already in the silent era. 
There was Noah’s Ark, big effects in Cecil B. DeMille’s King of Kings, and 
in Metropolis. In the 1930s, there was the disaster sequence of Deluge. In 
the 1950s, The Rains of Ranchipur, followed by other disaster pictures. 
Everything returns in a cycle. When audiences will become weary they 
*	 Britain’s biggest grossing double bill of 1962.
†	 FXRH (Special Visual Effects Created by Ray Harryhausen), published from 1971 to 1974.

316
Acting and Character Animation
will turn to something else like love stories. We were able, through all 
cycles, to make our pictures because we produced them always at reason­
able prices so that there never would be a big loss.
Q:	Are there any projects you regret that you couldn’t make them?
A:	There are several projects that I would have loved to do. Once I wanted 
to do the Russian legend of Ilya Muromets, using Symphony No. 3 by 
[Reinhold] Glière—until I found out that they had done it already in 
Russia [directed by Alexander Ptushko, in America released as The Sword 
and the Dragon, the first Russian scope picture]. A very expensive project 
would have been Dante’s Inferno if one had it made properly. But I don’t 
know how many people would have gone to see other people in hell… 
There would have been certain nudities, however, because you don’t go to 
hell in clothes. Gustave Doré’s renderings of Dante’s Inferno have always 
impressed me. But today I wouldn’t touch such a project. Once Hammer 
wanted to do a remake of King Kong, but they couldn’t secure the rights.

317
59
The World’s Leading 
Performance Capture 
Expert
Joe Letteri
Joe Letteri (born in 1957 in Aliquippa, Pennsylvania) graduated from the 
University of California in Berkeley in 1981. In 2001, he joined Peter Jackson’s 
company Weta Digital in New Zealand. As a senior visual effects supervisor in 
charge of creative, artistic, and technical direction, specializing in performance 
capture technology, he won four Academy Awards (The Lord of the Rings: Two 
Towers and The Return of the King; King Kong; and Avatar) and was five more 
times nominated, won four BAFTA awards and four Visual Effects Society 
Awards.
Q: Is there any type of acting that applies best to performance capture? 
What type of qualifications must actors have to get into it?
A:	The goal of the process is to capture everything the actor is doing and the 
emotions actors are expressing through their performance. The tools and 
workflow are designed to make sure the actor is uninhibited and can stay 
in the moment. Any actor’s approach or technique can work in a motion 
capture context.

318
Acting and Character Animation
Q: Is it helpful for Mocap acting to be able to visualize, for filmmakers as 
well as actors, because everything that you act with is virtual and green 
screen? Of course, there is previz but that’s virtual and not physical. 
What can you do to support the director and get the actors in the right 
mood for the respective part?
A:	We’ve evolved our motion capture setup to be much more compact and 
mobile. This allows us to use it on a live-action set, even in adverse con­
ditions, without disrupting principal photography. We really established 
this workflow with the Planet of the Apes franchise where the director was 
focused on working with the actors, knowing that if the emotion was there 
in the performance, we would translate it into the digital apes.
	
  In other cases, a simulcam workflow is useful. With the simulcam 
setup, the director and actors can choose to see a live-action or digital ver­
sion of the set and the actors depending on what is most important for the 
shot. There are many different permutations of these tools, but ultimately 
it is about providing a virtual approximation of the desired shot to aid the 
decision-making process to onset production.
Q: Some traditional animators seem reluctant to identify performance cap­
ture with animation. Of course it is more kinetic and creates movement 
in real time against painstaking frame-by-frame animation but what 
they mean is: They use live models only as reference while in the case 
of performance capture the actors in a way are animating themselves. 
Or are you considering yourself a virtual marionette player? Then, of 
course, you would be an heir to Willis O’Brien, Ray Harryhausen, and 
other artists who were close to puppetry.
A:	Performance capture is far less polarizing than it was, in part because art­
ists now have a broader understanding of the process. The data that are 
gathered through the performance capture process is a starting point for 
animators to craft a performance. Nothing is determined by the data.
	
  Even when the creative decision is made to replicate an actor’s perfor­
mance with a digital character, there is a tremendous amount of talent and 
skill that goes into translating the nuances of a human performance onto 
a digital character that, in most cases, does not share the same physical 
characteristics.
	
  Performance capture is an additive process; it gives the animator 
another tool to work with. Traditionally, the animator must rely only on 
his/her eyes to match reference. Performance capture gives animators 
a representation of motion that may include subtlety of movement or a 
slight asymmetry of posture or gate that adds to what we perceive subcon­
sciously. Sometimes we don’t know why something looks “right,” only that 
it does. In some cases, performance capture can help you get there more 
quickly by doing the basic work more efficiently, freeing the animator to 
spend more time polishing  the extra 10% that make a performance.

319
59.  The World’s Leading Performance Capture Expert
Q: You had many great evolutionary steps in your career that reflect the 
progress of technology: I, Robot—King Kong—The Hobbit—Batman v 
Superman: Dawn of Justice. What do we have to expect the next years 
while you are working on sequels of Avatar (I guess until 2024)? There’s 
only one case you were involved in a project that had no naturalistic 
rendering of characters and environments. That was the comic book 
adaptation of The Adventures of Tintin.
A:	It’s always the films that drive the requirements. You look at the script 
and talk to the director about his vision for the film and you have to 
determine if the tools you have are sufficient to achieve that vision. 
Obviously Jim Cameron is a director with a great imagination and a 
thorough understanding of the visual effects technology and process. 
I would certainly expect his films to continue to push our process 
to evolve.
	
  In recent years we have been working to make our capture setup more 
versatile to handle more adverse onset conditions and also more robust in 
terms of how many actors we can process in real time. Larger ensemble 
casts with full facial capture put a strain on any system due to the sheer 
amount of data being processed but we’re getting more and more efficient 
with our setup. We’ve also integrated much more realistic lighting for 
the virtual production stage because lighting is a critical component to 
a performance and having a good approximation of the lighting onset is 
invaluable.
	
  We mainly associate performance capture with the necessities of 
the entertainment industry, but there are many other fields to use that 
technology. The basic idea didn’t come from entertainment industry 
as well.
	
  Most of the techniques that we use, including motion capture, come 
from the field of Computer Graphics. But much of the continuing research 
and development is driven by the requirements that we have for creating 
characters, environments, and stories. Which is why you tend to see their 
most visible uses in entertainment.
Q: How are you going to advance 3D technology beyond movie-making: 
cross-media? Do you think that there will be synthespians one day who 
will act like real people and, above all, will be equipped with artificial 
intelligence? Maybe in interactive games?
A:	Our focus is on film but obviously others will take these tools into new 
areas. Creating a believable digital human requires extraordinary skill 
over a long period of time. Once you start asking a computer to make act­
ing choices, you enter a whole other level of difficulty. Certainly for film­
making, it relies on a team of artists to create the final result and can’t be 
done by computers alone.

320
Acting and Character Animation
Q: How should film schools train young people in a field that is going to 
change considerably the next decades?
A:	Everything starts with understanding the principles of good storytelling. 
This is as true in visual effects as it is in any other part of filmmaking. 
An understanding of how shots are framed, the use of lighting for tone 
and motivation and the fundamentals of composition will always be an 
essential part of filmmaking. Starting with the basic language of film will 
always serve you as well.
	
  For visual effects in particular, having a good balance of art and techni­
cal skill is extremely valuable. Computing skills that enable you to extend 
and get more out of the software you use is part of mastering your tools.

321
60
The German Animation 
Producer
Tony Loeser
Tony Loeser was born in Liverpool in 1953 but raised in GDR (East Germany), 
where he worked as a stop frame cameraman at DEFA Studios Babelsberg. After 
reunification, he became a producer and founded MotionWorks, a production 
company based in Halle in Lower Saxony. He did TV series as well as feature 
films (Mullewapp 1 and 2) that all aimed at a young audience.
Q:	As a European animation producer you have the benefit of state sup­
port, but we guess you still have to overcome a lot of obstacles.
A:	The biggest barrier for all people who are creative is the increasing admin­
istration in the media. It gets more and more complicated to raise funds. 
Everything is being bureaucratized. Some bloated machinery has been 
built up. And the more money they spent for this bureaucracy, the less is 
available for the creative aspects of production. Unproductive work soaks 
up parts of the budget that doesn’t go into production. Decision-making 
processes are slowed down and delayed over periods of 1 to 1.5 year. This 

322
Acting and Character Animation
bureaucratic superstructure paralyzes creative animation production and 
results in unnecessary compromises.
Q:	On all levels in Europe, mediocrity seems to be on the rise. Mediocrity, 
however, is the arch enemy of creativity, not to mention the employ­
ment situation of the creative personnel and animators, social security, 
and old-age provision. In a way, they have to live from hand to mouth.
A:	That’s right. Our system causes forty to fifty percent outsourcing to for­
eign countries due to shrinking funds, severe competition, and overpro­
duction. But it looks as if Germany will become a low-wage country too. 
We have producers from Spain coming to us and asking if we got excess 
capacities. We don’t have tax incentives in Germany as they now have in 
Italy where they offer up to thirty percent tax relief for film productions.
Q:	And in this economically serious situation, you continue to focus on 
an audience of little kids and do preschool entertainment. Why do you 
neglect big family audiences?
A:	On the contrary, I consider this very young audience group highly impor­
tant. We shouldn’t ignore the kids. In this age, the foundation is laid for 
social competence and cultural education.
	
  In media there is a big problem with globalization: We have program 
without end. The Americans have succeeded in adapting European con­
tent, fairy tales, and so on, and have transformed it into a global formula. 
That kills local content in Europe, in India, and everywhere in the world. In 
France they still have a good cultural policy and reach sufficient quota for 
French movies. But this is an exception based on a strong national tradition.
Q:	You have produced two parts of an animated feature film series from 
children’s books by Helme Heine: Both parts of Mullewapp, the first 
(Friends Forever) released in 2009, the second one in 2016, deal with a 
rural community of animals: a trio of friends consisting of a mouse, a 
cock, and a pig.
	
  You put a lot of effort into the second part. Did you reshape Helme 
Heine’s very simple picture-book animals for the needs of animation?
A:	Yes, in the picture-books the eyes of the animals were mere dots. We spent 
some time on the eyes as they are the mirror of the souls.
Q:	Despite your hard work Part 2 didn’t perform at the box office as 
expected.
A:	We knew that we wouldn’t get an audience of half a million but we hoped 
for 300,000. We got 200,000. That was very disappointing.
Q:	These preschool films are very tame. Aren’t they too infantile even for 
the youngest? They seemed to have been commissioned by mothers who 

323
60.  The German Animation Producer
fear for the salvation of their kids. Today the Brothers Grimm would 
have big problems in a number of European countries we guess.
A:	We have no other choice than to turn to the persons who actually buy the 
tickets at the box office, and these are the mothers.
Q:	Why shouldn’t kids see things that are frightening provided it’s not 
autotelic but cathartic?
A:	I remember that this discussion, in East Germany too, started some­
time in the 1960s and 1970s when they developed a different attitude 
toward scenes of violence in fairy tales and began to listen to pedagogues. 
Children, if they are not directly confronted, have no conception of death. 
So death is cut out.
Q:	You avoid death and at the same time change nature considering ani­
mal behavior.
A:	As an antagonist in Mullewapp 1 we had a wolf that was after the pig. 
Parents but also some reviewers considered him too radical.
Q:	We guess this wolf was no vegetarian. The Big Bad Wolf was our favor­
ite in Disney’s Three Little Pigs. The same is true for the Russian series 
Nu Pogodi that told of the perennial controversy between wolf and hare.
Animal characters from Mullewapp 2: Franz von Hahn, a rooster and Waldemar, 
the pig.  (Courtesy of MotionWorks.)

324
Acting and Character Animation
A:	Right, but we shouldn’t forget what kind of powerful experience the first 
visit to the movies is for little kids. It gets dark and you are alone, even with 
Mom and Dad sitting beside you. And the screen is so large. On the audio 
side of things there is Dolby Surround. The impression is overwhelming. 
The visual and audio effect is way too big. So there are many parents who 
care about what their children are watching.
Q:	Among your TV series is one that is very interesting under intercul­
tural aspects: The Travels of the Young Marco Polo. The episodes of the 
first season were released in 2013. Here you had a famous name, a brand 
so to speak, and a Eurasian topic linked by the Silk Road.
A:	Right now we are working on the second season which is being produced 
exclusively in Germany, with some Canadian input.
Q:	The first season had everything one could wish for with regard to an 
exotic background. But we found it a little bit too stiff and educational.
A:	That was my idea. I am the one to blame. But I think it was a good adven­
ture series. In Cannes we were approached by a Chinese buyer who had 
seen one episode. For a moment we feared she had seen a pirated copy on 
the Chinese internet, but then we learned that the young woman had seen 
this episode in an Arabian studio and became very interested.
Q:	The animation is very simple for this type of series.
A:	I wanted it that way. I didn’t want Pixar-type animation. I would like to 
have something that is in style and animation similar to the Flintstones. 
But there are not many animators around who are really able to animate 
that way. Everybody wants to work on Pixar level, but they all will fail try­
ing to achieve that. They never will come near that quality. Sadly we have 
no tradition regarding the simple line. Characters that are intended for 
full animation will not work drawn in simple lines. But if you have a well-
designed simple character raising the eyebrow, it will get noticed. These 
characters will not do much, but what they do will have an effect on the 
audience. Yet there are not many people around anymore who are able to 
keep it simple and good.
Q:	Characters such as Mister Magoo or Signor Rossi that are real types 
born from simple designs. By the way, with a nod to Marco Polo, what 
do you expect from China animation-wise?
A:	We have to adapt ourselves in the future more and more to China. In 
Germany we have a TV entertainer named Harald Schmidt who joked: 
My child is going to learn Chinese that someday he can serve Chinese 
guests in a Chinese restaurant.

325
61
The American Expert 
in 3D Scans
Karl Meyer
Karl Meyer is founder and CEO of Gentle Giant Studios, which is part of 3D 
Systems, a leading provider of 3D printing centric design-to-manufacture solu­
tions. The company is nestled near the major studios in Burbank, California. 
Business started with designing toys, but when Meyer purchased the first 
scanner and 3D printer in 1997, he gradually became involved in scanning 
and collecting data for film, television, and games. Since then the company 
scanned virtually everybody including Lady Gaga and participated in almost 
every major VFX movie working with Industrial Light & Magic, Rhythm & 
Hues, Sony Imageworks, and other companies: Star Wars, Harry Potter, Lord 
of the Rings, Spider-Man, King Kong (2005), The Chronicles of Narnia, X-Men, 
Hulk (2003), Transformers, Ratatouille, Coraline, Avatar, Toy Story 3, TRON: 
Legacy, Terminator Genisys, Gravity, Fast & Furious 7, Ant-Man, and Batman v 
Superman: Dawn of Justice.
Q:	You are working in the field of digitizing actors. Can you describe the 
process and estimate how many actresses and actors you have scanned 
in the meantime and have digital data of?

326
Acting and Character Animation
A:	Digitizing people has many benefits and applications. Capturing the “real 
geometry” of a human provides an indisputable dataset that becomes an 
asset which can be utilized across multiple platforms. Data can be pro­
cessed and refined using a myriad of software and tools to create the 
“digital thespians” we see in most action sequences in feature films today. 
There are many different approaches and often various VFX houses will 
develop their own proprietary pipeline for producing their models. This 
includes texture capture and refinement, animation rigging, and sophis­
ticated lighting controls to simulate any environment. The tools are ever 
evolving, from the early laser scanners, white light grid projection to the 
flexibility and versatility of high-resolution camera photogrammetry. 
Over the last couple of decades, Gentle Giant Studios has 3D scanned 
thousands of people. Many people we have captured are actors, athletes, 
and other notable celebrities. This is significant because along with their 
life’s body of work, they leave behind 3D information that contributes to 
their immortality. Combined with motion and sound capture synthesis, 
the digital double can participate in media long after the life of the origi­
nal host.
Q:	Obviously, this is not the end but the beginning of digital clones. If you 
look to other media, not only the movies, do you see a chance that vir­
tual actors, maybe commanding artificial intelligence, might act out of 
their own? Can you speculate a little about the future of digital acting? 
Will it always rely on performance capture, on a human “marionette 
player” so to speak?
A:	Today we see the results of leveraging “real geometry” into the most accu­
rate toys, statues, and bio medical physical reproductions. The fast prog­
ress of 3D printing has elevated the quality and authenticity of transposing 
digital data to the physical form in an expanding scope of materials. One 
day possibly living flesh and bone. This is driven by the progression of 
content collection. Virtual reality, augmented reality, and the “fourth 
dimension” cross the boundaries of new experiences.
	
  I believe it is not far in the future where AI (artificial intelligence) will 
be a common driver of sophisticated geometry. Today there are amazing 
immersive video games and films that project a clear vision of what’s to 
come. The more that can be captured and collected, the more can be mul­
tiplied and emulated providing an almost indistinguishable reality with 
unpredictable outcome.

327
62
The Managing Director 
from Hungary
Ferenc Mikulás
In the spring of 1957, Ferenc Mikulás (born in 1940)—because of his participa­
tion in the Revolution—was dismissed from secondary school. From 1970 on, 
after writing scripts and directing short films, he was getting acquainted with 
animated cartoon films at the Pannónia Film Studio. Since June 1, 1971, he has 
been the head of the Kecskemét Animation Studio, where he produced several 
films and series. Since 1993, he has been Director of the Kecskemét Animation 
Film Festival. Between 1997 and 2000, he was member of the Board of Directors 
of ASIFA. For his activities, he received the Golden Cross of Distinction of the 
Hungarian Republic in 1995.
Q: How did you get involved in animation? What was it that fascinated you 
personally in creating life artificially on screen?
A:	By accident, from the field of documentaries. The discovery of other lan­
guages and metacommunication was significant for me.

328
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	Were there special movies and series that impressed you?
A:	The work of numerous film directors had a great effect on me: e.g. Disney, 
[Yuri] Norstein, Miyazaki, [Paul] Driessen, the Hungarian [Sándor] 
Reisenbüchler, etc.
Q:	In Europe, Hungary for some time was a very important animation-
producing nation. How did you secure funding in the past? How did 
you train young aspiring animators and technical personnel?
A:	Before the change of the Hungarian political system (1989), the bud­
get  for Hungarian films was distributed—based on thematic plans—
among the state-run studios by the Ministry of Culture. Public 
television also allocated a significant amount to the production of ani­
mated series.
	
  In this period, between 1970 and 1990, 20 full animated feature films, 
several dozens of animated film series and numerous artistic short films 
that received significant festival awards were made at Pannónia Film 
Studio and in the Kecskemét Studio.
	
  In this period there was still no animation faculty at the universities, so 
the training of the animators and directors took place in the film studios 
during production.
Q:	How is the state of the Hungarian animation industry today? How is it 
positioned at home and on the global market?
A:	Today, the Hungarian animation industry is weak, due to a recession 
which started with the 1989 change of the political system.
	
  Instead of the distribution of funds by the state, tenders could only be 
submitted to the Hungarian National Film Fund, where the power of fea­
ture film makers forced the animation genre into the background.
	
  One sign of the recession is that during the past 25 years only a total of 
5 animated feature films could be made. The Hungarian Television does 
not commission animated films at all and does not want to be involved in 
co-productions and the production of TV series.
	
  The state-owned Pannónia Studio disbanded. The Kecskemét Studio 
was privatized. We purchased the share of the state with my colleagues. 
Currently, it is the only such studio that has been continuously operating 
with almost a constant staff number for 45 years.
	
  In Europe, the Moholy-Nagy University has its presence with its gradu­
ation films, while Kecskemétfilm Ltd. operates primarily with its services 
(Irish—The Secret of Kells; Spanish—Chico and Rita; French–Japanese—
The Red Turtle), as it participates in the production of full animated fea­
ture films requiring character animation.

329
62.  The Managing Director from Hungary
Q:	What about co-producers you worked with then and now? Is it mainly 
about money and outsourcing? And what happened when the competi­
tion from Asia got strong and stronger?
A:	The Hungarian co-producers operate an enterprise established for a certain 
film, and if needed, we can help each other by providing working capacity.
	
  For Kecskemétfilm Ltd., there are orders from Western Europe requir­
ing high-quality character animation almost continuously. The situation 
in Asia does not affect us.
Q:	TV participation has become hard to obtain in Europe. Do you see 
options in new digital media and maybe in developing characters that 
work well in merchandising?
A:	Due to the lack of new television series the significance of merchandising 
is minimal. The new media is likely to take over the role of television in the 
future among young people.
Q:	Can you describe how the evolution from 2D to 3D did work in your 
country? What problems did you have? Is 2D still an equivalent?
A:	In Hungary, the number of films made in 3D is not significant. Currently, 
2D and 3D go hand in hand peacefully in Hungary. In the Kecskemét 
Studio, we successfully apply 3D technology to 2D productions, and a new 
and unique film language has developed.
Q:	What is the main quality a good cartoon character should fulfill?
A:	A good example: the appearance of a character evokes a feeling of déjà vu, 
and the posture, movement, and gestures of the character reflect his/her 
personality without words.
Q:	Very often you were commissioned to animate cartoon characters that 
were copyrighted by someone else. Did you have enough creative free­
dom to develop even these figures?
A:	No, in such cases we do not have the opportunity of development. 
However, in the process of animation the characters often get perfected, 
and we follow the best example.
Q:	Working with low budgets: What is the best method of getting a good per­
formance out of the characters? Is it more based on writing and dialogue 
or on a design or is there anything the animator can do above the usual?
A:	Based on my experience, storytelling is getting a greater role today, and the 
quality and nature of animation has a lower priority. With the aid of the 
visual cues, many things are up to the imagination of the viewer; thus, audi­
ences are more involved in the acts, rather than showing everything to them.

330
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	What can producers and directors do to support and inspire the ­creative 
personnel?
A:	This largely depends on the person. Based on my experience, it is the dif­
ficulties that make people truly creative. I give them tasks and oppor­
tunities. I send them to festivals, and certain films they watch wake up 
something in them many times.
Q:	Just being curious: How do you see the future of European and 
Hungarian animation and how do you judge the evolution of digital 
technology in this field? Why is it that character animation in some of 
the old cartoons is so much better than nowadays’ animation, in spite 
of all the digital tools?
A:	Currently, in several countries of Europe, I do not see such a problem. I 
think it depends on who is using the digital technology: if it gets into the 
hands of a talented artist, there is no need to worry.
	
  “Old” character animation was better due to the lack of dialogue and 
the joyful satisfaction given by the exploration of a new form of language. 
A great deal of knowledge was needed: to draw well, to know anatomy, to 
think spatially, etc. Talent and thinking cannot be replaced by software 
and machines.

331
63
The German Puppet 
Animator
Heinrich Sabl
Heinrich Sabl (born in 1961 in Görlitz/GDR) started out as a locksmith. His 
objective was to work in the theatre as a technician. It was then that he became 
interested in puppetry. He studied puppetry at Ernst Busch Drama School in East 
Berlin and turned to stop-motion filmmaking, producing animated short films 
(including Père Ubu and Mère Ubu), and devoting most of his lifetime to finish­
ing a stop-motion feature film titled Memory Hotel.
Q:	In your practice you have decided to work with animated puppets. 
What do puppets mean to you? What do puppets relate to you while you 
are animating them? Do you feel comfortable within the tradition of 
the puppet play and the classic stop-motion puppet film? Do you watch 
what’s going on in international puppet play?
A:	At first I want an exact terminology. This has to do with my socialization. 
While I was trained as a puppeteer back in the 1980s, the puppet play 
tried to emancipate and this was underlined by some theoretical work, for 

332
Acting and Character Animation
instance, by Konstanza Kavrakova Lorenz. Puppetry discovered the adult 
audience. And we understood “the puppet” as our tool—as a material 
which, depending on the story, could be replaced through other materials 
which include an actor. In the process of work with the material, a termi­
nology was established that has since accompanied my work. The lifeless 
material (it might be a thing, it might be a puppet) becomes a character 
by means of animation. In this regard, the term puppet doesn’t exist for 
me. It is just material, a tool that transforms by the process of animation/
life giving into a character. A figure with regard to screenplay/the literary 
source, however, that ceases the right to be a character if we, the recipients, 
won’t believe in it.
	
  When I animate I have to embrace the material. In the material I find 
all information for the camerawork, the choreography, and, related to 
that, the animation. This approach takes place from different angles as 
I have been for the past 15 years behind the camera (cinematography, 
direction) and as animator in front of it. Although some of these three 
working areas overlap, it was helpful to separate and distinguish these 
three activities very well from each other. The first impulse is the issue 
what I am going to tell. This is ever an action, for instance, if the pro­
tagonist will enter a room or something like that. Is the action defined 
I search for the best-as-possible camera angles. This process is complex. 
At one hand, the camera shall capture that action understandably for 
the spectator, and at the other hand, the material (the puppet, the object, 
or the prop) doesn’t stand any closeness and proximity, any angle, any 
lens. Then there is the lighting which—at least in my work—subordi­
nates to the scene, to the narrative. The final decision is about aperture 
and focus.
	
  Then it needs free ways to be able to animate and the adventure can 
begin.
	
  I don’t feel within the tradition of stop-motion film. I can’t because I 
don’t share that term. A 24 fps moving image was nothing else inside the 
film camera than film transport—exposure—film transport—not differ­
ent from stop motion.
	
  My first roots are indeed those of puppetry. This is what I studied. It was 
like learning in a hard school and the best prerequisite for my job. I feel 
connected to puppetry as spectator and attend, sporadically, from time to 
time, stage plays.
Q:	Before you entered the field of puppetry, you wanted to go to the the­
atre to become a technician. How would you see the difference between 
stage play and puppetry?
A:	Let me try to explain it backward. I have realized that certain fabrics 
are very useful for puppetry. Whenever something is more model and 
exemplary, an abstraction in the story which is to be told, then one ends 

333
63.  The German Puppet Animator
very fast at puppetry or animation. That works for me only provided the 
abstraction is reinforced by a plausible narrative.
	
  I differentiate not so much between show and puppet players. The deci­
sion for this one or that one I am always searching in the source, in the 
story that is to be told.
	
  The reason for being a technician is not by chance. If I want to possess 
material and to animate it there is a technical aspect too. There are light­
ing and shooting techniques. The question is how to use the machinery for 
my story. This is a lifelong process of searching which still forces me to my 
knees in spite of my many years of experience.
Q:	Are there any examples in the field of stop motion that have influenced 
or impressed you? Were there films you didn’t like?
A:	There is a film that left an effect on me continuously: Balance by the 
Lauenstein Brothers. I like films with a position which sure has to do 
with my East German background (Friedrich Wolf’s “art as weapon” has 
an effect on me until today). Regarding this, Jan Švankmajer’s Death of 
Stalinism in Bohemia and, on an Expressionist level, Food [an animated 
documentary short] are very close to me.
	
  In 2D animation, there are Andreas Hykade’s Ring of Fire (although I 
haven’t really understood it) and the groundbreaking [abstract] work by 
Raimund Krumme and Phil Mulloy.
	
  Then it gets difficult. Of course, Chicken Run—but since then there was 
nothing by Aardman that fascinated me.
	
  Actually, there is almost nothing I like, neither in style nor in story—I 
am waiting for Tarantino to make a stop-motion film or Lars von Trier. 
Both would hopefully please me, this I would like to watch.
Q:	What qualities should a good puppeteer and a good stop-motion ani­
mator have?
A:	This question hits my heart. As I said I had a training to become puppe­
teer: acting lessons, dancing, movement, pantomime, acrobatics, speech 
training, Materials Science, just to name some of the disciplines.
	
  This education became an essential basis for my work today.
	
  I think that the abilities of an animator and a puppeteer are very close to 
each other. Both have to know how a movement works, where the center of 
mass displacement is, they have to abstract and beat the bush. They have to 
think straightforward and in concrete terms have to be able to transfer their 
ideas onto whatever material. Never mind if you use a puppet or a match box.
Q:	How do you approach a character when you animate it? Do you observe 
a lot? Do you work with a stop watch to time movements?
A:	In the moment of animation, I am interested solely in the action that has 
to be told. Everything else is craftsmanship. If a material/puppet stands 

334
Acting and Character Animation
safely, the difficulty of a certain movement, etc.—all this doesn’t count 
because in the end it’s a mixture of craftsmanship, intuition, and experi­
ence. You can rely on these abilities. More important is what’s under the 
surface, how my protagonist moves from A to B. What does he have in his 
luggage? In actor’s school, we called that subtext. This is what really inter­
ests me. I never animate original text/dialogue but always the so-called 
subtext. In the forefront, I don’t time any movement, not even camera 
movement, which has to be segmented into single frames too.
Memory Hotel. (Courtesy of Heinrich Sabl.)

335
63.  The German Puppet Animator
	
  In the past years, I didn’t have much opportunity to observe. But yes, I 
do, on the way to the studio and back. But actually what I’m doing more 
is to study the possibilities that are in my materials, what they allow me 
to do. Then the searching starts. I am convinced that how a thing/puppet 
moves is still part of the material itself.
	
  This requires lots of patience, humility, and devotion. One has to be 
concerned with the material.
Q:	You are regarded as perfectionist. For many years, you are working 
to finish your most ambitious film: Memory Hotel. What can you tell 
about the project and the story? Was it a challenge or did it culminate in 
a series of disappointment and frustration considering the enormous 
difficulties?
A:	I don’t think there is a difference between perfection and precision. In 
my work on Memory Hotel I made some effort to avoid the perfection; 
I worked with an old 35-mm film camera and denied high-resolution 
images and total control of animation, I worked under open sky and 
deprived the safe atmosphere of the studio, I even widely quit story­
boards and dashed into the adventure of improvisation. I didn’t ani­
mate any classic lip sync but trusted in the power of the subtext—short, I 
faced danger. This was and is part of a creative process that is continued 
in postproduction. During this process, I work as long as possible with 
the sketchy. My objective is to shove as much sketch as possible into the 
final product to keep the space for reception as open and big as pos­
sible. This process will not be in the way of precision while selecting the 
devices.
	
  To talk about Memory Hotel is not easy in the moment. The work/gen­
esis involves many groups of themes: to tell a story with the means of the 
animated film, the question of financing it, analogue technologies, the 
digital changes in image, sound and communication, social questions, 
time, aging, etc. It’s useful to consider all this separately and it needs a 
structure.
	
  The first idea for the project came up in the 1990s. In 1995, the first 
application for film subsidies was filed, and in 1999, we began physical pro­
duction. That’s now 17 years; there was no single day when the film project 
was not part of daily thinking and acting. During a long learning process, 
I developed some kind of resistance to frustration. Nevertheless, there 
were and are declines that weight heavily—but there still is—unswerv­
ing—besides a straightforward surrounding of supporters, a central driv­
ing force that doesn’t let me give up: THE IMAGE and increasingly again 
THE STORY which this film is about to tell. And the security to live in 
Germany; I was and I am still able to continue in this highly unusual type 
of work. I regard this as a great privilege.

336
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	You had a story, set among Germans and Russian troops in the ruins 
of a Berlin hotel in the aftermath of World War II, but as you said, con­
trary to many commercial animators, you improvise a lot during your 
work.
A:	I don’t know many commercial animators, so I don’t know much about 
their work process. As I said, there is craftsmanship which I have to mas­
ter and extend. Then the fun begins; similar to instrumentalists whose 
play we hear and recognize from their own style during a music record­
ing, I am looking for my own style. I always felt the requirement to create 
strong characters. These I inflict with my own handwriting and this must 
be strong. For this I need space. This space I grant to my figures, this is 
why they become characters. In the moment of shooting, of animating I 
give all to them. This mostly is an arduous live performance. It isn’t neces­
sary that the animation is perfect but the power, the motivation, and the 
impulse must be right.
	
  So animation can become a preplanned process. It would bore me to 
exchange the so-called replacement faces for consonant sounds and vocals 
to put perfect lip sync into the mouths of the characters. It would bore me 
too if an animatic would dictate a movement.
	
  I listen to my material. I react to and use alleged mistakes. Siegfried 
Kracauer attributed the “affinity to unstaged life” to film. This is what I 
want to bring into my studio and therefore I leave, among else, the unpro­
tected room of the studio and animate under open sky.
Q:	What’s your relationship with the hybrids of live action and 3D anima­
tion, with the blockbusters that dominate currently the global screens?
A:	This is a question I cannot answer because I haven’t seen such films.
Q:	Which qualities of your work would you like to see “saved” in the future 
which undoubtedly will be digital and virtual? Which status will stop 
motion have? What kind of audience do you wish?
A:	If I type the term “Stop Motion” in the search field of YouTube, I encoun­
ter Lego films, Tutorials, etc. I do not want to call the creative efforts of 
the makers into question as these trials are well-meant. Software easily 
accessible and approachable for anybody besides camera technique makes 
it possible. The line of demarcation between hobby and professional aspi­
ration seems to be fluent or seems to disintegrate. A determination of the 
position is difficult. This is not meant derogatorily, but what is needed is 
delimitation and differentiation. Anybody can do it,—and yet, to myself, 
filmmaking is breadwinning and art production at the same time. I myself 
can get the inspiration that is part of my life only from the material. And 
from the stories that I hopefully will be able to tell in the future. From my 

337
63.  The German Puppet Animator
own stylistics and from my way of animation which, so I hope, I will be 
able and will be allowed to develop further. These abilities are completely 
independent from questions of technology. These are questions of physical 
nature and afford my presence, my senses, and my abilities.
	
  I previously only had the brief pleasure to use digital technology. 
Regarding the total control it made my work very simple; there were still 
stage fright and a certain tension which were always part of my film work. 
In the realm of digital filmmaking, I have to search a new focus.
	
  I guess that in spite of all commercial efforts and the box office receipts 
of the American Laika [producers of Coraline, ParaNorman, Boxtrolls, 
and Kubo] or the British Aardman Studios the so-called stop-motion 
technique will remain a niche product. The global networking, however, 
is, considering the distribution of animated films, a true chance, but the 
creators shouldn’t have to wait for getting reimbursed.
	
  A source of inspiration I always found in musicians, creative artists, 
filmmakers, and writers. They have carried me, their work has touched 
me.
	
  Maybe in the future there will be young film enthusiasts who will take 
Memory Hotel as a source of their inspiration. Then I would have had 
accomplished something.


339
64
The Animation Student 
from Romania
Veronica Solomon
Veronica Solomon (born in 1980 in Tirgu Mures/Romania) is an animation stu­
dent at Film University Babelsberg, which is located on a studio lot near Potsdam, 
Germany. We thought it would be interesting to interview not only professionals 
but students too.
Q:	Do you develop your projects out of the characters or do you prefer to 
explore them through a finished story?
A:	I would say I explore characters out of certain situations. Usually at the 
beginning I have no precise story, but I must know what it is all about to see 
the characters in my head. I have no defined style. It depends on how the 
story is going to develop. But the characters are the first that become clear.
Q:	How do you get into the mood, into the spirit of a certain character 
when you animate? Do you animate 2D or 3D?
A:	I understand myself as 2D animator, using digital tools. But it turned out 
that I make my final assignment now as claymation.

340
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	Do you watch humans and animals? Do you do caricatures?
A:	I always watch humans and animals, but I haven’t done it explicitly while 
designing a character. My characters come so to speak from my own per­
sonal universe of mythology, which consists of everything I have read, 
seen, or heard. I like to mix these ingredients.
Q:	We noticed that many projects of young animation filmmakers and stu­
dents are quite ambitious, sometimes overly pretentious, but relatively 
limited in animation, in spite of all digital tools.
A:	I can only tell what I have watched in my own personal neighborhood. At 
the Film University Babelsberg, you don’t have to finish a project of your 
own, but there is this tradition and they all want to become filmmak­
ers [auteurs]. Rarely people are pleased to play a certain supporting part: 
character designer or background designer or just being an animator for 
a fellow student. Then you have to do everything yourself: screenwrit­
ing, directing, designing, modeling and rigging in case of 3D, animat­
ing, compositing, editing, and 9 times out of 10 handling the production 
chores. So you start very carefully on designs, backgrounds, characters, 
props, and what else—and then you realize that there is no time for 
extensive animation. You have to finish your degree. In the professional 
world, similar things will happen, but this has to do with lack of money 
I guess.
Q:	Are there examples of character animation that have impressed you?
A:	The encounter with God scene from Mind Game. And all from Tekkon 
Kinkreet. Otherwise classic Disney films such as Jungle Book, Robin Hood, 
and Aristocats. Character-wise I also like Emperor’s New Groove. I am 
very influenced by Japanese animation—there is a special kind of charac­
ter movement—they have a different rhythm.
Q:	How do you judge hybrids of live action and 3D animation, these block­
busters that currently dominate our screens? Do you consider perfor­
mance capture a legitimate tool of animation?
A:	I must admit that I haven’t seen a lot. I don’t consider it real animation but 
cannot tell why. I recall when Polar Express came out, I think that was one 
of the first features that used motion capture, that I thought: Hey, man, 
that’s terrible, I don’t want to see it. But recently I have seen a Making 
of The Hobbit with Benedict Cumberbatch who played the dragon. Very 
impressive. Maybe a good animator would have been able to deliver the 
same performance, but it would have lasted longer and would have been 
more expensive. I don’t know. But that’s certainly no art.

341
64.  The Animation Student from Romania
Q:	Given the fast evolution of digital technology, how do you see the future, 
including your own? Will you have to change artistically and economi­
cally to reproduce yourself?
A:	I find everything very exciting and frightening at the same time. I don’t 
know if I am flexible enough. Changing and reproducing don’t have to be 
bad things. I am very grateful for the Undo function. Technology is just a 
bunch of tools. I hope that at the end the story is what counts and not the 
glitter.


343
65
The Czech 3D Producer
Jan Tománek
Jan Tománek (born in 1978 in Prague) experimented with 3D computer anima­
tion since he graduated from the High School of Arts in Prague in 1996. In 2003, 
he became the first Czech filmmaker to produce a feature-length 3D animated 
movie: His Goat Story—The Old Prague Legends (Kozí prĭbĕh—povĕsti staré 
Prahy) was finished by his Art And Animation Studio in 2008. A sequel, Goat 
Story with Cheese, was released in 2012.
Q: Prague has always been an interesting playground for all kind of pup­
petry, the illusions of the Black Theatre, and, of course, animation and 
stop motion. How were you influenced personally by this tradition? 
You were born 10 years after Jiří Trnka’s death.
A:	Really? I didn’t think about Jiří Trnka’s death like that…
	
  But in fact, when I was younger there was Communism here in Czech 
Republic. That meant: no commercial U.S. cartoons, just traditional Czech 
animation that was of very good quality and Russian films.

344
Acting and Character Animation
	
  It was natural for kids here to see quality traditional animation like 
Trnka, [Hermína] Týrlová, [Jiří] Barta.
	
  But the main influence for me was my family. Both of my parents are 
artists. My mother [Dagmar Doubková] is a very famous director of ani­
mated movies with awards from the famous festivals like Hiroshima, 
Bilbao, etc.
	
  So I grew up with puppets and animation.
Q:	You were among the firsts to experiment with 3D computer animation, 
the first to produce a feature-length 3D animated film in the Czech 
Republic: Goat Story. Can you talk a little about the challenges and the 
difficulties?
A:	The whole movie took me 5 years of my life. The most difficult part was 
collecting the money. I got small funds from the EU MEDIA program for 
development, but all other financing I had to secure from private inves­
tors. Czech government, Czech funds, even the City of Prague didn’t par­
ticipate in financing.
Q:	Did you have problems to find 3D animators and how did you train 
them?
A:	It’s a paradox situation compared to the long Czech animation history, 
but we have here no 3D animators. There are some elder classical ani­
mators, but they don’t know computers, and the new ones are educated 
by these old ones… Worse was to accept students from Czech animation 
schools. We had to teach them from scratch on how to animate by modern 
standards.
Q:	You chose not a modern topic for Goat Story but based your work on 
Old Prague Legends. Was this a distinctive move on your part not pick­
ing an international adventure yarn?
A:	Prague as location was and is interesting for foreign audiences. The only 
problems were some adult jokes in the movie and the dark atmosphere. 
The buyers had problems how to classify the picture. Nevertheless, we sold 
the movie to many countries and territories, but mainly DVD and TV.
Q: 	You had to work on a miniscule budget as you have said. What did this 
mean for designing the characters and, above all, for the animation 
itself?
A:	Concerning the design I had a very accurate idea and I stuck to it the 
whole movie. The money didn’t prove limited for design at all. But when 
I tell somebody that the movie was produced for less than 2 million USD 
and the whole picture was made by 15 people (3D models and anima­
tion), nobody believes it. Shrek cost 150 million USD, and even Shrek’s 

345
65.  The Czech 3D Producer
animated credits were made by more people than worked on our whole 
movie.
Q:	How do you approach the acting part in 3D animation?
A:	Each animator has its own character, same as an actor in live films. I tried 
to distribute the main characters between our animators according to 
their own character and style of animation.
	
  It was the same with certain moods—some person is more qualified 
for a funny scene and another is better handling slow and scary ones.
	
  I think it’s also a benefit to work with a small team because I talked 
with all animators personally and showed them what I wanted them to do 
acting-wise. There was no “interface” like a senior animator who would 
step in and translate my emotions to them. I did it myself.
Q:	How do you see the future of 3D animation in Europe as well as other 
territories?
A:	Notwithstanding that Goat Story was the most successful Czech anima­
tion movie I didn’t hardly recoup the budget, without any profit…
	
  It’s getting harder and harder. When I created Goat Story 1 in 2008, I 
knew that I would get the money back from releasing the movie to Czech 
cinemas. When I did Goat Story 2 in 2012, it was 50/50 to get the money. 
Now I know that if I would create a new movie and even provided all goes 
very well, Czech cinemas will never pay this movie back. It’s getting worse 
and worse.
	
  We have to look for new distribution channels. I gave both movies to 
YouTube for free. This act generates some money for the advert. It’s para­
dox but this act didn’t spoil DVD and TV sales.
Q:	Can you please name a few 3D-animated films that have impressed you 
recently?
A:	I like Pixar movies but I have to say that the last one that I saw, The Good 
Dinosaur, is the worst entry Pixar ever produced.
	
  The last movie I saw with my kids was The Secret Life of Pets. It was 
fun—because of the great animal characters.


347
66
The Experimental 
Stop-Frame Animator
Grigori Zurkan
Grigori Zurkan (born in 1986) is a freelance animator specialized in stop motion 
including editorial, art direction, camera work, and solo projects. He gradu­
ated from Film University Babelsberg, Germany and worked on Frank Gessner’s 
expanded animation project Alias Yederbeck. He was invited to China to work on 
a solo stop-motion project at Jilin Animation Institute in Changchun.
Q:	You have studied animation. What insights did you win during your 
study?
A:	The most important discovery I made during my study was that technique 
and even more expenditure only partly have an influence on animation 
films as end product. Whether the final film was several years in produc­
tion or not is relevant for me to know only after I have evaluated the work.
Q:	You are focusing on puppet animation. Do you design your puppets in 
a certain style? What about facial expression and what about the eyes?
A:	I can say that I have a certain style of my own: partly because I have dif­
ficulties to imitate others. Regarding the facial play of a puppet, it is of 

348
Acting and Character Animation
course important that it corresponds with the character. The eyes play a 
very important role. While creating a puppet, it is crucial how the eyes 
are “positioned” in the face of the puppet. That includes how high or 
deep compared to the forehead, the distance between the eyes, between 
eye and eyebrow, how big the eyes are, and the facial angle. All these 
things must work for a character and be noticeable even without anima­
tion, in a still.
Q:	Is animating for you like slipping into the role of the puppet? Or is it 
more a communication process with the puppet?
A:	It’s more communication. I must get to know the puppet and its abilities, 
technically and from the design point of view. I know then as a matter of 
fact where I have to change things, especially technically.
Q:	Shall a puppet move like a human or do you have your own stylized type 
of movement?
A:	As most of the puppets I have built so far are human they should move 
at least anatomically comprehensible. I have noticed that the more life­
like and realistic a puppet and its movements are, the more it feels as 
if it acts, just compared to a more stylized puppet. It’s likely that it is 
extremely difficult to imitate a realistic human movement a hundred 
percent.
Q:	Do you have a stop watch in mind when you are animating? Do you 
think in frames and time? Or do you explore the movement of a charac­
ter intuitively?
A:	In my own work I animate more intuitively.
Q:	Have you seen recent animation films like Anomalisa and Kubo?
A:	Both films are, in their own way, very impressive.
	
  With Anomalisa it’s, besides the plot, the design of the puppets. For the 
facial expression, they eschewed deliberately elaborate image processing 
so that you can see that these are puppets with replacement faces although 
the design is quite realistic. This certain kind of “sincerity” makes this 
film so sympathetic for me.
	
  Kubo is just the opposite in this regard. This film is indeed special and 
to me in particular as I appreciate and like Far East cultures. And yet it is 
not the stop motion which makes this picture so special because visually 
it doesn’t differ from 3D.

349
66.  The Experimental Stop-Frame Animator
The Miracle Doctor (Der Wunderdoktor). GDR 1958. Director: Herbert K. Schulz. 
Puppet: Willibald Hofmann.
Anton the Musician (Anton der Musikant). GDR 1968. Director: Dietrich Nitzsche. 
Puppet: Dietrich Nitzsche.

350
Acting and Character Animation
Rübezahl. Puppet series. GDR/ČSSR 1979. Director: Vins Zdenek. Photographed by 
Rolf Hofmann. (Courtesy of Deutsches Institut für Animationsfilm/Archiv [German 
Institute for Animated Film/Archive.])
The Suitcase (Der Koffer). GDR 1983. Director: Kurt Weiler. Puppet: Martina Grosser. 
Photographed by Rolf Hofmann. (Courtesy of Deutsches Institut für Animationsfilm/
Archiv [German Institute for Animated Film/Archive.])

351
66.  The Experimental Stop-Frame Animator
The Falling Shadow (Der fallende Schatten). GDR 1986. Director: Stanislav Sokolov. 
Puppets: W. Dudkin, A. Melik-Sarkisian. Photographed by Rolf Hofmann. (Courtesy 
of Deutsches Institut für Animationsfilm/Archiv [German Institute for Animated Film/
Archive.])
Fairy Birds (Feenvögel). GDR 1987. Director: Monika Krausse-Anderson. Puppets: 
Klaus Schollbach. Photographed by Rolf Hofmann. (Courtesy of Deutsches Institut 
für Animationsfilm/Archiv [German Institute for Animated Film/Archive.])

352
Acting and Character Animation
Q:	How do you see the future of stop motion compared to 3D computer 
animation?
A:	It gets more and more difficult to judge the future of animation in gen­
eral. But I got the impression that stop motion still has a future regarding 
auteur filmmaking with an intensely defined individual style.
Q:	What do you think is the special quality of animation compared to live 
action?
A:	The quality of animation, particularly stop motion, I see in the fact that 
I have much more control over the whole process. It is my responsibil­
ity what a puppet should be able to do. So I cannot blame the puppet for 
“bad acting.”

353
Selected Filmography
1912
HOW A MOSQUITO OPERATES
The first triumph of character animation in the cinema: A partly humanized 
Mosquito plagues a sleeper. Still a masterpiece, animated by the brilliant Winsor 
McCay.
1914
GERTIE THE DINOSAUR
Elements of this already appeared in Winsor McCay’s comic strip work, Dream of 
a Rarebit Fiend. Made in the “McCay Split System”: with key frames being done 
first, then the inbetweens.
1926
THE ADVENTURES OF PRINCE ACHMED
(Die Abenteuer des Prinzen Achmed)
Comenius Film GmbH
Lotte Reiniger’s sensitively animated delicate silhouette characters.
1933
KING KONG
RKO Radio Pictures
He was a king and a god in the world he knew, but now he comes to civilization 
merely a captive—a show to gratify your curiosity. Ladies and gentlemen, look 
at Kong, the Eighth Wonder of the World. Although you see the fingerprints of 
animators Willis O’Brien and Buzz Gibson on the rabbit fur that model maker 
Marcel Delgado was given for the two Kong models, it’s still the most ­memorable 
screen monster. The 18″ armatures of the models are not exactly the same: One 

354
Selected Filmography
Kong that was built earlier had a long face and looked a little bit human, while the 
other one with a rotund face looked more like a gorilla.
1933
THREE LITTLE PIGS
Walt Disney Productions
The breakthrough in Disney color animation, this Silly Symphony won the 1934 
Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film. The pigs all look equal, but they 
differ in character: Fiddler Pig and Fifer Pig, the care-free ones, and Practical Pig, 
the foresighted one.
1934
PLAYFUL PLUTO
Walt Disney Productions
Norman Ferguson animated a brief (one-minute-and-half) sequence that shows 
Pluto’s tussle with a piece of flypaper.
1935
LONESOME GHOSTS
Walt Disney Productions
The blueprint of Ghostbusters: Mickey, Donald, and Goofy make a good trio. The 
Technicolor short was animated by Isadore Klein, Ed Love, Milt Kahl, Marvin 
Woodward, Bob Wickersham, Clyde Geronimi, Dick Huemer, Dick Williams, 
Art Babbitt, and Rex Cox.
1937
SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS
Walt Disney Productions
The first big success of Disney character animation: the dwarfs and the witch 
(Norman Ferguson).
Honorary Award, Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, 1939, recog­
nized as a significant screen innovation, which has charmed millions and pio­
neered a great new entertainment field (one regular Oscar statuette and seven 
miniature statuettes for the dwarfs).
1938
BRAVE LITTLE TAILOR
Walt Disney Productions
Mickey Mouse, as Grimm Bros.’ Valiant Little Tailor animated by Fred Moore, 
outwits a giant that was animated by Vladimir “Bill” Tytla.
Nominated for an Academy Award for Animated Short Film, 1939.

355
Selected Filmography
1940
PINOCCHIO
Walt Disney Productions
Disney once asked Albert Whitlock, who was one of his matte artists, “Al, what’s 
your favorite Disney picture?” Albert said, “Pinocchio.” Disney seemed to be 
pleased, “Mine too.” Ward Kimball became the supervising animator for Jiminy 
Cricket. Bill Tytla animated Stromboli, the brutal puppeteer.
1940
FANTASIA
Walt Disney Productions
Bill Tytla animated Chernabog and projected his own powerful and self-­
confident character onto the Devil of the Night on the Bald Mountain Sequence.
1941
DUMBO
Walt Disney Productions
Bill Tytla’s animation made you cry for the little elephant with the big ears.
1943
EDUCATION FOR DEATH: THE MAKING OF THE NAZI
Walt Disney Productions
Milt Kahl, Ward Kimball, Frank Thomas, and Bill Tytla, who did a Nazi teacher, 
were in charge of animating this authentic anti-Fascist short.
1944
THE SNOW MAN
Der Schneemann
Fischerkoesen Film Studio
A snow man longs for the melting experience of summertime.
1947
KING-SIZE CANARY
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc.
Tex Avery’s surreal play with proportions: A bottle of Jumbo-Gro transforms a 
hungry cat, a tiny bird and a dog to creatures of monstrous size. If there ever 
was Expressionist acting with characters staring wide-eyed and mouths dropped 
open to indicate surprise, then this is it.

356
Selected Filmography
1950
GERALD McBOING-BOING
UPA United Productions of America/Columbia Pictures
Not the limited animation but the boy’s Sound FX makes this short and its title 
character that is based on a story by Theodor Seuss Geisel.
Academy Award, Best Animated Short Film, 1951.
1952
NEIGHBOURS
National Film Board of Canada
Pixilation by Norman McLaren.
Academy Award, Best Animated Short Film, 1953.
1956
EARTH VS. THE FLYING SAUCERS
Clover Productions/Columbia Pictures
Flying Saucers became living objects in the hand of master craftsman Ray 
Harryhausen.
1957
THE BLACK SCORPION
Amex Productions/Warner Bros. Pictures
Eerie underground cavern sequence with giant scorpions and a lively spider that 
rockets around the ground in pursue of a human victim, with stop motion con­
ceived by Willis O’Brien and executed by Peter Peterson.
1958
THE 7TH VOYAGE OF SINBAD
Morningside Productions/Columbia Pictures
Ray Harryhausen’s stop-frame animation of a Cyclops and a Skeleton swordfight 
are the highlights of this (in its days) spectacular although low-budget Arabian 
Nights adventure, the equivalent to the age of Star Wars.
1959
SLEEPING BEAUTY
Walt Disney Productions
Maleficent, the evil fairy, designed complete with a collar that made her look like 
a bat and devil horns, was animated by Marc Davis for this Super Technirama 
70 production.
1959
A MIDSUMMER NIGHT’S DREAM
Sen noci svatojánské
Studio Kresleného a Loutkového Filmu, Prague
Ambitious puppet film version of Shakespeare’s play directed by Jiří Trnka.

357
Selected Filmography
1963
JASON AND THE ARGONAUTS
Morningside Worldwide/Columbia Pictures
Ray Harryhausen multiplied the one sword-wielding skeleton from Sinbad and 
gave us seven. While animating he averaged less than a foot of film a day, only 13 
to 15 frames. The 4-minute sequence took 4.5 months to do.
1967
THE JUNGLE BOOK
Walt Disney Productions
Milt Kahl’s animation of Shere Khan, young Mowgli’s nemesis, was a milestone 
of 2D animation. The Disney people tried to remake it in 3D CGI (released in 
2016), but in spite of incredible technical resources weren’t able to capture the 
light spirit of the 2D original.
1981
CLASH OF THE TITANS
Peerford, Ltd./Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Not a great film but a superb Medusa with snake-body and snakes in the hair, Ray 
Harryhausen’s swansong as animator.
1988
GRAVE OF THE FIREFLIES
Hotaru no haka
Studio Ghibli
Isao Takahata’s tragic tale of a 14-year-old Japanese boy and his little sister who 
don’t survive the last days of World War II.
1988
MY NEIGHBOR TOTORO
Tonari no Totoro
Studio Ghibli
Hayao Miyazaki sure understands the imaginary world and the souls of kids.
1988
WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT
Touchstone Pictures (Disney)/Amblin Entertainment (Spielberg)
Robert Zemeckis’ picture, in its time, was an inventive project mixing 2D ani­
mated characters and live action: Bob Hoskins co-starring with the residents of 
animated Toontown.
Academy Awards, Best Effects, Visual Effects (Ken Ralston, Richard Williams, 
Ed Jones, and George Gibbs), Special Achievement Award for animation direc­
tion and creation of the cartoon characters (Richard Williams), 1989.

358
Selected Filmography
1988
THE WIZARD OF SPEED AND TIME
Jittlov/Kaye Productions
The ultimate in Pixilation which grew out of a 1979 short film by Mike Jittlov.
1989
CREATURE COMFORTS
Aardman Animations
Clay-animated zoo animals talk in this short like ordinary people about their homes.
Academy Award, Best Animated Short Film, 1990.
1995
TOY STORY
Pixar Animation Studios
The clean surface of toys was easy to render in those days.
Academy Award, Special Achievement Award (John Lasseter), 1996.
1995
GHOST IN THE SHELL
Kokaku Kidotai
Bandai Visual Company
Mamoru Oshii’s anime of the year 2029 that anticipated everything from the age 
of the internet to Cyborgs and the Matrix.
1997
PRINCESS MONONOKE
Mononoke-hime
Studio Ghibli
Hayao Miyazaki’s romantic epic fantasy was based on his early sketches from the 
1970s that had a princess living in the woods.
1997
PERFECT BLUE
Pafekuto buru
Studio Madhouse
Satoshi Kon’s directorial suspense debut based on a novel by Yoshikazu Takeuchi: 
The picture focuses on a pop idol who decides to pursue an acting career and 
becomes a victim of stalking.
1999
THE IRON GIANT
Warner Bros. Animation
Brad Bird’s tale of a boy who saves a robot from outer space from government 
agents is often described as a prime example for outstanding acting in animation. 
Well, it’s good but not outstanding. The robot itself is an oversized E.T. rip-off.

359
Selected Filmography
2001
MILLENNIUM ACTRESS
Sennen joyu
Studio Madhouse
Satoshi Kon’s postmodernist comedy-drama features two documentary film­
makers who are going to investigate the life of a retired actress.
2001
MONSTERS, INC.
Pixar Animation Studios
Two colorful monstrous scaremongers: top scarer Sulley and his one-eyed friend 
Mike become attached to a little girl they name “Boo” and hide the kid from their 
fellow monsters.
2001–2003
THE LORD OF THE RINGS:
THE MOTION PICTURE TRILOGY
WingNut Films/The Saul Zaentz Company/New Line Cinema
Andy Serkis’ captured performance as Gollum became a milestone in mocap acting.
Won 17 out of 30 total Academy Award nominations.
2003
FINDING NEMO
Pixar Animated Studios
Not so much the fish but the animation of an Australian pelican, Nigel, fasci­
nated the animation community.
Academy Award, Best Animated Feature (Andrew Stanton), 2003.
2004
TERKEL IN TROUBLE
Terkel i knibe
A. Film/Nordisk Film
Maybe not everybody’s choice: Simple 3D teenage animation from Denmark but 
great fun and lots of sarcasm.
2004
RYAN
National Film Board of Canada
The gradual deconstruction of a drug addict.
Academy Award, Best Animated Short Film, 2004.
2007
RATATOUILLE
Pixar Animation Studios
The delicious adventures of a rat in French cuisine.
Academy Award, Best Animated Feature Film of the Year (Brad Bird), 2008.

360
Selected Filmography
2007
THE PIANO FOREST
Piano no mori
Studio Madhouse
Manga-turned-anime: A teenage boy dares to play a mysterious piano in the 
middle of a forest.
2009
CORALINE
Laika Entertainment
Henry Selick’s stop motion illustrates a girl’s nightmare.
Nominated for an Academy Award, 2010.
2009
FANTASTIC MR. FOX
Twentieth Century Fox/Indian Paintbrush/Regency Enterprises
2009 was an exceptional year for the art of stop motion: Wes Anderson’s adapta­
tion of Roald Dahl’s children’s novel featured the voices of George Clooney and 
Meryl Streep, but the real stars were animated puppets.
Nominated for Golden Globe and Academy Awards for Best Animated Feature 
and Best Original Score.
2009
AVATAR
Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation/Dune Entertainment/Ingenious Film 
Partners
James Cameron’s commercial triumph of performance capture.
Academy Award, Best Visual Effects (Richard Baneham, Andrew R. Jones, Joe 
Letteri, and Stephen Rosenbaum), 2010.
2010
HOW TO TRAIN YOUR DRAGON
DreamWorks Animation
The friendship between a Viking boy and a black dragon, a Night Fury, based on 
a book by Cressida Cowell.
Nominated for an Academy Award, Best Animated Film, 2011.
2010
CHICO & RITA
Isle of Man Film/CinemaNX, Estudio Mariscal
Havanna in the 1940s: Jazz and love in a melodrama that tells of Cuban Dancing 
and hot music.
Nominated for an Academy Award, Best Animated Film, 2012.

361
Selected Filmography
2011
WRINKLES
Arrugas
Perro Verde Films
Alzheimer’s disease is the topic of a very touching Spanish comic book that 
became an astonishing low-budget 2D animation film.
Nominated for European Film Award, 2012.
2012
PARANORMAN
Laika Entertainment
An 11-year-old Norman is not only thrilled by horror movies, he actually can see 
ghosts. ParaNorman was stop-frame animated by a crew of 300.
2012
ERNEST & CÉLESTINE
La Parti Productions/Les Armateurs/Maybe Movies
This very poetic film is about an unlikely friendship—Ernest is a bear, Célestine 
a mouse:
If you don’t eat me, I’ll give you whatever you most want in the world.
Nominated for an Academy Award, Best Animated Feature Film, 2014.
2015
ANOMALISA
Snoot Entertainment/Starburns Industries
Charlie Kaufman (screenplay, Being John Malkovich) and animation director 
Duke Johnson teamed to create one of the most unusual stop-motion films. 
Puppets become people as they never were.
2016
FINDING DORY
Pixar Animation Studios
Great 3D animation of Hank the octopus.
2016
KUBO AND THE TWO STRINGS
Laika Entertainment
Amazing stop-motion story about a Japanese magic boy who fights the spirit of 
his evil grandfather, the Moon King.


363
Bibliography
Béla Balázs, Early Film Theory. Visible Man and The Spirit of Film. Edited by Erica 
Carter, translated by Rodney Livingstone. New York/Oxford: Berghahn, 
2010.
Tom Bancroft, Creating Characters with Personality. For Film, TV, Animation, 
Video Games and Graphic Novels. New York: Watson-Guptill, 2006.
Joe Barbera, My Life in ‘Toons: From Flatbush to Bedrock in Under a Century. 
Atlanta, Georgia: Turner Publishing, 1994.
Michael Barrier, Hollywood Cartoons: American Animation in Its Golden Age. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Michael Barrier, The Animated Man: A Life of Walt Disney. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press, 2008.
André Bazin, What Is Cinema? Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of 
California Press, 1970.
Jerry Beck, “I Tawt I Taw A Puddy Tat”: Fifty Years of Sylvester and Tweety. New 
York: Henry Holt and Company, Inc., 1991.
Giannalberto Bendazzi, Cartoons: One Hundred Years of Cinema Animation. 
London: John Libbey and Company Ltd., 1994.
Giannalberto Bendazzi, Animation: A World History. Volumes I–III. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group. A Focal Press Book, 2015.
Bruno Bettelheim, The Uses of Enchantment: The Meaning and Importance of 
Fairy Tales. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1976.
Preston Blair, Cartoon Animation. Irvine, CA: Walter Foster Publishing, 1994.
Jaroslav Boček, Jiří Trnka, Artist and Puppet Master. 1st Eng. Ed. Prague: Artia, 
1965.
Richard Boleslavsky, Acting: The First Six Lessons. Original: New York: Taylor & 
Francis, 1933. Literary Licensing LLC, 2011.

364
Bibliography
Peter Brooks, The Shifting Point: Theatre, Film, Opera 1946–1987. New York: 
Theatre Communications Group, 1986.
Oksana Bulgakowa and Dietmar Hochmuth (eds). Sergei Eisenstein, Disney. 
Translated by Dustin Condren. Berlin: Potemkin Press, 2016.
Leslie Cabarga, The Fleischer Story. Rev. ed. New York: DaCapo Press, 1988.
Roger Caillois, Man, Play and Games. Translated from the French original by 
Meyer Barash. New York: Free Press of Glencoe, 1961.
John Canemaker, Winsor McCay: His Life and Art. New York: Abbeville Press, 
1987.
John Canemaker, Felix: The Twisted Tale of the World’s Most Famous Cat. New 
York: Pantheon Books, 1991.
Sharon M. Carnicke, Stanislavsky in Focus: An Acting Master for the 21st Century. 
London: Routledge Theatre Classics, 2008.
John Cawley/Jim Korkis, The Encyclopedia of Cartoon Superstars. Las Vegas, NV: 
Pioneer Books, Inc., 1990.
Michael Chekhov, On the Technique of Acting. New York: Harper Perennial, 1993.
Pinto Colvig, It’s a Crazy Business: The Goofy Life of a Disney Legend. Edited 
and Introduced by Todd James Pierce. Oregon: Southern Oregon Historical 
Society/Theme Park Press, 2015.
Donald Crafton, Before Mickey: The Animated Film 1898–1926. Cambridge, MA/
London: The MIT Press, 1987.
Donald Crafton, Shadow of a Mouse: Performance, Belief, and World-Making in 
Animation. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA/London: University of California 
Press, 2013.
Shamus Culhane, Talking Animals and Other People. New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1981.
John Culhane, Walt Disney’s Fantasia. New York: Abradale Press/Harry N. 
Abrams, Inc., Publishers, 1987.
Shamus Culhane, Animation from Script to Screen. London: Columbus Books 
Limited, 1989.
Jim Danforth, Dinosaurs, Dragons & Drama: The Odyssey of a Trickfilmmaker. 
Vol. 1 and Vol. 2. CD Books. Los Angeles: Archive Editions, 2012/2015.
Walt Disney, Growing pains. American Cinematographer 22, 3 (March 1941): 
106–7, 139–42.
Robert D. Feild, The Art of Walt Disney. New York: Macmillan, 1942.
Christopher Finch, The Art of Walt Disney: From Mickey Mouse to the Magic 
Kingdoms. New York: Harry N. Abrams/New American Library, 1973.
Richard Fleischer, Just Tell Me When to Cry: A Memoir. New York: Carroll & Graf 
Publishers, Inc., 1993.
Richard Fleischer, Out of the Inkwell: Max Fleischer and the Animation Revolution. 
Lexington, Kentucky: The University of Kentucky, 2005.
Friz Freleng, with David Weber, Animation: The Art of Friz Freleng. Newport 
Beach, CA: Donovan Publishing, 1994.

365
Bibliography
Didier Ghez (ed.), Walt’s People. Talking Disney with the Artists Who Knew Him. 
Volume 1–12. Bloomington, IN: Xlibris, 2005–2012.
Didier Ghez, Disneyland Paris from Sketch to Reality. London: Neverland 
Editions Ltd., 2012.
Didier Ghez, Disney’s Grand Tour: Walt and Roy’s European Vacation Summer 
1935. Theme Park Press, 2014.
Didier Ghez, They Drew as They Pleased: The Hidden Art of Disney’s Golden Age. 
Chronicle Books: San Francisco, 2015.
Rolf Giesen/Claudia Meglin, Künstliche Welten. Hamburg and Vienna: Europa 
Verlag, 2000.
Rolf Giesen/J. P. Storm, Animation Under the Swastika: A History of German 
Trickfilm, 1933–1945. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2012.
Rolf Giesen, Chinese Animation: A History and Filmography, 1922–2012. Jefferson, 
NC: McFarland, 2015.
Eric Goldberg, Character Animation Crash Course! Los Angeles, CA: Silman-
James Press, 2008.
Daniel Goldberg and Charlie Keil (ed.), Funny Pictures: Animation and Comedy 
in Studio-Era Hollywood. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of 
California Press, 2011.
Orville Goldner and George E. Turner, The Making of King Kong: The Story 
Behind a Film Classic. New York: Ballantine Books, 1975.
Jonathan Gottschall, The Storytelling Animal: How Stories Make Us Human. New 
York: Mariner Books, 2012.
Donald Graham, The Art of Animation. Unpublished manuscript dated July 20, 
1955, held at Walt Disney Studios.
John Halas and Roger Manvell, The Technique of Film Animation. New York: 
Hastings House, 1963.
Mike Hankin, Ray Harryhausen: Master of the Majicks. Volume 1: Beginnings and 
Endings. Volume 2: The American Films. Volume 3: The British Films. Los 
Angeles, CA: Archive Editions, 2008–2013.
Derek Hayes and Chris Webster, Acting and Performance for Animation. 
Burlington, MA/Abingdon, Oxon: Focal Press, 2013.
Gordon Hendricks, Eadweard Muybridge: The Father of the Motion Picture. 
Mineola, New York: Dover, 2001.
L. Bruce Holman, Puppet Animation: History & Technique. South Brunswick 
and New York: A. S. Barnes and Company. London: The Tantivy Press, 
1975.
Ed Hooks, Acting for Animators: A Complete Guide to Performance Animation. 
Revised edition. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann Drama, 2003.
Johan Huizinga, Homo ludens: A Study of the Play-Element in Culture. London, 
Boston and Henley: Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1949.
Leslie Iwerks and John Kenworthy, The Hand Behind the Mouse. New York: 
Disney Editions, 2001.

366
Bibliography
Ollie Johnston and Frank Thomas, Walt Disney’s Bambi: The Story and the Film. 
New York: Stewart, Tabori & Chang, 1990.
Chuck Jones, Duck Amuck: The Life and Times of an Animated Cartoonist. New 
York: Macmillan, 1999.
Buster Keaton and Charles Samuels, My Wonderful World of Slapstick. Garden 
City, NY: Doubleday, 1960.
Isaac Kerlow, The Art of 3D Computer Animation and Effects. 4th edition. 
Hoboken, New York: Wiley, 2009.
Klaus Kohlmann, Der Computeranimierte Spielfilm: Forschungen zur 
Inszenierung und Klassifizierung des 3-D-Computer-Trickfilms. Bielefeld: 
transcript Verlag, 2007.
David Krasnar, An Actor’s Craft: The Art and Technique of Acting. London: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2012.
Trish Ledoux (ed.), Anime Interviews: The First Five Years of Animerica Anime & 
Manga Monthly (1992–97). San Francisco, CA: Cadence Books, 1997.
John A. Lent (ed.), Animation in Asia and the Pacific. Bloomington and 
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press/John Libby Publishing, 2001.
Esther Leslie, Hollywood Flatlands: Animation, Critical Theory and the Avant-
Garde. Verso: London/New York, 2002.
Sergey Levine, Body Language Animation: Synthesis from Prosody. An Honors 
Thesis submitted to the Department of Computer Science of Stanford 
University, May 2009.
Judy Lieff, Performance and Acting for Animators. Animation World Magazine, 
4.12, March 2000.
Peter Lord and Brian Sibley, Creating 3-D Animation. New York: Harry N. 
Abrams, 1998.
Jonathan Lyons, Comedy for Animators. Foreword by John Canemaker. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press Taylor & Francis Group, 2016.
Mark W. MacWilliams, Japanese Visual Culture: Explorations in the World of 
Manga and Anime. Foreword by Frederik L. Schodt. London and New York: 
Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, 2008.
Marcel Mauss, Techniques of the Body (1935). In: Techniques, Technology and 
Civilization, ed. Nathan Schlanger. Trans. Ben Brewster, 77–95. New York: 
Berghahn Books, 2006.
Helen McCarthy, Hayao Miyazaki: Master of Japanese Animation. Berkeley, CA: 
Stone Bridge Press, 1999.
Sanford Meisner and Dennis Longwell, Sanford Meisner on Acting. New York: 
Random House, Inc., 1987.
Albert Menache, Understanding Motion Capture for Computer Animation and 
Video Games. San Diego/San Francisco/New York/Boston/London/Sydney/
Tokyo: Morgan Kaufmann/Academic Press, 2000.
Alice Miller, The Untouched Key: Tracing Childhood Trauma in Creativity and 
Destructiveness. Translated from the German [Gemiedene Schlüssel] by 

367
Bibliography
Hildegarde and Hunter Hannum. New York: Anchor Books. A Division of 
Random House, Inc., 1991.
Alice Miller, The Body Never Lies: The Lingering Effects of Hurtful Parenting. 
Translated from the German by Andrew Jenkins. New York and London: 
W. W. Norton & Company, 2006.
Tracey Miller-Zarneke, The Art of DreamWorks’ Kung Fu Panda 2. San Rafael, 
CA: Ensight Editions, 2011.
Hayao Miyazaki, Starting Point: 1979–1996. San Francisco, CA: VIZ Media LLC, 
2009.
Desmond Morris, Bodytalk: The Meaning of Human Gestures. New York: Crown 
Publishers, 1995.
Eadweard Muybridge, Animals in Motion. New York: Dover Publications, 1957.
Eadweard Muybridge, The Human Figure in Motion. New York: Dover 
Publications, 1955.
Gerald Peary and Danny Peary, ed., The American Animated Cartoon. A Critical 
Anthology. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1980.
Floriane Place-Verghnes, Tex Avery: A Unique Legacy (1942–1955). New Barnet, 
Herts: John Libby Publishing Ltd., 2006.
Barry Purves, Basics Animation: Stop-Motion. Worthing: AVA Publishing, 
2010.
Hannes Rall, Adaptation for Animation: Transforming Literature Frame by 
Frame. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Taylor & Francis Group, 2017.
John Howard Reid, Hollywood Movie Musicals: Great, Good and Glamorous. 
Hollywood Classics 16, Raleigh, North Carolina: Lulu Press, Inc., 2006.
Lotte Reiniger, Shadow Theatres and Shadow Films. London and New York: B. T. 
Batsford and Watson-Guptill Publications, 1970.
Valliere T. Richard, Norman McLaren: Manipulator of Movement. The National 
Film Board Years, 1947–1967. An Ontario Film Institute Book. London and 
Toronto: Associated University Press, 1982.
Richard Rickitt, Special Effects: The History and Technique. Foreword by Ray 
Harryhausen. New York: Billboard Books An imprint of Watson-Cuptill 
Publications, 2007.
Roger C. Schank, Tell Me A Story: Narrative and Intelligence. Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press, 1995.
Steve Schneider, That’s All Folks! The Art of Warner Bros. Animation. London: 
Aurum Press, 1994.
Walt Stanchfield, Drawn to Life: 20 Golden Years of Disney Master Classes. New 
York and London: Focal Press, 2009.
Konstantin Stanislavsky, An Actor Prepares. New York: Taylor & Francis, 1989.
Bob Thomas, Walt Disney, the Art of Animation: The Story of the Disney Studio 
Contribution to a New Art. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1958.
Bob Thomas, Disney’s Art of Animation: From Mickey Mouse to Beauty and the 
Beast. New York: Hyperion, 1991.

368
Bibliography
Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston, Disney Animation: The Illusion of Life. 
New York: Abbeville Press Publishers, 1981.
Tony Thomas, Gene Kelly: Song and Dance Man. Foreword by Fred Astaire. 
Secaucus, NJ: The Citadel Press, 1974.
Patrick Tucker, The Secrets of Screen Acting. 3rd edition. Routledge: Theatre Arts 
Book, 2014.
Bill Warren, Keep Watching the Skies! American Science Fiction Movies of the 
Fifties, the 21st Century edition. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2009.
Tom Weaver, A Sci-Fi Swarm and Horror Horde: Interviews with 62 Filmmakers. 
Jefferson, NC and London: McFarland, 2010.
Peter Weishar, blue sky: The Art of Computer Animation. Featuring Ice Age and 
Bunny. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., Publishers, 2002.
Paul Wells, Understanding Animation. London: Routledge, 1998.
Paul Wells. Animation: Genre and Authorship. London and New York: Wallflower, 
2002.
Harold Whitaker and John Halas, Timing for Animation. Updated by Tom Sito. 
New York and London: Focal Press Taylor & Francis Group, 2009.
Tony White, The Animator’s Workbook. Oxford: Phaidon Press Limited, 1986.
Pat Williams with Jim Denney, How to Be Like Walt: Capturing the Disney Magic 
Every Day of Your Life. Deerfield Beach, FL: Health Communications, Inc., 
2004.
Richard Williams, The Animator’s Survival Kit: A Manual of Methods, Principles 
and Formulas. London: Faber and Faber, 2001.
S.S. Wilson, Puppets & People: Large-Scale Animation in the Cinema. San Diego, 
CA: A.S. Barnes and Co. Inc., 1980.

369
Index
Note: Page numbers followed by “fn” indicate footnotes.
A
Aardman, 42, 206, 333, 337
Abbott & Costello, 106
Abbott and Costello Cartoon Show, 106
Abel, Robert, 115
The Absent-Minded Professor, 23
The Abyss, 10
Ackerman, Forry, 309
Acting, 135, 181, 225
with animated characters, 69–74
against odds of visual effects, 109–111
theories, 49–52
Action analysis, 172
Adamski, George, 309
Adamson, Andrew, 36, 42
Adamson, Joe, 38fn
Adler, Stella, 51
Adobe After Effects, 110
Advanced humans, 213
The Adventures of Prince Achmed, 
13–16, 353
The Adventures of Tintin, 42, 120, 319
Advertising films, 169
Aesop, 36, 91
Aesop’s Fables, 91, 197
AI, see Artificial intelligence
Aladdin, 27–28, 38–39, 195
Alakazam the Great, see Saiyu-ki
Alan Young Show on NBC Radio, 56
Aldrin, Buzz, 57
Alias Yederbeck, 347
Alice in Cartoonland, 69
Alice in Wonderland, 55
Allegro Non Troppo, 241, 243
Allen, David, 169
Allen, Irwin, 312
Allen, Woody, 106
Alois Nebel, 18
Alpine Climbers, 286
American 3D animation, 114
The American Animated Cartoon: A 
Critical Anthology, 56fn
American short silent comedy, 173
American Toy Fair, 168
Anchors Aweigh, 65
Anderson, Wes, 360
Andrews, Julie, 67
Anger, 45
Anger, Kenneth, 100
Animafest Zagreb, 235
Animal Farm, 164
Animals, 163–166
The Animal World, 77, 312
Animated characters
acting with, 69–74
around world, 91–97

370
Index
Animatics creation, 205
Animation, 16, 29, 41, 59, 131, 133, 136, 
167–169, 231–232, 255, 258
feel at ease in, 207–209
future of acting in, 211–215
Animator(s), 35, 131–133, 143, 145, 228
developing kinesthetic sense, 36
Disney’s principle, 37
at Disney studio, 38
The Animator’s Workbook, 113fn
Animism, 29
Anka, Paul, 57
Anomalisa, 186, 348, 361
Ant-Man, 325
The Ant and the Grasshopper, 91
Anthropomorphic
animals, 36, 91, 274
cartoon animals, 29
Anthropomorphism, 163–166
Anticipation, 189
Antiheroes, 99–101
Antisocial, 124
Anton the Musician, 349
Apollo, 289–290, 291
Arabian Nights, 299–300, 310
Aristocats, 340
Armstrong, Robert, 70
Armstrong, Todd, 71
Arrugas, 160, 163, 253
Artaud, Antonin, 46
“Art film” approach, 280
Artificial intelligence (AI), 270, 326
agents, 212
The Art of Kung Fu Panda 2, 58fn
Ashman, Howard, 55
Ashpei, 158
Ashpitel, 158
Assault on a Medieval Town, 88
Associative position, 222
Astaire, Fred, 287
Asterix, 42, 43
Asterix and Obelix, 42, 178
Asterix Conquers America, 295, 296–297
Astro Boy, 92, 281
Atkinson, Rowan, 105
Atta, Mohammed, 100–101
Aubier, Stéphane, 230
Audley, Eleanor, 100
Augmented reality, 238, 326
Auschwitz, 58
Authenticity, Stanislavsky’s definition 
of, 291
Automatic Fitness, 245, 250
Avatar, 113–122, 270, 317, 319, 325, 360
The Avengers, 74
Avery, Tex, 55, 166
B
Babbitt, Art, 21, 51–52
Babes in Toyland (1934), 107
Bacher, Hans, 38
Backus, Jim, 56
Bacon, Kevin, 115–116
Badham, John, 124
Baker, Rick, 26
Bakshi, Ralph, 118–119
Ballerina, 67
Ballets Russes de Monte Carlo, 13
Bambi, 55
Bancroft, Anne, 51
Baneham, Richard, 360
Barbara Millicent Roberts, see Barbie
Barbera, Joseph, 37, 41, 66, 106
The Barber of Seville, 31
Barbie: A Fashion Fairytale, 168
Barbie, 168
Barbie as Rapunzel, 168
Barbie in Rock ’N Royals, 168
Barbie in the Nutcracker, 168
Barbie of Swan Lake, 168
Barks, Carl, 160
The Barn Dance, 25
Barta, Jiří, 344
Baskett, James, 65
Batman, 10, 267
Batman Forever, 116
Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, 
319, 325
The Beast from 20, 000 Fathoms, 78, 
308, 313
Beast Wars: Transformers, 168
Beaudet, Louise, 287
Beauty and the Beast, 38–39, 55
Bee Movie, 144
Beijing Film Academy, 202
Being a Beast, 225

371
Index
Being John Malkovich, 361
Belcher, Ernest, 21
Belcher, Marjorie Celeste, 21
Believe It or Don’t, 106
Belling, Rudolf, 10
Bell, Margie, 21
Ben, 144
Benaderet, Bea, 55
Ben and Me, 164
Bendazzi, Giannalberto, 235–236
Ben Hur, 70
Benjamin the Elephant, 296–297
Benn, Sean, 123
Beowulf, 211
Bertel, Daniel, 87
Best, Ahmed, 116
Bettelheim, Bruno, 158fn
Betty Boop, 187–188
Betuel, Jonathan R., 124
Beyond: Two Souls, 120
Bibi Blocksberg, 295, 296–297, 299
Big Bad Wolf, 323–324
The Big Meeting, 274, 275
The Big Sleep, 146
Biomechania, 50
Bird, Brad, 36
The Birds, 26
Biroc, Joe, 308
Black Cauldron, 165
Black, Jack, 57, 147, 194
The Black Scorpion, 76–77, 356
Blackton, James Stuart, 9, 174
Blair, Mary, 274
Blair, Tony, 57
Blalack, Robert, 237–239
Blanc, Melvin Jerome “Mel”, 55
Bletcher, William “Billy”, 54
Bliefert, Ulrike, 61, 62
Blue Cat, 95, 281–282
Blue Sky Studios, 165
Bluth, Don, 264
Böcklin, Arnold, 11
Body language, 177
Disney-ify, 183
hand rubbing, 179
personality typologies and friend–foe 
modes of thought, 178
stimulus, 181
visual sense, 180
The Body Snatchers, 117
Bodytalk, 181
Bogart, Humphrey, 145
Boleslavsky, Richard, 37
Bond, James, 166
The Bonker, 292
The Book of Life, 97
Bonsels, Waldemar, 323
Bordo, see Dovniković, Borivoj
The Borrowers (fantasy novels), 92
Bostrom, Nick, 213
Bowers, Charles R., 106
Bowie, David, 203
Boxtrolls, 337
Bozo the Clown, 105–106
Bozzetto, Bruno, 42, 136, 241–243
Bradbury, Ray, 194
Bradley, Scott, 193
Brain–Computer Interfaces, 215
Brando, Marlon, 51
Brandon, Henry, 107
The Brave Little Tailor, 25, 236, 354
Brecht, Bert, 50
The Bride of Frankenstein, 3, 306
The Brocaded Slipper, 158
The Broken Pitcher, 158
Brook, Peter, 10
Brothers Quay, see Quay, Stephen and 
Timothy
Browning, Tod, 173
Brown, Treg, 55
BSSS, 289–290
Bugs Bunny, 56, 106
Bunuel in the Labyrinth of the Turtles, 253
Bunuel, Luis, 253
Burton, Tim, 36, 116, 304fn
Butler, Charles Dawson “Daws”, 54–55
Butler, Larry, 237, 309
Butt-Head, 178
Butz, Martin, 212
C
Cabinet of Dr. Caligari, 173
Café d’Amour, 60, 61
Caillois, Roger, 126
Caiman (project), 137
Call of Duty: World at War, 123, 124

372
Index
Cameron, James, 116, 121, 319
Campbell, Joseph, 99
Canemaker, John, 236
Capra, Frank, 104–105
Captain Blackbeard, 23
Captain China, 150
Carrey, Jim, 120, 211
Cartoon Forum, 136–137
Cartoon(s), 41, 235
aficionados, 31
characters, 38, 53, 185
creators, 288
famous cartoon animals, 29–33
Castaneda, Carlos, 145
Castellaneta, Daniel Louis “Dan”, 57
Catmull, Ed, 288
Cavalette, 241
Caveman, 81, 262
Cavett, Dick, 57
Cendrillon ou La Petite Pantoufle de 
Verre, 158
CGI, see Computer-generated imagery
A Chairy Tale, 59
Chandler, Raymond, 146
Chaney, Jr., Lon, 104
Chaney, Sr., Lon, 172
Chan, Jackie, 57
Chaplin, Charles, 29, 42, 172, 104–105, 
106, 107
Character
character-driven storytelling, 266
design, 171
designer, 222
Character animation, 236, 264
peak of, 21–23
Charlie Brown, 178
Charly Vet (project), 137
Cheng, Tang, 155
Chicken Run, 57, 206, 333
Chicken with Plums, 36
Chico & Rita, 328, 360
Chinese animation, 167, 279–280, 282
Chomet, Sylvain, 107
A Christmas Carol, 120
The Chronicles of Narnia, 325
Churchill, Frank, 93
Cinderella, 25, 27–28, 55, 100, 158, 159, 
164, 268
Cinderella Ate My Daughter, 204
Clampett, Robert, 32, 54, 55
Clark, Les, 22
Clash of the Titans, 259, 262, 303, 357
bust from, 79
Clausen, Jürgen, 86
Clokey, Art, 261
Clooney, George, 360
Close, Glenn, 57
Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs, 231
Coco, 61, 62
Cognitive Modeling group, 212
Cohl, Émile, 9–10, 59
Cohn, Harry, 70
Collins, Eddie, 21
Collodi, Carlo, 158
Columbus, Christopher, 166
Colvig, Pinto, 54, 105, 193
Comedy and comedian, 103–107
Computer-generated imagery (CGI), 114
The Congress, 212
Contempt, 29, 46
Contradictions, 143–147
Cook, Randy, 262
Cooper, Gary, 70
Cooper, Merian C., 70, 206, 306, 310–311
Cooper, Wilkie, 311
Coppola, Francis Ford, 100
Coraline, 325, 337, 360
Cornillón, Gustavo, 60
Corpus Hippocraticum, 178
Couceiro, Alberto, 84, 245–251
Cowell, Cressida, 360
Cox, Rex, 354
Cox, Vic, 76fn
Coyote & Roadrunner, 41, 96, 106, 145
Cozzi, Luigi, 154, 212
Crafton, Donald, 354
Crawford, Cheryl, 51
Creativity, 230
Creature Comforts, 358
Creature from the Black Lagoon, 10
The Crimson Pirate, 70–71
Cristóbal, Manuel, 253–258
Culhane, Shamus, 180
Culliford, Pierre, 43
Cultural Industries, 91–92
Cumberbatch, Benedict, 111, 340

373
Index
Curie, Alvaro, 256
Cutout-style animation, 136
D
Daffy Duck, 32, 55, 106
Dafoe, Willem, 57, 120
Dahl, Roald, 360
Dalton Brothers, 178
Dam, Thomas, 168
Dance, Charles, 123
Danforth, Jim, 72, 72fn, 73fn, 81, 82, 86, 
103, 137–138, 169, 194, 259–262, 
304–305
Daniels, Chris, 110
Dante’s Inferno, 316
Darby O’Gill and the Little People, 109
Darwin, Charles, 173
A Date With Duke, 304
Daumier, Honoré, 274
Davey and Goliath, 261
David and Goliath principle, 29, 142, 197
Davis, Marc, 287, 356
Davis, Mark, Dr., 125
Davis, Virginia, 69
Davy Crockett, 23
Deadly Creatures, 123
Dean, James, 51
Death of Stalinism in Bohemia, 333
de Basil, Wassily, 13
Debray, Régis, 124
de Chomón, Segundo, 59
DEFA Studios Babelsberg, 321
Defoe, Daniel, 157
Deja, Andreas, 38, 39
de la Cruz, Angel, 256
Delać, Vladimir, 274, 275
de la Pena, Nonny, 125
Delfs, Holger, 80
Delgado, Marcel, 353
Delgado, Victor, 307
del Toro, Guillermo, 97
DeMille, Cecil B., 315
De Niro, Robert, 51
Denney, Jim, 69fn
Denver, Bob, 57
DePatie, David H., 136
Depp, Johnny, 111, 215
Der ewige Jude, see The Eternal Jew
Der Trickfilm: A Survey of German Special 
Effects, 12fn
DeRycker, Piet, 263
Design, 171–175
Despicable Me, 254
Deutsch, Ernst, 173
Deutsche Zeichenfilm GmbH, 198
Devane, William, 115
DeVito, Danny, 57
di Caprio, Leonardo, 103
Dickens, Charles, 120, 211
Diehl, Ferdinand, 87
Diehl, Hermann, 87
Dietrich, Marlene, 114–115
Dinosaurs, 74
Dionysos, 49
Disco ormene, 166
Disco Worms!, 166
Disgust, 46
Disney-Pixar, 45, 145, 171, 186, 324
Disney, 94, 100, 106, 163
animators, 21
character animation, 38–39
method, 206, 230
Princesses, 203–204
Studios, 230
style, 274
Disney Allen, Alice, 22
Disney Animation: The Illusion of Life, 285
Disneyland, 23
Disney, Walt, 18, 21–23, 25, 37, 65, 69, 142, 
172, 180, 205, 288
Dissociative position, 222
Ditko, Steve, 111
Django, 242
Dlugaiczyk, Thomas, 269–271
Docter, Pete, 45
Doctor Faustus, 3
Doctor Strange, 111
Donald Duck, 25, 32, 53, 65, 160, 178, 
190, 225
Donen, Stanley, 65
Donner, Richard, 57
Döpfer, Peter, 87
Doraemon, 281
Doubková, Dagmar, 344
Douglas, Kirk, 22, 57
Dovniković-Bordo, Borivoj, 273–277

374
Index
The Downfall, 58, 101
Dracula, 22, 173, 306
Dragonkeeper, 253, 257–258
Dragonslayer, 80, 81
Dragon Trouble (project), 137
DreamWorks Animation, 94, 22, 166, 
168, 191
Driessen, Paul, 328
Droopy, 178
Dr. Seuss, see Geisel, Ted
Duck Amuck, 4
Du, Daisy Yan, 279–283
Duga Film, 274, 275
Dujardin, Jean, 109
Dumas, Alexandre, 10
Dumbo, 355
Dune, 123
Dykstra, John, 116
Dynamation, 304
E
Earth vs. the Flying Saucers, 309, 356
Eastwood, Clint, 145, 155
Ebert, Roger, 93
Eddy, Nelson, 144
Edison Manufacturing Company, 9
Education for Death: The Making of the 
Nazi, 47, 197, 198, 355
Efira, Virginia, 109
Egged On, 106
Eisen, Armand, 287
Eisenstein, Sergei, 27
Eisler, Hanns, 193
Eisner, Michael, 288
Ekman, Paul, 173, 174fn
El bosque animado, 253
El Cid, 70
The Elder Scrolls: Oblivion, 123
Elena of Avalor, 28, 160
Elmer Fudd, 55
Emmerich, Roland, 211
Emotions
emotional effect, 222
infants, 45
older persons, 45
Empathy, 125–126
Empathy games, 125
Emperor’s New Groove, 340
Enchanted, 165
The Enchanted Drawing, 9
Engel, Volker, 211
Ernest & Célestine, 360
Esso/Exxon Tiger, 169
Estabrook, Howard, 91
Eternal Jew, 203
Evolution (project), 312
Exaggeration, 189
The Execution of Mary Queen of 
Scots, 9
The Expendables, 270
Expressionist acting, 173
The Expression of Emotions in Man and 
Animal, 173–174
Eyer, Richard, 66
F
The Face of Another, 175
Facial Action Coding System 
(FACS), 174
Facial expression(s), 171–175
FACS, see Facial Action Coding System
Fairbanks, Jr., Douglas, 310, 311
Fairbanks, Sr., Douglas, 30, 173, 310
Fairchild, Chelsie Haunai, 169
Fairy-tale characters, 159
Fairy Birds, 351
Falk, Lee, 242
The Falling Shadow, 351
Fallout 3, 123
“Famous Monsters of Filmland” 
magazine, 309
Fantasia, 12, 22, 172, 193, 194, 355
Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find 
Them, 111
Fantastic Mr. Fox, 360
Fantomas, 10
Farrell, Colin, 111
Fast & Furious, 166
Fast & Furious 7, 325
Father Knows Best, 41
Faulds, Andrew, 71
Faust, 172
Favreau, Jon, 122
Fear, 46
of own imagination, 226–232
Felix in Hollywood, 105

375
Index
Felix the Cat, 105, 114
Ferguson, Norman, 354
Ferreras, Ignacio, 161, 256, 257
Feuillade, Louis, 10
Fields, W. C., 56, 114–115
Film Fantasy Scrapbook, 80
Final Fantasy: The Spirits Within, 120
Finding Dory, 186, 361
Finding Nemo, 115, 186, 359
Finney, Jack, 117
Fischerkoesen, Hans, 200
Fleischer, Dave, 17–20
Fleischer, Max, 4, 17, 21, 69, 116, 201
rotoscoping process, 116
Fleischer, Richard, 18fn
Flesh Gordon, 259
The Flintstones, 41–43, 178
Flip the Frog, 30
Flushed Away, 94
Fly Me to the Moon, 157
Flynn, Errol, 92
Foghorn Leghorn, 55
Folman, Ari, 212
Fonda, Jane, 51
Fonda, Peter, 114
Food, 333
Foray, June, 55
Ford, John, 242
Foster, Charles, 225
The Fox Hunt, 225
Fox, Terry Curtis, 49
Franco-Belgian comics, 91–92
Frankenstein, 3, 4, 10, 173, 306
Franklin, Benjamin, 164
Franquin, André, 42
Freberg, Stan, 54–55
Freddie as F.R.O.7, 166
Freleng, Isadore “Friz”, 32, 56, 136
Freud, Sigmund, 197
Friends Forever, 322
Frito Bandito, 169
Fritz the Cat, 160
Frog Kingdom, 166
Fulton, John P., 3, 110
Funny Girl, 66
Futurama, 178
Futureworld, 114
FXRH, 315fn
G
Gable, Clark, 70, 190
Gallopin’ Gaucho, 30 
Galouye, Daniel Francis, 212–213
Games Academy, 269
Ganesha, help! (project), 296
Ganz, Bruno, 58
Garfield, 178
Geisel, Ted, 58, 356
Gemora, Charlie, 26
Gentle Giant, 120
Gerald McBoing-Boing, 58, 356
Gerber, Craig, 28
German Expressionism, 173
Geronimi, Clyde, 354
Gerron, Kurt, 58
Gerson, Betty Lou, 100
Gerson, Dora, 58
Gertie the Dinosaur, 5, 115, 353
Gessner, Frank, 347
Ghez, Didier, 22fn, 285–288
Ghost in the Shell, 92, 358
The Giant Claw, 309
The Giant Ymir, 309–310
Gibbons, Tom, 115
Gibbs, George, 357
Gibson, Buzz, 307
Gibson, Mel, 57
Giesen, Rolf, 12fn, 305fn, 80
Gigantis, the Fire Monster/Godzilla Raids 
Again, 26
Gil, Carlos, 72
Gilliam, Terry, 248
Gladiator, 116
Gladstone, Frank, 36
Gladstone Gander, 32
Glière, Reinhold, 316
Goat Story-The Old Prague Legends, 
343, 345
Goat Story 2 (Goat Story with Cheese), 
343, 345
The Godfather, 100
The Godfather II, 270
Godzilla, 26
Goebbels, Joseph, 46–47
Goebbels, Magda, 202
Goennert, Felix, 289–293

376
Index
Gojira no gyakushu, see Gigantis, the Fire 
Monster/Godzilla Raids Again
The Golden Touch, 54
The Golden Voyage of Sinbad, 3, 74, 77, 
203, 303, 315
Goldner, Orville, 70fn
Goldorak, 204
The Golem, 10, 173, 306
Gollum, 118
Good Dinosaur, 145
The Good Person of Szechwan (play), 118
Good Will to Men, 164
Goofy, 21, 51, 54, 225, 164
Goofy and Wilbur, 164
The Goose That Laid the Golden Eggs, 91
Gorillas in the Mist, 26
Goscinny, René, 42
Gottliebová, Dinah, 202
Graham, Don, 172
Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas, 123
Grant, Joe, 286
Grau, Albin, 16
Grave of the Fireflies, 268, 357
Gravity, 325
The Great Rupert, 304
Green, Seth, 123
Greystoke: The Legend of Tarzan, Lord of 
the Apes, 26
Griffith, David Wark, 173
Groening, Matt, 42
Gromit, 42
Guest, Lance, 124
Guest, Val, 73
Gutierrez, Jorge R., 97
H
Hackett, Buddy, 137–138
Hadžić, Fadil, 275
Hagen, Louis, 13
Hahn Film, 232, 295–296
Hahn, Gerhard, 295–300
Hahn Graphics, 295
Halo: Combat Evolved, 124
Hamill, Mark, 71–72
Hand, David, 172, 286
Hand gestures, 179
Handler, Ruth, 168
Hand rubbing, 179
The Hand, 4
Haney, Carol, 66
Hankin, Mike, 71, 301–304
Hanks, Tom, 57, 120, 186, 270–271
Hanna-Barbera, 106
Hanna, William, 37, 41, 66, 194
Hannah, Jack, 160, 190
Hansel and Gretel, 85
Hara, Setsuko, 93
Hardaway, Ben, 31
Hardy, Oliver, 106
Harlan, Veit, 46
Harman, Hugh, 164
Harmon, Larry, 105–106
Harryhausen, Fred, 77, 308–309
Harryhausen, Ray, 12, 26, 66, 75, 186, 206, 
259, 304–305, 305–316
Harry Potter, 111, 325
Hausner, Jerry, 56
Havoc in Heaven, 154, 155
Hawking, Stephen, 57
Hawkins, Emery, 31
Hawks, Howard, 146
Hayes, Craig, 115
Hayes, Derek, 136
Hefner, Hugh, 57
Heidi, Girl of the Alps, 92
Heine, Helme, 322
Heinemann, Art, 31
Heinzel, Carla, 292
Hell and Back, 107
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 214
Hendler, Darren, 212
Henson, Jim, 122, 188
Herbst, Helmut, 213
Hergé, 42
Hero of Alexandria, 77
Herrmann, Bernard, 311
Herzog, Werner, 57
Heskes, Wam, 304
Hippocrates, 178
Hitchcock, Alfred, 26
Hitler, Adolf, 58, 101, 292
The Hobbit, 118, 319, 340
Hoe Een Reclame-Affiche Ontstond, 304
Hoffman, Dustin, 51, 57
Hoffmann, E. T. A., 78
Hoffmann, Heinrich, 219

377
Index
Holland, Tom, 35
Holloway, Sterling, 55
Hollow Man, 115–116
Hollywood Babylon, 100
Holmes, Sherlock, 173
Homer, 135
Homer Simpson, 41, 42, 179
Homo Faber: Man the Maker, 126
Homo fictus, 135
Homo Ludens: Man the Player, 125–126
Homunculi, 3–4
The Honeymooners, 41
Hooks, Ed, 26, 36fn, 37fn, 101, 131, 133, 144
Hopkins, Anthony, 211
Hopper, Dennis, 123
Horikoshi, Jiro, 93
Horsley, David Stanley, 3
Horvath, Ferdinand, 286
Hoskins, Bob, 110
Hound Hunters, 185
How a Mosquito Operates, 6, 353
Howard, James Newton, 194
How to Train Your Dragon, 191, 360
Huang Weiming, 96
Hubley, John, 56, 235
Huckleberry Hound, 55
Huemer, Dick, 38
Hughes, Howard, 310
Huizinga, Johan, 125–126
Hulk, 325
Humorous Phases of Funny Faces, 9, 174
The Hunchback of Notre Dame, 104, 145, 
172, 195
Hunt, Helen, 57
Huntington, Samuel P., 94
Hurter, Albert, 25
Hurtley, Owen, 168
Hykade, Andreas, 333
I
Ice Age, 115, 186
Ice Age: Collision Course, 186
The Illusionist, 107
I Love Lucy, 41
Ilya Muromets, 77, 316
Independence Day, 211
Infants, emotions, 45
Inside Out, 267
Interactive environments, 120
Invasion of the Body Snatchers, 117
Invasion of the Pod People, 117
The Invisible Ray, 109–110
Invitation to the Dance, 65, 66, 67
I, Robot, 120, 319
The Iron Giant, 268, 358
Irony, 107
Islamic Revolution Design House, 203
It Came from Beneath the Sea, 78, 308, 309
It’s a Bird, 106
Iwerks, Ub, 29–30
J
Jack Benny Show, 55
Jackson, Michael, 57
Jackson, Peter, 117, 118–120, 194, 317
Jackson, Samuel L., 123
Jackson, Wilfred, 22, 53–54
Jack the Giant Killer, 35–36, 70, 
137–138, 259
Jack the Giant Slayer, 120
Jacobsson, Oscar, 42
Jannings, Emil, 172
Jason and the Argonauts, 71, 79, 194, 314, 357
Jeffrey Katzenberg: How to Make a Perfect 
Family Film, 22fn
Jennings, Garth, 195
Jerry Mouse, 66, 164
The Jewelled Slipper, 158
Jew Suss, 46
Jiminy Cricket, 164
Jin Guoping, 155
Jittlov, Mike, 60, 259
Joe’s Apartment, 165
Johnny Head-in-the-Air, 219
Johnson, Duke, 361
Johnston, Ollie, 100fn, 189
Jolie, Angelina, 57, 211
Jones, Andrew R., 360
Jones, Chuck, 32, 106, 144, 182
Jones, Davy, 120
Jones, Ed, 357
Jones, James Earl, 57
José Carioca, 65, 287
Joseph and His Brethren (project), 70, 310
Journey to the West, 154
Jouvet, Louis, 101

378
Index
Joy, 45, 181
Judex, 10
Judge Dredd, 116
Jungle Book, 145, 268, 340
The Jungle Book 3D, 55, 121–122, 357
Juran, Nathan, 70–71, 309–310
Jurassic Park, 10, 80, 81, 115
Jutrisa, Vladimir, 274
K
Kabuki Theatre, 50
Kahl, Milt, 354, 355, 357
Kane, Helen, 188
Karloff, Boris, 110
Kasday, David, 66
Katzenberg, Jeffrey, 22, 94, 136, 191, 288
Katzman, Sam, 309
Kaufman, Charlie, 361
Kauka, Rolf, 275
Kavner, Julie Deborah, 57
Kawamoto, Kihachiro, 93–94, 262
Kazan, Elia, 51
Keaton, Buster, 104, 106, 169, 172
Keaton, Joe, 104
Kelly, Gene, 65
Kendrick, Anna, 168
Kennedy, Edgar, 106, 287–288
Kerempuh, 275
Kermit the Frog, 166
Khrushchev, Nikita, 23
Kiki’s Delivery Service, 92, 267, 268
Kilmer, Val, 116
Kimball, Ward, 164
Kim Jong-il, 202
King-Size Canary, 355
King, Jack, 160
King Kong (1933), 70, 74, 80, 81, 137, 145, 
306, 307, 317, 319, 353–354
King Kong (2005), 120, 194, 325
King, Larry, 57
King of Kings, 315–316
Kinney, Jack, 31
Kleinbach, Heinrich von, see Brandon, 
Henry
Klein, Isadore, 143
Kleiser, Jeff, 116
Kleiser–Walczak Construction 
Company, 116
Knick Knack, 293
Knight, Charlott, 309
Knock Knock, 31
Ko-Ko the Clown, 69
Koenig, Wolf, 60
Kolar, Boris, 274
Kon, Satoshi, 92–93, 358, 359
Kostanjšek, Vjekoslav, 274
Kostelac, Nikola, 274
Kracauer, Siegfried, 336
Krause, Hermann, 198
Krauss, Werner, 173
Kristl, Vlado, 274
Krumme, Raimund, 333
Kubo and the Two Strings, 155–156, 337, 
348, 361
Kung Fu Panda, 57, 94, 145, 147, 258, 
281–282
Kung Fu Panda 2, 148
Kung Fu Panda 3, 148
Kung Fu Rabbit, 146
Kurosawa, Akira, 155
Kurzweil, Raymond, 214
L
La Cava, Gregory, 36
La Cenerentola, 158
Ladouceur, J. P., 60
Lady and the Tramp, 164
Lady Gaga, 325
La Fontaine, Jean de, 197
Lahr, Bert, 25–26
Landau, Martin, 51
The Land Before Time series, 81
Landreth, Chris, 174
Langdon, Harry, 104–105, 172
Lang, Fritz, 16
L. A. Noir, 270
Lansbury, Angela, 55
Lantz, Walter, 31, 105, 147, 190
La Peau de Chagrin, 274
Lasky, Jesse, 309
Lasseter, John, 115, 186, 288
The Last Days of Pompeii, 306
The Last of Us, 212
The Last Starfighter, 124–125
Laughton, Charles, 287–288
Laura’s Star, 263, 267

379
Index
Laura’s Star and the Mysterious Dragon 
Nian, 267
Laurel & Hardy, 106, 107
Laurel, Stan, 76, 106, 107
Law, John Phillip, 315
Leberecht, Frank, 199
Lee, Christopher, 56
Lee, Stan, 111
Le imprese di una spada leggendaria, 
70–71
Lei, Ray, 280
Lemmon, Jack, 57
Lem, Stanisław, 212
Leone, Sergio, 145, 242
Les Jeux et Les Hommes, 126
Letteri, Joe, 317–320
Levene, Larry, 257
Le Vicomte de Bragelonne, 10
Lewis, Jerry, 173
Lewis, Robert, 51
Ley, Robert, 202
Li, Jet, 116
Lilo & Stitch, 38–39
“Limited” animation technique, 37
Lindbergh, Charles, 30
Lin Yuting, 6, 96
Lionello, Oreste, 242
The Lion King, 38–39, 171, 195
Little Caesar, 306
Little Carp That Jumped over the Dragon 
Gate, 159
Little Nemo in Slumberland, 5
The Little Polar Bear, 263
Little Red Riding Hood, 85
Little Rural Riding Hood, 55
Little Sisters of Grassland, 203
Little Soldier Zhang Ga, 203
Little Tadpoles Look for Mama, see Where 
Is Momma?
Liu Jian, 280
Live-action movies, 175
The Living Forest, 253, 256
Lloyd, Harold, 105
Loeser, Tony, 321–324
Lofgren, George, 25–26
Lommel, Andreas, 26
Lonesome Ghosts, 354
Looker, 114
Loos, Anita, 173
Lord of the Rings, 117, 118–119, 317, 325, 359
Lord, Peter, 206
Lorenz, Konstanza Kavrakova, 332
Lorre, Peter, 22
The Lost World, 306
Loup, 289–290
Love, Ed, 354
Low-budget filmmakers, 18
Lucasfilm Games, 269–270
Lucas, George, 269
Lucia, 182, 289–290
Lucky Luke, 43, 178
Lugosi, Bela, 22
Lukas, Paul, 22
Luminaris, 60, 194
Lundy, Dick, 21
Luo Yinggeng, 96
Luxo Jr., 293
Lynch, David, 248
M
MacMurray, Fred, 23
Madame Tutli-Putli, 186
Maderna, Osmar Héctor, 194
Magic of first moment, 107
The Magic Voyage, 166
The Magnificent Seven, 155
Maguire, Tobey, 110
Maher, Laurie, 186
Mailer, Norman, 124
Make Mine Music, 144
Making Faces: a Masterclass on Facial 
Animation, 174
Maltese, Michael, 32
The Man in the Iron Mask, 10
Man Made Monster, 109–110
Man of Steel, 120
Man, Play and Games, 126
The Man Who Laughs, 172
Mao Zedong, 155
Maraun, Frank, 86
Marceau, Marcel, 181
Marks, Aleksandar, 274
Marlowe, Philip, 145
Marsupilami, 42, 43
Martin, Kevin H., 57fn
Marvel Comics, 116

380
Index
Marvin the Martian, 55
Marx, Groucho, 242
Mary Poppins, 67
The Mask, 10, 120
Mason, James
The Masque of the Red Death, 228
Mathews, Kerwin, 71
The Matrix, 212–213
Mauss, Marcel, 153
Maverick, 57
McCartney, Paul, 57
McCay, Winsor, 5, 6, 9–10, 353,
McDowell, Malcolm, 123
McLaren, Norman, 59, 60
McLuhan, Marshall, 114
McQueen, Steve, 51
“Mechanomorphic” humans, 274
The Meeting, 274
Mein Kampf, 47
Mehrabian, Albert, 180
Meisner, Sanford, 51
Melancholiacs, 178
Méliès, Georges, 9, 11, 59
Memory Hotel, 331, 334–335
Mendelssohn Bartholdy, Felix, 47
Mengele, Josef, 202
Mental delusions, 30
Mephistopheles, 172
Merchandising, 167–169
Mère Ubu, 331
Messmer, Otto, 105
Metropolis, 306
Meyer, Karl, 325–326
Meyerhold, Vsevolod, 50
Mia and me: Adventures in Centopia, 128, 
130, 295, 296, 299
Mickey Mouse, 25, 29, 54, 56, 164–166, 
193, 193, 222, 354
Midler, Bette, 57
A Midsummer Night’s Dream, 118, 356
Mifune, Toshiro, 155
Mighty Joe Young, 75, 301–302, 307, 
313, 314
Mighty Mouse, 164
Mikkelsen, Mads, 111
Mikulás, Ferenc, 327–330
Millennium Actress, 92–93, 359
The Million Dollar Cat, 164
Mimesis, 26
Mimica, Vatrosvlav, 274
Mimicry, 126
Mio Fratello Superuomo, 241
The Miracle Doctor, 349
Misadventures of Charley Zhang 
(project), 153
Miss Peregrine’s Home for Peculiar 
Children, 304fn
Mister Magoo, 56, 136, 148–149, 324, 235
Miyazaki, Hayao, 91–92, 93
Moana, 168–169
Mocap, 318
Modern Times, 42
Moers, Walter, 292
Möllendorff, Horst von, 198, 201
Monkey King, 155, 281–282
Monkey King: Hero Is Back, 280–281
Monroe, Marilyn, 51, 214
Monster Hunt, 280–281
Monsters, Inc., 359
Monster Stick, 71–72, 303
Moore, Fred, 236fn, 354
Moore, Ray, 242
Moorhead, Joanna, 22fn
Moross, Jerome, 314
Morris, Desmond, 181
Mother Goose Stories, 85
MotionWorks, 321
Mr. Bean, 105
Mr. Jinks, 55
Mulan, 97, 155–156
Mullewapp, 322, 323
Mulloy, Phil, 333
Munro, Caroline, 303
Munro, Grant, 59–60
Murders in the Rue Morgue, 26
Murdoch, Rupert, 57
Muren, Dennis, 115
Murnau, Friedrich Wilhelm, 16, 172
Musumeci Greco, Enzo, 70–71
Mutt & Jeff series, 106
Muybridge, Eadweard, 18, 172, 262
My Neighbor Totoro, 357
Mysterious Island, 315
The Mystery of the Leaping Fish, 173

381
Index
N
Nakadai, Tetsuya, 175
Nakai, Go (Kiyoshi), 204
The Naked and the Dead (novel), 124
Naruse, Mikio, 93
Nash, Clarence Charles, 53
National Film Board of Canada, 59, 186
Natwick, Grim, 187–188
Neeson, Liam, 123
Neighbours, 59, 356
Neugebauer, Walter, 274, 275
Newman, Paul, 51
Nibbelink, Phil, 166
Nighy, Bill, 120
Nimoy, Leonard, 57
Nixon, Richard M., 180
Noah, 135
Noah’s Ark, 315–316
Nonplayer characters (NPCs), 212
Nordberg, Cliff, 182
Norstein, Yuri, 328
Norton, Mary, 92
Nosferatu, 16, 172
NPCs, see Nonplayer characters
O
Obelix, 42
O’Brien, Conan, 57
O’Brien, Darlyne, 75
O’Brien, Willis, 26, 75, 81, 121, 307, 
314, 353
O’Connell, Jerry, 165
Oldman, Gary, 123
Oliveira, José, 287fn
Omnibus Computer Graphics, 116
One Cab’s Family, 166
One Froggy Evening, 144
One Hundred and One Dalmatians, 100, 190
One Hundred Years of Cinema 
Animation, 235
One Million Years B. C., 303, 314
The One, 116
Oooops! Noah Is Gone, 46
Orenstein, Peggy, 204
Orwell, George, 164
Oshii, Mamoru, 358
Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, 29–30
O’Toole, Peter, 101
Our Gang comedies, 54
Out of the Inkwell: Max Fleischer and the 
Animation Revolution, 18fn
Out of the Inkwell, 4, 17, 69
Ozu, Yasujiro, 93
P
Pablos, Sergio, 254, 257
Pacino, Al, 51
Page, Ellen, 212
The Pajama Game, 66
Pal, George, 83, 85, 103, 301, 303–305, 309
Panda Jing Jing, 147–148
Pantomime, 181
Paracelsus, 3
ParaNorman, 337, 361
Parker, Fess, 23
Park, Nick, 206
Pasternak, Joe, 65
Patar, Vincent, 230–231
Patterson, Ray, 66
Pauli, Peter, 60, 62
Peace on Earth, 164
Peary, Danny, 144fn
Peary, Gerald, 144fn
Pena, Nonny de la, 125
The Penguins of Madagascar, 178–179
Pepe Le Pew, 55
Perception, 217
exercises, 217–218
Perceptual positions, 222
Père Ubu, 331
Perfect Blue, 93, 358
Performance capture, 18, 318, 319
techniques, 211–215
Perlman, Ron, 111
Perrault, Charles, 158
Perri, 163
Persepolis, 36
Personality, 189–192
Peter and the Wolf, 55
Peter Pan, 268
Peterson, Peter, 307, 356
Petzold, Frank, 115–116
Phantasmagoria, 213

382
Index
Phantomatics, 213
Phantom of the Opera, 104
Phantom of the Rue Morgue, 26
Phlegmatic types, 178
Photo-realism, 114, 251
Photographic effects, 27
Physiognomy, 179
The Piano Forest (2007), 360
Pickley, Leonard, 21
Pigor, Thomas, 292
Pigott-Smith, Tom, 303
Pillsbury Dough Boy, 169
The Pink Panther, 32–33
Pinnacle System’s Commotion, 110
Pinocchio, 21, 25, 27, 158, 231, 267, 268, 355
The Pirates of Blood River, 315
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man’s 
Chest, 120
The Pirates of Tortuga: Under the Black 
Flag, 295
Pixilation, 59–63
pi ying, 14
Plane Crazy, 30
Planet of the Apes, 145
Plato, 49–50
Playful Pluto, 354
Pleasant Goat and Big Big Wolf, see Xi 
Yang Yang Yu Huitai Lang
Pluto, 27
Pocahontas, 27–28, 160
Poe, Edgar Allan, 228
Poitier, Sidney, 51
Pokémon, 222, 281
Polar Express, 120, 186, 211, 270–271, 340
Pollock, Channing, 306fn
Ponyo, 92
Poor Hansi, 198, 199
Popeye, 51
Porco Rosso, 92, 236
Porky Pig, 55
Posing, 171–175
Post humans, see Advanced humans
Poultry in Motion, 57fn
Powell, Michael, 80
Power Animals, 26, 27
Power of imagination, 221
Powers, Patrick A. (Pat), 166
Pozzi, Moana, 169
Prejudices, 179
Preproduction, 255
Pretty Woman, 158
Previz, 318
The Princess and the Frog, 159
Princess Mononoke, 267, 268, 358
Ptushko, Alexander, 316
Puppetoons, 301
Purves, Barry, 248
Q
Quaid, Dennis, 81
Quay, Stephen and Timothy, 248
R
Rae, Nola, 181
Ragtime Bear, 235
Rainbow Film, 274
The Rains of Ranchipur, 315–316
Ralston, Ken, 357
Rango, 145
Rapunzel, 28, 85
Ratatouille, 27, 101, 144, 268, 325, 359
Ravel. Maurice, 194
The Raven, xiv
Ray Harryhausen’s World of Myth and 
Legend (project), 77
Reason and Emotion, 45–47
Red Hot Riding Hood, 185
Redmayne, Eddie, 111
The Red Turtle, 328
Reinhardt, Max, 12, 13, 125–126, 230
Reiniger, Lotte, 13–16
Reisenbüchler, Sándor, 328
Rendezvous à Montreal, 214
The Return of the King, 317
Rhapsody in Wood, 304
Rhys-Davies, John, 123
Richard III, 101
Riefenstahl, Leni, 172
Ries, Irving G., 66
Rimsky-Korsakov, Nikolai, 66
Rise of the Planet of the Apes, 118
Roach, Hal, 105
Robert, Étienne-Gaspard, 213
Roberts, Julia, 158
Robertson, Dale, 310
Robin Hood, 340

383
Index
Robinson Crusoe 3D, 157
Robinson, Edward G., 306
Roca, Paco, 160–161
Rocch, James, 118fn
Rock-A-Doodle, 263
Roddenberry, Gene, 270
Rogue Warrior, 123
Rooney, Mickey, 57
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 54–55
Rosenbaum, Stephen, 360
Rotoscoping, 17–20, 59
Rourke, Mickey, 123
Rowling, J. K., 111
Rübezahl, 350
Rudiš, Jaroslav, 18
Ruff and Reddy, 55
Ruka, 4
Rutsch, Edwin, 101
Ryan, 359
S
Sabl, Heinrich, 331–337
Sadness, 46
Safety Last, 105
Sahara Hare, 32
Sailor Moon, 204
Saiyu-ki, 154
Salten, Felix, 163
Saludos Amigos, 288fn
Sammy’s Adventure, 157
The Sandman, 78
Sanguine persons, 178
Saperstein, Henry G., 160
Satrapi, Marjane, 36
Sausage Party, 145
Schatten, 16
Schleicher, Kurt, 201
Schlesinger, Leon, 55
Schmidt, Harald, 324
Schneer, Charles H., 66, 70, 194, 308, 
310–311
Schneider, Rob, 116
Schneider, Walther, 30
Schoedsack, Ernest B. “Monty”, 74, 307
School for Vampires, 295, 296
Schreck, Max, 172
Schtroumpfs, 43
Schulze-Boysen, Libertas, 200
Schumacher, Joel, 116
Schwarzenegger, Arnold, 221
Scott, Ridley, 116
Seawright, Roy, 105
Secondary action, 189
The Secret Life of Pets, 345
The Secret of Kells, 328
The Secret of NIMH, 268
The Secret World of Arrietty, 92
Seeber, Guido, 12
Selick, Henry, 360
Sellers, Peter, 242
Semon, Larry, 172
Sennett, Mack, 105
Serkis, Andy, 117, 118
Sethi, Neel, 122
7 Faces of Dr. Lao, 259, 304
Seven Samurai, 155
The 7th Voyage of Sinbad, 66, 70–72, 77, 
78, 80, 81, 186, 194, 302, 310, 311, 
312, 313, 315, 356
Sex Bugs Rock’N’Roll, 165
Sexy Robot, 115
Shadow, 13–16
The Shadow, 10
Shadow Theatres and Shadow Films, 16fn
Shakespeare, William, 49, 356
Shamanism, 25–28, 228
Shane, 242
Shanghai Animation Film Studio, 
280–281
Shanghai Super Kids (project), 
150–151, 153
Sharpe, Albert, 109
Shaun the Sheep, 42
Sheen, Martin, 123
Sherazade: The Untold Stories, 232, 296, 
299–300
Sherlock Holmes TV series, 111
Shin, Nelson, 166, 202
The Shirt, 249
Shore, Howard, 194
Shrek, 136, 191
Shuster, Joe, 188
Siegel, Don, 117, 188
Siegel, Jerry, 188
Signor Rossi, 42, 241–242, 324
The Silly Goose, 202

384
Index
Silly Symphonies, 32, 38, 54, 194, 354
The Simpsons, 42, 57, 202
SimsalaGrimm, 295
Simulacron 3, 212
Sinbad:Beyond the Veil of Mists, 
116–117
Sinbad and the Eye of the Tiger, 261, 
315–316
Sinbad the Sailor, 66, 310
Sing, 195
Siodmak, Curt, 104
Slapstick, 107
Sleeping Beauty, 100, 165, 356
Slow burn, 106
Slow in/slow out, 189
Small, Edward, 310–311
Smith, David, 22
Smurfs, 43, 168
The Snow Man, 190, 200, 201, 355
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, 21, 
58, 93, 100, 187–188, 202, 205, 
212, 354
Solomon, Veronica, 339–341
Song of the Prairie, 82
Song of the South, 65
Son of Kong, 74
Son of Sinbad, 310
Sony Pictures Imageworks, 110
Soozandeh, Ali, 18, 20, 110
The Sorcerer’s Apprentice, 25
Soren, David, 166
South Park, 136
Speedy Gonzales, 55
Spider-Man, 99, 110, 143, 150, 325
Spielberg, Steven, 115
Spirited Away, 27
SpongeBob, 51, 145
Stadtmaus und Feldmaus, 88
Stafford, Grace, 55
Stallone, Sylvester, 116
Stanislavsky, Constantin, 26, 50
Starevich, Ladislas, 82, 85
Starfighter, 124
Starr, Ringo, 57, 81
Star Trek, 135
Star Wars, 18, 99, 116, 135, 237, 325, 269
Stassi, Mike, 122
St. Cyr, Lili, 310
Steamboat Willie, 56
Steiger, Rod, 51, 57
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 198
Stewart, Patrick, 57, 123
“Stillness”, 93–94
Sting, 57
Stokowski, Leopold, 193
Stop-frame technique, 59
Stop motion, 246
animation, 114
puppets, 59
technique, 336–337
“Stop trick” technique, 61
Storks, 188
Storyboarding, 205
The Story of King Midas, 85
Stowaways on the Ark, 166
Strasberg, Lee, 51
Streep, Meryl, 57
The Student of Prague, 12
Studio Ghibli, 214
Sturm und drang, 30
Stylization, 227, 251
The Suitcase, 350
Sullivan, Pat, 105
Summer, Eric, 67
Sun Li Jun, 146
Sun Wu Kong, 154–155
Superman, 188
comics, 143–144
Surprise, 46, 248
Surrealism, 107
Surrogat, 274
“Survival of the Fittest”, 197
Suspense, 221
Sutherland, Donald, 57
Sutherland, Kiefer, 123
Švankmajer, Jan, 248, 333
Švejdík, Jaromír, 18
The Sword and the Dragon, 316
Synthespians, 116, 120
Syria, 125
T
Table top process, 201
Takahashi, Ryosuke, 92
Takamine, Hideko, 93
Takeuchi, Yoshikazu, 358

385
Index
Tale as Old as Time, 55
A Tale of Two Kitties, 106
Tangled, 28, 165
Tanin no kao, see The Face of Another
Tapum, the History of Weapons, 241
Tashlin, Frank, 31–32, 36
The Tasmanian Devil, 55, 164
Tati, Jacques, 107
Taylor, Elizabeth, 57
“Techniques of the body”, 153
Tehran Taboo, 18, 19, 110
Tekkon Kinkreet, 268, 340
Temple, Shirley, 93
Terboven, Josef, 202
Terkel In Trouble, 359
Terminator 2, 10
Terminator Genisys, 325
Terry, Paul, 91, 144
Teshigahara, Hiroshi, 175
Tetsuwan Atom, see Astro Boy
Te Wei, 95
Tezuka, Osamu, 92, 187
Thalmann, Nadia Magnenat, 213–214
Thatcher, Torin, 311
Théâtre Robert-Houdin, 9
Theseus and the Minotaur (project), 77, 
137–138, 261
The Thief of Bagdad, 85, 310
Thomas, Frank, 100fn, 189
1001 Arabian Nights, 160
The Three Caballeros, 65, 160, 287fn
Three Little Pigs, 38, 54, 96, 354
The 3 Worlds of Gulliver, 302
Thumbelina, 268
Timberlake, Justin, 168
Time for Beany, 54–55
The Time Machine, 304
Tintin, 42, 43
Tippett, Phil, 115
Tirard, Laurent, 109
Tischlein deck dich, 88
Titanic, 103, 116
Tobias Totz, 268
Tolkien, J. R. R., 118–119
Tom & Jerry, 32, 37, 41, 66, 164, 193
Tom & Jerry Movie, 164
Tománek, Jan, 343–345
Tomei, Alejandra, 84, 245–251
tom thumb, 304
Toniolo, Benedikt, 62
Toot, Whistle, Plunk and Boom, 242
The Tortoise and the Hare, 32
Tortoise Wins by a Hare, 32
Totemism, 25–28
Totheroh, Rollie, 107
A Town Called Panic, 230–231
The Town Mouse and the Country 
Mouse, 91
Toys, 167–169
Toy Story, 115, 304, 358
Toy Story 3, 325
Trance, 228
Transcendence, 215
Transformers, 166, 325
The Travels of Young Marco Polo, 154
Trier, Lars von, 333
Triplets of Belleville (2003), 107
Trnka, Jiří, 4
Trolls, 168
TRON: Legacy, 325
Trouble in Paradise, 241
True-Life Adventures, 163
True Crime: Streets of LA, 123
Trump, Donald, 202
“Trusted authorities”, 153fn
Tsuburaya, Eiji, 26
Turbo, 166
Turner, George E., 70fn
Turpin, Ben, 185
TV animation, 136
TV City, 245, 250
Tweety & Sylvester, 55
Tweety Bird, 106, 197
20 Million Miles to Earth, 309–310
20,000 Leagues Under the Sea, 18, 22, 152
Two by Two or All Creatures Big and 
Small, 46
Týrlová, Hermina, 344
Tytla, Vladimir “Bill”, 37, 197, 287, 354
U
Uderzo, Albert, 42
United Productions of America (UPA), 
42, 274
Universal, 94
Updyke, Hubert, 56

386
Index
Up for Love (Un homme à la hauteur), 109
Uproar in Heaven, see Havoc in Heaven
Urchs, Wolfgang, 166
Ustinov, Peter, 23
Utnapishtim, 135
V
Vaiana, see Moana
Vallée, Rudy, 54–55
The Valley of Gwangi, 80, 81, 302, 313
Valley of the Mist (project), 313
Van Dyke, Dick, 67, 242
van Hessen, Frieda, 58
The Vanishing Lady, 9
Vasallo, Javier, 256
Veidt, Conrad, 172, 173
Verhoeven, Paul, 115–116
Verne, Jules, 22, 152
Viaje a Marte, 231
Video game industry, 116
VIP, My Brother Superman, 241, 242
Virtual camera, 121
Virtual Reality (VR), 237–239, 326
Visualization techniques, 221, 222, 228
Visual sense, 180
Vitagraph Company of America, 9
Voight, Jon, 111
Volpone, 118
Voltaire, 47
von Neumann, John, 214
VR, see Virtual Reality
Vukotić, Dušan, 274, 275
W
Walcazk, Diana, 116
Walken, Christopher, 123
Wallace, Edgar, 137
Waltz with Bashir, 212
Wan Brothers, 154
Wan Lei-Ming, 154, 155
Wang Borong, 147–148
Wanted: Dead or Alive series, 92
War Eagles (project), 121, 124, 307–308
War Games (1983), 124
Warin, Éric, 67
War Planets, 168
Warren, Bill, 77
Warren, Gene, 103
Waters, John, 57
Watkins, Robert, 169
Wayne, John, 190
Wazowski, Mike, 186
Webster, Chris, 136
Wedge, Chris, 165
Wegener, Paul, 11–12, 17, 173, 306
Weiss, Lawrence, 105–106
Weizenbaum, Joseph, 270
Welch, Raquel, 303, 314
Wen Jiabao, 94
Werner-Beinhart, 295
West and Soda, 241, 242
Weta Digital, 317
When Dinosaurs Ruled the Earth, 72, 
259, 262
Where Is Momma?, 95, 282
Whitaker, Harold, 166
Whitaker, Scott, 307
White, Tony, 113
White Wilderness, 163
Whitlock, Albert, 355
Whitney, Jr. John, 114
Who Framed Roger Rabbit, 110–111, 357
Wickersham, Bob, 354
Wiene, Robert, 16
Wile E. Coyote, 32, 55
Wilkinson, Carole, 257
Willard, 144
Williams, Dick, 354
Williams, Guy, 23
Williams, Pat, 69fn
Williams, Richard, 357
Williams, Tennesse, 101
Willie the Operatic Whale, 144
Willie Whopper, 30
The Wind Rises, 93
Winnie the Pooh, 55
The Wise Little Hen, 25
The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt, 123
The Wizard of Oz, 25–26
The Wizard of Speed and Time, 60, 358
Wolf, Friedrich, 333
The Wolf Man, 10
The Wonderful World of the Brothers 
Grimm, 103, 137–138, 259
Woods, James, 123

387
Index
Woodward, Marvin, 354
Woody Woodpecker, 31, 32
World History of Animation, 235
Worry Eaters, 295–297
Wray, Fay, 70
Wright, Robin, 212
Wrinkles, 160–161, 253, 256–257, 361
Wu Cheng’en, 154
Wyndham, Anne, 71–72
X
Xi Jinping, 94
Xi Yang Yang Yu Huitai, 96
X Men, 325
Y
Yan Dingxian, 155
Yeh-Shen, 158
Yellow Submarine, 194
Yogi Bear, 55, 164
Yosemite Sam, 55, 178
Young, Aida, 73
Yuting, Lin, 96
Z
Zagreb Film, 242, 277
Zagreb school of animation, 273–277
Zaramella, Juan Pablo, 60, 194, 231
Zeman, Karel, 248
Zemeckis, Robert, 120, 186, 211, 
270–271
Zhang, Tony, 258
Ziemer, Gregor, 47
Zootopia, 104–105
Zorro, 23
Zurkan, Grigori, 347–352


