14 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
ignated hitter or not? Have relief pitchers radically changed the nature of 
batting averages? A far less useful approach to evaluating baseball might 
be to criticize it for not having enough touchdowns. A system should be 
evaluated-and hence criticized-based upon the integrity of its system 
and assumptions, not upon another set of assumptions. "Drives," a basic 
assumption of classical psychoanalysis, are not part of the assumptions of 
Individual Psychology. Similarly, striving for superiority is a key assump-
tion of Adler's theory but has little direct relevance to Freud's system. 
"Don't," the old saying states, "confuse apples with oranges." 
D The Basic Assumptions of Individual Psychology 
In Chapter 1, we explored the "style of life" of Adler and how his back-
ground influenced the development of the person (Mosak & Kopp, 
1973). Adler astutely noted that a system, or theory, frequently has a life 
style of its own (Adler, 1931 11964b). That style reflects the personality of 
its originator and those who are attracted to it. What is about to be dis-
cussed is the life style of a theory-the underlying "schemas" that orga-
nize its structure. 
Holism 
Adlerians postulate that the person is an indivisible unit, that the person 
needs to be understood in his or her totality. From this vantage point, di-
viding the person into id, ego, and superego, or parent, child, and adult 
states, is not beneficial. As Adler (1956) stated: 
Very early in my work, I found man to be a [self-consistent] unity. The 
foremost task of Individual Psychology is to prove this unity in each indi-
vidual-in his thinking, feeling, acting, in his so-called conscious and un-
conscious, in every expression of his personality. (p. 175) 
What exactly is holism? In more concrete terms, holism can be concep-
tualized in the following ways. 
The whole is different than the sum of its parts (Smuts, 1926/1961). 
For instance, imagine three parallel lines of equal length. In their present 
configuration, one "sees" one pattern; these same three lines can be 
reconfigured to form an equilateral triangle or the letter N or the letter 
Z and other configurations. One must know the Gestalt in order to un-
derstand the particular item, for in each case, we have three lines of 
equal length. If we focus too exclusively upon the parts, we lose the 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
15 
Gestalt and, hence, we may "miss the boat." We do not see the forest for 
the trees. 
Similarly, to allude to the opening quote of this chapter from Niet-
zsche, to say "the arm moves" is to assign to "it" (i.e., the arm) a "mind" 
and "will" of its own. "I raised my arm" is a very different statement 
philosophically than "my arm rose." The first statement awards responsi-
bility to the person; the latter gives responsibility to the arm. Hence, 
Freud's emphasis upon drives and instincts originating from the id raised 
all sorts of "sticky" issues with regard to personal responsibility. Who, if 
anybody, was responsible for directing the instincts? If they "directed 
themselves," as Freud typically implied, that meant they had to have 
some sort of "ego-functions," a point Adler (1956) duly noted and called 
into question during his early days as a psychoanalyst. 
Finally, as we demonstrate in our teaching, imagine this: For a mo-
ment, hold your hands out in front of your chest, with elbows bent, 
hands close to your body, and hold your hands. Now, pull. Notice some-
thing? Your hands, to paraphrase Nietzsche, stay dead center. No matter 
how hard you pull, with your left hand pulling left, right hand pulling 
right, they stay center. Why? Because you choose to keep them there. As 
long as we conceptualize the "hands"-that is, the parts-as being the 
focus of our attention, we formulate the idea of internal conflict or in-
trapsychic conflict with the person expressing him - or herself as a victim 
of the conflict (Mosak & LeFevre, 1976). Actually, we have decided to 
keep our hands "in conflict." Rather than victims of conflict, we are cre-
ators of conflict. The conflict is only apparent from an atomistic, reduc-
tionistic perspective (a different set of assumptions). From a holistic 
perspective, the hands are not in conflict with each other because "they" 
are exhibiting equal force in opposing directions; the hands stay dead 
center because we have decided to keep them there by exerting equal 
force. Conflict is a decision not to make a decision, to stay "dead center." 
The "pain" we feel is the price we pay for not making the decision (and 
perhaps "look good" to ourselves and others). If you "allow" one hand to 
pull harder (Le., if you make a decision), notice how easily they move. 
Teleology 
Given this emphasis upon holism, and the fact the "intrapsychic con-
flict," or conflict that is related to a reductionistic perspective, is a func-
tion of choice, why would one choose to remain "in conflict?" It serves a 
purpose. In Aristotle's work, The Metaphysics (350 Bc/1941), this is re-
ferred to as the final cause. Aristotle delineated four causes and believed 

16 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
that in order to understand the nature of something (i.e., anything), we 
must know the: 
Material cause-what it is made of 
Efficient cause-how it came to be 
Formal cause-what shape or essence it is 
Final cause-for what sake, or purpose, it is 
A clinical example clarifies. A woman is depressed: 
Material cause: A sad presentation, with lethargy. diurnal variation, 
psychomotor retardation. 
Efficient cause: She may have a biological vulnerability she inher-
ited. She suffered a loss in childhood of a parent. Her husband has just 
left her. 
Formal cause: A mood (affective) disorder. She dislikes it and it 
causes suffering to herself and those around her. She complains and 
feels "horrible" and is self-critical. 
Final cause: It places others into her service. With it. she can get oth-
ers to move toward her and allow her to seek revenge upon her hus-
band ("Look how that bastard has ruined my life!"). 
The various "schools" of psychotherapy have emphasized different 
causes. The first three causes (the materiaL efficient. and formal) are 
well known, at least in applications, to most clinicians. Adler's emphasis 
was upon the fourth, the final. cause. To emphasize anyone to the ex-
clusion of the others would be reductionistic, and Adlerian psychology is 
holistic; we stress all four causes, particularly the final cause (Ansbacher, 
1951 ). 
As Adler (1927/1957) wrote, the "first thing we discover in the psy-
chic trends is that the movements are directed toward a goal .... This 
teleology, this striving for a goal. is innate in the concept of adaptation" 
(p. 28). In order to understand a person's goaL we need to understand 
his or her line of movement. People move towards goals in various ways; 
the most common goal is to belong. The importance of belonging is 
stressed by Horney (1950) in one of her central concepts, that of "basic 
anxiety," which she defines as "the feeling of being isolated and helpless 
in a potentially hostile world" (p. 18). All of us want to belong, and we 
establish a finaL fictional goal that directs us as to what we should be or 
accomplish in order to belong (Adler, 1956). Goals are generally differ-
entiated along two dimensions: concrete versus fictionaL and long-range 
versus short-range. Fictional goals are subjective and state what must be 
achieved-fame, power, perfection, money, sexual attractiveness, per-
formance, conquest, or so forth-in order to have a place in life. Because 
one can achieve significance in other ways, these goals are fictional. 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
17 
An example clarifies the matter. Carl establishes early during his de-
velopment (see Chapter 3) that the way for him to "fit in," to bond with 
his family, is to be "the best." This is unarticulated-it is learned pre-
verbally (Rogers, 1951). To be the best is a "fictional goal." It becomes 
concretized in many diverse ways, such as to be the smartest student, the 
swiftest runner, the most popular classmate, and so forth. Even the con-
crete, "tangible" manifestations can be further broken down. If his long-
term goal is to be the number-one student, many short-term goals can 
be envisioned: to study hard, to be "teacher's pet," or to have no one an-
swer more questions than he does when in class. The final, fictional goal, 
therefore, can have many permutations and components. Also, there 
can be more than one final fictional goal (Mosak, 1979). Carl may want 
to be the best and he may crave excitement as well. The competition to 
be number one is certainly important, but the feelings of excitement and 
the thrill of competing may be "addictive" for him as well. This second 
final, fictional goal can have the same kind of permutations and varia-
tions mentioned about being the best. 
To return to the issue from the beginning of this section, why would 
someone choose to be "in conflict?" What purpose could that serve? A 
more complete discussion is presented in the chapters on inferiority 
complexes and psychopathology, but for present purposes, a brief ratio-
nale can be offered. Sometimes, it seems beneficial "not to move," to 
"stay put" (Mosak & LeFevre, 1976). A man who cannot decide between 
his wife and his mistress can be conceptualized as in conflict. The pur-
pose: As long as he "cannot" choose, he keeps both. If he "suffers" 
enough, they feel sorry for him and continue to wait for his decision. It is 
apparent that not to decide is to make a choice. 
The Creative Self 
Adlerians view people as actors, not merely reactors. We are more than 
the product of heredity and environment, more than simply reactive or-
ganisms; as Mahoney (1991) has stated, the prevailing trend in the social 
sciences is to see individuals as actively constructing their experiences, 
not simply passively responding to what is presented. 
Adlerian psychology has been erroneously characterized as one that 
advocates merely reactive adjustment to society. Adler (1933 /l 964f), to 
the contrary, indicated that if we do not live in a suitable societal situa-
tion, we have the obligation to change it. 
Adler (1929b, p. 34) noted that the child "strives to develop, and it 
[the child] strives to develop along a line of direction fixed by the goal 
which it chooses for itself." Although heredity and environment do pro-

18 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
vide parameters (see subsequent discussion of "soft determinism"), they 
do not take into account how the person will perceive his or her heredity 
or background. 
Two processes are worth noting: feedback and feedforward mecha-
nisms. Feedback mechanisms are (generally) homeostatic in function; 
they interpret data and determine what adjustments need to be made in 
order to maintain the status quo or adjust accordingly. Feedforward 
mechanisms are proactive; they anticipate and modify the situation in 
order to produce feedback that is already in line with the organism's re-
quirements. The creativity we speak of is related to feedforward mecha-
nisms. Children, for example, not only passively receive input from their 
caregivers, but actively elicit responses from those same individuals 
(Mosak, 1980). Similarly, anyone can be victimized; life can, and does, 
"kick us in the teeth" on occasion. Whether or not one chooses to be-
come a victim, however, is not so automatic. As Frankl (1983) has dis-
cussed, life challenges us, but the meaning we derive from life is up to us. 
Life deals the cards; we only get a chance to play the hand. 
Soft Determinism 
This assumption becomes evident at this point. The classic philosophical 
debate has been between determinism and nondeterminism. The former 
assumes that causality (in the sense Nietzsche referred to at the opening 
of this chapter) is a fact, and that A implies (leads to) B. Nondeterminism 
assumes no causal connections whatsoever. Soft determinism is the mid-
dle ground. It stresses influences, not causes, and speaks of probabilities 
and possibilities, not givens. According to Adler (1933/ 1964f), the givens 
of a person's life situation and biologic constitution "are events of statis-
tical probability. The evidence of their existence should never be allowed 
to degenerate into the setting up of a fixed rule" (p. 27). As Adler (1936) 
was fond of pointing out, "Everything can also be different" (p. 14). 
Several clarifications need to be made, for the subtle distinctions of 
this issue have fostered considerable misunderstandings, even among 
Adlerians. First, choosing does not always mean wanting. I may choose a 
broken leg, even though I do not want it, if it means jumping from this 
burning building in order to save my life. Similarly, one may choose to 
go to graduate school to get one's doctorate, but one may not want to 
have to do all the work and read all the texts. 
Second, freedom to choose is not the same as freedom of choice. Life 
does impose certain limits, and within those limits I am free to choose. 
Freedom of choice typically implies unlimited choice. That rarely exists. 
Nonetheless, we are always free to choose, at least how we feel about 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
19 
what is presented, in other words, our attitude (see Frank!, 1983, for a 
cogent discussion of this topic). 
Third, the dynamics of responsibility, choice, and blame need to be 
explored. Although Adlerians hold them responsible for their actions 
(Maniacci, 1991; Mosak, 1987a), they do not blame people. Given the 
assumptions of holism, creativity, teleology, and soft determinism, peo-
ple choose; they, and they alone, are responsible for their choices. They 
may not be aware of making the choices or of the consequences of their 
choices and many of the implications that those choices entail, particu-
larly the social implications, but they are responsible for them. Adlerians 
do not believe that "the Devil made me do it." People are not to be 
blamed but to be educated, and Adler (1956) considered his therapy to 
be strongly reeducative (see the discussion of this issue by Ford & Urban, 
1963; and Mosak, 1995a). 
Phenomenology 
"1 am convinced," Adler (1933/ 1964f, p. 19) stated unequivocally, "that a 
person's behavior springs from his idea ... because our senses do not re-
ceive actual facts, but merely a subjective image of them." Technically 
speaking, we do not see the world, we apprehend it. Adler (1956, p. 182) 
spoke of a "schema of apperception [Apperzeptionsschema]." An appercep-
tion is a perception with meaning, a conclusion, attached to it. Whereas 
Freud operated from the premise (vantage point) of an objective psychol-
ogist, Adler was a subjective psychologist (Ford & Urban, 1963). Adler 
was not interested in facts per se, but the individual's perceptions of 
the facts. 
The cognitive map we form to guide us through life, to direct our line 
of movement toward our fina!, fictional goa!, is based upon our phe-
nomenological interpretation of experience (Mosak, 1995a). A story 
clarifies: 
A child turns to his father and asks, "Which is closer, the moon or China?" 
His father, being a man who values logic, replies, "China." The child force-
fully disagrees. Upon questioning, the child explains that the moon must 
be closer, because he can see the moon, and he's never seen China. 
An interesting historical note is in order. It is generally considered that 
the founder of the "school" of phenomenology was the mathemati-
cian/philosopher Edmund Husser!, who first detailed his system in his 
book, Ideas: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology (1913/1962). Adler 
was writing at the same time and had published his book The Neurotic 
Constitution a year earlier (1912/1983b). Though it is not commonly 

20 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
known, Husserl was a classmate of Freud; the only nonmedical course 
Freud took at the University of Vienna was from Franz Brentano, 
Husserl's mentor. Husserl's "star pupil" was a young theology student 
who switched to philosophy, Martin Heidegger, the founder of the 
school of existentialism. The phenomenological method is the corner-
stone of existential psychology (Yalom, 1980), and one of the key as-
sumptions of Individual Psychology (Allers, 1961; van Dusen, 1959). 
The interrelatedness of the two schools has been well documented (Ans-
bacher, 1959a; Birnbaum, 1961; Ellenberger, 1970; Farau, 1964; Holt, 
1967; Johnson, 1966; Radl, 1959; Schaffer, 1974, 1976; Stern, 1958; van 
Dusen, 1959). 
If the person is continually acting on, and not simply reacting to, his or 
her environment, and that person is actively creating his or her own 
perceptions, goals, and movements through life, then the Adlerian con-
ception sees development as an ongoing process; the person is continu-
ally creating (or recreating) him- or herself. He or she is always in the 
process of becoming (K. Adler, 1963; Allport, 1955). As is evident in 
Chapter 4, the influences, not causes, from the past may have had phe-
nomenological reality for us, but conditions do change, and we have the 
capacity to change with them. We may have "had to," from our phe-
nomenological reality, react a certain way "back then," but if the situa-
tion has changed, we are responsible if we continue to act as we did in 
the past. As a patient eloquently put it, "You mean I'm giving condi-
tioned responses to conditions which no longer exist." Time moves on, 
life changes, but we have a stubborn, tenacious ability to continue to see 
things "in the future," as "they were." Hence, as May (1983, p. 140) 
aptly phrased it, "What an individual seeks to become determines what he 
remembers of this has been. In this sense the future determines the past." 
Social-field Theory 
Individuals develop and live in a social context. The idea of a person liv-
ing outside of a world is incomprehensible. People have challenges; that 
is part and parcel of being human. Whether or not the challenges become 
problems is an issue that is contingent upon the individual's phenome-
nology, goals, and creativity. Not all problems are social problems, for 
some are genuinely within the province of the individual; but all prob-
lems are capable of becoming social problems. For example, if my toe 
aches, that is a challenge with which I must deal. I may choose to see it as 
a problem but not bother anybody about it. I can make it a social prob-
lem, however, quite easily: I can whine and complain, demand special 
services, and in general expect an "exemption" from life-and in a social 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
21 
context, that means that if I fail to pull my share of the load, sooner or 
later, someone will have to pull it for me or it will be left undone. 
Adler (1927 /l957, p. 34) stated it this way: "In order to know how a 
man thinks, we have to examine his relationship to his fellow men .... 
We cannot comprehend the psychic activities without at the same time 
understanding those social relationships" (p. 34). Adler was against clas-
sification and labeling. He cautioned that 
the student may very easily fall into the error of imagining that a type is 
something ordained and independent, and that it has as its basis anything 
more than a structure that is to a large extent homogeneous. If he stops at 
this point and believes that when he hears the word "criminal," or "anxiety 
neurosis," or "schizophrenia," he has gained some understanding of the in-
dividual case, he not only deprives himself of the possibility of individual 
research, but he will never be free from misunderstandings that will arise 
between him and the person whom he is treating. (Adler, 1933/1964f, 
p. 127) 
Flexibility is one key to adaptation, survival, and, as Gazzaniga (1985) 
postulates, human evolution. To say someone is phobic does not tell you 
much. Where is he or she phobic? With whom? For how long? What ap-
pears to precipitate it? To stop it? How does he or she feel about being pho-
bic? These types of questions help elucidate the phenomenological field, 
and therefore provide a better grasp of the person. A characteristic of mal-
adaptive behavior is its inflexibility (Krausz, 1973). To continue with our 
phobic patient: He or she may have been afraid of a particular dog that pro-
vided a rather nasty bite when our patient was quite young. If overgeneral-
ization occurs (Mosak, 1995a), all dogs may be perceived as threatening. If 
overgeneralization occurs, the phobia may be extended to any fur. The un-
derlying assumption (or schema) may be too rigid. A more extreme exam-
ple would be the man who feels he has to be "The Boss." At work, this may 
be fine, but it can cause him some grief at home or with his friends. 
A somewhat different, but related, issue revolves around preparation 
for practice as a psychotherapist. If, given this assumption, one needs to 
know not only the person but the person's social field, therapists need to 
be versed in more than psychology. Literature, myths, religion, ethnicity, 
history, movies, and the like all help to illuminate the person's picture. 
Striving for Superiority 
Motivation, from some Adlerian perspectives, is conceptualized as mov-
ing from a perceived minus situation to a perceived plus situation. As 
Ansbacher and Ansbacher have documented (Adler, 1956), Adler gave 

22 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
this movement several different names throughout his writings, with the 
phenomenological "plus" situation being variously described as being: 
A real man 
A will to power 
Self-esteem 
Security 
Perfection 
Completion 
Overcoming 
Superiority 
The first four phrases were characteristic of early Adler, when he 
wrote primarily as a psychoanalyst, and his concepts were about abnor-
mal individuals. The last group evolved as Adler wrote more and more as 
a philosopher, educator and social psychologist. During this period, he 
was more interested in describing normal development. A useful distinc-
tion is made by Lazarsfeld (1927/1991). She differentiates the normal in-
dividual who strives for perfection from the maladaptive person who 
tries to be perfect. In the first case, one realizes it is a goal that can never 
be totally achieved; but in the latter, one actually attempts to become 
perfect. Adler (1933/l964f) states it this way: "The material of life has 
been constantly bent on reaching a plus from a minus situation" (p. 97). 
In practice, it can be difficult to see how some people are moving 
towards a plus situation, or towards what Adler (19371l964e), in one 
of his last papers, finally referred to as superiority. Some elaboration 
clarifies. 
Adler (1937 /l964e) felt that everyone strives for superiority. That is 
the single, motivating force for all living organisms. The fina!, fictional 
goal is a goal that the person perceives as bringing him or her that supe-
riority. The degree of social interest that the person displays (see Chapter 
7) sets the direction to the striving. If he or she is very interested in the 
welfare of others, then the striving is on the socially useful side of life, as 
manifested in caring, compassion, social cooperation, and contribution 
to the common welfare (Mosak, 1991). If there is a low degree of social 
interest then the striving is not prosocia!, but rather antisocial (in the 
broad sense of the term). Those individuals attempt to gain their superi-
ority at the expense of those around them, rather than for the better-
ment of all involved. 
Sometimes, the price one pays to get to the perceived plus (i.e., superi-
ority), may be a "real" (i.e., concrete) minus. First a relatively common 
example. In order to have a clean house, I may have to work very hard 
and sacrifice some of my free time. Similarly, in order to earn a degree, I 
may have to spend a lot of money and time and put myself through con-

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
23 
siderable anxiety and discomfort. In the short term, I experience a 
"minus," but the "plus" will come. A more clinical example: How can 
self-mutilation move someone toward a plus situation? Once again, that 
may be a "real" minus, especially in the short-term situation. Long-term, 
however, that person may receive attention, others may "walk on 
eggshells" when near that person (so as to not "upset" him or her), and 
he or she may gain some sense of subjective relief from the act, including 
a sense of being able to tolerate pain. The self-mutilator may even de-
velop moral superiority, quoting Jesus (Mark 9:47): "And if your eye 
causes you to stumble, cast it out; it is better for you to enter the king-
dom of God with one eye, than having two eyes, to be cast into helL" 
The striving for superiority that takes into account the long-term 
good, or welfare, of those in life can seldom go wrong. If striving for su-
periority takes place at the expense of others, or on too short a term, 
others are not very likely to benefit. 
Idiographic Orientation 
Adlerians tend to emphasize the idiographic nature of individuals, that 
is, the particulars of the specific person. This is relatively evident, given 
the assumptions of phenomenology, teleology, soft determinism, holism, 
and creativity. "Certainly we cannot altogether avoid using it (the gen-
erallaw), for it enables us to generalize ... but it can give us very little 
idea of any particular case or its treatment" (Adler, 19331l964f, p. 127). 
The generaL or nomothetic, laws place us "in the ballpark," but only by 
knowing the particular person in his or her phenomenological idiosyn-
crasies can we know a person. This applies to all people, normal or ab-
normal. 
Research, for instance, has validated Adler's (1956) assumption that 
agoraphobic persons tend to value control (see Guidano & Liotti, 1983). 
That is the nomothetic principle. That does not tell us much about the par-
ticular person sitting across from us, in our office, seeking our help be-
cause the agoraphobia is becoming unbearable. All of us feel inferior at 
one time or another; that makes us human (Wolfe, 1932). How we feel in-
ferior, what we define as inferior (e.g., being short, fat, dumb, ugly, too 
talL too smart), when, and under what circumstances, all of this fleshes 
out the idiographic dynamics. Remediation in generaL and psychotherapy 
in particular, is greatly enhanced by knowing the person as a person, not 
as a cluster of signs, symptoms, and syndromes. The various diagnostic la-
bels place us in the ballpark but do not describe the individual patient. 
Given the phenomenolgical and idiographic assumptions, it follows that 
one cannot completely interpret a dream unless one knows the dreamer. 

24 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Psychology of Use 
Adler (1929c) stressed that "it is not what one has inherited that is im-
portant, but what one does with his inheritance" (p. 37). Mosak (1995a) 
has noted that life does, to some extent, provide limits to what one can 
do, but within those limits, the opinion one has of one's situation, and, 
hence, the use one makes of it, can be rather startling. A person born 
without legs will probably never be a high jumper in the Olympics; but 
Bo Jackson, with his artificial hip, can play for a pennant-contending 
major league baseball team. As Maniacci (1993, 1996b) points out, a dis-
tinction between impairment and disability can prove useful. Tvvo indi-
viduals with the same impairment may not be equally disabled. The 
stances they take toward their situation can be crucial determinants. 
Adler's early work led him to study the biological substrates of organic 
compensation. Published in 1907, Study of Organ Inferiority and its Psy-
chical Compensation was given considerable praise by Freud as having 
contributed greatly to understanding the biological origins of neurotic 
dynamics. In it, Adler discussed how certain organs or organ systems 
tended to compensate for deficiencies. One kidney is removed, and the 
other enlarges and assumes the missing kidney's function. As Adler pro-
gressed in this thinking, this original biologicaL mechanistic view be-
came replaced with a more psychologicaL holistic one. Although organ 
inferiority still retained its biological definition (an inherited deficiency 
or weakness of the body or organ or organ system), the compensations 
became more psychodynamic. Dreikurs (1948b) has elaborated upon 
this issue at length, and interested readers are referred to that work for a 
more complete discussion. But for present purposes, those Adlerians 
who are medically trained (or sensitive) can often quite accurately find 
biological correlates to many psychological conditions, such as an organ 
inferiority of the gastrointestinal system leading to personality traits of a 
getter (Adler, 1956). 
Three areas of special interest with reference to the assumption of psy-
chology of use are memory, emotions, and cognitive processes. We ex-
amine each in turn. 
Adler (1927/1957) noted that what we remember is greatly influenced 
by where we are going (hence May's comment noted previously about 
our future determining our past). As Adler stated, "We remember those 
events whose recollection is important for a specific psychic tendency" 
(p. 49). If I want to move toward someone, I will remember nice, pleas-
ant things about that person; but as soon as I want to move away from or 
against that person (Horney, 1945), I will remember negative, unpleas-
ant things. These serve to justify my movement to my goal. Not only will 
I remember what suits my purpose, but I will forget what does not suit it 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
25 
as well. The role of memory, and early recollections specifically, is dis-
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 9, in which the process of assessment 
is detailed. For the present discussion, suffice to say that memory, like 
many other tendencies, is greatly influenced and used according to the 
goal we set for ourselves. 
Emotions are much the same. Adler (1927/1957, 1956) spoke of dis-
junctive and conjunctive emotions. Like other psychological processes, 
emotions are used according to the goals people establish (Beecher & 
Beecher, 1971/1987; Dreikurs, 1951). Some emotions move us towards 
others; others move us away. Adlerians tend to view emotions as moti-
vators for behavior; to use a metaphor, they are the gasoline we use to 
power us to our goals. Interestingly enough, contemporary psychoana-
1ysts such as Basch (1988, p. 68) state that "the affect attached to a par-
ticular perceptual goal moves a person to engage in behavior that will 
fulfill or reach it." This is strikingly similar to Adler's formulation. Once 
again, the idiographic component of Individual Psychology is important, 
for to know what purpose a particular emotion serves one needs to 
know the person. Some general guidelines about two particular emo-
tions can offer some clarity: anger and hurt. 
If one is angry, it generally serves the purpose of motivating one to 
change something. It is as if one is saying, "There is something about it 
or me that needs changing." However, for various reasons the person 
may fear or be unwilling to attempt that change. By being hurt the per-
son avoids changing it then because she or he first has to get over the 
hurt. The person shifts her or his focus from changing it to changing her 
or his feelings. More clinical examples, such as anxiety, fear, depression, 
and aggression are discussed in Chapter 8. 
Finally, Adler (1956) made a distinction between common sense and 
private sense (private intelligence) or what has more recently been re-
ferred to as private logic. Ansbacher (1965) and Dreikurs (1973) have 
provided detailed analyses. 
Common sense is that which is shared with others, the ability to speak 
a common language and share perceptions with others. One ingredient 
of common sense is consensuality; we all agree upon it. A second is that 
what we all agree upon may be a fiction (Vaihinger, 1911/1 965). In real-
ity, a paper dollar is only a piece of paper. We can tear it, burn it, write 
on it, and the like. But our society has created the fiction that it has 
worth, and as long as we observe that fiction and behave as if it has 
worth, it makes commerce easier. Private logic has three components: 
immediate goals, hidden reasons, and life style goals. 
Life style goals or long-term, personality goals, are the final, fictional 
goals. As mentioned previously, those are generally nonconscious, non-
verbal, and not clearly understood by individuals. Immediate goals are 

26 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
those short-term goals that are more readily attainable. These too are 
often not clearly understood and were discussed previously. The hidden 
reason is the explanation we give ourselves for what we are doing. Ma-
niacci (1993) has provided a clinical example of how all three operate in 
a case formulation, and a brief example is provided to illustrate: 
Life style goal 
To be perfect 
Frequent Immediate Goals 
To look good 
To be without error 
To never be corrected 
Frequent hidden reasons 
"I'm always right." 
"Who are you to judge me?" 
"I can't let anybody see me as weak." 
Imagine a client with this private logic. In his striving to be perfect, he 
does not allow anyone to contradict him; he is difficult and moody if 
"crossed" (and remember, given his phenomenology, he may perceive 
"crossed" quite differently than others). His hidden reasons (what many 
cognitive therapists term "self-statements" or "automatic thoughts") re-
flect this bias. A more detailed analysis of private logic is presented in the 
chapters on development, life style, and psychopathology. 
Finally, cognitive processes such as intelligence are greatly influenced 
by the person's private logic. For instance, if it does not suit a person's 
goal to use his or her intelligence, than that person may choose to fail in 
school if it furthers him or her along towards his or her goal. As one stu-
dent gleefully announced after flunking out of medical schooL "That's 
the first decision I ever made without my parents in all my life." 
Acting "As If" 
Adler (1956) was greatly influenced by the work of the philosopher, 
Hans Vaihinger (1911 /1965). According to Vaihinger, people construct 
"fictions" that help move them through life. These fictions are like lines 
drawn on a map. They do not exist in reality, but they provide useful 
guidelines for navigating. Adler applied this philosophical insight to his 
clinical work. It soon became a cornerstone of his theory. 
Given the aforementioned assumptions, people select goals, perceive 
according to those goals, and move throughout life as if all of this were 
"true." From a phenomenological standpoint, for the particular person, 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of Individual Psychology 
27 
all of it is true. But as Adler (191211983b) stated on the first page of his 
first psychological book, "Everything is a matter of opinion." People act 
according to their fictions, their beliefs, and even set out to have life (and 
other people) conform to their expectations or construct life in terms of 
their expectations. Hence, someone who feels inferior tends to act that 
way, or to compensate so as to appear superior. 
Self-fulfilling Prophecy 
This is a natural outgrowth of the tendency to act "as if." As Festinger 
(1957) attempted to establish, if given a discrepancy between what we 
believe and what "is," cognitive dissonance occurs. We tend to stick to 
our beliefs. Adler (193311964f, pp. 19-20) provides an example: 
In a word, I am convinced that a person's behaviour springs from his 
idea .... As a matter of fact, it has the same effect on one whether a poiso-
nous snake is actually approaching my foot or whether I merely believe it 
is a poisonous snake. 
If I believe "it's a dog-eat-dog world out there," I act as if it is, construe 
events to support my belief, and probably provoke others to take a cold, 
if not hostile, stance toward me. I then feel justified in declaring, "See! I 
was right!" As Milton stated over 300 years ago, the mind can make a 
heaven of hell, or a hell of heaven. 
Optimism 
The last assumption of Individual Psychology is that of optimism. Freud's 
system is basically pessimistic; it postulates a different set of assumptions 
about human nature, assumptions that view individuals as in conflict, 
not only within themselves but with each other. Adler's system is much 
more optimistic. People can, and do, change. They can, and do, take re-
sponsibility for themselves and are quite capable of working coopera-
tively for the greater good. Adler (1978) was rather clear about one point, 
however, that is frequently overlooked. People are neither good nor bad; 
human nature is neutral. This view was enunciated by the 12th-century 
physician and philosopher Maimonides (118011944), who wrote, 
Pay no attention to the view ... that at man's birth God decrees whether 
he shall be righteous or wicked. That is not so! Every person has the power 
of becoming as righteous as Moses or wicked as Jeroboam-wise or stupid, 
tender or cruel, miserly or generous. (5: 1-2) 

28 
A Primer of Adlerian Psychology 
Heredity, environment, and the choice of the creative self all interact 
to help the person produce the final, fictional goal, which can be socially 
useful or useless, or neutral itself, with the nature of the movement to-
wards that goal being "good" or "bad." Adler was not naive. He lived 
through a world war, worked with criminals, psychotics, and the under-
privileged. He knew the extremes of human nature as well as did Freud. 
Freud came out of World War I and postulated the death instinct. He felt 
that the ultimate aim of human life was to return to an inorganic state. 
Adler came out of the same war, a war in which he served as a physician, 
and postulated the concept of social interest, more recently called com-
munity feeling (Ansbacher, 1992a). We, as a species, have the potential 
for good. Whether or not we actualize it is up to us. We are responsible 
for our fate-the best of it, or the worst of it. 
D Summary 
The assumptions of Individual Psychology are not very complex. Adler 
(1956) disliked technical jargon, and he was determined to avoid mak-
ing his system too complicated. To paraphrase him, on the surface it ap-
pears simple, but to those who know the system, it is comprehensive, 
broad in scope, and sophisticated in breadth. 
Having established the foundation, let us now turn our attention to 
how individuals develop. The development of the life style is examined 
in the next chapter, and with that, the assumptions that have been pre-
sented in static form can be seen in action, as they apply to the under-
standing of personality. 
D Points to Consider 
By knowing the assumptions of a system, one is in a better position 
to evaluate that system. Systems should be evaluated based upon their 
adherence to their assumptions, not from the basis of another set of 
assumptions. 
Adlerians emphasize the final cause of people's behavior. Although 
they consider all four causes (as detailed by Aristotle), they believe the 
final cause is crucial. 
Adler was neutral with regard to human nature. He felt that people 
could be either good or bad. 
Adlerians tend to speak of probable outcomes of certain back-
grounds. This is known as soft determinism. 

Basic Assumptions and Philosophy of 
29 
Although it is important to understand what a person has, it is more 
important to understand the use she or he makes of her or his qualities. 
D Questions 
1. What is phenomenology? How is it incorporated into Adlerian psy-
chology? 
2. What did Adler mean by "fictions?" 
3. What are some of the various terms Adler used to describe the "plus" 
position people strive for? 
4. What is the difference between freedom to choose and freedom of 
choice? 
5. How do Adlerians introduce teleology into their system? 
6. How do Adlerians tend to view "intrapsychic conflict?" 

