2100046  (1 of 5)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
www.advsustainsys.com
Perspective
Why the Circular Economy Will Drive Green and Sustainable 
Chemistry in Electronics
Michael Kirschner
DOI: 10.1002/adsu.202100046
for the recycling of items they produced 
once they have reached the end of their 
useful life, known as e-waste.
By 2012 only 3.2 Mt out of 9 Mt, less 
than 27%, of e-waste generated in the 
European Union was being collected.[3] 
Aware of the limited effectiveness of the 
various producer responsibility regula-
tions they had put in place over the past 
two decades, the European Commission 
defined a different, more comprehensive 
approach. This would enable them to 
drive manufacturers to grapple with the more general effects of 
their products on the planet as a whole, not just on nearly full 
landfills.
The approach defined is called the circular economy,[4] as 
opposed to the linear economy. The linear economy is the 
current economy, where, as shown in Figure 1, we “take” sub-
stances and materials from the planet, make something with it 
and then, when we are through with it, we dispose of it.
2. Circular versus Linear: Implications for Product 
Development
The circular economy replaces the “dispose” step with a 
“recycle” step but then that step leads back to the “make” step. 
This implies the reuse of material that was previously used.
Considering that society recycles products today, what effect 
does this have on the manufacturer? Today most manufac-
turers are still using a phase-gate based linear product life cycle 
management process (PLMP),[5] as shown in Figure  2, which 
mirrors the linear economy to develop products. The linear 
PLMP neither mandates nor suggests that recycled materials 
are reused to make new products. The PLMP must therefore 
change to reflect the demands of the circular economy.
As I wrote in my first column on the topic in EE Times:
The only real delta between the linear economy (or, 
hewing more closely to manufacturing, the linear product life 
cycle)—“take, make, waste”—and the circular economy is the 
incorporation of environmental and health safety properties and 
parameters in the design and manufacture of our products.[6]
The big difference is the requirement to reuse a far greater 
amount of the materials that manufactured products contain. 
That reuse can be at any of several levels: substance, material, 
part, subassembly or module, or even at the full product level. 
But it must occur and the recycling and reuse must be a very 
significant portion of the total product weight. The only way to 
achieve this is to define and design the product with the recy-
cling and reuse requirements in mind.
Electronic product manufacturers have successfully used a linear product life 
cycle management process (PLMP) for product definition, development, and 
manufacturing for decades. While this has met industry’s and the markets’ 
requirements in the past, today markets are increasingly demanding products 
that are “circular”: more durable, more recyclable, longer-lived, and less 
toxic. PLMP requirements must now include criteria that will enable a more 
circular economy; these criteria can drive demand for green and sustainable 
chemistry in the electronics industry and its supply chain.
M. Kirschner
Design Chain Associates, LLC
San Francisco, CA 94131, USA
E-mail: mike@designchainassociates.com
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adsu.202100046.
1. Introduction
Chemistry, whether green and sustainable[1] or not, does not exist 
in isolation in the electronics industry and its supply chains. Yet, 
to a large extent, its specification and control does. The manu-
facturers of finished goods, i.e., the brand owners, specify—and 
select—materials and the substances that comprise them based 
on functional and parametric requirements that they define far 
more often than they directly specify substances.
For instance, a mechanical engineer will specify a resin 
compound, such as an acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) 
or polycarbonate (PC), for a given application based on various 
specifically required properties such as tensile strength, hard-
ness, Young’s modulus, coefficient of thermal expansion, color, 
flammability, and so on. The compounder—a supplier to the 
finished goods manufacturer—will select the various sub-
stances that result in a resin which will achieve the desired 
performance. Unless the target requirements include relevant 
“green and sustainable” properties, the resulting product is 
“green and sustainable” only by chance. The mechanical engi-
neer neither knows nor cares what the substances are that com-
prise their resin; their concern is that it meets the technical and 
functional requirements.
Starting with the Packaging Directive in 1994, the European 
Commission put a series of regulatory requirements in place 
to manage and recycle waste, including keeping it out of land-
fills. This series included the Waste Electrical and Electronic 
Equipment (WEEE) Directive,[2] which initially came into effect 
in 2005 and requires electronics manufacturers to be responsible 
Adv. Sustainable Syst. 2022, 6, 2100046

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2100046  (2 of 5)
www.advsustainsys.com
3. Product Design and Development 
Considerations
Today any given product is defined and designed by accounting 
for requirements from each phase of the product life cycle 
and ensuring that they are considered in Phase 0. Phase 5 in 
the linear PLMP is often viewed as immaterial to the product 
design and manufacture; it is considered an administrative task. 
The technical aspects of physical recycling are typically viewed 
as “somebody else’s problem,”[7] so little design and develop-
ment effort is expended to optimize a product’s recyclability. 
With a few notable exceptions,[15] manufacturers do not own or 
control the means of recycling so the task is left to a third party. 
However, designing products—and defining the materials that 
comprise them—to implement a circularized Phase 5 requires 
extensive requirements review, information, analysis and, ulti-
mately, decisions that impact the rest of the PLMP phases.
This delta is, in fact, enormous. Making a product RoHS[8] 
and REACH[9] compliant along with all the other substance-
related regulatory requirements in markets today makes pro-
gress toward addressing all of the “environmental and health 
safety properties and parameters in the design and manufacture 
of our products.”[6] These additional requirements narrow the 
engineer’s safe design space[10] considerably, but in doing so also 
drives them to research and find (and develop) new materials.
Considerations for circularizing the PLMP, Figure 3, include 
the following:
•	 Requirements Review: The manufacturer defines a set of re-
quirements that the product and the materials it is comprised 
of must meet to ensure that the finished item meets circular-
ity requirements and goals. Targets will be specified at both 
the system and component/material level. Example system 
and material/substance performance areas are in Table 1.[11]
•	 Analysis: The product, its components and materials, its 
manufacturing process and the manufacturer’s business 
model must be evaluated against these additional perfor-
mance areas. For instance:
⚬	 What aspects of our product can or must be made modu-
lar and replaceable?
⚬	 Is the product durable enough to have a longer use phase?
⚬	 What aspects can be upgraded over time? How do we en-
sure the availability of parts and materials?
⚬	 How will this affect the market for our product? How do 
we position it? How do we maximize profitability with a 
circularized product?
Figure 1.  The difference between the linear and the circular economy.
Figure 2.  A simplified representation of today’s linear product life cycle management process. Reproduced with permission.[16] Copyright 2008 Design 
Chain Associates, LLC.
Adv. Sustainable Syst. 2022, 6, 2100046
 23667486, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adsu.202100046 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/01/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2100046  (3 of 5)
www.advsustainsys.com
•	 Information: Additional information besides functional 
parameters historically used in material selection must be 
obtained or developed and assessed against the following 
additional requirements:
⚬	 What materials are we using today?
⚬	 Should/can we continue using them for new products?
⚬	 What functional parameters drove their selection? Do 
they meet new parametric requirements?
⚬	 Are alternatives available?
⚬	 Can we reduce the number of different materials?
⚬	 Can we design to reduce the amount of material used?
⚬	 How and where do we source consistently high quality re-
cycled materials?
To some degree every chemical used, even those—and 
maybe especially those—that a supplier says are proprietary or 
a trade secret, must be considered against the appropriate new 
requirements.
This 
entails 
understanding 
the 
environmental—and 
social—footprint of each chemical substance used, including its 
source (e.g., petrochemical, plant materials, mined; including 
where it’s farmed or mined and how), water and energy use 
during manufacture and, as applicable, the extraction and for-
mulation phases, waste products and their life cycle, etc.
4. Cost and Technological Considerations
This is not a simple or inexpensive project. The United 
States’ Conflict Minerals requirement, enacted in 2010 as  
Section 1502 of the Dodd-Frank Act[12] and implemented by 
the Securities and Exchange Commission in 2012,[13] to find 
out the source of just four elements—tin, tantalum, tung-
sten, and gold—resulted in a multiyear and multibillion-dollar 
effort across many manufacturing industries. The conflict 
minerals regulation only addresses the sources of the min-
erals and their supply chains; it does not cover the environ-
mental footprint for those elements or the substances created 
from them. Extrapolating this cost to the rest of the periodic 
table  elements the electronics industry uses for just one 
aspect of the substance life cycle provides a sense of the cost 
and effort required to do even a partial environmental and 
social footprint assessment.
Toxicological assessment is also an extremely tall order. 
While one of many green and sustainable chemistry and chem-
ical engineering aspects, thousands of substances are used in 
a given product. Assessment of toxicity and exposure during 
extraction, refinement and manufacturing, use and disposal, 
and reuse is a Sisyphean task. Do they require: toxic solvents 
during any phase of extraction or manufacturing? High pro-
cessing temperatures? Extensive PPE (personal protective 
equipment) and at which stage(s) of the substance life cycle? 
High water use? Are they volatile during the use phase or, like 
certain additive brominated flame retardants, do they “bloom” 
out of the polymer they were added to and contaminate the 
room[14] the products are being used in?
What happens to these substances during recycling? Do they 
degrade or will they continue to perform as needed over time? 
What is the appropriate recycling process? Are specified mate-
rials separable or can we design them to be separable? What 
wastes are created? Can we reuse the recycled materials in new 
manufactured goods? Is the recycling process available and 
cost-effective? If not, can we implement such a recycling and 
reuse system?
These are significant, challenging questions. And they must—
to some extent be asked of every substance in every material that 
is considered for use in any given product. These questions inevi-
tably lead manufacturers to suppliers, consultants, and academic 
institutions for answers and guidance. Only the external normal 
force of the circular economy applied to the linear product life 
cycle will make it bend into a circular form. Humanity invented 
its way into this situation and (re)invention is the way out. Man-
ufacturers must work with suppliers, experts, and academic 
institutions—and maybe even with each other—to identify the 
path toward a circular PLMP, a circular product life cycle, and 
Table 1.  Example green/sustainable material and system performance 
areas.
Example green/sustainable material and system performance areas
System level (incl. packaging)
Material/substance level
Modularity
Renewable source
Reusability
Reusability
Repairability
Recyclability
(Re)Manufacturability
Manufacturing requirements
Energy source and efficiency
Process efficiency
Reliability
Waste minimization
Material efficiency
Toxicity (hazards)
Upgradeability
Material diversity
Life cycle thinking
Durability
Transportation
Figure 3.  A circularized product life cycle management process.
Adv. Sustainable Syst. 2022, 6, 2100046
 23667486, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adsu.202100046 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/01/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2100046  (4 of 5)
www.advsustainsys.com
a cleaner and more sustainable economy. It is this process that 
will drive rapidly increasing demand for green and sustainable 
chemistry and chemical engineering. Upstream chemists and 
chemical engineers must therefore work closely with down-
stream stakeholders to understand use cases and requirements 
to ensure successful and profitable markets for their products.
5. Conclusion
The pressure on the electronics industry to circularize its prod-
ucts is still in its infancy. The European Union is using its 
market muscle to drive the industry toward its vision of greener 
and more circular products. Manufacturers are being forced to 
take a more serious look at their business models and product 
life cycle management processes. But changes like this cannot 
happen overnight; the inertia of the linear PLMP and the indus-
trial manufacturing processes that have supported it is pow-
erful. But it must change and green and sustainable chemistry 
is an integral aspect of that change. The opportunity for green 
and sustainable chemistry and chemical engineering in the 
electronics supply chain has never been brighter.
Despite its importance, implementation of green and sus-
tainable chemistry in the electronics supply chain and in the 
products themselves is insufficient to result in “green and 
sustainable electronics.” Considerations at a product level go 
beyond the chemistry used in the various components and 
materials that comprise the product, such as energy efficiency, 
supply chain-related transportation, and product modularity/
upgradeability. Chemistry innovation can address electronics 
industry challenges that impede sustainability and circularity of 
products in areas including flammability and flame retardance, 
nontoxic plastic additives, etc. Yet it is only part of the broader 
challenge the electronics industry faces.
Conflict of Interest
The author declares no conflict of interest.
Keywords
circular economy, design, electronics, green and sustainable chemistry, 
life cycle, manufacture
Received: February 11, 2021
Revised: March 30, 2021
Published online: April 30, 2021
[1]	 A. C. S. G. C. Institute, “Explore the Design Principles of Green & 
Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering,” [Online]. https://www.acs.
org/content/acs/en/greenchemistry/principles.html 
(accessed: 
February 2021).
[2]	 Directive 2002/96/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council, of 27 January 2003 on waste electrical and electronic 
equipment 
(WEEE), 
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/
weee/old_en.htm (accessed: February 2021).
[3]	 C. P.  Baldé, F.  Wang, R.  Kuehr, J.  Huisman, The global e-waste 
monitor – 2014, United Nations University, IAS – SCYCLE, Bonn, 
Germany, p. 44, https://i.unu.edu/media/unu.edu/news/52624/
UNU-1stGlobal-E-Waste-Monitor-2014-small.pdf 
(accessed: 
February 2021). That number has since risen to only 42.5% in 2019; 
internationally only 17.4% of e-waste was collected and recycled in 
2019.
[4]	 Ellen MacArthur Foundation, What is a circular economy?,  
https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/circular-economy/con-
cept (accessed: February 2021).
[5]	 H. J.  Thamhain, Paper presented at Project Management Insti-
tute Annual Seminars & Symposium, Houston, TX, Project Man-
agement Institute, Newtown Square, PA, https://www.pmi.org/
learning/library/phase-gate-processes-promising-complex-547 
(accessed: February 2021).
[6]	 M.  Kirschner, 2020-04-17, EE Times, “Environmental and Health 
Safety; Electronics and the Circular Economy” (accessed: February 
2021).
[7]	 D.  Adams, The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, Harmony Books, 
New York 1980.
[8]	 Directive 2011/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 8 June 2011 on the restriction of the use of certain haz-
ardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment (RoHS), 
https://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/rohs_eee/legis_en.htm 
(accessed: February 2021).
[9]	 Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, 
Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), 
https://echa.europa.eu/regulations/reach/legislation( 
accessed: 
February 2021).
[10]	 M.  Kirschner, “Thought Leadership series: Aligning the design 
and supply chains,” Electronic Buyers News, 23 April 2002, http://
designchainassociates.com/adsc.html
[11]	 See, for example, CEN-CENELEC Joint Technical Committee 
10 on Energy-related products - Material Efficiency Aspects for 
Ecodesign (CEN-CLC/JTC 10), A new series of European stand-
ards addresses the material efficiency of energy-related products,  
https://www.cencenelec.eu/news/brief_news/Pages/TN-2020-037.
aspx (accessed: February 2021).
[12]	 Dodd-Frank Act, Section 1502, p. 839, https://www.govinfo.gov/con-
tent/pkg/PLAW-111publ203/pdf/PLAW-111publ203.pdf 
(accessed: 
February 2021).
[13]	 Securities and Exchange Commission, 17 CFR Parts 240 and 249b 
[Release No. 34-67716; File No. S7-40-10], RIN 3235-AK84, Con-
flict Minerals, https://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2012/34-67716.pdf 
(accessed: February 2021).
[14]	 Novel brominated flame retardants – A review of their occur-
rence in indoor air, dust, consumer goods and food, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.126816 
(accessed: 
February 
2021).
[15]	 Examples of implementations of circular, closed-loop recycling 
in the electronics industry include HP’s truly circular, closed loop 
recycling system for reuse of the plastic for ink-jet cartridges over a 
decade ago; Dell’s claim of extensive closed-loop recycling of plas-
tics (presumably used for enclosures) and rare-earth magnets used 
in disk drives; and Apple’s use of recycled rare-earth elements in a 
specific iPhone component.
[16]	 M.  Kirschner, Presented at Project Workshop, “Manufacturing 
industry challenges and responses to EU, California, and other 
product-targeted environmental regulations”, May 2008.
Adv. Sustainable Syst. 2022, 6, 2100046
 23667486, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adsu.202100046 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/01/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2100046  (5 of 5)
www.advsustainsys.com
Michael Kirschner is an environmental compliance, sustainability, safety, and performance 
expert providing advice and expertise to manufacturers, governments, and others. Mike helps 
manufacturers understand, monitor, and assess environmental and health-related regulations 
and market requirements around the world that impact product design and the supply chain. 
Kirschner is currently serving on the ACS Green Chemistry Institute Advisory Board. He founded 
product life cycle and environmental consultancy Design Chain Associates, LLC (DCA) in 2001. 
Prior to DCA, Mike spent 20 years in engineering and engineering management roles in the 
electronics industry at manufacturers including Intel and Compaq.
Adv. Sustainable Syst. 2022, 6, 2100046
 23667486, 2022, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adsu.202100046 by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [17/01/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

