PHYSICS
On conservation laws in quantum mechanics
Yakir Aharonova,b,c,1, Sandu Popescud,1, and Daniel Rohrliche
aSchool of Physics and Astronomy, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel; bInstitute for Quantum Studies, Chapman University, Orange, CA 92866;
cDepartment of Physics, Schmid College of Science and Technology, Chapman University, Orange, CA 92866; dH. H. Wills Physics Laboratory, University of
Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TL, United Kingdom; and ePhysics Department, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba 8410501, Israel
Contributed by Yakir Aharonov, September 17, 2020 (sent for review January 14, 2020; reviewed by Lucien Hardy and Serge Massar)
We raise fundamental questions about the very meaning of con-
servation laws in quantum mechanics, and we argue that the
standard way of deﬁning conservation laws, while perfectly valid
as far as it goes, misses essential features of nature and has to be
revisited and extended.
quantum mechanics | conservation laws | fundamental aspects of
quantum mechanics
C
onservation laws, such as those for energy, momentum, and
angular momentum, are among the most fundamental laws
of nature. As such, they have been intensively studied and exten-
sively applied. First discovered in classical Newtonian mechanics,
they are at the core of all subsequent physical theories, nonrela-
tivistic and relativistic, classical and quantum. Here, we present a
paradoxical situation in which such quantities are seemingly not
conserved. Our results raise fundamental questions about the
very meaning of conservation laws in quantum mechanics, and
we argue that the standard way of deﬁning conservation laws,
while perfectly valid as far as it goes, misses essential features of
nature and has to be revisited and extended.
That paradoxical processes must arise in quantum mechanics
in connection with conservation laws is to be expected. Indeed,
on the one hand, physics is local: Causes and observable effects
must be locally related, in the sense that no observations in a
given space–time region can yield any information about events
that take place outside its past light cone.∗On the other hand,
measurable dynamical quantities are identiﬁed with eigenvalues
of operators, and their corresponding eigenfunctions are not, in
general, localized. Energy, for example, is a property of an entire
wave function. However, the law of conservation of energy is
often applied to processes in which a system with an extended
wave function interacts with a local probe. How can the local
probe “see” an extended wave function? What determines the
change in energy of the local probe? These questions lead us
to uncover quantum processes that seem, paradoxically, not to
conserve energy.
The present paper (which is based on a series of unpublished
results, ﬁrst described in refs. 3 and 4), presents the paradox and
discusses various ways to think of conservation laws, but does not
offer a resolution of the paradox.
Superoscillations
Essential to this paper is a mathematical structure we call “super-
oscillation.” Common wisdom assumes that no function can
oscillate faster than its fastest Fourier component. Yet, as we
show here, there is a large class of functions for which this
assumption fails. Indeed, we have found functions that oscil-
late, on a given interval, arbitrarily faster than the fastest Fourier
component. An example of such a function is the following:
f (x) =
1 + α
2
eix/N + 1 −α
2
e−ix/N
N
,
[1]
where α is a positive real number, |x| ≤πN , and N is a large
integer. An extensive discussion of the properties of this func-
tion, ﬁrst introduced in refs. 3 and 4, appears in refs. 5–7. To
display its basic properties, we ﬁrst write it, via the binomial
formula, as
f (x) =
N
X
n=0
c(n; N , α)ei(2n/N−1)x,
[2]
where the c(n; N , α) are constants;
c(n; N , α) = 1
2N

N
n

(1 + α)n(1 −α)N−n.
[3]
From 2, one can see that f (x) is a sum over wave numbers kn =
2n/N −1, ranging from −1 to 1.
Now, consider this function in the region |x| ≤L, where
L is of order O(N
1
2 −ϵ) with ϵ positive and arbitrarily small.
Here, we can approximate the exponentials by their ﬁrst-order
Taylor expansion and obtain (see also SI Appendix, section 1)
f (x) ≈
1 + α
2
(1 + i x
N ) + 1 −α
2
(1 −i x
N )
N
=

1 + iαx
N
N
≈eiαx.
[4]
Hence, in the restricted region, f (x) behaves as an oscillation of
wave number α. But, crucially, α need not be smaller than one.
By taking α ≫1, we ensure that in the region of validity of the
approximation, |x| ≤O(N
1
2 −ϵ), the function f (x) oscillates with
wave number α ≫1, although all its Fourier components have
wave numbers smaller than one. In other words, a superposi-
tion of long wavelengths, the longest being 2πN and the shortest
Signiﬁcance
Conservation laws are one of the most important aspects
of nature. As such, they have been intensively studied and
extensively applied, and are considered to be perfectly well
established. We, however, raise fundamental question about
the very meaning of conservation laws in quantum mechanics.
We argue that, although the standard way in which conserva-
tion laws are deﬁned in quantum mechanics is perfectly valid
as far as it goes, it misses essential features of nature and has
to be revisited and extended.
Author contributions: Y.A., S.P., and D.R. designed research; Y.A., S.P., and D.R. performed
research; and S.P. and D.R. wrote the paper.y
Reviewers: L.H., Perimeter Institute; and S.M., Universit´e Libre de Bruxelles.y
The authors declare no competing interest.y
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).y
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: yakir@post.tau.ac.il or S.Popescu@
bristol.ac.uk.y
This article contains supporting information online at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/
doi:10.1073/pnas.1921529118/-/DCSupplemental.y
Published December 28, 2020.
*This is not contradicted by the existence of the well-known nonlocal quantum effects
such as the Aharonov–Bohm effect (1) and violations of Bell-inequalities (2) as well as
Aharonov–Bohm type, which are local in this sense.
PNAS 2021 Vol. 118 No. 1 e1921529118
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921529118
|
1 of 7
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.200.88 on January 16, 2024 from IP address 159.2.200.88.

being 2π, can, in the region |x| ≤O(N
1
2 −ϵ), oscillate with the
much shorter wavelength 2π/α. Furthermore, the region of
these superoscilations can be made arbitrarily large and include
arbitrarily many wavelengths by taking N sufﬁciently large.
Note that there is no contradiction with the Fourier theorem,
since the region where this function is (almost) identical to an
oscillation of a frequency not contained by its Fourier decompo-
sition does not extend over the entire region where the function
is deﬁned.
Although it is not essential for our present paper, it is inter-
esting to note that outside the superoscillatory region, f (x)
increases exponentially. This is a generic property of functions
with superoscillatory regions.
The Experiment
The type of effect we describe here is common for all conserved
quantities that depend on the shape of the wave function all over
the space, including energy, momentum, and angular momen-
tum. Here, we will focus on energy, for which the proof is more
intuitive.
Here, we start by presenting the idea intuitively, in terms of
a relativistic model, where the arguments are simpler. However,
since relativistic quantum-ﬁeld theory has well-known technical
difﬁculties, we will in subsequent sections formulate a standard
nonrelativistic quantum model and do all of the calculations
there.
Consider a box of length 2πNa (where a is some unit length)
that contains a single photon in the state ψ(x)
ψ(x) = i
N (f (x/a) −f ∗(x/a))
[5]
with f (x) deﬁned in Eq. 4 and α ≫1. Here, N is a normaliza-
tion factor. ψ(x) has properties similar to f , but it obeys the
boundary conditions ψ(−πNa) = ψ(πNa) = 0 at the walls of the
box (Fig. 1).
From now on, however, for simplicity, we take a = 1, and we
work in the usual units ℏ= c = 1.
Given the relation between wavelength, frequency and energy
for the photon, the decomposition 2 shows that the photon is in a
superposition of different energy eigenstates with wave numbers
kn = (2n/N −1)
[6]
all smaller than or equal to one (in absolute value), correspond-
ing to energy eigenvalues
En = |kn|
[7]
with the maximal energy Emax = 1. On the other hand, we also
know that in the region |x| ≤L = O(N
1
2 −ϵ), around the center
of the box, the wave function of the photon resembles that of a
monochromatic photon with wave number α, hence, of energy
E = α ≫Emax = 1.
[8]
In other words, in the box, we have a low-energy photon, which
in the center of the box looks like a high-energy photon.
Suppose now that a mechanism that we will call the “opener”
opens the box in the center and inserts a mirror, such that if the
photon hits the mirror, it comes out of the box (as in Fig. 1). The
mirror is left inside for a time T, then it is extracted out of the
box, and the box is closed. The photon could come out of the box
only if initially is situated at a distance not larger than T from
the mirror; otherwise, it cannot get there while the box is open.
The probability for this to happen is at most
R T
−T |ψ(x)|2dx.
Let now the time T be smaller (in units of speed of light c = 1)
than L, the length of the region of superoscillations, and suppose
1/α
1
A
B
Fig. 1.
(A) A photon in the box in the specially prepared low-energy quan-
tum state which, in the central region, oscillates with a spatial frequency
greater than that of any Fourier components (B). As the opener is passing
by, it opens the box and extracts the photon, if the photon is there. The
shape of the wave function is not accurate, but simply illustrative; the true
wave function is exponentially larger away from the center and has a more
complicated shape.
that at the end of the experiment, we ﬁnd the photon out of the
box. What is its energy?
Naively, we would think that the emerging photon must have
one of the energies En = |2n/N −1| ≤1 that it had originally in
the box—after all, reﬂection from a mirror doesn’t change the
spectrum of light. On second thought, however, we realize that
this cannot be so. Indeed, the box was open only for a time T.
Because any signal propagates, at most, with velocity of light,
only information about the wave function in a region, at most,
of distance T from the origin can inﬂuence what happens at the
origin. But we took T < L, i.e., smaller than the region where
the wave function behaves essentially indistinguishably from a
plane wave of high energy E. Hence, the photon that emerges
from the box must be in a state which is identical to that in
which a genuine photon of energy E would emerge from the
box. Indeed, if this would not be so, we would know that the
function far away is different from that of the genuine pho-
ton and contradict special relativity. But for a genuine photon
of energy E, it is trivial to see what happens: The mirror just
reﬂects the photon out of the box, but it doesn’t signiﬁcantly
change its frequency and energy. All that happens to the wave
function of the genuine energy E photon is that its wave func-
tion is chopped into a wave-train of length T by our closing the
2 of 7
|
PNAS
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921529118
Aharonov et al.
On conservation laws in quantum mechanics
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.200.88 on January 16, 2024 from IP address 159.2.200.88.

PHYSICS
box after time T. Hence, if a genuine photon of energy E = α
emerged from the box, its energy spectrum would have a peak
at energy α and a spread in energy of 1/T. By increasing N , we
can increase T and, hence, reduce by as much as we want the
disturbance produced by the ﬁnite opening time of box; the pho-
ton thus emerges as close as we want to its initial energy E. We
thus conclude that when our “fake high-energy” photon emerges
from the box, it must have energy E exactly as the genuine
high-energy photon, and not the low energies it originally had
(Figs. 2 and 3).
To summarize, when the photon emerges from the box, it has
much higher energy than it initially had. Where did the extra
energy come from? This is the question that concerns us in
this paper.
The Paradox
Inside the box, the photon was in a superposition of different
energy eigenstates, all smaller than one, and out it emerges with
the much higher energy α. Where does the extra energy come
from? A ﬁrst guess is that the energy comes from the mecha-
nism used for extracting the photon. Indeed, we need to open
the box, insert the mirror, and then take out the mirror and close
the box. This mechanism, which we call opener, effectively sub-
jects the photon to a time-dependent Hamiltonian, and such a
Hamiltonian need not conserve energy.
To put it differently, we can look at the total Hamiltonian,
describing the photon and the opener. The total Hamiltonian
is time-independent, since it describes the total system, with no
parts left outside; the time dependence seen by the photon comes
from the time evolution of the opener and its interaction with
the photon. The total energy is conserved for time-independent
Hamiltonians. Thus, we are tempted to say, all that happens is
that the opener and the photon exchange energy: When the pho-
ton emerges from the box, and, as we proved, has higher energy
than it had inside the box, the opener must have lost the same
amount—a trivial case of energy exchange.
Fig. 2.
The initial and ﬁnal distributions of the energy of the photon. Ini-
tially, it was a superposition of low energies and strictly no energy higher
than one. Finally, a peak at energy α appears, which corresponds to the
extracted photons.
We now arrive at the crux of the problem. Although this expla-
nation is the most natural, it is wrong: The photon could not have
gotten its energy from the opener. The reason is again causality,
as we shall now see.
Consider the case of a monochromatic high-energy photon of
energy α. When this photon emerges from the box, its energy
is unchanged (up to ﬂuctuations of order 1/T). Hence, in this
case, the opener does not give it any energy. But then the opener
cannot give energy to the fake photon, either.
Indeed, recall that the entire difference between the high-
energy photon of energy α and our specially prepared low-energy
photon lies in regions situated further from the center than L;
this information cannot arrive at the opener during the time of
the experiment, T < L. Immediately after the experiment is over,
we can measure the energy of the opener. Since the opener is
localized in a small region (around the center of the box), we
have immediate access to it and can measure its energy in a
short time; the measurement can be ﬁnished long before infor-
mation from |x| ≥L can arrive. If by measuring the opener, we
could determine whether the box contained the original low-
energy photon or the monochromatic high-energy photon, we
would violate relativistic causality. Thus, since the opener didn’t
lose energy when the box contained a high-energy photon, it can-
not lose energy in the case of the low-energy photon either! We
must therefore conclude that the extra energy did not come from
the opener.
This is the paradox. The photon emerged from the box with
energy much higher than it had inside, but the energy did not
come from the opener, the only other system in the problem.
Energy seems not to be conserved.
Energy Conservation
Faced with this paradox, one can respond in various ways. The
conventional response is that there is no problem whatsoever,
and there cannot ever be. In quantum mechanics, the standard
formulation of a conservation law is that the probability dis-
tribution of the conserved variable over the entire ensemble
should not change. This law applies to any time-independent
Hamiltonian. On this basis, there should be absolutely no energy
nonconservation in our example, either. And, of course, from
this point of view, there is none. Indeed, in the preceding sec-
tions, we focused on what happens when the photon emerges
from the box. But it is also possible (and actually far more prob-
able) that the photon does not emerge from the box. It happens,
because the wave function of the photon extends all over the
box, so the photon has a nonzero (and, in fact, quite large) prob-
ability to be far from the central region. If so, it cannot reach
the opening while the box is open; therefore, it cannot leave the
box. To see standard energy conservation at work, we must con-
sider these cases as well. What we ﬁnd in these cases is that,
again, the opener didn’t lose any energy (since it did not collide
with the photon), but the photon remains in the box with lower
energy (as the wave function loses its superoscillatory piece)—
again, a paradox. Considering these cases as well, we ﬁnd that, as
expected, the probability distribution of the total energy (photon
plus opener) did not change.
But—and this is the main point of our paper—we would like to
argue that the standard formulation of conservation laws, though
absolutely correct as far as it goes, is simply not enough. The
standard conservation law is statistical and says nothing about
individual cases. We would like to argue, however, that it is legit-
imate to ask what happened in a particular individual case. In
our example, suppose we have in the box a photon of energy
of order 1 eV (more precisely, a photon in a superposition of
various energies, but absolutely none of them larger than 1 eV).
Yet, when we open the box, the photon emerges with energy of
order of 1 GeV. We should deﬁnitely be entitled to ask where
the energy came from.
Aharonov et al.
On conservation laws in quantum mechanics
PNAS
|
3 of 7
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921529118
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.200.88 on January 16, 2024 from IP address 159.2.200.88.

Fig. 3.
The initial and ﬁnal probability distribution PΩ(E) of the energy
of the opener for the cases when the photon emerges from the box. One
would expect the ﬁnal energy of the opener to be lower than the initial, to
compensate for the increase of the energy of the photon, but this does not
happen; instead, the ﬁnal energy distribution is the same as the initial (up
to small perturbations due to the truncation of the photon wave packet).
What we showed in our example is that this energy cannot
come from the mechanism that extracts the photon from the box.
Since this is the single other system in the problem, we are faced
with energy nonconservation in this individual case. So we do
have a problem that needs to be explained.
Furthermore, we also argue that the standard formulation is
not only limited in that it cannot address individual cases, it is
also unsatisfactory in the meaning of the story it tells.
Suppose that we repeat our experiment a large number of
times. Consider a large number of boxes, each box containing
just one single photon, prepared in the special low-energy state
ψ(x) of Eq. 5, each box having its associated opener. In some
experiments, the photon comes out of the box; in others, the
photon remains inside. In each case, the energy of the opener
remains unchanged (apart from ﬂuctuations of the order 1/T ≪
E −Emax). Since the photons that emerge from their boxes have
increased energy, for the average energy to remain constant, the
photons that stay in their boxes must be left with lower energy.
But what this effectively means is that the photons that emerged
from their boxes got their energy from the photons in the other
boxes. But the experiments are completely independent; they
may even happen at different times and in different places.
Nevertheless, the photons which stay inside their boxes supply
energy to the ones that emerge from the other boxes! Clearly,
the idea is absurd, and it cannot be an acceptable resolution of
our paradox.
Another possible response to the paradox is to argue that it
makes no sense to talk about the energy of a photon as long as
it is in a superposition of different energy eigenstates. However,
we note that the photon had zero probability to have any energy
larger than Emax = 1, yet it emerges with the high energy E ≫
Emax. So the paradox of the photon’s extra energy remains.
As noted in the introduction, we do not offer any resolution
here; we leave the paradox open. But below we provide more
details. First, we present an explicit model; then, we analyze in
more detail the standard energy conservation as applied to our
situation. Although there are no contradictions here, the speciﬁc
way in which the energy is conserved in the statistical ensemble
is extremely unusual and instructive.
Explicit Model
We now give an explicit model. Since relativistic quantum-ﬁeld
theory has well-known technical difﬁculties, we will formulate
a nonrelativistic model. The experiment is the same, the only
difference being that, instead of a photon, the box contains a
nonrelativistic particle. Of course, we are now no longer allowed
to use relativistic causality arguments, and we will prove our
statements by explicit calculations. Nevertheless, the intuition for
the nonrelativistic model is exactly the same as in the relativistic
case, since also nonrelativistic quantum mechanics allows ﬁnite
time intervals in which a part of a wave function can act, to a
good approximation, independently of the rest (8).
Consider the following Hamiltonian to model our experiment:
H = p2
2 + V (x)1 + σz
2
+ pq + π
2 g(x)δ(q)σx.
[9]
The low-energy particle in the box has coordinate x, momentum
p, and mass m = 1, while the opener is modeled by a particle with
coordinate q and momentum pq. V (x) is an inﬁnite square-well
potential which represents the box: It is zero inside the box (i.e.,
for |x| ≤πN ), and it is inﬁnite outside.
We let our particle have an internal degree of freedom, a
“spin,” which determines whether the particle is in the box or
free. The states |↑⟩and |↓⟩are eigenstates of σz. When the spin
is |↑⟩, the potential V (x) conﬁnes the particle inside the box;
when the spin is |↓⟩, the particle is free, since the term in 1 + σz
multiplying V (x) vanishes.
The opener’s free Hamiltonian is pq, while the last term in H
describes the particle–opener interaction. The interaction takes
place when the opener is at q = 0; at all other times, the opener is
free. The opener moves at constant speed ˙q = 1 without spread-
ing, both when it is free and while the interaction takes place.
The opener moves from q < 0 where it is free, through the inter-
action region, q = 0, to q > 0, where it is free again. (One may
recognize the opener as the model of an ideal clock that turns
on and off an interaction when the “clock time” indicated by the
pointer q is q = 0.)
The interaction term is designed to release the particle if it is
situated in a window around the center of the box. This works
as follows. The operator σx can release the trapped particle by
ﬂipping |↑⟩to |↓⟩. But the particle is released only if it is situ-
ated in a window around the center of the box. The window is
determined by g(x), which is zero outside a window of size L,
of order O(N
1
2 −ϵ), centered around x = 0, and g(x) = 1 inside.
The interaction term is, thus, nonzero only when the particle is
in this window; hence, the particle can be released only if it is
situated here. (Note that this toy model differs slightly from the
example in the previous sections: There, the window was taken
to be small, but open for a time long enough for a wave-train
of length L to emerge through it. Here, the window is open for
an inﬁnitesimal time, but is large enough to let a wave-train of
length L emerge from it.)
Consider now that at time t = 0, we prepare the trapped
particle in a state Ψ(x, 0) |↑⟩with Ψ(x, 0) equal to our spe-
cial state ψ(x) given by Eq. 5. In the region |x| ≤L with L
of order O(N
1
2 −ϵ) , the wave function Ψ(x, 0) looks like a
high-energy state. In relativistic quantum mechanics, when the
particle is situated in this region, its time evolution is iden-
tical to that of a high-energy particle, since the information
that this is not a true high-energy particle is contained only in
4 of 7
|
PNAS
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921529118
Aharonov et al.
On conservation laws in quantum mechanics
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.200.88 on January 16, 2024 from IP address 159.2.200.88.

PHYSICS
faraway regions of space, and it takes a ﬁnite time to arrive in
the center of the box. But, as we mentioned above, and as we
show in detail in SI Appendix, section 2, the same is (approx-
imately) true also in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics. That
is, in the region of superoscillations, |x| ≤O(N
1
2 −ϵ), the time
evolution of the particle (in the absence of the interaction with
the opener) is Ψ(x, t) = e−iα2t/2Ψ(x, 0)—i.e., it just accumu-
lates the same time-dependent phase as the bona ﬁde energy
eigenstate sin(αx). This approximation is valid for any time T ≤
O(N 1/2−δ) with δ positive and arbitrary small, and δ > ϵ. During
this time, in the limit of large N , information from the region
|x| ≥
√
N , where the wave function differs signiﬁcantly from the
high-energy plane wave, cannot reach the region of superoscil-
lations. It is during this time that we extract the particle from
the box.
To ensure that the opener opens the box during this time win-
dow, we choose its initial state φ(q) to have support only for q
within −T ≤q ≤0.
We now have to calculate the time evolution of the particle–
opener system
e−iHTφ(q)ψ(x) |↑⟩= Θ↑(q, x) |↑⟩+ Θ↓(q, x) |↓⟩.
[10]
As noted above, if the particle is found in the central part of the
box, after the interaction with the opener, it gets released; oth-
erwise, it remains inside the box. This corresponds to the ﬁnal
state 10 being a superposition of two terms, one with the spin
↓and one ↑, respectively. (Note that Θ↑and Θ↓are not nor-
malized; the norm of Θ↓is much smaller than the one of Θ↑
since the probability of the particle to emerge from the box is
much smaller than the probability to remain inside.) Here, we
are interested in the case when the particle is released. The
combined released-particle-and-opener state is approximately
(SI Appendix, section 2)
Θ↑(q, x) =
Z
e−i α2
2 Tφ(q −T)e−i( k2
2 −α2
2 )qh(k)eikxdk,
[11]
with
h(k) = 1
2i
Z L
−L
dx ′(ei(α−k)x′ −ei(−α−k)x′).
[12]
An essential thing to note about Eq. 11 is that it is identical (up to
normalization) to what we would have obtained had we started
with the particle in the energy eigenstate sin(αx) instead of the
“fake” state ψ(x) of Eq. 5.
To see the meaning of Eq. 11, we ﬁrst note that, since the
particle is now free, the energy eigenstates are the plane waves
eikx. Hence, as far as the particle is concerned, Eq. 11 is actually
the decomposition of the state into energy eigenstates. Every-
thing else being phase factors, the probability of the released
particle to have momentum k corresponding to energy k 2/2 is
|h(k)|2. But all we have in 12 are two truncated wave-trains,
corresponding to the (untruncated) plane waves e±iαx. Thus,
the most probable ﬁnal plane-wave state is a free particle in a
superposition of eigenstates of momentum ±α and energy α2
2 .
The particle could also emerge with other energies k2
2 ̸= α2
2 , but
with smaller probability. The possibility of coming out with these
energies is due to the truncation of the wave-train to |x| ≤L.
Taking N larger, we can make L larger and, thus, decrease
these probabilities, relative to the probability of having energy
α2/2, as much as we want. As noted before, this is exactly
what would have happened had we started in the high-energy
eigenstate sin(αx).
One’s natural suspicion is that when the particle emerges from
the box with energy α2/2, which is much larger than the maximal
energy it had inside the box, the additional energy of the emitted
particle comes from the opener. But the energy distribution of
the opener before and after the interaction is the same; φ(q) is
merely displaced, as if there had been no interaction. This is the
paradox.
Note also that when the particle emerges with an energy
slightly different from α2/2, because of the truncation of the
wave packet, the opener supplies this small difference (mathe-
matically expressed by the q-dependent phase accumulated by
the opener), but not the difference between the true low energies
that the particle originally had and the high energy with which it
emerges.
The Standard Energy Conservation
As we discussed before, for any time-independent Hamiltonian,
energy is always conserved in the standard sense—that is, the
probability distribution of the total energy is time-independent.
Since this is a theorem, it holds in our case as well; our paradox
appears only at the level of individual cases. Yet, it is worth look-
ing in more detail at the standard account of energy conservation
as it applies in our case. As our case has interesting characteris-
tics, the standard account of energy conservation turns out to be
interesting as well.
The total Hamiltonian is
H = Hp + HΩ+ Hint
[13]
where Hp and HΩrepresent the free Hamiltonians of the particle
and opener, respectively, and Hint is the interaction Hamiltonian.
Energy conservation, strictly speaking, refers to the distribu-
tion of the eigenvalues E of H , which includes the interaction
term. However, although the interaction Hamiltonian is present
at all times, the system is prepared such that the particle and
the opener interact only for a ﬁnite time. Indeed, they evolve
essentially free, then interact for a ﬁnite time, and then continue
the free evolution. Hence, long before the interaction and long
afterward, we can ignore Hint and say that the probability distri-
bution of the free Hamiltonian, Hp + HΩ, is conserved. That is,
the distributions of the total energies Hp + HΩlong before the
interaction, and long after, must be the same.
The total energy long before the interaction and long after it
is simply the sum of the free energies, E = Ep + EΩ. With this
deﬁnition, the standard energy-conservation relation is
P tot
i (E) = P tot
f (E)
[14]
where P tot denotes the probability distribution of the total
energy, and the indices i and f stand for “initial” and “ﬁnal.”
Note that all of the probability distributions discussed here are
over the entire ensemble, including both the cases in which the
particle emerged out of the box and the cases when it didn’t.
Before the interaction, there is no correlation between the
energies of the particle and opener—i.e., the initial joint prob-
ability P p,Ω
i
(Ep, EΩ) of their energies is the product of their
respective individual probability distributions
P p,Ω
i
(EpEΩ) = P p
i (Ep)P Ω
i (EΩ).
[15]
Correspondingly, the initial total energy distribution is given by
P tot
i (E) =
Z
P p
i (E ′)P Ω
i (E −E ′)dE ′.
[16]
After the interaction, it is again the case that the probability
distributions of the particle and opener are uncorrelated. More
precisely, as discussed in The Experiment and Explicit Model, the
truncation of the emerging wave packet leads to some correla-
tions between the energy of the particle and the opener (both
Aharonov et al.
On conservation laws in quantum mechanics
PNAS
|
5 of 7
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921529118
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.200.88 on January 16, 2024 from IP address 159.2.200.88.

when the particle emerges out of the box as well as when it
remains in the box), but these correlations can be made as small
as we want by taking the length 2πN of the box long enough.
Hence,
P p,Ω
f
(EpEΩ) = P p
f (Ep)P Ω
f (EΩ)
[17]
and the ﬁnal total energy distribution is
P tot
f (E) =
Z
P p
f (E ′)P Ω
f (E −E ′)dE ′.
[18]
The main feature of our experiment is that the energy distribu-
tion of the opener doesn’t change. Indeed, this feature remains
also when we look separately at the cases in which the particle
remains in the box and the ones in which the particle is emitted.
The particle remains in the box if originally it was far from the
central region; in this case, it doesn’t hit the mirror, so the mir-
ror (and its entire moving mechanism) doesn’t change energy.
On the other hand, when the particle is in the central region,
it collides with the mirror. However, as we emphasized when
we analyzed the paradox, the mirror-energy distribution cannot
change its energy distribution because, by causality, it must act
identically to the case in which a true high-energy particle was
in the box; just as the high-energy particle just emerges with-
out changing its energy, and thus leaving the mirror’s energy
unchanged, so must the fake high-energy particle. Hence,
P Ω
i (E) = P Ω
f (E).
[19]
On the other hand, the ﬁnal probability distribution for the
energy of the particle is different from the initial distribution,
P p
f ̸= P p
i . Indeed, initially the particle was in a superposition of
energy eigenstates all smaller than 1 (Fig. 2). After the interac-
tion, however, there are cases when the particle emerges from
the box and has high energy, much higher than 1, while in other
cases, it remains inside the box and has low energies, and the low
energies average to something less than the original average in
order to conserve the total energy average.
All this leads to a surprising situation: The distribution of the
energy of the particle changes without being accompanied by a
corresponding change in the distribution of the energy of the
opener, yet the distribution of the total energy is conserved.
Although the above situation is surprising, it is mathematically
consistent, and it has remarkable implications. Denoting the con-
served distributions P tot
i (E) = P tot
f (E) = P tot(E) and P Ω
i (E) =
P Ω
f (E) = P Ω(E), we obtain
P tot(E) =
Z
P p
i (E ′)P Ω(E −E ′)dE ′
=
Z
P p
f (E ′)P Ω(E −E ′)dE ′.
[20]
By making the Fourier transform of the convolutions 16 and 18,
we obtain
˜P p
i (τ)˜P Ω(τ) = ˜P p
f (τ)˜P Ω(τ)
[21]
where, for each index, ˜P(τ) =
R
eiEτP(E)dE is the Fourier
transform of P(E).
Eq. 21 can have a solution with ˜P p
i (τ) ̸= ˜P p
f (τ) if and only if
for some values of τ, the Fourier transform ˜P Ω(τ) is zero, and
the changes in ˜P γ
i (τ) are conﬁned to these τ values.
To understand the signiﬁcance of the above results, we ﬁrst
note the general meaning of the Fourier transform of the energy
distribution. Consider a particle prepared in the state |Ψ(t)⟩
and evolving according to a Hamiltonian H . Then (SI Appendix,
section 4),
˜P(τ) = ⟨Ψ(t)|Ψ(t + τ)⟩.
[22]
Note that since the Hamiltonian is time-independent, ˜P(τ) is
independent of t; indeed, ⟨Ψ(t)|Ψ(t + τ)⟩is independent of t.
In our case, we want the opener–particle interaction to take
place only for a ﬁnite time: The box must be opened, the mirror
inserted, then extracted, and the box closed, all before informa-
tion from remote places in the box can reach the opening. In our
explicit model, the opener must, thus, move from far away, going
from an initial state in which there is no interaction to an orthog-
onal state in which there is interaction, and then again to a state
with no interaction. This is accomplished by moving through a
long sequence of orthogonal states both before and after the
interaction (as one can explicitly see in the model). Hence, since
the interaction should only take a ﬁnite time T, it must be
the case that the wave function φ of the opener, as it evolves,
must obey
⟨φ(t)|φ(t + τ)⟩= 0
[23]
for any time τ > T. Since 23 is independent of t, we can take
t to be far in the past, when the opener evolved under its free
Hamiltonian HΩ. Hence, the fact that the interaction takes only
a ﬁnite amount of time implies that ˜P Ω(τ) = 0 for τ > T, and
this enables the strange behavior of the energy distributions that
characterizes our problem.
Note that the opener has the role of a catalyst: Its energy dis-
tribution doesn’t change, yet, without it, the particle’s energy
distribution could not change, because the energy of the parti-
cle would then be the total energy, and changing its distribution
would violate the standard energy-conservation law.
Modular Energy Exchange
It is interesting to examine further the changes in the energy
distributions. Since neither the total energy distribution nor the
opener energy distributions change, it is clear that the average
energy of the particle cannot change: Indeed, both before the
interaction and after
⟨H ⟩= ⟨Hp⟩+ ⟨HΩ⟩;
[24]
since ⟨H ⟩and ⟨HΩ⟩are constant, so is ⟨Hp⟩.
Furthermore, given that both initially and ﬁnally the energy
distributions of the opener and particle are uncorrelated, and
that the distributions of total energy and opener energy do not
change, one can easily derive the fact that all of the moments of
the particle energy distribution ⟨H n
p ⟩are unchanged.
We thus arrive at another remarkable conclusion: The energy
distribution of the particle changes, although none of its
moments change.
At ﬁrst, it seems that something must be wrong—indeed, it
is generally assumed that the moments of a distribution com-
pletely deﬁne it. This, however, is not so. It is actually perfectly
possible for a distribution to change without any of its moments
changing. In fact, in quantum mechanics, this behavior charac-
terizes some of the most basic phenomena [such as momentum
conservation in the two-slit experiment (9–13)]; and many of
the “mysteries” of quantum mechanics have this mathematical
effect at their core. This behavior generally stems from deep rea-
sons connected with causality and nonlocality—as our present
example illustrates.
So, if none of the moments of the particle’s energy distribution
change, what changes? It is the average of observables that we
call “modular energies” (11, 12), as we now show.
Consider the operator eiHτ; we call this operator modular
energy since it depends only on the energy modulo 2π/τ. Each τ
deﬁnes a different modular energy.
Since H is a conserved operator, so are its associated modular
energies:
6 of 7
|
PNAS
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921529118
Aharonov et al.
On conservation laws in quantum mechanics
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.200.88 on January 16, 2024 from IP address 159.2.200.88.

PHYSICS
⟨eiHτ⟩i = ⟨eiHτ⟩f .
[25]
As noted in The Standard Energy Conservation, long before
the interaction and long afterward, we can replace the full
Hamiltonian by the free part, so that
⟨ei(Hp+HΩ)τ⟩i = ⟨ei(Hp+HΩ)τ⟩f .
[26]
Since there are no correlations between the states of the particle
and the opener either before the interaction or after it, from 26,
we obtain that
⟨eiHpτ⟩i⟨eiHΩτ⟩i = ⟨eiHpτ⟩f ⟨eiHΩτ⟩f .
[27]
And since the energy distribution of the opener doesn’t change,
the averages of its modular energy for every τ don’t change
either—i.e., ⟨eiHΩτ⟩i = ⟨eiHΩτ⟩f . Hence, the only changes in the
energy distributions of the particle are those of averages of
the modular energy corresponding to those values of τ for which
the average of the corresponding modular energy of the opener
is zero. (This statement is just Eq. 23 stated differently.) Here, in
particular, we have
⟨eiHΩτ⟩= 0
[28]
for every τ > T. This means that for τ > T, the modular energy
of the particle may change.
Note the interesting way in which the conservation of modular
energy works. The total modular energy is conserved, so if one of
two interacting systems changes its modular energy, this must be
accompanied by changes in the modular energy of the other, yet
the average modular energy of the particle (for some τ) changes,
while the corresponding modular energy of the opener doesn’t.
This is possible due to the fact that, as opposed to energy, which
is an additive conserved quantity, its modular part is nonadditive
but multiplicative, and the modular energy of one of the sys-
tems, namely, the opener, is completely uncertain, which makes
its average zero.
In concluding this section, we would like to emphasize that the
whole issue of exchange of modular energy (or momentum) with-
out any (signiﬁcant) exchange of any of its moments (or where
the exchange of the moments plays a trivial role) is a general
characteristic of phenomena in which a localized probe inter-
acts with a system in an extended wave function. At the same
time, the particular phenomena described in this paper (the high
energy of the particle that emerges from the box) depend on the
particular form 1 of the extended wave function. The possibil-
ity of exchange of modular energy without changes in any of the
moments of the energy distribution simply opens a window of
opportunity, through which the phenomena described here can
manifest themselves. In other words, the exchange of modular
energy without changes in the moments of the energy distribu-
tion is just a necessary, but not a sufﬁcient, condition for the
phenomena we describe here.
Discussion
To summarize, in our paper, we present an effect that raises
questions about what we actually mean by conservation laws.
The standard approach is statistical, and it is good as far as it
goes. However, our effect begs the question of what happens
in individual cases. A particle, prepared in a superposition of
low-energy states and with no high-energy component whatso-
ever, comes out of a box with great energy. It is legitimate to
ask where the energy comes from. We showed that the mecha-
nism used for extracting the particle—the only other system in
the problem—did not provide this energy, so we are left with
a puzzle.
Our example concerned energy conservation. It is, however,
clear that one can construct examples involving conservation
of other quantities such as momentum or angular momentum
(SI Appendix, section 5). The phenomenon is, therefore, a gen-
eral one. Thus, we argue that the conservation laws of quantum
mechanics must be revisited and extended. Without doing this,
we will be missing a large part of the message that quantum
mechanics is telling us.
Data Availability. There are no data underlying this work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. Y.A. was supported by Israel Science Foundation
Grant 1311/14 and also the Israeli Center of Research Excellence Excellence
Center “Circle of Light” and the German–Israeli Project Cooperation. S.P.
was supported by the Institute for Quantum Studies at Chapman Univer-
sity; European Research Council Advanced Grant Nonlocality in Space and
Time; and the Institute for Theoretical Studies, ETH Zurich. D.R. was sup-
ported by John Templeton Foundation Project 43297 and Israel Science
Foundation Grant 1190/13. The opinions expressed in this publication are
the authors’ and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of any of the supporting
foundations.
1. Y. Aharonov, D. Bohm, Signiﬁcance of electromagnetic potentials in quantum theory.
Phys. Rev. 115, 485–491 (1959).
2. J. S. Bell, On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox. Physics 1, 195–200 (1964).
3. Y. Aharonov, S. Popescu, D. Rohrlich, How a soft photon can emit a hard photon
(TAUP 1847-90, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 1991).
4. S. Popescu, “Multiple-time and nonlocal measurements,” PhD thesis, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel (1991).
5. M. V. Berry, S. Popescu, Evolution of quantum superoscillations and optical
superresolution without evanescent waves. J. Phys. Math. Gen. 39, 6965 (2006).
6. M. V. Berry, “Faster than Fourier” in Quantum Coherence and Reality: In Cele-
bration of the 60th Birthday of Yakir Aharonov, J. S. Anandan, J. L. Safko, Eds.
(World-Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 1994), pp. 55–65.
7. Y. Aharonov, F. Colombo, I. Sabadini, D. C. Struppa, J. Tollaksen, Superoscillating
sequences as solutions of generalized Schr ¨odinger equations. J. Math. Pure Appl. 103,
522 (2015).
8. E. H. Lieb, D. W. Robinson, The ﬁnite group velocity of quantum spin systems.
Commun. Math. Phys. 28, 251 (1972).
9. S.
Popescu,
Dynamical
quantum
non-locality.
Nat.
Phys.
6,
151–153
(2010).
10. Y. Aharonov, “Nonlocal phenomena and the Aharonov-Bohm effect” in Foundations
of Quantum Mechanics in Light of New Technology [Proceedings of the International
Symposium, Tokyo, August 1983], S. Kamefuchi et al., Eds. (Physical Society of Japan,
Tokyo, Japan), pp. 10–19. (1984)
11. Y. Aharonov, H. Pendleton, A. Petersen, Modular variables in quantum theory. Int. J.
Theor. Phys. 2, 213–230 (1969).
12. Y.
Aharonov,
D.
Rohrlich,
Quantum
Paradoxes:
Quantum
The-
ory
for
the
Perplexed
(Wiley
VCH,
Weinheim,
Germany,
2005),
chaps. 5–6.
13. A. J. Short, Momentum changes due to quantum localization. Fortschr. Phys. 51, 498–
503 (2003).
Aharonov et al.
On conservation laws in quantum mechanics
PNAS
|
7 of 7
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921529118
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 159.2.200.88 on January 16, 2024 from IP address 159.2.200.88.

