
The International Library ofPsychology
ALFRED ADLER: THE
PATTERN OF LIFE
Founded by C. K. Ogden

The International Library ofPsychology
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
In 21 Volumes
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
XIII
XIV
XV
XVI
XVII
XVIII
XIX
XX
XXI
The Practice and Theory of Individual
Psychology
The Neurotic Constitution
Duality
Problems of Personality
An Introduction to Individual Psychology
The Psychology of Alfred Adler and the
Development of the Child
Personality
The Art of Interrogation
Appraising Personality
Physique and Character
The Psychology of Men of Genius
Handreading
Gn Shame and the Search for Identity
ABC of Adler's Psychology
Alfred Adler: Problems of Neurosis
Principles of Experimental Psychology
The Psychology of Character
The Hands of Children
The Nature of Intelligence
Alfred Adler: The Pattern of Life
The Psychology of Intelligence and Will
Adler
Adler
Bradley
Camphell et al
Dreikurs
Ganz
Gordon
Harttilton
Harrower
Kretschmer
Kretschmer
La/fan
Lynd
Mairet
Mairet
Pieron
Rohack
Spier
Thurstone
Wolfe
Wyatt
I

ALFRED ADLER: THE
PATTERN OF LIFE
Edited by W BERAN WOLFE

First published in 1931 by
Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co., Ltd.
Reprinted in 1999, 2001 by
Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, axon, OX 14 4RN
Transferred to Digital Printing 2006
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
© 1931 Editorial Selection and Introductory Essay, W Beran
Wolfe, Chapters Alfred Adler
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced
or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means,
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying
and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
The publishers have made every effort to contact authors/copyright holders
of the works reprinted in the International Library ofPsychology.
This has not been possible in every case, however, and we would
welcome correspondence from those individuals/companies
we have been unable to trace.
These reprints are taken from original copies of each book. In many cases
the condition of these originals is not perfect. The publisher has gone to
great lengths to ensure the quality of these reprints, but wishes to point
out that certain characteristics of the original copies will, of necessity, be
apparent in reprints thereof.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book
is available from the British Library
Alfred Adler: The Pattern of Life
ISBN 0415-21070-4
Individual Differences: 21 Volumes
ISBN 0415-21130-1
The International Library of Psychology: 204 Volumes
ISBN 0415-19132-7
Printed and bound by CPI Antony Rowe, Eastbourne

CONTENTS
ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
An Introductory Essay by the Editor
A GESTURE OF THE WHOLE BODY
~rATERNAL DOMINATION
THE ROAD TO CRIME
THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
THE FEAR OF GROWING UP
THE REBELLIOUS
tc BAD" BOY
THE HUNGER STRIKE
FOLLOW THE LEADER
THE TOO DOCILE CHILD
LAYING THE NEUROTIC FOUNDATIONS
CONGENITAL FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS
THE TYRANNY OF ILLNESS
PAGE
7
47
64
go
1°7
132
I48
I69
192
2°7
227
243
255

This page intentionally left blank

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
An Introductory Essay by the Editor
T
HE art of understanding human nature is the art
of understanding the dynamic patterns of human
conduct. Alfred Adler has given us the key to this
understanding in his monumental contributions to
modern psychology, but before the compilation of this
volume of case histories the student of the methods of
Individual Psychology has been compelled to search
for his case material among the German publications
of Adler and his pupils. Many of these published cases
deal with conditions germane to continental environ-
ments, but puzzling to American readers.
The prin-
ciples and practice of Individual Psychology, however,
are universall~yvalid in their application, as this volume
of purely American cases demonstrates. The essential
unity of all human conduct is amply adduced by the
success of the Viennese psychologist and educator in
the analysis and treatment of these cases brought to
his clinic, without previous selection or limitation, at
the New School of Social Research, during his lecture
season of Ig2g. They are typical of cases found in
the schools and child-guidance clinics of every large
American city. Some of the cases were brought in by
New York physicians, some by psychologists, but the
majority by New York school teachers who were
puzzled by problem children under their care.
All of the cases were worked up more or less
thoroughly according to an outline for the study of
7

8
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
problem children written originally for the child-
guidance clinics which Dr. Adler established in Vienna.
Although for the sake of brevity tile headings have not
been incorporated in t~e text, the arrangement will be
obvious to any student who desires to prepare a case
history for study. The method of presentation was as
follows: a physician or teacher who had studied a
problem child prepared the history according to the
protocol.
Dr. Adler, without having seen the child or
previously discussing the case with the teacher, read
the case history, sentence by sentence, making his
deductions as- the case progressed. Occasionally Dr.
Adler was misled by a statement in the protocol, but in
the vast majority of instances he built up a dynamic
picture of the child's personality, often predicting the
findings with uncanny insight into the ways of a child's
soul, always illuminating the history with his gentle
sympathy for the actors in the human drama under
discussion.
After the record had been analyzed \vith the finesse
of a psychiatric detective weighing clues, a brief discus-
sion of the child's situation followed, and a summary
of the aims of psychotherapy or guidance outlined.
The parents of the child were then brought into the
lecture room and questioned and instructed before the
class. Finally the child himself was brought in, and
the situation was discussed with him in simple, kindly
language.
The follow-up
work,
indicated by the
analysis, was then entrusted to the teacher or physician
who had presented the history. From time to time,

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
9
during the course of lectures, reports of progress were
brought in, and the reactions of the children discussed.
Not all the cases were finally successful in their
readjustment, failures being due sometimes to the
ignorance and lack of co-operation of parents whose
neuroses remained unresolved despite the efforts of
teachers and psychiatrists to change their attitudes
toward their children. Other causes of slow progress
were deplorable economic situations, intercurrent dis-
eases, or difficulties which served to restore the original
situation in \vhich the neurosis occurred. Some of the
cases showed temporary improvement but presented
new sets of symptoms under new conditions, which
required continued psychotherapy until the parents had
gained a more complete insight into the dynamics of
the child's behaviour, or the child had exhausted his
repertoire of neurotic tricks. One of our own cases
which showed excellent progress under intensive treat-
ment and re-education, relapsed when the child was
faced by the insuperable problem of an old-style school
teacher, \vhose discouragement and deprecation in a
few days destroyed the results of months of painstaking
work. Yet the great majority of these cases showed
definite improvement, and a considerable number a
complete change of pattern.
Readers of this book should realize that it is not a
comprehensive treatise on psychotherapy, but rather
an outline of childhood neuroses and a key to the art
of reading case histories. Its chief value lies in acquaint-
ing all those who have to deal with children and adults

10
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
with the dynamic patterns of human conduct. The
technique of cure can no more be taught by such a
volume than the art of etching can be taught by a
treatise on the various physical and chemical processes
that comprise the technique of preparing and printing
a copper-plate. The book will have fulfilled its purpose
if it succeeds in encouraging all who study its pages
to view human beings not as static machines designated
by labels, but as moving, living, purpose-fulfilling
entities striving for significance and security in a per-
plexing world.
II
The principles and practice of Individual Psychology
have been treated exhaustively in works devoted to
the scientific discussion of Dr. Alfred Adler's contribu-
tions to modern psychology. At the risk of fatiguing
readers who have already mastered the theories of
Individual Psychology, it seems especially advisable
to include a short and necessarily incomplete outline
of these principles for readers to whom "The Pattern
of Life"
is a first introduction to Adler's work, lest
the cases in the book seem unrelated and incompre-
hensible.
The concept of the unity of the human personality,
\vhich is the foundation of Individual Psychology, is
neither new nor unique to Alfred Adler's psychology.
The Greek dramatists considered this unity essential
long before the birth of Christ. The unknown writer

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
II
of the nursery rhyme of Humpty Dumpty stated the
case for this indestructible unity of living organisms
\vhen he proclaimed that all the king's horses and all
the king's men could not reassemble a broken egg.
Were it not for this unity, no psychologist could predict
human behaviour as Adler has been able to predict the
conduct of a child after reading a case protocol. It is
philosophically impossible to conceive of more than
one soul in a body, just as it is impossible to believe
that human conduct is solely the result of certain
motivating and activating drives and instincts, since
no one can predict the relative potency of such drives
and instincts. If each human being were no more than
the haphazard resultant of the blind interaction of
imponderable energies, a systematic psychology would
be as impossible as a science of chemistry in which
the chemical elements changed their valency from day
to day. Great poets, shrewd old women, novelists,
successful generals, and business men know that this
unity of the human organism is the sine qua non of
human understanding.
The second great principle of Adler's psychology is
that the unit organism is a dynamic whole, moving
through a definite life pattern toward a definite goal.
" The goal of life is the maintenance of life," as Remy
de Gourmont wrote in his " Physique de l'Amour."
It is this goal which differentiates living matter from
dead matter. A sand pile has no goal. If you remove
a few shovelfuls of sand from a sand pile, its essential
nature is not changed. It remains a sand pile. But a

12
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
living organism, be it a one-celled amceba, a humming-
bird, or giraffe, has a goal of life, and its entire
organization and way of life is appropriate to the
attainment of that goal. You cannot remove an essen-
tial portion of a living organism without changing it
into an amorphous congeries of inert cells.
Each living organism has a definite life pattern and
a definite and characteristic technique of combating
the environment in order to maintain its life and
goal. The complexity of the pattern varies with the
organism's capability of change and adaptation, and
for this reason the patterns of human behaviour are
much more complicated than the patterns of an oak
tree, a comparatively immobile and fixed organism.
What we call soul, or psyche, in a purely biological
sense, is the function of adaptation, of apperception,
of the mobilization of resources, and the maintenance
of life by an offensjve-defensive strategy of living.
What is the goal of human life? We shall not attempt
an essay in the metaphysics of human existence here.
Viewed objectively and dispassionately we see that
every human organism strives for a measure of security
and totality which makes continued existence tolerable.
The goal of the human race is the maintenance of the
human race.
Jlist as every living species has its characteristic
technique of self-preservation-the tortoise its shell,
the chameleon its adaptability, the hare its fleetness,
the tiger its ferocity and strength-so the human race
has its characteristic method of self-preservation. This

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
I3
technique we call communal life, society, civilization.
Millennia of living have proved this the best method.
So far as archreological researches can determine,
human beings have always lived in groups. The recent
discoveries of the most primitive man, the Pekin man,
showed that ten millions of years ago our ancestors
were already living in a community.
Because it is no more possible to conceive of an
isolated -man than it is possible to conceive of a short-
necked giraffe, it is obvious that every psychology,
every science of human behaviollr, must be a social
psychology. The fate of the individual is inextricably
linked with the fate of his group. This is a fundamental
principle of Adler's Individual Psychology. To under-
stand a human being you must understand his relative
situation in the human group iIi which he moves.
He cannot be isolated in a laboratory and watched
and observed as the behaviourists have attempted to
do, because in the moment he is isolated he no longer
acts as a human being, but as a caged animal. He is
no longer, strictly speaking, a human being. All human
behaviour, therefore, must be taken in its social
relativity if it is to be understood. Just as a pine tree
develops differently at the snow line from the way it
does in a sunny valley, so the human being will act
differently if his social environment is changed.
The social life of the human race is an outgrowth of
its weakness. Communal existence was probably the
quickest and most effective way our
~ncestors could
find to protect themselves. The pattern of the human

14
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
race has been a pattern beginning in individual weak-
ness, moving toward a goal of comparative security in
social solidarity. All the strengths of the human race
fit into this pattern; all its weaknesses are derived
from the danger of isolation. Just as in our structural
growth we recapitulate the evolution of all living
matter, from a single cell to an organized unity of
inter-dependent tissues and organs, so the psycho-
logical growth of the individual is a recapitulation of
the psychological organization of the race.
Every human being begins life as a relatively help-
less, impotent, dependent parasite. Without the aid
of his parents, the first community of the family, the
human infant would perish miserably in a few hours.
Under the fostering influence of parents the individual
child grows in power and ability. During his growth
he is a virtual parasite of the society that nurtures him.
With maturity the normal individual has developed
adequate powers to begin life as a contributing mem-
ber of his social group. In affirlning the multiplex
bonds that bind human being to human being,
~e
normal mature individual gains a measure of peace,
security, and a sense of totality' and validity which
make life worth living. The more of these bridges that
a human being builds to his fellows the more secure
he is. Speech, common sense, reason, logic, ideas,
sympathy, love, science, art, religion, politics, respon-
sibility, self-reliance, honesty, usefulness, play, love
of nature, and the like, are among the most important
bridges. To forego any of these techniques of communal

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
IS
life is to be only partially successful as a human being,
to be only partially secure.
Unfortunately for us this normal pattern of develop-
ment does not always occur. The reasons for its failure
derive from an important biological characteristic of
the human infant. The young of other species also
go through a period of helplessness and dependence
upon their parents, but as their physical powers grow,
a parallel development of their mental capabilities
occurs. A kitten that is capable of recognizing a mouse,
can stalk it, catch it, and eat it. But in the human
infant there is a gross disproportion between the per-
ceptual faculties and the motor capabilities. The baby
can recognize the fact that it is dependent upon its
mother for food and wa.rmth and protection. It knows
that the mother is capable of many necessary activities
which lie beyond its powers. A father appears as a
huge and relatively omnipotent giant. The world about
the baby moves according to ineluctable laws. Dark-
ness and light, food and hunger, speech, locomotion,
are vassals of the strange adults who move so surely
anq knowingly through the baby's cosmos. But the
young child realizes his relative weakness. The human
baby is the only living animal that experiences his
own inadequacy because his mind develops faster than
his body. It is in this situation that the feeling of
illferiority, a cornerstone of Individual Psychology, is
created.
Far from being a handicap, the inferiority feeling
has proved itself the most cogent stimulus for the

16
'THE PA1"TERN OF LIFE
development of the human race. The telescope and the
lnicroscope would never have been invented if our
human eyes were as powerful as the eagle's; the phono-
graph, the radio, the telephone, could never have
existed without a need for better communication
between human beings; the art of the perfumer and
the virtuosity of the chef are our compensations for
the blunting of primitive sensory perceptions far better
developed in the II lower " animals. The very structure
of our civilization, from ne\vspapers to skyscrapers,
from aeroplanes to sympllony orchestras, from steam
shovels to silk stockings, is the resultant of this primi-
tive need for the compensation of human frailties.
The inferiority feeling to which every human being
is heir because of his physical and biological constella-
tion in the cosmos need not therefore be an individual
liability. Man's history is replete with records of his
conquest of inferiority. Genius is probably no more
than the expressioll of the urge to compensate for an
individual defect in terms of social contribution. Every
work of genius bears this mark of social usefulness.
When we speak of genius we are inclined to forget
those unsung men who invented the lever, the wheel,
the axe, the musical reed, weaving, writing, and the
like, and remember solely our modern geniuses who
have but combined these elements in some novel form.
The true history of human genius is the history of the
caveman's struggle for existence.
Each human being is capable of elaborating his per-
sonal defects into a useful contribution to society, yet

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
17
a superficial survey of our society indicates that only
a small proportion of the human race has gained the
courage to effect such compensations. Our neurotics
far outnumber our geniuses. How can we account for
the failure of useful compensation?
Unfortunately for the human race, a variety of
factors militate against the optimum compensation of
the inferiority feeling in social adjustment and in
useful work. The first of these factors that intensify the
inferiority feeling until it crystallizes in an inferiority
complex is the factor of physical defect. If in addition
to his normal \veakness the human infant experiences
a special weakness in the form of a defective apparatus,
his struggle for significance is made more difficult.
This inferiority may be an actual inferiority of certain
organs or organ systems of his body. It may, how-
ever J be an unimportant physical anomaly, medically
unimportant,
but
socially
embarrassing,
such
as
abnormal fatness, thinness, albinism, moles, red hair,
bow legs, facial hair, and the like. Ugliness is a special
case in point, and, strange as it may seem, excep-
tional beauty may eventually lead to an inferiority
complex because the beautiful child believes that his
beauty is the only contribution which society requires
of him.
The second group of factors that intensify the
inferiority feeling deals with the social, religious, and
economic- condition of the individual. Members of any
minority group, whether social, religious, or economic,
suffer an
accentuation
of
their inferiority feeling
2

18
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
because of the additional difficulties of the world, con-
tact with sordidness, vice, and crime. Great riches,
however, may also have a disastrous effect, because
the proper stimulus to work is so frequently lacking
where a child grows up in an atmosphere. of affluence.
A third set of factors that may intensify the
inferiority feeling of the child derive from his family
constellation. This group is important, because no
child escapes its influence. The only child derives his
inferiority complex from his abnormal importance in
the family, and his poor training for social adjust-
ment. His life is all too frequently a search for the
lost paradise of his youth. The oldest child, having
been an only child, and displaced by a younger rival,
may be so discouraged by his fall from power that
11e can never muster sufficient courage to attack the
problems of existence objectively. The second child,
although he grows up in the same house, imbibes the
same milk, sleeps in the same room as the older child,
nevertheless has an entirely different environment.
He has always a pace-maker ahead of him and, in
his aggressive striving to overtake the older child, may
overshoot his mark and become an unobjective rebel.
'The youngest child may shrink in fear of competing
\vith the more successful older children. The only boy
in a family of girls, the only girl in a family of boys,
may be discouraged because of this unique position.
\Vhile no position in the family is without its dangers,
it is one of the most important teachings of Indi-
vidual Psychology, the first science to point out the

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
19
significance of the ordinal position of the child in the
family constellation, that no position can cotftpel a
child to become neurotic.
Sex in itself may be a factor that complicates the
burden of the child. We live in a civilization dominated
by a masculine ideal, a civilization that exaggerates
lnasculine values and activities, and still considers,
despite good scientific evidence to the contrary, that
woman is an inferior sex. The utter fallacy of the
prejtldice has been exploded by the microscope and
the machine, but it exists in widespread tradition
nevertheless. Every girl child therefore has an addi-
tional burden of proof thrown upon her shoulders.
The fact that she is
II only a girl"
often precludes a
normal development along lines of her choice.
The prejudice in favour of the males, however, is
not without damage to them. Many a boy is terrified,
either by minor physical defects or by other discour-
aging factors, until he doubts his ability to be a
It hundred-per-cent he-man" and spends the rest of
his life avoiding the implications and responsibilities of
his sex. The increase in marital disharmony, divorce,
homosexuality, and sexual delinquency among chil-
dren,. is an important aspect of our over-emphasis 'on
sexual differences, and the ever-increasing struggle for
prestige that marks the contemporary life of the sexes.
As we have indicated in an earlier section, the
normal course of human development may be divided
into two phases; an earlier phase of individuation,
with gro\vth of the individual at the expense of the

20
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
environment; and a secondary phase of communal
adjustment, marked by the continuation of individua-
tion in terms of social contribution. A child does not
grow naturally into the second phase without a certain
reconciliation with his adult environment and without
a proper initiation into the fellowship of mankind.
This initiation is usually accomplished by the inter-
mediation of the child's mother.
A child's mother is the first person with whom the
child makes a social contact. Mother's love is the first
social approval. As soon as a child realizes that he is
appreciated by one other human being he has begun
the process of social adjustment. In his mother, and
she need not be his blood mother, he experiences the
first wholly trustworthy individual in his environment,
and with this beginning he can continue his progress
toward the normal goal of human adjustment.
It is apparent that the mother has a double function,
\vhose first phase is the reconciliation of the child to
his situation in the world, \vhose second phase consists
in encouragement of the child to develop his own
powers of growth and adjustment to other individuals.
This delicate role is seldom played to perfection, and
in the mistakes of a child's mother the infinite variety
of human patterns may take their origin. There are
several typical mistakes, all of which produce easily
recognizable types of
tt problem " adults.
Althollgh children are no longer treated so brutally
as they have been in the past, there are nevertheless
many mothers in this selfish age who either neglect

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
2I
their children or actually hate them. Illegitimate, ugly,
unwanted children often develop anti-social character
traits because their guardians have not interested or
reconciled them with the world in which they live. It
is not straIlge that many criminals are recruited from
the poorer sections of the population, where such
neglect and such hate, together with the poverty that
leads to ugliness and disease, flourish most widely.
These children learn courage and independence in the
gutter, but their courage is always the false courage
of rebellion against society.
These children can l1ardly be held entirely respon-
sible for tlleir criminal behaviour, so long as society
allows them to grow up without the warmth of a
mother's love and without the opportunities to develop
their social feeling and their sense of social signifi-
cance. These are the children who feel as if they were
hated spies in an enemy land, uncomprehending young
aliens in our midst. The prevailing social structure,
which vouchsafes opportunities to some and denies
them to others, seems to them a greedy dragon, against
which they may justifiably take up arms.
A far more common type is the spoiled and pam-
pered and solicitously coddled child who basks in
the
tropic warmth
of a
fostering
but physically
murderous mother-love throughout the first years of
his life. More mothers overdo than underdo their first
function of reconciliation. They prove themselves so
indispensable to the child that the child never develops
the ability to think and act for himself. Such a warm

22
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
initiation into human society might be very desirable
if the child were to live forever like a fairy prince
or princess. Unfortunately, this is not the case. Our
civilization demands a maximum of contribution, a
maximum of adjustment. Its rewards are few, its
punishment quick to those who do not pay their
dividend of socially useful work in return for the
opportunities which civilization guarantees them as
individuals.
In some respects the pampered child assumes an
attitude toward the world of men al~ost identical with
that of the hated child. He too is an enemy alien,
one who was met by a fanfare of trumpets, beautiful
speeches, floral tributes, and the keys to the city of the
world, so to speak, only to be betrayed as he grows
older, only to realize that his cordial reception bears
no relation to the tasks before him. Pampering, over-
solicitude, over-protection, are false techniques for
parents to follow, because they are poor preparation
for the communal tasks that the individual child must
face later in life. Naturally both hating a child and
pampering a child increase his sense of inferiority
and complicate his future adjustment. Perhaps in our
modern civilization this emotional over-emphasis of
the child's helplessness is the most potent cause of
mistaken patterns of life.
Patterns of life are usually fixed by the time a child
is five or six years old. That is to say, a definite set
of situations, giving a specific and characteristically
individual tinge to the inferiority situation of each

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
23
child, expresses itself in a characteristic goal in life,
which is often crystallized in a phrase-formula. Unless
the individual gains insight by later education or by
an abrupt change of conditions, this pattern of con-
duct-between the first inferiority situation and the
final crystallized goal of what seems security, totality,
superiority-eontinues as an unchanging dynamic,
unified stream.
It is only rarely that an individual learns from his
experiences. One can learn from experiences, that is
to say, change one's pattern, only if one has previously
learned the art of being objective about oneself. This
art is seldom learned spontaneously-it derives usually
from some external influence or education. The great
majority of human beings make their experiences fit
into their patterns. Unconsciously they so live that
the appropriate experiences occur. After a fashion
our experiences are predestined by the nature of our
childhood inferiority situation and its fictional com-
pensation in the consequent goal of life. Only that
individual who has learned to understand completely
the pattern of his own life, who can change his goal
if necessary, who realizes the bad and the good in ;his
own conduct, can be said to be the master of his own
fate and the captain of his own soul. It is the outstand-
ing merit of Individual Psychology that its study helps
us to understand our own goals and our own patterns,
and to change them, at least to the extent that lesser
errors
are substituted for
the major mistakes of
neurotic conduct.

24
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
Once the goal of superiority has been crystallized,
each individual proceeds toward its attainmen.t as
directly as the obstacles of reality permit. Toward this
end each one of us chooses a kit of appropriate tools
and a scale of appropriate values. We call these tools
character traits, and the whole kit, the ·personality. A
human personality may be considered the sum total
of the instruments and devices which any individual
has chosen to attain his life goal. The theory of the
II splitting of the personality" so commonly used in
other systems of psychology becomes only a fiction
which describes certain psychic phenomena but does
not explain them. The personality is a unity, as we
explained in the beginning of this essay, and what
seems to be a
I I splitting of the personality" is no more
than the choice of a different set of tools to meet a
different situation. It would be ludicrous to hold that
a stockbroker who played "bull" on the market one
day and
II bear"
the next was suffering from a dis-
sociation of personality. His goal and his pattern
remain the same: to make money. Only the instru-
ments have changed!
The characteristic instruments which an individual
chooses vary with his physical constitution, his environ-
ment, the age in which he lives, and the resistance
he meets. Thus we have patterns of life as different
as the aggressiveness of the " go-getter" and the sub-
mission of the saint. Mussoliniand Mahatma Gandhi
may be striving for the identical goal-time and
environment force them to choose unrelated means.

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
25
In the case of children the pattern of life is often
dictated by the special interests of the parents. It is
not fortuitollS that preachers' sons are frequently
sinners, that lawyers' and policemen's sons are often
criminals; a protesting child who feels overpowered
by the artificial authority of an overbearing parent is
quick to search out the psychological weaknesses of
that parent and strike at the Achilles' heel of the
parent's pattern. Specially well-developed talents in
an older brother may lead to the choice of another
sphere- of activity in a younger brother who fears to
compete in the same field. If one child follows the
model of the father, a second child, contesting with
the first for the family prestige, is almost compelled
to choose the mother as an ideal, and in depreca'ting
the model of the first child develop his sense of
security and totality along the only path that remains
to him.
In this way each individual builds up a scheme of
apperception with which he tests all his experiences.
It is this artificially developed scale of values which
he applies to every experience that he meets. The
fable of Procrustes and his ill-famed bed is the nearest
analogy to this scheme of apperception. Just as
Procrustes stretched unfortunate visitors who were too
short for his bed until they met its proportions, and
lopped· off the feet of those who were too long· for
it, so each individual subjects every experience to the
Procrustean bed of his apperception formula. In this
\ve find an explanation of the diverse consequences of

26
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
the same experience to a number of individuals. To
use another analogy, we have the Great War making
brutes out of some, shell-shocked neurotics out of
others, ardent and active workers for world-peace
of still others, while some because of the nature of
their life pattern remain entirely untouched by their
experience.
Individual Psychology is a relative and comparative
science, not a normative body of laws. There is no
categoric imperative, no panacea for all ills, no simple
formula for personal salvation. Yet it is desirable to
outline a relative norm, appropriate to our times, with
which we can compare the behaviour of those whom
we call neurotics, criminals, and psychotics. If we were
to dare to outline a normal it would be the pattern of
an individual whose goal, in life was to be a complete
human being, compensating for his personal
we~k­
nesses and the experiences of his childhood by some
socially valuable, productive work. Such a human
being would develop the traits of honesty I sincerity,
responsibility. As he gre\v older his social connections
would become more extended, his usefulness wider,
his poise better I his courage greater. He would be
independent in action and judgment and service, but
his activities would be dominated by the social need
of his time. What vanity and ambition were left
unresolved in his struggle for significance would be
impressed into his technique of contributing to the
commonweal.
He
would
regard
members
of the
opposite sex as honoured fellow workers and equitably

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
27
divide not only the labours but the prerogatives of
life with them.
Even in such bald outline it becomes apparent that
most human beings deviate widely from this norm.
Only a
few
human
beings make humanity and
humanism their goal in life. Many could formulate
their goal in life in such phrases as
I I I want to be
godlike"
or
I I I must be the centre of all human
attention,"
II I must be beloved by all,"
II I must
sexually conquer all women (or men) to be happy,"
tl I wish to be a one-hundred-per-cent. male,"
II I want
all the happiness I can get with the least expenditure
of energy,"
I I I must protect myself from the machina-
tions of my evil fellow men,"
II I must avoid all
responsibility and return to the childhood paradise of
my youth,"
II I want to be a baby all my life,"
It I
must dominate my environment by my knowledge,"
It I must be sick all my life so that society will take
care of me," or III must avoid all risks." These and
a thousand similar goals in life are the results of mis-
taken evaluations of the childhood situation. The more
inferior a child feels himself in the beginning, the
higher his goal of compensatory superiority, the closer
to the idea of godlikeness. The sick child wants to be
entirely healthy, the poor child rich, the myopic child
wants to translate the world into visual values, the
clumsy child desires complete dexterity, the hated child
demands a
II plus"
of love beyond the gifts of man-
kind. The goal of impotence is omnipotence. As the
individual's goal is set long before he realizes that

THE PATTERN OF LIFE
power and security come with growth and develop-
ment, this goal is frequently beyond the reach of
human aspiration and activity.
Now and again in the course of human existence an
individual finds a technique which .gives him a sub-
jective sense of having attained his goal. It may then
happen that the technique is elevated into a secondary
goal. The phenomenon of the preponderance of the
means over the end may supervene. In this case the
individual loses sight of his original goal,
~nd' con~
tinues the rest of his life in a fatuous repetition and
enlargement of his favourite instrument, to the detri-
ment of his efficiency as a human being. For example,
a spoiled child who senses that he has lost the paradise
of whis mother's love, whose
goa~ in life for the first
years of his existence is to be an irresponsible pam-
pered baby, is taken sick with a dangerous disease,
which brings his parents to his side with their old
solicitude and attention. The experience teaches him
the value of sickness as a means to power and as a
path to the attainment of his ideal. He makes a
secondary goal of illness, and approaches each new
task, decision, difficulty, or obstacle with one and the
same device-illness.
The tragedy of this technique of elevating an instru-
ment (and frequently it is an unworthy tool) into a
goal of life, is that the individual loses the normal
opportunities to develop the real powers within him-
self,
which
might
have
vouchsafed
an
objective
security. The pragmatic effectiveness is dangerous
26

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
29
because such a man knows that the subjective security
he has gained by the cult of ill-health is false, and he
is tortured by his inner need to redouble his efforts
and reiterate his ill-health, until, sunk in the morass of
hypochondriacal self-pity, he not only loses all contact
with the world, and all sense of real values, but his
joy in living as well. The tragedy of the neurosis is
that every neurotic eventually pays more dearly for
avoiding the responsibilities of living than he would
pay for living responsibly.
The neurotic lives in
unremitting fear that his unconscious devices will be
discovered. He fears living, and he fears death. He
becomes a living corpse, afraid of being afraid.
A man with a broken leg needs no justification for
not running a race, but a neurotic must spend his
life justifying his lack of interest in his fellows, his
irresponsibility, failure of achievement, his indecision,
his procrastinations, his over-cautiousness, his sexual
perversions, his vanity, his ambition, or his self-pity.
Something there is in every human being that recog-
nizes the necessity of being human, of contributing
and co-operating in human society. Some call it
conscience, some call it the over-soul. Its name is
unimportant, but its existence is attested by the con-
tinuous efforts of neurotics to justify their failures.
Every neurosis is the substitution of an artificially
(usually unconsciously) manufactured and arranged
,t I cannot" for an innate "I will not." To say
U I
will not"
would evoke the criticisms of society. "I
cannot" not only justifies the neurotic but shifts the

3°
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
onus of his failing to the group I while a subjective
sense of justification and exoneration accrues to the
neurotic. A neurosis is a self-deceptive device in which
a painful alibi is substituted for a useful performance.
The neuroses of adults begin as the
II problems II of
childhood. Every
II problem II child is a potential
neurotic. But
II problem II children can grow only in
II problem II environments. They are, so to speak, the
normal reactions to a vicious environment. They
flourish best where ignorance of human nature appears
most crassly. The whole problem of mental hygiene is
a problem in education, a problem which Alfred Adler
has courageously attacked by applying his methods
to the prevention of conduct deviations in children.
This is the great contribution of Adler to contem-
porary society: other psychiatrists have realized that
the neuroses begin in childhood-Adler has developed
a technique, not only of investigating these childhood
deviations of conduct, but of obviating them.
Indi-
vidual Psychology I therefore, has gro\vn beyond its
original scope as a system of psychotherapy, and has
taken its place as a fundamental corner stone of
sociology and pedagogy.
When and where do childhood neuroses begin? We
may consider a neurosis to be the frustration product
of a false pattern of life. In other \vords, where an
individual, having misinterpreted his inferiority situa-
tion, and having set out in an unconscious pattern
of over-compensation that outrages the laws of reality,
objectivity,
and communal living, meets with an

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
31
insuperable obstacle in reality, he produces a new
pattern. This new pattern is his neurosis. It repre-
sents an attempt either to justify his failure to solve
the problem, or to make a psychic detour around it;
in some cases he produces a pattern in which the very
existence of the obstacle is denied by the creation of
a system of hallucinations. The neurosis, furthermore,
may represent an attempt to restore a former situation
in which problems and obstacles did not exist, or it
may take the form of retaliation against those indi-
viduals in the immediate environment whom the
individual holds responsible for his failure.
A few examples of neuroses in childhood will help
us understand their dynamics. An only child, pam-
pered and carefully guarded throughout the first six
years of his life, which were marked by difficulties in
his digestion, is faced with the task of adjusting him-
self to the community of the kindergarten for the first
time. Naturally his former life is the worst possible
preparation for such an adjustment. The kindergarten
is the first frustration of his pattern of dominating
his environment. Formerly, \vhen his adult environ-
ment did not meet his approval he countered with a
hunger-strike, \vhich immediately brought his parents
to their knees. The hunger-strike was the forerunner
of his neurosis, because the child \vas misusing an
organic inferiority to voice his protest against his
parents, and club them into submission. We might
expect that this child, faced ,vith the seemingly insuper-
able problem of becoming an ordinary member of a

32
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
community of twenty children, will counter with similar,
protests in terms of his digestive tt organ dialect." He
does this by vomiting every morning on the steps of
the school. In the moment that we investigate this
behaviour in terms of origin, goal, and means to an
end, it becomes understandable. The child wants to
restore his former favourable situation by making
adjustment to the kindergarten impossible.
A first-born son is followed by a sister, who, because
of her greater beauty and the ,villingness to ingratiate
herself, displaces him in the family's affection. The
boy does not understand the situation, but he considers
himself dethroned and displaced by a girl, and betrayed
by his mother, who formerly held him more warmly
in her affections. Little by little this boy's mistaken
goal in life becomes formulated in the phrase:
tt You
must be careful with women. They are false. Consider
every woman your enemy! " During the years of child-
hood and adolescence he pursues this unconscious goal
by cruelly teasing all girls, by deprecating everything
feminine, by refusing to work for women teachers,
by over-emphasizing his masculinity. His Procrustes
formula becomes crystalized in the dialectic,
tt Male =
good; female = bad."
By the time he has reached
adolescence he has built up an elaborate system of
false evaluations of ,vornen and their role in life.
The development of sexual maturity presents a new
problem. The neurosis may now take one of several
directions. If he comes under the influence of some
kindly male teacher, or finds some friend who gives

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
33
him the comfort and communal feeling which he failed
to find in his relations with women, he may well choose
the neurosis we call homosexuality. In this case he
will divert all his love to men, because the problem of
loving a woman, marrying, and forming a true human
bond, seems impossible in the light of his misconcep-
tions. From this point he begins training himself to be
a homosexual by avoiding all relations with women,
reading books \vhich glorify friendship between men,
and other books which treat of the perfidy of women.
He does not realize that these books have been written
by other disappointed men who are attempting to
justify their o\vn failures.
On the other hand he may consider his sexual
maturity as another instrument to effect his domination
over women, and he may become a veritable Don
Juan, to whom every woman is a challenge to prove
his sexual superiority. As a necessary part of the latter
pattern he may feel that sexual intercourse is equiva-
lent to subjugation of his partner, and again no real
happiness will be possible for him in his relation with
women. Such men are interested only in the chase-
not in the community of marriage.
IJet us take the case of a youngest child in a
large family of successful alld well-adjusted children.
Terrified by the thought of competing with his older
brothers and sisters, this child builds another world
of fantasy and dream for himself, to substitute for the
world of reality, which seems too difficult. He is afraid
to make human contact \vith other boys and girls,
3

34
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
because he feels his inadequacy too deeply. He builds
up a new world of fairy tales, a private language, an
individual system of values and ideals. Not being able
to make contacts with other children, he imagines fan-
tastic companions within himself. He cannot talk the
language of others, and therefore develops a language
of his own. The fiction of dissociation of personality
is necessary to such a child, because no human being
can live entirely alone, and it follovvs, as the night the
day, that if the child cannot make contact with other
children, he will create imaginary companions, who
proffer no risk, who accede to all demands, who fit
into the picture of his ideal world.
When this child meets with the real problems of the
school, or when he finds his struggle for significance
conlplicated by the strains and stresses of adolescence
or disease, it is not surprising that he should develop
a pattern of isolation, of negativism, of a cramped
relation to the outside world, on the one hand, and
on the other, a full inner life. Some of these children
gradually reconcile themselves to life, become poets,
dreamers, dramatists, writers, occasionally philoso-
phers and psychologists. But it is more than likely,
especially if their problems are complicated by certain
obscure physical inadequacies of constitution, that they
will join the great army which fills our state hospitals
with cases of dementia prrecox.
The descriptions of schiz9phrenia, the splittings of
the personality, the mutism, the individual language,
the negativism, the sexual aberration that all authors

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
35
l1ave described in this interesting syndrome, can be
understood by any student'of human nature who sees
in all these manifestations the common denominator of
hopelessness. As soon as physicians learn to under-
stand the utter logic of the behaviour of cases of
dementia prcecox, their inexorable mark toward a
goal of isolation and irresponsibility, the fiction that
it is always an incurable disease will be dispelled.
Many cases of dementia prcecox, as Adler has shown,
are curable if the physician ,vho treats them is more
hopeful than the patient. To accede in the patient's
hopelessness, to act "as if" the patient were correct
in his deductions, is to produce the very condition
that is premised.
III
It is impossible to sketch the variety of human
patterns of life even in the baldest olltline, but it is
possible to diagram the situation of every human being
in relation to the problems which he must meet.
Because of man's relation to the cosmos there are three
great groups of problems which he must face. These
problems are the problems of society, of work, and
of sex.
The first group of problems derive from the biologic
necessity of man's communal life. Everyone who
\vishes to be human must affirm his connection with his
fellow men by affirming certain common bonds, not-
ably those of speech, reason, common sense, sympathy,

THE PATTERN OF LIFE
and the like. Society exists for the benefit of the
individual. It is the very best means that could be
devised to guarantee the full development of the
individual's native faculties and powers. The second
problem,. that of work, arises from the corollarial
necessity that each individual uphold the social struc-
ture. The individual must pay a dividend to society,
and that dividend we call useful \york. The third
problem derives from the bisexuality of the human
race, and from the fact that it may best be solved in
these social terms we call love and marriage. The outer
forms of love and marriage vary with time and place,
but wherever and whenever they occur they always
bear a definite relation to the social good of the
community.
These three problenls may well be compared to a
huge three-ring circus in which each and everyone of
us must play his role. The solution of these problems
is not a private matter, left to the discretion of each
individual. Human society can exist solely by the
mutually protective reciprocal contributions of group
and individual. As in any other circus, however, there
are a variety of side-shows included under the big tent
we call the cosmos. Some are nearer to, others farther
from the main arena. Anyone who observes the human
comedy will find many human beings busily engaged
in these side-shows. Their activity seems more·feverish
than the activity of those performers who go through
their paces in the three great rings. These side-show
performers are the netlrotics and psychotics whose
26

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
37
hyperactivity is designed to deceive themselves and
their fellow men. They demonstrate their good will,
their entire helplessness, their irresponsibility, their
extreme activity, as a justification for their desertion
from the main arenas.
It must not be believed that these side-show per-
formers are maliciously avoiding their obligations
~s
human beings. It is their ignorance of the coherence
of all human activities that enables them to continue
patterns whose constant common denominator is social
uselessness. They look longingly at the greater arenas
of life, for whose challenge they are unprepared, and
attempt to exonerate their failures to conform. qne
hears the phrases: "I would, if . . ." and "I know,
but. ..." And their entire neurosis is expressed in
the "if"
and the "but."
They make reservations,
they make conditions which are impossible of fulfil-
ment, shrug their shoulders, and allow their'fellows to
assume the responsibility of x:naintaining them.
The first stages of a neurosis are ushered in by a
group of symptoms that constitute what Adler has
called
'~the hesitating attitude."
Doubt, indecision,
procrastination, pessimism, deprecation of life, anxiety,
over-cautiousness,
exaggerated ambition
(which is
always ambition for personal power or dominance),
isolation,
disinterestedness,
abnormal
fatigue,
im-
patience, and a host of similar character traits mark
this hesitating attitude. When we remember that all
human activities are purposive, we can deduce what
the goal of these traits is. Doubt, vacillation, laziness,

THE PATTERN OF LIFE
are not to be considered static descriptions of character.
These are actually very dynamic instruments exquisitely
appropriate to their goal: to avoid the final tests of
life, to approach problems so slowly that no solution is
possible, to maintain what Adler has called II distance "
from the normal activities of man. While the boun-
daries of normalcy and neurosis overlap and are
indistinguishable, the degree of this
II distance" from
the normal goals and activities of human beings is the
sole criterion of the severity of the neurosis.
A large proportion of mankind solves the problem
of work to a greater or lesser degree because of the
tyranny of its stomach. The side-shows about this
arena are nevertheless numerous. Individuals, such
as beggars, who live on a false exploitation of the
sympathy of their fellows, are surely to be considered
as side-show artists. Pimps and prostitutes who distort
their sexual functions for economic grounds fall in a
similar category.
II Confidence" men, criminals, and
the whole host of underworld characters who live by
their wits at the expense of a gullible humanity are
individuals who have never realized that work is not
a curse, but a form of personal salvation. Those who
change from one job to another, not holding to any
one piece of work long enough to contribute anything,
those who cannot adjust themselves to normal working
conditions, those whose work is the exploitation of
other human beings, are unhappy men and women
who have not understood the meaning and value of
work. Women who spend their lives in a futile attempt
26

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
39
to escape from ennui via unceasing bridge, mah jong,
gossip; gamblers who do not trust their own powers
and must therefore worship " Luck" ; men and women
whose work depends on the cupidity and ignorance of
their fellows-these crowd the ranks of the vast army
which lacks the courage to face the problems of becom-
ing productive, useful contributors to the welfare of
mankind.
Isolation is practically impossible in a world grow-
ing more and more inter-related and co-operative with
every passing day. Only the insane, who completely
break the bridge of human contact, ever effectively
isolate themselves. As we have previously indicated,
the ideal social relation of an individual to the society
in which he lives consists in the building of as many
bridges to his fellow men as he finds it possible to
construct. The only security of which a man can be
sure is the security which originates in the good will of
his fellow men. Because of the faults of our education
many unhappy souls attempt to win this security by
building walls around themselves instead of construct-
ing bridges to their fellows. The technique of isolation
is the technique of snobbery, of bigotry, of hate, of
suspicion, of jealousy, of envy, of egoism in the last
analysis. Professional class-consciousness, patrioteer-
ing, clannishness, pride, vanity, misanthropy, are tools
of the tendency to egotistic seclusion. Discourtesy,
pedantic fastidiousness, sullenness, vulgarity, ostenta-
tion, make the task of social adjustment more difficult.
These are the side-shows of the social life.

THE PATTERN OF LIFE
Because our training for the sexual problems of our
time is relatively unsuited to the development of a
normal attitude towards sex, because we still live in a
\vorld in which sexual antagonism rather than sexual
co-operation is the rule, and because, unlike the other
two sets of problems, the solution of the sexual problem
is not immediately necessary to individual life, and
its good solution demands a high degree of social
feeling, the side-shows about this arena are more
numerous, perhaps, than those about the other two.
A full catalogue, under the circumstances, would lead
us beyond the scope of this essay. Suffice it to say that
the existence of those major sexual deviations of our
times-homosexuality in both men and women, frigidity
in women, and impotence in men, dyspareunia in
sexual relations, prostitution, sadism and masochism,
fetishism, the excesses of "free love,"
the puritan
spirit, the neurotic pruriency of the Watch and Ward
Society, the cult of pornography, the inhuman exploita-
tion of sexual problems in the tabloid newspapers,
the legal proscription of contraceptive information-is
evidence that a very considerable portion of the human
race finds itself in the side-shows of the sexual arena.
When we add celibacy, masturbation phobias, sexual
asceticism,
tl white slavery,"
child marriages, incest,
both physical and mental (as the abnormal attachment
of parents to children of the opposite sex), rape, and
the long list of perverted sexual practices of our time,
\ve realize how little prepared for the sexual problem
the average It civilized 11 man and \varnan is.
26

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
41
It is not surprising that a certain system of psycho-
logy has premised that all human woes begin with
sexual maladjustment, and all neuroses are based on
aberrations of the sexual function. Students of the
Adlerian psychology will quickly see the fallacies
underlying such a
system of psychology.
Sexual
behaviour is never a cause of neurosis or insanity-it
is one of its manifestations. It is frequently the first
sign of neurosis, but a careful analysis of the entire
pattern of an individual's conduct, an examination of
his goal in life, and his technique of approach to his
goal, will demonstrate that the neurotic attitude may
be found in his social and occupational reactions as well.
IV
The therapy of Individual Psychology is based on
the application of its philosophic premises. The "cure"
of the neurosis depends on the art of giving the neurotic
insight into his errors and the demonstration of the
inefficiency of his technique together with the encour-
agement to find better goals and patterns. It means
that the psychiatrist discloses the neurotic's hidden and
secret goal of domination to him, traces the formation
of his unconscious pattern, ferrets out his appercep-
tion formula, applies it to the material \vhich the patient
presents in his autobiographical data as well as in his
present activities and desires, and eventually convinces
the neurotic, in the course of friendly conversations,
which are carried out without dim lights, couches, or

42
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
hypnotic suggestions, that more human goals offer him
greater human satisfactions than the false securities of
his neurosis.
Realizing that the neurotic patient has somewhere
falsely interpreted his childhood situation, the Adlerian
psychiatrist re-enacts the role which the neurotic's
mother has somehow failed to fulfil. He wins the
patient by presenting an attitude of indestructible
good will, patience, and sympathy. The patient re-lives
the early inferiority situation only to learn that his
inferiority complex is an unnecessary and subjective
product of a childhood misconception of the objective
state of affairs. Presently he learns that the bulwarks
of human friendship are stronger than the spurious
walls of isolation.
During the analysis and re-education of the patient
the
Adlerian
psychiatrist
abrogates
all
personal
authority. This is in contradistinction to the methods
of psychoanalysis, in which the analyst demands abso-
lute servility, and denies the patient the use of his
critical faculties. The Adlerian re-education is in the
nature of a co-operative research between physician
and patient, in which the patient contributes the
material from
his
life,
the
psychiatrist furnishes
interpretation and encouragement. The psychiatrist
minimizes any personal superiority of insight. Like
any good educator he uses his position to encourage,
not to humiliate his pupil. Together they work out a
new goal, always the goal of active hllmanism, and
a new technique of its attainment suited entirely to the

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
43
individual's needs. As the analysis of the situation can
be sketched, usually, during the first few hours of
these conferences, much less time is spent in the fatuous
research of details of the dead past, which can offer
only further corroboration and affirmation of the
pattern, once the pattern has been established, while
more time is spent on the synthesis of valuable existing
elements into a new and more effective pattern of life.
There can be no place for moralizing in such a
research. The psychiatrist holds 110 moral superiority
over his patient. His attitude is always: "Under what
circumstances, and toward what goal, would I employ
the same technique of living?"
Knowing that every
neurosis is essentially the product of discouragement,
the psychiatrist sets his pupil easy tasks, which are
well within the patient's power to solve. In this way
the patient-and in the Adlerian psychology the rela-
tion of physician and patient is much more the relation
of teacher and pupil-enlarges his initial capital of
cOllrage and social feeling, only to be given progres-
sively more difficult tasks, until his behaviour pattern
approaches the normal in all these problems of life.
No attempt is made to make a perfect human of the
patient. The benefit the patient derives from his newly
gained insight is that he is enabled to substitute minor
errors for the major mistakes of his neurosis; by
living a fuller life, he gains a greater joy in living.
In the treatment of childr.en with behaviour and
conduct problems the Individual Psychologist finds
the Adlerian technique simple and amazingly effective.

44
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
After reading a case protocol, or hearing a mother's
description of her child's difficulties, the psychiatrist
has usually gained insight into the nature of the child's
specific problem. Problem children have simple pat-
terns, and to those who can read and interpret. the
signs, the remedies are almost immediately apparent.
Problem children, as the case histories given here
demonstrate, are those who have been discouraged by
any or all of the factors described in the first para-
graphs of this foreword. The problem usually lies with
the parents, who have frustrated the normal channels
of the child's development by the interposition of
additional difficulties alld obstacles. The treatment of
problem children, then, consists largely in the educa-
tion of parents a11d teachers to the understanding of
the dynamic patterns of the child's conduct and the
removal, wherever possible, of discouraging factors.
The logical and trenchant simplicity of Individual
Psychology is attested by the fact that children very
often understand its workings a11d may be WOIl over
to its point of view. In the case of the very young
child the problem is solved by the removal of the dis-
couraging factors by the parents and the psychiatrist.
In older children there is a definite training toward
courage, toward independence, and toward the acquisi-
tion of th~ social feeling. While Individual Psychology
can110t claim to cure all cases of problem behaviour
in children, even the most difficult cases respond to
its treatment when parents and teachers can be taught
to co-operate intelligently in the treatment.

ADLER AND OUR NEUROTIC WORLD
45
Alfred Adler has always claimed that the school was
the ideal locus for the prophylactic mental-hygiene
clinic. Here every child faces a microcosm of the world
in the social situation of the schoolroom and its
tasks. Teachers who have learned Adler's method of
approach, and his technique of influencing the child
mind, find their classroom tasks materially lightened.
The recognition of neurotic behaviour patterns is the
first step in their re-direction into normal channels.
Children react as surely to encouragement and under-
standing as plants react to sun and rain and proper
soil, and it is quite as easy for parents and teachers to
understand and to encourage as it is to put children in
static categories and discourage thenl. The Adlerian
psychology posits as a first principle: "Every human
being can do everything." This theorem has limitations
well known to its discoverers, but as a pragmatic
principle in human relations it is invaluable. One thing
is certain: when teachers categorize children as bad,
as stupid, as lazy, as neurotic, nothing is accomplished
thereby but to make them sttlpid and neurotic. To
treat them as such usually results in the child's obliging
with the very conduct that is expected of him. To
treat a child "as if" he could adjust himself to the
scheme of human society costs nothing, and often
accomplishes miracles.
This necessarily brief introduction to Individual
Psychology is not for pessimists or for cowards; but
it is hoped that those readers who believe that human
beings have a spark \vhich may be kindled into a steady

46
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
flame, those readers who believe that human beings
have the right to be happy in being human, will find in
it the stimulus to continue their studies. The cases cited
in the following pages will help them to understand
something of the technique of reading the patterns of
human life as a skilled musician reads the score of a
symphony. Beyond this, Individual Psychology is an
art more than a science. Its application is a matter of
creative intuition, of that fine empathy with human
striving which has actuated great poets and great
teachers throughout the history of mankind. None
\vho has not lived life fully and shared profoundly the
woes and the ecstasy of living need expect to master
the art, yet everyone who is a thinking human being
has it in his- power to become a good craftsman,
capable of mastering and applying its fundamental
principles.
w. Beran Wolfe, M.D.
New York City

A GESTURE OF THE WHOLE BODY
T
HIS evening we have the problem of Miss Flora,
whose chief complaint is that for years she has
been subject to attacks of unconsciousness. She lives
with her mother, father, two younger and two older
brothers, and two young children. The relationships in
the home are very congenial, and the patient, who is
the only girl, has always had her own way and has
been distinctly favoured by the father.
Now when we hear of attacks of unconsciousness
we think immediately of epilepsy, but epilepsy is a
\vord that is very loosely used to describe a variety of
illnesses. The differential diagnosis is sometimes ex-
ceedingly hard to make and is entirely the concern of
the physician. Usually people who suffer from epilepsy
are facing great difficulties in their lives, and, these
difficulties being mirrored in their mental attitude, it
is sometimes hard to decide where the organic disease
leaves
off
and
its
mental
superstructure
begins.
Epilepsy has always been called a sickness, because
up to the present time epileptics have been taken care
of by physicians. It is rather similar to the attitude of
laymen toward the neuroses, which were previously
always called hysteria.
There are a number of symptoms that are highly
significant in the differential diagnosis between a true
epilepsy and a simulated epilepsy. In a real epileptic
attack the pupils of the eyes are dilated and do not
react to light. This is one of the most important signs
47

48
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
of an organic epilepsy. So far nothing like this sign
is mentioned in the case history of Flora. The second
important symptom is the presence of the Babinski
reflex dllring the fainting spells. To te~t the Babinski
reflex we stroke the sole of the foot and find that the
great toe rises (toward the dorsum of the foot) instead
of moving down\vard as one would normally expect.
The Babinski reflex
signifies that an injury has
occurred to a certain part of the brain and this injury
prevents the passage of the nervous impulse along its
usual routes. There are other symptoms that point to
the presence of a true epilepsy. Sometimes one finds
small hemorrhages below the skin, especially behind
the ear; often the epileptic patient
bite~ his tongue
during the attack, and we find that his saliva is bloody.
Frequently, too, the epileptic falls and hurts himself
during his attack. The epileptic often has a fleeting
presentiment that the attack will occur. We call this
the aura, which varies in its form but is usually
present.
This group of symptoms, which are present in a
true epilepsy,
distinguishes it from other fainting
attacks of an hysterical nature, in which the person
feels himself injured, hopeless, and powerless,' and
expresses his attitude in a gesture of his entire body.
The fainting attack of an hysterical patient means:
t'I am powerless." The hysterical patient recuperates
quickly from his attack:, but the true epileptic attack
is followed usually by a period of somnolence, head-
ache, and malaise, which may last several hours. One

A GESTURE OF THE WHOLE BODY
49
of the important differential points between epilepsy
and hysteria is that the epileptic does not know that
he has fainted-he realizes it only after the attack
is over.
To add to our difficulties in making a differential
diagnosis, most cases of epilepsy are associated with
certain mental deficiencies.
If you attack a true
epileptic in such a way that he would normally respond
with a fit of anger, you may increase the frequency of
his attacks. Epileptic persons often ha\Te bad tempers,
and in investigating the families of epileptics, I have
usually been able to find that one member of the family
has a conspicuously bad temper. We must interpret a
bad temper as the sign of an inferiority complex, and
where I have found epileptic children in a family of
an irascible father, I have sometimes felt that they
were imitating their. father's tantrums.
Sometimes epileptic fits are later complicated by an
epileptic insanity, which is usually marked by hallu-
cinations and wild and cruel behaviour. Epileptics are
usually treated in asylums by the 11se of sedative
drugs, which make them dreamy and sleepy most of
the time, and under such treatment the number of
epileptic attacks often is decreased although the attacks
are not wholly stopped.
In spite of all the differences which exist between
true epilepsy and hysterical attacks of unconscious-
ness, a true diagnosis is hard to make because a doctor
is seldom present when the attack occurs to examine
tIle eyes and test the Babinski reflex.
4

5°
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
According to my experience, epileptic attacks occur
only in certain susceptible people \vhen they are in a
bad situation. I believe that this susceptibility consists
in apathologic variation of the blood-vessels of the
brain. An epileptic attack much resembles the picture
of a man in a towering rage. The epileptic looks as if
he wanted to attack somebody. An epilepsy no doubt
occurs most frequently in those individuals who have
both the pathologic variation of the cerebral blood-
vessels and the tendency to have fits of anger. Usually
epileptics are very cruel, and in their dreams they
often experience brutality and fighting. Cruelty plays
a large role in the mental make-up of the epileptic, and
though you will find apparently \Tery kind, sweet,
and quiet individuals who are epileptic, when you
investigate their dreams you will find anything but
benevolence. There is no doubt that alcohol increases
the frequency of epileptic attacks, and this could be
proved experimentally if it were not too inhuman.
Epileptics who are adversely influenced by alcohol
must avoid it -in every form.
In my experience with epilepsy I have found that
it is advisable to allow the epileptic patient to live as
easy a life as possible, and it has been my experience,
furthermore, that the patient's sitllation can be bettered
if he is taught to be stronger, more self-reliant and
calmer. In other words, I have found that epilepsy
disappeared when the patient becalne socially well
adjusted, even in cases where many other physicians
had corroborated the diagnosis. I do not mean by this

A GESTURE OF THE WHOLE BODY
51
that I am able to cure epilepsy, but I do say that the
symptoms of epilepsy can sometimes be alleviated and
the patient made much more comfortable if we can
bring about a greater degree of social adjustment.
And it is certainly true that in some cases where the
social adjustment has reached a high level the epileptic
symptoms have completely disappeared.
Now let us go on with our case. vVe have learned
that it is that of an only girl in a family of brothers,
and it has been my observation that in such a family
a girl is over-indulged and freque11tly does not develop
her normal feminine role. She will often be very
obedient, but hardly ever self-confident and inde-
pendent; and she will develop in such a way that
others will
alwa~ys have to support her. More than
likely she will be unable to stay alone. On the other
hand, there is a different type of development in this
situation, wIlen such an only girl develops as if she
were a boy, becomes very hardy, and exaggerates her
boyish tendencies. The case history must sho\v which
of these two paths our patient has followed.
We learn that a congenial relationship exists in the
entire family and that the girl has always had her own
\vay and been favoured by her fatller. We may expect,
therefore, that our patient will show the characteristics
of a pampered child who has not developed sufficient
strength of mind. She is probably very sweet, quiet,
and obedient, and very greedy for appreciation. I find
in the case notes this statement:

52
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
II Since her first attack she sleeps with her
mother."
Here is evidence that the girl not only refuses to
be alone, but that her first attack served to accentuate
her dependence. This point leads me to believe that the
so-called epilepsy is premeditated. The notes further
state:
II The family life is very complete. The patient's
health has been perfectly normal and there has
been no sign indicating a neurosis heretofore. Her
mother says that she is almost perfect in every
way. She has made friends easily."
The mother's remark about Flora's perfection corro-
borates my belief that she belongs to the 'first type,
and is a sweet, obedient young woman. It is also quite
certain that she is a spoiled child and it is high time
she should be made independent. Such independence
would be of great advantage to her; it is, in fact, her
only hope of a cure.
II Her recreations are the movies, theatre, and
riding in the auto. She did excellent work in school
and graduated fourth in her class. She worked
after school, and enjoyed her work."
Her school record perhaps shows that she wanted
to be a favourite in school as well as in the home and
did good work in order to be properly appreciated.

A GESTURE OF THE WHOLE BODY
53
(( At present she is occupied as a secretary and
says she likes her work. While she was at school
she wanted to be a teacher, but gave up her
ambition because of the extra effort that was
required.',
Here again we see that she lacks self-confidence and
\vill make no effort to become independent.
If The patient is now twenty-five years old, is
said to be good-looking, although she has a slight
cast in one eye. She has one joint of her engage-
ment-ring finger cut off, but she holds her hand
in such a way that this is seldom noticed."
Undoubtedly these defects have played an im-
portant role in her life, and she tries to protect herself
from their' consequences. She approaches life with a
hesitating attitude, as if she did not trust herself very
far.
"It is impossible to get any early memories
from her, and she complains it is hard for her to
recall her youth."
I believe that if I had tried to get her childhood
recollections she would have been able to remember.
Some people have difficulty in recalling childhood ex-
periences because they believe they must recall some
horrible episode before their twelfth or thirteenth year.
This is not at all necessary. I usually ask, "Do you
remember your school-days? " The patient frequently
feels very cautious about answering this. The choice of

54
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
a patient's recollections is an important clue to his
personality. After some of the school incidents are
recalled the patient often remembers certain pre-
school experiences. I sometimes advise my patients to
write all that they can remember about their early
childhood, as if they were making notes for an auto-
biography. This patient recalls two dreams, however,
which it may be of interest to hear.
II
I I dreamed of having a petting party with a
boy who works in the drugstore where I take
lunch. I also had the same dream about my boss.' "
This dream again shows us that our patient wants
to be petted and made much of, not only at home but
also where she works. If her employer did pamper
her she would probably not dream about it, and so
we may conclude that he is not so kind to her as she
\vould like. She creates the situation in a dream:
II How would it be if he petted me? How can I make
him love me ?" You see she is preparing the way to
her goal, and that is to be loved. This much certainly
\ve can interpret in the dream. TIle boy in the drug-
store has probably not had a petting party with her.
We may conclude that she is not in a position in which
she would like to be, which is an important factor in
our interpretation.
It 'I dreamed that a tide was overtaking the
other people on the street. It did not touch me,
and I just looked on.'"

A GESTURE OF THE WHOLE BODY
55
Now this second dream is much more significant
because it shows the patient's innate cruelty, as she
sees other people drowning without offering help. This
dream means:
II How could I create a situation in
which the other people in the world would drown and
I would be alone? How would it feel to be wholly
alone?"
Very probably she would like to save her
father and mother from the deluge, but she is not
interested in other people, she would let them drown.
Why should she want everyone else to perish? We can
safely conclude that she hates the rest of the world
because she feels powerless to make them love her.
The only way to remedy the, situation is to extinguish
the whole of mankind. This idea suggests a superiority
complex, but we know tha.t a superiority is always
based on an inferiority complex. Her dream is like an
outburst of temper. It is as if she said, It Let the people
perish! "
t' She complains that her mother does not make
the grandchildren mind, but that she can make
the children,
\vho
are five
and seven,
obey
her. "
This glves us an indication of why she wanted to
be a
t~acher. Sl1e believes that a teacher is always
surrounded by obedient children, and she wants them
to show their appreciation of her by obedience.
tt She believes that the family have been too
good to her and too easy with her. ',

56
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
This report shows that she has a considerable
insight into her own situation, but nothing is changed
by such a statement, except that it is valuable for
appearances' sake. We know that what she wants is
to have everybody in submission to her, her employer,
the drugstore clerk, the children, and her parents. Her
problem is how to reach this goal. Otherwise her entire
scheme of life is shattered and she is powerless.
" The first attack of epilepsy occurred after she
had been working some two years in the same
office. She screamed and fell to the floor of the
office where many people were working. Her
head strllck the concrete floor, she bit her tongue
and had to be held by force until she was removed
to her home, where she was attended by several
doctors and a trained nurse. She was very ill for
a week and at the same time developed kidney
poisoning.' ,
This sounds as if the first attack were real epilepsy,
but as she had another illness at tIle same time it is
quite possible that her faint was not entirely epileptic.
We
must
reserve
our
judgment
and
investigate
further.
"The next attack occurred seven months later,
when she was in her own home. She fell and
burned her arm badly on a curling-iron. Although
her aunt was in the house at the time, her mother
had gone off on an overnight visit, for the first
time since the child was born."

A GESTURE OF THE WHOLE BODY
57
If this is a real case of epilepsy then it certainly
has had a very uncommon development. For usually,
when epilepsy is diagnosed as late as the eighteenth
year, there is a history of minor attacks preceding
the major attacks. This case occurred too suddenly.
The first attack began at the eighteenth year, and the
illness became aggravated to such an extent that the
patiept had to sleep with her mother. The next attack,
coming seven months later, curiously coincides with
the fact that her mother was away on an overnight
visit for the first time since the child's birth. This is
surely remarkable. The unavoidable conclusion is that
our patient \vants to rule her mother, even though ,her
rule is expressed in a svveet, kind manner. The attack
is one way of saying, I' Why did you leave me alone? "
You see we must learn to understand the language of
the entire body.
Thirteen months passed before the next attack.
During this time the patient took luminal and was
on a diet. Patients are usually rather \veak as a con-
sequence of the diet and the luminal, but the treatment
helps to tide the patient over, and sometimes has good
effect.
"After the last attack, the attacks of uncon-
sciousness have come every month at the time of
the menstrual period. The attacks are most violent
at this time. At present they occur almost every
week and are ushered in by the patient's calling
her mother when she feels the attack coming."

58
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
These are important clues to the nature of the ill-
ness. The beginning of menstruation \vas a period of
great difficulty for this girl. She had an attack of un-
consciousness at the beginning of menstruation, which
was probably due to her desire not to admit she was
actually a girl instead of a boy, as she would prefer.
Whenever the menstrual period arrives the patient
becomes more tense, and it is this tension which is an
important determinant of the beginning of the spells.
That she calls her mother when she feels the attacks
coming, further indicates its purpose. The case history
says,
tt At one time she felt one coming and went
outdoors where there were neighbours near by." This
shows that she wanted someone to replace her mother
when she was absent.
,( Her intelligen<;:e decreases during the epileptic
fits and her attacks often occur after she has had
a quarrel."
I do not know what we can do to help this patient,
but our treatment will be directed toward changing
her entire style of living, and reco11ciling her with her
female role. At this point it would be wise to consider
her relations to her lover, since she dislikes being a
woman. Although I have not read the entire history,
I feel sure that we shall find some expression of the
inferiority complex in her love life. \Ve shall have to
ask her lover the details, but perhaps the case notes
will help us.

A GESTURE OF THE WHOLE BODY
59
(( She has been going with the same boy for
eight years. She has been engaged for three years.
She notices that the attacks have been more fre-
quent since her engagement."
I think we will all agree that going with one boy
for eight years is too long. And since her attacks are
more frequent now, I am sure that one of two things
will happen. Either her fiance will be shocked by her
illness and decide not to marry her, or she will insist
on the formula, (( Wait until I am well." These attacks
will help her maintain her formula. It is her goal in
life to avoid the female role and defer any decision
about marriage. She fears that she will be ruled by
men, and she has assumed her formula, (( Wait until
I am well,"
as a last line of defence. She wants to
escape, to hesitate.
(( There is another boyan the scene at present.
She loves the second boy J but feels that she must
be true to the one who has waited so long. The
first boy knows nothing of his rival, and says he
wants to wait until Flora is well. She says, (I
would marry if I did not have these attacks.' "
Now it is a rule that two boys are less than one,
and we can understand how being in love with two
men defers the question of marrying one of them.
Her goal in life is to escape the problem of love and
she realizes her goal, not only by dividing her love
interests, but by exaggerating her fainting spells to

60
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
demonstrate that she is not responsible. But you must
not believe that these actions are conscious or malicious.
The girl is sick, and it is a part of her pattern of life
to be unconscious of the real meaning of her attacks.
You see how appropriate this pattern is for the attain-
ment of her hidden goal. The fact that she wants to
be true to the boy who has waited so long, is perhaps
a sign of her scrupulous conscience, but what we must
do in the treatment is to show her that she is not as
conscientious as she believes. I am a little suspicious
of the boy who says he will wait until she is well, and
perhaps she has chosen him as a lover because he
falls in with her plans and is willing to wait. It is
interesting to see how she formulates her own style of
life in the statement,
It I would marry, if I did not
have these attacks." This demonstrates her good will,
to be sure, but the real meaning of the statement can
be derived solely from the dramatic aside which we
do not hear:
II But I do have them! "
The case history gives two more important points.
'I At the time of the second attack a grandchild
was born and Flora's mother kept her at the
house most of the time. Also at this time she
met the first young man with whom she fell in
love."
This second attack is very questionable and it is
probable that Flora unconsciously realized she could
achieve much more in the house if she were ill.

A GESTURE OF THE WHOLE BODY
61
CONFERENCE
Flora enters the room.
DR. ADLER. I should like to ask whether you had a
good position when you were taken sick? Were you
having any difficulties in the office?
FLORA. I had considered leaving the position several
times. I was not happy in the place because there were
too many people and too much excitement.
DR. ADLER. Did you like your employer and the
people you worked with?
FLORA. Yes, my companions were very nice and my
employer was typical of most employers.
DR. ADLER. I understand that you had some kidney
trouble and this might have made \vorking difficult for
you. Did your employer ever criticize you?
FLORA. No, he never criticized me. I was perfectly
\vell.
DR. ADLER. But you wanted to leave your job.
FLORA. Yes.
DR. ADLER. Are you working now?
FLORA. Yes, as a secretary in a real estate office.
DR. ADLER. Do you like your new job?
FLORA. Yes, I like it very much better.
DR. ADLER. I am glad that you have bettered your
position. Can you tell me something that you remem-
ber from your early childhood? It need not be anything
very important. Perhaps you can remember what you
liked and \vhat you disliked.

62
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
FLORA. That's rather hard to say. I suppose I liked
outdoor sports.
DR. ADLER. Which sports did you like best?
FLORA. Skating, sliding down hill, and climbing
trees.
DR. ADLER. You must have been a very brave girl.
FLORA. I had to be. I had four brothers to contend
with.
DR. ADLER. Were you able to stand it?
FLORA. I think I always held my own.
DR. ADLER. Do you remember wishing you were
a boy?
FLORA. No, I don't think I ever wanted to be a boy,
but I always played with boys because there were no
girls to associate with.
DR. ADLER. I suppose you were brought up like a
boy, and had many boy friends because of your
brothers.
FLORA. Undoubtedly.
DR. ADLER. I think if you speak with your teacher
\vho has brought in the history, she will tell you why
you have become so very sensitive. You are a person
who easily gets in a state of great tension, and you
have these fainting spells to demonstrate your weak-
ness. They occur only when you have been crossed
or criticized. It seems to me you are a little afraid of
the future, alld that you do not trust yourself enough.
I think also that you do not want to decide things for
yourself and that you want to be loved without any

A GESTURE OF THE WHOLE BODY
63
effort on your part. I can understand such a state of
mind very well; but I believe that your health will
be improved if you are more courageous and if you
realize that you need not always contend with your
brothers. There are better ways to live than always
being
in
a
position
of
complete
powerlessness.
Wouldn't you like to try another way?
FLORA. Yes, of course.
DR. ADLER. The whole trouble is that you are not
brave enough. I would suggest that you decide to
assume the whole responsibility for your own actions,
and I am sure that if you take this one step it will be
tremendously helpful to you.
FLORA. Do you mean that if I am courageous I can
cure my attacks?
DR. ADLER. Yes.
FLORA. \Vell, I am willing to try anything.

MATERNAL DOMINATION
T
HIS evening we are to consider the case of
Robert, who is eleven years and eight months
old. There is some doubt in the mind of his teacher
as to whether or not the boy is feeble-minded. The
problem of feeble-mindedness is extremely difficult and
complicated, and we must be very careful in our
diagnosis, because the patient's failure or success as
a human being may depend entirely upon our decision.
It is reasonable to expect a completely normal boy
of this age to have reached at least the fifth grade,
but the case notes state:
II The boy is retarded in school; he is in the
third grade,
and has a very low intelligence
quotient. He is quiet and docile in his class. In the
past he has always been slow and timid and did
not learn to speak until very late."
It seems as if there \vere really a considerable
retardation in this case, but sometimes normal children
also are slow and timid, especially if they are left-
handed. Frequently the left-handed child is not clever
with his hands and, having experienced a number of
defeats and failures, he expresses his over-cautiou~ness
by slow movement. The fact that this boy did not
learn to talk until very late is suspicious, because we
know that this is a common difficulty with feeble-
minded children. Where the mental defect is profound
they do not learn to speak at all. On the other hand,
10

MATERNAL DOMINATION
65
there is also a certain type of spoiled child who does
not talk until late. We have a special word for this
type in German, but there is no such word in English.
These children can hear, but do not speak, although
they are not deaf and dumb. Under such circum-
stances it is very hard to determine whether a child
is or is not feeble-minded, especially as some of these
children prove later to be intelligent, and good talkers.
I know of some people, both among the dead and
among the living, who, after great difficulty in the
beginning, "vere able to speak beautifully later in life.
In this case we must look for one of t"vo patterns-
either that of a feeble-minded
child, or that of a
spoiled child. In some respects the patterns of the
spoiled child and the feeble-minded child are identical.
It is possible that this child is a combination of both
and we may have some difficulty in deciding what the
truth is.
II The father is a short, stout, retiring man, the
mother a charming and attractive woman. There
are two older sisters, sixteen and fourteen years
old; there have not been any other children. The
parents are congenial; there are no quarrels,
but the mother dominates the home. The mother
says that the father favours the elder girl but that
the boy has been closer to her."
You see that he has a certain advantage in being
the only boy and the baby of the family. Perhaps it
is a contradiction, but I have not seen many happy
5

66
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
marriages in which one parent or fue other dominated
the home. When the mother says that the boy is closer
to her, she does not express herself very fully. She
probably might add, 'I I have spoiled him."
"The boy speaks oftener of his mother than of
other members of the family. The family calls him
Buster, a very inappropriate nickname because
he is slow and retarded. Both girls are in high
school and are very bright."
When one child in the family is very bright we
can usually look for difficulties with the other children.
The superiority of the more intelligent child makes
the other children appear inferior by contrast, and this
probably has happened in the case under consideration.
An over-petted child is easily discouraged, and it may
be that this is the trouble with Robert. This gives us
a little hope, because it is easier to discourage an
intelligent child than a feeble-minded boy, and allows
us to conclude that the child had more courage before
he went to school. Perhaps, after all, it is not a case
of feeble-mindedness.
" Entrance to school is gained by a competitive
examination, and the record of his two sisters was
held up to the boy. His present teacher has dis-
couraged this."
This corroborates our point very satisfactorily.
"The father takes a negative attitude toward
the child. He believes that the boy was born this

MATERNAL DOMINATION
67
way and will always be this way. The mother says
that none of the children were ever spanked. She
says, 'He is our only boy, the baby, and it was
such a blow to find that he was not like the
others.' "
The father's hopelessness is discouraging, because
very often a child
d~velops according to his father's
opinion of him. On this account particularly, it will
be our duty to encourage the child and let him feel
that there is hope for his normal development. The
fact that the child has progressed as far as the third
grade in the public school leads me to believe that
this is not a hopeless case.
Suppose we try thinking of Robert as if he were
only a problem child, leaving the question of his feeble-
mindedness entirely out of consideration. We find that
his position in the family has been very circumscribed:
on the one hand, he is too closely connected with his
mother and dependent on her for support; on the other
hand, he cannot compete with the two older girls, who
are brighter than he is. As he is not courageous, he
does not fight-he remains quiet, as we have heard.
\Ve can hardly expect that such a boy would develop
very well. You might compare it, for instance, with
three trees growing in a narro\v place-if two of the
trees have overcome the difficulties and grown strong,
the third tree cannot grow freely. The same thing
holds true for children. In this family the girls have
taken up all the available space, and the boy has been

68
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
forced to place his goal on the lower level: not to go
on. In this way we can explain his entire pattern of
development.
t t The girls are very companionable with each
other. The boy speaks oftener of the older girl,
who takes him for walks and to the movies. He
claims the younger girl teases him, and he teases
her in retaliation."
The younger girl and the boy show the extremes of
the situation. The younger girl is active and aggres-
sive, and although there is not much said about hel;
it is almost certain that she is striving to be the
first in the family; whereas the boy, having been dis-
couraged, has given up his efforts and is content to
remain in the rear. The fact that the boy and the
younger girl tease each other bespeaks their'competi-
tion. She is fourteen years old and he is nearly twelve.
This means that she ,vas two and a half years old
when he was born. She felt herself dethroned by his
presence, and her attack was. directed against him so
successfully that he did not try to compete.
It The family's finances are fair. The mother
keeps house, while the father manages a local
grocery, in which he has a financial interest. The
girls are well dressed and do not work in their
spare time. There are fi,re rooms, and five single
beds; each member of the family sleeps alone. The
boy sleeps with his face to the wall and sometimes
curls up."

MATERNAL DOMINATION
69
I have done some research in this matter of sleep-
attitudes, and I have found that a great deal may be
discovered by watching the way people sleep at night.
The boy's sleep-attitude seems to say, "I am not
courageous. I do not want to see anything." When he
curls up, it means that he would like to disappear, or
roll himself into a baIl like a hedgehog, so as to offer
no exposure to the enemy.
"The father sleeps in the same room with the
boy, and the mother says that she must sometimes
lie down with the boy and quiet him until he falls
asleep."
This latter point is important because it shows that
the boy is very fearful and demands that his mother
support him in his timidity. He does not want to
function as an independent being, and regulates his
behaviour to compel his mother's attention. Put this
boy in a situation where he is not with her, such as a
classroom at school, and he is discouraged. In a way,
he turns his back and closes his eyes in a fashion
symbolized by his sleep-attitude. It is evident that he
does not want to be -confronted by any problems.
"The mother admits that she slept \vith the boy
until he was much older than the other children.
l"he parents are of Italian descent, but there are
no limitations placed by the father on the mother
and the girls, as is common in some Italian
families. The mother says,
I I have full control
at home. Sometimes my husband tells me I ought

70
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
not to go out, as I am too tired, because like all
men he does not want me to go out, but he does
not say so in so many words.' "
The mother's admission proves that Robert has
been humoured more than his sisters, which we already
suspected.
Moreover,
the father
does not under-
value women, and has not attempted to suppress his
dominating wife.
" The physical history of the boy is as follows:
the mother was in labour twelve hours at his birth,
but no instruments were used. There was some
difficulty in the labour and during his birth the
boy's face became quite blue. He weighed twelve
pounds at birth."
This point of the difficult delivery is not as important
as may be believed. Probably the child had a large
head. It is quite common for boys to have larger heads
than girls \vhen they are born.
It Mother says he was not a
pr~tty baby and
had a yellow skin when he was born. At two
months he broke out in a rash which remained
until he was fifteen months old. He held up his
head at an early age and sat up at six months.
First tooth appeared at eight months, and at this
time he was weaned. There was considerable
trouble with feeding, and until a proper formula
was found, his bowels were inflamed. At the age
of nine months he began to eat solid food. At

MATERNAL DOMINATION
71
fifteen months the mother began to train him to
keep dry, and at two years he had full control
of his bladder. He was given a little cod-liver oil
as a child. The mother noticed something was
wrong when he got bigger and bigger but did not
speak. He walked at two years."
Only the physician who was present at birth can
give us the proper information about the yellow skin
and the early rash. It is presumable that he had rickets
as a child if he did not learn to walk until he was two
years old.
ee He communicated
by motions and a few
sounds which the family understood and
~e
mother understood best."
It is very unfortunate that the mother understood
these motions of the child. As talking was unneces-
sary it is not surprising that he had little desire to
develop speech.
"There is no hearing defect. The doctor told
the mother not to worry about the boy but to
leave him alone because some day' things would
dawn on him.' The boy began to talk at the age
of five.
His adenoids and tonsils have been
removed. He has never been sick and he eats
everything. ',
It is not uncommon for children \vhose whims have
all been gratified, not to talk until after the fourth

72
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
year. On the other hand, it is usual to hear that these
children have many food fads or that they wet the
bed. As our patient does not do these things, we may
conclude that he has maintained such a favourable
situation with his mother that he feels no need to
improve it.
t t For the past two years he has been wearing
glasses to correct a defective vision (20/70). He
learned to dress himself about a year and a half
ago. He has to be constantly urged to dress him-
self, as he dawdles a long time, and it takes him
considerable time to determine which shoe goes
on \vhich foot. He is bigger and heavier than most
children of his age (five feet tall, weighs one
hundred pounds)."
That he did not learn to dress himself until he was
ten years old is a certain sign that he has been badly
spoiled. He is not very much interested in dressing
himself, because he wants his mother to help him.
The fact that he is larger than children of his age may
be a symptom of a diseased pituitary gland, but on
the other hand it may simply be a sign that he is a
healthy child and that his mother has fed him well.
t t He writes with his right hand but does every-
thing else with his left hand."
This is a very important point because it assures us
that he is congenitally a left-handed child who has

MATERNAL DOMINATION
73
been confronted and discouraged by the problems of
adjusting himself to a right-handed world.
It The boy has always been closer to his mother
and older sister. He seldom mentions his father."
It is a common situation among pampered children
\\tho spend the greatest part of their time with their
mother, that the father cannot compete with the
mother. This father has really made a great mistake,
especially by being hopeless about the boy. I am sure
that the older sister could win our patient over, but
his reconciliation with the father is a more difficult
problem. As long as the mother is present the child
will always turn toward her. The father should take
the boy away on a trip, show him a good time and
become his "pal."
At some time he should confess
to Robert that his opinion of his intelligence was
mistaken. Our treatment should begin with the recon-
ciliation of the boy and his father.
,'The mother sends him on errands, and he
likes to go and talks about it. If she wants two or
more items from the store she must write them
on a slip of paper. Since this report was begun,
the storekeeper suggested that the mother give him
no slip, and an improvement has been noticed."
We can hardly expect a child who is not accus-
tomed to function alone to remember two or more
items when he is sent to the store. The storekeeper,

74
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
however, understands the boy and has good insight
into his situation. There are many laymen who have
such understanding. The fact that an improvement
has been noticed, indeed, that there are possibilities
of improvement, is a very good sign. It leads us to
believe that most of the bad mistakes that we find
can be obviated.
" Sometimes the mother notices him talking to
a make-believe child, and answering for him. It
is usually a boy with whom he is speaking. Then
he talks rough and ready, like a street boy.
His face becomes animated and he seems to be
fighting."
Many children play this game of talking to a
fictitious child, and it is very interesting that this boy
who could not talk for such a long time now trains
himself to speak, not only for himself, but also for
another child. Robert might even develop into a writer
or a dramatist. Left-handed children are often inclined
to be artistic. We may also infer from his game and
the fact that he quarrels with his sisters, that he longs
for the companionship of a boy. He has probably
already developed a certain fear of women and an
overvaluation of their power, especially if his mother
is a dominating woman. He evidently has a lively
imagination-which is very common in timid children.
It is easy to be heroic, gallant, and courageous, in a
day-dream. Really, he is a coward, and yet it hurts

MATERNAL DOMINATION
75
him to believe this and so in his imagination he makes
believe that he is a conqueror. What we have to do is
to show him the way to be courageous in reality.
C C He does not play with the boys in the street.
He says,
t The boys in the street will no~ play my
way; they are always fighting and I don't like to
fight.' Sometimes he has quiet laughing spells,
which the mother fears. These are greater at
times, and then almost disappear."
He does not play with the boys in the street because
he is timid, while the laughing spells that the mother
fears are instruments with which he can weaken
her
domination.
Probably they are
most violent
when she does not give Wa)l to him, or indulge him
sufficiently.
t C Sometimes in sleep he sits up in bed, talks to
himself about various things, then quietly lies
down and sleeps without anyone interfering."
Many children scream at night in order to bring
their mothers to them. This boy is satisfied merely to
give his mother a hint.
c' In school he tries to make friends but is easily
discouraged. The children do not avoid him or
call him names.
Although he has had many
teachers he can recall but two of the names of
preceding ones."

76
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
If a pampered child does not make friends easily,
he soon gives up trying. So far as his memory is
concerned, he does not remember the names of his
teachers because he did not like them. This is not so
much a lack of memory, as it is a desire to forget.
"It is only recently that he began to speak to
the children around him in school. He entered
school at the age ,of six, spent two terms in lA,
three in IB, two in 2A, two in 2B, one in 3A,
two in 3B, now being in 3B for the second time."
The fact that he does not speak to other children
shows again how isolated our patient is. Nevertheless,
he is beginning to improve. It is fortunate that he
began school at the age of six, and not. at a later age.
His constant repetition of classes is hardly calculated
to encourage him, and we can understand that he is
not very much interested in school. It will be our duty
to give him hope. One way to do this is to give him
some good repcrts in school, even though his work is
not excellent. This policy is not as erroneous as it
sounds. There is little sense in discouraging this boy
by giving him bad reports, and my recommendation
is not to give him any reports until he has made
some progress. It might be well to give him easier
tasks in school, which the teacher is convinced he can
accomplish. She should find out his special interests,
and encourage him to work along those lines. It is
the teacher's task to show him that he can really be
a worth-while pupil. I know that it is very difficult

MATERNAL DOMINATION
77
to do this in public schools, and I know the objection
may be raised that the other children will believe
Robert is preferred to them. My answer to this is, that
a feeling must be developed which will enable the
entire class to help the teacher deal with the child. It
will help our patient if the other pupils co-operate in
helping him.
II His handwriting
IS that of the 7th grade
child."
Here is one field in which he is advanced. He has
trained his hands. This is a compensation for his
deficiency as a left-handed child. Nevertheless, the boy
is discouraged in spite of conquering this particular
handicap. Many individuals prefer to be influenced by
their defeats rather than by their success, and in the
pattern of a timid child defeat is often valued more
highly than success.
I I His drawing is poor."
In spite of this statement, I believe that Robert could
develop considerable facility in drawing or designing
if his interest were aroused. This would be one of the
compensations for his poor eyes. The teacher says that
he wears glasses in school, but perhaps he has not
trained his eyes because he does not like to wear
them.
"He is very backward in reading."

78
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
It is well known that some left-handed children
are slow in reading because they tend to reverse the
letters in the word. Perhaps Robert belongs to this
type of left-handed individual. One of my students,
Dr. Alice Friedman, made the discovery that left-
handed children reverse and twist the letters in words
when they read. Movements from left to right are
normal for right-handed people, whereas left-handed
people move more easily from right to left, and this
fundamental tendency permeates the entire psyche. A
left-handed child whose peculiarity is not recognized,
experiences a number of failures in school, and eventu-
ally is no longer interested, because he cannot compete
in reading with right-handed children. It is no wonder
that his progress stops, for his misfortunes in reading
and drawing are projected toward all the problems
he must face. If we find that Robert is suffering from
the reading disability associated with left-handedness,
we must try to correct his training.
There are a number of signs which will help us. If
he twists the letter of a word in spelling, or if you
ask him to draw an animal and he draws it moving
from right to left, or places his left thumb on top when
he clasps his hand, it is presumptive evidence that he
is left-handed.
II In spelling he has three tricks. He knows the
word; he knows the word and inverts two letters,
or he doesn't knovv the word and almost invariably
begins it with 'e.' The teacher attributes the last
two to his left-handedness."

MATERNAL DOMINATION
79
I believe this is only a symptom of his despair, he
does not know how to go on.*
l'In March, I926, he was examined by the
inspector of the ungraded classes. He was then
eight years old and he attained a mental age of
four years, six months."
We can easily see how the suspicion might grow
that this boy is feeble-minded, but intelligence tests
are not definitive, and must not stop our diagnosis.
We know that an over-petted child is so frightened
by his defeats in school that he does not concentrate
in tak~ng the test and the results are not reliable. The
low intelligence quotient fits into the pattern of a
spoiled child just as well as it does into that of a feeble-
minded child. The psychological tests are valuable
only when they coincide with all our other findings,
but in this case the boy's failures are due to his
wish to be supported by his mother and to his deep
discouragement.
"His intelligence quotient according to the
Stanford-Binet Test, was 52, the basal year was
3, the upper limits 7. The achievement in reading
according to the Haggerty Reading Test, is that
of a IA child. The achievement in arithmetic
according to the Woody-McCall Mixed Funda-
mental Test is that of a rA child. The boy is
* Editor's note: As a great many words end in "e/' and the natural
tendency of this child is to begin a \vord from the end, it is reasonable
to suspect that this is an important sign of his left-handedness.

80
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
very attractive and pleasant and co-operates well
in the test."
The last sentence gives us another reason for his
being spoiled and shows 'also that he is intelligent
enough to make capital of his attractiveness.
(I His reaction time is quick, and his attention
good. He habitually repeated the last word he had
spoken, but the present teacher does not find that
he does this."
The repetition of words is a sign of uncertainty
and an attempt to win time by hesitating and stam-
mering. Very likely his present teacher does not find
this fault because she does not press him so much and
he is not afraid of her.
(( The boy is seriously retarded in mental de- .
velopment and fails to distinguish colours and
forms. (He had no glasses at this time.) "
There is no doubt that there is an organic inferiority
of the eye, and he may be colour-blind as well. The
fact that he cannot distinguish forms indicates a lack
of proper training.
" His memory for digits is equal to a four-year
child, while his memory for thoughts is equal to a
three-year child."
This information seems really discquraging, but we
know that intelligent adult persons under severe strain

MATERNAL DOMINATION
81
may be unable to conpt, and Robert's emotions and
attitudes, during the examination, are important fac-
tors in deciding its importance.
'I He was
recommended
for
the
ungraded
classes, but as his mother would not consent, he
was put with the other children in the slow-
progress class. He claims he has no dreams."
If he has no dreams it is a sign that he is entirely
satisfied with his present situation, that he has arrived
at his goal of being thoroughly indulged and that the
world presents no problems to him. He has attained
security at home and at school, and he does not strive
any more.
II At first he claims that he has no childhood
remembrances, but states, , A little girl used to let
me ride on her bicycle.' This hap.pened recently,
but he speaks of it as if it had happened a long
time ago."
This remembrance fits into his pattern: he wants
everyone to be his servant.
" Ambition: at one time he wanted to be big
enough to do his own spelling; at another time
he wanted to sweep the store for his father. "
If he expressed the first ambition independently, it
is a good indication that he understands his deficiencies
G

82
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
and expects to overcome them in the future, while the
second ambition shows that he wants to be liked by
his father also.
" Another ambition is to be "big enough to play
around in the street; he does not want to work
to earn money. Given three wishes, he chooses: to
be big, to be strong, to learn his lessons. The first
two came quite spontaneously. JJ
We find a note of discouragement again in his desire
to avoid work. So far as his ambitions are concerned,
I believe the first two are the wish of every boy,
especially in America where athletics play such an
important role. That he wants to learn his lessons,
shows where the trouble lies.
"Given his choice of staying in the house to
read a book or going on the street, he chooses
the second. The teacher believes this is a case
of a discouraged youngest child handicapped by
the clumsiness" of his large size and his left-
handedness. The parents have been told to give
him responsibilities, to notice his useful activities,
and to avoid praising his sisters in his presence.
The teacher has given him responsibility in the
classroom, such as distributing paper and ventilat-
ing the room. He is quick to watch for the signal.
At first he showed little judgment in the amount
of paper he took, but an improvement has been
noticed."

MATERNAL DOMINATION
83
The teacher has chosen the very best way to help
this child, and I could not recommend any better. I
should like to explain to this child that some mistakes
in his education have been made. I want to encourage
him to believe that he can rise to his sisters' level, and
explain to him that he has not succeeded because he
has been too dependent on his mother and lost con-
fidence in himself. We must assure him of his success
even if it does not come immediately. We can use the
analogy of learning to swim, where all initial move-
ments are wrong-or otherwise one could swim from
the very beginning. You cannot swim right away, but
you can learn it in the end. We must put the proposi-
tion to the boy in terms that he can understand.
The child must also understand that he has to make
better contacts with his playmates. I should place him
in a group or a club after school hours, so that he
wOl1ld be more with strangers and less with his mother.
We must explain the specific difficulties that he has in
reading and re-educate him to read correctly. If we
can lift him from his hopelessness he will improve.
The last points of the case history show that he is
already on the right path, and I am sure that the
teacher will notice an improvement. Furthermore, we
must speak with the mother and explain to her that
he is an intelligent child, but that she will be able
to enjoy his intelligence only if she makes him inde-
pendent. It is clear from the difficulties of this case
why spoiled children contribute the largest percentage
of problem children.

84
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
CONFERENCE
The mother enters.
DR. ADLER. We should like to talk to you about
Robert. We believe that he is an intelligent boy, and
that his difficulties are largely due to the fact that he
does not see any necessity for acting independently
so long as you solve his problems for him. It ~s possible
for you to correct the situation. You must make him
more independent, put him among strange children,
and let him live more among his playmates. Let him
join a club or a play group in his free time. It is not
good for Robert to be with you so much, because
he knows how to influence you and always knows what
to expect from you. We also believe that the child is
left-handed and that this left-handedness is the cause
of much of the trouble, especially in reading and
spelling. If he is correctly taught he can learn to read
and spell as well as any other child, but at present he
is discouraged, and refuses to go on because he has
failed so often. You must let him wash and dress him-
self, and do not nag him if he makes a mistake. It
would also be well to have this boy more closely con-
nected with his father. You should tell your husband
to give Robert a chance. It would be well for the
father to take him a\vay for a few days on a trip and
make a comrade of him. The boy must be told in so
many words that his father believes in his success. It
is my opinion that he is a normal child, and if you will
give me permission, I shall talk to him now to see
\vhether I can influence him to be more independent.

MATERNAL DOMINATION
85
MOTHER. I know he will be very much frightened.
I am frightened myself because I did not expect to
see such an audience.
The boy is called for. As he enters the room the
mother says, (( Come on, Buster," and he goes straight
to his mother and puts his arms around her.
DR. ADLER. Must you protect your mother? I do
not think she will fall. I think she can stand up by
herself. Would you like to be supported by your
mother all the time or be a grown-up man?
ROBERT. A grown-up man.
DR. ADLER. Would you rather work alone or would
you rather have others work for you?
ROBERT. I should like to have my mother work
for me.
DR. ADLER. It is very nice to like your mother,
but you cannot expect her to do everything for you.
You would be happier if you did more things for
yourself. You must begin to do things alone. Other
children begin very early, and you have had some
trouble because you have begun late. But you can
help yourself if you begin right away to do everything
alone: brush your teeth, wash yourself, and dress
yourself alone. Do not let your mother interfere with
you. Wouldn't it be much nicer if you could do things
by yourself ? Have you learned to swim?
ROBERT. Yes.
DR. ADLER. Don't you remember that it was hard
work at first? I am sure it took you some time to learn
to swim as well as you do now. Whatever you do is

86
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
hard in the beginning, but after a while you succeed.
If you can learn to swim, you can also learn to read
and do your arithmetic, but you must keep at it, have
patience, and not always expect your mother to do
it for you. I am sure that you can do it. Do not worry
because others can do better than you. Your teacher
tells me that you have made some improvement re-
cently. That is splendid. How would you like to have
some friends to play with? How would you like to
join a club?
ROBERT. It would be very nice.
DR. ADLER. We will find you a jolly club, where
you can play and talk and show how independent you
are. I think it would be nice if you were to take a trip
with your father, too.
Robert leaves the room with his mother.
Discussion by the class:
STUDENT. Should we teach a left-handed person to
write with the right hand?
DR. ADLER. I think this is a good thing to do for
two reasons. In the first place, our entire 'civilization
is right-handed. In the second place, if a person
always uses the left hand, he is conspicuous. He is
apt to believe that he is different or unequal. You
have no doubt seen rather uncomplimentary statistics
about left-handed people, but my statistics show that
many of them are artistic, especially when they have
trained the weak right hand. There is a superstition
that if you train a left-handed child to use the right
hand he will become a stutterer. We should not take

MATERNAL DOMINATION
87
this superstition seriously. To be sure, when the
training is done in a mistaken way, and the child is
reproached and humiHated, he may show his malad-
justment by stuttering. I consider it very important
tllat a teacher know whether a child is essentially left-
handed or right-handed, because if a left-handed child
is labouring under difficulties we kno\v that mistakes
are being made about him whose effects may last for
years.
STUDENT. What would you do in a case where a
ten-year-old boy, ready for junior high, uses both
hands and is very precocious? Attempting to write
witll his right hand makes him nervous; he cries, and
says he won't do it.
DR. ADLER. That is because he has been badly
trained.
STUDENT. He plays the piano very well.
.DR. ADLER. You could use his interest in the piano
in training the right hand. This should be done by
SOIl).eone not personally interested, who can speak to
the child only from a scientific point of view. You
see, by playing the piano, he can exercise both hands.
STUDENT. Would you suggest manual training for
a left-handed child?
DR. ADLER. Yes, by all means. You know that
many left-handed ball-players and prize-fighters train
themselves so that they are much quicker with the
right hand than with the left. Success always comes
to those who struggle for it, and this is especially true
of left-handed people in the arts. But let us get back

88
TIlE PATTERN OF LIFE
to our case. We see that Robert's greatest problem
is his school work. Do you remember how he came
into the room and immediately clung to his mother?
This is characteristic of his whole life; he wants
his mother to support him. You will see how he
will improve in a short while if he carries out our
instructions.
STUDENT. Would you advise corporal punishment
for such a child, under any circumstances?
DR. ADLER. You ought to be convinced that I am
entirely against all corporal punishment. The method
I use is to learn the circumstances of early childhood,
to explain and to persuade. What possible result could
you gain by beating such a child? We have no justi-
fication for beating a child because he is' a school
failure. He is not able to read, because he has not
been properly trained, and spanking would not im-
prove the training. The only result \vould be that the
child \vould reconcile himself to being spanked for
his failures, and would become a truant in order to
escape an unpleasant situation. Look at the spanking
from the child's point of vie\v and yo'u will see that
it only increases the difficulty. In passing, let me say
that only those people beat children who do not
understand what else to do with them.
EDITOR'S NOTE. After the conference in Dr. Adler's
class this patient was seen by the editor and was
treated for a period of months. A thorough examina-
tion showed that the child was suffering from an

MATERNAL DOMINATION
89
aggravated form of dyslexia strephosymbolica, the
specific reading disability of left-handed children. His
left-handedness was very marked and was indicated,
not only by a complete preponderance of the left
half of his body, but also by his preference for left-
handed actions in all intuitive and early formed
motor reactions. The child had no conception of
the inner structure of "vords, twisted the letters within
the ·words, confused the plus and the mUltiplication
signs, and had practically no idea of the correlation
of the sounds of individual letters in the alphabet. He
was taught to read by a kinesthetic method devised
by the editor, so that at the end of two months' treat-
ment he was able to read books far in advance of his
school age. It was "vith great difficulty that the mother
was persuaded to allow the child to come alone to the
consultations and she never consented to his going
to a boys' camp. Although great progress has been
made in this case, it is probable that the boy will
always be inhibited and will never attain a complete
independence, not because of any inherent defect, but
because of the emotional fixations of his mother.

THE ROAD TO CRIME
T
HE case we have tonight is that of an eight-year-
old boy. The first notes of the case history are
the following:
"Carl T., age eight years, two months, class
2B, 1.Q. g8, whose present problem is that he
lies to his family, teacher, and other boys. He
has committed some thefts, and has been lying
and stealing since the age of five. Before this time
there was no problem."
As Carl's average intelligent quotient is 98, we may
safely conclude that he is not a feeble-minded child.
Lying is a sign of the child's insecurity and weakness.
When we hear of a child who lies, it is wise to learn
in the very beginning whether he tells boastful lies
or whether there is someone in the environment of
\vhom he is afraid. Perhaps the child wishes to avoid
punishment, scolding, and humiliation.
It is stated in the .case history that he has lied and
stolen since the age of five, but before that was not
a problem child. If this observation is correct we may
assume that a crisis in the boy's life occurred in his
fifth year. It is probably that he has an inferiority
complex, and is more interested in himself than in
anyone else. He steals, which signifies that he feels
humiliated and tries to increase his self-esteem in a
useless way.
10

91
THE ROAD TO CRIME
t t The mother told the teacher in confidence
that she was ne.ver married to the child's father.
Her mother died when she was very young and
at the age of sixteen she was seduced by a friend
of her father whom she never saw subsequently,
and who never knew that she gave birth to a
child."
It is usually very difficult to develop social interest
in an illegitimate child. In our prevailing civilization
illegitimacy is considered a disgrace, and a child with
this background is put on the defensive. Carl has been
brought up in a difficult situation. A large percentage
of illegitimate children develop into criminals, drunk-
ards, sexual perverts, and so on, because they have
been badly handicapped and are attracted by illicit
modes of behaviour which seem to promise a short
cut to happiness. In this case the father has been
absent, and the boy has lacked still another normal
opportunity for developing social feeling.
t, When he was five years old his mother
married. The stepfather has a child of his own, a
girl two years older than Carl."
Carl's trouble began in his fifth year, when his
mother married. Probably he felt that the one perso~
with whom he had made an adequate social contact
was taken away from him by his mother's husband.
We may presume that he came to the conclusion,

92
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
,t Nobody is interested in me." The introduction of a
sister into the family offered an additional complicating
factor, because his mother probably had to take care
of this child too. Perhaps this girl was well developed,
beloved by her father, and a well-behaved child,
making the difficulty even greater for Carl. He was
only five years old, after all, and his former experi-
ence had not been of a kind to develop sufficient
courage and strength to face this new situation. So
he became a problem child.
(( There are now two other children, a sister
two and one-half and a brother one and one-half
years old."
These two other
childre~ narrow his position still
further. In all probability, his pattern has been built
up in such a way that he actually believes the others
are preferred by his parents.
tt Until he was two years old he lived with his
mother. Then the mother went to work in a
children's nursery, and for three months he was
on a nursery farm in Connecticut. He was unhappy
at the farm and came home so frighte11ed that he
ran away from everyone."
During the two years that he was with his mother,
Carl was probably interested only in her. Evidently
his experiences at the farm were not conducive to a
development of his slight social feeling.

THE ROAD TO CRIME
93
II He stayed with his mother six months, until
she went to work for a doctor whose children
she cared for. Carl was boarded in a near-by
home, and his mother saw him daily. He was
very happy there and remained in the home until
his ·mother married when he was five years old.
Both parents are members of the Salvation Army
and the father plays in the Salvation Army
band."
Carl was happy only when he was close to his
mother. The occupation of the parents is evidence
that they probably are quite poor.
" The mother cried the first time she was inter-
viewed by the teacher, and said, 'I do not know
what to do about Carl.'"
We know that it is very bad for a child if his parents
are discouraged about him. The child is justified then
.in losing all hope himself, and when a child is hopeless
the last vestiges of his social interest are lost.
"The father beats him with a razor strop when
he is bad. He goes to Sunday school regularly and
last week attended a new Sunday school. He was
given fifteen cents, ten cents for car-fare and five
cents for the collection. After he had gone, his
mother wondered whether he had taken the right
street-car and \vent to the corner to look for him.

94
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
She saw him coming from a candy store where he
had spent ten cents for candy."
These are important facts, because we have found
the severe person whom we
pre~supposed
in the
environment. The candy store is a simple compensa-
tion for a
child who feels
himself discriminated
against. Such a child has not many ways to compen-
sate, and the candy store is one of the most common.
tt He came to school lately, bringing the teacher
a box of candy."
From the fact that he tries to bribe his teacher
to like him, we may conclude that he was once a
spoiled child and remembers the pleasures of being
indulged.
" He had four and a half dollars which he said
belonged to his mother. It was the change he
had obtained from the candy store. The teacher
put the money in an envelope and kept it for
him until dismissal time. Then she returned it to
him, impressing him with the fact that he must
return the money to his mother. When Carl
returned to school at one o'clock and was asked
whether he had returned the money, he answered,
'Yes.'"
No child in such a situation would answer in the
negative. We cannot expect a child to admit stealing.

THE ROAD TO CRIME
95
II A short time later the teacher noticed that
many of his classmates had new toys and some
of them money they had received from Carl."
He wants to bribe his playmates as well as his
teacher, and we must conclude that he feels a lack of
affection and appreciation. It is not surprising that
he behaves badly, that he is a problem boy, and that
he is treated as an outcast, but we must realize that to
Carl all this is a confirmation of the central thesis of
his life. 'I The others are preferred."
I I The teacher said that his mother was sent for,
and after many lies as to where he got the money,
he finally confessed that he took it from an aunt
who was visiting them."
In cases of this kind the teacher must be very tactful
in her investigation. It was wise to speak with the
mother first and not allo\v the other children to know
of his theft.
I I Carl was a normal, healthy child until he was
two years old, but since then has been rather
weak. He asks to leave the room many times a
day. The mother has had him examined by a
physician, but no kidney trouble is present. He
masturbates frequently in school."
These facts further indicate that Carl wishes to gain
the attention of his teacher in the schoolroom. When

96
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
he cannot do it by bribing his teachers and classmates,
he does it by masturbating.
It He wets the bed every night of his life."
If this is true, we can be certain that the mother
has not fulfilled her functions correctly in teaching
him how to be clean.
It He was deprived of dessert, but it had no
effect on his bed-wetting. He went without dessert
for six months. He was promised twenty-five cents
if he would stop for a week, but he did not stop
even for a single night."
If his pattern demands attention from his mother,
none of these methods will cause him to relinquish so
important a weapon against her as bed-wetting. How
could this boy stop? His goal is a goal of useless
superiority: to be the centre of attention. He must
folIo",," this pattern, and if he is stopped in one way
he will increase his efforts to gain attention another
way. Depriving such a child of dessert will only
increase his desire for candy. His mother's method of
compelling him to stop his bed-wetting deepened Carl's
feeling ofdegradation. He has lost hope of ever winning
proper appreciation from his family, but he still knows
how to be the centre of attention.
'I He has had the mumps and a severe case of
whooping cough. Two years ago he had stomach

THE ROAD TO CRIME
97
trouble and was on a strict diet for a year, but
since this time has had no further trouble."
It is unusual for a child to have stomach trouble
which demands a strict diet for an entire year, and the
diet complicated by the deprivation of dessert gives
us an interesting picture of his environment.
II His earliest recollection is that at the age of
two he threw his mother's dresser-set out of the
window and boys from the street brought it back
to the house.
I I didn't get punished because I
was too young.' "
It is not unusual to find mismanaged children
throwing things out of the window when they feel they
are not being sufficiently indulged. I know of another
case in which a child, who had a sister some years
younger than he, threw everything he could lay his
hands on, out of the window; he was punished for his
misbehaviour until he developed an anxiety neurosis.
This anxiety neurosis was centred about the fear that
he might throw something out of the window, and
so the boy cried all day. He had found another way
to gain attention in his exaggerated terror that he
\vould be naughty again.
When you punish a child of this type you only
aggravate his condition, for he has no real under-
standing of the circumstances. Should you ask the
child whether he is neglected or discriminated against
in his family, he will usually answer, "No," but you
7

98
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
will see that he is always doing things whose meaning
seems to be, "Watch me more closely."
Lying,
masturbation, stealing, and wetting the bed are all
instruments which the child unconsciously uses because
he wants to be observed and is afraid that he will be
overlooked.
It is interesting to note that Carl's earliest recollec-
tion is connected with the idea of punishment. He
seems to say that there was a time when he could
have avoided punishment, but that he would be
punished if he .did these things today. We know that
there are children who really do not object to being
beaten. When you beat them, they simply say to
themselves, "I must be more cunning and not be
discovered."
This is excellent training for a career of
crime, which is precisely what we are afraid of in this
case.
"It is his ambition to be a doctor. His oldest
sister is going to be a nurse, and he wants to be
in the same hospital."
His real ambition is to be ahead of everyone else
"vith the least effort, and his desire to be a doctor is
his method of making his ambition concrete. As he
has been sick and has suffered a great deal and his
mother has been working in a hospital, we can im~gine
that to be a doctor is Carl's equivalent to being very
close to God. Moreover, he wants to be at least the
equal of his oldest sister and he knows already that a

THE ROAD TO CRIME
99
doctor in the hospital holds a higher position than a
nurse. It is the typical striving of the second child to
surpass the older child. It is a simple and common
story, but Carl's preparation has been especially bad.
Obviously the boy is on the defensive, and our treat-
ment must be directed toward making him feel that
he is the equal of his brother and sisters and not under-
valued by his family. We can do this by explaining
that he can win more significance by good behaviour
than by bad.
The father must be taught to conciliate the child,
rather than to punish him with a razor strap. I am
sure that this father who works in the Salvation Army
would listen to such advice, and I believe that the
mother too could be influenced in the right direc~on.
To be sure, the difficulties are very great, and if it
proves impossible to make Carl's home happier for
him than it now is, with a despairing mother and a
stern father and with his brother and sisters preferred
to him, it may be necessary to remove the boy to a
more favourable environment.
We must explain to the mother the circumstances
that make it possible for Carl to feel he is neglected.
Children often make mistakes because they do not
understand their situation. The mother is the important
member of the family to influence, because it will be
easier for her to make him feel appreciated. Carl must
be instructed to make friends and we might suggest
that it is not necessary to bribe people if he is inter-
ested in them, and faithful to them. This case gives

100
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
a very good idea of the origin of criminality in the
family situation. It is entirely useless to wait until a
boy has committed a hold-up, before we consider him
a criminal. This is the point at which we should
start.
CONFERENCE
STUDENT. Do you believe the religious training and
exercises of the father have influenced this child to go
in an opposite direction? The Salvation Army people
are very strict and make their children do penance
every night for the wrongs they have committed during
the day.
DR. ADLER. I doubt whether there are any further
reasons for this boy's behaviour than those I have
described. You must qe careful not to read ideas into
a case history which are not actually there. If I had
heard that he suffers under the pressure of some
authoritative religious idea, I
might consider your
point, but no such pressure was mentioned. Neverthe-
less your interpretation may be valuable, but from
a different angle. If this boy became thoroughly
rebellious he might attack his parents at the point
where they are most sensitive: in other words, he
might attack their religion. Recently some interesting
statistics were published by a very good German
sociologist, who found that a striking proportion of
criminals came from the families of people who were

THE ROAD TO CRIME
101
occupied with the enforcement of the law. No one has
been able to explain why the children of judges,
lawyers, and teachers are so often criminals. It seems
to me that the only explanation lies in the point I
have just mentioned-that belligerent children attack
their parents at the point of greatest sensitivity. Per-
haps that is why we find so many illnesses in the
families of doctors.
The mother of Carl is sent for but she is reluctant
to enter the room.
DR.
ADLER. The hesitant attitude of this mother
indicates her lack of courage. Perhaps
sh~ is also
ashamed to speak openly about her boy's misdeeds.
Perhaps she does not come because she is crying. We
\vill do what we can to console her and encourage
her. Some of you may wonder why I don't go Qut
to her. I know that she expects me to, but I shall wait
here, because I rather imagine she believes we are
very much excited about the case of her son. I want
to talk to her quietly about his misbehaviour, as
though it were quite usual and easily corrected.
The mother enters the room.
DR. ADLER. I find that Carl's faults are not extra-
ordinary, although I know that many families and
teachers consider them tragedies. Children cannot
always develop in the correct way. I once went into
a classroom and asked, "Who in this room has never
stolen anything?
J J and I found that every child had
stolen something. The teacher too admitted that he

102
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
had stolen things. Therefore we need not look upon
stealing as very terrible, especially, as a child gets
much discouraged if he feels that his mother is hope-
less about him. It would be better if you tried to win
Carl's confidence, and encouraged him to believe that
you are quite hopeful about his future. How does he
act toward the other children in the family?
MOTHER. He seems to be very fond of them.
DR. ADLER. Is he sometimes jealous?
MOTHER. He has a step-sister, and I think there is
a little jealousy between them.
DR. ADLER. Is the step-sister well developed, very
bright, and much beloved?
MOTHER. Yes.
DR. ADLER. I have often found that if one child in
the family is making great progress, the other children
are afraid to compete. It is hard to avoid this situa-
tion, and I think therefore it would be well if you
could reconcile these two children. I believe that your
son thinks he is not liked. He lies and commits other
Inisdeeds because he is in an unhappy situation. Give
him the impression that he will be pardoned and that
you understand why he felt jealous and inferior. With
encouragement, he will become a better pupil in
school, and a good child all round if he can be recon-
ciled with his step-sister. Does the child depend upon
you a great deal?
MOTHER. Yes.
DR.
ADLER. Does he depend as much upon his
father?

THE ROAD TO CRIME
1°3
MOTHER. He thinks a lot of his father, but does not
seem so close to him.
DR. ADLER. Do you believe that it would be possible
to see that his father gives Carl a chance? Have them
take occasional walks together and talk about nature
and the world. Has the father time for this?
MOTHER. Yes, I think he would do it.
DR. ADLER. After a great deal of experience with
this kind of boy, it is my belief that his behaviour
will be greatly improved as soon as he feels he is loved
as much as the other children. His present conduct
shows that he lacks confidence in his ability to develop
as well as his step-sister, but this mistake in his think-
ing can be corrected by showing him how to win your
approval. Then if he did make a mistake, I would
not punish him as you have heretofore. I think you
must be convinced, by now, that there is no advantage
in spanking him or in depriving him of his dessert.
If he should lie or steal again, say to him,
tt Do you
feel that you are being treated unfairly again? Tell
me what you want." Such a conversation would make
a great impression upon Carl. I also believe that in
this same way you could help him to remain clean
at night. It has been my experience that children wet
the bed because they want someone to take care of
them. You see, if you have to get up at night to attend
to his wants, he feels that you are taking care of him
as you did when he was a baby. Is he afraid of the
dark?
MOTHER. Nothing seems to affect him very much.

104
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
DR. ADLER. We are probably correct in thinking
that his misdeeds are committed because he has lost
all hope of competing with his sister for his parents'
affection. Would you like to have me try to encourage
Carl?
MOTHER. Yes.
The mother goes out of the room.
DR. ADLER. You see we have found the correct
clue: jealousy toward the step-sister. I think we can
relieve him from this unpleasant situation.
The boy comes in.
DR. ADLER. I understand that yOll are a good pupil
in school. If you are attentive and work hard, your
friends and your teacher will like you. If you do work
hard, I am sure that you will be as good in school
as your sister is. Would you like that?
CARL. Yes.
DR. ADLER. They tell me that you want to be a
doctor. It is a very nice profession. I also am a doctor.
To be a good doctor, you must be more interested in
others than yourself, so that you can understand what
they need- vvhen they are sick. You must try to be a
good friend and not think too much about yourself.
It is not really friendship if I give somebody a present
so that he will be nice to me, but if I like him and
do not lie to him he will be a real friend. I am sure
that you can do this. And I am going to ask you
sometime whether you have. I know that your sister
is older than
yo~ are and therefore knows a little
more than you do, but that does not matter. If you

THE ROAD TO CRIME
l°S
behaved in such a way that you were not scolded or
punished, you would soon catch up with her and be
as well liked as she is. Would that please you?
CARL. Yes.
DR. ADLER. You must also be a good friend to your
sister and be interested in her. Does she like you?
CARL. Yes.
DR. ADLER. Then it is very easy. All you have to
do is not to disturb her when she works and help her
when you can. See whether you can find out how
she works, and then do the same thing, so that you
can be on equal terms with her. You really cannot
make yourself any better by taking things from her
or from your mother. You must wait and do your
work and show how valuable you are. Sometimes we
are treated unjustly, but we must be strong enough
not to be unfair to ourselves. To be interested in others
and not cheat them, is a good way to win people's
love.
Boy leaves the room.
DR. ADLER. I have spoken to this boy as I have,
because I am certain that he does 110t realize why
he lies and steals. He's utterly discouraged, and in
his perplexity is striving frantically to make his position
secure. The parents should now guarantee this boy his
natural measure of love and affection.
TEACHER.
The father
says that he
prefers his
daughter.
DR. ADLER. We will have to instruct the father not
to show his preference, and to this end I propose the

I06
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
simple expedient of having him take a walk with the
boy and talk with him, so that Carl will feel honoured
and appreciated and somehow sense the fact that his
father is interested in him.
STUDENT. What should the mother do if he lies and
steals again ?
DR. ADLER. The mother should say to him, ,( Have
you lost hope of competing with your sister again?
I am sure that you can succeed, but not by lying
and stealing."
Above all, the mother should not
despair. Not" infrequently children of this kind commit
suicide later in life, and we must try to avoid such an
outcome.

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
T
HIS evening we are to consider the case of John,
who is almost nine years old. This is his present
problem:
"Difficulties with other children. He loves to
fight at all times. In school he disturbs his class
and attempts to be noticed by acting silly. He
has no social adjustment with other children and
wants constantly to be in the limelight."
If a boy has difficulties with other children, it is
probable that he lacks social interest, and if he fights
to gain attention we may presume that he is not
brave enough to face the problems of life in a useful
way.
"The parents have always had as great trouble
with him at home as his teacher has at school.
He has been very mischievous and does not obey
orders."
As John's behaviour at home and at school is
identical, he evidently considers the two situations to
be similar. We may conclude therefore that he is
properly appreciated neither in the home nor at school.
That he is very mischievous and does not obey orders
promptly, is not astonishing, because we cannot expect
a rebel to be obedient-that would be a contradiction.
101

108
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
"The mother says that he had a very strict
nurse for sixteen months when he was a young
baby. No one, not even his father, was allowed to
enter his room after six at night."
Apparently the nurse was strict with the parents
too, and while I think that it is wise for a child not to
be disturbed when he is asleep, I do not understand
why he should not be seen if he is awake. The boy was
evidently connected only with this one nurse, and as
she lacked the skill to develop his social interest, he
grew up under a certain disadvantage. The point will
be tested later when we learn his earliest recollection.
"The family constellation consists of a father,
a mother, the patient, and a younger sister almost
three years old."
This is a very familiar constellation. The boy is
nearly nine and there was a long period during which
he was the only child. It is improbable that his
rebellious attitude can be traced to the birth of the
younger sister; it is more prqbable that he has devel-
oped the characteristics of an only child. It is a little
hard to understand why he needs to fight for sufficient
attention. Perhaps something has happened in his life
which has aggravated the situation.
"The relationship of the parents is normal and
happy. The father is the only one the boy obeys.

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
109
Formerly he was extremely strict with him and
punished him severely when he did wrong."
We know that if a marriage is unhappy it hinders
the development of the child's social theory. On the
other hand, the child of very congenial parents may
be kept too long in the position of a baby and acquire
a dangerous feeling of inferiority to them. Parents
should not show too much affection for each other
in the presence of the child. If John obeys only his
father, then it is probable that the mother is weak
and the child chooses her to attack. Punishment is
the best way I know to stunt the social feeling. It
is possible that John developed some sort of social
feeling toward his nurse and his mother, but cannot
establish any bon,d with his father, who has inflicted
corporal punishment. The child may actually begin
to hate his father and wish he would go away or
die. Such an attitude is always the result of malad-
justment-the Freudian CEdipus complex. It is an
artificial problem. You can develop the CEdipus com-
plex in a child by beating him, as you can prevent
it by developing the child's social interest toward each
parent.
" He is mischievous and troublesome when left
alone with his mother. She is very nervous, and
he makes her unhappy because he \viII not obey
her. He knows he can easily have his own way
with her. She can do nothing with him. Therefore.

IIO
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
the father takes entire charge of the training and
discipline of the boy."
John's mother is unwise in complaining about her
pains and aches before the child. The child is always
the stronger, and there is no use fighting stronger
people. We do not know what she means when she
says that n he will not obey her." Perhaps she demands
too much of him. It is never desirable that a child
should obey like a dog. There should be a comr.adely
relationship between parents and children. I have seen
too many parents who insisted on blind, unreasoning
obedience. This mother's behaviour is that of a hope-
less personwho has declared her intellectual bankruptcy
to the child and turned the whole matter over to his
father.
"The little girl is very smart, obedient, and
lovable. The parents often remind Jahn how care-
ful and obedient his little sister is, and her conduct
is given as a pattern to follow."
Very often, if one child in the family is disobedient,
the conduct of the other child is held up as an example.
The obedient child is not necessarily kind and good by
nature, but may be merely an opportunist who has
learned the advantages of propitiation. I remember
the instance of a family in which one daughter became
violently rebellious when a younger girl was born.
l'his younger child was always very sweet, was much

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
III
praised by the parents and became a model child
because she found it the best way to get everything
she wanted. Yet, when this younger child went to
school, over-indulgence ceased, and she spent the rest
of her life debating every problem because she did
not have the courage to risk making a mistake. She
had no friends, no occupation, and she could never
fall in love and was never married. Because she could
find no useful channel for her desire to be a model
person and the centre of attention, she began to suffer
from a compulsion neurosis, wh~ch expressed itself in
unremitting efforts to keep everything spotlessly clean.
By the feeling that she was the purest and cleanest
person in the world she obtainedher goal of superiority,
and she believed herself defiled by everyone who
approached or touched' her. In John's case, the
younger sister probably enjoys being a pattern, per-
haps not so much from social interest as from a feeling
of pride and an ambition to be the adored favourite.
Nevertheless, we need not be surprised to hear that
this boy likes his sister. Nor should we be astonished
to hear the opposite. Both situations may exist in a
case like this.
,t John does not seem to resent the parents'
praises of the younger sister. He says she is cute
and that he loves her very much. The mother is
afraid that he ,viII teach her bad tricks and that
it will spoil her sweet manner. She has already
been seen making faces and imitating him. "

112
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
Probably John does not resent his sister's sweetness,
because he thinks his fighting attitude is the superior
technique. He finds that he can gain more power in
that way than by obedience, and it seems as if the
little sister were beginning to agree with him.
it The mother and father have a fine store which
they operate together. The mother leaves at nine
in the morning and returns at half-past six in the
evening, leaving the home in the care of a maid
and a nurse whom she supervises. The home is
tidy and tastefully furnished; there are six rooms.
John and his little sister sleep in the same room
but have separate beds. The nurse sleeps in the
same room with the children."
The training in this case seems to have been largely
in the hands of nurses, but \vhen a child is rebellious
he disregards his nurse because he knows she is paid.
Children are quick to sense the difference between
parents and servants. Our John has perhaps always
been able to dominate the nurse, and now he wants
to dominate the entire household.
" John's birth was normal; weight, seven and
one-half pounds at birth. He was fed on the bottle
from the beginning. He has had German measles,
diphtheria, and mumps. Tonsils have been re-
moved. He was taken to one of the neurological
hospitals because he fatigued easily, was nervous
and had poor muscle control."

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
113
There are some medical questions involved here.
Although being fed on the bottle is not the best way
to bring up a baby, I have seen bottle-fed children
\vho have developed satisfactorily. Ancemic, under-
nourished children frequently have poor muscle control
and are easily fatigued, but I hardly think this is the
case with John. There is a certain type of fatigue in
children and adults which appears more or less as a
defence against the demands of their life. I am inclined
to believe that this is the reason for his lack of interest
in work and play. He does not seem to tire so easily
in the conflict with his mother.
" John does not seem to remember things at
the right time. He is always slow in dressing."
Children whose social feeling is not developed do
not pay attention or concentrate because they refuse
to co-operate, and a defective memory is the result of
lack of interest in others. The second point is surely
evidence that he is a spoiled child. Only children of
this type make problems of dressing, eating, and the
like. It may be that he was indulged by one of his so-
called strict nurses, and then later severely disciplined.
The change in nurses might be sufficient to make a
rebel out of him.
"He dawdles when dressing, and someone must
help him to finish on time. He often is late to
school because of his slow dressing--or because he
8

1I 4
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
stops at news stands and reads the headlines. He
is fatigued in the morning, although he goes to
bed at nine o'clock."
If John wanted to get to school on time he would
dress quickly enough, but school is a problem he does
not want to face. He is looking for situations in which
he can rule, and school is not one of them. Now, rising
in the morning means, 't I have to go to school," and
we find him hesitating and being tired because these
are the best expressions of his disinclination to face
reality.
"He says he likes his father as well as his
mother."
I do not believe this. If you ask a child, "Whom
do you prefer, your mother or your father? " he will
answer, "I like both." Children are usually drilled to
say this. Even if they are not drilled but are intelligent,
they know that it is not nice to express a dislike for
one parent. If you really want to know which one the
child prefers, don't ask questions, but watch the child's
behaviour.
"He obeys only his father, \vho is strict with
him; he does not obey anyone else. His mother
is too lenient with him and spoils him. She begs
him to be good in school every day, but he pays
no attention."

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
115
The mother's begging is entirely useless, as are tears
and outbreaks of temper. This child's goal is fixed,
and it is his pattern to avoid all situations in which
he is not especially favoured. His greatest difficulty
is remaining in a situation which he does not dominate.
The mother's begging and crying will do no good.
The more the child is pushed into an unpleasant situa-
tion, the more he pushes back. Sometimes children
seem to be prevailed upon to move forward, but defeat
always follows, because the child's real goal does
not coincide with the behaviour which is forced
upon him.
tt The mother says he knows that he can do as
he likes with her, and is very disobedient and
mischievous when left alone with her. He likes to '
play with his sister, but does not like the nurse,
upon whom he sometimes plays mean tricks. Last
week he discharged the water pistol into her
mouth. His father punished him by not allowing
him to have the pistol at bedtime. He thinks all
life is fun."
The surest index of a child's social feeling is to be
found in his relation toward servants. We also see
that he does not take life
seriousl~y. This is quite
appropriate to the behaviour pattern of a spoiled child.
I remember another case which demonstrated this
feature to an even more marked degree. A certain
boy was always joking and laughing in school, no

116
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
matter what happened. When the teacher asked him
a question, he laughed and could not answer. The
teacher thought he was feeble-minded and brought him
to me, but when I won his confidence, he talked to
me freely and said: ttl know they want to fool me;
school is established by parents to fool the children. J,
Children should not be ridiculed. In the case just
mentioned, the boy's attitude was derived from parents
who ridiculed him from early childhood. He was a
belligerent child, and when the parents wanted him
to be serious, he refused. This type of individual may
commit suicide later in life when he finds that the
\vorld is not all fun.
,t John wants to play all the time and to be silly
when in school. He wants to annoy and bother the
teacher. He has no feeling of responsibility and no
feeling for the rights of others. He has no friends
in his class."
Now you see what a well-developed technique this
child has acquired to avoid the responsibilities and
duties of a classroom and at the same time maintain
the centre of attention. Really, when we understand
his pattern of life, we must admit that it is very
intelligent of him not to have a feeling of respon-
sibility or any interest in the rights of others. If I
were to hear that John liked to go to school in the
face of all the facts of his history, I should suspect
his mentality.

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
II7
t t His
classm~tes look upon him as a great
nuisance. He is always annoying, pushing, and
stepping on others. He delights in tripping up
other children or fighting with any child he is
near. I always had him sitting next to my desk~
I always had him the first in line so I could control
his actions. He goes downstairs so badly that I
am always afraid he will trip and fall and perhaps
hurt someone. He seems to have poor muscular
control."
It is quite evident from this report that John has
won his point and considers himself the conqueror of
the teacher. I have often seen very spoiled children
who have made trouble in the line, but I have seldom
seen one who was so spoiled that he could not keep
his balance. Perhaps John is playing the role of a
clumsy child to make others laugh. On the other hand,
there are children who do not walk correctly because
no one has understood how to train them to function
for themselves, and the children themselves have not
been interested in learning because dependence fitted
into their pattern.
'I The friends with whom he plays on"the street
are nve boys he met at camp."
I wonder whether he has poor muscular control
when he is playing or fighting on the street. As he
has developed in the pattern of an only child, I should
expect him to prefer the company of older boys. This

lIB
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
is not always true, but only children are usually to
be found in the company of older persons. You might
think this strange courage in a boy who has evaded
most problems, but I believe that if he goes with older
boys, he does so because he is sure they will not
attack him.
e, He is always fighting with other boys who
come around his block. He likes fighting better
than anything else and always blames it on the
others. He fights so much with schoolboys that
he must be kept at home until ten minutes before
school opens in the afternoon because of the many
complaints that have been re-gistered by other
parents. He likes to play cops and robbers and
other street games."
This is not so much courage as a cheap imitation
of heroism.
"He likes mystery stories where detectives
catch robbers. He reads a great deal, very quickly,
preferring ghost stories and mystery tales. He does
not belong to any club."
Surely we have had enough evidence now to assert
that this is a mismanaged child
whose pattern is
directed to maintain the centre of attention by fair
means or foul.
"He has been to camp since the age of five
and one-half and "he likes sports. He was so

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
119
mischievous that· the camp director wanted to
send him home, but the counsellor liked his intel-
lect and pleaded to keep him, chiefly because of
his innocent tone of voice. Each year the coun-
sellor helped him with making his bed, cleaning
his tent, and so on. He is untidy, late and dis-
obedient at camp, but he manages to evade
responsibility wherever he goes."
I am in great favour of camps for children, but I
must say that you cannot expect a camp to change
a child's life pattern if it is already well established.
If there is someone at the camp who thoroughly under-
stands the child, such a change may be effected, but
it is foolish to believe that a child's bad behaviour will
necessarily be improved by camp life. John attained
his goal of useless superiority and parasitism even in
the camp, by the development of such undesirable
traits as slyness and feigned innocence.
"He shows very superior general intelligence
and prefers working problems ill arithmetic. He
likes school work and does not object to any
studies that he can master."
These are excellent reports. Probably he has had
success in arithmetic and therefore has been interested
in making progress in it. I believe we can solve his
problem if \ve indulge him correctly, and thus make
him interested in worth-while things. We know this
is not the proper way to handle the situation later on,

120
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
but we must begin by winning him over to our way
of thinking. He is not guilty, because he has no idea
that his main interest in life is to evade responsibility.
t t Mentally he is about a year in advance of
his physical age. In 1A he liked his teacher and
got along very well with his lessons; his conduct
was B and work A. After one month he was pro-
moted to IE; in IB he disliked his teacher and
his conduct was D and his work B. In 2A the
conduct was C, the work A; in 2B the conduct
D, the work A; in 3B his work fell off; con-
duct D, work C. His best subjects are reading
and arithmetic. His poorest subject is physical
training, although he tested ten years on a muscle-
co-ordination test."
The fact that there seem to be no organic reasons
for his poor co-ordination justifies us in our belief
that he plays the role of a clumsy child because he is
not especially interested in physical exercise. He was
probably criticized in the gymnasium.
"He fatigues easily and must lie down after
some classes. He is not allowed to use ink in pen-
manship as he gets it allover himself; his papers
are very untidy, his drawing is poor."
It may be that his fatigue after classes is a sort of
joke he is playing on the teacher.
"He was continually sent to the principal's
office because of his disturbing conduct in class.

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
121
The principal said it was too bad John could not
smile and that he had such a sad expression. This
sad expression is his way of trying to appear
innocent."
If sending John to the principal two or three times
did not have the desired effect, it should have been
discontinued. Smiling may be the expression of various
emotions, and perhaps it is too much to expect many
smiles from this particular rebel. His role is that of
an innocent person accused by mistake.
"When
scolded
for
any
misbehaviour
he
assumes a mild, babyish voice. He continues talk-
ing a great deal about it and hardly stops for
breath. He never wants for an excuse to fit the
deed, and often lies to excuse himself."
By talking continually, he probably hopes to defeat
his superiors. His slyness is the result of trying to
evade his father's discipline.
"The boy "vas sent to be examined by the
psychologists at one of the universities in January,
1928. This is the summary of the results. 'Physi-
cal:
height and \veight above normal; vision
impaired but helped by glasses;
dental care
needed. Mental age ten years and three months;
motor co-ordination and perception of relation-
ships at ten-year level; comprehension, 4A level;
comprehension of arithmetic, SA level.'"

122
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
This examination gives us a hint that the boy is
suffering from some organic defects, and thro~gh lack
of encouragement, has refused to make proper com-
pensation.
"The father insists
th~t John come in from
the street at five o'clock, but John disobeys and
does not come in promptly. His gang have a rule
that anyone who leaves before a closed session of
the day is announced, receives sixty punches.
Of course, John would prefer hitting others to
being hit himself, and therefore stays over his
allotted time. He does not remember the things
that he is told to do by his parents. His father
cannot understand this, because John is very
intelligent. John's friends get a fifty-cent allow-
ance, and John wants the same. His parents do
not believe that he needs so much money, as they
give him ever)7thing he needs at home and they
do not want him to abuse money. John's friends
used to go to Sunday school with him, but now
they have decided to stay away, and John wants
to stay away also. His parents insist that he attend
religious instruction."
These facts indicate that John is much happier with
his gang where he plays an important role. He does not
remember to obey his parents because their demands
do not fit into his pattern.
"The father is very anxious for John to get
good marks in conduct. He brings home a conduct

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
I23
card every day, and the father bribes him to be
good. He has organized a system of cash pay-
ments for good behaviour. If John gets B he gets
fifteen cents, B plus, twenty cents, A, twenty-
five cents. But if John gets C he pays his father
ten cents, and if he gets D, twenty-five cents.
Recently John brought home a D in conduct;
his father scolded him and gave him a slight taste
of how the rolling-pin felt by administering a few
light taps and promised him a severe whipping
if he got a D again. Unfortunately, John returned
that very day with another D."
The father, for all his good intentions, is only work-
ing on the surface. It is impossible to bribe a boy to
be good, if his pattern demands non-conformity. And
it must be evident to everyone that, for this child,
corporal punishment is worse than useless.
"In school his lessons are very good, but his
conduct is very annoying. He disturbs the class
work by talking to himself and to other children
and by playing the clown to attract attention. His
desk is kept in a very untidy state, with some of
his books on the seat, some on the floor, and
papers strewn all around. His written work is very
untidy, as is his personal appearance at the end
of the day, although he is clean and neat when he
comes in the morning. The father of another boy
in his class came to school with the following

124
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
complaint: John had threatened to fight his son
and had planned to meet him on a certain corner
after school. The boy was afraid to go to school,
for fear Jahn would attack him. The children in
his class do not like him because he always wants
to be the leader and will allow no one else to
assume any authority."
These are further corroborations of the pattern that
we have seen worked out before. If the boy is an ex-
cellent fighter, there can hardly be a poor co-ordination
of his muscles.
"The boy usually plays on the street until five
o'clock when he goes to his father's shop, re-
maining until six, and returns home for supper.
Reads in the kitchen until the nurse says his baby
sister is asleep, and then goes to, bed at nine
o'clock. On rainy days, he goes to his father's
shop and reads a book."
Perhaps one of the reasons for his reading is that
he dislikes reality and prefers to indulge himself in
fantasies in which he is identified with the heroes of
his books.
"The home training and discipline have been
very inadequate; both parents have spoiled him.
He has been left to himself after school hours and
allowed to get into bad habits. He seems to be
acquiring the gang spirit. He is not afraid in the

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
I25
dark nor does he callout in his sleep I but he is
very restless in bed."
John's fearlessness in the dark is a mistake, for
he could easily force his mother or the nurse to pay
attention to him during the night as well as the day.
II He wants to be a detective so he can catch
robbers, or a doctor so he can cure people of
cancer (his grandfather died of cancer), or a
lawyer so he can help people in trouble."
In these days the cure of cancer is a heroic deed.
As he has described his ambitions it seems as though
he had a certain degree of social feeling which fits
into the picture of his gang activities. Street boys have
a certain honest tradition: they are faithful to one
another; and the fact that he belongs to a gang may
be very beneficial to him. That he prefers to be a
detective, rather than a robber, is also reassuring.
John's record is not entirely black, and there are
certain good phases in his development. The chief
difficulty is that he has misplaced his emphasis. He
fights because it is the only way he knows to gain
significance. From this point we must proceed in the
therapy. We shall speak to the parents, and advise
the father not to \vhip him, but to make a companion
of him. It would be a good thing for them to take a
trip together and try to understand each other.
It is of the greatest importance to make the boy
and the parents realize that John's goal is to gain

126
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
attention. It will be more difficult with the boy, and
it may take some time before we can convince him
about his own aim in life. We must use every means
at our command to help him. Fortunately, we have
his teacher here, and I know that she will help very
much to explain the boy's behaviour to him and direct
him in a better way.
CONFERENCE
STUDENT. If this child's goal is in his unconscious,
how can he be rational about it?
DR. ADLER. We proceed by holding up a mirror
to his soul; we enable him to see his attitude and com-
pare it with other pictures that ,ve make. If we are
successful in making him see himself as he actually
is, the time will come when he will think of this
while he is misbehaving, and the procedure will be
weakened. And once he has completely understood the
reasons for his behaviour, he will be a different boy.
The mother and father enter the room.
DR. ADLER. We have taken some pains to try to
understand your boy John, and I believe we have
been successful. It seems to me that if you will do
your share, we can help you to make him a normal
child. It appears that John's chief goal in life is to
gain attention. Sometimes he does this in a construc-
tive way, sometimes in a bad way. He has made good
progress in reading and arithmetic, and his behaviour

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
127
toward his youngest sister is reassuring, as is his
ambition to be a useful person later in life. But his bad
behaviour is an indication that the boy feels injured
and discriminated against. We should like to know
more about his childhood situation. If a child is first
over-indulged and petted, and then suddenly loses his
accustomed support, he feels as though he had lost
a paradise. He may spend the rest of his life avoiding
any situation of which he is not the master. If he does
not get the centre of attention without effort, as he
did in his coddled babyhood, he develops th~ person-
ality of a rebel and fights for it. He will fight his
mother, his teacher, other children, as long as he is
not the most admired and the strongest individual
in the situation. John is struggling to reconquer the
paradise which he believes he has lost. Now the history
says that he had a very strict nurse for the first sixteen
months. Is this so?'
MOTHER. She was always strict. She never allowed
anyone to go near the baby.
DR.
ADLER. Do you remember whether he liked
her?
MOTHER. He was too young to understand at the
time.
DR. ADLER. Was the second nurse more strict than
the other?
MOTHER. I think she was nicer to him.
DR. ADLER. It seems impossible to reconstruct the
circumstances exactly, but it is probable that this boy
was babied by a nurse, by a maid, or by you. You see;

128
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
he was an only child for a number of years. Did you
spoil him?
MOTHER. No, I never did.
DR. ADLER. Then we must presume it was a nurse.
But whoever it was, \ve know that his situation sud-
denly changed. How long has John been giving you
trouble?
MOTHER. For two years. He had a little trouble in
the beginning of school but has been \vorse since the
age of seven.
DR. ADLER. It often happens that a child's diffi-
culties begin when he enters school, where he cannot
maintain his position of effortless superiority.·
MOTHER. He went to a private school at first, where
he had a great deal of freedom.
DR. ADLER. Probably he felt that the change to the
new school shifted him from a favourable to an un-
favourable situation. John's behaviour is intelligent,
but he is mistaken in his goal. The boy will never
change until we convince him that he can only be
loved and appreciated by being useful. I suggest that
you both make an effort to show him that you are
really his friends. If you can win him over to this
point of view, his disobedience will disappear. I am
sure that he can be reconciled to his place in the
family, as well as to his place in the school. Taking
him to the principal, giving him bad reports, spank-
ing him, bribing him with money, do not work. I
suggest that you try my method, and if you like I shall
say a few words to John and explain to him that he

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
129
is not a bad boy, but that you have all misunderstood
each other.
MOTHER. Yes.
DR. ADLER. Thank you, I will speak to him.
Parents leave the room.
DR. ADLER. The father looked very doubtful when
I suggested that the boy could be helped. This does
not matter. If you make suggestions to parents in
an audience like this, and they sayee No,"
do not
antagonize them by insisting on your point of view,
but let them go. Frequently their refusal changes to
acquiescence after they have left the room. It was my
chief desire to point out to his parents that John is not
guilty, because they have always considered him so.
We have overlooked one point-their insistence that
he go to Sunday school. You see that by their strictness
they cause him to rebel against religion also. A child
always chooses the things that the parents over-value
as the point of attack against them. If a boy is good
in reading and arithmetic, and can fight, I am certain
that he can also do well in other subjects and conduct
himself perfectly.
The boy comes in.
DR. ADLER. I hear that you want to be a doctor,
as I am. Would you like it?
JOHN. Yes.
DR.
ADLER. It is very interesting to help other
people out of their difficulties. It is really easy, other-
wise we would not have so many doctors. Have you
many friends?
9

130
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
JOHN. Yes.
DR. ADLER. Very good friends?
JOHN. Yes.
DR. ADLER. And do you like them?
JOHN. Yes.
DR. ADLER. That is fine. Are you the leader?
JOHN. We take turns being the leader.
DR. ADLER. Would you like to be the leader always?
It is splendid to be a leader in good work, but some-
times a boy believes it is better to be a leader in bad
things. It takes a great deal of courage to be a leader
in good things. It seems to me that you always like
to be the centre of attention. Did they spoil you when
you were a child?
JOHN. No.
DR. ADLER. Suppose you think it over. Perhaps
you feel you are not made as much of as you used
to be and feel that the only way you can attract notice
is to disturb your class or quarrel with your mother.
Perhaps you have not found any other way, but I am
sure that a boy as clever as you are could do it better.
Are you courageous enough to try a new way? I
know that you can accomplish anything you like and
I am sure that you could be one of the best pupils
in your school. Perhaps you do not believe it and are
afraid to try. Don't you think it would be much more
pleasant if everybody said,
It John is a fine boy·"?
To disturb people in order to be the centre of attention
is very cowardly. It is much braver to help other
people. Are you brave enough to try it? How long do

THE BOY WHO WANTS TO LEAD
131
you think it will take you to become one of the best-
behaved pupils in the class? I feel sure that you are
bright enough to do it in two weeks. Will you come
and see me again in two weeks and tell me how you
are getting along?
JOHN.' Yes.

THE FEAR OF GROWING UP
T
HIS evening we will consider the case of George,
a boy six years and eight months old, in the
IB grade. The case history states that the mother is
bringing him here in the hope that we can help to
correct his speech defect. He talks baby talk and has
other bad habits, such as grimacing, clowning, and
pretending not to be able to read or answer questions.
His intelligence qtlotient is 89. It is possible that his
peculiarities of speech are due to an organic defect.
But as the child has other bad habits, it is more likely
that he is badly adjusted in some way. If the latter
is true, the child speaks improperly either to avoid
associations with his fellows or to narrow them to a
sphere in which he feels himself secure. We must
corroborate our hypothesis with other evidence. He
may be untidy, unsocial, a food faddist, a timid child,
and so on. With an I.Q. of 89, he is undoubtedly
intelligent and therefore there must be a purpose in
his acting like a baby. From former experiences, I
suspect that this is a child who is afraid to face the
problem of growing up. I know of a five-year-old boy
who always wanted to drink out of a bottle. In this
very obvious manner he insisted on fixing himself
in the favourable situation of infancy. He had an
inferiority complex. Such a child does not say .~in so
many words, t'I do not want to grow up,"
but' he
acts correctly to avoid a new condition which he does
not understand. Even if the child knew consciously
101

THE FEAR OF GROWING UP
133
that he did not want to grow up, he would still
be unconscious of the reasons for his reluctance.
Consciousness and unconsciousness are never contra-
dictions. They are two streams that flow in the same
direction.
A child who wants to remain a baby will almost
inevitably have bad habits. It is very important to
know why he has chosen this goal. Perhaps he has
been badly spoiled, perhaps he was a handsome baby,
perhaps he was sick in the beginning of his life, or
perhaps he is an only boyar the youngest child. His
clowning and making faces, which are excellent ways
to get attention, confirm the impression that he is a
spoiled child, and that he is fighting for the pleasurable
condition which he feels is slipping away from him.
His baby talk is not a defect but a stroke of genius.
Baby talk and grimaces are part of the marvellous
creative work of the child. Grant that he wants to
remain a baby, and you can find no more effective
technique than the one he has chosen. Many children
:find a way to be comical. Sometimes they are laughed
at for something they have done accidentally and then
practice similar activities until they really become
artists in making themselves ridiculous.
By pretending not to read George makes other
people work for him and projects himself back into
babyhood when he was not expected either to read
or to answer questions. It would be a great mistake
to reproach him or punish him for his tricks. He is
not lying, because he is pursuing his own goal-not

134
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
the one his parents have set for him. If it were his
goal in life to be a good pupil, he would learn to read
and to answer questions. Instead he pretends,
tt I
cannot." When we translate this into our psychological
language it means,
,t I am a babYI you must expect
nothing of me."
The case history says:
t t His family consists of a brother fourteen
years old and two sisters I eleven and nine years
old."
This is the second corroboration of our hypothesis.
As the youngest child he is very likely to be spoiled.
t I The brothers and sisters quarrel with George
very often."
This is interesting because it shows that George is
not entirely cowardly. The older children would hardly
quarrel with him if he had lost all his courage.
II He gets along better with his sisters, especially
the eleven-year-old one. The older sister is a very
capable child and during the mother's illness took
her place in the household."
Evidently the older sister gives him the sort of atten-
tion he wants. The mother probably spoiled him first,
and the sister occasionally imitates her.

THE FEAR OF GROWING UP
I35
"The older brother hits George, objects to his
friends, especially a little coloured boy whom
George brings home. He says George has terrible
manners."
These
C C terrible manners', are the manners of a
baby. I do not find them terrible; I think they are
very artistic. If he is going to act like a baby, he must
defend himself like one. He cannot change his goal,
because he has no insight into his situation. I hardly
believe it will be very difficult to make George under-
stand that to grow up means to have more power, and
that it is better to strive for progress than to look
for the paradise of the past.
This gives us an indication of the value of school,
for George will have an open road to the future if
his teacher can encourage and train him in the art
of growing up. His mother aiso must be persuaded to
make him more independent, and urge him to take
more interest in other members of the family and in
his playmates. The older boy must be taught that his
methods are wrong. None of the children should laugh
when he makes grimaces. They should not give him
the opportunity to make himself important by such
cheap tricks.
t t The other children in the family hate to hear
George's baby talk. The older brother and sister
do very good work in school, and both are in a
high I.Q. group. The younger sister is in a low

I36
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
I.Q. group. George is a handsome blonde boy,
and the others are dark and not at all attractive.
The mother says,
t We could not help loving him;
he was so blonde and cute.'"
Here are more and more corroborations of our
theory that he is a pampered child.
II The father is an Italian, a bricklayer. The
mother is an American. The parents are not happy
together."
This is a complicating factor in the child's develop-
ment. If the parents are not happy together and the
boy leans too much on his mother, his tendency is
probably to
exclud~ his father from his love. This
narrows his life too much, and is a reason for his
wanting to remain an irresponsible baby.
II George came to school one day very much
upset and said,
t Mother did not come home all
night; my daddy made mamma cry and she went
out and did not come back.' It worried him all
morning and he kept asking me whether it wasn't
time to go home."
The quarrel in this family must be a very bitter
one if the mother stays out all night. Under such cir-
cumstances it is particularly difficult for a child to
develop any social feeling. Evidently he is deeply
attached to his mother.

THE FEAR OF GROWING UP
137
"When the mother came home, she told him
that she had been to the movies and became so
ill that she could not come home."
This is an indication that the mother lies to the
child, and, while I should not advise her to tell the
child the entire truth, I am sure she could find a less
transparent lie.
e I At one time the family was very comfortably
situated, owned property and an automobile in
the South. The mother is sorry that they left the
South. She was very ill for a lo.ng time, and the
father was out of work for months. A few months
ago he appealed to the school for financial aid,
but now he is working."
Here is another difficulty in this child's case. The
boy probably remembers that his childhood was con-
siderably happier than his present condition because
the family had more money and less worry.
Ie The mother has a sixteen-year-old nephew
living in another state who has a speech defect
similar to George's."
This makes me think that the mother believes in
inheritance. The mother of this other boy is a sister
of George's mother, and they both have come from
a family that spoiled its children. This is not a matter

138
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
of inheritance, but a set of similar circumstances. We
must never leave a family tradition out of our inquiry,
but when we investigate thoroughly we frequently find
that the supposed inheritance of character traits is
merely ignorant superstition.
,t The child's birth was normal, but he was a
very difficult child to feed and was often sick
until he was three years old."
Perhaps this child has a defective alimentary tract,
or perhaps his mother was simply not skilful in feed-
ing him. It is very likely he was pampered while he
,vas sick, because that is in accordance with this
family tradition.
II He has had an operation for the removal of
his tonsils, as the parents believed it would help
his speech, but it had no effect."
Naturally his situation was not changed by a tonsil-
lectomy. If a boy wants to be a baby, he will be a
baby with or without tonsils.
II The doctors have assured the mother that
there is nothing wrong with his speech organs.
The school doctor finds that, aside from a few
carious teeth, he is in good 'condition. At school
the
other
children
like
him
and
enjoy
his
grimaces."

THE FEAR OF GROWING UP
139
Young school children are easily pleased and George
has trained himself to be amusing.
"He often gets into fights with his classmates,
pushing them, or talking to children who sit near
him. He comes to school looking clean, but soon
pulls his stockings down over his shoes and opens
his tie."
.
These are all tricks of his repertoire as an actor.
"He never hangs his coat up but just throws
it into the closet. He came to school on cold days
without a coat because he said his winter coat was
too short for him, and he refused to wear his
lumber jacket because it h.ad a hole in it."
Untidiness is an unmistakable sign of a spoiled
child, but George is also vain and does not want to
appear badly dressed. Perhaps the fact that he used
to have nice clothes when his parents were better off
is an important factor in his life. If he always had
had a coat with a hole in it, he would not know the
difference.
II His work in arithmetic
IS good and he
IS
learning to read nicely."
These are good signs that he is overcoming the diffi-
culties of school, and evidently he has a kind teacher,
or he would be likely to have trouble with arithmetic.

140
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
II His writing is very poor, and his papers are
untidy and dirty."
This point leads us to believe that he might be left-
handed, in which case writing would be specially hard
for him.
II He is a converted left-hander.
He never
attempts to use his left hand in the classroom,
but he can write numbers quite well with his left
hand."
We were right in our assumption that he is a
left-handed child, and that he has not completely
compensated for the weakness of his right hand in
writing. Frequently such children have difficulty in
learning how to read and are considered stupid because
of their failure, but if we investigate closely we find
that they can read quite well from right to left-
mirror-writing.
" He responds quickly to praise."
This hardly needs an interpretation.
"He is not clumsy but pretends to be unable to
do things. For instance, if the teacher is watching
him he pretends that he cannot fold his paper,
but if she does not look at him, he can do it
perfectly."
Over and over again we see this boy's goal in life;
to make everyone who is kind to him do his bidding.
He is trying to prove that he is only a baby.

THE FEAR OF GROWING UP
141
tt He does not dress himself; he hates to be
washed, and when his mother washes him he
makes a terrible fuss and screams with all his
might."
More signs that he p.as been spoiled. He screams
when his mother washes him, not because he dislikes
being washed, but because he wants to give her more
trouble.
"She punishes him by whipping and sometimes,
to avoid the fuss, she rewards the eleven-year-
old sister for washing him. He feeds himself, but
very slowly and with much playing. .
No mother who has over-indulged her son in other
ways will be able to impress him with the necessity
of washing himself, merely by whipping him. Meal
times are evidently turned into opportunities for him
to attract more attention.
"He is not obedient at home; often makes the
same faces at home that he makes at school, and
never puts his toys or clothes away. He sleeps in
the same bed with his l1ine-year-old sister and the
older sister sleeps in the same room."
The mother should be told that the sleeping arrange-
ments are not the best that might be made.
I'The father did not punish him at all, but the
relation between mother and son is much stronger

I42
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
than between father and son. Mother said she
would feel 'terrible' if he preferred his father."
This throws a great deal of light upon our case.
It was apparent that the bond was closer between
the mother and the child, but it seems that she has
actually prevented the child from companionship with
his father. Even though the mother had not made this
statement we might have come to the same conclusion.
For if the marriage is an unhappy one, and the child
inclines toward the mother, the mother unconsciously
and instinctively makes him a partizan against the
father.
,e He plays with some boys on the street, but
prefers playing with girls."
Such a preference fits into his pattern. He prefers
women because he has been indulged by his mother
and his older sister. If it was necessary to find a tutor
for him, this point would be one to consider. To be
sure, it is not wise to allow a child to remain in this
mistaken emotional fixation, but we must remember
that in the beginning we cannot attack him too strenu-
ously. I should say if he needed a tutor, he should
have a woman.
"It is his ambition to grow up to be a cowboy,
because the cowboys he sees in the movies all
fight."

THE FEAR OF GROWING UP
143
It is very common for disheartened children to play
a heroic role in their fantasies. To this boy being a
cowboy is an approximation of godlikeness. It should
not be too difficult to get this boy to forge ahead. His
ambition shows that he would really like to grow up,
if it was made easy for him. In other words, he wants
to be a hero under the proper conditions.
II He dreams that a man comes and takes the
door of his house away."
We could almost guess this boy's dream. The
proper dreams for such a child would point to the
danger of growing up, and with them he would deceive
himself into justifying his desire to remain a baby.
Now the dream that is stated in the case history is
rather curious, but I think it can be interpreted. If
someone came and took the door of the house away,
the house would be open and he would not be pro-
tected. The door is a protection and George is very
much interested in his defences.
From a sample of his hand\vriting, there are several
indications that he is left-handed. For instance, he
reverses his "M's"
and has very narrow margins
on the left side of the paper. His handwriting is very
bad.
The greatest task here is to persuade his mother to
reconcile George with his father. The older children
should be told not to criticize him and not to pay
attention to his grimaces. The mother must try to make

144
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
him more independent. She can reward him when he
washes and dresses himself and runs errands for the
family. I believe that the teacher understands the child
thoroughly and needs very little instruction. She might
\\~ait for the opportunity to praise him when his paper
is a little less untidy, and he should not be scolded if
his paper is dirty. When he tries to attract attention,
the teacher should exaggerate her response. She might
tell him personally, and not in the presence of other
children, that if he really wants her to, she will do all
his \vork for him. Then she should say something like
this: ttyou see, your mother has spoiled you a little,
and so you always want to have somebody working
for you and taking care of you. This is a poor way to
grow up to be a man. It is good only if you want to
remain a baby."
CONFERENCE
The boy, George, comes in with his mother, holding
on to her, and will not shake hands with Dr. Adler.
DR. ADLER. Why won't you shake hands with me ?
I -am your friend. I see you are a big boy and you
ought to be able to walk alone without your mother.
You are not a baby, are you?
The boy walks away from the mother with Adler.
DR. ADLER. Have you many friends?' Are they good
friends? Do you help them?
George nods his head in assent to all the5e questions
but does not look at Dr. Adler.

THE FEAR OF GROWING UP
I45
DR. ADLER. You see, he is not sure that I am his
friend, and he will not look at me. (To George) You
think I am going to bite you? What do you like to
do most of all?
GEORGE. Paint.
DR. ADLER. Would you like to be a painter?
George does not answer.
DR. ADLER. What would you like better than being
a painter?
GEORGE. I would like to be a co,vboy.
DR. ADLER. What ,vould you do· if you were a
cowboy?
GEORGE. I would ride horseback.
DR. ADLER. You don't have to be a cowboy to ride
horseback. I am sure you can do anything you want
to. Tell me, would you like to be a baby? Or would
you rather be a teacher, or a doctor?
George answers "No"
to these questions.
DR. ADLER. I think that if you were more careful
with your school work and kept your hands clean,
people would like you better, and your teacher would
praise you. Is your brother rough \vith you? I am
going to tell him not to fight with you any more. I
shall also tell him not to listen to you if you talk like
a baby. From now Oll, if you make faces like a baby
nobody will look at you, and you can make them all
day and all night if you like. What are you going to
do when you grow older? Wouldn't you like to learn
to speak and recite very well?
GEORGE. Yes.
10

146
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
DR. ADLER. Then you must begin to dress and wash
yourself, and eat correctly and not be a baby any
more. How can you be a CO\vqoy if you act like a baby
all the time? That is not the right way to train yourself.
The boy hurries away.
DR. ADLER. His quick exit indicates that he is not
comfortable in the presence of people, but I believe
we have put a new idea into his head.
DR. ADLER (to the mother). George has created the
role of a baby for himself, probably because he
remembers that, as a small child, he was in a very
pleasant situation and he wishes to restore it. For this
reason he makes trouble for you, forces you to wash
and dress him, and to keep him a baby. He does not
want to be naughty; he is a good pupil and a fine
boy, and I am sure he will overcome his difficulties
in a short time. If you want to help, do not notice his
grimaces and do not reproach him for them. See that
the other children ignore him \vhen he makes faces.
When he talks baby talk act as if you did not hear
him, and praise him when he speaks like a grown-up
boy. He leans on you too much and is too shy with
others. It would be a good thing if his brother and
father would make an effort to be friendly with him.
I know that he is being properly encouraged at school
and if you help him, too, everything will go well. Let
him wash and dress himself, even if it takes a long
time. When you see him making an effort in the right
direction, praise him and say, "I am glad you are a
grown-up boy now and no longer a baby." All his

THE FEAR OF GROWING UP
147
bad habits are caused by the fact that he is afraid to
grow up, and he must be encouraged to understand
that it is not really dangerous. Do not preach to him,
but when he talks like a baby, pay no attention to
him until he tries to speak correctly.
The mother agrees to carry out the instructions.
DR. ADLER (to students). You see, sometimes I do
not give many direct instructions, because no one can
tell a mother all the little tricks that are necessary to
cure such a child, but if she understands the total
situation she will know what to do. It is impossible to
give a set of rules which will cover every emergency.
Of course, this family seems rather unhappy, but,
occasionally, a few small changes in the household will
clear up the whole atmosphere.
STUDENT.
How can you love a
child without
indulging him?
DR. ADLER. Ybu can love a child all you wish, but
you must not make him dependent. You owe it to the
child to let him function as an independent being, and
you must begin training him from the very beginning
to do this. If a child gains the impression that his
parents have nothing to do but to be at his beck and
call, he gains a false idea of love.

THE REBELLIOUS "BAD" BOY
T
HIS evening we have the case of a boy twelve
years and five months of age, whose present
problem is that he is incorrigible. He is accused of
fighting, and stealing while on probation, and the
parents have been advised to send him away to an
institution.
This arrangement probably means that the parents
have not found the way to persuade this child to live
a correct life. No doubt there are cases in which
every person, even one who has been well trained in
individual psychology, feels that he is incapable of
changing a child's pattern of life, but we must never
despair of finding a correct method nor doubt that
another person can do it if we cannot. In very difficult
cases, it is sometimes wise to speak to the problem
child or adult in this way: "I believe I know why
you act like this but I do not know whether I can
make you see it as clearly as I do." This usually makes
a good impression upon the patient. Children and
adults of this type are suffering from inferiority and
superiority complexes, and if they find a teacher or
a doctor who is not conceited enough to think he can
cure any case, or does not suffer when he has to admit
a failure it is a great relief to the patients, especially
to a child who believes he must show that no teacher
can succeed with him. If you approach such a child
with the attitude,
It Perhaps I will not succeed, but
another person could,"
you soften his antagonism.
101

THE REBELLIOUS "BAD"
BOY
149
It is to be expected that a belligerent child of this
type would also be accused of fighting and stealing.
He feels cheated and yet he is courageous enough to
fight for his rights-probably against a weak environ-
ment. The case history tells us that he has been on
probation. Being on probation is in itself a bad thing,
and it is a pity that \ve did not see this boy four 01"'
five years earlier, before probation was begun. At the
present time the boy is branded because he is on
probation. The fact that the parents have been advised
to send hiIn away indicates that his environment has
exhausted its resources, has become hopeless about
his future, and labelled him an incorrigible boy. Under
the circumstances I should not be against sending
him away, 'but where shall we send him? Who. will
understand this boy and train him for a useful life?
It is essential that this child be made self-confident,
that he likes his teacher or the doctor who tries to
help him. I do not know where we could send him
to have this done, but I do know that if there were
a mental-hygiene clinic in his school, the problem could
be attacked there advantageously. In the mental-
hygiene clinic some friend or tutor would be found
for him, who would allow him to experience a human
friendship which he has not found in his home. The
usual thing is to send such a boy to a reformatory,
but it has been my observation that most young
criminals have been to reformatories. I very much
doubt whether anyone has ever been reformed by a
reformatory.

150
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
Let us turn to the case notes:
II Past problems are: difficulties in school, steal-
ing and fighting. He was sent to a parental home
for three months."
No doubt his commitment to the parental home
simply exaggerated this child's protest.
"The family is German. The father, who was
a strict, stern man, and preferred the oldest girl
in the family, died of tuberculosis. The mother
is much older than her second husband. The step-
father is very friendly with Nicholas. A sister
died at the age of six years. She was two years
older than
Nicholas.
Another
sister,
thirteen
months older than the patient, is alive. He has a
half-sister now, four years old. Nicholas was four
years and four months old when the oldest sister
died, and four years and six months old when
the father died."
Apparently the father was not the sort of person
who would have fostered Nicholas's social feelings.
\Ve must look for the impression that the deaths in
his family had upon him. The half-sister is eight years
younger and is probably no rival to him. His style of
life had been fixed and established before she was
born. We can hazard the guess, therefore, that the
person in his environment who makes difficulties for
him is his older sister, and we can presume that she

THE REBELLIOUS "BAD n BOY
151
has developed very well, is a good girl, and is pre-
ferred by the mother. If the evidence confirms this
inference we can easily understand the dynamics of
his life. He feels that he has been discriminated against
and is afraid that he cannot compete. Probably he has
been discouraged because he has not found a good
method to surpass his sister.
It The father and the mother do not complain
of any difficulties between themselves. Nicholas
and his oldest sister quarrel constantly. His step-
father is good to him and tries to win his
confidence. Nicholas is very fond of his half-
sister. The mother says she cannot endure Nicholas
any longer and wants him sent away because he
is noisy and gets the house dirty."
These are very significant facts. Our presumption
that rivalry exists between Nicholas and his older
sister has been confirmed. The step-father seems to be
a well-meaning man, but his method of reconciling
Nicholas is inadequate. As we suspected, the youngest
daughter is not a rival. There is conflict between the
mother and our patient, and we may be certain from
the tone of her remarks about him that her relations
with the boy are not good. We know that Nicholas
wants to surpass his older sister, but finds her too
strong. He expects his mother to promote his inte~ests,
and when she refuses he attacks her by being untidy
and by fighting. He expresses his discouragement by

152
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
stealing.. He has chosen his mother's weak point
by being noisy and dirty-although most twelve-year-
old boys are noisy and dirty.
II The step-father owns a meat market. The
mo~her receives a small pension and keeps house
for the family.
The family circumstances are
moderate. They have a five-room apartment, the
parents having a bedroom to themselves, while
the two girls sleep together and Nicholas sleeps
on a couch in the dining-room. Nicholas attends
a Methodist Sunday school.
.
II His birth was normal and he was a good baby.
He was weaned at five and one-half months and
was noticeably under-sized until he was ten years
old. He walked at thirteen months, talked at six-
teen months. At the present time he masturbates."
These
under-sized children are frequently very
aggressive, and in Nicholas's case the fact that he was
small might have been a considerable stimulus to
competition with his older sister. It is my opinion that
masturbation in young and maladjusted children is
derived chiefly from their desire to attract notice, as
well as their desire to be watched and guarded, and
this fits in with our supposition that the patient wants
more attention from his mother and probably feels
that she cares more for the older sister..
"He has been examined at the Post Graduate
Hospital by a psychiatrist and put on a medication

THE REBELLIOUS uBAD"
BOY
153
of bromides and pituitary gland. The treatmerit
has been discontinued. The mother says that
before the death of the boy's father she had no
difficulties with him. The difficulties began much
later, when she took him back after her second
marriage. J ,
We are almost forced to believe that the mother
handled Nicholas very well for the first four years.
Then the father's death occurred, the boy was sent
away, and after her re-marriage she took him back.
It is probable that because he deprived him of his
mother the step-father did not succeed in winning over
the boy.
The boy could not make an adjustment after he
came back, because he came into a new situation for
which he was unprepared, and the reason for his
difficulty with his mother is that he believed her
responsible for his lessened importance.
II After the father's death the boy was placed
in
the
father's
sister-in-law's
home
for
two
months. There were two other children in this
family, and the foster-mother complained that
both Nicholas and his sister were bad, and she
wanted more money for keeping them."
Here is a situation in which both children began to
fight because they were in an uncongenial environment.
It Then Nicholas was put into a home with
strangers \vhere there were three other children.

154
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
This family was not clean and did not give
Nicholas and his sister enough to eat. Nicholas
got into difficulties and mischief with the other
children, while going to an outside toilet. Then
he was placed with a third family, where the
children were never allowed to play outside of
the house. The mother often found Nicholas crying
on the bed when she went to visit the children.
She really wanted to be kind and good to the
children, and brought them presents every time
she came. An older girl took Nicholas's sister out
sometimes, but left Nicholas at home. He remained
in this home for a year and a half, until the
mother re-married."
The boy has had repeated experiences of humilia-
tion, and he suffered deeply in the first six years of
his life.
"When Nicholas first returned to his home he
cried a great deal and sat on his mother's lap
most of the time."
We could hardly have a better corroboration of
our suppositions of this boy's situation. The child
wanted his mother and couldn't find her. And now
he is with her and his mother wants to send him away
again. Nicholas is anxious to win his mother's love
and to be close to her.
tt Nicholas says, 'I want to get away from home
to some place where no one knows me.'"

THE REBELLIOUS I'BAD"
BOY
155
One frequently hears such statements from children
who are fighting for their rights. It means the same
as being dirty or masturbating. He really does not
want to be dirty, or leave his home, or masturbate;
he does these things in a spirit of revenge. Certain it
is that he feels hopeless in his present circumstances,
because there is no one whom he can trust.
tt He also says,
t I don't want to go to school
any more because the work is too hard for me.
I wish I could go back to the parental home; I
liked it there.' "
These remarks are familiar indices of the beginning
of a criminal career. Yau see, if a person believes
his work is too hard, he feels he has to steal to earn
a living, and now this boy is making a gesture of
bravado, as if he wanted to be a criminal and wanted
to go to jail. Such statements are signs of hopeless
rage, and I see that we shall have to gain the boy's
confidence before we can do much with him.
I I He rushes into the room in the morning and
makes his older sister wait on him. He screams
for his meals, teases his older sister and, although
usually impudent to his mother, he is sometimes
affectionate to her. He talks back to his father
and is disobedient and refuses to help him."
Here is the whole family drama. By screaming for
his meals he says in effect,
If I am cheated because

156
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
you do not take enough care of me."
His sister and
his father are his enemies, and he is revenging himself
on his mother.
I I He steals food in enormous amounts."
This is a point that should be investigated more
carefully, to learn whether he eats the food or gives
it away to others. Diabetic children often have the
desire to steal quantities of food. Such children are
always hungry and thirsty and are usually considered
nuisances about the house, until someone finds out
that they have diabetes.
II He runs out of the house and does not come
back for hours. He says he will run away when
he is thirteen years old."
This means, not merely that he prefers to be away
from home, but that he wishes to occupy his mother
with running after him.
ct He eats disgustingly at the table."
This is a corroboration of the points we have already
mentioned.
II Until three months ago he was kept in a
special class at school. He fights with other children
and deliberately spoils their games. He also steals
from these children and swears at them in vile,
abusive language."

THE REBELLIOUS
II BAD"
BOY
157
We could hardly expect this boy to do well iIi school,
because what he really wants is to be the favourite,
and since neither teacher nor children allow him to play
as important a role as he would like, he finds ways of
depreciating and humiliating them. He deprives them,
to enrich himself, and by cursing his comrades he
maintains an artificial elevation in his own eyes.
I I He wants to go back
I where the children are
tougher.' He was superior intellectually to the
children in the special class. He is impudent to
the teachers, disobedient, unruly, sulky, nervous,
impatient, rebellious, argumentative, and defiant.
He has no respect for authority, and teachers and
principals have always hated him. The first day
he went to school he stole a kiddy car, the second
qaya ball. He has stolen ever since and has even
broken into a house with two older boys. He was
sent to a parental home because he told the judge
he wanted to go there."
Nicholas has unfortunately launched himself upon
a criminal career because he has been unable to adjust
himself to the demands of the school community. He
glories in the punishment that is meted out to him.
Many children who are beaten and spanked say,
II It
does not hurt me, I want you to beat me." He shows
a certain amount of strength in his willingness to
suffer in order to maintain his ideal. What he needs is
a good comrade, ¥,rho will know how to keep him from
falling any lower.

IS8
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
It He cut off the tails of two cats with his
father's cleaver and he let out a carload of
chickens, so he could chase them. He started a
parked car, setting it rolling down a hill. Once he
stole twenty dollars from a ,voman's apartment.
He has taken many small articles from stores and
the like."
All these crimes indicate beyond any doubt that he
has no social feeling, either for animals or for human
beings, and he will do anything in order to annoy
people. From one point of vie,v, of course, the boy
is justified in behaving as he does, for his goal is to
maintain the centre of the stage, and to torture and
punish his mother, teacher, and all others who do not
favour him.
II He reads for recreation and occasionally goes
to the movies. He has no friends."
In a case of this kind it is perhaps fortunate that
he has no friends, because if he could make friends
more readily he would surely join a gang where he
would be appreciated and accepted.
Ie He roams around alone, jumping on trucks,
riding a long way, and then catching other trucks
back. If he meets boys on the street, he stops
them, asks them who they are, where they are
going, and usually makes derogatory remarks
which lead to a fight."

THE REBELLIOUS "BAD" BOY
159
He behaves like a wild street boy, and shows some
little courage, but of course this is not the proper
training for a useful human being.
"He \vas given money to join the Boy Scouts,
which he immediately spent. His father has given
him many playthings, such as a bicycle, musical
instrument, and the like. While he was in the
special class, he received fair marks, doing well
in reading, spelling, and language, but poorly in
drawing, music and hand-work. At present he is
in the fifth grade where he is doing poor work.
He refuses to do his homework un.1ess his mother
or sister helps him. He never asks aid of his
father. His I.Q. has at various times ranged from
eighty-five to one hundred and three."
These points indicate again that he regards his step-
father as the conqueror in the home and that he
refuses to work except under conditions which he
specifies. The wide range of the intelligence quotient
sho\vs how very relative the value of intelligence
tests are.
"The family complains that he gets into some
kind of trouble every day. They are tired of
having him dragged in by the police. Neighbours
constantly complain about his actions, and every-
thing that happens is blamed on him. His sister
says that the boy disgraces her. The patient says
that it is too cro\vded in the home, that his

160
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
father wants him to do too much work. He hates
his home, his school, and the town. The teacher
wants him sent back to the special class. Other
children in his class taunt him and get him into
fights. The principal is trying to be kind to him
and attempting to get the boys to co-operate. The
teacher is attempting to interest him in sports,
but so far he has rejected all advances."
This boy is succeeding excellently in attaining his
goal in life-to make trouble for other people; but I
see that both principal and teacher are on the right
path. Perhaps, if one of the boys in the class could
win him over as a friend, the fights would cease.
"He wishes to read and be alone. He says the
other boys get in his way. No one knows just
how he spends his time except when he comes
home at night. One of the teachers took him
driving in her car all day, and then to supper
with friends of hers, and Nicholas made himself
most agreeable and helpful, even helping t? set
the table for an impromptu supper."
You see how easily he can be disarmed on occa-
sion. But a method must be found which works
continually, and not only from time to time.
tt His early recollections are the following: he
remembers his father chasing him around the

THE REBELLIOUS
II BAD"
BOY
I6I
table when he asked for a penny, and seeing his
older sister fighting with another girl in the
street."
His real father was probably not kind to him if
this is his first recollection. The memory of his sister's
fighting with other children corroborates his feeling
that she is a belligerent girl and is guilty in her
quarrels with him.
"He remembers hiding behind a florist shop
because he did not want to go to his father's
funeral. He recalls seeing the crematory services
and his sister dressed while in her coffin."
This boy has evidently been very much impressed
by death, bllt it is hard to tell whether he was
refusing to go to his father's funeral because he was
moved by his death or because he wanted to revenge
himself. I should not be surprised to discover that
this boy wants to be a doctor. Many children who have
had experiences with death want to be doctors.
"He dreams at night, screams, and has night
terrors. Sometimes he says he dreams of going
to an undertaker and of sitting on a nice, soft
bed. The undertaker says,
I Get off there, that's
where I dress dead people.' Then he runs out into
a room where there are dead people lying on
beds."
11

162
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
His screaming at night is a means to persuade his
mother that he hasn't the courage to be alone in the
dark without her. The recurrence of the death motive
shows how clearly this thought looms in his mind as
a possible solution of his problems. After all, the
possibilities of a boy who is utterly without hope are
only three: wandering, suicide, and crime.
tt He sometimes dreams that the small image
on the mantel opens its eyes, looks at him, grows
bigger and bigger, bursts into flame, and dis-
appears. On some nights he sees men looking into
the window but he sees only the tops of their
heads and their eyes."
These are interesting dreams, for they show that
he thinks he is surrounded by enemies both by day
and by night. He trains himself to be frightened so
that he can scream and call for his mother, to corro-
borate his feeling that he is timid and that not even
his mother takes care of him.
"He wants to join the army or the navy but
he will take any job that is offered to him. He
does not want to be a lawyer because they have
to study too hard. He says he will never be a
butcher or a doctor."
The fact that he says he does not want to be a
doctor shows that he has been occupied with the idea

THE REBELLIOUS
II BAD"
BOY
163
to some extent. But finally he finds it ridiculous to
think of being a doctor, because he makes no progress
in school. He does not want to be a butcher, because
it is his step-father's profession and he hates his
step-father. Perhaps, however, it is because he has
overcome his inclination to cruelty. If this boy were
to choose a career of crime, I doubt \vhether he would
be a murderer. It is more likely that he would be a
burglar.
tt He would like to be a travelling salesman,
and see the world."
The
teacher's
interpretation
of
the
case
is
as
follows:
,t I believe that, although the mother is kind
to Nicholas in many ways, she feels he is an
affliction on her and is anxious to get rid of him
because she is afraid he \vill destro)T her happi-
ness with her husband. She lives in terror lest
he become such a problem that the husband will
tire of the whole family situation, and feels that
she must choose behveen her child and her hus-
band. Nicholas has promised me that he will not
scream for his dinner any more, and has kept
his word. He has also promised to report to his
father's shop for a week, every afternoon after
school, to assist in delivering packages. He did
so for the first day, but after that he failed to
appear."

164
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
Now we are at the end of the case history and I
believe that the teacher's interpretation of the mother's
state of mind is entirely correct. We seem to be as
well acquainted with Nicholas as if we had known
him for a long time. We realize he is in a dangerous
position, but we know also that he can be propitiated,
because the teacher has been able to make a friend
of him. We need to find another friend for this boy,
so that his continual quarrels in school will cease.
And we must explain to him the fallacy of his belief
that his sister is preferred to him. We must tell him
\vhy, as a second child, he is very ambitious, and why
he cannot pardon his mother because she married
again. We must try to persuade the step-father to be
even more helpful and comradely with the boy. The
teacp.er in the school occupies the key position. As I
have told you so often it is in the school and by the
teacher that crime waves must be stopped. The school
must become the .centre of social progress. It is the
logical source of all social reforms. We must try to
convince the mother in one interview, making her
understand that Nicholas considers himself unappre-
ciated, and that therefore she must not
p~nish him
or threaten him with the police, but must give him the
feeling that he ,is an intimate member of the family.
The older sister, who is probably not too .well adjusted
socially, must relinquish her belligerent attitude and
her rivalry with Nicholas.

THE REBELLIOUS
II BAD" BOY
165
CONFERENCE
The mother enters the room.
DR. ADLER. We wish to speak with you concerning
your boy. After our examination of his history we
believe that this is riot at all a hopeless case. We find
that he is an intelligent boy, and if we can discover
the mistakes that have been made in his e~rly educa-
tion, and correct them, he \viII turn out very well. I
am sure that you have tried 'hard to do this, but you
see the boy is also trying very hard to show you that
he feels he is being discriminated against. I believe
that it would be a good thing to convince him that you
love 'him just as much as you do the older girl, who
is a 'very good pupil and has made good progress. We
have found that your son' believes his sister has a
distinct advantage, and he is hopeless because he feels
that he is out of the competition. It is for this reason
that he wants to make trouble, and annoys you and
your family.
The teacher has understood his case very well and
has shown him how to make friends and how to
improve his school record, and I believe the same
thing can be done at home. You might begin by taking
him into your confidence. ,t Do you know a good book
v'fe could buy for your little sister?"
t, Would you
like to have your own room?"
,t What would you
like to have for lunch today?" By doing this, the
child will feel of some importance. You must also
influence his sister to stop quarrelling with him. She

r66
THE
p.~TrERN OF LIFE
must be made to understand that he has lost hope
through feeling that his unhappy situation at home
cannot be changed because you prefer the other
children.
MOTHER. He behaves so badly that nobody likes
him.
DR. ADLER. When he came back to your home he
probably wanted to have you alone, but he found
instead that his older sister and your husband had
displaced him. That is when the trouble began. You
are a kind mother and probably understood how to
make a friend of hiln in the beginning, while he was
with you, but on his return, when the trouble began,
you did not understand how to treat him. In your
endeavour to have him turn out to be a good boy,
you have reproached him too much. If a friend makes
a mistake, one should only smile and call it to his
attention gently. One should not be annoyed; one
should not scold. If )TOU think it will do any good, I
will talk to him and explain some of the mistakes
that ha've been made. I shall try to convince him that
~you like him as much as you like the other children.
It is your problem to make the home more attractive
to him, and everybody in the famil)7 must try to con-
ciliate him. The teacher and I wjll also help, but you
must be patient, for the process \vill take time. This
bo)! is in a very serious predicament, but we must
not let him kno\v it. You must never say to him,
"You will come to a bad end." You see, he has lost
his courage and only wants to have an easy life. It

THE REBELLIOUS "BAD"
BOY
167
will be your duty to encourage him to face life more
bravely.
The boy comes in.
DR. ADLER. How do you do. Suppose you sit down
among these friends .and tell us what you like to do
most.
NICHOLAS. I want to go to West Point and ride a
horse and carry a gun.
DR. ADLER. Couldn't you do that on a ranch or
on a farm?
NICHOLAS. No, they have fat horses on a farm.
DR. ADLER. Do you like quick horses, race horses?
Are you having a race with your sister, to see who is
going to come out ahead?
NICHOLAS. Yes.
DR. ADLER. I believe you are not brave enough.
She is a good pupil in school. But it seems to me that
you have lost hope of being a good pupil. Your teacher
is convinced that you could be a good pupil if you
paid more attention to the work. I believe that you
are a clever boy and could be one of tile best pupils
in your class, if you tried. It "takes some time though,
but it is bound to happen. You cannot go to West
Point right away, and it requires a great deal of study
to be allowed to enter. The best \vay to get to West
Point is to do your present school tasks courageously.
You would be very lonesome at West Point, if you
have no friends. YOll might begin by making friends
at school. You have to be able to do more than fight
\\'ith your comrades, you must make friends with them.

168
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
Perhaps you believe your mother does not love you
enough and that your sister does not care for you
either. I know that your mother does love you, and
I am going to send word to your sister, telling her not
to fight with you all the time. If I were you I should
become a pal to my father. He is a good, kind man
and he is not against you. Your mother likes him very
much, and when you grow up you will also find that
some girl will love you and will marry you. The fact
that your mother loves your father does not mean she
has stopped loving you. She also loves your younger
and older sisters, and you are just one part of the
family. If you would help your mother a little more,
your mother and sister would certainly like you better.
Now I suggest that in the next week you do. things
that other people do not like, only two times, and
then come back and see me again. Do you think you
can succeed?
NICHOLAS. Yes.

THE HUNGER STRIKE
T
HIS evening \ve are to consider the case of
.
Betty, a six-year-old girl whose chief problem
is difficulty in eating, more or less marked in propor-
tion to her attitude to her
su~roundings. She shows
a particular. resentment against food if the situation
is not exactly to her liking, which is characteristic
of a spoiled child. On the other hand, we must be
careful to exclude organic diseases such as tuber-
culosis, rickets, or infectious diseases in which a child
might have a similar lack of appetite. Sometimes
two-and-one-half-year-old
children
have
the
same
symptoms we find in maladjusted children, who, when
examined, show definite organic changes and are abso-
lutely right in their disinclination to eat. It is necessary
for anyone who deals with children to have s.ome
medical experience, and lay psychologists and social
workers should be very careful lest they make dan-
gerous mistakes in their diagnoses. However, when
we hear that Betty's antipathy to food vari~s with her
attitude toward her environment, we may suspect that
it is a psychological rather than a medical problem.
The case notes go on to state:
"Her condition is particularly unfavourable
with her mother. Rarely is the child eager for food
and almost always she dawdles over her meals.
When she eats she keeps a few bolts of her food in
her cheek and appears agonized at the necessity
of swallowing."
169

170
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
This is almost unmistakable evidence that Betty
wishes to intensify her dependency on her mother's
care. Perhaps her mother spoiled Betty in the begin-
ning, and then realized that she had followed the
wrong course and gave it up. Of course, the child
resents the sudden loss of her high estate, and as the
mother has probably over-emphasized the importance
of eating, Betty is attacking her weakest point. It is
only in the rarest instances of severe organic disease
of the brain that a child cannot swallow. Children,
as well as adults who have difficulty in swallowing,
usually want to attract attention at meal-time. They
seem to be in great danger, make frantic efforts,
and successfully frighten their table companions, but
it is very difficult for anyone else to tell you how
to swallow.
"The worst meal is breakfast, at which Betty
can hardly be forced to eat anything."
I am not sure whether I am correct in my explana-
tion, but this appears to me like a child's morning
song, as if Betty was giving her mother a hint of the
difficulties she might expect during the day.....i\mong
many neurotics, especially in cases of melancholia,
the symptoms are worse in the morning, as if the
patients wanted to reiterate their sickness. Parents are
much troubled if a child refuses to eat in the morning,
probably because they believe that the child's health
will suffer. It is easy to see how Betty's power grows

TaE HUNGER STRIKE
and how she begins to rule the household by her
refusal to eat. The child's goal seems to be that of
domination over her family. To understand why she
has chosen this goal, we must understand her position
ill the family. My first guess would be that she is an
only child, and that, for some reason, it is vitally
important to her to dominate her ~amily.
"For a long time she resorted to vomiting and
had a ,number of food fads. If she was forced
to eat she would vomit. Recently she had a fit
of vomiting which was precipitated by an occur-
rence in school. The teacher insisted that she
consume something which Betty had refused.
Betty felt this was an injustice, because she had
called for double portions of everything else and
had had a long record of eating at sc'hool and
at home."
I have often insisted that children must not be
forced to eat, because they are stronger than we are.
I conclude from this report that Betty had a par-
ticularly strict teacher. The child's resistance met with
harsh treatment, which was worse than the uncertain
discipline at home. It used to be the usual procedure
to throw cold water on a person or scream at her
when she had a nervous fainting attack, and often this
succeeded in stopping the attacks. But if improperly
ambitious' individuals fail to get their own way by
means of such attacks, they simply look: around for
173

172
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
a more effective method. I remember the caSe of a
very ambitious and domineering woman who could
never bear to drive in traffic with her husband. When
she was afraid and irritated she would grasp his hand
or the wheel, to stop him or hinder him in driving.
When she did this he would drive even faster, until
she realized she could not restrain him. You may call
this a cure or a treatment, but it reminds me of the
curative measures which were common during the
war. When a soldier developed hysteria and trembled,
or could not speak, he was often tortured by the
doctors by being shocked with an electric current.
These soldiers would either stop their tremors or they
would scream. This is not a treatment. Bodily symp-
toms which are based on psychological attitudes can
be made to disappear very easily by using great force.
But the individual's behaviour pattern does not change
thereby. He always finds another road to his fictitious
role of superiority. It would be easy enough to stop
Betty's food fads and vomiting, but at a later time
she would develop other symptoms.
II There is a secondary problem, in that in the
last two years she has evinced a growing un-
social attitude and increasing belligerency toward
others, including her mother. She refuses to greet
people."
We have already gathered that her attack was
directed chiefly against the mother. The refusal to

THE HUNGER STRIKE
173
greet people is a very common symptom, and an
interesting one to explain, because it is .linked with
the whole origin of greetings between individuals. Many
children, whose goal is to dominate the grown-up
environment, have difficulty in greeting their teachers
or people on the street, because they feel that such a
salutation is evidence of sllbmission. In Vienna, for
instance, this feeling of submission is not only im-
plied but actually expressed. A common greeting is
lC Servus! " This actually means,
II I am your slave."
It is a form of salutation which goes back, I believe,
to Roman times when a slave had to lift his hat to his
master and say,
It I am your slave."
In America of
course, the greeting is more an index of friendliness.
II Betty does not speak freely or civilly to people
she meets and often uses abusive language. She
will not forget a fancied wrong and goes from
one fixed idea of grievance to another. At present
she seems reluctant to experiment with the new;
she shuns new situations and meeting new people,
old or young, but she is ready to have someone
else makes the preliminary contacts when she
happens to want to play with a strange child."
This is further evidence that the child's social interest
has not developed.
"She seems to think a great deal and often
desires to be quiet for long periods of time, which

174
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
she spends in brooding; but often she emerges
from these moods with very intelligent questions."
Other schools of psychology, notably the school of
Dr. lung, in Zurich, would say that this contemplative
attitude indicated that the child was an introvert.
This child is an introvert, but it is not a congenital
state,
and we
can understand how it has been
artificially developed. Betty is isolated and unconnected
with her companions, and therefore has nothing to
do but to think. If the child liked companionship and
had a strong social interest, Jung would call her an
extrovert. This would simply mean that she had been
properly educated and had growt:l up in a situation
where she could experience and follow social interests.
I do not believe that introversion and extroversion
are fixed qualities.
"The outdoors and nature are very dear to
her. She asks constantly to live· in the country,
and when scenery is especially appealing she is
moved to say with elation,
I Isn't the world
beautiful? ' "
When a child is social and still can be interested in
nature it is very fortunate; but with this child who
is not interested in human beings I am inclined to
believe that she loves nature, not because of her
courage, but because of her weakness. One often finds
such a love of nature among people who are afraid to

THE HUNGER STRIKE
175
make social contacts, and would live wholly isolated
from mankind on some little island, or in a hut in
the forest.
"The other day, however, when she seemed
to be impressed with the freshness and beauty of
the sunny morning she said pointedly, 'I like
being cross.' "
This again indicates that she cannot make social
connections, and that, therefore, being cross is one of
the few spheres of activity which is left her. Being
cross is also the best means to cross her mother,
therefore, she likes it.
"The p.arents say the eating problem has existed
since she Was born, but that her other difficulties
are new developments."
This simply means that Betty has changedherinstru-
ments, but the general situation has not changed.
,t This immediate family consists of mother,
father, and the one child. The relationship between
the parents is a loving one, and the home may
be said to be one of real marital happiness,
although there is a considerable nervous tension
due to economic stress and a long siege of ill-
ness in the mother's own family, with which she
has been in intimate contact. Both parents are

176
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
high-strung~and outbursts of nerves have occurred
from time to time."
An only child usually insists on being the centre of
attention, more than a child in a large family, and
we have already considered how such a child, finding
that the parents love each other dearly, feels dis-
criminated against. When a marriage is unhappy, it
is usually a problem for a child to adjust to, but
we cannot insist that a happy marriage is the most
important thing in bringing up children. We must
always see the family situation in its relativity, before
we can understand the relation of the child to its
parents.
Now we have more clues concerning Betty's conflict
with her mother. No doubt the moth~r's pre-occupation
with he.r illness in her family has detracted from her
interest in her child. Outbursts of nerves on the part
of parents are always difficult for children, especially
if they are ambjtious children, accustomed to holding
the centre of the stage. Such outbursts prev~nt Betty
from having a chance to prove her superiority. She
has been precluded by her lack of social interest
from making contacts with people outside, and the
nervo~s strain has closed the way for her within the
family. The sale remaining sphere to express her
superiority has been in the maintenance of her food
fads.
't The father is a writer; the mother is at busi-
ness. It is essential to have the combined incomes

THE HUNGER STRIKE
177
to make ends meet. The apartment contains fOUf
large bright rooms. The parents have a room to
themselves. The child sleeps in her own bed,
alone, although she shares her room with the
maid. There is a paternal grandmother, who has
been over-anxious about the child's food and
weight from the beginning, and constantly dis-
cusses these matters in the child's hearing. She
has succeeded in imposing her fears
on the
parents."
A new complication. A grandmother usually over-
indulges children and makes it difficult for the mother,
especially if she is a paternal grandmother. We hazard
the guess that differences exist between the paternal
grandmother and Betty's mother. The grandmother
has increased the child's idea of the importance and
significance of food and encouraged her to believe that
eating is the most vital thing in the world.
tt The
grandmother's
attitude
toward
the
mother has continued to be a critical one, even
in the child's presence, and the mother believes
that the grandmother's influence has precipitated
the child's present critical and unfriendly attitude
toward her."
It is natural for a child who wants to rule her family
by being the centre of attention, to take the side of
a grandmother who is very kind and anxious and
believes that the child is not fussed over enough. But
12

I78
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
the grandmother is probably not the entire cause of
Betty's difficulties, though she has no doubt played
an important role.
II The child was in perfect health at birth, was
breast-fed for seven months, and then weaned.
Immediately. thereafter, she was given
imp~re
milk, which caused a severe intestinal disorder
that required a long time to heal. Her develop-
ment was normal. She walked at the age of
fourteen months and talked at fifteen months,
speaking
at
once
in
sentences
and
forming
plurals."
The intestinal disorder gives us another clue con-
cerning the importance of eating in this family. The
other data are important because they indicate that
the child is unusually intelligent.
II Her habits are excellent. She is quite cleanly
but given to thumb-sucking. It was a tremendous
task to break her of this habit."
Thumb-sucking is generally a means of attracting
attention, and it was probably difficult to break Betty
of the habit because she found this an easy way to
assure
herself
of
being
constantly
watched
and
guarded. However, there are some differing opinions
about this habit.
The Freudian interpretation of
thumb-sucking is that it is a sexual complex and a
perversion. A much more reasonable explanation is

THE HUNGER STRIKE
I79
one which Dr. David M. Levy of the Institute of Child
Guidance, in New York, has advocated. Dr. Levy
found that if a child is breast-fed by a mother who
has a great deal of milk which flows too rapidly, the
proper exercise of the mouth and jaws is lacking and
thumb-sucking is a compensation. While I believe Dr.
Levy's explanation may be a factor in thumb-sucking,
I also believe that any child can be made to form
this habit if he feels that he is being watched and
observed because of it.
II When Betty's hands were bound she resorted
to vomiting."
In other words, she proved herself the stronger in
another way. Freud would say that she had to suppress
her sex desire, and therefore vomited.
" The mother cannot recall whether her first
recourse to vomiting was a revolt against the
restrictions or against the food. She has always
been in violent revolt against prohibitions."
We can readily understand that children who want
to dominate resent prohibitions. SlICh children cannot
be influenced by punishment.
"When less than two years old Betty replied
when threatened with the loss of her toys: 'I
don't care, I don't need them. I can look out of
the window and think.'"

180
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
How easily this child maintains her fictional goal
of superiority. It is the expression of her pride in
being the stronger.
II The social position of the family is in the
upper middle class. The parents' friends
~re
chiefly professional people. The child submits
more readily to her father and is very much
attached to him. When the father caresses the
mother, the child voices a definite protest such
as
I Kiss me, too,' or
I I want a hug, too.'"
It is very evident that the child believes that the
parents' affection for each other represents a sub-
traction from the love which is due to her.
It It is necessary for the mother to \vork and at
the age of two and one-half years the child was
sent away for \veeks with a well-trained, kindly
nurse, in order to wean her from her mother, to
whom she was devoted to a fault. The parents
also hoped that by sending her away the feeding
problem could be corrected. This was done shortly
after the mother's enforced absence from home,
due to family illness, during which time the child
was inconsolabIe. ',
The sudden desertion of her indulgent mother was
of course incomprehensible to Betty. It was a real
tragedy for the child.

THE HUNGER STRIKE
181
tt While the child was away she grieved quietly
for a few days, but was eventually won over to
her situation and apparently became adjusted."
tt Apparentl~y" is the correct word to use, because
later developments show that Betty never pardoned
her mother.
tt The mother believes that the child never for-
got the enforced absence, and never forgave it.
Shortly after this she was sent to a private school
of an experimental type."
The mother seems to have understood Betty'~ ~itua­
tion without knowing how to remedy it.
t t She revolted violently against the school,
crying agonizingly, refusing to eat, and vomiting.
This kept up for three months."
Betty shows a great deal of strength in carrying
out her protest. In a way I consider this a promising
sign, because if this strength can be directed into
useful channels the child \vill become a leader.
"Then the child suddenly announced that she
would go to school without crying, and since then
there has been no trouble on this score. She is
now in her third year kindergarten, and is quite
popular."
The reason for her sudden change must have been
that she either found a better way to master her

182
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
problems at school or a more advantageous situation.
Her popularity is rather surprising in view of her lack
of interest in other children. However, many spoiled
children are able to develop a splendid technique for
attracting people; this has probably happened in
Betty's case.
II Until recently she had a very marked attrac-
tion for older boys, and used her charm with
relish. Her influence was so unusual that the
teachers made efforts to learn how she managed
to win the boys, but they could not learn her
procedure."
This is confirmation of our belief that she has a
good technique for getting other people to pamper her.
Her procedure with the boys was probably the same
that she used to conciliate her father.
It She was away at a summer camp run by one
of the teachers of her school, for the past two
summers,
remaining
away
from
home
three
months each time. Last year this was supple-
mented by a two weeks' trip with another child
and that child's parents. She conducted herself
so graciously that the parents were loud in her
praise. Each year, however, she announces in
advance that she will not go away, and she is
quite insistent this year as well, but each year she
goes quite gladly."

THE HUNGER STRIKE
183
Here we have more evidence that the child knows
how to endear herself to people. As far as her protests
against going away are concerned, she uses these
merely as a means to trouble her parents.
"This year she insists on going away with her
mother as her school friends do."
Now this is the fire that burns in her soul: she wants
to be with her mother. She very intelligently takes her
mother to task: "My friends go with their mothers,
and I want to go with you."
,t Her recreations are normal. She has no street
friends, for she is at school until half-past four
every afternoon. Her inclinations are toward the
piano, at which she has decided talent, and
although she has not yet been tutored slle has
composed some very beautiful little pieces. Her
teacher in school says she does everything well
when she tries. It is being noticed that she is
sensitive about her work. She is not at ease unless
she thinks she excels and refuses to work or
play when she fears that she will not show to
advantage."
Betty's conduct is irreproachable in school, because
any reproof \vould be too grave an insult to her pride
and ambition.
"She feels the absence of a sister or brother
and complains that she has no one to play with at

184
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
home. Friends are called in, but there is always
trouble when she is left alone again and there is a
constant and intense protest about the mother's
work and absence from home."
It is doubtful whether she really wants a brother
or sister, and probably she is certain that she will not
have either one. Her complaints are to be considered
rather as an accusation against her mother. She really
wants her mother to be at home, occupied solely
with her.
tt The child has tried by tears, prayers, and
incriminations, to keep the mother at home. She
says for example,
t I'll be your friend if you will
only stay at home.' The day's routine is normal
for her age. She sleeps well, so far as it is known,
without dreaming, with the exception of a few
occasions when she awoke screaming, saying that
lions and tigers were coming up the stairs."
Betty has finally found a way to irritate and occupy
her parents at night. Lions and tigers are very useful
for this purpose.
" The mother takes her to school every morn-
ing, and the father frequently calls for her. Since
infancy this child's interest, almost to the exclu-
sion of everything else, seems to have been in
watching the reactions of people, both
childre~
and adults. This tendency is so marked that she
will at times provoke a reaction simply to observe

THE HUNGER STRIKE
and comment upon it. She is very quick to report
accurately the idiosyncrasies of those whom she
watches.
Her
mind
is
decidedly
logical
and
analytical.',
What does this mean? It is an obvious imitation of
the father, who, as a writer, must constantly observe
the reactions of people. l\Iany of you no doubt know
the superstition that women cannot be logical and
analytical, but here is an example that proves its
fallacy. Any girl can be logical and analytical when,
as is the case here, it serves her purpose.
(( She invented the following game. Betty was
a judge while her playmates took the roles of
policemen, who had arrested a naked woman and
arraigned her before Judge Betty. Then Judge
Betty pronounced the following sentence: (The
only thing to do with a naked woman is to
electrocute her.' "
This is a significant game, because it shows in the
first place that she has understood the difference
between the sexes, and in the second that she has
developed the feeling of inferiority; she does not speak
of naked men but of naked women. It is her masculine
protest. An index at one and the same time that she
resents being a woman and that she wants to be a
man. We need not be surprised that she imitates her
father. Her high ambition is not consistent with her
idea of the feminine role.

r86
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
II Nudity as such is not a startling fact to her,
as she has constantly seen her campmates naked
and her parents are quite casual about her seeing
them bathe, should she happen to come to the
bathroom."
The object of Betty's intolerance is not nudity, but
women.
II For a long time she demanded to be told
stories about bad animals and bad people. The
good stories do not interest her."
Very likely the stories about bad animals are useful
material with which to trouble her mother at night.
Individuals who have no social interest like to believe
that people are naturally bad. Most egoistic philoso-
phers have sponsored such theories. Socially interested
individuals are usually tolerant and kind and try to
understand the factors which make people bad. More-
over, stories of good people are really not very
interesting to read. Nobody would be interested in the
story of a good man who always got up smiling in the
morning, said kind words to his family, went to work
with a laugh, brought home presents to his children
and flowers to his wife, and was always kind, sweet,
and gentle. Brit if you tell a story of a bad man who
is cruel and thoughtless, you can get people to read it.
II Recently in a very dramatic fashion, the girl
threatened her schoolmates as follows:
I If you

THE HUNGER STRIKE
I87
don't do such and such, I'll send the influenza to
get you tonight, I'll send it through the open
window and you'll die.' Finally she believed the
story
~erself and insisted on the windows being
shut."
You see her striving for magic power in the phrase,
ttyou will die."
She is beginning to assume the role
of godlikeness. She wants to be master of life and
death, to make people die when they do not obey her.
. Herein lies the tragedy of such a child's life. The
lack of social interest and her dominating attitude
will be revenged upon her own person. Whoso uses
this sword will perish by it. This is the cruel logic
of life.
I have been told that the child is sick this evening,
so that we can speak only with the mother. I am not
sure whether we can persuade her to our point of
view, but it will be our problem to explain the situation
to her, and she will have to explain it to Betty. In
many ways the mother has acted very correctly, and
has understood the coherence of her child's behaviour.
She will have to explain to Betty that eating is not the
vital matter that the grandmother thinks it, but in
such a way that the grandmother will not be hurt. The
child can be told, for instance, that the grandmother
means well, but is not sufficiently versed in these
matters. The child should have more friends, and be
encouraged to train herself toward a useful leadership
among them.

188
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
CONFERENCE
The mother comes in.
DR. ADLER. We have carefully considered the story
of your little girl and find that she is a very intelligent
and promising child. I think that your understanding
of her conduct has been excellent in many respects.
It seems to me that the child felt that she was deserted
when you were busy with your family and has not
forgiven you for it. She does not realize that her life's
purpose now is to punish you for this desertion, but
I believe that if you speak with her about it you can
convince her of your friendship.
MOTHER. I have done that time and time again, but
she is not interested. She is very abstract about the
matter, and so emotionally involved and so resentful
that she will not allow her mental faculties to operate.
She is very irritated about my position, and says,
It Why don't you get a position with my school?"
I
tell her there is no position for me in her school, and
in the second place, I could not earn 'enough money
that way.
DR. ADLER. I would suggest that you tell her you
will try it for fourteen days to see how she will like
going hungry because you are not earning sufficient
money. I doubt whether she will consent to this,
because I see the matter of eating is very much
exaggerated in your family.
MOTHER. That's true.
Mother tells about the influenza and about the child's
watching other human beings.

T.RE HUNGER STRIKE
18g
DR. ADLER. Her terror of the influenza is to show
you that she really has the power to call down the
influenza on her playmates. You might explain it to
her in this way. Tell her also that since babyhood she
has wanted to be the centre of attention.
MOTHER. I have tried to rationalize her and have
progressed to a certain extent, but then I have been
blocked.
DR. ADLER. You probably did not find the right
catchword. Take a \valk with her and in a friendly
\vay tell her that to have been forced to leave her hurt
you very much. Impress upon her that you would
prefer being with her as much as possible, and then
appeal to her reason and ask her if she would not also
\vork if she had to take care of a family. Then remind
her that she is an only child and suggest that ·she is
trying to rule the family by making difficulties -about
her eating. You might say to her that you are not
entirely certain whether this is so, and you would like
to discuss it with her.
MOTHER. Recently there have been several deaths in
the family due to tuberculosis and other causes. Since
these deaths she has been very bad about eating. She
is quite conscious of what she does. She says, "If I
don't eat tonight, I am sure I shall not die."
DR.
ADLER. She only wants to irritate you and
occupy you with her interests. What she really means
is, "I will not eat. Are you not afraid that I shall
die? " Then she believes you will be worried and force
her to eat.

190
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
MOTHER. She is really not so disturbing about her
eating as she is about her other reactions. She is not
at all interested in her associates.
DR. ADLER. I believe this can best be settled in
school. Her teacher will talk to her as a real friend
and show her how she can be the leader of other
children, not by ruling them and attacking them, but
by helping them. You may discuss this point with her
too if you like, but do not criticize her. I believe you
understand what I mean. Her goal in life is to irritate
you, which is common among only children, especially
if they have been over-indulged once, and then been
deserted. We must make her more sociable and more
interested in other people, and you can do this best
by dropping a friendly hint here and there as to how it
can be done. The child is very contemplative and will
understand it. Is she not sure that she will always be
an only child?
MOTHER. Yes.
DR. ADLER. You see how clever she is. She knows
that she can pray for another child, and that her
prayer will not be granted. Have you noticed that
she would prefer to be a boy?
MOTHER. Yes, she believes that boys have more
freedom.
DR. ADLER. She feels inferior, so she fights and is
abusive. Nevertheless, I am sure that she is a fine girl.
If she is abusive, then you can tell her that swearing
is not especially clever and that really fine adults never
do it. You must be more free with her and take her

THE HUNGER STRIKE
I9I
into your confidence, ask her opinion about little
matters in the household, treat her as a grown-up and
let her feel that she can win significance by assuming
responsibilities and by being kind. Yau must also
explain to her that she has always tried to dominate
the family and point out that neither you nor your hus-
band try to dominate; that the family is a partnership,
one for all, and all for one.
MOTHER. I think that is a very good idea.

FOLLOW THE LEADER
T
HIS evening we have under consideration the
case history of Michael, a boy twelve years and
eight months old, \vho has been caught in a number
of robberies. He is a member of a roughly organized
gang, led by a boy of fourteen years, who teaches
these younger boys how to steal.
Our first impression is that 1'Iichael must be seriously
dissatisfied with the conditions of his environment. If
the leader of the gang influences him to steal it is
evident that he has more significance among these boys
than in school or at home. The notes state:
tt He has been stealing for quite some time,
until' Baldy,' who was the leader, was sent away
to a home. This was about two years ago. Now
Baldy is back in the neighbourhood, and the boys
have been caught in several robberies."
An important factor is that the boy does not steal
independently. He is used and abused by the gang.
Perhaps the leader flatters Michael's egotism, or per...
haps Michael is one of those feeble-minded, or almost
feeble-minded, children who are blindly obedient to
their a~cepted chief. Anyone who has studied criminal
cases knows that members of this type are to be found
in every gang. They are the cat's-paws who do the
actual stealing. It is probable that this child is not
feeble-minded, but he is certainly extremely dependent
101

FOLLOW THE LEADER
193
on others. He wants to be an underling, and acquires
a distorted sense of superiority in blindly following
his leader's commands.
II Michael was taken to the Children's Court
and is now on probation."
It is hardly in order to discuss here whether proba-
tion for children is a good thing or not. But for a
child only twelve years old to be on probation to the
court is an important difficulty \vhich may add to his
feeling of degradation and humiliation.
"The father and mother were born in Ukrainia
and the mother speaks very little English. The
father speaks English fairly well. They have lived
in New York about three years. The father works
from eight to five in a factory, the mother works
from five to nine cleaning offices. Both parents
are naturalized citizens, and the children were all
born in America."
The mother's inability to speak English readily is
an additional handicap. Such little things can easily
hinder a child's social development.
Furthermore,
when the children are at home the parents are prac-
tically never there together.
"There are three children, Leon, aged fourteen
years and six months, Michael, aged twelve years
18

I94
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
and eight months, and Mary, aged six. They
live in a four-room flat of the old tenement type.
There are no elevators, no bath, no heat, and the
toilet is in the hall. There are two bedrooms.
Michael and Leon sleep together. The family is
Catholi~.' ,
It is probable that Michael's older brother has
developed the characteristics of a leader, and that
Michael has submitted to him in order to feel his equal,
as his companion and partner. By allo\ving himself to
be led he gains the leader's attention and appreciation.
His brother is two years older, and his sister is six
years younger, so the older brother probably influ-
enced his pattern more than the younger sister. The
description of the home shows that they are very poor,
and the family situation may be bad.
tt Michael had a normal birth and development.
He \valked at one year, and talked soon after that.
He seems affectionate and friendly with every-
one, including his own family. At school he is
popular and gets on well \vith the other children."
The history confirms our assumptions about this
child's psychology. He is friendly and submissive
and
therefore
unlikely to
be
the leader in an)"
misdemeanour.
" Michael says he had some teachers that he did
not like, but he likes his present teacher."

FOLLOW THE LEADER
I95
Obviously he wants to be treated kindly, and his
conduct is in the nature of a pact with authority, tt Be
good to me and I will be good to you." It is because
he is so humble that he can be led into crime. It would
be just as easy to lead him to do good things, but this
would be insufficient. He must also be taught to be
independent and self-confident. It is not enough to
admonish him and preach to him. He must be given a
sense of his own responsibility.
t t He plays on the street much of the time. He
plays tag, and ball games, and shoots dice, is
generally \vell liked by other children and easily
led by bigger boys."
Our presuppositions are being confirmed over and
over again by the case history. Michael will do any-
thing to be appreciated.
,t Michael says he has a girl whom he takes to
the movies sometimes and whose house he some-
times visits. He and his brother take turns in
shining shoes. They have a bootblack outfit and
go out after school and on Saturdays."
t, He and his brother."
Again the confirmation of
the fact that he must be the leader. Going out with
girls is a patent gesture of imitation of the older boys.
"Michael's mother says, 'Mike a good boy.
He always happy at home. Loves to play with his

196
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
young sister, teases her sometimes. I do not know
he is going with Baldy. Baldy very bad boy.
Mike never get in trouble until he meet with Baldy.
He stayed away from school two times, once when
he went to Coney Island, once when I wanted
him to go to hospital with me. I nqt speak so
good. Mike now going with bad boys. I think we
try to move, so Mike go with better boys.'
"The mother says that when she goes to work
at five o'clock the father looks after Michael and
does not let him run out. She wants him to go
to the Settlement House every afternoon, so that
he will not go out on the street. Michael often
earns one or two dollars which he takes home to
his mother and she gives him a nickel or a
dime."
Although it is good for a boy to contribute his
earnings to the family, perhaps in this case it is a
further indication of self-abasement. The mother is
quite right about moving into a different neighbour-
hood. It is better to move such a child, if he is being
constantly tempted, than to expose him to a vicious
situation. Michael can be led by his father, but as the
father cannot always be at home, Michael comes under
the influence of older boys. The only real cure is to
make him more independent.
ct The father says,
't Mike is not bad.
He
never takes money at home, although he could
take it from my pocketbook.' Leon takes the

FOLLOW THE LEADER
I97
older-brother attitude to\vard Mike. He will fight
for him and with him. The older brother eagerly
tells how he beat up another boy in his brother's
defence, but he feels very much superior to
Michael. He is farther along in school and gets
better marks. He does not steal or play dice."
The case history continues to confirm our earlier
conjectures. The older brother fights with Michael
and suppresses him in order to overcome his own
innate feeling of inferiority, while Michael worships
his brother as a hero.
"Michael says, 'My father and mother like
Leon best.' Leon eagerly confirms this and adds
that his little sister likes him best too. Michael
is very fond of his mother and his little sister I
and does not show resentment of the family
disapproval, although I know he feels it."
His lack of resentment probably means that Michael
tolerates his subordinate position only to derive cer-
tain advantages from it. It is important to know
whether the child's mentality is really of a low order,
and for this information we must go to the school
report.
,'Michael was born in a factory town in New
York, and both mother and father worked all
day in the factory. The children \vere taken to a
nursery at eight in the morning, and called for at

198
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
five or six in the evening. This lasted for three
years. Then the children were sent to a Catholic
school. When Michael was eight years old the
family moved to Michigan, but returned to New
Yark the same year. This change cost Michael
a year in school. Although he was past .eight
years, he was put in the first grade. He is now
in the 4A junior shop. His best marks are in
arithmetic, his poorest in reading and spelling."
It is probable that he was humiliated by this loss
of a year, which put him in a class with younger
boys. He may be a left-handed child, for his nickname
is Lefty.
c, The teacher says: 'I like Michael, and the
children like him. He does not quarrel. The
intelligence test shows that he has an intelligence
quotient of 70. A motor-mechanical showed that
he had good ability in using his hands, his score
being average for his age. An emotional test
indicated that he is much concerned over the
robberies and with being taken to the Children's
Court. He appears to be afraid of the older boys
in the gang.'"
The low I.Q. would lead many people to believe
that this child was feeble-minded, but it must be
remembered that his life pattern is one of discourage-
ment and fear. I am very much in favour of removing
him to a more favourable situation.

FOLLOW THE LEADER
I99
" Last summer Michael went to a free camp for
two months. His record was best in swimming,
good in athletics and music. His attitude was co-
operative and helpful. The counsellor remarked:
'Mike was one of the bright spots of the season.
He possesses the cheeriest smile I have ever seen
and it was always in evidence. He is a typical
happy-go-lucky type. His routine work and play
were always done in a spirit of gaiety."
Michael would be quite ready to destroy himself, if
someone asked him to do so, as a favour. The coun-
sellor, beset by many problem boys, would of course
appreciate a child who was a good athlete and always
cheerful. He smiles so constantly because he puts all
responsibility for his actions in other people's hands.
This child would never be a problem in a favourable
environment.
"For several months previous to March 30,
I929, the boy had committed a number of petty
thefts, which culminated in a good-sized robbery
of several pocketbooks, the contents of which
amounted to $60. They were taken to an open
room where a class was in progress. The theft
was traced to the gang of which Baldy was the
leader, another boy the brains, and lVIichael the
tool."
It has been perfectly clear that Michael would not
be the instigator or leader in an activity of this kind.

200
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
" In Michael's confession he said that he came
in the front hall and got the elevator man, who
has charge of the building, to chase him. He said
the elevator man threatened to wring his neck
if he caught him. While he was being chased, the
other boys climbed into the building and stole
the pocketbooks and watches, and divided the
money."
To be chased by an elevator man is not exactly an
heroic role.
"In the Brooklyn robbery, l\1:ichael said that
he did not take anything. He said his job was to
'watch for the cops.' When he saw one coming
he called
I Chicki,' and the other boys ran.
Incidentally not fast enough, for they were all
caught and taken to court."
Again he plays an inferior part.
"This gang also shoots crap on Sundays in
front of Michael's house. Michael is afraid of
Baldy. 'Baldy bites when he fights.' II
His subservience, in this instance, is probably based
on fear alone.
" His earliest recollection is,
I I remember when
we lived in Little Falls, we used to steal water-
melons.' "
It is interesting that he does not say, "I used
to steal."
Michael is never solitary. I doubt if he

FOLLOW THE LEADER
20I
understands that it is wrong to steal. He is more or
less hypnotized by the gang spirit,. for in the gang he
loses his personal identity and responsibility.
I I
I I remember when I was little there was a rat
hole in the floor and I was putting matches in it
and a match fell on the bed and it caught fire.
My brother ran downstairs and got my father.' "
This recollection shows Michael's conviction that
when he attempts any independent activity, failure
and catastrophe are sure to follow. He is equally cer-
tain that there will always be someone to help him.
This is a child who has never overcome his original
feeling of inferiority and is desperately afraid to
venture anything on his own responsibility. His life
has been a succession of scenes in which he has been
completely dominated by his brother, by his teacher,
by Baldy, and by his gang companions.
II
I I dreamed that I was in a palace, a castle,
with big rooms that were very nice.' "
Perhaps this is evidence of Michael's desire for a
more important position in life.
f' Another dream:
t When I ,vas sleeping one
night, a man came in and robbed my mother and
shot my brother. I got on a horse and chased
him and shot him twice in the heart and threw
him off his horse.

202
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
'" I dreamed that my mother died, and I was
crying and I wanted to get the guy that killed
my mother and I got him and killed him. He was
a big gangster.' "
In this dream he plays the role of a hero. It also
shows his fear of losing any of his family. Emotion-
ally the dream says, "I am glad that I have my
mother and brother, because I am so weak." He can
imagine no greater calamity than to be left without
a leader.
" To the question, 'vVhat would you like to be
when you grow up?' Michael instantly replied,
'Police commissioner.' "
Michael wants to be a police commissioner, because
his ideal symbolizes the commander, the strongest
man. It is a compensation for his o,vn weakness.
The teacher's interpretation of the case is as
follows:
't Michael has really not had a fair chance,
because his mother has had to work most of the
time. His brother Leon makes a much better
showing both at school and at home. His younger
sister took his place when he was six years old,
and now, although he loves her very much, she
prefers Leon to him. Michael's schooling has
been another cause for discouragement. When he
had a chance to join the gang, which no doubt

FOLLOW THE LEADER
203
received him gladly, he did so. The treatment
that is advised, is that he be recommended to
return to camp where he was last summer. This
will put him in a good environment for two months
and give him a chance to do the things in which
he excels, such as swimming. We have advised
that Michael and Leon be placed under different
counsellors, so that Michael can gain strength and
courage in his own right. We are trying to have
the family see Michael, not as a disgrace, but as
an asset."
This is a good way to start, but it is only a
beginning. Michael must understand why he insists
on playing an inferior role. He should be encouraged
to believe that he is capable of being his own leader.
In talking to 1\iichael, it will be better not to speak
of the robberies. We need concern ourselves only with
his undervaluation of himself. We must find out
whether he is really a left-handed child, and whether
he needs special training in reading and spelling.
CONFERENCE
The father comes in.
DR. ADLER. We should like to speak to you about
your SOll, l\lichael, whom we find a very promising
boy. His greatest mistake is that he likes to be led
too much. His whole personality is built upon this
mistake, and for this reason he is not very courageous

204
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
and wants someone else to take the responsibility for
his actions. Have you noticed that he is not brave,
that he is afraid of the dark, that he does not like to
be left alone?
FATHER. Yes, I know that he does not like to be
left alone.
DR. ADLER. You can do a great deal to help him.
He should not be punished. He is not really guilty.
He must be encouraged and convinced that he is strong
enough to accomplish everything by himself without
the help of his brother and his gang. I believe that
he is a good boy, and it is only necessary to show
him where he has made his mistake. Do not reproach
him or punish him, but ~ncourage him to be stronger,
and he will be more responsible.
The boy comes in.
DR. ADLER. Why, you are a great, strong boy!
I thought you were little and weak, and it's not so
at all. Why do you believe that other boys know more
and understand more than you do, and that you must
listen to what they say and do what they ask you
to do? Would you climb this wall if somebody told
you to?
MICHAEL. Yes.
DR. ADLER. You are an intelligent boy and do not
need a leader. You are big enough to be independent
and courageous and be a leader yourself. You can
get rid of the idea that other people do things better
than you do. Do you think you must always be a
slave to other boys and do what they command?

FOLLOW THE LEADER
205
Ho\v long would it take you to stop doing everything
they tell you? Do you think you can do it in fOUf
days?
, MICHAEL. Maybe.
DR. ADLER. Eight days?
MICHAEL. Yes, I can do it in eight days.
Michael goes out.
DR. ADLER. We have no rules, but our task in this
case is obviously to bring Michael to the useful side
of life by changing his pattern to a more courageous
one. His ambition was too hard for him to C:lttain,
and so he satisfies himself with what he can get.
STUDENT. Is his constant smile a sign that he is
trying to win others over to take care of him?
DR. ADLER. Yes, very likely that is one reason.
STUDENT. How can you make him feel that it is
worth while to be courageous?
DR. ADLER. Courage cannot be given like a spoonful
of medicine. What wOe must do is to show him that
he will be happier if he does not undervalue himself,
and he will discover the advantages of courage as
soon as we can get him to resist the commands of his
gang. I tried to show him that it is a mistake to be
always led. If we add to his self-esteem, courage will
come of itself. So long as he feels inferior he will not
accept responsibility. The training to be responsible
and the training to be courageous are all part of the
same thing.
STUDENT. Were you not a little more severe with
this boy than with the others?

206
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
DR. ADLER. I must confess that" if so" it was not
intentional" but I hope that I spoke to him as wisely
as possible. The art of speaking to a child must be
learned and it is quite possible that I, as well as others,
make mistakes. No two people will approach a child
in the same way. Personally I like a rather dramatic
manner, because this helps the child to identify himself
as an important actor in the conversation. I tried to
be very friendly with the child, and I should not be
surprised if he likes me and would be willing to come
here again. Perhaps the teacher will give us a report
on his further progress.

THE TOO DOCILE CHILD
T
HIS evening we have the case of Saul, who is
eight and one-half years old. The present problem
is that he does not get along well at school, a situation
of long standing.
With an eight-and-one-half-year-old child who can-
not
get
along
in
school,
there
are
always
two
possibilities to consider. The child is either feeble-
minded or he is unable to adjust himself to school
conditions because he has been used to a more favour-
able situation in the home.
The case notes state:
"In the last two or three weeks there seems
to be an improvement, owing to the fact that
the person in charge of the school, who is attend-
ing these lectures on Individual
Psychology,
seems to have gained a better insight into his
problem."
Apparently we have the second of the two possi-
bilities here, and I am very happy to learn that these
lectures have been a practical benefit.
" Saul seems quite indifferent to his standing
in school and says he does not knovv how to do
his work. After considerable pressure on the child
in private conference, it was found that he did
possess some knowledge, although it was difficult
to determine the extent of his understanding,
207

208
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
because he made no effort at all to produce any
facts from his memory."
If a child has given up hope, and believes progress
is impossible, his attitude is best expressed by a lack
of memory and an ignorance of facts.
"He would not do his arithmetic, yet he had
some kno\vledge of processes and combinations.
He would scrawl on a paper or leave it blank,
except at fitful intervals. His conduct was very
poor and interfered decidedly with school work.
He would leave his seat and wander around,
attack other children for real or fancied slights,
talk aloud and especially attempt to be funny
and make children laugh by gestures, ways of
walking, and joking. He seemed to have a certain
amount of dra!Jlatic power and would have been
funny had he done the same thing at the right
time. But there is no place in school for this kind
of action, and he was what the long-suffering
teachers called' an impossible child,' which very
well describes his relation to the classroom."
Saul plays the role of a clown in order to be the
centre of attention. He uses the cheap means at his
disposal because he does not trust himself to gain the
limelight of the classroom in a useful way.
c' He cries easily
.

THE TOO DOCILE CHILD
209
This makes me think he has been petted until he
has come to believe himself such a valuable person
that if he suffers, others must suffer also.
"
.
and seems rather babyish when re-
proved. This conduct alternates with his attempts
to be funny."
A spoiled child very often likes to play the role
of a baby. He uses two means to gain attention-
either he is a comedian or a baby.
.
I I He quarrelled and fought with school children
older than himself. He was always in trouble at
recess or when coming and going to school."
This sort of behaviour shows that he is not socially
adjusted.
II Sometimes he tells fantastic stories. He was
promoted from the last class, and the chances
are that he would have improved, but he told
the new teacher that he was promoted because his
father and the father of the former teacher were
friends. (They were friends, but the teacher was
not the one who decided his promotion.)"
The fact that he accuses the teacher of fraud indicates
that he is not at all willing to co-operate.
It One day as an excuse for not doing hi!S home
work he told the teacher that his house had
14

2IO
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
burned down. (There had been a fire in his aunt's
house.) "
He is beginning to lie to save himself from difficult
situations.
t t His stories were evidently suggested by facts
which he deliberately injected into his own life,
but at the time they were told no one knew that
they were derived from veritable occurrences.
Saul knew he was not telling the truth and
admitted it under pressure. His past problems
were similar. He had no trouble in the kinder-
garten where no scholastic results were required
of him, but as soon as he entered the grade, at the
age of six, the trouble began and has increased
with each grade."
The less you demand of such a child, the less trouble
you will have. In the comparatively easy situation of
the kindergarten, he gave no trouble, but when he
was confronted with mature tasl{s, the boy began to
protest. He had not learned to work independently.
If we review our knowledge of the case, up to this
point, our conclusion must be that he is a spoiled
child \vho has made prqgressive resistance to the
problems of growing up. The nearer he approaches
these problems the harder he protests, trying to evade
the issues and escape to the useless side of life.
Formerly his life ran along very quietly, and he
gave no trouble until he enteret1 school. If we have

THE TOO DOCILE CHILD
2II
been given all the necessary facts, and nothing is
omitted from the case history, we may be reasonably
sure that his mother spoiled him, and still does.
e, The parents are living. There are two children,
Saul, eight and one-half, and Sarah, who is
five years old."
Here again we have· the problem of an older boy
and a younger sister. There must be considerable
competition between these two children, and I imagine,
if we investigate thoroughly, we sh.all find that the
trouble began when he was three or four years old
and was forced to face the rivalry of his sister. It is
probable that he began losing his courage and self-
confidence at this time and began to insist by his-
actions that he wanted his mother's over-indulgence to
continue. Probably his sister is a strong, healthy child
whose progress is making inroads into his domain.
" The relation between the parents is excellent;
the mother, though quiet in manner, rules; the
father works for a moving-van concern and gets
a small salary, which varies somewhat each week.
The mother is economical and an excellent house-
keeper. She does all the laundry work herself, but.
tells her neighbours she sends it to the laundry,
because these neighbours send out their laundry
and she wants to keep up appearances. The father
brings his wages home each week and is proud
of her exc.ellent management and neat home."

2I2
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
These facts show us that the mother is proud and
ambitious, and that her husband is also leaning on
her.
"The mother keeps both children up to the
mark in every way as to neatness, obedience, good
health habits, and the like. She supervises where,
and with whom the children play. She is an
excellent \vife and mother. The father is more
ilnpulsive and has great faith in his wife and is
kind to the children. He cannot manage Saul as
\vell as the mother can, and on this account the
mother thinks Saul prefers his father. Saul is help-
ful, likes to assist with housework, go on errands
for his mother and take care of the room which
he shares with his little sister."
Our patient has no resistance to his sister because
he is with her too much. I believe if he spent more
time with his father he would be more critical of her.
"Each child has a separate bed. When the
mother was ill, Saul showed great solicitude about
her, running down to the drug store of his own
accord to get help."
These again are signs that the child depends on his
mother, and it is probable that he wishes to appear
a hero in her eyes.
"When his mother punishes him he cries a
little but quickly gets over ,lit. He shows no

THE TOO DOCILE CHILD
2I3
resentment, but says, 'All right, you're the boss;
you're the mother, you're right.' His mother does
not praise him overmuch, but in the last two or
three weeks he has been praised for his improve-
ment in school."
The boy's attitude toward punishment is the humble
criticism of a weak person, but I think he will get
more courage as his school work shows improvement.
II The little sister is very attractive, and though
not spoiled, the whole family pet her. Saul is very
fond of her."
This would seem to upset our interpretation, were
it not for the fact that Saul probably recognizes that
he has been conquered by the enemy, and as he h~s
lost hope of winning the battle he makes friends with
his conqueror. It is not unusual for dethroned children
to express fondness for those who have displaced them.
II He is afraid that the gipsies will kidnap her
in the street."
By this attitude he makes capital of his sense of
being dominated.
II His mother gives him six cents, he spends
five for milk and often gives the penny to his
little sister. Mother says Saul is like his father-
generous. Sister takes this as a matter of course.
When the boys on the street want to tease him,

214
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
she tells them not to. He gets a good deal of
teasing in the street."
Saul plays the role of protector, which is a good
\vay to reconcile an older brother to a sister, because
it gives him an opportunity to feel grown up. On
the other hand, the sister also wants to protect her
brother.
"He plays chiefly with boys who are related to
him. They call him "Fat" because he is very
fat; they' also call him a "dope" because of his
school difficulties. When his' uncles also called him
stupid, his mother requested them not to.' J
The most common reason for excess of fat is over-
eating. But, on the other hand, he may have some
glandular illness which causes obesity. The mother is
right when she cautions the uncles not to humiliate
him.
"He fights and, though he gets the worst of
it, he generally fights on."
It is not unusual to find that hopeless children fight
\vith the conviction that they will be beaten.
"He is exceedingly kind to animals and likes
flowers."
This type of boy ordinarily prefers a quiet life, and
probably if Saul were not teased or attacked he would
be interested in the care of animals and plants.

THE TOO DOCILE CHILD
215
"He goes to the movies and they fill a great
deal of his thoughts."
I ought to say a word here about the movies. I doubt
very much whether they can be wholly responsible
for incorrect development in a child, but I am certain
that if mistakes have been made in the home, moving
pictures may intensify them, and the child may obtain
data for his mistaken pattern. We can hardly expect
to change his pattern by forbidding the movies, because,
he would find another way to train himself. In Europe
there is a strict censorship which decides whether
children can see a moving picture or not, but this
is surely not enough, for we cannot prevent adults,
often the parents of children, from training themselves
to a false pattern. The movies accustom people to
cunning and slyness. Most movies depend for their
appeal upon tricks, and that is what children and
adults want to learn-a quick way to power. Many
people believe that craftiness and trickery are advan-
tageous, hut we can hardly agree with this from the
psychological point of view. To us the use of such
methods is only a sign that an individual is not
courageous, and we should educate people to this
realization. Tricks, slyness, and cunning should be
recognized as the devices of a coward. We may laugh
at them and be astonished by their efficacy, but in
our deeper conscience we ought to know that they are
used only by people who do not trust their own powers
toward a normal goal.

2I6
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
II The child was healthy when bQrn, but· the
delivery had to be made with instruments. He
was breast-fed for nine months and then fed on
the bottle. Talked at one year, walked at fifteen
months; between the ages of eighteen months and
two years, he had convulsions at four different
times. After the teeth came, there were no more
convulsions."
It is fairly certain that this child had some difficulty
with his parathyroid gland. The convulsions had
nothing whatsoever to do with the eruption of the teeth.
tl He had measles at two years, and chicken
pox at four. At present he eats well, is healthy,
but is not greedy."
If the child were greedy it would show a certain
degree of stubbornness. This boy is evidently not of
the resistant type, but is much more inclined to
submit.
"He is very neat in his habits and has never
had enuresis."
We might well have expected this child to have
had enuresis and difficulties in eating, but his mother
has apparently managed him with considerable under-
standing. I am sure that when we speak with her we
shall have the impression that she is an intelligent
woman.

THE TOO DOCILE CHILD
217
"He likes to look neat and demands a clean
blouse for school each day. He likes his mother
to wash and dress him, but he is independent in
his sleeping. As a baby he was wakeful and
required a good deal of rocking, but he sleeps
well now."
He imitates his mother in being neat because this
gains her attention. Her technique of treating his
sleeping difficulties seems to have improved with time.
"H~ collects small pictures and postal cards."
In other words, he feels that he must add to his
diminished prestige by the accumulation of objects.
This boy is likely to steal if his situation is not
improved.
"He may need glasses and is being examined
this week to ascertain whether a visual defect
exists."
There may be some difficulty in persuading Saul to
\-vear glasses.
"His earliest recollection is that he visited his
grandmother when he was three years old, and
was punished by his mother for enuresis. His
mother says that this was not a usual habit with
him."
This must have beerl one of the first times when he
felt his importance threatened, and he tried to gain

2r8
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
the attention of his mother by wetting his bed, only
to find that he was punished instead.
II Another recollection dates from the age of
four. He was with his father in a moving van
and when his father was not looking, he helped
move a number of small objects out of the van,
evidently with great satisfaction."
This shows a helpful attitude and perhaps his
remembering the episode signifies a desire to win his
father's approbation.
(I He remembers when his sister was born when
he was three and one-half years old. He says his
mother gave him candy at that time."
The birth of his sister presented a real problem,
and I doubt if the candy reconciled him to her
pres~nce.
(, There are a number of dreams which he
remembers. (Dream r) 'I dreamed I was with a
cowboy and I was on a horse; the horse turned
into a nanny-goat; I had the cowboy's gun. When
I shot once, the gun went off, but the second
time it was a trick gun and it didn't go off.' "
We see the emphasis on tricks in this dream. A
horse changes into a nanny-goat, a trick gun fails
to go off. This boy is looking for tricks to change
himself.

THE TOO DOCILE CHILD
219
" (Dream 2) 'I dreamed I was on a horse and
I was Rudolph Valentino. When a man dies I
dream about him.'"
It is obvious that he is moulding himself on moving
picture heroes.
"
C I dreamed about William S. Hart. I dreamed
he kidnapped me and ran away with me.'"
Here is one of the dangers of moving pictures.
Kidnapping plays entirely too important a role in his
life. About the death dreams. If he dreams about men
after they die, he is trying to avoid death. But if he
says he dreams about them before they died, it would
indicate an effort to be a prophet.
cc It is his ambition to be a movie actor. He
is deeply interested in them all, and his hero is
Tom Mix."
This ambition is not surprising in view of the fact
that he has been playing a role all during his school,
life. The role of a clown, of a comedian, of an actor
interested in tricks. He wants to overcome dangers,
to be powerful, and probably he believes that being
a moving picture actor is a way to attain his ends.
"The following conversation shows his fears.
Saul. I am afraid of Rudolph Valentino-I see
him in my sleep. Q. Don't you know he is dead?
Saul. Yes, I know. I kno\v why he died. He was
too nice; all the women liked him."

220
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
Remember that this is a boy of eight and one-half
years. It is amazing how early the fear of love and
women may be definitely part of a child's pattern. It
is not hard to understand why Saul has this attitude.
He has a very strong mother, and I have already
spoken of the fact that boys with masterful mothers
are frequently afraid of women. Later in life, when
this fear or exclusion of women becomes fixed, the
individual may become a homosexual. Here we have
the process in the making, and in order to prevent it
we must influence the mother not to dominate her son
too much.
"Saul. One day a woman put poison in his
food; she put in a little every day until he died.
My father showed me the picture. When his wife
woke up, she didn't find him any more. Q. Did
his wife do this? Saul. No, a different la"dy."
Here again we have the influence of movie training.
"Teacher's discussion of the case: 'About three
weeks ago, I judged that Saul's attempts to be an
entertaining actor ill the classroom agreed with
the description of a discouraged child, blocked on
all sides. Therefore I gave him more praise than
his work deserved and excessive encouragement.
He is beginning to respond; his eyes have lost
their dull expression, and he sho\vs some ambi-
tion. He is taking home good reports and he is
promising his mother to do better yet. It seems

THE TOO DOCILE CHILD
221
that he is a courageous child, for he explained to
me that one day his mother dropped a clothes-pin
into the yard in the dark and he went downstairs
to get it, without fear.' "
He
wants
to
be a
hero
when
his
mother is
looking on.
tt t His fighting would show his courage. He is
not timid and does not pretend to be. His pre-
tence is that he does not know his work. There
may be a certain amount of handicap from his
eyes, but it will be corrected this week if it exists.
His objections to the names the boys call him
can be removed if he learns to take them good-
naturedly. He has been told that boys often
nickname each other, that there is a coloured
boy, for instance, in his class who has been nick-
named Farina, and likes it.'"
About nicknames. It is true that if a boy has other
advantages, nicknames do not trouble him much.
I see that Saul's teacher has found the best way
to influence him and I am sure that she will be suc-
cessful. Her success will be more stable if the boy's
mother ceases to dominate him and if he is assured
that he has every chance to progress and that the
fear of his sister's overtaking him is groundless. He
must realize that girls develop more quickly than boys
and that he in turn will later develop more quickly
than his sister. His mother should be persuaded to

222
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
take him more seriously. It is not wise to make this
boy too obedient. Let her discuss her plans with him,
and never demand anything from him, simply because
she wants it. She should take hinl into llcr confidence,
CXI)Iain things to hinl in greater (letail, ancl even seck
llis advice.
ti Would it not be better if you washed
and dressed alone?"
t, Do you not think this would
be good for your sister? "
CONFERENCE
The mother enters, accompanied by the teacher
who is presenting the case, and is introduced to Dr.
Adler.
DR. ADLER. In many ways you have been very
sensible in dealing with your son. You have guided
him from certain dangers which children frequently
cannot surmount.
MOTHER. I have tried to make him a good boy.
DR. ADLER. He is a good boy but he finds things
very difficult in school. Probably the origin of his
difficulties is the fact that he was an only child for
three and one-half years and found life easier than he
does today. He is not a coward and he has not made
the mistakes of other children in the same situation.
Nevertheless, in ~ome hidden fashion he feels that his
sister is competing with him too successfully and per-
haps he believes that you prefer her. Has he ever
said anything about this?

THE TOO DOCILE CHILD
223
~iOTHER. No, he has never been jealous.
DR. ADLER. In spite of the fact that he wants to be
her protector, I believe he is afraid she is developing
more rapidly than he is. You see, she tries to protect
him also. It is my opinion that Saul \vill develop better
if he is not dominated too much. I should like you
to encourage him to believe that he is an important
member of the family. Give him ample opportunities
for having his own experiences away from home, and
consult him occasionally so that j ' OU can develop his
critical faculties.
MOTHER. I will try to do that.
DR. ADLER. Another thing which is very painful
to him is his excessive fat. Perhaps he should have a
different diet. Is he particularly fond of sweets?
MOTHER. No, he does not care much for sweets.
He drinks milk in school in the morning and then has
lunch at noon and dinner in the evening.
DR. ADLER. Does he eat too much bread, butter,
and pastry?
Mother emphatically denies that the boy eats too
many sweets.
DR. ADLER. If the child is really fat he is assimilating
too much, and I suggest that you give him less to
eat. The boy's teacher understands him very well and
I am sure she will help him. She will be glad to have
you consult her if you are in a quandary as to how
to treat him.
Saul enters the room smiling and full of confidence,
yet a little puzzled by the students. He is dressed

224
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
in a long trouser suit affected by the younger boys,
which makes him look older than he really is.
DR. ADLER (shaking hands with the boy). Hello,
sonny, how are you? Won't you sit down here and
talk to me? I have some interesting things to tell you.
SAUL. Sure.
DR. ADLER. Howald are you?
SAUL. Nine-well, I'm going to be nine.
DR. ADLER. That's fine. I think from now on, you
\vill be able to make very good progress in school.
I believe you used to think that you could not be a
good pupil.
SAUL. I_guess so.
DR. ADLER. But I know that you really ~an be a
good pupil and soon all the old troubles will be gone.
You will be more attentive and will understand the
teacher better. Then you will get ahead and be well
liked in school.
SAUL (impressed). Yes.
DR. ADLER. Do you like athletics?
SAUL. Yes, I do.
DR. ADLER. Is your sister a very sweet girl?
Saul nods in assent.
DR. ADLER. Girls usually develop more quickly than
boys when they are young, but you ·must not believe
she is any brighter than you are. You may have
believed that she was getting ahead of you, but in a
short while you will be able to keep in advance of her.
You will always be the older one and will always
protect her.

THE TOO DOCILE CHILD
225
SAUL. Yes, sir.
DR.
ADLER. They have told me that you were
worried because the boys in the street called you
"Fat."
When I ,vas your age the boys also used to
call me
II Fat," but it did not bother me, because I
studied hard in school and I told the boys that even
when they called me nicknames I got good school
reports. What do you want to be when you grow up ?
SAUL. I want to be an actor.
DR. ADLER. Then you must learn to read and write,
and speak carefully. Even the movie actors must know
how to speak well now. I think it would be better
for you to study hard than to disturb your class by
playing the clown. Wait until you are grown up and
are a movie actor, before you try to make other people
laugh. Your job now is to pay attention to the teacher
and make friends for yourself. Is your mother very
strict with you?
SAUL. Yes.
DR. ADLER. You will find that she will not be as
strict as she used to be, especially if you get good
school reports. Would you like that?
SAUL. Yes.
DR. ADLER (as the boy is leaving). You are a very
fine boy.
SAUL (turning at the door and bowing several times).
Thank you.
Discussion by the class:
STUDENT.
Why
did
the
mother
say
that
the
boy never had enuresis, when the boy's earliest
15

226
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
remembrance is of being punished for bed-wetting at
his grandmother's?
DR. ADLER. The mother explained that this occur-
rence was unusual. She believed it had been stopped.
STUDENT. What is the significance of this boy having
picked for his heroes movie stars who are tall and
slender?
DR. ADLER. I do not know these actors, but it is
very interesting to hear that they are tall and thin.
You see how quickly children find their goal. He wants
to be tall and slender because he dislikes being fat.
If a child is weak he wants to be strong, if he is poor
he wants to be rich, if he is sick he wants to be a
doctor because he believes doctors are always healthy.

LAYI~lG THE NEUROTIC FOUNDATIONS
T
HE student who is presenting the case this even-
ing tells us that the conduct of the patient is a
riddle, but we shall do what \ve can to solve it, in
the simplest manner possible.
It Rachel is a twelve-year-old girl, whose pre-
sent problem is truancy. She refuses to go to'
school, on the ground that she cannot work in
the classroom."
The opening words of this case history fairly accur-
ately describe a child with an inferiority complex.
However, it is not sufficient for us to assume that
there is an inferiority complex; we must find all its
ramifications and develop a method that will enable
the child to compensate for her inadequacies. If Rachel
plays truant we may be certain that there are adults
in the environment who are attempting to enforce
her attendance. The child is saying
tt No" to these
adults, and in this way attains a subjective feeling of
inferiority in her home.
It Rachel has always been a problem child. Her
present problem is an extension of her attitude
in the class."
tt Always" is a very strong word to use, and it is
hard to believe that she was a problem from the first

228
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
days of her life. It is more likely that something
happened against which she rebelled. Perhaps this
unhappy event was the birth of a younger brother
or sister.
II Rachel was promoted in February to a junior
high school with departmental work, from an
elementary school where she had been studied
and dealt with according to her needs. Rachel
cried in her classrooms, and said she could not
do the work because it was too hard for her. The
teacher of her official class, as well as some of
the other teachers, attempted to smooth things out
for her, but Rachel insisted that she must return
to the elementary school, from which she had
been promoted. This she was not permitted to
do, because she was expected to meet her problem
in her new surrounding."
Crying seems unnecessary, as it would be quite
enough if she could not do her work. It is more likely
that she cried in order to disturb the class and call
attention to her inability. To a certain degree, her
reaction is an original one. So original that we may
be sure that a girl who is intelligent enough to be in
the junior high school ·at the age of twelve, would
recognize that the point would be contested. I am
certain that someone, by winning her confidence, could
encourage her to face the problem in the class where
she is. The fear of being unable to meet her class
requirements is hardly likely to be the real reason for

LAYING NEUROTIC FOUNDATIONS
229
her resistance. She has always been a good pupil, and
her teachers seem to be kind.
II Rachel then said she would attend school, if
she were permitted to be in a lower class in the
junior ,high school."
Whenever we hear this word
II if," we may expect
a set of impossible conditions. The real reason Rachel
wants to get out of her class and worry her entire
environment, is lack of courage to face the new situa-
tion. She is boasting of her inability, and the Dlore
she insists that she is incapable of doing the work, the
more the teachers and parents insist on the contrary.
This is one way of turning an inferiority complex into
a superiority complex.
I I She was put in a class similar to the one
which she had just left in the elementary school,
but she did not keep her promise. Her mother went
to the elementary school and asked that she be
transferred back, but was definitely refused t};1is
transfer. Then her father beat Rachel, but she
refused to attend. Finally a hearing was called
before the Bureau of Attendance, and Rachel was
taken to the children's clinic at one of the hospitals.
At this clinic, permission was granted her to stay
at home for a time."
Rachel's circle of trouble is increasing and it would
not be surprising for her case finally to appear in the
ne\vspapers. The child was able to make the clinic fall

230
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
into her trap. It is not sufficient to allow Rachel to
stay at home, for she is still the same child, with the
same pattern of life.
"Rachel came to the elementary school to
answer the questions for this case history, and
brought along a girl whom she seems to have
adopted as a friend. This friend's influence is in
the direction of inducing Rachel to attend school.
Rachel has decided to attend school next fall.
Rachel has also said that if she had been per-
mitted to be in the same class with her friend,
she would have attended, but this request was
refused. Now she is exceedingly worried because
her friend will be promoted in June, and Rachel
could never get into the same class with her."
This need of being accompanied by a friend and
the postponement of a decision to go to school are
all symptoms of the inferiority feeling. It is this
type of individual who develops a neurosis called
agoraphobia,
a
neurosis which demands constant
companionship and support. By cleverly setting her
conditions this child has maintained her goal, and put
teachers and doctors and parents in an impossible
situation. Rachel is the conqueror.
"Rachel, whose pose is sometimes that of
timidity, has showed anything but a meek dis-
position in the course of her refusals at school.

LAYING NEUROTIC FOUNDATIONS
231
She has been very rude and disrespectful on
several occasions."
This interesting evidence confirms my feeling that
she belongs to a domineering type, and is not at all
averse to fighting others. Her only fear is to meet a
new situation alone.
" As a little girl, there was no fault to find with
her conduct, but a year and a half ago, a teacher
criticized her work in school."
You see, we must amend the statement that she has
always been a problem. Evidently Rachel is striving
for an ideal, fictitious goal of superiority. She would
like to play God. In order to fill this role she must be
faultless and domineering, and when she can no longer
play that part, she refuses to play at all.
"At this period she manifested her present
symptoms for the first time. She professed to be
unable to do her work and was absent occasion-
ally, in spite of the protests of her family, because
she said that she was afraid and unprepared.
She was allowed to remain at home, on the score
of her general health. Recently Rachel revealed
that she had harboured resentment against this
teacher for six months, before she showed it."
These six months are highly significant, because
they were the time of preparation for her neurotic

232
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
behaviour. A neurosis does not appear overnight. It
must be nurtured before it can bloom.
'c In February, 1927, when she was promoted,
she was not made a monitor in the new class, as
she had been in the previous class. This was with
a different teacher. At that time, however, she
concealed her feelings, so that the teacher never
suspected her resentment, and had no fault to find
with her. Difficulties began six months later. At
this time she remained out of school for some
time. In February, 1928, she returned to school
and was placed in a slow class with a teacher who
was sympathetic and experienced in working with
such children. Rachel remained with her for a
year, became interested in her work and appar-
ently conquered her timidity. She was encouraged
to take part in the assembly exercises and did so to
the extent of giving a vocal solo, which she seemed
to enjoy. After Rachel became at ease in her
classroom she occasionally manifested an attitude
contrary to her previous timidity. On one occasion
when her teacher could not find Rachel's sewing
for her, she became quite impertinent."
You see how easily this girl is able to change her
entire behaviour pattern when she is in a favourable
situation.
"The parents are living. The family consists of
an older sister, nineteen; a brother, seventeen;

LAYING NEUROTIC FOUNDATIONS
233
Rachel who is twelve; a younger sister who is
seven years, and a younger brother who is five
years old."
We find that she is five years younger than the
older boy, and because of this considerable difference
in age her situation is similar to that of an oldest
child. Her younger sister is five years younger and
her little brother seven years younger. Rachel suffered
the typical dethronement of the child used to a cen-
tral position in her family, on the arrival of a little
sister.
tt The father rules the family. At one time the
oldest son was the father's favourite. The mother
has no favourites, but as the children grew older,
she had conflicts with all of them."
Probably the mother got along well enough with
the children while they were little and she could give
them what they wanted. As they grew older, and that
was no longer possible, they became troublesome.
Perhaps Rachel has been sick, too, and so has had
more than her share of indulgence.
"The children do not tease each other, but
Rachel seems to be the ugly duckling."
"Ugly duckling"
probably means that she is irrit-
able and domineering. It is quit~ likely that she causes
dissension among the others.

234
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
"The older brother has a habit of biting his
nails, and when Rachel sees him do this she
becomes quite upset and screams. The brother
realizes Rachel's nervous state but does not stop
biting his- nails. The mother is helpless in the
entire situation. The oldest sister is very good to
Rachel and assumes a motherly attitude toward
her. She made a dress for Rachel and took her to
the movies. Rachel seems to appreciate that the
oldest sister is good to her. Rachel is friendly with
the younger child and plays with her, since this
younger sister yields to her, as everyone else in
the family does."
More evidence confirming the idea we have formed
of Rachel's pattern. She dominates the entire family;
when she is crossed, she screams.
"The father and the oldest sister work. There
are five rooms in the home, and Rachel sleeps
with her oldest sister. The child had a normal
birth, was breast-fed for three months, and began
having stomach trouble when she was weaned.
The child was supposed to have rickets, and dur-
ing the first three years of her life was taken to
the Post Graduate Hospital every week for some
months, because she suffered from heart trouble.
When she was ten years old she ·was kept in bed
for a short time because of the heart trouble. She
has always suffered with stomach trouble, but is

LAYING NEUROTIC FOUNDATIONS
235
m better health now. She does not vomit except
when riding on street-cars."
Because of her sickness, every whim was probably
gratified, and she learned to make use of her ill-health
to perpetuate this happy state of affairs. This is
demonstrated by her reactions in street-cars. As she
cannot command the street-car, she is irritated and
she expresses her irritation in terms of her inferior
organ system, the gastro-intestinal tract. This may be
the beginning of agoraphobia.
"She will not eat at home and prefers to eat
at a neighbour's house."
Again the imperfect stomach speaks, this time as
an accusation against her mother.
"It may be that the home food is unappetizing,
as the investigator found that the luncheon con-
sisted of a bowl of canned salmon, \vhich perhaps"
would not appeal to a delicate child. The younger
sister is following Rachel's example of reluctance
to eat at home."
It is also possible that the importance of eating is
over-emphasized in the home, and the children choose
that point for attack against their mother.
,e Rachel walked and talked at thirteen months,
her tonsils were removed when she was a year
and a half old because she had abscesses in her

236
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
throat. She had measles at a very early age. The
mother claims that when Rachel was a baby she
was afraid of people and she showed her fear by
screaming. According to her mother's report she
is clean and neat about herself. She is neat in her
appearance in school, punctual in her attendance,
and very careful about her written work.' I
Just as fear was an advantage in her babyhood,
so she changes to neatness in school to maintain her
favourable situation.
" She is indifferent to the wishes of her family,
in that she does not want to go to school. She got
along very well with the children in school, to
the extent of even being sympathetic with other
problem cases, in her second term."
This interest means,
Cl I am not a problem case."
l' Rachel played with another pupil, Molly, who
is in the same class with her I during the second
term. 1101ly is about -twelve years old, but not
as bright as Rachel and rather a quiet girl; not
a leader."
Rachel has evidently been successful in dominating
her classmate or their friendship would not continue.
"Rachel does not play games, but attends the
movies. Her favourite books and the stories she
could relate were fairy stories."

LAYING NEUROTIC FOUNDATIONS
237
The movies require no social feeling, and enable
the child to gain an easy sense of significance by
identification with the heroines. The competition in
games requires self-reliance and hard work.
II At the present time she will not go to school,
refuses to eat or take her medicine. The mother
bought the younger sister a pair of socks and
although they were not Rachel's size she took
such a strong fancy to them that she deliberately
put them on after the father left the house."
The father is evidently a power in the family, but
as soon as he leaves the home, Rachel is the ruler.
t t The other children realize her condition, and
give in to her. They are considerate and kind to
her. Rachel got along perfectly in her last class-
room and in elementary school, where she was
spoiled to a
cert~in extent. The teacher reported
that she exhibited fear when she could not do the
work. Once, when she was afraid, she cried and
held her hands to her mouth, while they twitched
nervously. She was mothered and kept at the
teacher's desk, and the rest of the class was
warned not to disturb her."
Fear is her strongest weapon. By means of fear she
is able to control her environment.
t, She had many difficulties during her first term,
but in the second term did not differ froni other
children and seemed to adjust herself very well."

238
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
It is quite apparent that when she gets what she
wants, Rachel does not cause any trouble.
tt Rachel's earliest recollection is that when she
was three years old, her sister Mary had some
roller skates given to her by a friend. Rachel
wanted to use them but was not allowed to."
It matters little whether it is socks, or roller skates,
Rachel resents the fact that other children have pos-
sessions which she does not have.
't Recently she dreamed that she was in her
house and that she had to pass the door of a
cellar which appeared dark and menacing to her.
She dreamed that she was afraid to go out of the
house because she had to pass the cellar door. Her
mother was asleep, and the children were warned
not to wake her. Some friends were in the house,
and the children could not keep them quiet. They
awakened the mother, who got out of bed and
came toward them armed with a hammer. Rachel
took the two younger children, whom she pro-
tected, and started to go out, past the dreaded
door. A voice came up from the door,
t Go back,
she won't hurt you.' She felt reassured and woke
at that point."
This dream shows beautifully how Rachel prepares
her emotional attitude against leaving the home. This

LAYING NEUROTIC FOUNDATIONS
239
is another symptom of the beginning of an agora-
phobia. The dream means that she will pass the door,
which signifies danger, only in case of great terror;
but the voice comes from the door itself, telling her not
to take the menace of her mother too seriously. The
dream signifies: "Stay home, even if it is unpleasant.
Nothing very serious can happen to you there."
"Her ambition is to be a typist, and her fear
is a fear of coloured people."
The fear of coloured people would be of little value
to her in Vienna, where Negroes are very rare, but
in America it is an excellent method of producing
anxiety. It is as good as any other reason for not going
out on the street.
II The student's discussion of the case is as
follows: Rachel has been a spoiled child and has
used her ill-health to impose her will on others.
She desires to gain power by the exhibition of
her weakness. Her dream shows that she has a
sense of protection toward the younger children,
who are unable to thwart her as her parents do.
Her ambition may show desire for self-expression
along lines (composition) in which she feels that
she can do well. Her school troubles were largely
associated with difficulties in arithmetic."
So far as I can see, the student who has brought
in this report, has made an excellent digest of Rachel's

240
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
situation. Discussion with the mother elicited the fol-
lowing additional facts. On the first day that Rachel
changed schools, the teacher sent her to the black-
board to write a sentence which she could not write.
The child began to cry, and the teacher said, tt Stupid,
go sit down." When Rachel came home she said,
tt Mother, I do not want to go to school. The teacher
is bad and I don't want to go any more." Since this
time she has refused to go to school.
CONFERENCE
The child comes in with the mother.
DR. ADLER. Come in and sit down. How are you?
Do you like this place? Does it look like a school?
RACHEL. Yes.
DR. ADLER. Everybody likes you here, and they are
all looking at you. Does that please you?
RACHEL. Yes.
DR. ADLER. I think you are a little too fond of
having things your own way, wherever you are. If
there is a place where you are not sure of having
everyone's attention, you try to make excuses for not
going there. You make the excuse that you are afraid
of coloured people to keep from going on the street.
No one can keep the attention of the whole world all
the time, but if you are friendly and helpful everybody
will like you. I know the teacher told you that you
were stupid, but that is not so. I am sure that you are
a very intelligent girl. The teachers used to tell me

LAYING NEUROTIC FOUNDATIONS
241
that I was very stupid, but I laughed about it. Any-
body can do school work, and we all know that you
can do yours. But if you stay at home because of
your fear of coloured p.eople, I shall begin to think
you are not so intelligent after all. If I were you, I
should make friends with my father. I am sure he
likes you very much. If your parents see that you
are interested in them, they will like you much better
than if you use all your tricks to show them that you
are the most important member of the family. Would
you like to be a good pupil?
RACHEL. Yes.
DR. ADLER. I think you could do it in a week if
you tried. Will you write me a letter and let me know
how you are getting along?
Rachel and her mother go out.
DR. ADLER. I do not know how well the mother or
the child understood me, but I believe that you all
know what I have tried to do. I should like very much
to have someone who is close to Rachel explain her
tricks more thoroughly to her and encourage her to
give them up. It is obvious that the more the child
feels suppressed by the father or the teacher, the more
she desires to tyrannize over her family and the school.
As soon as she recognizes the futility of her goal, she
will improve. I believe that with the co-operation of
the teacher, this case has a good prognosis.
(The following is a letter which ,vas received from
the child a week later:)
16

242
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
May 22nd, I929.
DR. ALFRED ADLER.
My DEAR DR.. ADLER:
This week was entirely a different week. I was
outside all the time. I think that my visit to you
did me good. Miss X thinks that if you would
advise me to do some teaching to small children
in Miss X's school would be a good idea. I was
called in P .. S.-to write this letter. This is the
first letter I ever typewrote.
Yours truly,
RACHEL.

CONGENITAL FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS
T
HIS evening we are to have another one of those
difficult cases in which
we
must determine
whether a child is actually feeble-minded or not. You
\-vill remember that we have already had a somewhat
similar case (" Maternal Domination "), and therefore
I shall not go into a detailed diagnosis or a description
of the medical symptoms which must be considered.
I understand that this boy does not attend school
and is not taught at home. He has an older sister who
goes to school.
His is the only case of the kind in the family.
An intelligence test would be of some value here to
determine the level of development. I would not say
that the intelligence test which I shall give this evening
is the only one, or even the best one, to use; but it
will be sufficient to determine whether the child is
feeble-minded or not. After the test, I shall examine
the child by the method of individual psychology, to
learn whether he has a definite style of life-whether
his movements, attitudes, feelings, and ideas tend
toward a definite goal. A great deal may be learned
from a difficlllt case of this sort.
The case notes state:
I' Sidney is a ten-year-old boy who is unable to
read and write
~nd is impatient \vhen anything
is being read to him. He has a very poor memory,
and there is a question whether he is feeble-
minded or not."
101

244
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
The mere inability to read or write is not a sign
of feeble-mindedness. The child may have been badly
prepared for school lessons. It is true that most feeble-
minded children cannot read or write, but if Sidney
regards reading as an overpowering task from which
he wants to escape, he may be considered an intelligent
child. A feeble-minded child would be more likely to
stay in school and make no effort to get out of the
difficulty.
II The child has a poor muscular development
and bad neuro-muscular co-ordination, and he is
unable to dress and undress himself without
assistance.',
Here again we must determine whether or not his
intelligence is inadequate or whether he wants con-
stant support. If this is a spoiled child, it is a very
serious case.
I I He has suffered from rickets and poor dental
development. A physician advised extraction of
nine teeth a few years ago. He could not walk
until he was three and one-half years old, and
could not speak until he was five years old."
Rickets is a bone-deficiency disease, and a case
which lasted as long as this is usually complicated by
other imperfections in the child's constitution. The
teeth were probably extracted because of their bad
position. It is difficult to decide whether a child who

CONGENITAL FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS
245
cannot speak until he is five years old is feeble-minded,
or merely badly spoiled.
" He has always wet the bed at night, and still
does. He urinates too frequently, especially when
in a state of nervousness."
Bed-wetting is common among coddled children,
especially if there is a younger brother or sister. He
may urinate frequently during the day to gain atten-
tion, as if he were saying:
tt I am not grown up. You
must watch me."
tt There is no blood-relationship between the
parents.
The home atmosphere is good and
harmonious. There is no quarrelling, scolding or
nagging in the house. The boy is very fond of
his father. The mother attended business, and a
maid took care of the children until about two
years ago. The house consists of four rooms, there
being two small beds for the children. The religion
is Jewish-reform."
Perhaps the fact that the mother was a business
woman and did not take care of Sidney made it easier
for him to turn toward the father. We must learn
from the parents whether the maid was able to win
his confidence.
"There are no early recollections. He dreams
sometimes of his grandfather, who died two years

246
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
ago. It was impossible to find out what manifesta-
tions the grandfather had."
He may have been badly shocked by his grand-
father's death, which occurred when he was eight
years old. Perhaps the child is afraid of death. If it
suits a child to be afraid, he dreams of fearful things
and trains himself to find the very pictures which cause
him to be afraid. This means that someone must
always be on hand to protect him. We begin to have
some semblance of a pattern of life appearing in this
history.
'c He also dreams that he fights and quarrels
with his boy friends (he has no girl friends)."
It is usually a coward who dreams of fighting.
Children are irritated by their own cowardice, and so,
in their dreams and fantasies, they make themselves
heroes and prove to their own satisfaction how valu-
able they really are. After a fashion this is a sort of
education, but hardly the best kind.
c' It is his ambition to be a soldier, but he
expects to be a policeman because he is afraid
that if he goes to war he will be killed. He would
like to be a plumber, because he would be working
for women."
Here is the fear of death, and more evidence of a
positive pattern of life. It is interesting to see how

CONGENITAL FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS
247
timid children train themselves for warlike pursuits.
But Sidney is somewhat fearful lest being a soldier
is too much for him, and so he contents himself with
being a policeman. His desire to be a plumber indicates
lack of courage again. He thinks it is easier to work
for women in the descending scale of his ambition-
soldier, policeman, plumber. His failing courage is a
constant thing. This is not an example of ambivalence.
There is no question of whether he will be a coward
or a soldier; he is only a coward.
"It is also his ambition to be a drummer in
the army. He can distinguish various kinds of
music and associate the musicians with their
respective songs. He has only boy friends, usually
younger than himself."
When a ten-year-old child wants to have only boy
friends, it is usually because he wishes to make the
stage on which he plays as small as possible. From
his point of view he is quite right, and as he is more
friendly toward his father than his mother we may
suppose that he is afraid of women, and does not
trust them. Perhaps he has suffered at their hands,
and we must investigate the mother's attitude toward
him. It may be that the mother is more strict with
him than his father is.
tt He fears to go to school because the children
call him
t Idiot.'"

248
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
This is really very suspicious, because children are
often surprisingly good judges. On the other hand,
they are often cruel and inclined to exaggerate.
"He asks many questions about everything. He
plays ball, marbles, and the like for recreation."
I cannot take it for granted, as the Freudians do,
that these many questions have to do with sex. Nor
is it likely that he is very anxious for information.
It is far more probable that he asks stupid questions
in order to keep someone occupied with him.
"He likes to earn money in order to buy the
things he needs, also candy and ice-cream."
This sounds more intelligent.
"The day's routine consists of the following:
Sidney eats his breakfast, and then goes to a
near-by garage where he watches the mechanics
prepare the buses and _watches them drive them.
He discusses automobiles with the mechanics.
Until recently he could not sleep more than four
or six hours at a time. For the last few months
he has been taking chiropractic treatments and
now sleeps nine hours without waking."
If this has been correctly observed, and the child
really does not like to sleep, it may be considered
further evidence that he is spoiled. The pampered

CONGENITAL FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS
249
child does not like to sleep because he hates to lose
connection with his grown-up environment.
ee A year ago he dreamed that a picture of his
dead uncle was hanging over his bed, and every
morning when the child woke up he felt nervous
and despondent because he believed the uncle was
going to kill him."
Again there are ideas of death, and the fear of
death. We can be more or less certain that the child
has been badly frightened. Servants sometimes scare
children in order to cow them into submission-an
extremely dangerous proceeding.
II He can tell the time but cannot tell the days.
He likes funny moving pictures. Mother was told
that the child would outgrow his difficulties and
that no treatment was necessary."
This case history is rather inadequate, and we must
have more facts to complete the record. In the first
place, we must know more about his first year and
\\-"hy he became so timid. We want to find out why
he was so influenced by his grandfather's death, and
why he was afraid that his uncle would kill him. It
is also very important to understand the mother's
relation to the child. This is one of the cases in which
a conference with the parents is essential.

250
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
CONFERENCE
The parents come in.
DR. ADLER. We should like to know a little more
about your child, especially how he behaves at home.
FATHER. He likes the street very much, and runs
around with his boy friends of the same age. He likes
them but he does not understand why they tease him.
DR.
ADLER. Do they notice a great difference
between him and other children?
FATHER. Yes. He does not understand things as
well as the other children. Ile is very kind and good-
natured and a very lovable child. As far as his
behaviour in the home is concerned, he is very good
and he has a peculiar liking for music. He under-
stands anything with rhythm in it. My wife is more
fond of music than I am. There is no musical instru-
ment in the house except the radio.
DR. ADLER. Is he interested in anything else?
FATHER. He seems to be interested only in music.
His ambitions are very peculiar. One day he wants
to be a conductor, the next a policeman, and anything
that wears a uniform appeals to him.
DR. ADLER. Why does he want to go to \vork ?
FATHER. So that he can wear a uniform.
DR. ADLER. How does he behave toward the older
girl?
FATHER. They are very much attached to each other.
DR. ADLER. Does he cry out at night sometimes?
Do you get up to see him?

CONGENITAL FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS
251
MOTHER. Only when he wants to go to the bathroom.
DR. ADLER. How is he in the morning?
MOTHER. He gets up alone and starts singing. He
is a very happy child at all times. He sings anything
he hears over the radio.
DR. ADLER. When he was a younger child, did he
look normal to you, or did you sometimes find that
he had a vacant look?
MOTHER. When he was about three years old he
didn't seem to grasp things.
DR. ADLER. You didn't notice it before he was three
years old?
MOTHER. Until the end of the first year he acted
like a normal child, and then we began to notice that
he didn't learn to walk and that he was always listen-
ing. Although he could not ,valk, he was interested in
what was going on in the room.
DR. ADLER. How did he behave toward strangers?
FATHER. He was very friendly with them.
DR. ADLER. Did you try to take him to school?
FATHER. Not before last year, because we could not
teach him the ABC's.
DR. ADLER. Didn't you know that there are schools
for retarded children, with specially trained teachers
\vho have a good method of training these children?
FATHER. We tried to find such a school, but did not
succeed.
DR. ADLER. How is the older sister?
F.t\THER. She is physically perfect and is graduating
from high school this year.

252
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
DR. ADLER. Is the boy a timid child?
FATHER. No, he doesn't seem to be afraid of any-
thing. We have a girl to take care of him who is much
more timid than the child, and she is afraid that the
other children will strike him. He is not afraid of
the dark nor of dogs.
DR.
ADLER. I
should like to make a medical
examination of this child and look at his whole body.
FATHER. I might mention this: when he was three
years old he was playing with another child who hit
him on the head with a rake. I do not know whether
this caused any damage.
DR. ADLER. Did he faint or lose consciousness, or
vomit at that time?
FATHER. No.
DR. ADLER. Has he any deformities?
FATHER. I would not say he is deformed, but he is
very thin and his ears protrude.
DR. ADLER. Now I should like to examine the boy.
The parents leave the room.
DR. ADLER. I think we can learn more from see-
ing the child than from -further discussion with the
parents.
The boy comes in.
SIDNEY. Hello, doctor.
DR. ADLER. How are you? What would you like
to do when you grow up?
SIDNEY. I would like to be a soldier.
DR. ADLER. Why, we do not want any more wars!
SIDNEY. What do you mean?

CONGENITAL FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS
253
DR. ADLER. People are much happier when they
have peace.
While this conversation is going on Dr. Adler is
examining the boy's head.
DR. ADLER. What games do you play with the boys
\~lho are your friends?
SIDNEY. All games.
DR. ADLER. \Vhat month do you think it is ?
SIDNEY. Today is Saturday.
DR. ADLER. Which month?
SIDNEY. August. (The month is really May.)
DR. ADLER (showing him some coins). Which is
worth more, this or that?
Sidney knows that a quarter is worth more than
a dime.
DR. ADLER. What is the biggest city in America?
Do you know?
SIDNEY. America is the biggest city, England comes
next.
DR. ADLER. Would you like to go to school and
learn to read and write?
SIDNEY. Yes.
DR. ADLER. I will tell your father where we can
send you to school. Where do you live?
SIDNEY. East 170th Street in America.
DR. ADLER. What is the number of your house?
SIDNEY. I forget the number.
DR. ADLER. Could you find your way home alone?
SIDNEY. No.
DR. ADLER. What is this building?

254
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
SIDNEY. This is the college.
DR. ADLER. What do they do in such a college?
SIDNEY. They ask questions, and write, and do
ev'erything.
The boy goes out.
DR. ADLER. While I have been asking these ques-
tions, I have been making a physical examination of
this child and I find several stigmata of degeneration.
The most important are that he has an abnormally
small head which we call micrencephalous, and an
asymmetry of the left side of the skull. There can be
no question as to the defect in his intelligence. If this
boy had a real style of life, he would be afraid, but
both the manner of his entering the room and his
father's account of his activities show that he is not
timid. Feeble-minded children can often be distin-
guished from maladjusted children by their lack of
fear. This child is not intelligent enough to know that
he is in danger. You remember one of our other cases,
a timid and pampered child who screamed and cried
for his mother as soon as he was brought in here? He
could hardly be forced to look at me, much less to talk
to me. This child's behaviour was very different. He
entered the room fearlessly and opened the conversa-
tion himself. There can hardly be a doubt that he is
feeble-minded. I know that your board of education
provides a school for such retarded children, and the
father should be advised by the teacher who brought
in the case to enter his child in one of these classes.

THE TYRANNY OF ILLNESS
T
HIS evening we shall consider the case of a boy
of five and a half years. The record states that
his present problem is disobedience, cruelty, over-
activity, and that "he cannot catch his breath."
When a child is disobedient, cruel, and overactive,
it is quite obvious that these character traits are aimed
at someone. It may be safe to assume that Milton's
mother is a solicitous and orderly woman who de-
mands a certain amount of co-operation from the
child. Milton, on the other hand, is evidently not
inclined to yield to her, perhaps because he believes
that she has been unjust or harsh to him. His revenge
is to choose that very type of conduct which affects
her most keenly, for a housewife who wants to keep
her house in perfect order would naturally resent the
overactivity of a boy who jumps from chairs to tables,
pulls down curtains and breaks dishes.
The difficulty in breathing is a protest of much the
same sort of cruelty and overactivity. When the boy
is overactive he protests with his muscles, and when
he cannot catch his breath, he protests with his lungs.
We must learn to understand this slang which our
various organs speak. However, it is just possible
that Milton has a real case of asthma, due perhaps
to some protein sensitization. I should be very much
surprised if this proved true, as the respiratory protest
\vould be an important and logical part of this child's
pattern.
255

256
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
The case notes state further:
"Milton is the youngest of three children. There
are two older sisters, aged twelve and a half and
nine and a half years. The two older girls seem
fairly well adjusted, and the youngest child is the
chief source of difficulty. The father earns forty-
five dollars a week, and the rent of the home is
twenty-five dollars a month. The mother does not
work. There are four rooms, which are neatly
kept, and there are three beds. The family is an
orthodox Jewish family."
Perhaps the mother has praised the older children
for their orderliness, and Milton has lost hope of ever
competing with them. It is very probable that he used
to be spoiled. If he had a good deal of sickness, he may
have learned that while he was sick he was pleasantly
overindulged and has adopted the mechanism of an
artificial illness, in order to assure himself of his
mother's attention.
"The older girl sleeps alone, but the boy sleeps
either with his father or his mother, more fre-
quently with the mother."
A boy of five and a half years ought to be sleeping
alone. If he still prefers to sleep with his mother, it
is a good indication that he is too much attached to
her. He has succeeded in maintaining his connections
with his mother during the night, whereas during the

THE TYRANNY OF ILLNESS
257
day he engages her attention by means of his over-
activity. When a child of this age sleeps with his
parents, it is much too easy for him to occupy the
centre of the family stage. Presumably I the goal of
~filton's life is to be watched and favoured by his
mother. The conflict in this family lies in the fact that
the mother apparently wishes her son to be socially
adjusted, healthy, and orderly, while the boy is doing
his best to remain a baby.
It Milton's physical development was as fol-
lows:
he was a full-term baby, and the mother
experienced no difficulties at his birth. Does not
remember his exact weight at birth. He was
irregularly breast-fed, with supplemental feedings
from the bottle. He had convulsions at seven
months. During his early childhood he suffered
from bronchitis, pneumonia, pleurisy, tonsilitis
and rickets."
This may be evidence that his parathyroid glands
are underdeveloped and that his entire personality is
an unstable one. Quite possibly he will recuperate from
these defects as he grows older. Childhood convulsions
may be very terrifying and Milton has no doubt been
'very closely watched ever since their occurrence. A
child should never be allowed to learn the actual
dangers of sickness.
You remember that in the very beginning of the
case I advanced the theory that Milton's inability to
17

258
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
catch his breath was a protest in the language of the
respiratory tract. The information that he has had a
variety of diseases of the respiratory tract corroborates
this idea. In pleurisy or bronchitis, breathing is
extremely difficult, and the sick child presents a picture
of agonized discomfort which is very terrifying to a
parent.
During his illness Milton's every breath was the
object of attention and solicitude. Now when he finds
himself in an unfavourable situation in competing with
older and better-adjusted sisters, he threatens his
mother with his lungs, so to speak. He says in the
slang of the respiratory tract, "Take care of me or
I shall be sick and you will be sorry."
II He was tongue-tied at birth, and the frenum
of the tongue was cut. During the early convul-
sions the mother was told that the child was a
Mongolian idiot and that he would never amount
to anything."
In my opinion it is seldom necessary to cut the
frenum. The family must have realized that the child
had a speech defect. The mother was undoubtedly
shocked by the idea that he might be a Mongolian
idiot. Although we have heard only part of the his-
tory, this theory seems unlikely. Mongolian idiots are
always good, obedient children. They seldom become
problems, because they are very meek and never fight.
They occur sometimes in families of very good stock,
and there are a number of signs by which they may

THE TYRANNY OF ILLNESS
259
be recognized. This type of idiot usually has a very
small head, a round, uptilted nose and a very broad
tongue, which shows many fissures and is frequently
so long that the child can touch his chin with it. A
dry skin and occasionally webbed fingers or toes are
further characteristics.
"Milton is much attached to his mother, but
there is considerable conflict with the older sisters,
whom he teases. He is cruel to his sisters and to
other children. There is no organized recreation,
but he likes to play on the street."
Perhaps Milton was badly spoiled during babyhood
or during a period of illness, only to lose the affection
and solicitude of his mother as he grew older. Many
a mother can practically live the entire life of her child
for the first year or two, but later he is forced by the
very nature of life to accomplish some independent
activity. No six-year-old child can be as pampered
as a tiny baby, and the child is quite able to sense the
difference in the emotional temperature of his family.
As soon as this realization grows, the child will show
signs of rebellion.
The older girls probably antagonize Milton, and he
teases in retaliation. The case history tells us that the
boy is cruel. In psychological language this means that
he is discouraged. Very often children with an abnormal
tendency to cruelty wreak their po\ver on weak or
unsuspecting children and animals, in order to console
themselves for their diminished sense of importance.

260
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
"The mother is very much concerned with the
child's asthmatic attacks. Milton was referred to
the Child Guidance Clinic by a pediatrician who
found no organic cause for the asthmatic attacks."
Asthma is very
seldom an organic disease in
children. In many cases it occurs in children who have
had pleurisy or pneumonia, as Milton has had. They
dominate their parents by stimulating asthma, which
is a very terrifying disease to watch, and manufacture
strength out of their weakness. Whenever Milton is
hard-pressed to show his superiority, or whenever he
wishes to attack his mother and gain her attention,
he capitalizes on this organic disposition. Asthma is
his trump card.
"The mother complains that Milton is always
jumping around, and she is constantly afraid that
he will hurt himself. She is oversolicitous in caring
for his welfare. He spends the entire morning
with his mother, during which he is always in
trouble."
This is
quite conclusive proof that the boy's
behaviour is aimed against his mother. He knows that
she is inclined to be oversolicitous, and he touches her
at her weakest point, by bravado acrobatics.
"The afternoons are spent in the kindergarten
where Milton seems to adjust fairly well. The boy
complains that he has no one to play with. Both

THE TYRANNY OF ILLNESS
261
the father and the mother occasionally beat the
child because he refuses to obey them. The boy
is constantly surrounded by a wall of,
II don't do
this"
and
II don't do that."
After he is stopped
he usually has an attack of breathlessness. The
mother appeals to the child not to have the attacks,
because she is sick."
Herein lies the crux of the entire situation. The
parents, especially the mother, are so anxious for the
child's welfare that they do not allow him to play on
the street like other boys. 1Ylilton is frustrated in his
desire for social contact. If he cannot have boys of
his own age to play with, he occupies his mother with
his mischief. When she frustrates him in this, he
attacks her with his breathlessness. Although this is
not a conscious process, the child unconsciously realizes
what he gains by these spasms. We must admit that
the mother is a good psychologist in that she knows
that his attacks are not organic. It would be useless to
appeal to the child to cease attacks of organic asthma.
One does not beseech a lame man not to limp. How-
ever, she follows a bad technique because she places
a dangerous tool in the child's hand. She makes her
sickness or her health depend upon his whim.
It The boy has a bicycle which was given him
by an uncle. He cannot use this bicycle very
much because his mother has to carry it down
four flights of stairs and she is too weak to do
this."

262
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
In the beginning of the case it was made clear that
the child had rickets-a condition which might have
been deduced from his motor hyperactivity. A bicycle
would naturally be very important to such a child,
and it is probable that he resents not being able to
use it.
I I Milton sleeps with the covers over his eyes
and refuses to sleep alone."
This is a characteristic expression of a cowardly
attitude. By covering his eyes he shuts out the hostile
world, and by sleeping with the parents he maintains
the connection at night that he maintains by breath-
lessness and hyperactivity during the day.
It Milton's first childhood recollection is,
t I was
walking when I was a little baby.'"
The interest in walking is further evidence of the
important role that rickets has played in his life. This
type of child is always very active and must be given
adequate opportunities for motor activity.
It 1\tIilton's ambition is to be a doctor. He says,
t I want to examine.' He wants to be
t in the big
school.' He also wants to learn to write. He has
already learned to copy letters, although he does
not know their meaning."
A boy who has been as sick as Milton would inevit-
ably value the role of a doctor very highly. When
a child is sick, the parents must call in a doctor, and

THE TYRANNY OF ILLNESS
263
after the mysterious examination they follow his
instructions implicitly. I must say in many respects
my own history is very similar to the history of this
boy. I believe that my first desire to be a doctor
occurred after I had pneumonia as a very young child.
I wanted to conquer death, as I thought the doctor did.
tt Milton does not wash or dress himself, but
he can find his way on the streets or run errands.
He can recognize his own house."
The fact that he can recognize his own house is an
excellent test of normal mentality. The boy does not
wash and dress himself, because this keeps his mother
working for him.
This is an excellent case that should be very
instructive. Our course must be apparent to all who
understand
the
underlying
theories
of individual
psychology. We must influence this mother to make
Milton more independent. She must not criticize him
so much, and she must hide her fears for his future.
We have noted that the boy's behaviour is always
better away from home, and we must explain to the
mother that the boy will improve in a more social
environment. She should not be censured, but encour-
aged to get a new viewpoint.
CONFERENCE
The mother enters.
DR. ADLER. Good evening, madam. We have been
studying the story of your boy Milton, and we find

264
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
that in many things you have been a very careful and
conscientious mother. Perhaps your chief difficulty lies
in the fact that you are too careful. Don't you think
that a boy who is as clever as Milton should wash and
dress himself by this time?
MOTHER. I think he can wash and dress himself,
but he takes so long that he would not get to school
on time. He makes me very nervous.
DR. ADLER. It would be better if he were late to
school a few times and you allowed him to suffer the
consequences of his slowness. Have you noticed that
he is better when he is away from home, than when
he is at home?
MOTHER. He is much worse at home. He tears down
the shades, jumps from the table to the chair, and
sometimes overturns the table.
DR. ADLER. It is not hard to explain this. Your
boy had rickets when he was a child, and one of the
consequences of childhood rickets is great muscular
activity. He belongs to a type which must be con-
stantly doing something in order to be happy. Perhaps
~Y'ou can allow him a little more freedom outside of the
home. Does he have a bicycle or skates?
MOTHER. He has a bicycle, but I cannot carry it
downstairs every time he wants it. I am afraid he will
get run over, anyhow, riding it.
DR. ADLER. Perhaps you are a little too cautious.
Your boy is intelligent, and if you explain the dangers
to him, I doubt whether he would get hurt. This is a
fine opportunity to show him how much confidence

THE TYRANNY OF ILLNESS
265
you have in his ability. I think that if you try this
you will see that he rewards you, by becoming more
responsible.
MOTHER. What can I do about his jumping around
the house?
DR. ADLER. It seems to me that it would be very
wise for you to arrange to have the boy join some
playground group during the morning. He needs this
type of activity. The less you have him in the home
with you, the better it will be for his development.
Perhaps you can arrange to have some neighbouring
boy carry down his bicycle for him. I want you to
understand that Milton does not have a real asthma,
but that he produces these symptoms of breathlessness
in order to hold your attention and to threaten you.
Did you coddle and indulge him very much while he
was sick?
MOTHER. Yes, I had to take very good care of him,
because he was so ill.
DR.
ADLER. Now he is trying to reproduce the
attention and care that you gave him then, by recalling
to your mind how sick he has been in the past. We
believe that if you disregard and ignore these attacks
of breathlessness he will never have any more. In
addition, it seems advisable to have Milton sleep by
himself. He is too old to sleep with you now. He can
grow up to be a perfectly normal boy, if you teach
him to be independent now. He must learn from you
that you do not prefer the two older girls, and that
you expect him to grow up and be a useful citizen.

266
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
MOTHER. Is there anything wrong with his mind,
doctor?
DR. ADLER. So far as I can see from the history,
which your doctor has prepared, there is no trace of
Mongolian idiocy in this boy. He is very clever and
intelligent, but his trouble lies in his wanting to remain
a baby. You must show him that it is better to be a
grown-up than to be a baby, and your doctor will help
you if you have any difficulties. It is very worth while
to try to improve his condition, because if you co-
operate with us, I am sure that he will make rapid
progress. Now let us see the boy.
The child enters the room, is a little startled by the
presence of the students, sees his mother and runs
to her side. He will not be separated from her and
will not allow Dr. Adler to examine him physically.
When Dr. Adler asks him a question, Milton looks
up at his mother and says, " You tell."
He does not
want to look at the doctor and hides his face in his
mother's skirts. No amount of persuasion will cause
him to speak with Dr. Adler. The mother and the
child are sent out.
DR. ADLER. I have always taught my pupils not to
listen to what their patients said, but to observe their
actions as if they were watching a pantomime. You
see, this boy would say neither "Hello" nor (, Good-
bye." He refused to make any contact with me, even
though I spoke to him in a very kindly way. This is
not necessarily discouraging. The second time it would
go more easily. Evidently his physician has understood

THE TYRANNY OF ILLNESS
267
how to win his friendship, because he was able to get
lnany of the boy's reactions. If any of you have had
any doubt as to this child's attachment to his mother,
it must be dispelled by the boy's actions. If we had
suspended the mother from the chandelier, the boy
would have found some way to be close to her. She
is his sole support. Not only can he not wash and
dress himself without her, he cannot even answer
questions.
So far as his so-called asthma is concerned, it is the
same attachment to the mother written in a language
of the respiratory tract.. I have called this phenomenon
an organ dialect, when an individual does not express
his behaviour in words, but in the abnormal function-
ing of some organ, or organ system. There are many
remedies which cure the symptoms of asthma, but they
do not cure the patient. If this boy is to be cured, his
self-esteem must be increased.
Many of the students have questioned the statement
that I
have often made, that the pattern of an
individual's life is fixed by the time he is five years
old. This case demonstrates beautifully how complete
such a pattern may be at the age of five. Milton
excludes everyone from his society whom he cannot
rule. It is quite possible that he may be petted at school
and thus not show the signs of problem behaviour
during his first years there, but it is almost certain that
he ,viII become a problem later on in life, so far as
his social, and probably so far as his sexual, contacts
are concerned.

268
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
STUDENT. Why did the boy cry when you tried to
remove him from his mother?
DR. ADLER. You can imagine that an ivy plant that
has long been attached to its trellis, fears to be
removed from that trellis. Milton's crying is just
another expression of his will to power. You must
not believe that Milton really loves his mother. He
is interested in her only as a parasite is interested in
its host. With this difference, when the host does not
suit the human parasite, the parasite punishes the host.
Many people believe that tears are a sign of weakness,
but in this case they are surely a sign of power. Milton
does not look, nor listen, nor speak to anyone but his
mother, and in his complete attachment to her is the
beginning of his neurosis. His whole attitude seems to
say, "You can demand nothing of me; I am a sick
boy." This child may be a potential suicide or criminal.
If he meets very great problems which demand inde-
pendence and strength, with which he is not equipped,
he may later commit suicide. Or, on the other hand,
he may project his lack of interest in anyone but his
mother against society in the form of criminal contact.
I have often noticed that robbers and other criminals
have written poems in prison in which they shift the
guilt for their crime to their mothers, or blame alcohol,
morphin, or disappointment in love, for their short-
comings. They do not have to prove their lack of
courage.
STUDENT. How do you approach such a child who
\vill not speak to you or look at you?

THE TYRANNY OF ILLNESS
269
DR.
ADLER. It is impossible to give you all the
little tricks which individual psychology contains in
its repertoire of therapeutic devices. In the first place,
it is really not necessary to speak to the child in
the beginning. If enough is known about the boy to
instruct his mother how to act toward him, the child
can be influenced without his open co-operation. On
the other hand, it would be easy to pique the curiosity
of this child by not paying attention to him. He wants
to occupy the centre of the stage, and if I was to busy
myself with a large picture book or some mechanical
toy, without noticing him at all, he would soon be
unable to resist being interested.
EDITOR'S NOTE:
The after-treatment of this case
,vas continued in the editor's clinic. Although it was
difficult to gain the mother's intelligent co-operation,
she was finally prevailed upon to give the child a
greater measure of freedom and independence. She
,vas instructed to leave the room whenever he had an
asthmatic attack, as she was completely incapable of
being objective about the child's breathlessness. Within
two weeks the asthma had disappeared entirely, but
Milton had not given up his hope of dominating the
environment. He countered his mother's disinterested-
ness in his asthmatic attacks by developing a compulsive
repetitive cough, which his mother promptly mis-
interpreted again. The child had won his point, fOf,
whereas he formerly had five or six attacks of asthma
during a day, he now coughed continually. The child

270
THE PATTERN OF LIFE
was placed in a hospital, and the nurse was strictly
ordered not to pay any attention to his cough..He
coughed constantly during the morning of his first day
in the hospital. During this time a very good contact
was made with the child. He was given a stethoscope
and allowed to tt examine " some of the other children
in the ward who were not too ill to submit to this
procedure. This was perhaps the first time that Milton
gained a real feeling of significance. The editor asked
the child, who accompanied him on some of his
rounds, whether he thought a certain boy would get
well. Milton imitated the serious mien of one of the
attending phy~icians, and said that the boy was very
ill but he felt that he would get well. The child was
then impressed with the fact that doctors were too busy
curing other people to get sick themselves. On his
return to his home the cough reappeared, but as
his mother had been encouraged by his condition in
the hospital, she paid no attention to it and Milton
immediately gave up this particular expression of his
respiratory dialect. The following week he appeared
with an entirely new set of symptoms: an infinite array
of grimaces and facial tics. The interesting thing about
this symptom was that the child showed it only when
he was in public, in this way causing his mother the
greatest embarrassment. The symptoms disappeared
again after a few weeks of treatment. Milton was then
sent to a summer camp with a letter of instruction to
the director. For the first few days at camp he sulked,
refused to eat, caused a great deal of disturbance, and

THE TYRANNY OF ILLNESS
27I
was finally sent home because of his complete inability
to adjust to camp life. His return to the home was
characterized by a greater excess of motor hyper-
activity than ever before. A few conferences with the
psychiatrist were able to convince the child that he
was much better off in camp than at home. He was
returned to the camp and for the remainder of the
summer made a
much better adjustment, chiefly
because he was allowed to win a few races and gain
a measure of athletic significance. On his return in
the fall the boy seemed to have gained a certain amount
of self-respect and was placed in school for the full
day. Under the supervision of the Child Guidance
Clinic and the teacher, Milton has continued to make
a good adjustment.

