
ALFRED ADLER
REVISITED


New York   London
Edited by Jon Carlson and Michael P. Maniacci
ALFRED ADLER
REVISITED

Routledge
Taylor & Francis Group
711 Third Avenue
New York, NY 10017
Routledge
Taylor & Francis Group
27 Church Road
Hove, East Sussex BN3 2FA
© 2012 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC
Routledge is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
International Standard Book Number: 978-0-415-88446-4 (Hardback) 978-0-415-88447-1 (Paperback)
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.
copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
(CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organiza-
tion that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been 
granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and 
are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data
Alfred Adler revisited / Jon Carlson & Michael Maniacci. -- 1st ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-415-88446-4 (hardback : alk. paper) -- ISBN 978-0-415-88447-1 
(pbk. : alk. paper)
1.  Adlerian psychology. 2.  Adler, Alfred, 1870-1937.  I. Carlson, Jon. II. 
Maniacci, Michael. 
BF175.5.A33A44 2011
150.19’53092--dc22 
2011011250
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the Routledge Web site at
http://www.routledgementalhealth.com 

v
Contents
Acknowledgments  vii
Contributors  xi
	
1.	 An Introduction to Alfred Adler  1
Michael P. Maniacci
	
2.	 The Fundamental Views of Individual Psychology  11
Francis X. Walton
	
3.	 A Basic Difference Between Individual Psychology and 
Psychoanalysis  19
John D. West and Donald L. Bubenzer
	
4.	 The Progress of Mankind  35
Bret A. Moore
	
5.	 On the Origin of the Striving for Superiority and 
of Social Interest  41
Richard E. Watts
	
6.	 Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity: 
A Contemporary View  57
Paul R. Peluso
	
7.	 Position in Family Constellation Influences Lifestyle  71
Gary D. McKay
	
8.	 On the Essence and Origin of Character: An Introduction  89
James Robert Bitter
	
9.	 Character and Talent  99
Frank Main

vi	
Alfred Adler Revisited﻿
	 10.	 The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community  115
Terry Kottman and Melissa Heston
	 11.	 Individual Psychological Education  129
Guy J. Manaster
	 12.	 The Problem of Distance  139
Robert McBrien
	 13.	 Dreams and Dream-Interpretation  155
Dorothy E. Peven
	 14.	 Life-Lie and Responsibility in Neurosis and Psychosis: 
A Contribution to Melancholia  171
Mary Frances Schneider
	 15.	 Physical Manifestations of Psychic Disturbances  183
Len Sperry
	 16.	 What Is Neurosis?  195
Timothy S. Hartshorne
	 17.	 The Structure of Neurosis  213
Jill D. Duba
	 18.	 Trick and Neurosis  229
Daniel Eckstein
	 19.	 Nervous Insomnia  243
Paul R. Rasmussen and Kevin P. Moore
	 20.	 Neurotic Hunger Strike  257
Alan E. Stewart
	 21.	 Melancholia and Paranoia  263
Gerald J. Mozdzierz
	 22.	 Suicide  281
Sharyl M. Trail
	 23.	 Demoralized Children  291
JoAnna White
	 24.	 Significance of Early Recollections  303
Arthur J. Clark
Index  313

vii
Acknowledgments
We wish to thank the Provost’s Office at Governors State University (GSU) 
for providing state-of-the-art digital scanning equipment for use in reproduc-
ing the original manuscripts in a digital format. We also wish to thank the 
Division of Psychology and Counseling at GSU for help in preparing the man-
uscripts for republication and obtaining permission for their use. Specifically 
we want to acknowledge Dr. Shannon Dermer, Raquel Rios-Aguirre, Mona 
Douglas, Nanette Nelson, Lindsey Raske, Robert Rauworth, and Nicole Roy.
We thank Margot Adler for her support of this project through her permission 
to use her grandfather’s writings.
We are indebted to the work of Heinz L. and Rowena R. Ansbacher for their 
comprehensive translation and interpretation of Adler’s writing from 1907 to 
1937. It is only through their personal relationship with Alfred Adler and their 
scholarship that these ideas are available today.
We are also indebted to the ongoing support of our editor George Zimmar for 
making this project a reality.


ix
Contributors
James Robert Bitter, EdD, is professor of counseling at East Tennessee State 
University in Johnson City, Tennessee. He is a Diplomate in Adlerian Psychology 
and a former editor of the Journal of Individual Psychology. He is also on the fac-
ulty of the Adlerian Training Institute in Port St. Lucie, Florida.
Donald L. Bubenzer, PhD, is an emeritus professor in the Counseling and 
Human Development Services Program at Kent State University.
Arthur J. Clark, EdD, is a professor and coordinator of the Counseling and 
Human Development Program at St. Lawrence University in Canton, New York. 
His professional background includes positions in the schools and agencies as a 
counselor and psychologist. He is the author of Early Recollections: Theory and 
Practice in Counseling and Psychotherapy (2002), published by Routledge.
Jill D. Duba, PhD, is an associate professor and the coordinator of the Clinical 
Mental Health Counseling Program in the Department of Counseling and 
Student Affairs at Western Kentucky University; she also has a small private 
practice. She has been a long-standing board member of the International 
Association of Marriage and Family Counselors. She is engaged in research 
projects related to long-term marital satisfaction and religious training in coun-
selor education.
Daniel Eckstein, PhD, is a professor of medical psychology, Saba University 
School of Medicine, Saba, National Caribbean Netherlands. He has a Diplomate 
in Adlerian Studies and is a past president of the North American Society of 
Adlerian Psychology (http://www.leadershipbyencouragment.com).
Timothy S. Hartshorne, PhD, is a professor of psychology at Central 
Michigan University. A longtime Adlerian, he frequently addresses applica-
tions of Adlerian psychology to the issues of children and young adults with 
disability (http://www.chsbs.cmich.edu/timothy_hartshorne).

x	
Contributors
Melissa Heston, PhD, is an associate professor in the Department of Curriculum 
and Instruction at the University of Northern Iowa. She currently teaches intro-
ductory courses in teacher education and upper-level courses in child develop-
ment. Dr. Heston’s scholarship centers on the self-study of teacher education 
practices and leadership, and she has drawn upon the work of Adler and his dis-
ciples in her research and writing.
Terry Kottman, PhD, is the director of The Encouragement Zone, a training cen-
ter for play therapists, in Cedar Falls, Iowa (http://www.encouragementzone.com).
Frank Main, EdD, is professor emeritus at the University of South Dakota. 
He recently served a guest editor of a special issue of the Journal of Individual 
Psychology and continues to deliver training workshops in marriage and family 
therapy and family therapy supervision.
Guy J. Manaster, PhD, is the Spence Professor Emeritus in Education, Department 
of Educational Psychology, University of Texas at Austin. He is a former chair 
of the department and director of the Counseling Psychology and the Social-
Developmental-Personality Area. He was an editor of the Journal of Individual 
Psychology for 19 years and was president of the North American Society of 
Adlerian Psychology. He is presently president of the International Association of 
Individual Psychology.
Robert McBrien, PhD, is a licensed clinical professional counselor consulting 
in child and adolescent development, early childhood mental health, and family 
leadership training. As a consultant he introduces the optimistic psychology of 
Adler to professionals and parents on the eastern shore of Maryland and south-
ern Delaware. A Diplomate in Adlerian Psychology, he has presented encour-
agement-focused programs at regional, national, and international Adlerian 
conferences for more than 30 years.
Gary D. McKay, PhD, is the coauthor of 14 books and programs, includ-
ing Systematic Training for Effective Parenting (STEP), the world’s leading parent–
education program used by over 4 million parents in the United States alone 
(published by STEP Publishers). He is a retired psychologist and a Diplomate in 
Adlerian Psychology from the North American Society of Adlerian Psychology.
Bret A. Moore, PsyD, is a board-certified clinical psychologist, prescribing 
psychologist, and former active-duty Army psychologist. He is a graduate of 
the Adler School of Professional Psychology, Chicago, Illinois, and Fairleigh 
Dickinson University.

	
	
Contributors	
xi
Kevin P. Moore attends the undergraduate psychology program at Furman 
University. He plans to pursue a degree in clinical psychology upon completing 
his undergraduate studies.
Gerald J. Mozdzierz, PhD, is a clinical and consulting psychologist in private 
practice and a professor of psychiatry and behavioral neuroscience at Loyola 
University Stritch School of Medicine in Maywood, Illinois. His private practice 
is located in Lombard, Illinois. Dr. Mozdzierz is a Diplomate of the American 
Board of Professional Psychology and a Fellow of the American Academy of 
Clinical Psychologists.
Paul R. Peluso, PhD, is an associate professor at Florida Atlantic University. 
He is the coauthor of Couples Therapy: Integrating Theory, Research, & Practice; 
Principles of Counseling and Psychotherapy: Learning the Essential Domains and 
Nonlinear Thinking of Master Practitioners; and Infidelity: A Practitioner’s Guide 
to Working With Couples in Crisis. Dr. Peluso is the author of over 25 articles and 
chapters related to family therapy, couples counseling, and Adlerian theory. He 
writes a blog at http://drpaulpeluso.com.
Dorothy E. Peven, MSW, is a licensed clinical social worker in private practice 
in the Chicago metropolitan area and has served as professor at the Adler School 
of Professional Psychology, Chicago, Illinois. She has published 25 articles on 
Adlerian theory and practice as well as a book with Bernard Shulman, Who Is 
Sylvia? Case Studies in Psychotherapy (http://www.dorothyepevenmsw.com).
Paul R. Rasmussen, PhD, is a core faculty member in clinical psychology at the 
Adler School of Professional Psychology in Chicago, Illinois. He is the author of 
numerous professional articles and four books, most recently, The Quest to Feel 
Good.
Mary Frances Schneider, PhD, directs the doctoral program in school and edu-
cational psychology at National Louis University in Chicago, Illinois. Her cur-
rent research and writing focus on school-wide practices in social and emotional 
learning with an emphasis on evidence-based interventions for internalizing dis-
orders and family–school partnerships.
Len Sperry, MD, PhD, is a professor at Florida Atlantic University and a clinical 
professor at the Medical College of Wisconsin. He is board certified in clinical 
psychology, psychiatry, and preventive medicine, has 600 publications, and is a 
member of 12 editorial boards.

xii	
Contributors
Alan E. Stewart, PhD, works as an associate professor in the University of 
Georgia’s Department of Counseling. His research interests include psychologi-
cal birth order, Adlerian psychology, and the psychology of weather and climate.
Sharyl M. Trail, PsyD, is a lieutenant in the U.S. Public Health Service 
Commissioned Corps (PHS). She currently works as a clinical psychologist 
and PHS officer at the Indian Health Service in Zuni, New Mexico. Her clini-
cal focus includes addressing PTSD, historical trauma, and suicide prevention in 
the Native American community. Dr. Trail is an Adlerian parent educator. Her 
research interests include the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered commu-
nity as well as understanding social justice and social exclusion from an Adlerian 
perspective. Dr. Trail is a member of NASAP and in the past has participated in 
ICCASI and the International Congress of Adlerian Psychology.
Francis X. Walton has been a psychologist in private practice in Columbia, South 
Carolina, for over 40 years. He is a frequent consultant and lecturer in North 
America and Europe. Dr. Walton is the founder of Adlerian Child Care Center, 
Inc., is a former president of the North American Society of Adlerian Psychology, 
and has been a member of the faculty of the International Adlerian Summer 
Institute (ICASSI) for 31 years. His most popular publications, Winning Teenagers 
Over in Home and School and Winning Children Over (with R. L. Powers), have 
been published in 13 languages. Dr. Walton’s DVDs include Use of the Most 
Memorable Observation in Counseling and Parent Consultation and Teen Suicide: 
An Approach to Prevention. Contact him at his website, http://www.drfrankwal-
ton.com.
Richard E. Watts, PhD, is professor and director of the Center for Research 
and Doctoral Studies in Counselor Education at Sam Houston State University. 
He is the author of over 100 professional publications, a Diplomate in Adlerian 
Psychology, and a Fellow of the American Counseling Association (http://sites.
google.com/site/richardwattswebsite/Home).
John D. West, EdD, is a professor in the Counseling and Human Development 
Services Program at Kent State University.
JoAnna White, EdD, is chair of the Department of Counseling and Psychological 
Services at Georgia State University. Her research interests are in individ-
ual psychology and play therapy. She is the coauthor of the White–Campbell 
Psychological Birth Order Inventory.

1
1
An Introduction to Alfred Adler
Michael P. Maniacci
Alfred Adler (1870–1937) was a physician, psychiatrist, author, professor, and 
husband and father who lived at a significant time in our era. We were about 
to experience two world wars, the dawning of the nuclear age, social and politi-
cal upheaval, and revolution. Medicine in specific, and science in general, was 
ascending, as people began to move more toward scientific and away from tradi-
tional folk and religious explanations for the assorted troubles that were emerg-
ing. People were feeling lost, if not scared and anxious, about themselves, their 
children, and their worlds. The physician was becoming the source of hope, if not 
faith and salvation, for what disturbed us. It was into this context that three men 
stepped up to declare they had the answers to what was wrong: Sigmund Freud, 
Carl Jung, and Alfred Adler.
This book is intended to explore one of those men’s answers, Alfred Adler. 
Those were heady times. People listened, and read, and studied, and practiced. 
Perhaps, just perhaps, if we learned from these men and others like them, we 
could feel better, do better, and act better. Maybe, just maybe, we could change 
things—and be better.
Like Plato and Aristotle, Freud, Jung, and Adler have become common knowl-
edge to today’s world. Most of Western civilization knows their names, some-
thing about their theories, terms, and ideas. Even though the average person may 
not know any particulars, words and concepts like drives, unconscious, inferior-
ity complex, lifestyle, psyche, ego, introvert, extrovert, and the significance of 
dreams and the early childhood years have become commonplace. In particular, 
Adler wrote 13 books, authored dozens and dozens of articles, gave hundreds 
of lectures, and taught classes for both professionals and interested laypersons. 
He was interviewed all over the world and treated like a celebrity, with his life 
and work discussed, processed, debated, and challenged. Like his onetime asso-
ciates, Adler thought he had answers, and he felt almost compelled to share them 
with the world, for the world’s sake. Twice in his lifetime, he saw his country 

2	
Michael P. Maniacci
devastated by war, political upheaval, and social unrest. He and his family had 
to flee their country for their lives, and he lost one of his children to the political 
revolution the world was experiencing because she was on the front line, trying 
to intervene. This last pain was almost more than he could bear and shortly after 
he found out about it, he was struck with a near fatal illness that most likely took 
his life several brief months later.
This book is intended to bring some of his original writings back to life. To 
these original writings, contemporary experts have been asked to comment and 
introduce Adler’s work through the prism of the 21st century. Repeatedly, they 
note how contemporary his ideas seem, and how prescient he seemed to be. A 
possible reason for this will be explored below. Perhaps readers of this work will 
agree, and the debating, discussing, and challenging can continue.
Alfred Adler: A Brief Biographical Sketch
Ansbacher (1978), Ellenberger (1970), Furtmuller (1964), Hoffman (1994), 
Manaster, Painter, Deutsch, and Overholt (1977), Mosak and Maniacci (1999), 
and Orgler (1939/1963) provide the details highlighted in this and the previ-
ous section. Adler was the second of six children. He woke one morning to 
find one of his brothers dead in the bed next to him. Twice in his life, he was 
run over in the street outside his home. Once, he contracted a pneumonia 
that almost killed him. In fact, he heard the physician tell his father, “Your 
boy is lost” (Orgler, 1939/1963, p. 16). He suffered from poor eyesight, and his 
family was told he should be apprenticed to a shoemaker because his studies 
were so bad. With glasses, his academics improved so much he became one 
of the best students.
Adler learned the importance of health, how crucial the support of family 
was, and the necessity of constructively compensating for illness or weakness. He 
went to medical school, studied to be a clinician (as opposed to a researcher, like 
Freud), and specialized in ophthalmology. He quickly expanded to general prac-
tice, and eventually, psychiatry. He met and married a brilliant woman, Riassa 
Timofeyewna Epstein, a scholar who was multilingual and politically active. He 
set up practice in the lower- to middle-class part of town and treated the circus 
sideshow performers on a regular basis. He was struck by their ability to com-
pensate, and overcompensate, for their deformities and still meet the tasks of life: 
work, friendship, and love.
Partially under the influence of his wife, Adler was very politically active, 
attending meetings, writing pamphlets, and marching in various rallies, includ-
ing for women’s liberation. It was around this time, when he was beginning his 
practice, starting his family, and establishing himself in the community, that he 
met Freud.

	
	
An Introduction to Alfred Adler	
3
Adler and Freud: Coworkers and Rivals
Adler was 14 years Freud’s junior. Freud was much better established in the 
community. He had been practicing longer, had published more and lectured to 
professionals longer, and had done extensive research in neurology, particularly 
aphasia. He was a professor at the country’s prestigious medical school. They were 
both working professionals and colleagues, and while Adler deferred to Freud in 
many ways, as would have been expected given the differences in their ages and 
professional experience, Adler was not a disciple. Within a short time, Adler and 
Freud (and three others) started the Wednesday Night Meetings, soon to become 
the first psychoanalytic society, and invited others to join. Adler, not Freud, was 
the first president of the society, and coeditor (with Freud) of the journal they 
started. Over the years, they began to differ on several points, and soon, it came 
to a head over two issues: repression and the masculine protest.
Freud felt that repression was a product of living in a society, a community, 
and a consequence of having to adapt to communal life. If people did not repress 
their drives, they would kill each other, assault each other, and tear society apart. 
Only by repressing these drives could people live together. Adler disagreed. He 
felt that only poorly adjusted individuals had to repress their drives. If they were 
well integrated into the society, at peace with themselves and others, individuals 
could live in harmony and satisfy their drives with others, in cooperative ways. 
Freud felt this was naïve, even foolish, and stated that Adler was grossly under-
estimating the true depth of pathology that rested inside people. He called Adler 
superficial, a label that would haunt him his entire professional life, and well 
after his death. Adler stated that Freud was not describing normal individuals but 
childlike people who were poorly socialized and overindulged, and that people 
who were raised well and with love and compassion could achieve what Adler 
was advocating, and they did it every day, in many communities. Adler called 
Freud’s views the psychology of pampered children who would not accept no for 
an answer, who were self-serving and self-centered. They did not take into con-
sideration the welfare of others. They may have had good reasons for developing 
such attitudes, including poor social conditions and possibly inferior organs, but 
no such reasons were acceptable for maintaining such a stance.
Similarly, Freud felt that women were constitutionally and biologically infe-
rior. Because they were born without a penis, they could not experience the 
Oedipal conflict the way men did, they would not fear castration, and therefore, 
they would not develop a superego, a sense of morality and conscience. Adler 
forcefully disagreed, but he attempted to remain diplomatic. Yes, women may 
have difficulties in greater numbers than men (and therefore be utilizing more 
psychoanalytic services), but this was because of the social situation in which 
they found themselves. Women were treated as second-class citizens and told 
from an early age that men were more powerful, and they were not given the same 

4	
Michael P. Maniacci
choices and freedoms men had. They therefore exhibited what Adler termed the 
masculine protest: They were attesting to the fact that they were as powerful as 
men, but in many instances, in socially useless ways, such as through psychologi-
cal symptoms. It was only through their symptoms that they could gain power, 
recognition, and some sense of control in their lives and families. If women were 
given the rights and privileges of men, not only would they be better, so would 
society. Freud was unmovable.
A vote was taken, and Freud and his growing followers felt that Adler and 
those who thought as he did were wrong. They were no longer welcome in the 
new psychoanalytic movement. Adler and his followers tried to negotiate, but to 
no avail. Adler left and started his own group, originally called the Society for 
Free Psychoanalytic Research. Apparently, the free meant free from Freud. Many 
early members tried to keep membership in both groups, but Freud would have 
none of it. He declared that membership in one precluded membership in the 
other. Members would have to choose. Eleven members resigned from Freud’s 
group and joined Adler. A bright, young Swiss psychiatrist was recruited to 
replace Adler. His name was Carl Jung. He became the new head of the society 
and within just a few years, he too was voted out, by Freud and his loyal followers 
who felt that he too, as Adler before him, had deviated too far from psychoana-
lytic doctrine and that his new concepts were not compatible with Freud’s.
Adler: The Movement Toward Individual Psychology
As stated above, Adler wanted to originally call his group the Society for Free 
Psychoanalytic Research, but Freud objected to Adler using the term psycho-
analytic, so Adler began exploring for new titles. He considered Personality 
Psychology, but that was already being used. He then wanted Holistic Psychology, 
but that too was being used by a new and up-and-coming group that would 
become known as the Gestalt Psychologists (Gestalt, in German, meaning whole). 
He chose Individual Psychology, meaning individuum, a Latin term for indivis-
ible. The proper English translation should have been Indivisible Psychology, but 
as will be noted below, poor translation would become a curse to Adler and his 
writings to the present day.
Adler and his followers began meeting. Adler (1907/1917) had written one book 
as a member of the Freudian group, Study of Organ Inferiority and Its Psychical 
Compensation: A Contribution to Clinical Medicine. It was well received and even 
praised by Freud. Now, on his own, he needed a declaration of independence, and 
he had been preparing one for months even while still in the Freudian circle. He 
would rush its completion and submit it to the medical school where Freud taught 
so he could gain an appointment and train other physicians and thus grow his 
movement. It was his most important work, and Adler (1912/2002) called it, The 
Neurotic Character: Fundamentals of Individual Psychology and Psychotherapy. 

	
	
An Introduction to Alfred Adler	
5
He was still rather polite to Freud, giving his senior colleague credit and playing 
down any bad feelings toward him. Nonetheless, he outlined in exquisite detail 
his differences from mainstream psychoanalysis and pointed toward a new direc-
tion not just for psychiatry but for medical practice as well. It was two and a half 
years before Adler would receive a response. He was unanimously rejected by 25 
professors. Freud had been teaching there for 15 years already. The rejection was 
unequivocal, yet unclear. In part, it may have been Adler’s radical political lean-
ings that damned him. His once close association with Freud did not help either—
Freud was not popular among the academics at the medical school because of his 
“speculations.” In fact, Freud had not submitted any psychoanalytic works as a 
basis for his appointment: He submitted his research on aphasia. After he was 
appointed, he began teaching psychoanalysis. This did not please the faculty, but 
it was tolerated well enough to keep Freud on a limited basis. Adler was report-
edly devastated. He would never teach in his home country, nor did he ever apply 
again. As will become detailed below, he would never write a book again.
Adler and Social Psychology
For the rest of his life, Adler would continue to write articles, but his books 
would be “assembled” for him from two sources. Either his articles would be 
gathered together and anthologized, or his lectures to lay audiences would 
be hastily put together from his notes and transcriptions and published as 
“books.” He came to America and received academic appointments to uni-
versities, but almost always in departments of education, social work, or 
medical psychology. The Freudians had a stranglehold in the medical schools 
in America, and the psychology departments were dominated by a young 
psychologist named John Watson, with his new system he labeled behavior-
ism. The behaviorists had no tolerance for the Freudian speculators, and the 
Freudians had little patience for the naïve behaviorists; hence, the (almost) 
tragic split began in the 1920s between the medical schools and psychology 
departments of the major universities. Adler found himself welcomed in nei-
ther; he was not psychoanalytic enough for the Freudians, and the behav-
iorists considered him just another Freudian. He came up with an idea. He 
would turn to the people themselves, and he began teaching and writing for 
them, directly.
Adler opened clinics for the poor. He taught teachers and set up offices in the 
public schools, training teachers, counselors, and social workers in his methods. 
He lectured to whoever would listen, at churches, public meeting halls, commu-
nity organizations, and the community mental health clinics he was instrumen-
tal in establishing. He provided consultations to prisons, sanitariums, mental 
institutions for the “insane,” and magazines and newspapers. His popular self-
help “books” became global best-sellers, much to the annoyance of Freud, whose 

6	
Michael P. Maniacci
books did not sell well, especially in America. He became a media sensation and 
one of the most famous people in the world.
Adler as Writer
Adler wrote in German. Later in life, he wrote in English, but how much he 
actually “wrote,” versus was written for him, remains speculation. He did lec-
ture in English, but while he was reportedly a dynamic and captivating speaker, 
his English retained much of the Germanic structure from his native tongue. 
Adler turned over the editing of his works to translators, editors, and colleagues 
as he became increasingly popular. His global reach was unprecedented, and 
as he grew increasingly busy, he did not closely attend to their work. Frankly, 
some of his early translations were simply wrong. As noted earlier, Adler did 
not intend (primarily) the word individual to mean “unique person”; he meant 
“indivisible.” When he used words like lacking courage, he was not sympatheti-
cally translated—the more accurate translation is “discouraged.” Similarly, 
though the term pampered became synonymous with Adler, the more accurate 
translation is “tenderized.” In many of his early works, he appeared to have used 
the word soul; the more accurate translation of the same term from German is 
“mind.” When he apparently used the term failure, an alternate translation is 
“to breakdown” or “refuse.” The list could continue, but the point is clear. Adler 
should have checked more closely, but he was both too busy and too avoidant 
to address writing in great detail ever again, using a safeguarding operation he 
would later identify as “distance.” His lack of attentiveness hurt his reputation 
with scholars and unsympathetic students. (For the record, Freud fared little 
better in certain crucial instances. Freud was poorly translated as well, with 
words like id being an inaccurate translation of “it” and ego being a poor choice 
for “self.”)
To read Adler with such modified translations in mind helps. He was brilliant, 
but not scholarly. He was busy in private practice, not teaching. He did not have 
the time or structure of an academician. That was not his goal, and his behavior 
fell in line with that. He wanted to help as many people as directly as possible, 
and he did. He was considered a master clinician by those who knew him, but 
the effect upon his academic reputation was devastating. He is difficult to follow 
at times, unclear in his points, and apparently lacking in references and citations 
to other authors or experts (though not in his one scholarly book, The Neurotic 
Character). The articles presented in this text are an attempt to clarify some of 
this. In most of the articles in this book, Adler was direct, clear, and to the point. 
Some of the translations are still stilted but, in the interest of historical accuracy, 
are left in their original form. In the article format, Adler was sharp and often 
as penetrating as any physician or psychiatrist, and in many instances far more 
astute than scholars of his or our day. He was attentive!

	
	
An Introduction to Alfred Adler	
7
Adler and the Nature of His Theoretical Model
When Freud, Adler, and Jung met, wrote, discussed, and analyzed, they were not 
modest. They wanted to create a new discipline, even a new science. They were global 
(at best) and grandiose (at worst) in their aspirations. They wanted to explain every-
thing. They did. How successfully they attained that goal is open to question, but 
they did try. It is fascinating to compare their writings with contemporaries from 
our era. The articles written by today’s scholars and professionals are typically much 
more scientific, far more scholarly, and more tightly focused. Yet, they lack some-
thing. Experts in the social sciences today, especially psychiatry and psychology, are 
generally aiming much lower. They achieve their aims with precision and pedantry, 
but their global reach is limited, partially due to information overload among the 
general public, but also because many of them lack the vision—or hubris—to try.
The founding three (Freud, Adler, Jung) wanted to be taken seriously, and 
respect for a new discipline can be hard won. Freud’s answer was to model his 
system after the prevailing dominant science of his day: physics. It was, and is, 
considered to be the grandparent of all science. He began a tradition that contin-
ues to this day, that is, of using models from physics to explain the functioning of 
the mind and brain, thereby giving an apparent sophistication—and prestige—to 
his theories.
The machine of the day in Freud’s time was the steam engine. Newtonian 
physics could explain the workings of the world, and any science that was 
worth its salt had to at least implicitly acknowledge Newton. Freud’s terminol-
ogy was consistent with this: energy, force, resistance, pressure, blocking. As the 
technology of the day changed, so too did the metaphor. When the telephone 
and telegraph arose, psychology and psychiatry began using images of wiring, 
circuits, and communication theory. The model then became computers, and 
neural networks, nodes, and complex systems grounded in information process-
ing emerged. Freud’s system, like much in brain science, constantly undergoes 
revision as the models in physics change. With the new models of chaos theory 
and fractal mathematics emerging, psychiatry and psychology will scramble yet 
again to revise their languages, metaphors, and terminologies.
Interestingly, Adler tried this language of Newtonian physics in his first book 
on organ inferiority in 1907. It did not work for him. Perhaps he too was fas-
cinated by trying to emulate traditional scientific methodology, or he was still 
swayed by Freud’s views. He never returned to that language or its metaphors 
again after 1907. Slowly, his language, and thinking, began to change. By 1912, 
he found three new sources, and a major conceptual shift happened. He found 
Nietzsche, Vaihinger, and Shakespeare. Their influence upon the way Adler not 
only phrased his system but conceptualized his theory was enormous. He began 
a conceptual shift that was more than terminological. Adler began thinking dif-
ferently. A brief examination of each thinker will clarify.

8	
Michael P. Maniacci
With Nietzsche (1901/1967), he found a gadfly, a rebel who provoked, chal-
lenged, and disrupted practically everything he touched. Adler was drawn to 
this for many reasons, but one key was that Adler was a second-born who also 
enjoyed challenging others. Adler’s (favored) older brother was named Sigmund, 
and Adler saw in Sigmund Freud someone who was an oldest-born authority 
figure. Nietzsche delighted in questioning, and overthrowing, traditional val-
ues, assumptions, and pretenses. Nietzsche developed ideas such as the prime 
motivating force behind all human functioning as the will to power. He believed 
that people attempted to distance themselves from responsibilities and that most 
problems people developed were due to the fact that they were competitive and 
their unwillingness to acknowledge such competitive striving fostered all sorts 
of dysfunctions. Unconscious processes led people to make choices for which 
they were responsible, but unaware. There was an ideal type for which all people 
strove, and challenging that ideal produced panic, hostility, and dissimulation 
from people.
Vaihinger (1911/1965) elaborated upon concepts from Immanuel Kant. People 
formed cognitive assumptions, what he called fictions, and those fictions served 
as a map of the world. Some of those maps were just that, maps. They were useful 
expedients to navigate through the world. Some people, however, took those maps 
too seriously. They confused the map with the terrain and became too rigid.
With Shakespeare, Adler discovered a unique thinker. Though writing in the 
late 16th and early 17th centuries, Shakespeare’s influence seemed unbounded. 
Especially during his prime writing period (from about 1595 till his retirement in 
1611), Shakespeare changed the way people thought about human motivation and 
the world. He seems to have created the notion of the human as we know it today 
(Bloom, 1998; Nuttall, 2007). In Shakespeare, people were often victims of life and 
other people, but something new was added. People also brought their own down-
fall upon themselves. They had a unique, distinguishable character that was the 
source of both their strengths and their weakness. The same characteristics that 
made Hamlet, Othello, or Cleopatra great also brought them down. Their “desti-
nies” were largely self-created, through flaws that could be directly correlated to 
a mismatch between what they brought to situations and the requirements of the 
situations themselves. To truly understand human nature, one had to know both 
the character and the life situation (with its trials and challenges). It was the mis-
match between those two forces that led to tragedy, not one or the other.
In The Neurotic Character, Adler often cites Nietzsche, Vaihinger, and 
Shakespeare. The consequence is more than superficial; yes, other authors and 
physicians are cited, as is research, but there is a clear difference in his thinking 
from other things he had written thus far. Adler was not thinking like an aspir-
ing physicist. He was thinking like a philosopher or writer, and he had excel-
lent taste. The insights these three individuals had were profound and not tied to 
any fashion of the time. Since he was not tying himself to any particular system 

	
	
An Introduction to Alfred Adler	
9
in science, as the science changed, Adler did not seem out of step. The insights 
of Nietzsche and Shakespeare, in particular, have stood the test of time. Both 
those men are often cited as among the towering geniuses of all time (e.g., Bloom, 
2003). By building his thinking, and his system, upon their styles of thinking, 
Adler seemed to become “timeless” himself.
Adler’s theory has been relatively unchanged since he first articulated it. His 
assumptions are as valid today as they were back then. Some of the postulates 
derived from his assumptions have come under criticism, and in cases such 
as his stance toward “homosexuality” appropriately so, but he was a man of 
his times. His assumptions, though, are still amazingly relevant. Because his 
focus was clinically oriented, not academically driven, he developed numer-
ous tactics for achieving change in characters and the situations they find 
themselves in. While his theory is consistent, his tactics are diverse. Today’s 
Adlerian practitioners are diverse in their styles of counseling and therapy. 
Their theory is homogeneous. It appears to have stood the test of time. Freud, 
however, has not had the same fate. He was much more research and academi-
cally oriented. He only would work with patients that fit his system. If they 
did not, he would refer them out (often to Adler, at least early on it appears). 
That was not the case with Adler: He would modify his style to suit the needs 
of the patient.
Freud, till his death, advocated psychoanalysis as a research method. He wanted 
to be a researcher, but his desire to marry and start a family “got in the way,” so 
to speak. He found he could not support his growing family on a researcher’s sal-
ary, so reluctantly he began a private practice. He wanted to understand human 
nature, and the best way to do that (he thought) was to study cases in depth. He 
adopted a researcher’s stance: He would sit away from the subject, not interfere 
with the process, and take copious notes. He saw patients four to six times per 
week. Too much interference from the researcher might contaminate the data, 
so professional distance was required. His original research was on aphasia—
the loss of speech. He was fascinated about how and why people lost the ability 
to speak, to articulate their issues. Psychoanalysis was a method of transferring 
his academic research on aphasia into clinical practice. He found, as most of us 
do, only what he was looking for, and his theory closely resembles his biases and 
personality dynamics (Mosak & Kopp, 1973).
Adler was different. He wanted to overcome death. He wanted individuals 
to compensate for their weaknesses and unfortunate circumstances of life. He 
wanted to make life fair and better for all. He was clinically driven. He took any 
number of individuals, and types of individuals, into his practice. He worked 
with psychotics, criminals, children, families, couples, teachers, and school sys-
tems, as well as traditionally defined neurotics. He even advocated group psycho-
therapy. He found what he looked for as well, but he had a different outlook on 
life and himself than Freud (Mosak & Kopp, 1973).

10	
Michael P. Maniacci
It is within this context that Alfred Adler Revisited is presented. Following 
are some of his most important articles. Their selection was not exhaustive, 
nor was it comprehensive. They were picked because of their seeming rele-
vance to today’s issues and their importance in Adlerian theory and practice. 
They are relatively self-explanatory. Their selection will detail the core ele-
ments of his theory and some of the tactics he used and advocated for chang-
ing both individuals and the systems (e.g., families, schools, communities) in 
which they found themselves. We hope you enjoy them and look forward to 
the debate continuing.
References
Adler, A. (1917). Study of organ inferiority and its psychical compensation: A contribution 
to clinical medicine (S. E. Jelliffe, Trans.). New York: Nervous and Mental Diseases 
Company. (Original work published 1907)
Adler, A. (2002). The neurotic character: Fundamentals of Individual Psychology and psy-
chotherapy (C. Koen, Trans., & H. T. Stein, Ed.). San Francisco: Classical Adlerian 
Translation Project. (Original work published 1912)
Ansbacher, A. (1978). Essay: Adler’s sex theories. In A. Adler, Cooperation between the sexes: 
Writings on women, love, and marriage, sexuality and its disorders (H. L. Ansbacher & 
R. R. Ansbachers, Eds., & Trans.; pp. 248–412). New York: Jason Aronson.
Bloom, H. (1998). Shakespeare: The invention of the human. New York: Riverhead Books.
Bloom, H. (2003). Genius: A mosaic of one hundred exemplary creative minds. New York: 
Grand Central Publishing.
Ellenberger, H. F. (1970). The discovery of the unconscious: The history and evolution of 
dynamic psychiatry. New York: Basic Books.
Furtmuller, C. (1964). Alfred Adler: A biographical essay. In A. Adler, Superiority and social 
interest: A collection of later writings (H. L. Ansbacher & R. R. Ansbacher, Eds., & 
Trans.; pp. 309–393). Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Hoffman, E. (1994). The drive for self: Alfred Adler and the founding of Individual Psychology. 
New York: Addison-Wesley.
Manaster, G. J., Painter, G., Deutsch, J., & Overholt, B. (Eds.). (1977). Alfred Adler: As we 
remember him. Chicago: North American Society of Adlerian Psychology.
Mosak, H. H., & Kopp, R. R. (1973). The early recollections of Adler, Freud and Jung. 
Journal of Individual Psychology, 29, 157–166.
Mosak, H., & Maniacci, M. (1999). A primer of Adlerian psychology: The analytic-behav-
ioral-cognitive psychology of Alfred Adler. Philadelphia: Brunner/Mazel.
Nietzsche, F. (1967). The will to power (W. Kaufman & R. J. Hollingdale, Trans.; W. Kaufman, 
Ed.). New York: Vintage. (Original work published 1901)
Nuttall, A. D. (2007). Shakespeare the thinker. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Orgler, H. (1963). Alfred Adler: The man and his works: Triumph over the inferiority com-
plex. New York: Mentor Books. (Original work published 1939)
Vaihinger, H. (1965). The philosophy of “as if” (C. K. Ogden, Trans.). London: Routledge, 
Kegan, Paul. (Original work published 1911)

11
2
The Fundamental Views 
of Individual Psychology
Francis X. Walton
It is a pleasure to offer this commentary as to how the fundamental principles of 
Individual Psychology, as set forth by Adler in the following article, help provide 
direction for solving problems that face society in 2011.
As a practitioner, I am continually faced with the remarkably encouraging 
moment adult clients experience when they begin to understand the power-
ful hand they have had in creating their personal set of beliefs and the man-
ner in which their idiosyncratic interpretation of themselves and their problems 
brought them to the troubles they have presented in therapy. Adler’s contribu-
tions to the clinician’s ability to help the client understand “the bricks which he 
uses in his own ‘creative’ way” and his “individual way of using these bricks” 
has become more systematized and elaborated upon especially by psychiatrists 
Rudolf Dreikurs, Kurt Adler, and Bernard Shulman, as well as psychologist 
Harold Mosak in the period following Alfred Adler’s death, and subsequently by 
many others. Lifestyle formulation has become the precursor to counseling and 
therapy for a great many Adlerian clinicians.
When working with children I am often reminded how parents, educators, 
physicians, and mental health clinicians could be of so much more help to young 
people if they would use Adler’s understanding of the development of lifestyle 
when dealing with the most commonly diagnosed childhood disorder of our 
time: attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Sadly, one of the psychologists who 
has been particularly prolific and influential in his publications about ADHD, 
Russell Barkley, explains the etiology of ADHD as follows: “For most children, 
ADHD is a biologically based inborn temperamental style that predisposes them 
to be inattentive, impulsive, and psychically restless as well as deficient in their 
capacity for role governed behavior” (Barkley, 1990). This understanding of 
ADHD is prevalent in the medical community despite the fact it does not fit 
with the facts. Peter Freer in connection with the esteemed Drug Effectiveness 

12	
Francis X. Walton
Review Project at Oregon State University writes, “Dr. Russell Barkley just spoke 
at a national conference citing that medication is by far the best and most trusted 
method. Unfortunately, dinosaurs like Barkley do exist, are respected, and yet 
completely propagate information that has no substance in current research” 
(Freer, 2010). Despite this fact, more than 2.5 million children in the United 
States alone take ADHD drugs.
My point is that the conclusions Adler offers in the following article direct 
practitioners where we need to go when attempting to understand and help 
children who manifest behavior that meets the criteria for the ADHD diagno-
sis. Adler shows us a two-pronged approach, namely, help parents, children and 
teachers understand the particular way the child has learned to approach life, and 
help parents and teachers understand how children manifesting these character-
istics very commonly are influenced by a substantially underdeveloped sense of 
the social interest or social feeling and spirit of cooperation to which Adler refers 
in this article (Walton, 1996). I offer you the observation that so many clinicians, 
educators, and parents are accustomed to looking for the causes of behavior that 
they ignore the belief system and the style of behavior the child uses to create the 
difficulties he is experiencing. Adler emphasizes the need to understand the indi-
vidual in the light of his own “peculiar” development and avoid the “unfruitful 
roads of classification,” and yet we continue to see mental health workers adopt 
the language and labeling of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual as if placing 
clients in diagnostic categories is in any way similar to understanding the unique 
belief system that takes the client to his successes and to his difficulties.
Speaking further about the capacity to develop the social interest that Adler 
cites, it is probably not possible to overemphasize how important the “degree of 
social feeling and cooperation” is to individual and community mental health. 
Adler has helped us understand how important it is for the child to learn to 
approach life’s problems with concern for himself or herself, but also to develop 
concern for how the solution to problems will influence him and his mother, or 
him and other members of the family, and as the child grows older, him and his 
classmates, or him and other members of the football team, or him and other 
members of the community, or him and other inhabitants of his country, and, 
finally, him and others in the world. The closest to a guarantee that we may live 
in a world with peace and harmony is that we capitalize upon the capacity we 
possess to learn to care about the welfare of fellow human beings.
Probably the influence that most undermines the development of social inter-
est in young people today is pampering. Since Adler regards the development of 
social interest as having such importance for successful interaction with fellow 
human beings, it behooves us to emphasize how the pampered child learns to 
see himself as the center of the universe. His belief system includes the thinking 
that he is entitled to special treatment, and consequently he frequently can pic-
ture himself as being mistreated when the special treatment he thinks should be 

	
	
The Fundamental Views of Individual Psychology	
13
awarded to him does not materialize. The common reaction of such a person is 
to attempt to force others to treat him as special, and if that is not successful, he 
frequently attempts to punish others. Adler attempts to help us understand that 
life calls for cooperation, for a give-and-take, but the understanding of the pam-
pered human being is that you give and I take. Carried on without modification, 
the absence or low state of social interest in the pampered child dooms him to a 
life of poor relationships in work and social situations and in love. The blame and 
hate that such individuals are capable of calling upon can be seen in many sorts 
of antagonistic and harmful behaviors including suicide, which so very often has 
in it the motive of revenge.
It is noteworthy at this time in the history of society that we are faced with 
an increase in bullying, substantial violence, and other sorts of abuse of human 
beings by fellow human beings. Adler proposes that “the treatment and cure of 
the numerous failures and mal-adjustments of our time are wholly dependent 
upon increasing the degree of social feeling and cooperation.” Support for his 
position is abundant, but some very recent empirical support of his position is 
found in research conducted in areas as diverse as penology and parenting. It 
is noteworthy that the cutting edge to improving penal systems is found in the 
country of Norway, where penologists have instituted a system designed to bring 
about much greater respect and caring between guards and inmates as well as 
between fellow inmates. The guiding principles are that repressive systems do 
not work, and that treating prisoners humanely boosts their chance of reintegra-
tion into society. Within 2 years of their release 20% of Norway’s prisoners end 
up in jail. In the United Kingdom and the United States the figure is between 
50% and 60% (Adams, 2010). A study reported by Tulane University researchers 
found that 5-year-old children who had been spanked frequently as 3-year-olds 
were more likely to demonstrate aggressive behavior including defiance, cruelty, 
screaming, bullying or meanness to others, frequent threatening of others, tem-
per tantrums, destruction of things, and lashing out physically against people 
or animals (Taylor, Manganello, Lee, & Rice, 2010). Thus, whether our mistaken 
approaches to leadership consist of pampering or overcontrol, we steal away 
opportunities for others to develop social interest. In summary, Adler helps us 
understand how we behave in ways consistent with our belief system. It is very 
difficult to mistreat fellow human beings when we have made concern for fellow 
human beings part of our belief system. He writes that a great improvement in 
“the next generation” can be assured by preventive work. Of course, that work 
can be carried out in the family, but absolutely not only in the family. In this day 
when a great many young children commonly spend as much time in the early 
childhood education center as they do with parents, we have begun to recognize 
the tremendous opportunity that exists to teach preschool children to care about 
fellow human beings. There probably is no better opportunity to systematically 
work at “increasing the degree of social feeling and cooperation” for which Adler 

14	
Francis X. Walton
has called than in early childhood education centers. Finally, while the education 
of parents in groups in preschool centers, elementary schools, and churches is 
an important resource to continue the work Adler pioneered in his child guid-
ance centers in Vienna, let us not ignore a huge opportunity that has been largely 
wasted—that is, the opportunity for students from kindergarten through sec-
ondary school to acquire and practice socially interested behavior, so that schools 
ultimately operate much more in the manner of a caring extended family.
References
Adams, W. L. (2010). A look inside the world’s most humane prison. TIME, 175(21), 14.
Barkley, R. A. (1990). Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. New York: The Guilford Press.
Freer, P. (2010). ADHD medications and neurofeedback. Drug Effectiveness Review 
Project—Attention deficit. Retrieved April 28, 2010, from http://playattention.com/
attention-deficit/articles/category/drug-effectiveness-review-project/
Taylor, C. A., Manganello, J. A., Lee, S. J., & Rice, J. C. (2010, May). Mother’s spanking of 
3-year old children and subsequent risk of children’s aggressive behavior. Pediatrics, 
125, e1057–e1065.
Walton, F. X. (1996). Understanding and helping children who manifest symptoms that 
meet the criteria for the attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder diagnosis. Journal of 
Individual Psychology, 63(2), 235–280.

	
	
The Fundamental Views of Individual Psychology	
15
The Fundamental Views of Individual Psychology
Alfred Adler
In introducing the International Journal of Individual Psychology in the 
United States and Great Britain, it seems fitting to describe the basic struc-
ture of Individual Psychology, in order to show the contributions of this sci-
ence to modern psychology and psychiatry. I do not want to go into details 
here. Those details will be found in the articles of the contributors to this 
Journal. It is only the scien­tific framework that I want to explain very briefly.
The raw material with which the Individual Psychologist works is: The 
relationship of the indi­vidual to the problems of the outside world. The 
Individual Psychologist has to observe how a par­ticular individual relates 
himself to the outside world. This outside world includes the individual’s 
own body, his bodily functions, and the functions of his mind. He does not 
relate himself to the out­side world in a pre-determined manner as is often 
assumed. He relates himself always according to his own interpretation of 
himself and of his present problem. His limits are not only the common 
hu­man limits, but also the limits which he has set himself. It is neither hered-
ity nor environment which determines his relationship to the outside world. 
Heredity only endows him with certain abil­ities. Environment only gives 
him certain impres­sions. These abilities and impressions, and the manner 
in which he “experiences” them—that is to say, the interpretation he makes 
of these experi­ences—are the bricks which he uses in his own “creative” way 
in building up his attitude toward life. It is his individual way of using these 
bricks—or in other words, it is his attitude toward life which determines his 
relationship to the outside world.
He meets problems which are entirely different from those of his fore-
bears. He sees all his problems from a perspective which is his own creation. 
He sees the environment which trains him, with his own self­-created per-
spective, and accordingly changes its effect upon him for bet­ter or worse. 
There is a task in life which no individual can escape. It is to solve a great 
number of problems. These problems are in no way ac­cidental. I have divided 
them for clarity into three parts: problems of be­havior toward others; prob-
lems of occupation; and problems of love. The manner in which an individ-
ual behaves toward these three prob­lems and their subdivisions—that is his 
answer to the problems of life.
Life (and all psychic expressions as part of life) moves ever toward “over-
coming,” toward perfection, toward superiority, toward success. You cannot 
train or condition a living being for defeat. But what an indi­vidual thinks or 
feels as success (i.e., as a goal acceptable to him), that is his own matter. In my 

16	
Francis X. Walton
experience I have found that each individual has a different meaning of, and 
attitude toward, what constitutes success. Therefore a human being cannot 
be typified or classified. I believe it is because of the parsimony of language 
that many scientists have come to mistaken conclusions—believing in types, 
entities, racial qualities, etc. In­dividual Psychology recognizes, with other 
psychologies, that each indi­vidual must be studied in the light of his own 
peculiar development. To present the individual understandably, in words, 
requires an extensive reviewing of all his facets, the elaborate demands of 
which are apparent in the articles which follow. Yet, too often, psychologists 
are tempted away from this recognition, and take the easier but unfruitful 
roads of classification. That is a temptation to which, in practical work, we 
must never yield. It is for teaching purposes only—to illuminate the broad 
field—that I designate here four different types, in order, temporarily, to clas-
sify the attitude and behavior of individuals toward outside problems.
Thus, we find individuals whose approach to reality shows, from early 
childhood through their entire lives, a more or less dominant or “ruling” atti-
tude. This attitude appears in all their relationships. A sec­ond type—surely 
the most frequent one—expects everything from others and leans on others. 
I might call it the “getting” type. A third type is in­clined to feel successful by 
avoiding the solution of problems. Instead of struggling with a problem, a 
person of this type merely tries to “side­step” it, in an effort thereby to avoid 
defeat. The fourth type struggles, to a greater or lesser degree, for a solution 
of these problems in a way which is useful to others.
It is necessary to say here that each special type retains his style from 
childhood to the end of his life, unless he is convinced of the mistake in his 
creation of his attitude toward reality. As I have said before, this style is the 
creation of the child himself, who uses inheritance and impressions of the 
environment as bricks in building his particular ave­nue for success—success 
according to his own interpretation.
Individual Psychology goes beyond the views of philosophers like Kant 
and newer psychologists and psychiatrists who have accepted the idea of the 
totality of the human being. Very early in my work, I found him to be a unity! 
The foremost task of Individual Psychology is to prove this unity in each 
individual—in his thinking, feeling, acting; in his so­-called conscious and 
unconscious—in every expression of his personal­ity. This unity we call the 
“Life-Style” of the individual. What is fre­quently labeled “the ego” is nothing 
more than the style of the individual.
Individual Psychology has shown that the first three types men­tioned 
above—the “ruling” type, the “getting” type, and the “avoiding” type—are 
not apt, and are not prepared, to solve the problems of life. These problems 
are always social problems. Individuals of these three types are lacking in the 

	
	
The Fundamental Views of Individual Psychology	
17
ability for co-operation and contribution. The clash between such a life-style 
(lacking in social interest) and the outside problems (demanding social inter-
est) results in shock. This shock leads up to the individual’s failures—which 
we know as neurosis, psychosis, etc. Significantly, the failure shows the same 
style as the individual. As I mentioned before, the life-style persists.
In the fourth type (the socially useful type), prepared for co-opera­tion 
and contribution, we can always find a certain amount of activity which is 
used for the benefit of others. This activity is in agreement with the needs of 
others; it is useful, normal, rightly imbedded in the stream of evolution of 
mankind.
The first type also has activity, but not enough social interest. Therefore, 
if confronted strongly by a situation which he feels to be in the nature of an 
examination, a test of his social value, a judgment upon his social useful-
ness, a person of this type acts in an unsocial way. The more active of this 
type attack others directly: they become delinquents, tyrants, sadists. It is 
as if they said, with Richard III, “And therefore, since I cannot be a lover, I 
am determined to prove a villain.” To this type also belong suicidals, drug-
addicts, drunkards—whose lesser degree of activity causes them to attack 
others indirectly: They make attacks upon themselves for the purpose of 
hurting others. The second and third types show even less activity, and not 
much social interest. This lack ap­pears also in the expression of their shock 
results, which are neuroses and psychoses.
The principles which guide me when grouping individuals into these four 
types are (1) the degree of their approach to social integration and (2) the 
form of movement which they develop (with greater or lesser activity) to 
maintain that degree of approach in a manner which they re­gard as most 
likely to achieve success (in their own interpretation).
But it is the individual shade of interpretation that matters in the end. 
And when reconstructing the unity of a personality in his relation­ships to the 
outer world, Individual Psychology fundamentally under­takes to delineate 
the individual form of creative activity—which is the life-style.
I should not like to close this short introduction to Individual Psy­
chology without saying that a great improvement in the next generation can 
be assured by preventive work; while the treatment and cure of the numer-
ous failures and mal-adjustments of our time are wholly depen­dent upon 
increasing the degree of social feeling and co-operation. For difficult times 
like ours, the inherited potentiality for human co-operation does not suffice. 
It must be further developed. The necessity and impor­tance of this devel-
opment are inherent in the discoveries of Individual Psychology—and the 
scientific method by which it may be accomplished is its contribution to the 
advancement of mankind.

18	
Francis X. Walton
People are always blaming their circumstances for what they are. I don’t believe 
in circumstances. The people who get on in this world are the people who get up 
and look for the circumstances they want, and, if they can’t find them, make them.
—G. B. Shaw, Mrs. Warren’s Profession

19
3
A Basic Difference Between 
Individual Psychology 
and Psychoanalysis
John D. West and Donald L. Bubenzer
Although Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) was 14 years older than Alfred Adler 
(1870–1937), from some perspectives they lived in a similar context. Both were 
part of what today would be considered fairly large families. Both were born into 
Jewish households and spent most of their lives in Vienna, Austria. Both became 
physicians and were educated at the University of Vienna. And, both seemed to be 
highly influenced by personal experiences in developing their theories of person-
ality and therapy. Adler wrote of overcoming the influence of a sickly childhood 
and Freud developed many of his ideas while dealing with his own obsessions 
and fears. Yet their theories of personality and related therapies diverged greatly. 
Freud was much more influenced by science and the “objective,” particularly 
the principles of physics. He saw humans from a more pessimistic perspective 
where they could at best manage negative energy and influences through an array 
of maneuvers that might prevent them from manifesting destructive primal 
instincts. Adler, on the other hand, was more drawn by goals and the ability to 
contribute to life through social involvements. He was captured by the subjectiv-
ity of life and his work may have portended the social constructionist ideas of the 
current day (Hall, 1954; Heer, 1972; Orgler, 1963).
In the chapter titled “The Differences Between Individual Psychology and 
Psychoanalysis” (Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1973), Adler wrote of distinctions 
between Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis; for example, he commented 
on how Individual Psychology would view censorship, the Oedipus complex, 
the construct of narcissism, the notion of a death wish, the castration complex, 
and the ego ideal and superego. While commenting on these constructions he 
also commented on the idea of moving from a feeling of inferiority to a sense 
of excellence. He wrote concerning the basic difference between Individual 
Psychology and Psychoanalysis and stated “that Freud starts with the assumption 

20	
John D. West and Donald L. Bubenzer
that by nature man only wants to satisfy his drives—the pleasure principle—and 
must, therefore, from the viewpoint of culture be regarded as completely bad” 
(Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1973, p. 210). Individual Psychology, however, indi-
cates “development of man . . . is subject to the redeeming influence of social 
interest, so that all his drives can be guided in the direction of the generally use-
ful. . . . We find neurotics, psychotics, suicides, etc., only when social interest is 
throttled” (Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1973, p. 211). As opposed to social inter-
est, on the other hand, he wrote that there are also those who are seeking their 
personal interest rather than focusing on the well-being of others (Ansbacher & 
Ansbacher, 1956, p. 253).
Regarding the striving for significance, Adler noted, “It is the striving for 
superiority which is behind every human creation and it is the source of all con-
tributions which are made to our culture. The whole of human life proceeds along 
this great line of action—from below to above, from minus to plus, from defeat 
to victory” (Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1956, p. 255). Of social interest he acknowl-
edged that it “is innate, just as the striving for overcoming is innate, with the 
important difference, however, that social interest must be developed, and that it 
can be developed only when the child is already in the midst of life” (Ansbacher & 
Ansbacher, 1956, p. 134). He also explained, “The only individuals who can really 
meet and master the problems of life, however, are those who show in their striv-
ing a tendency to enrich all others. . . . All human judgements of value and success 
are founded, in the end, upon cooperation; this is the great shared commonplace 
of the human race” (Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1956, p. 255). It was Adler’s thought 
concerning the striving for significance and social interest that we believe holds 
great value today, and it is the idea of social interest that we would like to com-
ment on as it pertains to our current life and to the foreseeable future.
Social Interest in Today’s Climate
It is in moving from a sense of inferiority to superiority that people can become 
frightened about life and the unknown or potential outcomes of their encounters 
with life. At these times it appears that some human beings, suffering from a 
desire for protection and wanting guarantees and assurances about their futures, 
focus on assumed personal interests rather than social interest—for example, 
when preemptive strikes as in war seem to be based in limited evidence but a lot 
of fear, when concerns around personal interests appear to replace interests in 
national health care, when it appears that personal interests have allowed greed 
to direct behavior, when desires for profit shares seem to have supported abuse 
of natural resources, when anxieties about performance appear to lead to com-
pulsive behaviors, or when unfamiliarity and discomfort with cultural pluralism 
seems to spark an evangelical commitment toward a monoculture. Indeed, as 
Adler noted, “the lines along which the development both of the individual and 

	
	
A Basic Difference Between Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis	
21
the community . . . proceed are prescribed by the degree of social feeling” (Adler, 
1964, p. 104).
In juxtaposition to seemingly self-interested positions noted above, and on a 
more optimistic and helpful note, we have seen educators sending faculty and 
students out of the country—and welcoming international students into the 
country—in an effort to stimulate familiarity and cooperation and hopefully 
reduce suspicions and fears that may lead to conflict. We have heard reports of 
legislators voting for universal health care, we have heard of government officials 
advocating for citizens by trying to regulate how large financial institutions use 
the resources of constituencies, and companies of volunteers assign themselves 
to work details after a natural disaster. Consequently, it can be said that even in a 
time when our world is far from the ideal there are illustrations of social interest.
Those who work to help create better families, communities, and countries, 
as well as a better world, are certainly emblematic of a courageous people. The 
courage in the stories they live reflects a “confidence in oneself and one’s ability 
to cope either with the particular situation at hand or, even more importantly, 
with whatever situation may arise” (Dinkmeyer & Dreikurs, 1963, p. 33). Here 
there is no need to explain away one’s performance and no need to locate guar-
antees or assurances for the future. Instead, when writing of “the courage to be 
imperfect,” Dreikurs and Soltz (1964) mentioned that the issue becomes one of 
what to do once a mistake occurs and this, rather than focusing on the mistake, 
promotes courage (p. 108). Indeed, “the courage to be imperfect” would seem 
to be an essential ingredient for social interest, for it becomes difficult to hold a 
genuine interest in the welfare of others while also working to elevate or protect 
one’s personal status. If we want to increase concern for others and social inter-
est, a question becomes, “How do we shine a light on stories of caring such that 
others see this commitment as a worthy investment?”
At times it would appear that we have grown quite adept at highlighting sto-
ries in which abuse and neglect occur and much less proficient at highlighting 
moments where a caring commitment for the well-being of others has occurred. 
The latter stories may be present in a couple’s commitment to act as foster par-
ents, a grandparent’s decision to once more assume parenting responsibilities, a 
daughter’s commitment to return home to care for an ailing parent, a couple’s 
investment in a long-term relationship, a country’s decision to send aid to a for-
eign land, or one community’s decision to help another when a river is at risk 
of flooding its banks. Historically, research has been interested in understand-
ing conditions from which problems arise. We may, however, be better served by 
investing in the study of the spirit of commitment that supports the advancement 
and well-being of others. For, as human beings, we are not independent of one 
another but, rather, we are interdependent creatures who benefit from an eco-
logical perspective indicating that we will only survive and flourish in light of a 
demonstrated concern for each other.

22	
John D. West and Donald L. Bubenzer
Indeed, meaning and pleasure in life are not derived from inwardly focusing 
on one’s own security or advancement but in transcending the focus on oneself 
through concern and commitment to others. We have both been fortunate to expe-
rience this in our lives and are aware that it can also play out on a larger stage. On a 
personal note, one of the authors has a story about moving with his family to accept 
a new position. This event occurred some time ago and as with the narratives in 
each of our lives, the event is remembered in a way that brings meaning to the sto-
ryteller. In applying for his counselor license he understood that clarification for 
one of the courses he had taken in graduate school was needed. A letter was drafted 
to the professor who had taught the course explaining the nature of the request. 
John then followed up with a telephone call and discovered that his teacher had 
retired and was given the home telephone number. When the telephone call was 
placed the wife answered and mentioned that her husband had been resting but 
she was sure he would not mind coming to the phone. It was good to talk with the 
gentleman, for John had remembered him as kindly and helpful. He remembered 
the course and agreed to write a description of the course for the licensure applica-
tion. Eventually John received his license and wanted to call his teacher back and 
thank him for his assistance, but he had lost the telephone number and so called the 
counselor education department again and talked with a member of the staff. She 
mentioned remembering the day that the retired faculty member’s wife brought 
him back to the department office so that he could dictate the letter. She mentioned 
that at some point after that visit the wonderful gentleman died. It was clear to John 
that this individual had inconvenienced himself with what was probably a notice-
able level of discomfort to be helpful to someone else. John has tried to never forget 
that event or the realization that the real mission in life, and that of a university 
faculty member, is to try to be of service to others.
It seems that narratives around social interest are easily identifiable by oth-
ers and, consequently, have the strength to move people to concern and caring. 
Another illustration of social interest that touched both of us concerns the village 
of Rothenburg ob der Tauber, Germany. The village arose around 950 AD. The 
medieval town with its surrounding 30-foot wall remained intact until near the 
end of World War II, the 31st of March, 1945 (Kootz, 2007), when the allies bombed 
the city, destroying about 40% of it. In the final months of the war Lieutenant 
General Max Simon and his German forces sought refuge in Rothenburg after 
fleeing from the bombing of Nurnberg. He had orders to fight until the last man. 
Knowing that Simon and his troops were ensconced in Rothenburg, the allies 
had orders to bomb the rest of the city (Darheim & Baumgartner, 2004).
John McCloy, a US undersecretary of state, learned of these orders. McCloy 
remembered a picture of Rothenburg that hung on his mother’s wall in Los 
Angeles and his mother’s fondness for the village. As an expression of humanity 
he contacted the American general, Devers, to see if a meeting might be arranged 
with the Germans for purposes of securing a surrender of the city. The Germans 

	
	
A Basic Difference Between Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis	
23
agreed, and the meeting took place outside the city wall. The German negotiator, 
Major Friedrich Thommes, at risk of his own life for disobeying orders, agreed to 
surrender the city. The German troops vacated the city by the following morning 
and the bombing was averted (Darheim & Baumgartner, 2004).
The action took special courage on the part of a few men, supposed enemies, 
who resisted authority for the well-being of a community and a way of life. This 
story of valor and social interest related to Rothenburg was followed by another. 
After the war the village was faced with a need to rebuild with dire financial cof-
fers, but the community had a good idea. Citizens pooled their resources and took 
out advertisements in leading newspapers around the world stating their plight 
and soliciting funds to rebuild the village (Darheim & Baumgartner, 2004). For 
example, by providing a stated contribution people could rebuild 1 meter of the 
wall. The plea was heard by folks who had memories of the idyllic Rothenburg 
and by empathic others. The funds poured in and the city was rebuilt.
Both instances, the surrender and the rebuilding of the city, are examples of 
risk and courage and of working together for a cause much larger than any single 
player. The actions required tremendous presence to the posed contexts and to 
opportunities for the well-being of humanity.
Our Futures With Social Interest and Concluding Thoughts
The metaphor of the “rugged individualist” that appears to have captured parts of the 
Western world may have outlived its usefulness or at least may be in need of major 
alteration. This type of thinking may at times become associated with limited con-
sideration of others, self-promotion, and competition among people—for example, 
competition in schools where some excel and some others may become discouraged, 
competition between employees for merit pay or bonuses where some succeed and 
some others may feel underappreciated, and competition between departments and 
companies where the goal may become one of gaining the advantage rather than 
finding ways to cooperate. This focus on the individual and supporting personal 
interests rather than social interest may also be joined with a limited understanding 
and appreciation of others and marginalization of some citizens.
It seems essential for our future that we help people to understand that as 
human beings we often have similar needs, hopes, and concerns, and that 
“human kind is our kind,” that “you are me and I am you,” and that we can no 
longer live in “gated communities.” Whether we are considering our place in a 
family, our lives at work, or our connectedness with various communities, we 
need to become mindful and accountable for the welfare of others, in order that 
those we leave behind might inherit a more sustainable world. This we see as the 
essence of Alfred Adler’s social interest, for as he said, “The only thing that can 
save us from being crucified on a harmful fiction . . . is the guiding star of univer-
sal welfare” (Adler, 1964, p. 278).

24	
John D. West and Donald L. Bubenzer
References
Adler, A. (1964). Social interest: A challenge to mankind (J. Linton & R. Vaughan, Trans.). 
New York: Capricorn Books.
Ansbacher, H. L., & Ansbacher, R. R. (Eds.). (1956). The individual psychology of Alfred 
Adler: A systematic presentation in selections from his writings. New York: Basic Books.
Ansbacher, H. L., & Ansbacher, R. R. (Eds.). (1973). Superiority and social interest: A collec-
tion of later writings (3rd rev. ed.). New York: Viking Press.
Darheim, J., & Baumgartner, H. G. (Producers). (2004). The history of Rothenburg ob der 
Tauber [DVD]. Available from http://www.EuroFocus.com
Dinkmeyer, D., & Dreikurs, R. (1963). Encouraging children to learn: The encouragement 
process. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Dreikurs, R., & Soltz, V. (1964). Children: The challenge. New York: Hawthorn Books.
Hall, C. S. (1954). A primer of Freudian psychology. London: The World Publishing Company.
Heer, F. (1972). Freud the Viennese Jew (W. A. Littlewood, Trans.). In J. Miller (Ed.), 
Freud: The man, his world, his influence (pp. 1–21), Prescott, Great Britain: George 
Weidenfeld and Nicholson Ltd.
Kootz, W. (2007). Rothenburg ob der Tauber. Rothenburg, Germany: Simon Sauer.
Orgler, H. (1963). Alfred Adler: The man and his work. New York: Mentor Book.

	
	
A Basic Difference Between Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis	
25
The Differences Between Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis (1931)1,2
Alfred Adler
Interpretation of Psychoanalytic Terms
Censorship
Who creates and guides the censorship? According to which viewpoints does 
the censorship work? Is it not a striving for significance and superiority, to 
get away from a feeling of inferiority and to hold on to a feeling of totality, of 
equality?
I should like to say that we cannot possibly be satisfied by assuming that 
the censorship plays a role biologically. If such a thing exists, it could have 
meaning only if it veiled and changed some unconscious impulses for some 
purpose. For what purpose? We shall hardly be able to find any other pur-
pose than one which serves to hold and enhance the feeling of one’s own 
value. This would mean that the deeper basis for such a concept would again 
be found in the observations of Individual Psychology, in the striving to get 
away from a feeling of inferiority to some kind of superiority.
But this would also mean that in the work of a man who has explained the 
concept of a censorship, the idea is active which has been stated by Individual 
Psychology, namely, the upward striving. This would mean that in the 
unconscious of Freud the Individual Psychology conception is confirmed. 
If this conception does not become conscious, one would have to assume in 
Freud, according to his own view, the existence of a censorship which veils 
this deeper foundation. This censorship also would be guided by the striving 
from below to above.
Oedipus Complex
Since one often comes across the claim that psychoanalysis goes deeper, 
we may indicate that the Individual Psychology conception also points the 
way for the thinking of the psychoanalyst in the instance of the Oedipus 
complex, i.e., the idea that the child would like to possess the opposite-sexed 
parent libidinally.
1	 Original translation of A19310, with some rearrangements.
2	 The further footnotes here are supplementations from an unpublished English manuscript by 
Adler, titled “Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis” (A1930m), which despite the same title 
differs from the present paper. Footnotes 6 and 11 are exceptions in that they are citations from a 
later paper (A1935i).

26	
John D. West and Donald L. Bubenzer
The view has changed of late—girls do not have an Oedipus complex—
because with growing experience the Oedipus complex could not be retained 
as the fixed pole.
One thing is certain, that this thesis also could not be conceived without 
at the same time thinking that the son strives for the laurels, the possibilities, 
the strength of his father. Whether one conceives this as sexual libido or sees 
it in broader terms, it is certain that this view could not be held if the thinker 
were not unconsciously influenced by the idea that the boy wants to grow 
beyond himself, wants to attain a superiority over his father.
We see how strongly the fact of the striving for significance influences 
all our thoughts, as well as the thoughts of other schools. I do not think one 
could ask for more from a theory. In this conception also the deeper dynam-
ics of Individual Psychology can be seen.
Narcissism
Freud announced his concept of narcissism during a period in which 
Individual Psychology sharply pointed out the egocentric aspect of the neu-
rotic. It is a question of terminology. If I understand by narcissism only sex-
ual self-love, then narcissism is no more than one of a thousand variations of 
self-love. When sexual self-love appears, it is merely one of the many mani-
festations of a person thinking only of himself. This, however, takes place not 
only within his developing sexuality, but in all relationships of his live. We 
then find the picture of a child or adult turned in upon himself, a life style 
which can come about only when one was previously able to exclude all other 
persons from one’s experience.
Since the natural progression of development is not like this, we cannot 
regard a phenomenon such as narcissism an innate component or phase of 
development. We regard it as a secondary phase which occurs when a per-
son has excluded social relationships that are self-understood and naturally 
given, or when he has never found them. In this event, nothing is left.
If one expands the concept of the narcissist enormously, as in psychoanalysis, 
it shows nothing but the type of egocentric person whom we have described 
extensively. We shall have to observe that this exclusion of others signifies a lack 
of social interest. This lack must have arisen because the person does not have 
the self-confidence and has not learned how to do justice to the tasks with which 
he is confronted within the frame in which he is placed, the human context.
Thereby we say that in the conception of the narcissist the most important 
part has been overlooked: the permanent exclusion of others, the narrowing 
of the sphere of action. From this we justly conclude that such a person is one 
who does not consider himself strong, that narcissism signifies a feeling of 
weakness which originated from a feeling of inferiority. At the same time this 
feeling seeks compensation through seemingly making the situation easier. 

	
	
A Basic Difference Between Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis	
27
That this attitude comes into conflict with the social questions of life is obvi-
ous. Thus we find here a lack of social interest corresponding to a stronger 
feeling of inferiority, when a child sees himself as if in enemy country and 
believes he cannot accomplish anything any more, or only if he refers all 
events almost compulsively to himself and excludes every obligation.
Death Wish
The death wish, which later played a great role in psychoanalysis, is similar to 
narcissism in every way. It is nothing by the further exclusion of all relation-
ships to life. It also is the expression of a feeling of weakness.
This death wish runs parallel to the idea of pessimism. Psychoanalysis is 
pessimistic. The death wish is perhaps an unrecognized confession of weak-
ness in the face of reality, as well as a lack of interest in others, of cooperation. 
We find in it a lack of social feeling; it is a last resource for the weak in heart. 
An author who arrives at the view that the death wish is the general condition 
thereby confesses to being weak in heart. He experiences the world full of 
unrest and difficulties and capitulates before it. Here too it is the expression 
of an inferiority feeling presented in scientific form.
Castration Complex
Some psychoanalysts have themselves pointed out that the castration com-
plex has developed from the “masculine protest.” In our culture the error is 
inherent to regard feminine form and behavior as inferior, as a diminished 
form of life. In The Neurotic Constitution cases are described of patients who 
express their feeling of being diminished by talking of loss of penis.
Ego Ideal and Superego
The ego ideal is a late conception of psychoanalysis. It is mighty similar to 
social interest. The ego ideal means nothing other than the ideal represented 
by social interest: the striving towards a goal of fellowmanship. Thus we find 
hidden in the ego ideal the finalistic view of Individual Psychology.
Regarding the superego, we would say that it is a later conception of 
what we have come to know as the fictive goal of superiority. It is only a new 
and unattractive work, modeled after “superman.” If it were named thus, 
everybody could recognize the imprint of the striving for godlikeness. It 
is not called so because [superman is Nietzsche’s term and] Individual 
Psychology has erroneously been placed near Nietzsche. In the superego 
we find nothing other than the Individual Psychology goal of superiority.
Basic Difference
With these discussions I have not yet touched on much of what is important. 
I could talk about the different significance which we attribute to childhood 

28	
John D. West and Donald L. Bubenzer
recollections. We do not distinguish a type of child who has the Oedipus 
complex, but a child who is pampered. We also know other types, children 
with inferior organs, and those who never have had the experience of fel-
lowmanship. Here the frame is much wider than in the psychoanalytic view. 
Also the views on the dream are fundamentally different.
Now I should like to show the decisive basic difference between psycho-
analysis and Individual Psychology. It is not that Freud has taken up drive 
psychology, which was first created by Individual Psychology and was then 
left behind as incorrect when I brought the striving for significance to the 
foreground. This is not the basic difference. The difference is that Freud starts 
with the assumption that by nature man only wants to satisfy his drives—the 
pleasure principle—and must, therefore, from the viewpoint of culture be 
regarded as completely bad.
Concept of Human Nature
The Freudian view is that man, by nature bad, covers this unconscious 
badness through censorship merely to get along better in life. Individual 
Psychology, on the other hand, states that the development of man, by 
virtue of his inadequate physique, is subject to the redeeming influence of 
social interest, so that all his drives can be guided in the direction of the 
generally useful. The indestructible destiny of the human species is social 
interest. In Individual Psychology that is the truth; in psychoanalysis it is 
a trick.
Individual Psychology, accordingly, maintains that, due to his physique, 
i.e., physical condition, a biological factor, man is inclined toward social 
interest, toward the good. We find neurotics, psychotics, suicides, etc., only 
when social interest is throttled. In this case the child becomes egotistic, loses 
interest in others, and presses his biologically founded striving for signifi-
cance toward the useless side reach his goal of personal superiority.
If one has clearly comprehended this difference, one will not be able to 
think that these two theories have anything more in common than a few 
words. That much any theory has in common with any dictionary. It is not 
admissible to rely on such things.
Basic Drives and Heredity
It seems to me that in the entire problem of basic drives and heredity there 
prevails great confusion. Let us assume that in the life of a person nothing 
develops for which the possibility has not been present from the start. Then 
we see how this undeniable fact can be abused. Anything which shows later 
in life is already present in the embryo as a possibility. But this does not imply 
that what we see in later life before us was already present in the embryo in 
this very form. Each possibility can materialize in different ways.

	
	
A Basic Difference Between Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis	
29
If we want to illuminate a conception of the striving for significance in 
this light, we must say: Of course, it can come about only if it is founded 
in the original disposition. But what we see, such as the character, cannot 
be thought of outside society, because the striving for significance, seen as 
character, must be regarded as a social function which can show itself only 
within a social frame.
We shall not forget that the child experiences in his first days his physical 
weakness in the face of the cultural demands, and that this acts as a sting 
to the child, especially when he begins to make comparisons. Whatever the 
opportunities may be to develop a striving for power, the sting always leads to 
wanting to be more. Since the factor of evolution is incessantly effective—and 
the striving for significance is its psychological expression—the striving can 
degenerate into a striving for personal power.
Here social interest steps in as a regulator. The striving for power is only 
the distorted aspect of the striving for perfection. The child is urged daily to 
get beyond his difficulties to a point where he finds security, where he can 
expect satisfaction of his needs. But goal setting must precede this. Thus we 
must understand the striving for significance as a function rooted in biology, 
although not in the form in which we see it later on as striving for superiority. 
If this were the case, then of course one would arrive at the conclusion that 
man, so often greedy for egotistical power, is evil by nature. What we do find 
is always that the personal striving for power comes about through an error 
from earliest childhood when the mind of the child is not sufficiently mature 
to draw correct conclusions.
We see that after the fourth or fifth year of life a prototype forms itself, 
an original form of life, a psychological constitution, which will act inde-
pendently, draw independent conclusions, develop in a thousand variations 
according to the individual’s original peculiarity. From our viewpoint we can 
trace to what extent and why this original development of the child deviates 
from our comprehension of a social being. One cannot talk of an original 
drive of egotistical power striving, because power striving is a realization in 
the face of a social context, a phenomenon of social relations.
Pleasure Principle and Social Interest
I have never yet heard of an attempt to establish a relationship between the 
pleasure principle and social interest. The pleasure principle, according to 
Freud, is connected with the drive life. Social interest is the compensatory 
factor for the physical inferiority feeling of man. One cannot conceive of man 
in his weakness in any other way than being supported through society. One 
could say that this creature cannot live in isolation, that he is viable only 
through the aid of society. We can regard society as the most important com-
pensatory factor for human weakness.

30	
John D. West and Donald L. Bubenzer
The experience of social interest has nothing to do with pleasure [in the 
sense of lust]. It is pleasurable for the social person only because he is embed-
ded in society; it is unpleasurable for one who experiences society as a chain 
to which he is tied, and who desires only personal satisfaction. E.g., for the 
murderer it is pleasurable to act against social interest; for the neurotic it is 
pleasurable to lean on others.
It is the goal, the style of life, which will force pleasure or displeasure. In 
this connection I must comment that the fellow man strives in his goal not 
for pleasure but for happiness.
Since we Individual Psychologists emphasize so very much the unity of 
psychological life (“as in a kind of elephantiasis,” Pfaundler), it is beyond any 
question that the feeling of pleasure must run parallel to the goal. Nietzsche 
said approximately: “Pleasure sets in when it is in accord with a person’s gait 
[in the sense of his characteristic way of walking through life].” Therefore the 
pleasure principle cannot be used as a regulative concept. Only the striving 
for the ideal end form can be used in this way.
For some time I have tried to discover a biological analogy here. I do 
not know if it is more than a smile, but there is in the organic realm a simi-
lar process. The possibility, e.g., that a chicken’s egg always develops into a 
chicken, rests in the germ cell. Here is an organic process which has a final-
istic tendency, which, in turn, is latent in the original germ cell. Obviously 
a finalistic tendency is also admixed to the original psychological process 
and will seek to penetrate somehow. Thus I arrived at the concept of the 
striving for totality which can only mean the seeking of a situation in which 
all forces, drives, feelings, conscious and unconscious impulses, etc., strive 
in a self-consistent fashion toward overcoming the difficulties of life. This 
search, this movement takes on a form. Thus I may speak of an ideal end 
form.
Dream Interpretation
With Freud the dream was at first a wish fulfillment—to bring infantile sex-
ual impulses to a release and gratification. In consequence he had to compre-
hend sexually everything that happens in dreams, and there arose the view 
of the sexual symbols.
Freud assumes the dreamer wants to look backward. I have pointed out 
that the dreamer looks forward; he intends the solution of a task. This is the 
basic difference here. I do not believe that Freud has taken over this view-
point, that the dream attempts to bring a present problem to a solution.
In due course new aspects were added to our view—e.g., what is the pur-
pose of the dream?—and, what occupied me most—why do people dream 
if they do not understand their dreams? The answer which Freud gave is 
quite unfounded: Man is supposed to dream in order not to wake up, to be 

	
	
A Basic Difference Between Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis	
31
occupied with the fulfillment of his infantile impulses and not to disturb the 
sleep. I often find that patients wake up when they dream.
Why does a person dream? I did not find an adequate solution until 
the thought came: It is the intention of the dreamer not to understand his 
dreams. He wants to withdraw the dream from understanding. This must 
mean that something happens in the dream which he cannot justify with 
reason. The intention of the dream is to deceive the dreamer. The person 
attempts in a certain situation to deceive himself. I have also understood why 
one does not understand the dream. Its purpose is only to create a mood. This 
emotion must not be clarified: it must exist and act as an emotion, created 
from the individuality of the dreamer. This apparently corresponds to the 
desire to solve a problem by an emotional episode and in accordance with his 
life style, since he is not confident of solving his problem in accordance with 
the common sense.
Examination of the dream devices shows them to represent the right arse-
nal for self-deception.
	
1.	Selection of certain pictures. The explanation is not to be found in 
the pictures but in their selection; i.e., the dreamer is guided by a 
tendency in the selection of his thoughts. We know the force which 
select; it is the individuality of a person, his unity, his goal; and so 
we find in this one aspect already that here the individuality reigns 
and not the common sense. The person attempts to solve the prob-
lem by selecting a picture which produces an emotion suitable to his 
life style. What happens through the emotion is what he would have 
done anyway on account of his individuality. The dreamer wants 
only to strengthen himself, to justify himself. Thus I could under-
stand that the dream represents the bridge from the present prob-
lem to the individuality.
	
2.	Similes and symbols. Other dream devices for the purpose of auto-
intoxication are similes and symbols. Here also the most impor-
tant questions are: Why these similes in particular? Why a simile 
at all? In the psychological structure of the simile the inclination 
toward self-deception is also contained. It would be very interest-
ing to uncover the psychological structure of the poetic simile; here 
also there is a deception, a deception in the broader sense of doing 
justice to an intention through a detour, in this case for the purpose 
of poetic transfiguration. All symbols have the purpose of filling 
the person in question with a mood through which he does what he 
would do on the basis of his individuality alone.
	
3.	Simplification. There are a number of further devices, such as 
the simplification in the dream. This is the significant device of 

32	
John D. West and Donald L. Bubenzer
self-deception, to narrow down a problem so much that nothing is 
left but a small “harmless” remainder. Then the dreamer does not 
experience the problem as a whole, but only as a small part; he has a 
better possibility of going the way he wants to go than if he were to 
look all around.
These devices are not unique for the dream. If a person wants to deceive 
himself during waking life, he uses the same devices. He works with the 
selection of certain memories and pictures, he uses similes and symbols, and 
also simplification.
Thus our result is completely different from that of psychoanalysis, which 
considers, “The dream is the royal road to the unconscious.” This signi-
fies a contrast to waking thought. We say this contrast does not exist. The 
unconscious is no contrast to the conscious. If, in analyzing it, one tears the 
conscious from its context, one can also discover differences within it. But 
he who learns to interpret the conscious appreciates that it may be as little 
understood as the unconscious, i.e., remain as unconscious as the latter. A 
contrast does not exist here. Therefore Freud’s view that neurosis arises from 
the conflict between the conscious and the unconscious was not tenable.
Conclusion
One cannot understand the psychological structure of a person through 
the drive life because the drive is “without direction” (see also Hermann 
Schwarz). The main problem of psychology is not to comprehend the causal 
factors as in physiology, by the direction-giving, pulling forces and goals 
which guide all other psychological movements. Thus Individual Psychology 
arrived at its finalistic conception.
The necessity for ego formation is founded in the evolutionary tendency 
of the original germ cell (of men and other living creatures). The cell with its 
evolutionary tendency represents the ego. Outside of this ego there is noth-
ing—no “id” and no “drive” and no “libido”—that would furnish material for 
taking a stand towards the problems of life. Wanting to develop the ego from 
the drives—to crown it all, from the sadistic and masochistic drives—means 
to attribute these drives the figure of the ego. It means to place knowledge 
and cunning into the censorship and into the development of the superego 
and the ego ideal; likewise, to put direction into all three against persons, 
persons who appear only after birth; to put a striving for significance into 
the Oedipus complex, into the ego ideal, into the castration complex; to put a 
goal into the alterable sexual tendencies, etc. In short, the drive here becomes 
a demon in ready form.
The problem of the wholeness of the personality, which represents the 
essential contribution of Individual Psychology to modern medicine, appears 

	
	
A Basic Difference Between Individual Psychology and Psychoanalysis	
33
in psychoanalysis as unessential. How this wholeness penetrates every psy-
chological part-phenomenon and colors it individually is omitted from the 
considerations of psychoanalysis which, as if it were hypnotized, looks in 
each part for the sexual-libidinal structure.
Although it would take us too far afield to prove in this paper, Freud’s 
psychology is taken from the psychopathology of the pampered child, and 
describes it in sexual dialect.
In all points one finds the sad results of overlooking the whole as that 
which gives form to, and is the basic melody of, the penetrating motive which 
compels all parts, forces, and drives—including sexuality—toward a self-
consistent stand. Consequently, the misunderstanding of a contrast between 
conscious and unconscious; consequently also, the enthusiastic acceptance 
of ambivalence—both in contrast to the unity of the personality.
In treatment also psychoanalysis shows itself as inadequate. This is not to 
deny that there are patients who have been cured. We are attacking the basic 
principles—transference and the weak expedient of sublimation.
Transference in psychoanalysis has two faces. In the first there is noth-
ing more than the unalterable wholeness of the personality, including its 
stand toward the therapist. This aspect, then, belongs to the Individual 
Psychology personality theory. The second face is the continuous under-
scoring of sexual connections whether they exist or not. As always in life, 
such underscoring brings about a sexual atmosphere, and this leads to 
approach or rejection.
To point to cured or improved cases is not sufficient proof for the good-
ness of a method. Uncured cases would be more suitable. For despite all 
formulas the physician is forced to bring to bear his ability to take the com-
mon sense into account. Also, the patient can free his own common sense 
in the course of discussions, perhaps often without the physician noticing 
it. Common sense—that means thinking which corresponds to the human 
community.
Despite the many scientific contrasts between Freud and myself, I have 
always been willing to recognize that he has clarified much through his 
endeavors; especially, he has severely shaken the position of positivistically 
(materialistisch) oriented neurology and opened a wide door to psychology 
as an auxiliary science to medicine. This is his chief merit, next to his detec-
tive art of guessing through common sense. That he did not get any further 
is due to the limits of his personality and the limits of the personalities of his 
disciples.
In a future history of psychology and psychopathology Freud’s doctrine 
will figure as the admirable attempt to describe, in the strongest expressions 
of sexual terminology, the psychological life of the pampered child as a gen-
erally valid psychology.


35
4
The Progress of Mankind
Bret A. Moore
Alfred Adler’s paper “The Progress of Mankind” was originally published in 
1937. For Adlerians, this is a memorable year as it is the last year he edited the 
International Journal of Individual Psychology and the year his body was laid to 
rest. As I read this paper, I couldn’t help but wonder if Adler somehow knew that 
his final minutes were fast approaching. Although the main focus of this paper is 
on how social interest is connected to the continued evolution of man and soci-
ety, Adler touched on the philosophical question of what man leaves behind after 
death. Regarding the motivations and striving of previous generations with ade-
quate social interest, he stated, “This is the inheritance from our forebears which 
falls to us for administration. It is their contribution in which their spirit lives on 
immortally after the body has fallen.” For those who have not pondered or ques-
tioned the importance of social connection and decided to follow the useless trail 
of life, he wondered, “What happened to the earthly life of those who contributed 
nothing, or who interfered with the developmental process? The answer is: It has 
disappeared. Nothing from their lives can be found.”
Although I recognize the above may be a tad melodramatic, the underly-
ing message is very real and serious. The message is one that Adler put forth in 
almost all of his writings since his “split” with Freud; man can only find meaning 
and purpose and society can only progress within the context of social collabora-
tion, which includes working toward similar goals.
How can this permanently fixed tenant of Adler’s theory be placed into a con-
temporary context? Consider the current state of affairs of the United States.3
At the time of this writing, the United States is dealing with several crises. The 
economy is at its lowest point in decades, the eventual design and functionality 
of health care is uncertain, and a colossal oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico threat-
ens the solvency of an entire section of the country and the survival of a delicate 
3	 The author chose to focus on the United States as the example of how democracy can be strength-
ened by social interconnectedness and collaboration. This was due to space and time limitations. 
Without question, the leadership of other countries could have been used.

36	
Bret A. Moore
ecosystem. The question that invariably surfaces on television and radio and in 
coffee houses and living rooms across the nation is “What progress are we mak-
ing?” The answer is usually one of disappointment, frustration, and uncertainty. 
To understand this tone one needs to look no further than to the leaders of the 
country.
If Adler was right and that progress only happens when all people work 
together toward common goals, then it is no wonder why average citizens of the 
United States feel angry and hopeless. Effective examples of unity and collabo-
ration between political leaders within the halls of the US government are the 
exception and not the rule. For various reasons, so many that the limits of this 
paper do not allow analysis, the two dominant parties of the federal government 
work primarily in opposition to each other instead of in partnership and collabo-
ration. And as Adler and common sense tells us, progress will be stymied and 
unnecessary suffering will continue.
One can argue that dissention and stubborn discourse are essential to the 
survival of a democracy. However, it must be done without any personal gain 
or ill will toward others. If it is done within the context of true social interest 
and by the selflessness of those entrusted to represent American citizens, then 
expedient and meaningful progress has a chance. Unfortunately, it has become 
apparent that disagreement within the political system of the United States is 
fueled by personal reward (e.g., ego, money, power) and the instinctual desire to 
defend one’s beliefs no matter how much those beliefs are bathed in private ver-
sus common logic. And it is troubling that there is no reason to believe that this 
tendency will change as leaders are imperfect humans and are not versed in the 
psychological, social, and yes, the political principles of Individual Psychology.
As in most other areas of daily life, Adler’s principles of social interconnect-
edness are relevant to successful leadership. It is my hope that, somehow, leaders 
who are chosen to represent the masses consider their own legacies. What will 
they leave behind? Will the knowledge of their existence, or at least the positive 
impact of their existence, be nonexistent within a few generations? Or, will the 
positive effects of their selfless sacrifices made in collaboration with others rever-
berate infinitely? It is my hope that the latter will be the case. One only needs 
to look at Adler himself to understand the lasting effects that cooperation and 
personal sacrifice have on a society.

	
	
The Progress of Mankind	
37
The Progress of Mankind4
Alfred Adler
The question of whether progress of mankind is possible, probable, impos-
sible, or certain moves everyone today more than ever. But even regarding 
the meaning of progress there is disagreement. The explanation for this is 
probably that people in general tend to overlook the larger contexts, and to 
regard all problems, including scientific ones, from their own, usually too 
narrow, personal perspective. This is also true for the problem of progress.
Everyone subordinates all experiences and problems to his own concep-
tion. This conception is usually a tacit assumption and as such unknown to 
the person. Yet he lives and dies for the inferences he draws from such a con-
ception. It is amusing, and sad at the same time, to see how even scientists—
especially philosophers, sociologists, and psychologists—are caught in this net. 
Individual Psychology is no exception, in that it also has its assumptions, its 
conception of life, its style of life. But it differs in that it is well aware of this fact.
Basic Assumptions of Individual Psychology
Individual Psychology was the first school of psychology to break with the 
assumption of inner forces, such as instincts, drives, unconsciousness, etc., 
as irrational material. When it comes to the understanding and appraisal of 
an individual or a group, this break has proved most helpful. On the positive 
side, Individual Psychology makes the following assumptions:
Individual Psychology has established the presupposition, against which 
no argument can be found, of the unity and self-consistency of the personality.
Individual Psychology finds its firm, rational field of activity in the man-
ner in which the always unique individual behaves towards the changing 
problems of life. Decisive for his behavior is the individual’s opinion of him-
self and of the en­vironment with which he has to cope.
Individual Psychology assumes further the individual’s striving for suc-
cess in the solution of his problems, this striving being anchored in the very 
structure of life. But the judgment of what constitutes success is again left to 
the opinion of the individual.
Our criterion for appraising a specific variant, whether a given individual 
or a group, is always the direction towards the ascending development and 
welfare of mankind. In other words, it is the degree and kind of social interest 
necessary to arrive at this goal of general welfare and upward development.
4	 This paper appeared originally in 1937, the year of Adler’s death, in German, under the title “Ist 
Fortschritt der Menschheit moglich? wahrscheinlich? unmoglich? sicher?” (Int. Z. Indiv. Psychol., 
15, 1–4). Reprinted from The Journal of Individual Psychology, Volume XIII, Number 1, May, 1957.

38	
Bret A. Moore
The weightiest reason for this assumption is our finding that the indi-
vidual is faced exclusively with such problems as can be solved only with 
sufficient social interest. He may have had this from childhood, or may have 
acquired it later. All prob­lems of life merge into the three social problems of 
neighborly love, work, and sexual love. One finds a degree of social in­terest, 
although this is usually inadequate, in all men, with the exception of idiots, 
and even in animals. We therefore feel justified in assuming that this social 
interest which is demonstrated throughout life is rooted in the germ cell. But 
it is rooted as a potentiality, not as an actual ability.
Social interest, like all innate human potentialities, will develop in accor-
dance with the individual’s self-consistent style of life.
The style of life arises in the child out of his creative power, i.e., from the 
way he perceives the world and from what appears to him as success.
Such a foundation of a psychology greatly supports the cer­tainty of the 
observer. Firstly, since the assumptions are made explicit, he gains certainty 
in that he knows and understands them well and can check them at any time. 
Secondly, he is especially protected from false conclusions and mistaken apprais-
als regarding an individual or a group, because he is forced to seek the existing 
degree of social interest in all the expressive movements, personality traits, and 
symptoms. This latter advantage he owes to the basic view of the unity and self-
consistency of the personality in thinking, feeling, willing, and acting.
The Idea of Progress
From our basic assumptions there follows an important conclusion bearing 
on the problem of the progress of mankind.
We may define human progress as a function of a higher development of 
social interest. Admittedly the level of social interest is presently still low, as 
indicated by such phrases as “Why should I love my neighbor?” and “After 
me the de­luge.” But social interest is continually pressing and growing. For 
this reason, no matter how dark the times may be, in the long-range view 
there is the assurance of the higher develop­ment of the individual and the 
group. Social interest is con­tinually growing; human progress is a function 
of the higher development of social interest; therefore, human progress will 
be inevitable as long as mankind exists.
Three Prospective Considerations
In the following we wish to support through three brief prospects the 
view that evolution leads to the success of social interest. Such a view gives 
Individual Psychology the imprint of a gay and optimistic science.5
5	 The expression “gay science” is undoubtedly borrowed from Nietzsche’s book of that title. (Original 
footnote by H. & R. Ansbacher.)

	
	
The Progress of Mankind	
39
(1) The first prospect is in the nature of an anecdote. I once read it in an 
American article, the author of which I have unfortunately forgotten, and it 
moved me very strongly. A multimillionaire who had spent a hard youth in 
poverty and misery wanted to protect his descendants from similar depriva-
tions. He consulted a lawyer and told him the size of his fortune, as well as 
that he wanted to protect his descendants to approximately the tenth genera-
tion. The lawyer took his pen and began to figure. When he was finished he 
turned to his client and said: “Your fortune is so great that it is com­pletely 
sufficient to provide for your descendants adequately up to the tenth genera-
tion. But do you know that if you do this, you are protecting children, each 
of whom is related to over 1,000 persons of your generation as closely as he 
is related to you?”
It follows from this consideration, if we widen our view to include 100 and 
more generations, that everything that people have contributed, even if only 
in the apparent interest of their own families, is irrevocably for the benefit of 
the whole of mankind. This “equalization process” may be slowed down at 
times for lack of useful contributions, but it cannot be stopped.
(2) A consideration from my forthcoming book Social In­terest; a Challenge 
to Mankind supplements the first. I raise the question, “What do we find when 
we are born into this world?” The answer is: We find all the previous useful 
con­tributions which have been supplied by our forebears. We find human 
beings in their bodily and mental development, social institutions, art, sci-
ence, lasting traditions, social rela­tions, values, schooling, etc. We receive all 
these and build upon them, advancing, improving, and changing, always in 
the sense of a further durability. This is the inheritance from our forebears 
which falls to us for administration. It is their contribution in which their 
spirit lives on immortally after the body has fallen.
What happened to the earthly life of those who contributed nothing, or 
who interfered with the developmental process? The answer is: It has disap-
peared. Nothing from their lives can be found. Does this not appear like an 
inviolable law aimed against all who supply no contributions for later genera­
tions? Their trace on earth is lost forever.
This train of thought, against which it would be difficult to find any coun-
ter-argument, is closely related to my findings that the life of the individual 
as well as of the group presents itself as a “compensation process.” This pro-
cess attempts to overcome felt or alleged “inferiorities,” in a physical or psy­
chological manner. One goal of this compensatory striving is the steadily 
growing culture of mankind which collects all useful and productive contri-
butions of the various generations and passes them on.
The power of social interest which is inherent to the life of mankind, 
which as innate aptitude determines human nature in great part, and which 
is lacking only in the feeble-minded, comes to life and becomes productive 

40	
Bret A. Moore
through the creative power of the child, as pointed out above. Although not 
strong enough at present to solve human difficulties for the benefit of the 
entire human family, the existing social interest is nevertheless so powerful 
that individuals and groups must refer to it. Human judgment can do no 
more than consider whether the line of a proposed movement will ultimately 
merge into the well-being of man in general. Political move­ments, the utili-
zation of the advances of science and tech­nology, laws, and social norms are 
included in this evaluation. Claims of interest in the well-being of the com-
munity, how­ever, have power in the long run only if their professed accord 
with the general well-being finds confirmation.
(3) A third prospect has a much more serious background but leads to the 
same result, namely, that progress is forced upon men. This consideration is 
that the finality of the in­dividual life merges into the progress of mankind. 
Even though we are tragically affected by withered and rapidly withering life, 
we realize that its rejuvenation in the next generation, enriched by the ear-
lier generation, forces new contributions and progress. Rejuvenation raises 
new problems and meets them. No heredity has matured for these problems 
because they have never arisen before. Again and again the creative power of 
the child and of the adult come under new tensions until new solutions have 
been brought into being and useless ones have been removed.
Each new generation struggles afresh with old and new tasks and, pitted 
against the environment, is forced as a whole to maintain its equilibrium 
(Cannon) physically and psycho­logically with growing senses and growing 
understanding. This equilibrium can be gained only if the sum of the ener-
gies of the individual, supported through the growth of a rational picture of 
the world, is successful in bringing the problems of the environment closer 
to a solution.
In the holistic relationship between man and cosmos prog­ress will rule 
until the decline of the human family. “The environment molds man, but 
man molds the environment” (Pestalozzi). With the limitation of our senses 
and our under­standing of the ultimate things, rational science speaks the last 
word. At this point, a strong word is spoken by Individual Psychology with its 
emphasis on the whole and on social interest.

41
5
On the Origin of the 
Striving for Superiority 
and of Social Interest
Richard E. Watts
Adler died in 1937 having created a personality theory and approach to therapy 
so far ahead of its time that many contemporary psychological approaches are 
only now “discovering” many of Adler’s fundamental conclusions, but typically 
without reference to or acknowledgment of Adler (Watts, 1999). In reading his 
1933 paper “On the Origin of Striving for Superiority and Social Interest,” one 
can see the contemporary relevance of Adler’s thinking in several streams of 
psychological thinking. In particular, I would like to address Adler’s thoughts 
on striving and gemeinschaftsgefuhl (community feeling/social interest) as evinc-
ing Adlerian psychology’s position as arguably the first positive psychology in the 
20th century. Prochaska and Norcross (2010), echoing Ellenberger (1970), stated 
that many of “Adler’s ideas have quietly permeated modern psychological think-
ing, often without notice. It would not be easy to find another author from which 
so much has been borrowed from all sides without acknowledgment than Alfred 
Adler” (p. 91). This appears particularly true in the positive psychology move-
ment. Adlerian ideas are replete in the positive psychology literature, but there is 
no substantive mention of Adler or Adlerian psychology. In this brief introduc-
tion addressing the contemporary relevance of Adler’s ideas, I will first address 
striving for perfection or superiority, next gemeinschaftsgefuhl, and finally the 
remarkable common ground between Adler’s ideas and the contemporary posi-
tive psychology.
Striving for Perfection or Superiority
Adler’s understanding of “striving” evolved over time, and he used various words 
like completion, mastery, perfection, and superiority to describe how humans seek 

42	
Richard E. Watts
to move from “the present situation, as observed and interpreted, to a better one, 
one that was superior to the present status” (Manaster & Corsini, 1982, p. 41). 
According to Adler, the central human directionality is toward competence or 
self-mastery, what Adler called striving for perfection or superiority. This is the 
individual’s creative and compensatory answer to the normal and universal feel-
ings of insignificance and disempowerment, and the accompanying beliefs that 
one is less than what one should be (i.e., feelings of inferiority). Thus, striving for 
perfection or superiority is the natural human desire to move from a perceived 
negative position to a perceived positive one.
This concept of striving or teleological/teleonomical movement is seen in 
the writings of various personality theorists including Kurt Goldstein, Karen 
Horney, Carl Jung, Abraham Maslow, Otto Rank, Carl Rogers, and Robert White 
(Jorgensen & Nafstad, 2004; Manaster & Corsini, 1982). One can find similar 
ideas in various contemporary theoretical perspectives, including constructivist, 
evolutionary, and positive psychologies (Linley & Joseph, 2004; Mahoney, 2003; 
Rasmussen, 2010; Snyder, Lopez, & Pedrotti, 2011). For example, in discussing 
happiness and human potential, Ryan and Deci (2001) described optimal func-
tioning and development as “the striving for perfection that represents the real-
ization of one’s true potential” (p. 144).
All of the aforementioned personality theorists agree with Adler that humans 
are striving, seeking to actualize potential, and in the process of “becoming,” 
and most of the theories created by these theorists are listed as early exemplars of 
positive psychology in that literature. Adler’s theory, however, is not found in the 
various lists; the positive psychology literature typically lists Maslow and Rogers 
as the earliest exemplars, even though Adler clearly preceded both in his formu-
lation of an optimistic, growth-oriented psychology.
Gemeinschaftsgefuhl (Community Feeling/Social Interest)
Adlerian psychology is a relational theory. It asserts that humans are socially 
embedded and that knowledge is relationally distributed. Adler stressed that per-
sons cannot be properly understood apart from their social context. Consequently, 
the Adlerian perspective on the tasks of life—love, society, work, spirituality, and 
self—is a strongly relational one. These tasks of life address intimate love rela-
tionships, relationships with friends and fellow beings in society, our relation-
ships at work, our relationship with self, and our relationship with God or the 
universe (Carlson, Watts, & Maniacci, 2006; Watts, 2003; Watts, Williamson, & 
Williamson, 2004).
According to Manaster and Corsini (1982), the most unique and valuable concept 
in Adlerian psychology is Gemeinschaftsgefuhl. The cardinal tenet of Adler’s theory, 
it is typically translated as “social interest or community feeling” and emphasizes 
the relational, social-contextual nature of the theory. I believe both community 

	
	
On the Origin of the Striving for Superiority and of Social Interest	
43
feeling and social interest are needed for a holistic understanding of gemeinschafts-
gefuhl; that is, community feeling addresses the affective and motivational aspects 
and social interest the cognitive and behavioral ones. Thus, true community feeling 
(e.g., sense of belonging, empathy, caring, compassion, acceptance of others) results 
in social interest (thoughts and behaviors that contribute to the common good, the 
good of the whole at both micro- and macro-systemic levels); true social interest is 
motivated by community feeling (Watts & Eckstein, 2009).
A significant difference between Adler and other personality theorists regard-
ing the aforementioned “striving” is the role of community feeling/social interest. 
Adler emphasized that striving for perfection or superiority occurs in a relational 
context and this striving may occur in either a socially useful or a socially useless 
manner. How one strives, and the manifest behaviors, are predicated on one’s 
community feeling/social interest. Thus, in Adler’s mature theoretical formula-
tion, as evidenced in the 1933 paper, striving for perfection means that one is 
striving toward greater competence, both for oneself and the common good of 
humanity. This is a horizontal striving that is useful both for self and for oth-
ers, seeking to build both self- and other-esteem. Striving for superiority means 
to move in a self-centered manner, seeking to be superior over others. This is a 
vertical striving that primarily pursues personal gain without contribution to or 
consideration of others and the common good. The manner one chooses to strive 
constitutes the Adlerian criterion for mental health: healthy development follows 
the goal of community feeling and social interest; maladjustment is the conse-
quence of pursuing narcissistic self-interest (Manaster & Corsini, 1982).
Recent research by Leak and Leak (2006) and Barlow, Tobin, and Schmidt 
(2009) indicated that social interest is related to numerous aspects of positive 
psychology (e.g., hope, other-centered values, optimism, prosocial moral reason-
ing, psychosocial maturity, subjective well-being). Nevertheless, positive psy-
chology authors appear to have ignored an important early positive psychology 
construct: Adler’s Gemeinschaftsgefuhl.
Adlerian Theory and Positive Psychology
Snyder and Lopez (2002) identified the positive psychology movement as a “new 
approach” because “psychology and its sister disciplines . . . focus on the weak-
nesses in humankind” (p. ix). In affirming the positive qualities of humankind, 
the editors state, “no science, including psychology, looks seriously at this posi-
tive side of people” [emphasis in original, p. x]. Seligman (2002) noted that the 
goal of positive psychology is to move from a preoccupation with pathology to 
a more balanced perspective that includes the idea of “a fulfilled individual and 
a thriving community” by emphasizing that building strengths in people “is 
the most potent weapon in the arsenal of therapy” (p. 3). It is remarkable that 
Seligman’s goal is exactly the evolution of Adler’s theory development. Prior to 

44	
Richard E. Watts
World War I, Adler was more focused on deficits, pathology, and remediation. 
Adler’s mature theory, however, focused on strengths, healthy human develop-
ment, and prevention.
Given Adler’s evolution from a deficit and pathology focus to one emphasiz-
ing strength, health, and prevention, it is not surprising to find significant com-
mon ground between Adlerian theory and the positive psychology movement. 
Although not an exhaustive list, Carlson, Watts, and Maniacci (2006) identified 
the following shared emphases: normal human growth and development; pre-
vention/education rather than merely remediation; moving away from the medi-
cal model perspective; a focus on mental health and clients’ strengths, resources, 
and abilities rather than psychopathology and clients’ disabilities; and holism, 
spirituality, wellness, multiculturalism, and social justice. Adler’s 1933 paper on 
striving and social interest alludes to several of the emphases listed above.
Cowen and Kilmer (2002) criticized the positive psychology literature for its 
lack of attention to prior literature regarding prevention and wellness, its lack of 
a cohesive undergirding theoretical framework, and its lack of a developmen-
tal perspective. Adlerian theory has a rich literature addressing prevention and 
healthy development, and could serve as a useful cohesive theoretical framework 
that Cowen and Kilmer indicated is lacking in positive psychology.
Adlerian psychology is a growth model that emphasizes the holistic, phe-
nomenological, teleological, field-theoretically, and socially embedded aspects of 
human functioning. It is an optimistic perspective that views people as unique, 
creative, capable, and responsible. Adlerians disdain the deficit or “medical 
model” orientation to maladjustment, preferring a nonpathological perspective. 
Thus, clients are not sick (as in having a disease) and are not identified or “labeled” 
by their diagnoses. Because Adlerians believe the growth model of personality 
makes more sense than the sickness model, they see clients as discouraged rather 
than sick. Thus, Adlerians are not about “curing” anything; therapy is a process 
of encouragement. In fact, Adlerians consider encouragement a crucial aspect of 
human growth and development (Carlson, Watts, & Maniacci, 2006; Manaster & 
Corsini, 1982; Mosak & Maniacci, 1999).
Adlerian therapists focus on developing a respectful, egalitarian, optimistic, 
and growth-oriented therapeutic alliance that emphasizes clients’ assets, abili-
ties, resources, and strengths. Watts (1998) noted that Adler’s descriptions of 
therapist-modeled social interest look very similar to Rogers’s descriptions of the 
core facilitative conditions of client change: congruence, unconditional positive 
regard, and empathic understanding. The above qualities and characteristics of 
the therapeutic alliance are embedded in what Adlerians have historically called 
encouragement, or the therapeutic modeling of social interest (Carlson, Watts, & 
Maniacci, 2006; Mosak and Maniacci, 1999). Stressing the importance of encour-
agement in therapy, Adler (1956) stated, “Altogether, in every step of the treat-
ment, we must not deviate from the path of encouragement” (p. 342). In addition, 

	
	
On the Origin of the Striving for Superiority and of Social Interest	
45
Dreikurs (1967) stated that therapeutic success was largely dependent upon “(the 
therapist’s) ability to provide encouragement” and failure generally occurred 
“due to the inability of the therapist to encourage” (pp. 12–13). Encouragement 
skills include demonstrating concern for clients through active listening and 
empathy, communicating respect for and confidence in clients, focusing on cli-
ents’ strengths, assets, and resources, helping clients generate perceptual alter-
natives for discouraging fictional beliefs, focusing on efforts and progress, and 
helping clients see the humor in life experiences (Carlson, Watts, & Maniacci, 
2006; Watts & Pietrzak, 2000).
Adler and many subsequent Adlerians have focused on prevention rather than 
simply remediation and, consequently, they have been extensively involved in 
education. Throughout his career, Adler was actively involved in public health, 
medical and psychological prevention, and social welfare. He wrote, lectured on, 
and advocated for children at risk, women’s rights and the equality of the sexes, 
women’s rights to abortion, adult education, teacher training, community mental 
health, family counseling and education and the establishment of family coun-
seling clinics, experimental schools for public students, and brief psychother-
apy. Adlerians have continued Adler’s emphasis on prevention and education. 
For example, they have been perhaps the strongest proponents of child guidance 
and parent and family education, and have written extensively on parent and 
family education, couple-enrichment, and teacher education (Carlson, Watts, & 
Maniacci, 2006; Mosak & Maniacci, 1999).
Conclusion
As noted earlier, the basic tenets of Adlerian theory and therapy permeate con-
temporary psychology, typically without acknowledgment of Adler’s pioneering 
influence (Mosak & Maniacci, 1999). This appears to be evident in the positive 
psychology literature as well. Seligman (2002), considered the “Father of Positive 
Psychology,” stated: “I well recognize that positive psychology is not a new idea. 
It has many distinguished ancestors” (p. 7). The two examples he mentions are 
Gordon Allport and Abraham Maslow. I can find no evidence of Seligman ever 
acknowledging Adler’s pioneering positive psychology. As the 1933 paper on 
striving and social interest demonstrates, Adler clearly addressed key positive 
psychology tenets long before the “ancestors” (e.g., Allport, Maslow, Rogers) typi-
cally identified in the positive psychology literature (Jorgensen & Nafstad, 2004; 
Seligman, 2002; Seligman, Steen, Park, & Peterson, 2005; Snyder & Lopez, 2002; 
Snyder, Lopez, & Pedrotti, 2011). Thus, Adlerian theory is clearly relevant for 
today’s psychological zeitgeist because it has evinced the characteristics of posi-
tive psychology long before the emergence of the positive psychology movement. 
As Bitter (1998) suggested, “the more the fields of psychology and psychother-
apy develop, the more relevant the ideas and processes of Adlerian psychology 

46	
Richard E. Watts
become” (p. 412). All things considered, one can plausibly argue that Alfred 
Adler should be acknowledged as the “Grandfather of Positive Psychology.”
References
Adler, A. (1956). The individual psychology of Alfred Adler (H. L. Ansbacher & R. R. 
Ansbacher, Eds.). New York: Harper Torchbooks.
Barlow, P. J., Tobin, D. J., & Schmidt, M. M. (2009). Social interest and positive psychology: 
Positively aligned. Journal of Individual Psychology, 65, 191–202.
Bitter, J. R. (1998). Thanks for the opportunity. Journal of Individual Psychology, 54, 411–412.
Carlson, J., Watts, R. E., & Maniacci, M. (2006). Adlerian therapy: Theory and practice. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Cowen, E. L., & Kilmer, R. P. (2002). “Positive psychology”: Some plusses and some open 
issues. Journal of Community Psychology, 30, 449–460.
Dreikurs, R. (1967). Psychodynamics, psychotherapy, and counseling. Chicago, IL: Alfred 
Adler Institute of Chicago.
Ellenberger, H. (1970). The discovery of the unconscious: The history and evolution of 
dynamic psychiatry. New York: Basic Books.
Jorgensen, I. S., & Nafstad, H. E. (2004). Positive psychology: Historical, philosophical, and 
epistemological perspectives. In S. Joseph & P. A. Linley (Eds.), Positive psychology in 
practice (pp. 15–34). New York: Wiley.
Leak, G. K., & Leak, K. C. (2006). Adlerian social interest and positive psychology: A con-
ceptual and empirical investigation. Journal of Individual Psychology, 62, 207–223.
Linley, P. A., & Joseph, S. (Eds.). (2004). Positive psychology in practice. New York: Wiley.
Mahoney, M. J. (2003). Constructive psychotherapy: A practical guide. New York: Guilford.
Manaster, G. J., & Corsini, R. J. (1982). Individual psychology: Theory and practice. Itasca, 
IL: Peacock.
Mosak, H. H., & Maniacci, M. (1999). A primer of Adlerian psychology: The analytic-­
behavioral-­cognitive psychology of Alfred Adler. Philadelphia, PA: Accelerated 
Development/Taylor and Francis.
Prochaska, J. O., & Norcross, J. C. (2010). Systems of psychotherapy: A transtheoretical analy-
sis (7th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Rasmussen, P. R. (2010). The quest to feel good. New York: Routledge/Taylor & Francis.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2001). On happiness and human potentials: A review of research 
on hedonic and eudaimonic well-being. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 141–166.
Seligman, M. E. P. (2002). Positive psychology, positive prevention, and positive therapy. 
In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive psychology (pp. 3–9). New 
York: Oxford.
Seligman, M. E. P., Steen, T. A., Park, N., & Peterson, C. (2005). Positive psychology prog-
ress: Empirical validation of interventions. American Psychologist, 60, 410–421.
Snyder, C. R., & Lopez, S. J. (2002). Preface. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook 
of positive psychology (pp. ix–x). New York: Oxford.
Snyder, C. R., Lopez, S. J., & Pedrotti, J. T. (2011). Positive psychology: The scientific and 
practical explorations of human strengths (2nd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Watts, R. E. (1998). The remarkable similarity between Rogers’s core conditions and Adler’s 
social interest. Journal of Individual Psychology, 54, 4–9.
Watts, R. E. (1999). The vision of Adler: An introduction. In R. E. Watts & J. Carlson (Eds.), 
Interventions and strategies in counseling and psychotherapy (pp. 1–13). Philadelphia, 
PA: Accelerated Development/Taylor & Francis.

	
	
On the Origin of the Striving for Superiority and of Social Interest	
47
Watts, R. E. (2003). Adlerian therapy as a relational constructivist approach. The Family 
Journal: Counseling and Therapy for Couples and Families, 11, 139–147.
Watts, R. E., & Eckstein, D. (2009). Individual Psychology. In American Counseling 
Association (Ed.), The ACA encyclopedia of counseling (pp. 281–283). Alexandria, VA: 
American Counseling Association.
Watts, R. E., & Pietrzak, D. (2000). Adlerian “encouragement” and the therapeutic pro-
cess of solution-focused brief therapy. Journal of Counseling and Development, 78, 
442–447.
Watts, R. E., Williamson, J., & Williamson, D. (2004). Adlerian psychology: A relational 
constructivist approach. Adlerian Yearbook: 2004 (pp. 7–31). London: Adlerian 
Society (UK) and Institute for Individual Psychology.

48	
Richard E. Watts
On the Origin of the Striving for Superiority and of Social Interest (1933)
Alfred Adler
It sounds almost like a timely problem to speak on the striving for perfection 
and the roots of social interest. For Individual Psychology, however, it is an 
old problem. I may well say that in these two questions and their solution 
rests the entire value and the entire significance of Individual Psychology.
The emphasis on these two questions has never been lacking in our work, 
but you, like myself, will probably have felt the need to have the questions for 
once treated in a fundamental form, so that we can avoid the vacillation and 
uncertainty which we have met occasionally among our friends, still more 
often among our opponents. I don’t believe that outside our circle it is very 
well known what we understand by striving for perfection. I am obliged to 
add further supplements to the knowledge up to now. This knowledge can-
not be comprehended immediately; it cannot be found through an analysis 
of the visible phenomena and facts, as, altogether, something new can never 
be created through analysis. Here we would have parts in our hands instead 
of the whole. To us Individual Psychologists, the whole tells much more than 
the analysis of the parts. Also, nothing new can emerge through synthesis if 
one simply puts the parts together.
The Striving for Perfection
Where must we begin with our considerations, if we want to get beyond the 
position of what has already been reached? Regarding the striving for perfec-
tion, or as it manifests itself sometimes, the striving for superiority, or the 
striving for power which authors of less understanding sometimes attribute 
to us, some few have always known about it. But their knowledge was not 
so thorough that they could communicate it to a larger number, or could 
illuminate the fundamental significance of this striving for the structure of 
the entire personality. It took Individual Psychology to point out that every 
individual is seized by this striving for perfection, that we find it in every 
individual. It is not at all necessary first to inoculate man with the desire to 
develop into superman, as the daring attempt of Nietzsche has maintained. 
Individual Psychology has shown that every individual is seized by the striv-
ing for perfection, by the upward striving. He who can read between the lines 
will have realized that we are continuously aware of the fundamental impor-
tance of the striving for perfection. In the consideration of a case of illness we 
have always uncovered the individual direction of this striving.
And yet one question remains which always returns whenever this prob-
lem appears, a question emphasized by friends and opponents, a question 

	
	
On the Origin of the Striving for Superiority and of Social Interest	
49
which perhaps in our circle as well has not yet been completely clarified. I 
shall attempt today to bring it nearer to a solution because I have always con-
sidered it necessary to create on this point clarity for all.
Part of Evolutionary Principle
Thus I should first of all like to stress that the striving for perfection is innate. 
However, it is not innate in a concrete way, since we find it again and again 
in the various individuals in thousandfold variation. It is not innate in the 
sense of a drive which would later in life be capable of bringing everything 
to completion and which only needs to unfold itself. Rather, the striving for 
perfection is innate as something which belongs to life, a striving, an urge, a 
developing, a something without which one could not even conceive of life.
The scientists, especially the biological scientists, have always stressed this 
evolutionary principle in the body. Especially since Darwin, Lamarck, and 
others, it is a matter of course to take the evolutionary thought into account. 
If we go a step further here and emphasize more strongly what these inge-
nious researchers envisioned, we want to state: To live means to develop.
The human mind is accustomed to bring all flow into a form, to regard 
not the movement but the frozen movement, movement which has become 
form. However, we have always been intent to resolve into movement what we 
comprehend as form. Thus we must ascertain for the single individual of our 
time as well as for the development of living creatures in general that to live 
means to develop. Everyone knows that the complete man originates from an 
ovular cell. But one should also properly understand that in this ovular cell 
rest the fundaments for the development.
How life came on this earth is an uncertain matter; possibly we shall never 
reach a final answer. We could assume that there is life even in inanimate matter, 
as for example the ingenious attempt of Smuts6 has done. Such a view becomes 
quite plausible through modern physics which shows that the electrons move 
around the proton. Whether this view will be further vindicated, we do not 
know. But it is certain that our concept of life as development can no longer be 
doubted. Thereby movement is ascertained at the same time, movement toward 
self-preservation, procreation, contact with the surrounding world, victorious 
contact in order not to perish. We must take our point of departure from this 
path of development, of a continuous active adaptation to the demands of the 
external world, if we want to understand in which direction life moves.
We must keep in mind that we are dealing here with something primary, 
something which adhered already to primordial life. It is always a matter of 
overcoming, of the existence of the individual and the human race, of estab-
lishing a favorable relationship between the individual and the surrounding 
6	 Smuts, J. C. (1926). Holism and evolution. New York: Macmillan.

50	
Richard E. Watts
world. This coercion to carry out a better adaptation can never end. Herein lies 
the foundation for our view of the striving for superiority.
Probably much of what I have just discussed seems familiar, and it certainly 
was also known to others. Individual Psychology has only the one merit, to 
have established a connection and to have shown which form this force, called 
life, takes in each single individual and how it prevails. We are in the midst of 
the stream of evolution but notice it as little as the rotation of the earth. In this 
cosmic relation, in which the life of the single individual is a part, the striving 
for victorious adaptation to the external world is a precondition. Even if one 
doubted that the striving for superiority existed already at the beginning of 
life, the course of the billions of years puts it clearly before us that today the 
striving for perfection is an innate factor which is present in every man.
Individual Conceptions of Perfection
This consideration may show us something else. None of us knows which is 
the only correct way to perfection. Mankind has variously made the attempt 
to imagine this final goal of human development. The best conception gained 
so far of this ideal elevation of mankind is the concept of God. There is no 
question but that the concept of God actually includes this movement toward 
perfection in the form of a goal, and that as a concrete goal of perfection 
it corresponds best to man’s dark longing to reach perfection. Of course, it 
seems to me that each person imagines his God differently. Thus there are 
conceptions of God which from the outset are not equal to the principle of 
perfection. But of the purest formulation of God we can say: Here the con-
crete formulation of the goal of perfection has been accomplished.
There are, of course, countless attempts among men to imagine this goal 
of perfection differently. We physicians who deal with failures, with per-
sons who have fallen sick from a neurosis or psychosis, who have become 
delinquents, alcoholics, etc., we see this goal of superiority in them also, but 
in another direction, one which contradicts reason in so far as we cannot 
acknowledge in it a correct goal of perfection. When, for example, someone 
attempts to concretize this goal by wanting to dominate over others, such 
a goal of perfection appears to us incapable to steer the individual and the 
group. The reason is that not every one could make this goal of perfection 
his task, because he would be forced to come into conflict with the coercion 
of evolution, to violate reality, and to defend himself full of anxiety against 
the truth and its confessors. When we find persons who have set themselves 
as a goal of perfection to lean on others, this goal of perfection also appears 
to us to contradict reason. When someone perhaps finds the goal of perfec-
tion in leaving the tasks of life unsolved in order not to suffer certain defeats 
which would be the opposite of the goal of perfection, this goal also appears to 
us altogether unsuited, although it appears to many persons as acceptable.

	
	
On the Origin of the Striving for Superiority and of Social Interest	
51
Let us enlarge our prospect and raise the question: What has become of 
those creatures who posited for themselves an incorrect goal of perfection, 
whose active adaptation has not succeeded because they took the incorrect 
path, who did not find the path toward the advancement of all (Sinn des 
Lebens [A1933b])? Here the extinction of species, races, tribes, families, and 
thousands of individual persons of whom nothing has remained, teaches us 
how necessary it is for the individual to find a halfway correct path to the 
goal of some kind of perfection. After all, it is understood in our day and by 
the individual among us that the goal of perfection gives the direction for the 
development of his entire personality, for all his expressive movements, his 
perceiving, his thinking, his feeling, his view of the world. It is equally clear 
and understandable for every Individual Psychologist that a direction which 
deviates in a considerable degree from the truth must turn out to the detri-
ment of the one in question, if not to his doom. This being the case, it would 
be a lucky find if we knew more about the direction which we have to take 
since we are, after all, embedded in the stream of evolution and must follow 
it. Here as well, Individual Psychology has performed a great achievement, 
as it has with the ascertainment of the general striving for perfection. From 
thousandfold experience it has gained a view which is capable of understand-
ing to some degree the direction toward ideal perfection, through its ascer-
tainment of the norms of social interest.
Social Interest
Regarding social interest, you will also have observed certain fluctuations in 
the Individual Psychology literature, and it is for this reason that I wanted to 
talk about it. I do not wish to say much about the usual and thoughtless case 
which is occasionally found within our circle among beginners, and outside 
our circle—the mistake of understanding what we call community as a pri-
vate circle of our time, or a larger circle which one should join. Social interest 
means much more. Particularly it means feeling with the whole, sub specie 
aeternitatis, under the aspect of eternity. It means a striving for a form of 
community which must be thought of as everlasting, as it could be thought 
of if mankind had reached the goal of perfection. It is never a present-day 
community or society, nor a political or religious form. Rather the goal which 
is best suited for perfection would have to be a goal which signifies the ideal 
community of all mankind, the ultimate fulfillment of evolution.
Normative Ideal
Of course, one will ask, how do I know this? Certainly not from immedi-
ate experience. I must admit that those who find a piece of metaphys-
ics in Individual Psychology are right. Some praise this, other criticize it. 
Unfortunately, there are many who have an erroneous view of metaphysics, 

52	
Richard E. Watts
who would like to see everything eliminated from the life of mankind which 
they cannot comprehend immediately. But by doing so we would interfere 
with the possibilities of development, prevent every new thought. Every new 
idea lies beyond immediate experience; immediate experiences never yield 
anything new. Only a synthesizing idea can do this. Whether you call it 
speculation or transcendentalism, there is no science which does not have to 
enter the realm of metaphysics. I see no reason to be afraid of metaphysics; 
it has had a very great influence on human life and development. We are not 
blessed with the possession of the absolute truth, and on that account we are 
compelled to form theories for ourselves about our future, about the results 
of our actions, etc.
We conceive the idea of social interest, social feeling, as the ultimate form 
of mankind, a condition in which we imagine all questions of life, all relation-
ship to the external world as solved. It is a normative ideal, a direction-giving 
goal. This goal of perfection must contain the goal of an ideal community, 
because everything we find valuable in life, what exists and what will remain, 
is forever a product of this social feeling.
I want to repeat what I have mentioned in another connection. The new-
born child always finds in life only what the others have contributed to life, 
to welfare, to security. What we find when we enter our life is always the 
contribution of our forebears. This one fact alone could enlighten us as to 
how life will move on: We shall approach a condition of larger contributions, 
of greater ability to cooperate, where every individual presents himself more 
fully as a part of the whole—a condition for which of course all forms of our 
societal movement are trials, preliminary trials, and only those will endure 
which are situated in the direction of this ideal community.
We do not want to judge; only one thing we can say: A movement of the 
individual or a movement of the masses can for us pass as valuable only if it 
creates values for eternity, for the higher development of all mankind. Maybe 
you will understand this fact better if I raise once more the question: What 
happens to those persons who have contributed nothing? They have disap-
peared, have become extinct. There you see again how the force of evolution, 
how this urge to achieve a higher stage physically and mentally, how this urge 
extinguishes everything which does not go along and contributes nothing.
If one is a friend of formulations, one could say there is a basic law in devel-
opment which calls to those who are negating: Away with you; you do not 
understand what counts! Thus duration emphasizes itself, the eternal dura-
tion of the contribution of persons who have done something for the common 
good. Of course we are thoughtful enough not to assume that we have the key 
for telling in each case exactly what is calculated for eternity and what not. We 
are convinced that we can err, that only a very exact, objective investigation 

	
	
On the Origin of the Striving for Superiority and of Social Interest	
53
can decide, often also only the course of events. It is perhaps already a great 
step that we can avoid what does not contribute to the striving for perfection.
Social Context
I could talk more about this and show how all our functions are calculated 
not to disturb the community of man, to connect the individual with the 
community. To see means to receive, to make fertile that which falls on the 
retina. This is not only a physiological process; it shows the person as part of 
the whole, who takes and gives. In seeing, hearing, speaking we connect our-
selves with the others. Thus all functions of our organs are correctly devel-
oped only if they are not detrimental to the social interest.
We speak of virtue, and mean that one participates in the game; of vice, and 
mean that one disturbs cooperation. I could also point out how everything 
which signifies a failure is a failure because it disturbs the development of the 
community, whether we are dealing with problem children, neurotics, crimi-
nals, or cases of suicide. In all cases you see that the contribution is lacking.
In the entire history of mankind you will find no isolated persons. The 
development of mankind was possible only because mankind was a com-
munity and in striving for perfection strove for an ideal community. All 
movements, all functions of a person express whether or not he has found 
this direction in the stream of evolution which is characterized by the com-
munity ideal. The reason is that man is inviolably guided by the community 
ideal. He becomes impeded, punished, praised, and advanced by it, so that 
each individual becomes not only responsible for each deviation but must 
also suffer for it. This is a hard law, virtually a cruel law. Those who have 
already developed in themselves a strong social feeling constantly endeavour 
to ameliorate the hardships of anyone who proceeds erroneously. They do 
this as if they knew that here is a man who has missed the way for reasons 
which only Individual Psychology is able to demonstrate. If a man under-
stood how he erred, stepping out of the way of evolution, he would leave this 
course and join general humanity.
Innate Substratum
Finally, I should like to submit a thought which has much in its favor and 
which I should like you to consider. If you agree with my arguments, you 
will have to raise the question: Is social interest innate or must one bring it to 
man? Of course it is also innate, like the striving for perfection, except that 
it must be developed and can be developed only when the child is already in 
the midst of life.
Like the character traits which depend on it, social interest can come 
to life only in the social context. By social context, of course, is meant the 
child’s subjective understanding of the same. The decision [as to how he will 

54	
Richard E. Watts
interpret the essentially ambiguous social context] rests in the creative power 
of the child, which, however, is guided by the environment and educational 
measures, and influenced by the experience and evaluation of his body.7 
At the present stage of mankind’s psychological and possibly also physical 
development, we must consider the innate substratum of the social interest as 
too small, as not strong enough, to become effective or to develop without the 
benefit of social understanding. This is in contrast to abilities and functions 
which succeed almost all on their own, such as breathing. But with social 
interest we are far from having reached this stage. We have not developed it 
to the same extent as breathing. And yet we must expect the development of 
social interest so strongly in the ultimate goal of perfection that mankind of 
the future will possess and activate it like breathing.
Conclusion
What we have to do in the present critical state follows automatically. 
Unquestionably this consideration gives us a certain and firm foundation 
not only for the evaluation of a person and for the education of a child but 
also for the improvement and guidance of one who has gone astray. But 
this succeeds only through explanation and understanding. We must talk 
about it, because we are not certain whether every child and every adult 
knows where the way leads. This is why one must talk about it so long until 
perhaps in the course of thousands of years talking also will have become 
superfluous, as perhaps it has today become superfluous to talk about cor-
rect breathing.
The talking about social interest as belonging to the evolution of man, as 
a part of human life, and the awakening of the corresponding understanding 
is today being attended to by Individual Psychology. This is its fundamental 
significance, its claim to existence, and this is what represents its strength. 
Today everybody speaks about community and community feeling. We were 
not the very first, but we are the first to have strongly emphasized the basic 
nature of the social feelings.
The concept of community and community feeling can also be abused. But 
one who has properly understood knows that in the nature of community and 
community feeling rests an evolutionary factor which turns against every-
thing which resists this direction. He will be able to avoid the abuse of the 
concept of the community or to let himself be abused by others in its name.
7	 By “experience and evaluation of his body,” Adler means that the child is not directly influenced 
by his physique but by how he subjectively experiences and evaluates it. Thus a beautiful girl who 
feels that boys are attracted by her beauty rather than by her brains (for which she would like to be 
admired) will evaluate her beauty negatively. (Original footnote by H. & R. Ansbacher.)

	
	
On the Origin of the Striving for Superiority and of Social Interest	
55
This represents the practical value and the significance of Individual 
Psychology: It has clarified the fundamental significance of social interest for 
the development, the higher development, of the individual and of the whole 
of mankind.
Summary
Individual Psychology has shown that the striving for superiority and per-
fection is not limited to the characterization of certain individuals, nor is it 
brought to them from the outside; rather, it is given to every person and must 
be understood as innate, as a necessary and general foundation of the develop-
ment of every person.
The originators of the concept of evolution in the field of general organic 
life, such as Darwin and Lamarck, have pointed out that life must be under-
stood as movement toward a goal, and that this goal—the preservation of 
the individual and the species—is attained through the overcoming of resis-
tances with which the environment confronts the organism. Thus mastery 
of the environment appears to be inseparably connected with the concept of 
evolution. If this striving were not innate to the organism, no form of life 
could preserve itself.
The goal of mastering the environment in a superior way, which one can 
call the striving for perfection, consequently also characterizes the devel-
opment of man. It is expressed most clearly in the concept of God. In the 
individual case, however, the striving for superiority takes on very differ-
ent concrete forms. Typical is, e.g., the striving to master one’s fellow man, 
Exactly this form was shown by Individual Psychology to be erroneous, con-
tradicting the concept of evolution. Individual Psychology has uncovered the 
fact that the deviations and failures of the human character—neurosis, psy-
chosis, crime, drug addiction etc.—are nothing but forms of expression and 
symptoms of the striving for superiority directed against fellowmanship,8 
which presents itself in one case as striving for power, in another case as an 
evasion of accomplishments by which another might benefit. Such erroneous 
striving leads to the psychological decline and fall of the individual, as any 
biological erroneous striving has led to the physical decline and fall of entire 
species and races.
Individual Psychology has found a special formula for the correct striv-
ing for perfection of man: The goal which the individual must pursue must 
lie in the direction which leads to the perfection of all of mankind sub specie 
aeternitatis. “Virtue” means advancement, “vice” means disturbance of the 
common work which aims at perfection. Never can the individual be the goal 
8	 The German original for fellowmanship is Mitmenschlichkeit, meaning “being a fellow man,” as 
well as “co-humaneness.” (Original footnote by H. & R. Ansbacher.)

56	
Richard E. Watts
of the ideal of perfection, but only mankind as a cooperating community. A 
partial community of any kind—perhaps groups that are associated through 
certain political, religious, or other ideals—is also not sufficient. Neither do 
we mean the existing society, but an ideal society yet to be developed, which 
comprises all men, all filled by the common striving for perfection.
This is how the Individual Psychology concept of social interest 
(Gemeinschaftsgefuhl) is to be understood. This is to be considered as innate—
“innate” also in the categorical (metaphysical) sense, namely as the necessary 
and general premise for human cultural development. Every human being 
brings the disposition for social interest with him; but then it must be devel-
oped through upbringing, especially through correct guidance of the creative 
power of the individual. We can assume that the innate substratum of the 
ability to cooperate will become increasingly stronger through the training 
of the generations.
An important aid in this training is that the individual become conscious 
of the importance of social interest as the form of the striving for perfection 
which is appropriate for man. Exactly in this work of information rests the 
foremost practical task of Individual Psychology. 

57
6
Personality as a 
Self-Consistent Unity
A Contemporary View
Paul R. Peluso
The article “Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity” is taken from a lecture that 
Adler gave in Vienna in the early 1930s (the publication date of the article is 1932, 
and in it Adler references his book Problems of Neurosis, which was originally 
published in 1929). It reminds me of how I first came to know Shakespeare in 
high school: by reading his plays. Although this was supposed to be my intro-
duction to the legendary Bard, unfortunately nothing could be more boring for 
a teenager than reading spoken words whose origin was an English that was no 
longer spoken (Elizabethan)! It was only when I began to see the plays in action 
(especially the humor and the bawdiness), and hear the words spoken in the way 
they were meant to be received, that I saw how his work resonated with my expe-
riences of love, jealousy, fear, and wonder over 500 years after he wrote them. 
I became enthralled with the construction of these great works and wanted to 
reread and memorize them as much for their wit as for their iambic pentameter 
and rhythms. I think that it is the same way with many of Adler’s lectures that 
were later turned into articles. At first they may seem to be dull, dry, and life-
less. I remember struggling through Adler’s words in Ansbacher and Ansbacher’s 
(1964) famous anthology and wondering where was the “great man” that I was 
supposed to learn from, whose ideas were supposed to inspire me. It was only 
after I began to practice as an Adlerian therapist, and saw the theoretical con-
cepts and clinical interventions come to life, that I discovered new meanings 
from the once arcane and incomprehensible words of Adler (not surprisingly, 
much of the text for that work came from a series of lectures). I reread them (and 
other of his works) with new interest and excitement.
So as I read and reread this article, I had three competing thoughts. First, I 
had to focus on the contemporary aspects of article so that I could speak to its 

58	
Paul R. Peluso
contemporary value. Second, I was trying to read it as an Adlerian practitioner. 
I was looking for some new insight or shading from a great mind that I admired 
and whose work has been meaningful to me. Third, I was trying to read it and 
imagine that I was in a lecture hall and hearing these words spoken to me. I 
was trying to imagine the heavily accented broken English, of which I have only 
heard a snippet from an old Movietone newsreel, that would be pronouncing 
these words
It was interesting for me to discover that Adler delivered this lecture with 
several overlapping thoughts, or agendas of his own that he was trying to con-
vey. First, he devoted a fair amount of time to being an apologist for Individual 
Psychology. His theory was still under attack from competing schools of psy-
chotherapy (most notably the Psychoanalytic school) and he felt that he had to 
defend it from contemporary critics (many of whom were recycling arguments 
that were almost 20 years old). You can almost hear the weariness in his voice 
as he had to (once again) dispel many of the myths that had arisen around 
Individual Psychology. While this may have some interest to readers as a his-
torical point, I will not embellish much on it here (I think Adler does a good 
enough job without any help from me). Second, he was acting as a philosopher 
and theoretician. Here he was expounding on a theory that had both complex-
ity and simplicity at its core; it was familiar and common sense, and at the 
same time it was revolutionary and ahead of its time. These elements may be 
the most resounding to a modern audience, and I will discuss in some detail. 
Third, he was acting as a clinician and giving a clinical demonstration of his 
therapeutic insight and incisiveness. Even in his brief recall of several cases 
to illustrate his point, we can see some forward-thinking clinical approaches 
that echo many of the “cutting-edge” perspectives today. It is from the multiple 
perspectives of Adler as a theoretician and Adler as a clinician that I will make 
some commentary on this article and draw out those elements that are still 
noteworthy to an audience a century removed from the original delivery of 
this oratory.
Adler as a Theoretician
In the article “Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity,” Adler tackles several theo-
retical issues that were avant-garde for his time (the 1930s) and seems on-target 
in today’s world (2010s). One of the first issues that he tackles is the unconscious. 
At the time of this article, the existence and influence of the unconscious was 
considered to be beyond question. This was primarily due to the strong influence 
of psychoanalysis, which considered the unconscious to be central to shaping the 
personality and creating psychopathology. The unconscious was also seen as key 
to delivering any treatment. However, Adler refuted the idea of an unconscious 
that was mysterious and out of our ability to observe (directly or indirectly) or 

	
	
Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity	
59
bring under any kind of conscious control. He believed that an unconscious that 
could not be directly influenced was not consistent with human experience:
Animals have, of course, a consciousness without concepts; but doesn’t an infant 
have the same things, and doesn’t he behave exceptionally rationally? Aren’t we all 
able to carry things in the consciousness which we do not grasp conceptionally, but 
which nevertheless are there? (p. 436)
This idea is reminiscent of the current thinking in cognitive psychology about 
automatic (or implicit) processing, which may be outside of conscious awareness 
but is not unconscious. An example of this is adults riding a bicycle. This task 
is so automatic that few get on the bicycle and have to consciously recall how to 
balance, peddle, steer, or brake. Instead, they just ride. However, if required to, 
a person can describe the process for doing this step-by-step, even though he or 
she may have not thought about it for some time. Today most clinicians (from 
cognitive-behaviorists to constructionists) as well as cognitive scientists agree 
with Adler’s conceptualization and reject the idea of a “dark” unconscious.
Another central tenet of the philosophy behind Individual Psychology, and 
the focus of his article, is the holistic nature of the person. Again, this is in direct 
contrast to the dominant idea of the time that human beings could be thought of 
as machines, or that cognitive processes could be best represented by mechanical 
processes that could be broken down to their constituent parts. In fact, Adler ref-
erences this dominant idea by discussing one of the more sophisticated machines 
of his time: the Dictaphone (a vocal recording device before magnetic tape record-
ers). Many practitioners and scientists felt that human personality operated along 
the lines of a Dictaphone—that it simply recorded whatever it was exposed to 
and then played back whichever record was installed (sometimes jazz, sometimes 
opera, etc.) depending on the situation. While this was not the best metaphor for 
human functioning, the psychoanalytic view of unconscious forces was rooted 
in the metaphor of hydraulic steam engines that would exert pressure and forces 
that the individual had to balance to maintain order. Interestingly, this dominant 
mechanistic metaphor would be replaced in modern times with the “human as 
computer” model, or the “human information processing model” that had sepa-
rate processes and subroutines that could be broken down and “reprogrammed.”
Adler rejected the idea that humans were automatons “ruled” by these forces, 
instead suggesting that people were active decision makers and shaped both their 
experiences of the world and their behavior (or movement) in it: “The creative 
force arranges: it has the ability to look ahead and see what it must do” (p. 432). In 
addition, Adler believed that this creative force was goal-directed and directed by 
the individual. Indeed, this was a radical departure from the idea that personal-
ity was “force-driven” and able to be broken into subroutines. Instead, the per-
sonality (or “style of life”/lifestyle) is unique, and each person decides how to act 

60	
Paul R. Peluso
to meet the particular goal. Furthermore, this personality style does not change 
with a person’s context (work, home, etc.), but remains constant and whole. All 
things are arranged by it to consciously meet this goal. At times this may become 
automatic and out of the awareness of the individual, but it can be recalled (some-
times with some therapeutic intervention). This idea goes against a mechanistic 
view of the human as a machine, and from a clinical standpoint, it is consis-
tent with many Constructivist approaches and reflected in other, postmodern 
approaches (e.g., NLP, ACT).
Adler as a Clinician
In the last section of the article (and lecture), Adler demonstrates the theoretical 
points that he is trying to make. It was not surprising that he borrows a charac-
ter from Shakespeare to illustrate his point about the personality! And like a great 
Shakespeare play, this is where his mastery as a clinician shines. First, he sets the 
framework for how Individual Psychology works: “All we undertake to do is to be in 
a position to replace larger errors with smaller ones. Larger errors hinder the active 
adaptation to life” (p. 433). In other words, the goal of therapy is not a long-term 
“reconstruction” of the individual, but to help individuals to see where their persis-
tent errors in judgment (perception) “gets in the way” of their own functioning. If 
clients can be made to stop making the “big mistakes” in their lives, then they will 
be able to find relief and sort out the rest. For many in his time9 (and some in mod-
ern time), this is too simplistic. Adler himself even talks about how his approach is 
considered “simple” or too “common sense.” Today, however, most clinicians would 
recognize this approach as “brief” or “solution-focused” or even “results-oriented.”
Adler also emphasizes in his clinical examples how the therapist needs to be 
mindful of every behavior and statement from the client to understand the style 
of life and the goal that drives it. “It is not given to us directly; only from the forms 
of expression and their system of context can we understand it. . . . This much 
show itself in everything, in his bearing and in his achievements” (pp. 436–437). 
From this understanding of the “style of life,” the clinician can then intervene. In 
the first clinical example, Adler demonstrates how a brief interaction with a per-
son can reveal his or her goal. Adler discovers that the successful but depressed 
businessman operates under the assumption “if I am pitiful, people will take care 
of me” and how his goal of pitifulness makes his success intolerable to him. It 
puts him onto a “double bind” because he can have no joy or comfort in his suc-
cess, because to do so would risk the only method that he knows to connect and 
get his needs met by others (by being pitiful). Adler is able to take this dominant 
image (the “beggar”) and illuminates it for the client, saying, “We are forced to 
establish the connection” (p. 439). The internal constancy of this image (goal) 
9	 See Rollo May’s recollection of his time with Adler in 1933 in The Art of Counseling.

	
	
Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity	
61
was then validated by the client sending Adler a newspaper article that the client 
had written 10 years earlier on that topic! In terms of modern approaches, this is 
reflective of what schema-focused therapists and emotion-focused counselors do 
in finding the dominant underlying themes of the clients’ lives.
However, Adler cautions against being too confident or too complacent as a 
therapist. This admonishment is just as true today as it was almost 100 years ago:
Making the portrait completely true to life, so that the patient is convinced of its 
correctness, requires further, more subtle work. Where we come across the unsolv-
able contradictions our interpretation is incorrect and must be altered. This is an 
indication of the seriousness, misunderstood by many, with which Individual 
Psychology bears in mind and pursues the self-contained unity of the person. 
(1932, p. 440) 
In this way, Adler may be the most like modern practitioners. He was cautious 
about being too presumptuous and sure of oneself. Unlike many of his contem-
poraries, he was mindful of the possibility that his own interpretations could be 
wrong. This forced him to attend to the client and not only co-create a treatment 
that would address the client’s concern but also tailor a treatment that relied 
less on the therapist being “brilliant” or masterful and more on forging a col-
laboration with clients and demonstrating a spirit of Gemeinschaftsgefuhl (social 
interest/community feeling) that he wished to inspire in them. Of course this is 
consistent with the literature on effective therapy and the importance of a strong, 
positive therapeutic alliance.
As one reads Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity, I would encourage the mod-
ern reader to consider all of the audiences that Adler was speaking to. I would also 
submit that Adler may have been speaking to one more audience as well: us—the 
audience of practitioners that would read his work nearly a century later.
Reference
Adler, A. (1964).  The individual psychology of Alfred Adler.  In H. L. Ansbacher & R. 
R. Ansbacher (Eds.), The individual psychology of Alfred Adler. New York: Harper & 
Row.

62	
Paul R. Peluso
Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity10,11
Alfred Adler
Translation by Michael Cicero
The importance of a discussion on this theme may be shown by the fact that, 
even more outside the circle of Individual Psychology than within it, there 
have piled up a great number of misunder­standings, which, for us, act as a 
powerful incentive. We are often forced to help along the powers of under-
standing of those who stand outside our circle. We don’t know what it is 
the others are missing, but since the assault against Individual Psychology 
has sharpened in recent years, we have at our disposal the inexhaustible 
material of their errors. It is a re­warding task to throw some light on these 
misunderstandings.
I refer to the position of many authors who treat Individual Psychology as 
if it were an environmental theory (Milieutheorie), as if the whole mentality 
of a human being could be traced back to the effect of the outside world on 
him. If one took a closer look at this position, he would have to ask: who seeks 
out, who answers, who processes the impressions? Is a human being a dicta-
phone? A machine? There must be something at the bottom of this! Similarly, 
we cannot approve of the heredity theory. There we raise the most strenuous 
objections. Research on twins has shown that, there too, there is less to this 
than at first meets the eye. One speaks of the in­fluence of the upbringing, 
saying that social life is a modifying influence. Who does the modifying? Is 
it a mathematical calculation? In contrast, Individual Psychology takes the 
following position: when we begin to speak of the “psychic life” (Seelenleben), 
we go off into transcendental areas. We know something only of the effects, of 
the results, of the relationships which make themselves noticeable. We must 
make assumptions which someone who has a fixed, preconceived notion 
of the “psychic life” no longer thinks about, or, like the behaviorist, denies 
altogether. But, even with regard to behaviorism, we have to emphasize that 
there must be psychic impulses which are responsible for the outpourings of 
our thoughts, feel­ings, and actions which become visible; psychic impulses of 
which we can say that we are much better off than the physicists when they 
speak of elec­tricity. Just as it is with every science, Individual Psychology 
merges into metaphysics. We can smile about those objections which say that 
Indi­vidual Psychology dispenses with metaphysical foundations. There we 
are dealing with an area of our insight which we must presuppose: we can­not 
10	This article is a translation of Personlichkeit als geschlossene Einheit, Internationale Zeitschrift fur 
Individualpsychologie, 10, 81–88, 1932.
11	From a lecture held in the Society for Individual Psychology, Vienna.

	
	
Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity	
63
work there because we want to order the impressions which lie before us, and 
we want to designate them as psychic impressions. It is an a priori interpreta-
tion, one that we must make and which serves us well in order­ing events and 
placing them under a common light.
We can say even more about our psychic life if we stay in the transcen­
dental realm. If we want to construct the psychic life, we must be sure that 
it agrees with our conception of time and space, i.e., we must not only apply 
the conception of time to it, thus considering its movement, but we must 
also consider the direction. Where does the direction come from? It can-
not be derived from hereditary forces. If one propounds a drive psy­chology 
(Triebpsychologie), the movement can be determined, but not the direction. 
Here we come to that puzzle, upon which Individual Psychology has thrown 
itself, in accord with investigators dating back to times long past. There is a 
creative force at hand in the psychic life which is identical to the life force 
itself. This creative force arranges: it has the ability to look ahead and see 
what it must do. Indeed, such looking ahead seems necessary in the psy-
chic life, since man is mobile. Psychic life is movement and direc­tion, both 
placed under one goal. Since man is not isolated, the goal of a creative force 
must be formed from the stress of the overcoming of social difficulties which 
place themselves in opposition to movement. There must always be a goal of 
overcoming, of the carrying through of the purpose of self-preservation, of 
completion. Always before us there hangs also the threat of damage, of list-
lessness—of death.
We are pleased to stick with the general expression: overcoming. The mis-
understanding that Individual Psychology not only interprets the psychic life 
as a striving for power, but also seeks to propagate that idea, in­serts itself 
here. This striving for power is not our madness: it is the madness which we 
find in others. A goal of overcoming as an abstract for­mulation is unaccept-
able in the general stream of human thought. There, one finds a much more 
concrete formulation. According to this formula­tion, every individual comes 
to a concrete goal of overcoming through his creative force, which is identical 
to the ego. Our task is to ascertain the direction in which a person endeavors 
to overcome. His own opinion of this direction commands and directs him. 
All we can say of this opinion is that it is more, or that it is less, incorrect. We 
have never maintained that we were in possession of an absolute truth. All 
we undertake to do is to be in a position to replace larger errors with smaller 
ones. Larger errors hinder the active adaptation to life. In the very moment 
in which we speak of singleness of purpose, in that moment when we can 
better grasp the con­crete concept of a goal, there crops up a huge difficulty: 
that we have to do it with thousands of variations, each time in a unique case, 
with a unique concrete objective. Here, we come upon the fairy tale, which 
is imputed to us, that we have presupposed the equality of human beings or 

64	
Paul R. Peluso
that we have striven for it. The truth is that we only undertake to investi-
gate the nuances, the uniqueness of the objective, the uniqueness of a per-
son’s opinion of himself and of the tasks of life. That is the task of Individual 
Psychology, to understand individual wrongheadedness (Abwegigkeit). If I 
insert a few concepts here, as for instance that one seeks a goal of superior­ity 
in the domination of others or the evasion of duties, so that another becomes 
the object of exploitation, these are calm and composed posi­tions, which, 
along with their variations, it is the task of Individual Psy­chology to clarify.
When someone doesn’t know anything else to hold against Individual 
Psychology, he says: If we don’t believe at all in heredity, then it ought to 
be possible for a human being to develop into a goose. One should think, 
of course, that among serious people we wouldn’t need to speak about such 
things. Possibilities must be granted. Nothing can be developed which isn’t 
present somehow or other in the human embryo. Such objec­tions, however, 
could mislead us toward the belief that in odd cases such a development is 
possible.
Another misunderstanding exists in the notion that it should have 
oc­curred to us that we could raise children to complete maturity, children 
from whom, as from the feebleminded, all capability of development has 
been taken away. That would be as if we were to demand right-handed draw-
ings from one who has lost his right hand. I would never have believed that I 
would have to deal with such nuisances in the criticism of my work. It stands 
to reason that, if somehow the scope of humanity is narrowed, this incapa-
bility of development will show itself in the behavior of the per­son, e.g., in 
feebleminded children, or accordingly in people with unfit organs, such as 
the brain or endocrine glands. In such a case we make no claim of bringing 
them up to a level which to us seems normal.
In recent years, the vicious attacks against Individual Psychology have 
increased. For those in the know, it is easy to see how all the hard work 
of standing up for some different point of view, which is then raised up to 
high heaven, or which may on occasion coyly come to light in the notes of 
a margin, fogs the senses of the critic. Impartial observation allows us to 
distinguish several points of departure. The most humorous comes from the 
beginners and those ignorant in the area of modern psychology. Sworn to 
the word of their teacher, or of some textbook, they are full of indigna­tion 
at how one “could doubt heredity”; “how one could overlook sex­uality”; how 
one could believe that the “striving for power” rules every­thing; whether they 
realize that others as well . . . that “even Plato, . . . especially Guyeau—that 
every school of psychology speaks of the feeling of community, of the totality 
of the personality. . . .”
Then there are also the snappish critics. Mostly they speak of “depth” 
assuming, therefore, that people will recognize the depth in them, start off 

	
	
Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity	
65
wildly in the beginning, then more moderately, until they have snatched a 
little more of Individual Psychology for themselves. [They] write often in 
magazines whose publishers are either asleep or wishing they were [and] are 
occasionally taken seriously by these, otherwise, by no one.
Then comes the “entrance march of the plagiarists.” They cannot get over 
the fact that they must eke out a living while they undertake, from time to 
time, a “reception” of Individual Psychology. Often they don’t know it and 
are strengthened by the well-wishing silence of insiders in their projects. New 
words of insult don’t occur to them, which speaks poorly of the fruitfulness 
of their imaginations. Occasionally one notices how they, as eternal recruits, 
snap after the approval of the leaders of their sect. Words like “banal,” “super-
ficial,” and “unscientific” recur as stereo­typical expressions. The conduct of 
their patrons, the publishers, etc., is thereby more stigmatized than that of 
the recruits themselves. If one lets oneself get involved in this, making use of 
more than one shameless ex­pression, one shows one’s ignorance to a shock-
ing degree.
The “great expansion” of Individual Psychology permits them no rest. 
“There must be a mistake hidden in there somewhere or other.”
Of course, there are books and writings which cannot be considered 
fully and completely as Individual Psychology. Such writings, for example 
in politics and religion, believe it necessary to make use of psychoanalytic 
terminology. Recently there have appeared authors who seek the way to 
brain pathology with treacherous fervor. But although they strive to misuse 
Individual Psychology for their own personal views, they only barely nose 
out those who have learned nothing of Individual Psychology at all. There­
fore, leave them to me unmolested, even if they occasionally recommend a 
liqueur or swear on the corpus striatum, whether they seek to help God or 
politics. Sometimes, they instruct me about Individual Psychology.
Thus, according to one psychoanalyst: Since, however, isolation is not a part 
of the life plan of human creation, since community and social behavior are 
commands of nature, of whom one cannot escape without punishment. . . .”
An open-minded Freudian examines, “moreover,” the holistic per­sonality: 
It must be kept clearly in mind that all classifications have only abstract mean-
ing. If one confuses intellectual differences with real separation of outlook, 
then one falls back into the old ability psychology (Vermogenpsy­chologie). 
There is much sexuality hidden in the urge for admiration, and much striv-
ing for admiration in the sexual development; but it won’t do to have the one 
constantly reduced to the other or to award genuine causality to only one or 
the other of these desires. It would be as tasteless as if we were to subordi-
nate all human activities to the urge for food and were to produce art and 
science merely as a means to obtain nutrition. We should not forget that all 
psychic functions are elements of one organism. Since 1916, I have struggled 

66	
Paul R. Peluso
unceasingly for the “organic approach,” according to which every psychic 
activity is only understandable in connection with the wholeness of life. The 
isolating of individual drives (aside from their most elementary expression), 
the general subjugation of the one area of drive to the other, leads to errors 
and outrages. —The sexual drive seems to be one of the exceptions.
Likewise, another: “Furthermore, within the assertion of sexuality, there 
is always self-assertion.”
Another well-informed Theban: “Self-confidence and a serious will for 
achievement—nothing more is necessary.” Thus, an optimist without equal.
“Of course, behind it all, a world view which is not very deep, a psycho-
therapy for high school teachers, as Individual Psychology proudly claims 
himself to be.”
“. . . , for Adler, there is nothing but the striving for power.” As we can see, 
this one is an illiterate, and hardly a high school teacher himself.
Herbart: “Just because a village schoolteacher has practiced his failed 
method for 30 years, he shouldn’t expect us to believe in his results.”
On the other hand: “Whoever really understands homosexuals—assum-
ing the reader believes he can say that of himself—must be astounded by the 
basic points of the foreword (Alfred Adler’s, Das Problem der Homosexualitat, 
Leipzig, S. Hirzel, 1930) which con­tradict all experience. According to these 
assertions, homosexuality represents a kind of training since childhood for 
the discouraged human being, for the purpose of switching to the path of the 
exclu­sion of possibilities of defeat—in the case of the homosexual, the path of 
exclusion from the other sex—and an evasion of the normal solu­tion to the 
love question.”
I can only assume that the author has only dealt with exceptional cases.
“The reader who is not already sworn to Adlerian theory will find in these 
formulations no increase in his knowledge.”
And also no decrease? “He who is perfect, always feels that it is others who 
need to be set right.”
The poor ego has been shoved far into the background, as if it were impos-
sible for a fertilized egg cell to be already a complete entity. To speak of drives 
which supposedly generate the ego is far-fetched. It is the ego, which grows 
its way into life, which we see later as the creative force. If one believes that 
he can locate in the various drives what belongs to the ego, the seeking, ques-
tioning, doubting, thinking, feeling, desiring, striving for goals, etc., this 
is nothing more than sleight of hand. The most impor­tant question is: who 
moves the psychic life, and in which direction does he move it? Always, the 
answer is the ego.
I would like to give expression to a thought which has recently oc­cupied 
my attention especially. An error has crept unnoticed into the whole psy-
chological literature, to the effect that only a part of a mental concept which 

	
	
Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity	
67
is explicitly expressed belongs properly to the conscious­ness. If this were 
correct, then there would be no consciousness in ani­mals. Animals have, 
of course, a consciousness without concepts; but doesn’t an infant have the 
same thing, and doesn’t he behave exceptionally rationally? Aren’t we all able 
to carry things in the consciousness which we do not grasp conceptually, 
but which nevertheless are there? Why should someone depend only upon 
words? Maybe this discussion doesn’t seem extraordinarily important, but 
if I draw attention to the fact that when we think of the unconscious as that 
which cannot be conceptualized, it suddenly appears to be “conscious” as 
soon as we grasp the concept, then one comes to understand that the asser-
tion of the unconscious does not concern the inseparable, unified ego. Non-
conceptual thinking, with which we are filled every moment of our lives, is 
conscious in the sense of consciousness, because we always have it before us 
and because it never disappears.
In the course of this line of thought we come to information which 
confronts other views very sharply. The form of life (Lebensform) is also 
established through the setting of one’s goal in the psychic life. If for every 
impulse there is a goal at hand, then the form is also at hand. If everything 
(thoughts, feelings, desires, achievement) strives after this goal, then a life­
style (Lebensstil) is established, to which every part of the psychic life must 
adapt itself, and of which every portion is only a fragment of the whole. 
Therefore, out of fragments and the arrangement of the same, [and] through 
their relationship to one another, we are able to guess the form of life, the 
individual law of movement. It is not given to us directly; only from the forms 
of expression and their system of context can we understand it. We can only 
say: this is a person who has set himself the goal of leaving all tasks undone. 
This must show itself in everything, in his bearing and in his achievements. 
And through them we also take into account the thousand variations of such 
a life-style.
In order to take a step out of theory and into practice, I would like, as I 
usually do, to give a hypothetical case. I love to present cases in which the 
uniformity of the whole person is apparent to everyone. There is much talk 
about this idea of wholeness, but I have looked in vain in the literature for 
an example of proof that all thoughts, feelings, desires, memories, dreams, 
in short, every portion could be related to the same form of life. What we 
encounter are devout wishes. When I and others tried to represent this unity 
more sharply, these attempts of ours were the only attempts up to now to 
demonstrate the uniformity of the whole person.
That isn’t totally correct, since there have been men of the past and men 
of the present who have done the same thing. They are to be found among 
the poets, painters, and musicians who create unified personalities, just as the 
child creates the adult out of himself, in his unique and never to be repeated 

68	
Paul R. Peluso
individuality and unity, where every part fits into the whole. Schopenhauer 
expresses his admiration for Shakespeare for the way he portrays the character 
of Northumberland in a unified form in three of his dramas: a jovial henchmen 
until the king falls into danger. Then he betrays the king three times. This looks 
like “ambivalence”: submissive and re­bellious. We do not have a single concept 
for the millions of variations. Here is a man whose loyalty extends to a certain 
point and no further. What follows is no longer loyalty. This is the great merit 
of Individual Psy­chology to have shown that the best way to measure [a person] 
is by the capability of cooperative achievement. Thus, it stands to reason that 
the yardstick for the characterization of a form of life derives exactly from this 
one point of view; how far the feeling of community (Gemeinschaftsgefuhl), 
reaches, and where it ends. This is not a mathematical problem, but rather an 
artistic one. We must find out at what point one is no longer in a posi­tion to 
provide this feeling of community (Gemeinschaftsgefuhl), at what point one no 
longer insists on the test of social interest (soziales Intresse). Here, too, we are 
not speaking of a moral ideal, not in the sense of a reli­gious concept, but rather 
in the sense of a thoroughly scientific considera­tion of the human psychic life 
(Seelenlebens). All capabilities can be de­veloped only on the basis of the feeling 
of community. It is in this area that one person develops more, the other less. 
The feeling of community must be bred in the person. That doesn’t mean that 
environmental theory can celebrate a victory here. Knowledgeable educators 
have the task of linking the creative force of the child to the path of the feeling 
of community. This means more than just weighing influences. One must look 
at how the creative force of the child grasps the influence, [and] whether in doing 
so he stays on the right path.
In order to give an example of the unity of the personality, I refer back 
to a case which appeared in Problems of Neurosis.12 A man in his fifties came 
up to me after a lecture and complained about depression: he was constantly 
inclined to cry. In spite of this, he had been successful in his job and had 
amassed some wealth. I was short of time and tried to snatch a few frag-
ments from his life history. His earliest memory was: he was the young­est of 
many children in a family which lived for many years in the greatest poverty. 
He used to sneak about, pale and hungry, so that the neighbors took care 
of him and gave him gifts. Even at that time he suffered from his melan-
choly. Individual Psychology has shown that the form of life is ap­parent, to 
the expert, after the age of three or four years. I doubt that it ex­ists prior to 
that, but it becomes clearly visible only later. He was the darling of his mother 
and very spoiled. Once, when she wanted to get a job in order to earn some 
money, he cried so violently that she said: “I won’t go away. I would rather 
starve here with you.” He had a speech impediment and was often urged by 
12	Kegan Paul, London, 1929.

	
	
Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity	
69
others, for the sake of fun, to recite poems. Finally, he took his hat and went 
around collecting coins. He conducted himself like a beggar. The adult had 
retained the form of life of a beggar. I told him, that. It made a great impres-
sion on him. He said: “I remember the great impression it made, when, as a 
child, I saw a beggar in the street and heard him singing as people gave him 
coins. And the man still deported himself as a beggar, causing people to deal 
much more gently with him. I did not see the man again, but he wrote me a 
letter in which he made clear to me how very correct I had been. And he sent 
me a newspaper article, which he had written 10 years before with the title, 
“An Organization of Beggars.” Was the beggar idea supposed to be only in 
the man’s unconscious? We see unity in all his thoughts, in the way in which 
he wrote the article, in the feeling, the attitude, [and] also ultimately in the 
nature of his achievements. He approaches all the problems of life like a beg-
gar. This is his law of movement.
A salesman, 30-years-old, [is] the youngest in his family. The situation of 
the youngest as we know from our experience, is a special case. The young-
est grows up in a unique situation. After every child comes a new one. Only 
in his case is this not true. He has no one bringing up the rear. This is very 
significant in the manner of our upbringing. Each of the children has his 
day to be dethroned by a new arrival. The youngest never experi­ences this. 
Furthermore, the earlier children are bigger, they satisfy greater standards 
and are able to achieve more. This becomes a significant incen­tive for the 
youngest. Every youngest child is nuanced by it. This is where the creative 
force of the individual enters the picture. But the strong incen­tive for the 
youngest cannot be overlooked (Joseph in the Bible, the youngest in fairy 
tales). This particular youngest child had outdone all his siblings: he was 
his parents’ favorite, the best in school, a very ambitious child who trem-
bled before every test. This man married a girl whom he believed he could 
totally dominate. It was characteristic of his case that he didn’t really have 
any friends. This shows that he loved only those situations in which he was 
the master. All other situations he tried to shut out. It happened that he suf-
fered from nervous symptoms whenever something should hap­pen where he 
wasn’t the leading figure, where he felt pressure from out­side, for example as 
in the theater, when he sat in an isolated space. This situation, in which he 
was not aware of his commanding influence, seemed to be a danger to him.
I want to digress and speak about intellectual processes. It is not true that 
we could have intellectual processes within us without their being followed 
by desire and feeling. But people come in different sorts, some of whom look 
more to the intellectual, others more to the emotional, and still others more 
to the will. We are forced to establish the connection. If I think: I am not 
free—then, as a man who tolerates no coercion, I will develop feelings and 
emotions which militate against it. These are persons who, for instance, only 

70	
Paul R. Peluso
take the end seat in a theater in order to feel free. The man in question was 
distinct from the other type of anxious neurotic (Angstneurotiker); he fought 
against it but it was clearly visible that he was urged on by the motor of his 
ambition. He always wanted to be the leader, to outshine the others, which he 
succeeded in doing more easily through the impression that his symptoms 
made. No wonder that the incentive to ward them off was slight. I would like to 
point out that we could observe the same mechanism in the theory of dreams 
where we find an intellectual content that is not supposed to be understood. 
Dreams, too, contain a fragment of the personality: feelings are awakened 
which the dreamer needs.
First dream: Its setting was the school. He was not properly prepared.
If we look at that in context it says: The teacher is the doctor who knows 
better than I. After that, a worsening must ensue. This is one danger.
Second dream: He had some calculations to perform, among which some 
were done by him, some by others. The calculations of the others were wrong. 
His own were right. This is an attempt to create for himself an incentive to 
rise above others. The calculations are not correct and neither are those of the 
doctor. We see that this “resistance” has nothing to do with love and sexual-
ity. Rather, the patient wants to correspond to his own notion of a leader. 
Thus the others are not permitted any leadership activity.
Third dream: He sees himself having to wear an old jacket home. He says: 
“The most unpleasant thing for me was always when I was given something 
to wear.”
Fourth dream: He has two hats, a stiff one and a soft one. The latter he 
treats with great care. Asked what he does with two hats, he says: It is true 
that, in order to preserve the soft one, I wear the stiff hat in bad weather; that 
means, in order to prevent damage, so as not to have to spend so much money 
on hats. He is invoking his thriftiness. He springs all mines in order to force 
me, who must be paid, into the background.
The four dreams say: I won’t stand for it. Someone like a teacher stands 
before me; perhaps he gives me orders, and he believes that he understands 
things better than I do, while at the same time he lets me pay him money for it.
Making the portrait completely true to life, so that the patient is con­
vinced of its correctness, requires further, more subtle work. Where we come 
across the unsolvable contradictions our interpretation is incorrect and must 
be altered. This is an indication of the seriousness, misunder­stood by many, 
with which Individual Psychology bears in mind and pur­sues the self-con-
tained unity of the person. 

71
7
Position in Family Constellation 
Influences Lifestyle
Gary D. McKay
While many theorists have discussed birth order, only Adler addressed this con-
cept as family constellation—it’s not only the position into which one is born but 
how one interprets the position, or how it manifests as behavior. For example, 
most firstborns retain their desire to be the “good” one when the second child is 
born, while some feel dethroned by the second born and become the best at being 
“bad” while the second born becomes the good one.
Adler points out that people in the same family constellation position are 
more like each other than they are to their own siblings unless dethronement has 
taken place. For example, most firstborns demonstrate leadership and responsi-
bility, whereas second children strive to catch up or overtake the firstborn. If this 
is not possible, the second born may become the “bad” child as mentioned above 
or develop positive traits the oldest doesn’t have. For example, if the oldest is a 
good student, the second child may think he can’t match or overtake his or her 
sibling in that field, and become good at sports.
Youngest children never have to face someone younger trying to take their 
place. They have always been babies. The youngest may subsume to the spoiling 
of the parents and often older siblings. Or, this child may decide that he or she 
wants to strive to overtake his siblings, gaining their power. A youngest with this 
desire and behavior can be termed a “speeder.”
Adler suggests that families with only children may not feel up to raising more 
than one child and use birth control to avoid more children, failing to mention 
that some people have only children because the mother can’t have any more 
children. I am an only child, and this was the situation with my mother.
Adler discusses the difficulties of an only child. An only child retains the 
center of attention without effort and is usually pampered. Thus he or she devel-
ops a lifestyle that “calls for his being supported by others and at the same time 
ruling them.”

72	
Gary D. McKay
In the article Adler discusses eldests, second children, onlys, and youngest 
children. For some reason, he doesn’t discuss middle children. Perhaps this is 
because many families had several children at the time that the article was pub-
lished (1937). So the kids may have been in groups of oldests, seconds, and young-
ests. With large families this is often the case because if a child is 5 years older or 
younger than a sibling, that sibling has a limited effect on the child, for the life-
style is formed somewhere between 4 and 6 years of age. For example, in a family 
with six children the oldest is going to be several years older than the youngest. 
Families are generally smaller today than they were then. Table 7.1 points out 
the possible characteristics of a child today in each family constellation position.
In today’s world we find many stepfamilies. When both stepparents have their 
own children, kids from each family may influence the children of their steppar-
ent. For example, there could be two oldests who both compete for the top posi-
tion, which means one could be newly dethroned.
Throughout the article, Adler uses case examples to show how family constel-
lation influences lifestyle. For example, he discusses the case of a 60-year-old man, 
the youngest of three, who was still in the care of his two older sisters. Needless to 
say, he was very worried about what would happen to him when his sisters died.
Adler discusses homosexual development in relation to family constel-
lation. For example, being an only boy or only girl in the sibling ship also 
affects the development of that individual. The only boy in a family of girls 
may decide to become “a real man” or decide to join the feminine ship as one 
of the girls and strive to be the “best” girl in the crew, whereas being an only 
girl in the family may result in a masculine tendency for being the best guy 
in the pack.
He points out that only children or children reared in a family where all their 
siblings are from the opposite sex can be more prone to develop homosexual 
lifestyles. I’m not aware of any research that supports this theory even though it 
appears logical. Additionally, some of the language Adler uses to describe homo-
sexuals such as pervert or abnormal, or the word homosexual itself—instead of 
gay or lesbian—is unacceptable in society today. Again, we have to realize when 
this article was written and the social norms at that time.
Getting back to typical characteristics of family constellation positions, 
Table  7.1 outlines these characteristics. Of course it can always be different 
depending on how the child sees his or her position in relation to the others.
As you read this article, you will see how the characteristics of each position influ-
ence one’s outlook on life. But remember, as said above: “It can always be different.”
References
Dinkmeyer, D., McKay, G. D., & Dinkmeyer, D. (1997). STEP (Systematic Training for 
Effective Parenting) leader’s resource guide. Bowling Green, KY: STEP Publishers.

	
	
Position in Family Constellation Influences Lifestyle	
73
Table 7.1  Some Typical Characteristics of Family Constellation Positions
Position
Strives To
Possible Positive Traits
Possible Negative Traits
Only Child
Get own way 
(may play “divide 
and conquer”)
• Is creativea
• Has positive peer relationships as an adultb
• Is selective about choosing who to please
• May be pampered or spoiled, or self-centered
• Feels incompetent, feels adults are more capable
• Relies on service from others rather than being self-reliant
Oldest Child
Be first
• Is leader
• Is helpful and responsible
• Is selective about choosing who to please
• Is bossy
• Believes must please others
• Becomes discouraged if can’t be best (becomes “best at being worst”)
Second Child
Catch up or 
overtake
• Is sociable
• Puts forth effort
• Develops abilities lacking in oldest
• May rebel
• Can become “bad” child if oldest is “good” child
• Is uncertain of abilities if oldest child is successful
Middle Child 
of Threec
Make life fair
• Is adaptable
• Is concerned with justice
• Knows how to get along with all kinds of people
• Feels “squeezed”—May push others down to elevate self
• May be “problem” child
• Feels doesn’t have a place
Youngest child
Get service
• Knows how to influence others
• Is charming
• Is friendly
• May be manipulative
• Expects others to take care of his or her responsibilities
• Feels inferior or overtakes older siblings
a	 Only children may have to learn to operate in a world made up exclusively of adults and may have to entertain themselves. This may develop their creative side.
b	 When growing up, only children may want to be adults and may have poor peer relationships as a result. When they become adults, they often believe they’ve “made 
it” and can now relate better to adults as peers.
c	 Middle children in a large family don’t compete as much as middle child of three, since their parents don’t have as much time to reinforce the competition. Middle 
children from large families are usually more cooperative.
Source:	This chart comes from Dinkmeyer, D., McKay, G. D., & Dinkmeyer, D., STEP (Systematic Training for Effective Parenting) Leader’s Resource Guide, STEP Publishers, 
Bowling Green, KY, p. 1997, 12. It is not available for commercial purposes without permission from the publisher.

74	
Gary D. McKay
Position in Family Constellation Influences Life Style13
Alfred Adler
It is a common fallacy to imagine that children of the same family are formed 
in the same environment. Of course there is much which is the same for all 
children in the same home, but the psychic situation of each child is individ-
ual and differs from that of others, because of the order of their succession.
There has been some misunderstand­ing of my custom of classification 
ac­cording to position in the family. It is not, of course, the child’s number 
in the order of successive births which in­fluences his character, but the situ-
ation into which he is born and the way in which he interprets it. Thus, if the 
eldest child is feeble-minded or suppressed, the second child may acquire a 
style of life similar to that of an eldest child; and in a large family, if two are 
born much later than the rest, and grow up together separated from the older 
chil­dren, the elder of these may develop like a first child. This also happens 
sometimes in the case of twins.
Position of the First Child
The first child has the unique posi­tion of having been the only one at the 
beginning of his life. Being thus the central interest he is generally spoiled. 
In this he resembles the only child, and spoiling is almost inevitable in both 
cases. The first child, however, usually suffers an important change of situa­
tion, being dethroned when the second baby is born. The child is generally 
quite unprepared for this change, and feels that he has lost his position as 
the center of love and attention. He then comes into great tension for he is 
far from his goal and there begins a striv­ing to regain favor. He uses all the 
means by which he has hitherto at­tracted notice. Of course he would like to 
go the best way about it, to be be­loved for his goodness; but good be­havior 
is apt to pass unnoticed when everyone is busied with the new-comer. He is 
then likely to change his tactics and to resort to old activities which have pre-
viously attracted attention—even if it was unfavorable attention.
If intelligent, he acts intelligently, but not necessarily in harmony with the 
family’s demands. Antagonism, dis­obedience, attacks on the baby, or even 
attempts to play the part of a baby, com­pel the parents to give renewed atten­
tion to his existence. A spoiled child must have the spotlight upon himself, even 
at the cost of expressing weak­ness or imitating a return to babyhood. Thus, 
under the influence of the past, he attains his goal in the present by unsuit-
able means; suddenly showing in­ability to function alone, needing assist­
ance in eating and excretion and requir­ing constant watching, or compelling 
13	Originally edited by Philip Mairet; additional editing by Heinz Ansbacher.

	
	
Position in Family Constellation Influences Lifestyle	
75
solicitude by getting into danger and terrifying the parents. The appearance 
of such characteristics as jealousy, envy, or egotism has an obvious relation to 
the outside circumstances, but he may also indulge in—or prolong—illnesses 
such as asthma and whooping cough. The tension in certain types (depend-
ing upon the bodily organization) may pro­duce headache, migraine, stomach 
trou­ble, petit mal, or hysterical chorea. Slighter symptoms are evinced in a 
tired appearance and a general change of behavior for the worse, with which 
the child impresses his parents. Natu­rally, the later the rival baby is born, the 
more intelligible and understand­able will the methods appear which the first 
child uses in his change of be­havior. If dethroned very early, the eldest child’s 
efforts are largely “instinctive” in character. The style of his striv­ing will in 
any case be conditioned by the reaction of others in the environ­ment and his 
evaluation of it. If, for in­stance, the dethroned child finds that fighting does 
not pay, he may lose hope, become depressed, and score a success by worrying 
and frightening the par­ents. After learning that such ways are successful for 
him he will resort to ever more subtle uses of misfortune to gain his end.
The type of activity which in later life will be based on the prototype was 
shown in the case of a man who became afraid to swallow for fear of chok-
ing. Why did he select this symptom in­stead of another? The patient had 
an immediate social difficulty in the beha­vior of an intimate friend, who 
attacked him violently. Both the patient and his wife had come to the conclu-
sion that he must put up with it no longer, but he did not feel strong enough 
to face the struggle. Upon inquiry into his childhood, it appeared that he had 
had such a difficulty in connection with swallowing before. He was the eldest 
child, and had been surpassed by his younger brother, but he had at that time 
been able, by means of difficulty in eating, to make his father and mother 
watch over him. Now faced with a per­sonal defeat in later life, and not know­
ing what to do about it, he fell back upon this old line of defense, as though it 
might make someone watch over him and help him.
Effects of Dethronement
The dethronement of the first child by another may make it turn away from 
the mother towards the father, and a very critical attitude towards the mother 
will then persist ever after. A person of this type is always afraid of being 
“pushed back” all through life; and we notice that in all his affairs he likes 
to make one step forward and then one backward, so that nothing decisive 
can happen. He always feels justified in fearing that a favorable situation will 
change. Towards all the three life­ questions he will take up a hesitative atti-
tude, with certain problem behavior and neurotic tendencies. Problem beha­
vior and symptoms will be felt by him to be a help and a security. He will 
approach society, for example, with a hostile attitude; he may constantly be 
changing his occupation; and in his erotic life he may experience failure in 

76	
Gary D. McKay
functioning, and may show polygam­ous tendencies—if he falls in love with 
one person he very quickly falls in love with another. Dubious and unwilling 
to decide anything, he becomes a great procrastinator. I met a very perfect 
example of this type once, and his earli­est remembrance was this: “At three 
years of age I caught scarlet fever. By mistake my mother gave me carbolic 
acid for a gargle, and I nearly died.” He had a younger sister who was the 
favorite of his mother. Later in life this patient developed a curious fan­tasy 
of a young girl ruling and bullying an older one. Sometimes he imagined her 
riding the old woman like a horse.
First Child May Keep Position
The eldest child may, however, be so firmly fixed in the parents’ favor that he 
cannot be supplanted. This may be either by virtue of his own good native 
endowment and development, or be­cause of the second child’s inferiority, 
if the latter is ugly, organically handi­capped, or badly brought up. In such a 
case it is the second child who becomes the problem, and the eldest may have 
a very satisfactory development, as in the following case:
Of two brothers, differing four years in age, the elder had been much 
at­tached to the mother, and when the younger was born the father had been 
ill for some time. Caring for the father took the entire time and most of the 
attention of the mother. The elder boy, trained in friendship and obedience 
to her, tried to help and relieve her, and the younger boy was put into the care 
of a nurse, who spoiled him. This situa­tion lasted for some years, so that the 
younger child had no reasonable chance to compete with the elder for the 
love of the mother; and he soon abandoned the useful side of life, and became 
wild and disobedient. His behavior became still worse four years later, when 
a little sister was born, to whom the mother was able to devote herself owing 
to the death of the father. Thus twice excluded from the mother’s attention 
and spoiled by the nurse, this second child turned out to be the worst pupil in 
his class, while the elder boy was always the best. Feeling hopelessly handi-
capped in competition with his brother, unloved at home, and re­proached at 
the school (from which he was finally expelled), this second son could find 
no goal in life but to dom­inate his mother by worrying her. Being physi-
cally stronger than either the brother or sister, he took to tyrannizing over 
them. He trifled away his time, and at puberty he began to waste money and 
to incur debts. His honest and well-­meaning parent, provided a very strict 
tutor for him who did not, of course, grasp the situation, and dealt with it 
superficially by punishments. The boy grew into a man who strove to get rich 
quickly and easily. He fell an easy prey to unscrupulous advisers, followed 
them into fruitless enterprises, and not only lost his money but involved his 
mother in his dishonorable debts.

	
	
Position in Family Constellation Influences Lifestyle	
77
The facts of the case clearly showed that all the courage this man ever 
displayed resulted from his unsatisfied desire to conquer. He played a queer 
game from time to time, especially when things went against him. His nurse 
was now an old woman, earning her living in the family as a superior servant; 
she still worshipped the second boy and always interceded for him in his 
nu­merous scrapes. The odd sport in which he indulged was to lock her in a 
room with him and make her play at soldiers with him, commanding her to 
march, to fall and to jump up again at his orders; and sometimes he quick-
ened her obedience by beating her with a stick. She always obeyed although 
she screamed and resisted.
This singular sport revealed what he really wanted, the completest 
domina­tion in the easiest way. Some writers would describe this as sadistic 
conduct, but I demur at the use of a word which implies a sexual interest, for I 
could discover nothing of the kind in it. In sexual matters the man was prac­
tically normal, except that he changed his mates too frequently and always 
chose inferiors. Genuine sadism itself is a domineering tendency availing 
itself of the sexual urge for its expression, owing to the discouragement of the 
individual in other spheres.
In the end this man brought him­self into very bad circumstances, while 
the elder brother became very successful and highly respected.
Attitude of Eldest Toward Authority
The eldest child, partly because he often finds himself acting as representative 
of the parental authority, is usu­ally a great believer in power and the laws. The 
intuitive perception of this fact is shown in the ancient and per­sistent custom 
of primogeniture. It is often observable in literature. Thus Theodore Fontane 
wrote of his per­plexity at his father’s pleasure in hear­ing that ten thousand 
Poles had de­feated twenty thousand Russians. His father was a French emi-
grant who had sided with the Poles, but to the writer it was an inconceiv-
able idea that the­ stronger could be beaten; he felt that the status quo should 
be preserved and that might must, and ought to, suc­ceed. This was because 
Theodore Fon­tane was a first child. In any case the eldest child is readier than 
others to recognize power, and likes to support it. This is shown in the lives of 
scientists, politicians, and artists, as well as in those of simpler people. Even if 
the person is a revolutionary we find him harboring a conservative tendency, 
as in the case of Robespierre.
Position of Second Child
The second child is in a very different situation, never having had the experi­
ence of being the only one. Though he is also petted at first, he is never the 
sole center of attention. From the first, life is for him more or less of a race; 

78	
Gary D. McKay
the first child sets the pace, and the sec­ond tries to surpass him. What results 
from competition between two such children depends on their courage and 
self-confidence. If the elder becomes dis­couraged he will be in a serious situa­
tion, especially if the younger is really strong and outstrips him.
If the second child loses hope of equality he will try to shine more rather 
than to be more. That is, if the elder is too strong for him, the younger will 
tend to escape to the useless side of life. This is shown in many cases of prob-
lem behavior in children where laziness, lying, or stealing begins to pave the 
way towards neurosis, crime, and self-de­struction.
As a rule, however, the second child is in a better position than the first. 
His pacemaker stimulates him to effort. Also, it is a common thing for the 
first child to hasten his own dethronement by fighting against it with envy, 
jealousy and truculence, which lower him in the parental favor. It is when the 
first child is brilliant that the second child is in the worst situation.
But the elder child is not always the worst sufferer, even when dethroned. 
I saw this in the case of a girl who had been the center of attention and 
ex­tremely spoiled until she reached the age of three, when a sister was born. 
After the birth of her sister she became very jealous and developed into a 
prob­lem-child. The younger sister grew up with sweet and charming man-
ners, and was much the more beloved of the two. But when this younger sister 
came to school the situation was not to her taste; she was no longer spoiled 
and, being unprepared to encounter difficul­ties, was frightened and tried to 
with­draw. To escape defeat both in fact and in appearance, she adopted a 
device very common among the discouraged—she never finished anything 
she was doing, so that it always escaped final judg­ment, and she wasted as 
much time as possible. We find that time is the great enemy of such dis-
couraged people for, under the pressure of the requirements made on them 
by social living, they feel as if time were persecuting them continually with 
the question, “How will you use me?” Hence their strange efforts to “kill 
time” with silly activities. This girl always came late and post­poned every 
action. She did not antag­onize anyone, even if reproved, but her charm and 
sweetness, which were main­tained as before, did not prevent her from being 
a greater worry and burden than her fighting sister.
When the elder sister became engaged to be married the younger sister 
was desperately unhappy. Though she had won the first stage of the race with 
her rival by gentleness and obedience, she had given up in the later stages 
of school and social life. She felt her sister’s mar­riage as a defeat, and that 
her any hope of regaining ground would be to marry also. However, she had 
not courage enough to choose a suitable partner, and automatically sought a 
second-best. First she fell in love with a man suffering seriously from tuber-
culosis. Can we re­gard this as a step forward? Does it con­tradict her preestab-
lished custom of leaving every task unfinished? Not at all. The poor health of 

	
	
Position in Family Constellation Influences Lifestyle	
79
her lover and her parents’ natural resistance to the match were sure causes of 
delay and frustra­tion. She preferred an element of im­possibility in her choice. 
Another scarce­ly eligible partner appeared later in her life, in a man thirty 
years older than herself. He was senile, but did not die as the previous one 
had done, and the marriage took place. However, it was not a great success 
for her, as the attitude of hopelessness in which she had trained herself did 
not allow her to undertake any useful activity. It also inhibited her sexual 
life, which she considered dis­gusting, feeling humiliated and soiled by it. She 
used her usual methods to evade love and postpone relations at the appropri-
ate times. She did not quite succeed in this, however, and became pregnant, 
which she regarded as another hopeless state, and from that time on­ward not 
only rejected caresses but com­plained that she felt soiled, and began to wash 
and clean all day long. She not only washed herself, but cleaned every­thing 
that had been touched by her hus­band, by the maid servant or the visitors, 
including furniture, linen, and shoes. Soon she allowed no one to touch any 
of the objects in her room, and lived un­der the stress of a neurosis—in this 
case, a washing-compulsion. Thus she was excused from the solution of her 
prob­lems, and attained a very lofty goal of superiority—she felt more fastidi-
ously clean than anyone else.
Exaggerated striving for a lofty goal of high distinctiveness is well 
expressed in the neurosis of “washing-compul­sion.” As far as I have been able 
to ascertain, this illness is always used as a means of avoiding sexual rela-
tions by a person who feels that sex is “dirty.” Invariably it gives the fantastic 
compen­sation of feeling cleaner than everybody else.
However, due to his feeling life to be a race, the second child usually trains 
himself more stiffly and, if his courage holds, is well on the way to overcome 
the eldest on his own ground. If he has a little less courage he will choose to 
sur­pass the eldest in another field, and if still less, he will become more criti-
cal and antagonistic than usual, not in an objective but in a personal man-
ner. In childhood this attitude appears in rela­tion to trifles: he will want the 
window shut when the elder opens it, turn on the light when the other wants 
it extin­guished, and be consistently contrary and opposite.
This situation is well described in the Bible story of Esau and Jacob, where 
Jacob succeeds in usurping the privi­leges of the eldest. The second child lives 
in a condition like that of an en­gine under a constantly excessive head of 
steam. It was well expressed by a little boy of four, who cried out, weep­ing, “I 
am so unhappy because I can never be as old as my brother.”
The fact that children repeat the psychic behavior of older brothers and sis-
ters and of parents is, by some writers, attributed to an “instinct” of imitation 
or to “identification” of the self with another; but it is explained better when we 
see that a child imitates only that kind of behavior which he finds to be a suc-
cessful way of asserting an equal­ity which is denied to him on other grounds. 

80	
Gary D. McKay
Psychic resemblances to the conduct of ancestors or even of savages do not sig-
nify that the pattern of psychic reaction is hereditary, but that many individuals 
use the same means of of­fense and defense in similar situations. When we find 
so much resemblance be­tween all first children, all second, and all youngest 
children, we may well ask what part is left for heredity to play in determining 
those resemblances. Thus, as psychologists we have also not sufficient evidence 
to accept the theory that the mental development of the indi­vidual ought to 
repeat the development of the race of mankind successive stages.
In his later life, the second child is rarely able to endure the strict leader­
ship of others or to accept the idea of “eternal laws.” He will be much more 
inclined to believe, rightly or wrongly, that there is no power in the world 
which cannot be overthrown. Beware of his revolutionary subtleties! I have 
known quite a few cases in which the second child has availed himself of 
the strangest means to undermine the power of ruling persons or tradi-
tions. Not everybody, certainly not these rebels themselves, would easily 
agree with my view of their behavior. For though it is possible to endanger 
a ruling power with slander, there are more insidious ways. For example, by 
means of ex­cessive praise one may idealize and glorify a man or a method 
until the reality cannot stand up to it. Both methods are employed in Mark 
An­tony’s oration in “Julius Caesar.” I have shown elsewhere how Dostoievsky 
made masterly use of the latter means, perhaps unconsciously, to undermine 
the pillars of old Russia. Those who re­member his representation of Father 
Zosima in “The Brothers Karamazov,” and who also recall the fact that he was 
a second son, will have little difficulty agreeing with my suggestion regarding 
the influence played by position in the family.
I need hardly say that the style of life of a second child, like that of the first, 
may also appear in another child—one in a different chronological position 
in the family—if the situation is of a similar pattern.
Situation of Youngest Child
The youngest child is also a distinct type, exhibiting certain characteristics of 
style which we seldom fail to find. He has always been the baby of the family, 
and has never known the tragedy of being dispossessed by a younger, which 
is more or less the fate of all other children. In this respect his situation is 
a favored one, and his educa­tion is often relatively better, as the economic 
position of the family is likely to be more secure in its later years. The grown-
up children not infrequently join with the parents in spoiling the young­est 
child, who is thus likely to be too much indulged. On the other hand, the 
youngest may also be too much stimulated by elders—both mistakes are well 
known to our educationists. In the former case (of over-indulgence) the child 
will strive throughout life to be supported by others. In the latter case the 
child will rather resemble a second child, proceeding competitively, striving 

	
	
Position in Family Constellation Influences Lifestyle	
81
to overtake all those who set the pace for him, and in many cases failing to 
do so. Often, therefore, he looks for a field of activity remote from that of 
the other members of the family—in which case, I believe, he gives a sign 
of hidden cowardice. If the family is com­mercial, for instance, the youngest 
often inclines to art or poetry; if scientific, he wants to be a salesman. I have 
remarked elsewhere that many of the most suc­cessful men of our time were 
youngest children, and I am convinced this is also the case in any other age. 
In biblical history we find a remarkable number of youngest children among 
the leading characters, such as David, Saul, and Joseph. The story of Joseph 
is a particu­larly good example, and illustrates many of the views we have 
advanced. His younger brother Benjamin was seven­teen years his junior and, 
therefore, played little part in Joseph’s develop­ment. Joseph’s psychological 
position, therefore, was that of a youngest child.
It is interesting to note how well Joseph’s brethren understood his dreams. 
More precisely, I should say that they understood the feeling and emotion of 
the dreamer, a point to which I shall return later. The purpose of a dream is 
not to be understood but to create a mood and a tension of feeling.
In the fairy tales of all ages and peoples the youngest child plays the role 
of a conqueror. I infer that in earlier times, when both circumstances and 
men’s apprehension of them were simpler, it was easier to collect experi­ences 
and to understand the coherent current of the life of the latest-born. This tra-
ditional grasp of character sur­vives in folk-lore when the actual ex­periences 
are forgotten.
A strange case of the type of youngest child who is spoiled, which I have 
al­ready given elsewhere, is that of a man with a “begging” style of life. I found 
another such case in that of a physician who was having difficulties with his 
mouth and was fearful of cancer. For twenty years he had been unable to 
swallow normally and could take only liquid food. He had recently had a 
dental plate made for him, which he was continually pushing up and down 
with his tongue, a habit which caused pain and soreness of the tongue, so that 
he feared he was developing cancer.
He was the youngest of a family of three, with two older sisters, and had 
been weakly and much indulged. At the age of forty he could eat only alone or 
with his sisters. This is a clear indication that he was comfortable only in his 
favorite situation—of being spoiled by the sisters. Every approach to society 
had been difficult for him. He had no friends, and only a few as­sociates whom 
he met weekly in a restaurant. His attitude towards the three questions of life 
being one of fear and trembling, we can understand that his tension when 
with other people made him unable to swallow food. He lived in a kind of 
stage fright, fearful that he was not making a sufficiently good impression.
This man answered the second life­ question (that of occupation) with tol­
erable competence, because his parents had been poor and he could not live 

82	
Gary D. McKay
without earning, but he suffered ex­ceedingly in his profession, and nearly 
fainted when he had to take his exam­inations. His ambition, as a general 
practitioner, was to obtain a position with a fixed salary, and, later on, a pen-
sion. This great attraction to a safe official position is a sign of a feeling of 
insecurity. People with a deep sense of inadequacy commonly aspire to the 
“safe job.” For years he gave himself up to his symptoms. When he became 
older he lost some of his teeth, and decided to have a plate made, which 
became the occasion of the develop­ment of his latest symptom.
When he came to me, the patient was sixty years of age, and was still living 
in the care of his two sisters. Both were suffering from their age, and it was 
clear to me that this man, aging, and spoiled by two unmarried and much 
older women, was facing a new situation. He was very much afraid his sisters 
would die. What should he do in that case—he who needed to be con­tinually 
noticed and watched over? He had never been in love, for he could never 
find a woman whom he could trust with his fragile happiness! How could 
he believe that anyone would spoil him as his mother and older sis­ters had 
done. It was easy to guess the form of his sexuality—masturbation, and some 
petting affairs with girls. But recently an older woman had wanted to marry 
him; and he wished to appear more pleasant and attractive in be­havior. The 
beginning of a struggle seemed imminent, but his new dental plate came to 
the rescue. In the nick of time he became anxious about con­tracting cancer 
of the tongue.
He himself, as a doctor, was very much in doubt about the reality of this 
cancer. The many surgeons and physi­cians he consulted all tried to dissuade 
him from belief in it; but he persisted in his uncertainty, continued to press 
his tongue against the plate until it hurt; then he consulted another doctor.
Such preoccupations—“overvalued ideas,” as Wernicke calls them—are 
carefully cherished in the arrangement of a neurosis. The patient shies away 
from the right objective by fixing his glances more and more firmly upon 
a point somewhere off a good, produc­tive course. He does this in order to 
swerve out of a direction which is beginning to be indicated by logical neces­
sity. The logical solution of’ his prob­lem would be antagonistic to his style of 
life, and as the style of life rules (since it is the only way of approach to life the 
individual has learned), he has to establish emotions and feelings which will 
support his life-style and will insure his escape.
In spite of the fact that this man was sixty years old, the only logical solu-
tion was to find a trustworthy substitute for his spoiling sisters before their 
depar­ture. His distrustful mind could not rise to the hope of achieving this 
pos­sibility; nor could his doubts be dissi­pated by logic, because he had built 
up throughout his life a definite resist­ance to marriage. Because it improved 
his appearance, the dental plate should have been a help towards marriage 
but he made it into an insuperable impe­diment.

	
	
Position in Family Constellation Influences Lifestyle	
83
In the treatment of this case it was useless to attack the belief in the can­cer. 
When he understood the coherence of his behavior the patient’s symptoms 
were very much alleviated. The next day he told me of a dream: “I was sitting 
in the house of a third sister at a birthday celebration of her thirteen-­year-old 
son. I was entirely healthy, felt no pain, and could swallow anything.” But 
this dream was related to an epi­sode in his life which took place fifteen years 
before. Its meaning is very obvious: “If only I were fifteen years younger.” 
Thus is the style maintained.
Difficulties of Only Child
The only child also has his typical difficulties. Retaining the center of the 
stage without effort, and generally pampered, he forms a style of life that calls 
for his being supported by others and at the same time ruling them. Very 
often he grows up in an intimate en­vironment. The parents may be fearful 
people and afraid to have more chil­dren. Sometimes the mother, neurotic 
before this advent, does not feel equal to rearing more children, and develops 
such behavior that everyone must feel, “It is a blessing that this woman has no 
more children.” Birth control may absorb much of the attention of the family, 
in which case we may infer tension, and that the two parents are united to 
carry on their life in anxiety. The care then devoted to the only child never 
ceases by day or night, and often impresses the child with a belief that it 
is an almost mortal danger not to be watched and guarded. Such chil­dren 
often grow up cautious, and sooner or later they may often become success­ful 
and gain the esteem and attention they desire. But if they come into wholly 
different conditions where life is difficult for them, they may show strik­ing 
insufficiency.
Only children are often sweet and affectionate, and later in life they may 
develop charming manners in order to appeal to others, because they have 
trained themselves this way both in early life and later. They are usually 
closer to the more indulgent parent, which is generally the mother; and in 
some cases develop a hostile attitude to­wards the other parent.
The proper upbringing of an only child is not easy, but it is possible for 
parents to understand the problem and to solve it correctly. We do not regard 
the only child’s situation as dangerous, but we find that, in the absence of 
the best educational methods, very bad re­sults frequently occur which would 
have been avoided if there had been brothers, and sisters.
Case of Homosexual Development
I will give a case of the development of an only child, a boy whose attach­ment 
was entirely to the mother. The father was of no importance in the family; he 
contributed materially but was obviously without interest in the child. The 
mother was a dressmaker who worked at home, and the little boy spent all 

84	
Gary D. McKay
his time with her, sitting or playing beside her. He played at sewing, imitat-
ing his mother’s activity, and ultimately became very very proficient in it, but 
he never took any part in boys’ games. The mother left the house each day at 
5 p.m. to deliver her work, and returned punctually at six. During that time 
the boy was left alone with an older girl cousin, and played with sewing mate-
rials. He be­came interested in timepieces, because he was always looking for 
his mother’s return. He could tell the time when he was only three years old.
The cousin played games with him in which she was the bridegroom and 
he was the bride, and it is noteworthy that he looked more like a girl than she 
did. When he came to school he was quite unprepared to associate with boys, 
but he was able to establish him­self as a favored exception, for others liked his 
mild and courteous disposi­tion. He began to approach his goal of superiority 
by being attractive, espe­cially so to boys and men. At fourteen years of age 
he acted the part of a girl in a school play. The audience had not the slightest 
doubt that he was a girl; a young fellow began to flirt with him and he was 
much pleased to have ex­cited such admiration.
He had worn girlish dress during his first four years, and until the age 
of ten he did not know whether he was a boy or a girl. When his sex was 
explained to him he began to mastur­bate, and in his fantasy he soon con-
nected sexual desire with what he had felt when boys touched him or kissed 
him. To be admired and wooed was his goal in life; to this end he accom­
modated all his characteristics in such a way that he might be admired espe­
cially by boys. His older cousin was the only girl he had known, and she was 
gentle and sweet, but she had played the man’s role in their games and other-
wise she had ruled him like his mother. A great feeling of inferi­ority was his 
legacy from his mother’s overindulgent and excessive care. She had married 
late, at the age of thirty­-eight, and she did not wish to have more children by 
the husband she dis­liked. Her anxiety, then was doubtless of earlier origin, 
and her late marriage indicative of a hesitant attitude to life. Very strict in 
sexual matters, she wanted her child to be educated in ignorance of sex.
At the age of sixteen this patient looked and walked like a flirtatious girl, 
and he soon fell into the snare of homo­sexuality. In order to comprehend this 
development we must remember that he had had, in a psychological sense, 
the education of a girl, and that the difference between the sexes had been 
made clear to him much too late in his development. Also he had experienced 
his triumphs in the feminine role; and had no certainty of gaining as much 
by playing the man. In the imitation of girlish behavior he could not but see 
an open road to his goal of superiority.
It is my experience that boys who have this type of upbringing always look 
like girls. The growth of the or­gans and probably also of the glands is par-
tially ruled by the environment and the child’s attitude toward it; and they 
are adapted to them. Thus if such an early environmental training to­wards 

	
	
Position in Family Constellation Influences Lifestyle	
85
femininity is succeeded by a per­sonal goal of the same tendency, the wish to 
be a favored girl will influence not only the mind, but also the carriage and 
even the body.
This case illustrates very dearly how a pervert trains himself mentally 
into his abnormal attitude towards sex. There is no necessity to postulate an 
inborn or hereditary organic deviation.
When the boy in question came to me he was involved in a relationship 
with another boy who was the neglect­ed second child of a very domineer-
ing mother; this boy’s striving was to over­come men by his personal charm. 
It was by his charm that he had succeeded early in ruling his weak father. 
When he reached the age of sexual expres­sion he was shocked. His notion of 
women was founded upon experience of his domineering mother, who had 
neglected him. He felt the need to dom­inate but he entertained no hope of 
dominating women for, in accordance with the generalization he had made 
of his early experiences connected with a strong and ruling mother, he had 
come to feel that a woman was too powerful to control. His only chance to 
be the victor, he felt, was in rela­tionship with men; so he turned homo­sexual. 
Consider then the hopeless situa­tion of my patient! He wanted to con­quer by 
female means—by having the charm of a girl—but his friend wanted to be a 
conqueror of men.
I was able to make my patient realize that, whatever he himself thought 
or felt in this liaison, his friend felt him­self to be a conquering man-charmer. 
My patient, therefore, could not be sure that his was the real conquest, and his 
homosexuality was accordingly checked. By this means I was able to break 
off the relationship, for he saw that it was stupid to enter into such a fruitless 
competition. This also made it easier for him to understand that his abnor-
mality was due to a lack of in­terest in others, and that his feeling of inad-
equacy, as the result of being pampered, had led him to measure everything 
in—terms of personal tri­umph. He then left me for some months; when he 
visited me again he had had sexual relations with a girl, but had tried to play a 
masochistic part towards her. He obviously wished, in order to prove to him-
self that his original view of the world was correct, to experience with her the 
same inferi­ority that he had felt with his mother and cousin. This masochistic 
attitude was shown in the fact that his goal of superiority required that the 
girl should do to him what he commanded, and he wished to complete the 
act at this point, without achieving sexual inter­course, so that the normal 
was still excluded.
The great difficulty of changing a homosexual lies not only in his lack of 
general social adjustment, but also in the invariable absence of right training 
toward the sexual role, which ought to begin in early childhood. The atti-
tude towards the other sex is strained in a mistaken direction almost from 
the be­ginning of life. In order to realize this fact one must note the kind 

86	
Gary D. McKay
of intel­ligence, of behavior, and of expectations which such a case exhibits. 
Compare normal persons walking in the street or mixing in society with a 
homosexual in the same situations! Those who are normal are chiefly inter-
ested in the op­posite sex, the homosexuals only in their own. The latter evade 
normal sexuality not only in behavior but even in dreams. The patient I have 
just described used frequently to dream that he was climb­ing a mountain, 
and ascending it by a serpentine road. The dream expresses his discouraged 
and circuitous approach to life. He moved rather like a snake, bending his 
head and shoulders at every step.
In conclusion I will recall some of the most disastrous cases I have known 
among only children. A woman asked me to help her and her husband in the 
case of their only boy, who tyrannized over them terribly. He was then six-
teen, a very good pupil at school, but quarrel­some and insulting in behavior. 
He was specially combative toward his father, who had been stricter with 
him than had the mother. He antagonized both parents continually, and if 
he could not get what he wanted he made open attack, sometimes wrestling 
with his father, spitting at him, and using bad language. Such a development 
is pos­sible in the case of a pampered and only child who is trained to give 
nothing but to expect everything—and gets it, until the time comes when 
in­dulgence can go on no longer. In such cases it is difficult to treat the patient 
in his old environment, because too many old recollections are revived, 
which disturb the harmony of the family.
Another case was brought to me, a boy of eighteen, who had been ac­cused 
of murdering his father. He was an only child, and a spoiled one, who had 
stopped his education and was wasting, in bad company, all the money he 
could extort from his parents. One day when his father refused to give him 
money, the boy killed him by hitting him on the head with a hammer. No 
one but the lawyer who was defending him knew that he had killed another 
person several months before. It was obvious that he felt perfectly sure of 
escaping discovery this second time.
In yet another case of criminal devel­opment, an only boy was brought 
up by a very well-educated woman who wanted him to be a genius. At her 
death another experienced woman continued his nurture in the same way, 
until she became aware of his tyrannical tenden­cies. She believed it to be due 
to sexual repression, and had him analyzed. His tyrannical attitude did not 
cease, how­ever, and she then wished to be rid of him. But he broke into her 
house one night intending to rob her, and strangled her.
All the characteristics which I have described as typical of certain posi-
tions in the family can, of course, be modified by other circumstances. With 
all their possibilities of variation, however, the outlines of these patterns of 
behavior will be found to be substantially-cor­rect. Among other possibilities, 
one may mention the position of a boy growing up among girls. If he is older 

	
	
Position in Family Constellation Influences Lifestyle	
87
than they are he develops very much the same as an elder brother close to a 
younger sister. Differences in age, in the affec­tion of the parents, and in the 
prepara­tion for life, are all reflected in the individual pattern of behavior.
Where a female majority and feminine influence dominates the whole 
environment, a single boy is likely to have a goal of superiority and a style 
of life which are directed towards femininity. This occurs in various degrees 
and various ways: in a humble devotion to women and worship of them, in an 
imitative attitude, tending towards homosexuality, or in a tyrannical attitude 
towards women. People usually avoid educating boys in a too feminine envi-
ronment; for it seems to be a matter of general experience that such children 
develop towards one of two extremes—either exaggerated vanity or audacity. 
In the story of Achilles there are many points from which we may assume 
that the latter case was well understood in antiquity.
Importance of Evaluation of Women and Men
We find the same contradictory possibilities in the cases of only girls who 
grow up among boys or in a wholly masculine environment. In such cir-
cumstances a girl may, of course, be spoiled with too much attention and 
affection; but she may also adopt boys’ attitudes and wish to avoid looking 
like a girl. In any case, what happens is largely dependent upon how men and 
women are valued in the environment. In every environment there is always 
a prevailing attitude of mind in regard to this question; and it is largely in 
accordance with the relative value given to men and women in that attitude 
that the child will wish to assume the role of a man or of a woman.
Other views of like which prevail in the family may also influence the 
pattern of a child’s behavior, or bring it into difficulties, as for example the 
superstition about character being inherited, and the belief in fancy methods 
of education. Any exaggerated method of education is likely to cause injury 
to the child, a fact we can often trace in the children of teachers, psycholo-
gists, doctors, and people engaged in the administration of laws—policemen, 
lawyers, officers, and clergymen. Such educational exaggerations often come 
to light in the life-histories of problem-children, delinquents, and neurot-
ics. The influence of both factors—the superstition regarding heredity and a 
fanatical mode of training—appear in the following case:
A woman came to me with a daughter of nine, both of them in tears and 
desperation. The mother told me that the girl had only recently come to live 
with her, after having spent years under the care of foster parents in the coun-
try. There she had completed the third grade of her schooling, and she had 
entered the fourth grade in the city school, but her work had become still 
worse, and she was graded still lower and put in the second. The mother was 
thoroughly upset at this and obsessed with the idea that her daughter’s defi-
ciency was in­herited from the father.

88	
Gary D. McKay
At first sight it was evident to me that the mother was treating the child 
with exaggerated educational insist­ence, which in this case was particu-
larly unfortunate, because the girl had been brought up in a congenial, easy 
environ­ment and expected still greater kind­ness from the mother. But in her 
eager­ness that her child should not be a failure the mother was overstrict, 
and this gave the child the keenest disap­pointment. She developed a great 
emo­tional tension which effectually blocked her progress both at school and 
at home. Exhortation, reproaches, criticism, and spanking only intensified 
the emotion, with consequent hopelessness on both sides. To confirm my 
impression, I spoke with the girl alone about her foster parents. She told me 
how happy her life with them had been; and then, bursting into tears, told me 
also how she had at first enjoyed being with her mother.
I had to make the mother understand the mistakes in which she had 
become involved. The girl could not be expect­ed to put up with such a hard 
training. Putting myself in her place I could perfectly understand her con-
duct as an intelligent reaction—that is, as a form of accusation and revenge. 
In a situa­tion of this type, but where there is less social feeling, it is perfectly 
possible for a child to turn delinquent, neurotic, or even to attempt suicide. 
But in this case I was sure it would not be difficult for the girl to improve if 
the mother could be convinced of the truth, and could impress the child with 
a sufficiently definite change of attitude. I therefore took the mother in hand, 
and explained to her that the belief in inheritance was nothing but a nui-
sance, after which I helped her to realize what her daugh­ter had not unrea-
sonably expected when she came to live with her, and how she must have 
been disappointed and shaken by such disciplinary treat­ment, to the point of 
utter inability to do what was expected of her. I wanted the mother to confess 
to the child that she had been mistaken and would like to reform her method, 
so I told her I did not really believe she could bring herself to do it, but that it 
was what I would do in the circumstances. She answered decidedly, “I will do 
it.” In my presence and with my help, she ex­plained her mistake to the child, 
and they kissed and embraced and cried to­gether. Two weeks later they both 
vis­ited me, gay and smiling and very well satisfied. The mother brought me 
a message from the third-grade teacher: “a miracle must have happened. The 
girl is the best pupil in the class.”

89
8
On the Essence and 
Origin of Character
An Introduction
James Robert Bitter
In September 1929, Agostino Gemelli, an Italian psychiatrist/psychologist, 
presented a paper to the Italian Society for the Progress of Science, an article 
later published, according to Gemelli’s abstractor Steven Skelton (cited in 
Adler, 1935/1988), in the Acts of the Italian Society for the Progress of Science. 
Gemelli sought to articulate a comprehensive model of personality that 
encompassed “biological, sociological, psychiatric, and psychological per-
spectives” (Adler, 1935/1988, p. 424). While apparently offering a bit of praise 
for psychoanalysis, which in his response clearly irritates Adler, Gemelli’s 
article generally rejects a causal-mechanistic understanding of humanity in 
favor of the holistic-teleological orientation shared by Individual Psychology. 
In Gemelli’s model, human beings acquire and use character traits rather than 
have them—and these traits are “variable, and amenable to change or correc-
tion” (p. 424). Even though Gemelli’s ideas were developed at the same time—
and in much the same way—that Adler was developing Individual Psychology, 
he was apparently unaware of Adler’s work when he first presented his paper. 
Adler responds some 6 years later in 1935 in an effort to both honor the 
man and his work and to clearly delineate the philosophical foundations for 
Individual Psychology.
In his afterword, Adler (1935/1988) emphasizes the following positions:
•	 There is a unity to the human personality that is best understood in 
terms of the individual’s movement toward or away from others and by 
the life-goal each person chooses;
•	 Human character is a systemic construct; individuals develop character 
in relation to others and within the social contexts of their lives;

90	
James Robert Bitter
•	 Individual character is neither inherited nor absorbed; it is self-­
constructed in relation to the tasks of life (Gemelli’s “tasks of character-
ology”) that the individual sets before him or herself;
•	 The community feeling (Gemeinschaftsgefuhl) and its action line social 
interest (Ansbacher, 1992), are the determining factors in the develop-
ment of character and in living a good and productive life.
In the more than 70 years since Adler’s death, the fields of psychiatry, psy-
chology, counseling, and social work have moved increasingly away from the 
­reductionistic/mechanistic conceptualizations that originally characterized 
Freud’s (1914/1995) model—and that briefly reemerged in the structural-strate-
gic systemic models of the 1970s (see Bitter, 2009). The systemic holism that was 
a foundation for Adler’s understanding of human nature is today reflected in 
almost all aspects of the helping professions as well as the psychologies that sup-
port them.
The Unity of the Personality
Every individual is, so to speak, a crystallized unity-become-flesh in the whole 
evolutionary striving for perfection, with all its mistakes and preferences. (Adler, 
1935/1988, p. 426)
Adler is writing less than 2 years before the end of his life. From his earliest for-
mulations, he has authored a growth model for psychology, one that sees human 
beings as whole entities, striving for an improved and better position in life. It is a 
teleological perspective: Human beings self-select goals toward which they move, 
and it is each individual’s style of movement that becomes one’s character. Of all 
the possible goals that a person might posit, it is a life-goal that anticipates per-
fection, self-actualization, and/or fulfillment that brings unity to the personality. 
With the formulation of a life-goal, every thought, feeling, action, trait or part, 
belief, conviction, and decision can be best understood as part of the individual’s 
movement toward that goal, as an expression of one’s style of living.
This conceptualization of a unified movement toward the future permeates 
many of the models that constitute modern and postmodern approaches to psy-
chotherapy. It was the foundation for Maslow’s hierarchy of needs (Hoffman, 
1988), and the overall development of what came to be called humanistic psy-
chology. Such unified movement is evident, for example, in the later develop-
ments of Person-Centered Therapy (Rogers, 1961/1995, 1980), Existential Therapy 
(Bugental, 1992, 1999; May, 1953), and Reality Therapy (Glasser, 1999).
Erv and Miriam Polster (1974) expanded Fritz Perl’s (Perls, Hefferline, & 
Goodman, 1951/1994) emphasis on the here and now to include the there and 
then, noting that every moment in the present has a foundation in those moments 

	
	
On the Essence and Origin of Character	
91
which precede it. Erv Polster (1987) went on to develop the notion of tight thera-
peutic sequences and the anticipation in the present of the next, thus creating 
a therapeutic intervention in human movement. There is always a unification 
of personality in this movement toward the future; even in his delineation and 
therapeutic use of parts, Polster (1995/2005) recognizes that there is the person, 
the self, that contains and uses these parts with definite purpose.
Adler (1927/1965) initially defined human development as a movement from 
a felt minus position (inferiority feelings) to a felt plus position. To be sure, such 
movement is the basis for all of the growth orientations associated with human-
istic psychology as well as those postmodern models that focus on preferred out-
comes, that is, solution-focused/solution-oriented therapy (Walter & Peller, 2000) 
and narrative therapy (White & Epston, 1990; White, 2005).
Rasmussen (2005, 2010) makes the most use of Adler’s concept of movement 
when he merges Adlerian psychology with Millon’s (1990, 1996, 1999) evolu-
tionary psychology. Rasmussen and Millon describe human personality, includ-
ing pathological processes, as at once protective (Adler’s, 1996a, 1996b, concept 
of retreat) and anticipatory of desired outcomes: again, movement from a felt-
minus to a felt-plus. Adler (1935/1988) clearly anticipates the development of 
evolutionary psychology: “Characterology can, therefore, only be an investiga-
tion into the relationship of the individual to the entire evolutionary process of 
life” (p. 426).
Systemic Theory
The character cannot be separated from social reference (Soziale Bezogenheit). 
Character does not exist in a vacuum. Properly understood, every character trait 
shows the degree of the capacity for cooperation, coexistence, and common inter-
est (Mitarbeit, Mitleben, Mitlieben). (Adler, 1935/1988, p. 425)
Although Adler does not develop further his systemic understanding of individ-
uals and families in this article, his earlier works (Adler, 1927/1965; Ansbacher & 
Ansbacher, 1956) literally lay the foundation for the development of systemic the-
ory some 40 to 50 years later. The initial incorporation of general systems theory 
into psychotherapy all but dismissed the importance of the individual (see Bitter, 
2009). Because Adler started with a focus on the individual, he also anticipated 
and proposed a solution for the integration of the individual and the system, a 
unification that would not be sought again until the 1980s. Adler’s phenomeno-
logical approach to family constellation and birth order, culture and gender, and 
purposeful, relational sequences places the perceiving individual at the heart of 
living systems. In this sense, each individual both affects these systems and is 
affected by them. The individual is both a changer and the changed. We under-
stand each person by the way in which she or he manifests personal living within 

92	
James Robert Bitter
the systemic, cultural contexts of one’s life, a perspective most thoroughly and 
therapeutically explored today within the postmodern approach called Narrative 
Therapy (White, 2005).
Character and the Tasks of Life
What Individual Psychology has to say, perhaps only explanatorily but cer-
tainly surprisingly, about Gemelli’s “Tasks of Characterology” (“Aufgaben der 
Charakterologie”) is that it gives an essence of the character which is neither inborn 
nor acquired. What we call character is the outward manifestation of the relation-
ship of a person to a task postulated by him (sic). (Adler, 1935/1988, p. 425)
Adler’s response does not describe the nature of Gemelli’s tasks of characterology, 
but by the time his response was published, Adler had clearly defined his own 
universal tasks of life. His response suggests that both he and Gemelli regard 
character as something one chooses (“neither inborn nor acquired”) and then 
enacts, a stance that people take in relation to the demands and challenges that 
occur in life.
Adler’s three tasks were, from the beginning, based on an evolutionary per-
spective. Early humans, he noted, were too weak to survive individually, lacking 
sharp claws, speed, enhanced eyesight or hearing, and especially great size and 
strength. Like similarly incapacitated animals, humans formed into a herd or 
community for protection, a communal task that could be accomplished only 
if its members developed the capacity for cooperation and friendship. This is 
Adler’s social task. It was this same evolutionary demand for cooperation that 
also required a division of labor; shared work and contribution made the sur-
vival of many possible: The growth of all was contained in the efforts of each 
individual. Adler posited the work task as the avenue for personal meaning: The 
meaning of life is contribution to the whole. Adler’s task of intimacy includes the 
recognition that the human species is made up of two genders, men and women, 
and for the species to procreate and continue, both sexes have to learn to cooper-
ate and to get along with each other.
Character, Adler believed, was developed in the stance that each person took 
in relation to these universal tasks of life. Effective living required a social resolu-
tion to the life-demands that each person must face. In this sense, mental health 
and human contact have always been linked. Indeed, psychopathology almost 
always involves some form of self-absorption and a retreat from human connec-
tion (Adler, 1996a, 1996b). Impairment in social and occupational functioning is 
today at the center of determining most clinical disorders (American Psychiatric 
Association, 2000).
Both modern and postmodern approaches to assessment and therapy recog-
nize problems as a part of life: Life without problems is a myth. The current debate 

	
	
On the Essence and Origin of Character	
93
about whether psychological problems emanate from within (genetic or chemi-
cal) or are manifested in one’s response to life’s challenges has long been resolved 
in non-psychiatric clinical practice.14 In therapeutic applications, practitioners 
approach their clients with the same optimism that was inherent in the positions 
of Adler and Gemelli—that is, with a belief that personality (or character) traits 
are “acquired, variable, and amenable to change or correction” (Adler, 1935/1988, 
p. 424). Whether therapy is based on cognitive-behavioral interventions, human-
istic psychology, or postmodern therapies, the basis for change lies in the belief 
that the problem is not the problem; coping, one’s stance, is the problem. How 
one chooses to cope is both the essence and origin of character.
Community Feeling and Social Interest
[C]haracter, moreover, corresponds to the degree of its social interest, whose ideal 
measuring stick is nothing else but the goal of an ideal attitude (Verhalten) toward 
the welfare of all humanity and toward eternity. (Adler, 1935/1988, p. 425) 
Adler’s community feeling has long been associated in the literature of Individual 
Psychology with mental health. It is an umbrella-term that includes a sense of 
connectedness to all of humankind, past, present, and future. It contains the evo-
lutionary need to belong and manifests itself in cooperation, courage, contribu-
tion, caring and empathy, and compassion and engagement. Ansbacher (1992) 
called social interest the action line of community feeling. It is the way in which 
the community feeling is enacted in real life. In Adler’s response to Gemelli 
(1935/1988), he suggests that the quality of one’s character is directly related to 
the amount of social interest enacted in one’s life.
As noted earlier, Adler’s response to Gemelli was published just 2 years before 
the end of Adler’s life. His concepts of community feeling and social interest had 
evolved, and he was envisioning these concepts as central to the idea of perfec-
tion and the actualization of human potential: “Whatever one calls right, valu-
able, normal, or reasonable derives its worth from the idea of the perfection of the 
human race and from the idea of a claim for eternity” (p. 425). By over 80 years, 
Adler is anticipating the importance of spirituality within the psychological 
sphere. What is good for one must be good for all. Mental health, the soundness 
of character, and, indeed, the quality of daily living are all enhanced through 
a common striving for the greater good and for the well-being of humanity. In 
1975, the eminent Canadian researcher of stress, Hans Selye, would echo Adler’s 
emphasis on community feeling and social interest: The way to handle stress 
14	Even within the psychiatric profession, the chemical treatment of mental disorders is being suc-
cessfully challenged (see Breggin, 1994, 2009; Glasser, 2004).

94	
James Robert Bitter
without turning it into distress, he would suggest, is to live each day in such a way 
as to earn your neighbor’s love.
Still, Adler is suggesting something greater than the golden rule; he is calling 
on individuals to imagine and seek in their everyday actions the perfection and 
completion of human potential, to be more fully human and to be connected 
with all that there is. Spirituality provides individuals with the experience of 
bringing a connection to the whole of life into the present. It connects us to all 
that has gone before and all that may be ahead of us. It allows people to be both 
fully present and in the process of becoming at the same time. Toward the end 
of his life as well as the end of his response to Gemelli, Adler (1935/1988) infuses 
human experience with a call to aim for perfection, to take human growth to its 
farthest limit: “Characterology can, therefore, only be an investigation into the 
relationship of the individual to the entire evolutionary process of life” (p. 426).
Conclusion
This introduction is longer than Adler’s original article. His response to Gemelli 
is packed with ideas that represent a lifetime’s work. I have attempted to unpack 
these ideas for consideration in the present, in the 21st century. Adler’s con-
cepts were not only central to the development of Individual Psychology; they 
would also eventually serve as the foundation for both modern and postmodern 
approaches to psychotherapy. In his response to Gemelli, Adler reminds us that 
there is a unity to the individual and that personality and character are the result 
of the stances taken in relation to universal tasks in life. He provides guideposts 
for assessing both effective living and pathological dysfunction. Most impor-
tantly, he suggests that the humanity we dream for the world is possible now.
References
Adler, A. (1965). Understanding human nature (W. B. Wolfe, Trans.). New York: Fawcett. 
(Original work published 1927)
Adler, A. (1988). On the essence and origin of character. Individual Psychology, 44(4), 424–
426. (Original work published 1935)
Adler, A. (1996a). The structure of neurosis. Individual Psychology, 52(4), 351–362. (Original 
work published 1935)
Adler, A. (1996b). What is neurosis? Individual Psychology, 52(4), 318–333. (Original work 
published 1935)
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disor-
ders (4th ed., text rev.) [DSM-IV-TR]. Washington, DC: Author.
Ansbacher, H. L. (1992). Alfred Adler’s concept of community feeling and of social inter-
est and the relevance of community feeling for old age. Individual Psychology, 48(4), 
402–412.
Bitter, J. R. (2009). Theory and practice of family therapy and counseling. Belmont, CA: 
Brooks/Cole-Cengage.

	
	
On the Essence and Origin of Character	
95
Breggin, P. (1994). Toxic psychiatry: Why therapy, empathy, and love must replace the drugs, 
electroshock, and biochemical theories of the “new psychiatry.” New York: St. Martin’s 
Press.
Breggin, P. (2009). Medication madness: The role of psychiatric drugs in cases of violence, 
suicide, and crime. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Bugental, J. A. (1992). The art of the psychotherapist: How to develop the skills that take psy-
chotherapy beyond science. New York: Norton.
Bugental, J. F. T. (1999). Psychotherapy isn’t what you think: Bringing the psychotherapeutic 
engagement into the living moment. Phoenix, AZ: Zeig, Tucker & Theisen.
Freud, S. (1995). The basic writings of Sigmund Freud (A. A. Brill, Trans.). New York: 
Modern Library. (Original work published 1914)
Gemelli, A. (1935). Uber das Wesen und die Enstehung des Character [On the essence and 
origin of character]. Internationale Zeitschrift fur Individual-psychologie, 13, 29–30.
Glasser, W. (1999). Choice theory: A new psychology of personal freedom. New York: Harper.
Glasser, W. (2004). Warning: Psychiatry can be hazardous to your mental health. New 
York: Harper.
Hoffman, E. (1988). The right to be human: A biography of Abraham Maslow. Los 
Angeles: Tarcher.
May, R. (1953). Man’s search for himself. New York: Norton.
Millon, T. (1990). Toward a new personology: An evolutionary model. New York: Wiley.
Millon, T. (1996). Personality and psychopathology: Building a clinical science. New 
York: Wiley-Interscience.
Millon, T. (1999). Personality-guided therapy. New York: Wiley.
Perls, F., Hefferline, R., & Goodman, P. (1994). Gestalt therapy: Excitement and growth in 
the human personality. Gouldsboro, ME: Gestalt Journal Press. (Original work pub-
lished 1951)
Polster, E. (1987). Every person’s life is worth a novel. Highland, NY: Gestalt Journal Press.
Polster, E. (2005). A population of selves: A therapeutic exploration of personal diversity. 
Gouldsboro, ME: Gestalt Journal Press. (Original work published 1995)
Polster, E., & Polster, M. (1974). Gestalt therapy integrated. New York: Vintage.
Rasmussen, P. R. (2003). Emotional reorientation: A clinical strategy. Journal of Individual 
Psychology, 59(3), 345–359.
Rasmussen, P. R. (2005). Personality-guided cognitive-behavioral therapy. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Rasmussen, P. R. (2010). The quest to feel good. New York: Taylor & Francis.
Rogers, C. R. (1980). A way of being. New York: Houghton/Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1995). On becoming a person. New York: Mariner. (Original work pub-
lished 1961)
Selye, H. (1975). Stress without distress: How to use stress as a positive force to achieve a 
rewarding life style. New York: Signet.
Walter, J., & Peller, J. (2000). Recreating brief therapy: Preferences and possibilities. New 
York: Norton.
White, M. (2007). Maps of narrative practice. New York: Norton.
White, M., & Epston, D. (1990). Narrative means to therapeutic ends. New York: Norton.

96	
James Robert Bitter
On the Essence and Origin of Character15
Alfred Adler
“On the Essence and Origin of Character” by Father Agostino Gemelli, 
O.F.M.—This is a German translation of an article appearing in the Acts of the 
Italian Society for the Progress of Science, reporting on meetings of September 
1929.
	
A historical review is given of the modern approaches to the understand-
ing of human personality, as presented from biological, sociological, psychi-
atric, and psychological perspectives. It is mostly German authorities who are 
reviewed. Professor Gemelli rejects those views that are mechanistic and con-
ceived of as cause-and-effect. He defends those views that recognize personal-
ity traits as acquired, variable, and amenable to change or correction. He is 
interested in developing a comprehensive philo­sophical interpretation of the 
problems and expressions of personality that is, at the same time, teleological, 
of practical value in therapy, and in harmony with a recogni­tion of biological 
evolution. —Steven Skelton, Abstractor 
Adler’s Afterword to Gemelli’s Article
The work of the worthy and conscientious scien­tific researcher, Professor 
Gemelli, deserves a thor­ough assessment, not least because it appeared some 
years ago and thus did not take into considera­tion the clear presentation of 
Individual Psychology, which has taken place since that time.
It must be granted that the honored author stands at the very top among 
modern psychologists and psychiatrists. His conception, shared concurrently 
by Individual Psychology, that the personality of the normal as well as the 
abnormal person (and, along with that, what is commonly called the char-
acter), shows how imbued his theory is with a measure of the feeling of com-
munity (Gemeinschaftsgefuhl) with the ultimate con­ception of the human 
psychic life, with the fact of the unity of the per­sonality. His fundamental 
viewpoints draw his theory entirely into the neighborhood of Individual 
Psychology.
His partial praise for psychoanalysis we do not share. What it could offer 
to the above-mentioned viewpoints does not fit in with its causal­-mechanistic 
view, and in spite of its many borrowings from the areas of Individual 
Psychology, one often gets the impression that a foreign head­piece is adorn-
ing a body of an entirely different sort. After all, we must observe, too, that 
Freud’s inroad was into the antiquated psychology of utility (Psychologie 
von Nutzen) and that he was on the path that Individual Psychology devel-
oped. That he, for the sake of an untenable theory, because of an idea of 
15	Translation by Michael Cicero.

	
	
On the Essence and Origin of Character	
97
pansexualism, developed a causal-mechanistic view; that he became a slave 
to the heredity theory; that he interpreted degen­erations of the coddled life-
style (des verzartelten Lebenstils) as the norm of the psyche and viewed the 
fact of social interest (des Sozialen Interesses) as a cunning weakness (list-
ige Schwache); that he imparted the ego-charac­ter (Ichcharakter) to each of 
his artificial, psychic categories, without com­prehending the shaping unity 
(gestaltende Einheit) of the ego; these things separate him from Individual 
Psychology, to which, however, he owes many of the viewpoints of his later 
research.
What Individual Psychology has to say, perhaps only explanatorily but 
certainly surprisingly, about Gemelli’s “Tasks of Characterology” (“Aufgaben 
der Charakterlolgie”) is that it gives an essence of the character which is nei-
ther inborn nor acquired. What we call character is the out­ward manifesta-
tion of the relationship of a person to a task postulated by him. The character 
cannot be separated from social reference (Soziale Bezogenheit). Character 
does not exist in a vacuum. Properly understood, every character trait shows 
the degree of the capacity for cooperation, coexistence, and common interest 
(Mitarbeit, Mitleben, Mitlieben). This degree is imparted to it by the unity of 
the ego. That the degree of activity reveals itself in the character, moreover, 
corresponds to the degree of its social interest, whose ideal measuring stick 
can be nothing else but the goal of an ideal attitude (Verhalten) toward the 
welfare of all humanity and toward eternity. I have always emphasized that 
controversy is possible on this matter. But whatever one calls right, valuable, 
normal, or reasonable derives its worth from the idea of the perfection of the 
human race and from the idea of a claim for eternity.
This conception has its biological foundation in the overall structure of 
life. Every individual is, so to speak, a crystallized unity-become-flesh in the 
whole evolutionary striving for perfection, with all its mistakes and prefer-
ences. Characterology can, therefore, only be an investigation into the rela-
tionship of the individual to the entire evolutionary process of life. Along this 
path of our investigations, it is a happy occurrence to encounter the investi-
gations of Gemelli.


99
9
Character and Talent
Frank Main
Alfred Adler made his second visit to the United States in 1927, and it coin-
cided with the launch of his new book, Understanding Human Nature (Adler, 
1927). That same year, he also published “Character and Talent” (Adler, 1927) in 
Harper’s Magazine. The magazine of poets and presidents enjoyed a celebrated 
tradition as the literary launching pad for eminent artists, philosophers, writers, 
and scientists. Indeed, Adler shared the pages of the June 1927 issue with the likes 
of Will Durant. Durant, like Adler, had also just published an important book, 
The Story of Philosophy (Durant, 1926).
In a later issue also published in 1927, the man who coined the term behavior-
ism, John B. Watson, published an article titled “The Behaviorist Looks at Instincts” 
(Watson, 1927). It is not surprising, then, that Adler published this article joining the 
ongoing nature-versus-nurture controversy over the origins of creativity and talent.
“Character and Talent” was republished with Harper’s permission in the 
Journal of Individual Psychology under the “Classics Column” edited by Harold 
Mosak (Adler, 1989). In his introduction, Mosak established Alder’s primary 
intent: “It is the latter theme which Adler develops in ‘Character and Talent,’ 
that the creativity of the individual is more decisive than either heredity or envi-
ronment in shaping the organization of the personality—the Life-style’” (Adler, 
1989, pp. 513–514). There is no doubt this was Adler’s primary mission, and his 
language is emotionally charged to communicate the urgency he believed the 
topic required:
The thesis advanced by the group of psychological thinkers known as the Individual 
Psychologists—the thesis that talent is not inherited, and that the possibilities and 
potentialities of any individual for performance are not fixed—has been a bomb-
shell [italics mine] in a camp of the old-line academic psychologists. (Adler, 1927, 
p. 64)
Adler then presents case-based exceptions to the deterministic reduction of 
intellectual, artistic, and musical talent:

100	
Frank Main
And here again we are back at the problem of hereditary faculties and talents. And 
again I must deny that heredity has a great deal to do with accomplishment or 
performance. It is not true that with heredity the last word is said, that the chro-
mosomes are inexorable determinants of subsequent genius. (Adler, 1927, p. 67)
Adler offers a remarkable observation; he recognizes that the father of modern 
intelligence testing (Alfred Binet) came to recognize that although there were high 
correlations between higher scores and higher body weight and better health, these 
things were not causally related to exceptionality. Adler also appears to make the 
distinction between Binet’s more constructivist understandings and the more deter-
ministic conceptualizations developed by Lewis Terman at Stanford (Siegler, 1992).
Since Adler’s article was republished in the Journal of Individual Psychology two 
decades ago, research has evolved on two fronts. Both of these lines of investiga-
tion seem to affirm a number of Adler’s clinical and anecdotal conceptualizations.
First, Adler believed that predicting exceptional performance based on early 
assignment of a number to a child’s potential intellectual capacity was not pre-
dictive or helpful. His objections to this deterministic prescription seem to be 
corroborated by contemporary research. Recently, Gladwell (2008) offered quan-
titative and qualitative data suggesting that in most cases exceptional perfor-
mance can’t be accounted for by talent alone when early measures of the talent in 
question are assessed as approximately equal.
Indeed, Gladwell assembles a compelling case for the more predictive elements of 
opportunity, practice, intelligence thresholds, and work ethic. Gladwell’s investiga-
tions examine talents that include math, music, and computer programming skills.
Gladwell also addressed aptitude assessment through ACT and SAT test 
scores. The University of Michigan’s admissions policy faced a legal suit when 
plaintiffs challenged the university’s admissions policies that granted admis-
sion to minority students who earned test scores lower than those of their White 
counterparts. In response, the university determined, via extensive follow-up 
studies, that minority students did every bit as well (Gladwell, 2008). In this case 
opportunity seemed to be the sole equalizing factor.
Similarly, Geoff Colvin (2008) entered the fray with a more general condem-
nation of the very notion of “talent.” As he probes the concept of talent, he offers 
the following:
A few contend that the very existence of talent is not, as they carefully put it, sup-
ported by evidence . . . as the English music study mentioned earlier. In these stud-
ies, all the subjects are people of whom we’d say, “They‘re very talented.” Yet, over 
and over, the researchers found few signs of precocious achievement before the 
individuals started intensive training. (p. 23)
Although Colvin’s disqualification of the importance of talent was for the pur-
poses of extolling the significance of “deliberate practice,” it was also anchored 

	
	
Character and Talent	
101
in much of the same research that calls into question the notion of “natural,” 
genetically determined talent.
Finally, and perhaps of greater significance, Adler sets forth the notion that 
heredity and environment do not constitute determining mental variables of 
either the mind or the developing lifestyle of the child. Indeed, Adler makes a 
powerful case for the child’s internal creative power, which is central to the tenets 
of Individual Psychology:
Our objection to the teachings of the hereditarians and every other tendency to 
overstress the significance of constitutional disposition, is that the important 
thing is not what one is born with, but what use one makes of that equipment. 
(Ansbacher, 1964, p. 86)	
It is in this regard that Adler’s conceptualizations about development of the 
lifestyle or thinking processes and mental development are perhaps most star-
tling. Through case histories and his medical diagnostic skills, Adler inferred 
and named internal workings of the brain which he described as creative power. 
Adler believed this third element, creative power, brought to bear interactional 
experiences with others in concert with reflections upon early experiences. 
Recent research by Dr. Daniel Siegel (2007) seems to suggest that the interactions 
of heredity, experience, and emotional/relational contexts create unique and last-
ing pathways of thought. Siegel and others have attempted to deconstruct the 
components of these mental processes that give birth to a child’s unique inter-
pretations of circumstances.
Adler’s early hypotheses seem to be generally affirmed, extended, and refined 
through Siegel’s painstaking research. While Adler’s early thinking is affirmed 
in the work of Siegel and others, it is certain to evolve. Undoubtedly empirical 
identification of specific emotional and cognitive linkages is on the horizon. 
Eventually, we may understand how early recollections and cognitions specifi-
cally formulate the child’s worldview and style of living.
References
Adler, A. (1927, June). Character and talent. Harper’s Magazine, 155, 64–72.
Adler, A. (1989). Character and talent. Individual Psychology, 45(4), 514–526.
Adler, A. (1927). Understanding human nature. New York: Greenberg.
Ansbacher, H. L., & Ansbacher, R. R. (Eds.). (1964). Superiority and social interest. New 
York: Norton.
Colvin, G. (2008). Talent is overrated. New York: Penguin.
Durant, W. (1926). The story of philosophy. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Gladwell, M. (2008). Outliers: The story of success. New York: Little, Brown and Company.
Siegel, D. J. (2007). The mindful brain. New York: Norton.
Siegler, R. S. (1992). The other Alfred Binet. Developmental Psychology, 28(2), 179–190.
Watson, J. B. (1927, August). The behaviorist looks at instincts. Harper’s Magazine, 155, 
228–235.

102	
Frank Main
Character and Talent16
Alfred Adler, MD
I
The thesis advanced by the group of psychological thinkers known as the 
Individual Psychologists—the thesis that talent is not inherited, and that 
the possibilities and potentialities of any individual for performance are not 
fixed—has been a bombshell in the camp of the old-line academic talent, 
potentiality, endowment, special gifts are merely elements in the structure of 
an individual. It has been shown, further, that these elements may be variously 
employed, depending upon their relation to the total activity of the individual.
The Individual Psychologists have decided to understand the totality of 
the individual before regarding the partial phenomena of his existence. They 
hold that a partial phenomenon, such as a talent, a gift, an endow­ment, can 
be properly evaluated and properly understood only when the total is first 
known and thoroughly understood. In other words, we can judge the poten-
tial performance of an individual in some specific situation only when we can 
determine his total reactions, his total behavior pattern, his general style of 
life, his “distance” from the normal goal of life.
An example will show you how valueless any other viewpoint than that 
of Individual Psychology becomes in the face of an actual problem. Consider 
the case of a thirteen-year-old boy who gives the general impres­sion of a 
backward, mentally retarded, neglected child. He has not made the usual 
progress at school, has been forced to repeat several grades, and is brought to 
a social agency because of thievery and vagabondage. The reports concerning 
this boy are uniformly bad. He is irritable, un­social, has a poor memory, is 
unable to concentrate, inattentive. These reports are the results of psycho-
logical tests as well as the schoolroom experiences of his various teachers, 
Closer study of his character and history shows that he was the younger of 
two children for some eight years, during which time he was inordinately 
spoiled by his mother. Then his younger brother was born, and at the same 
time financial difficulties occurred in this family, with the result that the 
mother had to leave the home to help earn a living. The net result was that the 
boy began to receive far less attention and love than he had previously been 
accustomed to experiencing.
School, therefore, found him in an entirely new situation. His thievery 
occurred chiefly outside of his own home; but everything that he gained by 
stealing he gave away as presents to other children, in order to gain their 
16	Translation by Walter Beran Wolfe, MD.

	
	
Character and Talent	
103
friendship and affection. You can see by this that one cannot make final con-
clusions when one brands a child as a “thief.”
We next learn that this child often ran away from home when his father 
was particularly brutal to him, but that he always managed to deposit a bun-
dle of stolen kindling on the doorstep for his mother to cook with. This done, 
he spent the nights in the streets, sleeping in alleyways or old barns.
We can hardly evaluate this “truancy” or “delinquency” according to the 
timeworn conceptions. It is quite evident that his thievery is more than mere 
stealing, and his truancy more than running away from school. And we must 
call attention here to the inadequacy of branding the actions of an individual 
with some set label and then believing that we have understood him!
This “delinquency” and this “thievery” mean something different. It is as 
though this boy were saying, “I want to force my parents into a situation in 
which they will pay more attention to me, love me more, sympathize with 
me. I can best do this by showing my mother that I care for her needs!”
I should like to ask whether there is anyone who could suggest to a boy 
like this, for whom normal activity in the schoolroom seems hope­lessly dis-
tant because of his bad preparation for life, a better method of winning the 
affection and love of his parents and school friends than he has chosen? I 
shall later show why this normal activity seems to him so impossible of real-
ization. For the present I simply want to indicate that we cannot call such a 
child “delinquent,” “criminal,” or “backward.” If we want to characterize this 
boy, we could say that he is a child who demands and needs an inordinate 
amount of mother love. That this boy seeks for this affection in an asocial 
way, which he does not particularly like, is due to the fact that the normal 
approach to his goal seems to him effectually barred by circumstances. The 
normal paths to affection would be industry and progress in school, giving 
pleasure to his parents and teachers by helpfulness, attention to work, etc. 
But we have already heard that he was a spoiled child. It is the characteristic 
of all spoiled children that they cannot change the behavior pattern which 
they have developed as a result of being spoiled. It is their tragedy. A child 
has formed and shaped his behavior pattern at the end of his third year of 
life. A change in the nature of his character as a result of external influences 
sel­dom occurs thereafter. Particularly in the case of a child with the behavior 
pattern of the spoiled child. Such a child never learns from experience. His 
experiences, good and bad, are all assimilated into his pattern. He takes an 
experience and twists, turns, distorts, reshapes it until it fits into his prede-
termined scheme of things.
Naturally, he does not want to go to school, because the warmth and affec-
tion which he is used to is found in greater abundance at home. As a result, he 
comes to school on the first day against his will, and resis­tant to all attempts 
at instruction. His teachers will say that he is inattentive, lacks concentration, 

104	
Frank Main
day-dreams, spoils the games of other children, cannot concentrate, has a 
bad memory. All these things are explained when we know that he has an 
entirely different goal in life than that of a normal schoolboy. The truth is that 
our boy finds himself in a new situa­tion for which he was never adequately 
prepared. And in this situation occurs the tragedy of the petted child. He 
is always right! Since he does not play the game in school, school becomes 
a very unpleasant place for him. To make matters worse, he now finds his 
home also unpleasant. Bad school reports turn his mother against him. She 
does not show her love and affection to the same degree as before. The child 
blames the school for his misfortune at home, but he does not change his style 
of life. Love and affection he must have. He seeks it in other places, and with 
other means.
Enough for our example. It proves very simply that when someone char-
acterizes an individual with a definite character trait we really know nothing 
about him. We are in much the same situation as a musician who is asked for 
his opinion of a symphony after hearing three chords. But let the musician 
be acquainted with musical history, play him a simple melody, and he will be 
able to say “That is Bach!” or “That is Wagner!” We cannot judge a personality 
unless we have its dominant motif unless we understand it as a totality.
II
The Individual Psychologists have also shown that the development of a per-
sonality cannot be foretold from the phenomena of physical inheritance. The 
inherited instruments with which we fight the battle of life are very varied. 
How we use these instruments, however, is the impor­tant thing.
We can never tell what actions will characterize a man if we know only 
whence he comes. But if we know whither he is going we can prophesy his 
steps and movements toward his objective. It is for this reason that we have 
found the concept of goal-attainment, of goal-appropriateness, the essential 
one for the understanding of human behavior.
In the case of our boy, knowing that his purpose in life is to achieve warmth 
and affection, we can understand the means that he will choose toward that 
end. And we know also what our therapeutic approach must be, for we under-
stand the tragedy of this child’s life. Suppose, for instance, that we could dis-
cover that the father and the grandfather of this child were thieves also. This 
would in no way be responsible for the activity of this particular boy. To be 
sure, it is interesting to know just why the boy should choose thievery as a 
means to gaining love and affection. This point must be cleared up in order to 
rule out a possible hereditary influence. But we shall clear up this point, too.
In the earliest remembrances of childhood we often find the key to later 
activities. Among this boy’s earliest remembrances is the following: He recol-
lects that he was present at the burning of a delivery truck. The men on the 

	
	
Character and Talent	
105
truck threw many rubber balls out on the street, in order to save them from 
the fire. Children and adults who had gathered about the burning delivery 
truck seized upon these balls as the acknowledged booty of the onlookers. 
Nobody seemed to have any scruples about helping himself to this property. 
This remembrance served the boy as a model, as a training, if you will, for 
his future career as a thief. He found that there were, so to speak, extenuat-
ing circumstances even in thievery. Later, when the normal development of 
a child seemed barred to him, he chose the way to enrichment and power for 
which this scene had prepared him.
A word now about his development in school. In kindergarten things 
went rather well. He had a very tender, loving teacher, who was not unlike his 
mother. But in the primary grades he met a very strict and stern teacher—
and he immediately withdrew into himself, failed miserably in class, and 
resigned himself to the conduct mentioned above as a protest.
The great majority of our opponents stand on the theory that the really 
important factors in the development of a character or personality are hered-
itary and congenital. These opponents are always anxious to show that sub-
sequent developmental “trends” modify the result. In sup­port of this theory 
they often make very keen observations, as for instance Kretschmer and his 
school. We do not deny the findings of Kretschmer; in fact, we have antici-
pated them long ago when we stated that if an individual gets off to a bad start 
in life, by reason of congenital defects or hereditary anomalies, it requires 
an extraordinary beneficent environ­ment to prevent him from developing 
a warped style of life. Lacking this beneficent influence of a fostering envi-
ronment, the individual assumes a false and unwholesome behavior pattern 
which fits perfectly with his defectively developed physique, his inadequate 
endocrines, his sickly habitus. He is just like a man on a slippery incline: if 
he falls and sprains his ankle it is not to be wondered at. But wondering is 
not enough. We must attempt to keep him erect, and actually that is what we 
have suc­ceeded in doing.
III
What I have said about the development of character holds also for the ques-
tion of talent. In discussing this question I rule out those individuals whose 
equipment is so woefully inadequate as hardly to come under consideration. 
I mean the congenital idiots and imbeciles whose condition is actually due to 
a failure of organic development, to enormous defects in the actual nervous 
substance of their brains.
There remain, however, the great majority of children and adults, who have 
the materials but have not developed them to the full extent. Is it absolutely 
impossible for such people to render a good performance with relatively poor 
tools? In the early days of our human race were there not accomplishments 

106	
Frank Main
which could be compared with ours of to-day, even though our forefathers 
lacked our developed technic and worked with poor instruments? Are we 
capable of imitating to-day what the old guild workers accomplished with 
relatively poor tools? Of course we are!
And here we are back at the problem of hereditary faculties and talents. 
And again I must deny that heredity has a great deal to do with accomplish-
ment or performance. It is not true that with heredity the last word is said, 
that the chromosomes are inexorable determinants of subsequent genius. In 
fact, it is probable that an organism equipped with deficient organs, with 
inadequate tools, will actually develop a better and more ingenious technic to 
combat the rigors of its environment. Such an organism will pay a great deal 
of attention to detail, will devise more unerring “short-cuts,” will undergo a 
more intensive training. This brings us to the surprising, the terrifying con-
clusion of reality. The great accom­plishments, the really worthwhile achieve-
ments, have been made by individuals whose equipment was poor.
Normal individuals with normal organs approach the normal adjust­ments 
of everyday life with a greater equanimity, since accomplishing these tasks 
seems easily within reason. They lack the tremendous tension that is charac-
teristic of an individual who sees less clearly than his fellow, or a left-hander 
who is forced to work with his weaker and more poorly co-ordinated right 
hand. The normal individual seeks for no tricks, no legerdemain, because he 
can adjust without tricks and legerdemain. Try to drive a nail with a hammer. 
The hammer almost does it by itself, because it is an efficient instrument. But 
try to drive that same nail with a pair of scissors, or with a pocket-knife! You 
need tricks and legerdemain now, and a refinement of technic, to accomplish 
the same result that comes easily with a hammer.
We must come to the conclusion that it is one of the greatest advan­tages to 
an individual to be born with defective organs. That is the conclu­sion that we 
arrive at when we regard the question of heredity in a purely objective fashion, 
the great majority of psychologists, physicians, and laymen to the contrary 
notwithstanding, The average layman believes that he carries his future with 
him into life, like his milk teeth: a given quantum of creative ability, which 
need only be unpacked, so to speak, to make him a dolt or a genius. This super-
stition lies at the basis of the premise which so many investigators use when 
they say, “Let us see how far this individual has developed his native talent.”
We are constantly hearing people say, “Yes, there is a definite quantum 
of talent given every human being!” But this is not true. What occurs is this: 
There is a definite human constant of talent and potentiality, but this con-
stant remains only so long as no effort is made to develop and train it. The 
boy whom I discussed in the beginning of this paper certainly belonged to 
the “untalented.” He had been forced to repeat two grades by the time he had 
reached the fifth grade. After treatment he became the best student in his 

	
	
Character and Talent	
107
class. The psychologist of the old school will counter, “Yes, he had a latent 
talent.” That is precisely my point. Everyone has latent talent.
I shall cite several examples from our experience of so-called “un­talented” 
children who developed a marked “talent.” This development, however, does 
not take place by magic, or occur overnight. I am choosing for illustrative 
purposes some of the easy cases, but you must not believe that it is always 
so simple to make a brilliant student out of a backward child. Sometimes 
one succeeds easily; often it requires great effort and greater patience. In 
the end, however, it is always better to be able to say that one boy has talent 
because he was properly and encouragingly trained to overcome a defect and 
that another boy is untalented because this or that error was made in his 
education.
If we disregard professional activity for a moment and investigate, rather, 
very small details of child activity, we can best see the develop­ments of talent. 
Take for instance a little three-year-old girl who tries to sew dresses for her 
dolls. She takes a few stitches which are certainly far removed from works of 
art, and her mother comes to her and says, “Do you know, that is a very good 
beginning. Now if you take a few more stitches like this” (showing the child), 
“then you will have a beautifully dressed doll!” Such a mother, by encourag-
ing this child in its efforts, giving it new fields to conquer, appealing to the 
child’s ability to do more, is preparing the way for a “talent.” Contrast another 
mother whose three-­year-old daughter makes the same clumsy stitches in a 
doll’s dress, and is met with, “For heaven’s sake, don’t bother with that nee-
dle! You’ll only prick yourself! Little girls can’t sew dolls’ dresses!” In the 
first case the child is encouraged to find new combinations, new colors, new 
models, and develops its technic because its efforts are met by encourage­
ment and applause. The second child loses all desire for activity in which its 
clumsiness is held up as a cause for shame and punishment. The first develops 
a talent. The second will complain all her life, “I have absolutely no talent for 
needlework!”
An eight-year-old girl came into the office, weeping, with her mother. The 
latter explained that the child made no progress in school. She had come in 
from the country with excellent reports having finished the third grade. She 
was put in the fourth grade in a city school, failed, was demoted to the third 
grade, failed again, was finally demoted to the second grade, and was doing 
very poorly there. The disparity between the previous ex­cellent reports and 
the present bad reports was very marked. From the standpoint of Individual 
Psychology the change in reports represented not a change in talent, but the 
substitution of a bad environment for a good one.
Investigation of the child’s life disclosed the fact that until recent months 
she had lived in the country with foster parents. The mother had been divorced 
from her husband and, while trying to gain an existence by work in the city, 

108	
Frank Main
had sent her daughter to the country. Now that she had succeeded in establish-
ing herself financially, she had brought the child home to live with her.
From our standpoint this amounts to a psychological experiment, and the 
experiment in this case had been unsuccessful. The reasons for the child’s 
failure are not hard to find. We can imagine that this child living in the coun-
try with foster parents expected that the return to her mother would be some-
thing of a triumphal entry into a promised Eden. She ex­pected her mother to 
be the apotheosis of beauty, kindness, goodness. One question gives us our 
clue. I ask, “Did you like it out in the country with your foster parents?” The 
girl answers, “Yes. They were very kind to me, treated me like their own child, 
and bought me pretty playthings.”
Now I ask the mother, “How did you receive the child, and how do you 
treat it?” The mother answers, “I have had a very sad life with my hus­band. 
He was an habitual drunkard, and I was afraid that the child had in­herited 
his bad traits, and so I have tried to educate her very strictly, and prevent, if 
possible, the curse of drunkenness falling upon her, too!” “How do you do 
this?” I ask. “How does one educate a child to prevent the curse of drunken-
ness from showing itself?” The mother replies, “One must be very strict and 
severe with the child; not allow it to play with bad children, criticize all faults, 
punish all lies and moral failings.”
Now put yourself in the child’s position. This is the promised land, this is 
the mother from whom one expects the goodness of an angel, the beau­ty of 
motherly love! And the mother turns out to be a nagging, anxious, criticiz-
ing, punishing sort of an avenging witch.
I take the mother aside and tell her that perhaps under other circum­
stances her actions would be advisable, but that in this case it might be better 
if she attempted to win over the child to her with love and affection. “If I were 
in your shoes,” I tell the mother, “I should go so far as to admit to the child 
that I had made a mistake, that I had meant well but I had followed a bad 
method, and that now I wish to be reconciled, and to try to forget the past 
and do better in the future. I know that you will not follow my advice entirely, 
because it requires great courage on the part of a mother to admit an error to 
her child, but you can at least try love and af­fection.”
This mother, however, did have the courage. “I shall do exactly as you 
would do,” she said. Mother and daughter were reconciled before my eyes 
in the midst of ceremonial tears and sobs. Fourteen days later, mother and 
daughter returned. The picture was entirely different. Both were laughing, 
both were happy. The little girl was leading her class in the third grade, and 
brought a note from the teacher saying that a miracle must have occurred.
We have the records of a number of similar cases. With the more com­
plicated cases I do not wish to burden my readers, but it is precisely these 
most complicated cases which come into our hands, as psychiatrists. These 

	
	
Character and Talent	
109
are the cases of patients who have suffered a total shipwreck of their per­
sonality upon the rocks of somebody’s prejudice and have been misedu­cated 
in their childhood. Either the individual believes he is totally un­talented and 
unworthy, or, as frequently happens, the individual or his relatives believe 
that he is enormously talented, but the talent does not appear because the 
individual is “so nervous!”
There are hundreds of such individuals, who find themselves duty-­bound 
to live a life of sickness and “nervousness” in order that their “talent” (which 
they inwardly fear does not exist) shall not rise to the sur­face. You can see 
what mischief this conception of “talent” can ac­complish in a life. The para-
dox is that the poorly equipped man, the man who starts behind the line, 
has the greatest advantage. Progress and achieve­ment result only from the 
conquest of difficulties. He who conquers dif­fi culties wins.
The question of talent, particularly in America, England, and Germany 
where the need for trained technicians is great has reached such impor­tance 
that nowadays half-grown children are tested for their “talent” for some adult 
profession. It is my duty to point to the fact that the most expert and highly 
trained experimental psychologists all make timid, unconvinc­ing reports 
concerning tests of ability. All their experiments point to the fact that no 
well-defined, actual judgments can be rendered concerning the “talent” of 
an individual for any particular task. All of them agree that reality is quite 
different from the tests, and that one finally has to take the stand that the 
average man can perform the average task. The riddle really begins where we 
find an individual who cannot pass the tests.
IV
What science has designated as organic defects are a very general phenom-
enon. No one has ever seen a normal child, and one can find some kind of 
organic defect in everyone. What is important is the sense of defect which the 
child feels because he has an inadequate organ, and more particularly, what 
that child’s environment says about his defect. There are families who believe 
their children are sick if they do not weigh twice as much as normal children. 
As a result, a perfectly normal child grows up in an atmosphere of a chronic 
invalid. We have seen many children who have grown up with the idea they 
had weak hearts. Despite the fact that no cardiac lesion could be discovered, 
these individuals could not run or exercise, and shrank from every effort. 
Their anxiety and care for their preservation from excitement went beyond 
the bounds of all reason, and the tendency to guard and defend themselves 
as though they were fragile porcelain remained long after their discovery 
that they were quite healthy and as capable of work as anyone else. They had 
prepared a soft berth for themselves in life, and were loath to leave it. But 
as a matter of fact we find many children who suffer from organic defects, 

110	
Frank Main
particularly of the sense organs. And we know well that such individuals suf-
fer much more in life than normal children. They experience the deficiencies 
of their bodies, as for instance a weak digestive tract, a bad skin, poor eyes, 
more intensely; and they feel a certain pressure which, under normal circum-
stances, would develop into an added attention, a greater training, a better 
technic for overcoming their difficulties.
All poets probably belong in this class. Goethe and Schiller both had bad 
eyes, and the German poet Gustav Freytag writes in his diary that at the age 
of fourteen he could imagine better than he could see, as his ig­norant father 
refused to let him wear glasses. The organic defect often gives direction to the 
total activity of the individual.
Under unpropitious circumstances an organic defect is compensated in a 
useless way. In such cases we have problem children, criminal chil­dren, neu-
rotic children. It may be stated with certainty that wherever we see a child 
occupied with useless or criminal or neurotic behavior it is because he has felt 
himself “untalented” for the normal activity demanded by our world. Here 
is another angle to the difficult problem of “talent.” You see, the catchwords 
with which other psychologists finish their work remain the challenge of the 
Individual Psychologists to begin to do some­thing about it. A boy learns that 
he is not talented for mathematics, and finds himself in a group of similar boys 
who have been branded in the same way. Or a girl finds herself in a group who 
“cannot learn Latin.” These in­dividuals present us with a very ticklish prob-
lem, because if we cannot prove them otherwise, they maintain that they are 
right, that they are un­talented, or talented only to a certain degree.
One of the greatest contributions of Individual Psychology has come in 
the discovery that there need be no actual organic deformity or inferiority for 
a child to consider himself hindered at the start. The sense of pressure which 
I have described as occurring in the actual presence of organic in­feriorities 
may occur also in the presence of purely social difficulties, or as a result of the 
position of the child in the family constellation. In other words, a child with 
a normal digestive tract but bad nutrition may assume a behavior pattern 
similar to that of a child with a malformed stomach.
It is possible to burden a perfectly normal child with a pressure so great 
that he feels himself unable to cope with it. This point explains the fact which 
has been the thorn in the side of other psychologists, namely, that one occa-
sionally finds an individual with perfect organs, with good inheri­tance, and 
of good family, who is, nevertheless, untalented, incapable, a poor performer, 
the proverbial black sheep. We have determined that this is entirely due to the 
relative picture, the context within which this child finds himself, and that 
the blind fate of his behavior pattern has been fixed in previous relationships.
Similarly, in children who are educated without love or affection we find a 
characteristic behavior pattern. The unbelievably large number of il­legitimate 

	
	
Character and Talent	
111
children who are tossed from pillar to post by our society come in this cate-
gory. But a child does not need to be illegitimate to grow up with the idea that 
he is hated. The petted child sooner or later comes to the same conclusion. A 
petted child in a situation in which he does not get his accustomed love and 
affection shows all the reactions of a hated child. This becomes particularly 
evident in the case of first-born children who are followed by other children. 
The parents may not actually change their at­titude toward the first-born, but 
he interprets the presence of the second born as an insult to his prestige. 
He considers himself a dethroned monarch, and acts accordingly, making 
every effort to regain his lost power. Suspi­cion, hate, envy of the rival are 
the natural consequences. This type is par­ticularly frequent among firstborn 
children.
It is at this point that I wish to blast another superstition. It is generally 
believed that children who grow up in the same home pass through the same 
environmental influences. This is a fallacy. The tension, the relative context 
is as different for each individual as can be. No other child ever lives through 
the same situation that a first-born experiences. Every other child always has 
a pace-maker. The first-born always occupies the family limelight for a time. 
Put a child in the limelight and accentuate the situation strongly, and you 
build up an unmistakeable behavior pattern. This will be the style of life in 
which one strives always for the center of the stage, in which one must always 
occupy the main position. Quite different is the second-born. He directs 
all his energies at making power crash from its throne. He is always under 
steam, always on the go; he is always looking for short-cuts to power. I do not 
say that every first-born son and every second-born must follow this pattern; 
but we are more accustomed to finding these reactions in these situations.
V
If I have now given brief proof of the influence of the environment in deter-
mining the social and professional capabilities and talents of an indi­vidual, 
their preparation or lack of preparation for the solution of the problems of 
life, what remains of that mystic quantum which we have been accustomed 
solemnly to call talent? Where is this alchemic thing which psychologists 
want to weigh and evaluate with scientific instru­ments? Our problem is quite 
another one: To make talented individuals out of untalented ones.
The opposite school of thought has always suffered shipwreck. Wherever 
one has tried to foster the so-called talented individuals, one has come to 
no good end. The schools for talented, psychologically tested “over-average” 
pupils hide their heads in shame because of their poor results. What of classes 
for talented and untalented children? I have always found, particularly in 
Vienna, that the classes for talented children con­sisted mostly of relatively 
well-nourished individuals from the better classes, whereas in the untalented 

112	
Frank Main
classes the poorly fed and poorly dressed children of the proletariat were to 
be found. Binet, the father of psychological tests, made the same discovery. 
In the very beginning of his researches he called attention to the remarkable 
fact that there was a con­stant relation between talent and body-weight. We 
should not be surprised at this constant relationship. But it is not a cause and 
effect relationship at all.
The elements which the Individual Psychologists have found most nec-
essary to the development of a child into a useful social being are a good 
relation with the rest of humanity and the feeling that he is equal to other 
children. Training toward the social feeling should be begun in the earliest 
years, and continued through life. Courage and the consciousness of power 
and equality should be fostered wherever possible. If this is done, we find 
an individual always on the useful side of life, showing the per­sonality of a 
worthwhile, courageous, socially-minded man or woman.
Rob this child of his courage and the feeling of his equal chance, and 
you thwart his development. The bogey of talent is one of the most effec­tive 
means of putting bounds to the development of a child. If you tell a child 
offhand he is untalented, and he then proves untalented, this does not prove 
that you were right. You “fixed” him! And you must not wonder at your evil 
results. A similar damage can be done to the so-called “talented” individual. 
By constantly giving him tests of his prowess, usually useless ones, one runs 
the risk of serious damage to his self-confidence and self-esteem. At any rate, 
a pathological ambition is bound to develop and the chances are that this 
talented individual will soon have to hide behind a smokescreen of “nervous-
ness” to defend himself from useless tests of powers.
The courage which is the basis of talent must be combined with an ade-
quate training. Many seemingly untalented individuals are simply poor­ly 
trained. Their slightest actions bear the inhibitions of this inadequate tech-
nic. We know that there are individuals who walk badly, who have no talent 
for speaking, and of course others who seem to have no talent for studying, 
or reasoning or thinking, or reading books. It is simply a question of finding 
the right technic.
Let us refer to the biography of Charlemagne and read the amusing words 
of his biographer: “Although Charlemagne tried with might and main to 
learn to read and write, he never accomplished these things because he obvi-
ously had no talent for them.” But since the days of Pesta­lozzi, it is no longer 
necessary to have talent to read and write—every child can do it!
Growing insight into technic and training will doubtless open up new 
fields for the formerly “untalented,” and I prophesy that in not many years 
the delusion of “talent” will vanish into the limbo of witchcraft, the evil eye, 
and the casting of spells. If we could develop the technic of teaching compo-
sition better, we could make a half-way adequate composer out of everyone. 

	
	
Character and Talent	
113
This sounds like heresy to the composers, to the musical genius. But I need 
only to remind you that while Beethoven’s mother was preg­nant with him, 
his father said, “If this will be a boy, he will be a second Mozart!” We can say 
that he guessed correctly, that the boy had the ap­propriate talents. But what 
was the most outstanding feature about Beethoven? A hereditary organic 
defect. Otosclerosis, a hereditary disease of the ear ossicles which results in 
severe deafness about the twentieth year. What would one of our modern 
vocational guidance psychologists have said to the young Beethoven? Would 
he have prophesied talent as a musician? Certainly not. He would have made 
a shoe salesman out of him, would have directed him to leave music strictly 
alone. And had Beethoven followed his advice, become a shoe salesman, the 
vocational guidance psychologist would have claimed that he was right. No 
musical genius would have developed in him!


115
10
The Child’s Inner Life and 
a Sense of Community
Terry Kottman and Melissa Heston
Alfred Adler’s “The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community” is particularly 
intriguing in three different arenas. First, the various concepts used provide evi-
dence of the evolution of Adler’s own thinking given that some of the concerns 
mentioned were deemphasized in his later work, while others became increasingly 
powerful. Second, echoes of Adler’s stance on the negative effects of gender inequi-
ties can be seen today in the feminist movement and feminist psychology, as well 
as in the literature that emphasizes the differences between boys and girls in their 
developmental needs within our society. Third, this piece is especially relevant 
today in regard to Adler’s concerns about how parents, education, and society in 
general affect children’s developing personalities for better or worse. We will first 
consider this work as it relates to the evolution of Adler’s thinking, discuss briefly 
how his views on gender inequities and their consequences presage various topics 
related to contemporary feminist psychology and children’s development in a gen-
dered society, and end with an examination of the ways in which this piece is quite 
contemporary within the realm of child development, parenting, and education.
Throughout his entire career, Adler was particularly interested in how indi-
viduals develop their personalities and what moves them to become the people 
they are in adulthood. Although he always believed that the seeds for the forma-
tion of an adult’s personality were sown in early childhood, his conceptualization 
of the forces that created personality and his understanding of what motivated 
people evolved during his continued study of psychology (Monte & Sollod, 2003). 
In 1907, at the beginning of his career, Adler believed that the weakest or least-
developed part of a person’s body could be negatively affected by the demands of 
life and could constrain the individual’s development, leading to a tendency to 
compensate for organismically based weakness. He then moved toward the con-
cept that the dynamic force of personality development was based in biological 
drives, primarily the drive toward aggression (Adler, 1908, as cited in Ansbacher 
& Ansbacher, 1956; Oberst & Stewart, 2003). In this conceptualization of 

116	
Terry Kottman and Melissa Heston
individual motivation, a person would “act against the environment when 
thwarted in meeting his or her needs and in obtaining satisfaction” (Oberst & 
Stewart, 2003, p. 21). As time passed, however, Adler deemphasized drive psy-
chology, and in several works published in 1910 through 1913, he postulated that 
masculine protest, the desire to “be like a real man,” was the primary force that 
moved individuals forward in the development of their personalities (cited in 
Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1956, pp. 44–75; cited in Mosak & Maniacci, 1999, p. 
5). “Our civilization is mainly a masculine civilization, and the child gets the 
impression that while all adults enjoy superior powers the man’s are superior to 
the woman’s” (Dreikurs, 1989, p. 47). Adler believed, as a result of their interpre-
tation that being male was superior to being female, children strove to cultivate 
being masculine, whether they were male or female. By moving toward the mas-
culine, young children could strive “to be in control, to be competent, and to 
become the master of his or her own life. This reaction has as its goal the elimina-
tion of feelings of inertness and inferiority” (Oberst & Stewart, 2003, p. 21).
When the paper “The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community” was first 
published in 1917, Adler had not actually abandoned his earlier ideas about organ 
inferiority, the aggression drive, and masculine protest. He incorporated all of 
these ideas about how personality is developed and people are motivated into this 
paper, along with his newly developed ideas about the basic dynamic force of per-
sonality development in which he was shifting to an emphasis on the striving for 
a fictional goal of superiority, with successful adaption to life depending “on the 
degree of social interest in the goal-striving” (Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1956, p. 
172). In the 1920s, he expanded on this thinking, suggesting there is “an inherent 
tendency for individuals to grow and master the challenges of life. There is a trend 
toward growth and accomplishment” (Oberst & Stewart, 2003, p. 21). In the later 
stages of his life, Adler expanded this concept, suggesting that individuals strive 
for perfection, attempting to realize idealized images of themselves (Ansbacher 
& Ansbacher, 1956; Dreikurs, 1989; Oberst & Stewart, 2003). “The Child’s Inner 
Life and a Sense of Community” was written in the middle of Adler’s career—
although it includes references to the reactive mechanisms of organ inferior-
ity, masculine protest, and feelings of inferiority as the primary motivation for 
human growth and development, it signals a shift toward a more proactive stance 
on personality development: striving toward superiority and perfection.
In “The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community,” describing the devel-
opment of the child’s inner life and development of a sense of community, 
Adler developed many of the themes that undergird the theory of Individual 
Psychology: holism, teleology, and social interest (Carlson, Watts, & Maniacci, 
2006; Ferguson, 1984; Kottman, 2003). In this paper, he expounded on the “trend 
toward unitary development” (p. 417) and the “wholeness of the personality” 
(p. 418)—these phrases signaled his belief in the “indivisible whole of each per-
son” (Ferguson, 1984, p. 2), the holism which is a fundamental component of the 

	
	
The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community	
117
theory. The “constant upward striving” (p. 418), “the child’s inner life grows in 
the direction of and toward the goal that promises peace, gratification, accep-
tance, superiority, in short, ‘expansion’” (p. 419) reflected Adler’s teleological 
stance—that life is guided by the striving toward goals; that all behavior (which 
includes thinking, feeling, and doing) has a purpose. Even as early as 1917, when 
this article was published, Adler was already recognizing the value of this con-
tribution: “No matter how great a child’s insecurity, and no matter how pressing 
the urge toward compensatory efforts, the child could not move one stop ahead, 
whatever his capabilities or strengths, so long as there is no ‘goal’ to force the 
way” (p. 419). The emphasis on the development of a sense of community was 
illustrated by statements like “the good qualities and the defects of society exert 
a bilateral influence on the child’s inner development” (p. 422). This, combined 
with the suggestion that the absence of community feeling leads to neurotic and 
psychotic illnesses, underscores the Adlerian concept of social interest.
Throughout “The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community,” Adler delved 
into another recurrent theme in Adlerian theory: feelings of inferiority and their 
centrality in the development of personality. Feelings of inferiority were viewed 
as an inevitable result of the development of the child’s “inner life” (p. 417), which 
begins to become evident around 6 months of age. This astute observation of a 
significant shift in the infant’s understanding of the world has been well validated 
by research on infant cognition (Hetherington, Parke, Gauvain, & Locke, 2006). 
From Adler’s perspective, this new understanding would include an unconscious 
sense of inferiority which the infant strives to overcome. Developments in memory 
allow the child to recognize what is uncertain in the world, while developments in 
cause-and-effect reasoning encourage greater efforts to master that world. As chil-
dren move through toddlerhood, both competence and awareness of moments of 
incompetence grow, as the children increasingly recognize the greater competence 
(i.e., the superiority) of the adults and older children around them. Adler argued 
that the readiness with which young children respond to the efforts of adults to 
teach them was due to children’s sense of inferiority and uncertainty.
By addressing the “social devaluation of women and the concomitant strata-
gems in the behavior of the sexes toward each other” (p. 420), Adler had already 
started down the path of serving as a pioneer for the social equality of women 
(Watts, 1999). In this, he presaged the work of contemporary feminism and femi-
nist psychologists (Bond & Mulvey, 2000; Crawford & Unger, 2004; Denmark & 
Paludi, 2007; Gilligan, 1993). “Alfred Adler, in the first important synthesis of 
psychoanalysis and feminism, showed how social power relations structured the 
development of personality hierarchy in individual desire. His notion of ‘mascu-
line protest’ as a source of neurosis and social conflict is eerily relevant” (Connell, 
2003, p. 250).
The “‘battle’ of the sexes” that Adler just briefly described in the “The Child’s 
Inner Life . . .” continues to play out in powerful ways in contemporary society, 

118	
Terry Kottman and Melissa Heston
and the literature is replete with concerns about the damage being done to both 
boys and girls within a society that has not yet successfully grappled with its 
own deeply held biases (e.g., for boys, see Biddulph & Stanish, 2008; Johnson, 
2005; Kindlon & Thompson, 2000; Meeker, 2009; Rao & Seaton, 2009; e.g., for 
girls, see Deak, 2003; Holland & Eisenhart, 1990; Meeker, 2007; Pipher, 2002; 
Preuschoff, 2006; Simmons, 2010). This battle and its impact upon the charac-
ter of young men and women has been powerfully illustrated in the recent Tom 
Wolfe (2005) novel My Name Is Charlotte Simmons, in which an extremely bright 
young woman with dreams of taking academia by storm (a traditionally mascu-
line goal) cannot resist a culture in which women gain significance through their 
sexual liaisons with young men who routinely and overtly demean them. In the 
almost 100 years since Adler published “The Child’s Inner Life . . . ,” it seems that, 
despite extensive and explicit social attention to gender roles and gender inequi-
ties, there have been only superficial kinds of changes.
In this article, Adler gave particular attention to the role of the education pro-
vided by parents, and society more generally, in influencing the development of 
personality, which he viewed as the general stance a given child takes toward the 
world that guides the child’s way of interacting with that world. Today, develop-
mental psychologists use the language of parenting styles to describe some of the 
same phenomena. In particular, Adler speaks of “children who have been robbed 
of their courage by a strict, unfair upbringing” (pp. 418–419). Current research 
has established that an authoritarian parenting style in which discipline is based 
on a parent’s superior physical power, threats, and humiliation results in rela-
tively poor outcomes for children who can come to see themselves as “helpless or 
worthless” (Hetherington et al., 2006, p. 463). Such children may be “so bent on 
eliminating every ‘mistake’ from their experience that they waste their time in 
continuous uncertainty and end up in a ‘hesitant attitude’ for life” (p. 421).
Adler also noted in this paper that children learn through imitation, and 
when children sense “the increased bellicosity, the tyranny, the will to power, 
[they] will perceive this behavior as justification for [their] own desire for power, 
especially if [they experience] this pressure in [their] upbringing” (p. 420). 
Authoritarian parents make ready use of physical discipline in response to chil-
dren’s behavior, including aggression, thus demonstrating that aggression is a 
justifiable tool for the powerful. This, in turn, increases the likelihood that these 
children will become more, rather than less, aggressive in the future (Gershoff, 
2002). In Adlerian terms, such children develop both low social interest and 
respond to the world with a high level of activity, becoming the “sadists, tyrants, 
and delinquents” (Lundin, 1991, p. 321) of the future.
In Adler’s view, children who are pampered by their parents also fail to develop 
courage, and it is possible to see a similar approach to parenting today. So-called 
helicopter parents closely monitor their children, even as young adults in college, 
and are quick to intervene on their children’s behalf when a problem arises (Nelson, 

	
	
The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community	
119
2010). Such parents essentially over-parent, solving problems for their children that 
children need to solve for themselves as part of a normal developmental process. 
This phenomenon is believed to be the result of technological advances that poten-
tially allow parents and children to be in immediate contact at any time and the 
result of smaller family sizes, which leads parents to invest more heavily in the 
one or two children that they do have. Extensive research on the long-term conse-
quences of this type of parenting will not be available for some years yet; however, 
Adler would probably view this apparently growing cultural trend with consider-
able dismay. It seems unlikely that children who experience over-parenting will 
develop either the level of social interest that Adler believed essential for a healthy 
society or the personal problem-solving skills needed to overcome the life chal-
lenges that will inevitably arise. Over-parented individuals may develop a strong 
sense of entitlement, expecting much from society and giving little to it.
In “The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community,” Adler argued 
that the essential goal of education must center on preparing children to 
lead socially productive lives. Indeed, Adler recommended that only people 
who were committed to creating a sense of community should become edu-
cators. This notion that the purpose of education was to develop children 
into effective members of society was a view shared by John Dewey and Karl 
Marx (Cleverley & Phillips, 1986). The importance of becoming contributing 
members of society has found expression in today’s schools through a num-
ber of curricular initiatives, including programs such as Character Counts! 
(Josephson Institute, 2010) and community service requirements (Kaye, 
2010). At the same time, contemporary world events, media (including video 
games), and the emphasis on competitive sports create a “self-contradictory 
society” (p. 420) in which the challenge of developing children into adults 
with strong social interests and high levels of social competence may be 
impossible to meet.
Indeed, a careful reading of “The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community” 
leaves one with a poignant sense that the more things have changed, the more 
they have stayed the same. Despite the passage of time, the essence of Adler’s 
views on how children develop their personalities remains relevant today.
References
Ansbacher, H., & Ansbacher, R. (Eds.). (1956). The Individual Psychology of Alfred Adler: A 
systematic presentation in selections from his writing. New York: Harper Row.
Biddulph, S., & Stanish, P. (2008). Raising boys: Why boys are different—and how to help 
them become happy, well-balanced men. Berkeley, CA: Celestial Arts.
Bond, M., & Mulvey, A. (2000). A history of women and feminist perspectives in commu-
nity psychology. American Journal of Community Psychology, 28(5), 599–630.
Carlson, J., Watts, R., & Maniacci, M. (2006). Adlerian therapy: Theory and practice. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

120	
Terry Kottman and Melissa Heston
Cleverley, J., & Phillips, D. C. (1986). Visions of childhood: Influential models from Locke to 
Spock (rev. ed.). New York: Teachers College Press.
Connell, R. W. (2003). Masculinities, change, and conflict in global society: Thinking about 
the future of men’s studies. The Journal o f Men’s Studies, 11(3), 249–266.
Crawford, M., & Unger, R. (2004). Women and gender: A feminist psychology (4th ed.). New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Deak, J. (2002). Girls will be girls: Raising confident and courageous daughters. New 
York: Hyperion.
Denmark, F., & Paludi, M. (2008). Psychology of women: A handbook of issues and theories 
(2nd ed.). Westport, CT: Praeger.
Dreikurs, R. (1989). Fundamentals of Adlerian psychology. Chicago, IL: Adler School of 
Professional Psychology.
Ferguson, E. (1984). Adlerian theory: An introduction. Chicago, IL: Adler School of 
Professional Psychology.
Gershoff, E. T. (2002). Corporal punishment by parents and associated child behaviors and 
experiences: A meta-analytic and theoretical review. Psychological Bulletin, 128, 339–579.
Gilligan, C. (1993). In a different voice: Psychological theory and women’s development (6th 
ed.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hetherington, E. M., Parke, R. D., Gauvain, M., & Locke, V. O. (2006). Child psychology: A 
contemporary viewpoint (6th ed.). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
Holland, D. C., & Eisenhart, M. A. (1990). Educated in romance: Women, achievement and 
college culture. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Johnson, R. (2005). That’s my son: How moms can influence boys to become men of character. 
Grand Rapids, MI: Fleming H. Revell.
Josephson Institute. (2010). Character counts website. Retrieved from http://character-
counts.org
Kaye, C. B. (2010). The complete guide to service learning: Proven, practical ways to engage 
students in civic responsibility, academic curriculum & social action. Minneapolis, 
MN: Free Spirit.
Kindlon, D., & Thompson, M. (2009). Raising Cain: Protecting the emotional life of boys. 
New York: Ballantine.
Kottman, T. (2003). Partners in play: An Adlerian approach to play therapy. Alexandria, VA: 
American Counseling Association.
Lundin, R. W. (1991). Theories and systems in psychology (4th ed.). Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath.
Meeker, M. J. (2009). Boys should be boys: 7 secrets for raising healthy sons. New York: 
Ballantine.
Monte, C. F., & Sollod, R. N. (2003). Beneath the mask: An introduction to theories of person-
ality (7th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Mosak, H., & Maniacci, M. (1999). A primer of Adlerian psychology: The analytic-­behavioral-
cognitive psychology of Alfred Adler. New York: Routledge.
Nelson, M. K. (2010). Parenting out of control: Anxious parents in uncertain times. New 
York: New York University Press.
Oberst, U., & Stewart, A. (2003). Adlerian psychotherapy: An advanced approach to 
Individual Psychology. New York: Brunner/Routledge.
Preuschoff, G. (2006). Why girls are different—and how to help them grow up happy and 
strong. Berkeley, CA: Celestial Arts.
Pipher, M. (2002). Reviving Ophelia: Saving the selves of adolescent girls. New York: Ballantine.
Rao, A., & Seaton, M. (2009). The way of boys: Raising healthy boys in a challenging and 
complex world. New York: HarperCollins.

	
	
The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community	
121
Simmons, R. (2010). The curse of the good girl: Raising authentic girls with courage and con-
fidence. New York: Penguin.
Watts, R. E. (1999). The vision of Adler: An introduction. In R. E. Watts & J. Carlson (Eds.), 
Interventions and strategies in counseling and psychotherapy (p. 1–14). Philadelphia, 
PA: Accelerated Development.
Wolfe, T. (2005). I am Charlotte Simmons: A novel. New York: Farrar, Strauss, & Giroux.

122	
Terry Kottman and Melissa Heston
The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community17
Alfred Adler
What we find in the newborn—organ functions, reflexes, a totality of move-
ments, instincts, even affects—none of these represent the most important, 
the most valuable part of our existence which we think of as “inner life.” 
Rather, we might consider [the newborn] as the functional genotype, the liv-
ing matter from which the inner life is formed.
For in the life of a child and in his physical and mental growth, there 
is a largely hidden trend that leads “upwards,” that unceasingly guides and 
regulates all the physiological realities mentioned above, thus placing them 
in its service: Instincts and reflexes are adjusted, recognized as “appropri-
ate,” modified and utilized; movement of eyes, limbs, and trunk respond to 
a “plan”; all emotions—pleasure, joy, grief, pain, anger, love, hate, desire—
manifest themselves at appropriate occasions, and by the manner and the 
degree in which they are expressed, they establish close contact with the 
environment and with the people in their immediate surroundings. There 
also soon appear traces of character traits, of a consistent posture which, like 
call and response to the demands of the environment, represent a further 
connection to the outside world.
This stage of development begins as early as the second half of the first 
year, and can only be understood in terms of a trend toward unitary develop-
ment. It is a “readying” of inner forces to overcome external opposition.
It is only at this stage of development that we can speak of the child’s inner 
life. And now, the growth of a mental apparatus begins which, in manifold 
testing and groping attempts, undertakes the task of establishing and con-
solidating a stance vis-à-vis the questions of life.
This apparatus, which we are simply calling “inner life,” can be roughly 
compared to a machine capable of action and purpose. It is, of course, infi-
nitely more complex, a thousand times better equipped to attack and to 
evade; and in the structure of the organs and the capacity of their function, 
it incorporates the life experience of the individual as well as that of his fore-
bears. Primarily an agent of attack, collecting useful experiences, exercising 
self-control, acting with foresight, attempting to protect its tasks by a wide 
safety coefficient, and never losing sight of its goal—that is how we see the 
inner life of a human being.
The organs and their function have a limited capacity to start with. 
Therefore, only a small part of the universe can be understood, received, 
and utilized in any way—and that only in the manner of a human being. 
17	Translation by Lisa Fleisher.

	
	
The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community	
123
The limits of our mastery of the world are further restricted by the constant 
demands of our body and our mind at any given moment. This condition of 
dependency and the resulting sense of restriction burdens the human psyche 
first and foremost with feelings of smallness, of inferiority, of uncertainty. 
In this soil, out of archetypes of inherited potentialities, spring the mental 
instruments of memory and foresight, the essential “safeguards” against fear 
of defeat in life. Connected to these safeguards—which originated in physi-
cal and mental distress—and guided and influenced by them, there arise 
thoughts, plans, and impulses to increase personal significance as much as 
possible. This force, which from the sphere of insecurity presses toward an 
exalted position, toward mastery of matter, is what constitutes our surest 
guarantee of a route of continued progress. For man’s feeling of smallness is 
acceptable to him only if it gives rise to a constant upward striving, if it awak-
ens belief in the self and in the future, and insight into a common human 
destiny.
Careful observation of the child’s inner life shows, similar to recollections 
of adults, that this striving for security, this thinking ahead, this preplanning 
of the future, begins at an early age, molding and forging the “wholeness of 
the personality,” the individuality with unceasing force. But the feeling of 
insecurity affects the child much more powerfully. It makes him anxious, 
increases his need for support, causes him to seek adult protection and coun-
sel. The fact that we are able to train a child is an eloquent indication that 
the child feels inferior and is apprehensive about his future. This uncertainty 
is often tremendously intensified, and then our ability to train threatens 
to founder, because the child follows a quite different road of “compensa-
tion.” We must be prepared for such pathologically heightened feelings of 
inferiority in three types of children: (1) in constitutionally weak and sickly 
children; (2) in children who have been robbed of their courage by a strict, 
unfair upbringing and not by sickness; and (3) in pampered children who 
have never developed courage.
No matter how great a child’s insecurity, and no matter how pressing the 
urge toward compensatory efforts, the child could not move one step ahead, 
whatever his capabilities or strengths, so long as there is no “goal” to force the 
way. It is a lasting service of the School of Individual Psychology to have dis-
covered this fact and to have established it through numerous observations—
a fact that is equally valuable for theory and for practice. Let us recall the 
above-mentioned limits and insufficiencies of our organs and the technical 
“artifices and strategems” they exact by their sheer existence. To the scientist, 
the structure of an antediluvian organ clearly explains the purpose and the 
aim of its function and its mode of operation. He will, in fact, understand 
these only if, in addition to knowing all the details, he also contemplates the 
purpose of the organ, its “whither.”

124	
Terry Kottman and Melissa Heston
On the strength of his inferiority feelings, the child’s inner life grows in 
the direction of and toward the goal that promises peace, gratification, accep-
tance, superiority, in short, “expansion.” Every single symptom points in this 
direction, and not until we recognize this purposeful direction in its individ-
ual mode of expression, can we speak of understanding inner movement or 
of understanding human nature. Just as a child who is learning to walk can 
set down his feet only if he has a goal in view—even if he never reaches that 
goal—so every movement of the human psyche strives for and is contrived 
in the name of that “fictive goal” which in his naive uncertainty the child has 
erected for himself as a fixed pole in the chaos of the world.
Not so education which usually aims at a tangible goal! The self-chosen 
childhood goal incorporates all the characteristics of “divinity” itself, giv-
ing rise to psychical phenomena that are in constant and inexplicable con-
flict with reality. That is not surprising. The fictive goal of a child had other 
functions: It was supposed to calm, to guarantee superiority. That is why this 
seemingly “ideal” goal causes the child to experience the world, the environ-
ment, his immediate family as hostile agents, as obstacles; why it prepares 
and forces a battle stance which pure love can break through only once in a 
while. And so, out of the child’s individual life and his family life there arise 
in him malicious, or on a more lofty level, aggressive traits, running counter 
to the requirements of societal life and its thrust toward mutual goodwill, 
fellowship, sense of community, and equality.
What results from the collision of these two “guiding principles” is the 
nucleus of the personality to come. Further pursuit of this concept goes 
beyond the scope of our present inquiry.
In our view, then, the life of the individual, as well as human life in gen-
eral, is enacted both as a goal, unattainable but at the same time giving direc-
tion to life, and as a partially unconscious shaping of the future, though 
imagined and planned for; accordingly, every manifestation of the inner life, 
apart from its actual and possibly causal significance, shifts into a role which 
is of singular importance for psychological research: that of a preparatory act 
which incorporates a direction and a purpose.
Now we perceive questions of the child’s inner life in a different and 
much clearer light. The concept and the essence of education arises out of 
our understanding of the requirements of the societal life ahead. Its chief 
requirement, therefore, is clear: It must under all circumstances be “prepara-
tion” for a social and socially operative community. And it must be that in all 
of its nuances. No purpose, however bright its utopian glitter, may divert it 
from this course, if the meaning and essence of education are not to go astray. 
Education for our present self-contradictory society torn apart by antithesis 
would, of course, be asking the impossible and could not succeed. This gives 
rise to our obvious requirement that we accept as educators only those whose 

	
	
The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community	
125
social guideline goes at least as far as affirming a sense of community. The 
social structure and its tensions are reflected in the rearing and in the con-
stitution of children. The educator must know this source of damage, and if 
the child threatens to succumb, he must fight it, oppose it, teach him to seek 
new cultural paths. I was able to demonstrate in countless cases how great 
is the damage to entire generations, even to the life of an entire nation, that 
offers its rising generations social devaluation of women and the concomi-
tant strategems in the behavior of the sexes toward each other. The result is 
deplorable enough: The girls feel slighted, they accept the feminine role only 
under protest, and raise their desire for compensation to largely unattainable 
demands. This unhealthy situation affects boys no less strongly, as they feel 
obligated to demonstrate and to demand continuous evidence of their supe-
riority over women. In the process, they stamp [woman] as the enemy and 
place the outcome in her hands. All that is permanent in the “battle” of the 
sexes stems from this imbalance in the social level that weighs on the soul of 
a child from an early age.
Right from the start, the human psyche has a tendency to strive toward 
the goal of total superiority. When from the behavior of adults, as in our 
time, the child senses the increased bellicosity, the tyranny, the will to power, 
he will perceive this behavior as justification for his own desire for power, 
especially if he even experiences this pressure in his upbringing. He will then 
seek to establish a permanent combat readiness. With a generally malicious 
perspective, which results in constant competition and conflict with others, 
with a permanently overheated contest for prestige, the child develops from 
the family into the life of his society. And so it is plainly obvious if all his 
abilities develop as if for battle.
For this reason we must also consider the importance of the question of 
hereditary characteristics as clearly exaggerated. Many of the manifestations 
that could be considered hereditary turn out to be the result of imitation. 
We deny the action of a “drive.” Children imitate; at other times, they freely 
invent what, after tentative preliminary experiments, appears to them to be 
helpful in their struggle to become God-like.
Character traits and ideals develop in a similar way, under constant urg-
ing and shaping by the requirements of society. Their higher or lower level is 
the result of education—intentional or unintentional—which is capable of 
putting obstacles in the way of a child’s tenacity of purpose. Obedience, for 
instance, is frequently championed over defiance. Similarly, cowardice over 
courage which, however, does not prevent occasional development of both 
traits in a person as interchangeable means. At any rate, human beings seem 
to have a powerful tendency which we have so far not overcome, that traces 
such traits as timidity, anxiousness, submissiveness back to the nursery and 
there conjures up analogous behaviors.

126	
Terry Kottman and Melissa Heston
But since the child’s sights are always trained on the future, this depen-
dence on social criteria follows automatically, as if by fate. A world full of 
hostility and adversity will suggest to the adult as well as to the child that 
faults, weaknesses, and crimes, that self-abasement can operate like an act of 
revenge, of revolt and exaltation like an instrument of power. On the other side 
of such forceful attempts to break the social boundaries, there is the equally 
harmful attitude of others who are so bent on eliminating every “mistake” 
from their experience that they waste their time in continuous uncertainty, 
and end up in a “hesitant attitude” for life. We find these two groups so often 
that they have earned the epithet “neurotic” for our era. The faint-hearted 
ones are in the majority. This is easily explained by a typical peculiarity of 
our modern education, which makes the child over-cautious, often simply 
for the convenience of the parents. It is easy to understand how these fear-
ful views, of life adulterate every value judgment, and cause a permanently 
pathological approach to the world. The revisions of this point of view are the 
result of experience recorded without bias: as a rule, making mistakes is of 
lesser importance than the consequences that a child ascribes to them. This 
is also surely true of the sexual transgressions of childhood. We must not for-
get that the child has to solve the questions of his sexuality. When he makes 
mistakes, let us remember his immaturity, and the shortcomings of educa-
tors’ attempts thus far at providing a solution. We have come to understand a 
fact that we consider to be of special importance: The sexual behavior of the 
developing child is in complete harmony with his individual orientation and 
can be changed only together with that orientation.
We see the same unity of the “child’s life plan” in his favorite games, in 
career fantasies, in the earliest recollections, in his position vis-à-vis parents, 
teachers, classmates, strangers, and in certain peculiarities, some of which I 
want to mention here.
For example, our point of view permits us to conclude from a child’s 
deceitfulness, that his inner growth was subject to a feeling of inferiority to 
such an extent that he felt pushed into “artifices” and ruses in order to be able 
to hold fast to a higher goal. Selection of this goal and of artifices such as, 
for instance, laziness, blushing, shyness, tardiness, etc., pedantry, snivelling, 
violent temper, and all other characteristics always occur according to avail-
able forces, individual experiences, and the effect that will be useful in the 
battle against the environment. A more in-depth treatment can be found in 
the works that have been cited. The most prominent impression that always 
emerges is a “distancing” from societal life, a deficient desire or an aversion 
to “join the game,” or even a tendency to spoil the game for others. The coun-
terpart of social deficiencies, the absence of a sense of community, comes 
through clearly.

	
	
The Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community	
127
It has been our endeavor to show that the good qualities and the defects 
of society exert a bilateral influence on the child’s inner development as they 
steer the child’s budding ideal and longing into their paths, fill them with 
their content, strengthen or weaken them. In this way, they influence the 
child’s perspective, force him into a life-long position in which the “non-
self” is quite imperceptibly placed on the opposing, the antagonistic side of 
the ledger. We maintain, then, that the biased, rigidly one-sided view of life, 
which originates in childhood, causes the sense of community to wither, that 
it usually remains unrecognized and incorrigible as long as an expanded self-
awareness does not force a change. In order to bring this train of thought 
to immediate fruition, let me in closing point to two main types of spoil-
sports, One type develops a system of life whereby they are always prejudiced 
against others. Their low self-esteem is as obvious as that of the second type 
who, pointing to their weaknesses, always “blame” themselves, but assume 
thereby that others must place themselves at their service. How much these 
people are at odds with the actual requirements of life is evidenced by the fact 
established by our school, that among other things, they constitute the main 
contingent of people with neurotic and psychotic illnesses.


129
11
Individual Psychological Education
Guy J. Manaster
“Individual Psychology Education” was presented as a lecture to physicians in 
Switzerland in 1918 and published in 1920. To better understand how Adler’s 
influence on contemporary education is forecast from this paper we need some 
understanding of where Adler was at that time: geographically, historically, and 
developmentally.
Adler returned to Vienna from service during World War I touched and 
inspired by his experience. Although most of the basic tenets of his theory had 
been formed or suggested by that time, it was a work in progress. He concluded 
from his war experience that all of the problems of individual development and 
pathology could not be ameliorated on a one-on-one basis. Individual Psychology 
therapy could be successful in each case, but society’s ills were too great to rely on 
that technique alone.
Thus Adler broadened the application of his theory to groups, families, and 
the greater society through education throughout the rest of his life. He exposed 
the pillars of the educational system, the issues of power and status, for their 
deleterious effect on society, women, families, and mental health. He could not 
understand children except in the context of their family and community—views 
foreign to the strict and impersonal classroom of that time. Adler recognized 
the loneliness of the downtrodden teacher faced with children from all sorts of 
backgrounds, with all sorts of problems, with no professional help or practice for 
alleviating the teacher’s pain or the students’.
In taking on the challenge of improving the world through applying and 
developing his psychology in education and community, Adler was taking on 
entrenched establishments. In addition to the schools, he was confronting other 
professions to become involved with the challenge of improving child develop-
ment and education. This paper is a polite example of his facing physicians with 
that challenge.
This may not seem to be a particularly courageous move. However, at that 
time Adler was not securely ensconced in the Vienna medical scene, particularly 

130	
Guy J. Manaster
the academic medical community as Freud maneuvered against Adler receiving 
an appointment at the prestigious University of Vienna. Adler’s socialist sym-
pathies, and his wife’s communist leanings, kept him in contrast, if not conflict, 
with the conservative education authorities. Thus, as Adler developed, broad-
ened, and refined his theory and its clinical applications, he had to be a diplomat 
and politico to instigate his theory into the entire spectrum of social and educa-
tional arenas.
This paper well illustrates his expanding his theory into education and social 
applications to mental health while trying to appeal to the physician’s basic 
humanitarian and idealistic values.
Today, no one would think of confronting a child’s problems, a child in dif-
ficulty, without considering the child’s health and family situation. Adler’s 
exposition of birth order dynamics comes across as a friendly invitation to the 
physicians to consider family constellation when considering a child, to remem-
ber the family and social context. And, of course, the physician is to do this while 
focusing on the child’s health, bearing in mind the child’s perception of his or her 
relative capabilities and feelings of inferiority.
Sex identification and sex role issues are so imbued as societal and cultural 
issues that they are, today, recognized and addressed with alacrity in most 
schools. So too defiance, which now would be termed oppositional, is a not 
uncommon condition and diagnosis in schools. When Adler discusses these, and 
other issues, in this paper he is presenting the seeds of his eventual overall view 
and forecasting much in contemporary educational practice.
Adler is speaking to physicians in this paper, but he mentions parents’ and 
teachers’ involvement. He did not restrict the application of his theory to par-
ticular professionals and, over time, he would make the same plea to all mental 
health and education professionals. He interacted with and considered all pro-
fessions as worthy participants in the conversation and efforts of education and 
mental health. Contemporary team approaches in schools, parent education, 
democratic collaboration, and the seeds of community mental health in schools 
can all be seen in this paper.
At the end of the paper Adler makes a final appeal for prophylaxis, for pre-
vention. His first requirement is to educate all relevant professionals in psychol-
ogy, albeit his psychology, developmental psychology and educational theory. 
Although Individual Psychology is not the primary view taught, psychological 
theory and practice and developmental psychology are fundamental elements 
in all teacher training and educational practice. The general goals Adler spells 
out in this article have been instilled in current educational practice. To further 
improve education and mental health Individual Psychology should be at the 
center of the effort.

	
	
Individual Psychological Education	
131
Individual-Psychological Education18
Alfred Adler
The tremendous importance of a thorough, complete understanding of edu-
cational questions and the necessity for every physician mastering them up 
to a certain point, is particularly clear when looked at from the standpoint 
of the nerve-specialist’s treatment. We demand justifiably that the doctor in 
particular, have a knowledge of men, and we know that such a vital ques-
tion as the relations between physician and patient, always break down if 
the physician is either lacking in knowledge of men or in methods of educa-
tion. It was this attitude and interpretation of his role that made Virchow say: 
“Physicians will eventually become the educators of humanity.”
A question that has become acute in our day and which is bound to become 
even more acute in a short time, is that relating to the relative spheres of phy-
sician and educator. It is quite essential to reach some unanimity in regard to 
the whole range of problems involved and to obtain a bird’s-eye view of them. 
Both sides overlap but co-operative work is entirely absent.
If we but ask what purpose education serves, all the main points involved 
will certainly fall within the domain of the physician. The education of chil-
dren so that they may become individuals actuated by ethical principles, the 
utilization of their virtues for the good of the community, are regarded by 
every physician as the self-evident presupposition of life. It may justifiably 
be demanded that all his actions, measures and moves be in conformity with 
this object. The immediate direction of the education will always be in the 
hands of the educator, of the teachers and parents, but we may assume that 
they will acquaint themselves with those questions and difficulties that only 
the physician can really plumb to their depths, because he must unearth 
them from out the patho­logical interrelations of the psychic life. I wish in 
particular to emphasize the fact that it is impossible to cover in a short time 
a field of such tremendous extent and that until a unified conception can be 
reached, it is only possible to touch briefly on certain questions whose more 
extensive discussion will be the concern of the following future generations. 
Neverthe­less it is important to become acquainted with those view-points 
that individual-psychology insists are of fundamental significance and 
whose misunderstanding, it is claimed, will be visited upon the children in 
the course of their development.
What brings the physician into the closest contact with educational ques-
tions is the relationship between psychic health and bodily health, although 
18	Translated by P. Radin.

132	
Guy J. Manaster
not however, in that general sense so often spoken of, namely a sane mind in 
a sane body, a rather unwarranted con­ception. We all have ample opportu-
nity of seeing physically healthy children and, adults whose psychic condi-
tion is by no means healthy. It is difficult, if not impossible, for a child with 
a weak constitution to attain to that harmony expected of physically normal 
children. Let us take the case of a child born with a poor digestive system. 
From the very first days he will be cared for most carefully and solicitously. 
Such children will consequently grow up in a markedly affectionate atmo-
sphere; they will find themselves always protected, their actions directed and 
circum­scribed by a large number of commands and pro­hibitions. The impor-
tance of food will be markedly exaggerated so that they will learn to prize and 
even over-value the question of nourishment and digestion. It is the children 
with digestive troubles who form the main contingent on those who put dif-
ficulties in the way of their education, a fact with which the older physicians 
were already acquainted. It has been claimed that such children must become 
nervous. Whether such a definite compulsion exists is doubtful. It is however 
true that the “inimical” character of life weighs more heavily upon the souls 
of children who suffer and invests them with an unfriendly pessimistic atti-
tude toward the world. Sensible of their deprivation they demand stronger 
guarantees for their importance, become egotistic and easily lose their con-
tact with their fellowmen, because the discovery of their ego has rendered the 
discovery of their environment a somewhat antagonistic element.
The child is beset with a tremendous temptation by its relation to the envi-
ronment, its attitude toward school, to the frequently intensified discomforts 
entailed by the weakness of the stomach and intestinal tracts to obtain com-
pensatory advantages that can be derived from proving himself ill. He will, 
for example, develop an extraordinary tendency to being spoiled; from earli-
est childhood accustom himself to having others clear away all difficulties for 
him; it will be more difficult for him to become self-reliant and he will invari-
ably refuse to make increased efforts in all the dangerous situa­tions of life. His 
courage and his self-confidence will be shaken almost to their foundations. 
Such an attitude persists to old age and it is not easy to change a child who 
for ten, fifteen or twenty years had been a weakling, pampered by everyone, 
into the courageous man full of initiative, enterprise and self-confidence, 
demanded by our times.
The harm inflicted upon the community is of course, much greater than 
the above standpoint lets us see, for we must take into consideration not 
merely chil­dren with stomach and intestinal weaknesses but all those born 
with inferior organs, those whose sense­ organs are deficient and who, in 
consequence, find the approaches to life rendered more inaccessible. We fre-
quently find such difficulties mentioned in biographies or by patients. In such 
cases the physician will have to concern himself not merely with the psychic 

	
	
Individual Psychological Education	
133
educational question—but will endeavour with all his powers, to apply some 
remedy or treatment for correcting defects so that the child may, at an early 
stage, be prevented from falling back upon his weakness. We will do this all 
the more energetically if we ourselves realize that we are here not dealing with 
any permanent deficiences or with smaller or greater difficulties, and that the 
important point to bear in mind is that an original organic weakness, when 
subsequently corrected, may yet live on in a permanent feeling of weakness and 
make an individual unfit for life. These conditions become of extra­ordinary 
complexity because the children themselves, to an unusual degree, strive to 
make some compensations and corrections. Only a few succeed in making 
any good compensations and most of them attempt, in some fashion or other, 
to equalize the differences that exist (between them and healthy children), to 
make up for their deficiencies either by having recourse to cultural methods 
or by intensifying both their initiative and their mental powers.
In all these cases we shall find noticeable traits of character causing dis-
turbances such as, for example, psychic sensitiveness always leading to a 
conflict. We must remember that we are here dealing with manifestations of 
daily life which we cannot pass over lightly for otherwise both body and soul 
would be injured.
It is difficult to stress adequately enough how great is the distress and ten-
sion reigning in the child’s soul. It is an easy matter to understand the mental 
habits of men who have become useless if we suppose that their uselessness 
is a persistence of something they have brought with them from the nursery. 
Disease and the idea of disease means much more to the child than we gen-
erally imagine. Anyone who wishes to survey the child’s psyche from this 
angle, will soon discover that to a child these are important experiences, and 
that illness in almost all cases appears not as an increase of difficulties’ but 
as their alleviation, that it is even prized as a means for obtaining tenderness, 
power and certain advantages at home or in the school.
There are a large number of children who always have the idea that they 
are ill, who always feel weak. In all these cases where a persistence of the 
symptoms cannot be explained by any medical findings, it proves that the 
children are making use of this feeling of illness in order to gain prominence, 
to do justice to their desire for domination and importance in their own fam-
ily. For example, in cases where long after the whooping-cough has passed, 
children still adhere laboriously to a similar cough. We find that they invari-
ably succeed in frightening their families by these attacks. This would, for 
instance, be a case where it would be essential for the physician in his peda-
gogical capacity to intervene.
On the other hand there are also parents and educators who take the 
opposite view-point, treating their children with severity, even with brutal-
ity, or wish, at least, to give the children the impression of being so severe.

134	
Guy J. Manaster
Life is so diverse that it compensates for the errors of the educator. 
Nevertheless, a man whose childhood has been spent in a loveless atmosphere 
shows, even in old age, indications of this bringing-up. He will always sus-
pect that people desire to be unkind to him and he will shut himself off from 
others, lose touch with them. Frequently such people appeal to their loveless 
child­hood, as if that exercised some compelling force. Naturally enough a 
child does not necessarily develop mistrust because parents have been severe, 
to be as cold to others as they have been to him, or to distrust his own powers 
for that reason. It is, however, in such soil that neuroses and psychoses are 
prone to develop. It is always possible to disclose in such, a child’s environ­
ment, some disturbing individual who, either through lack of understanding 
or evil intention, poisons the child’s soul. Hardly any person except the phy-
sician is able in such cases to bring about a change in the environment either 
by alteration of residence or by explanations.
There are, however, certain complications only dis­covered through a pro-
found understanding of the individual, which, when grasped, clarify the pic-
ture to an extraordinary degree.
There exists, for example, a fundamental difference in the psychic devel-
opment of the first-born as con­trasted with that of the second or last-born 
child. The individuality of an only child it is also simple to characterize. A 
family where there are either only boys or girls, either one girl among a num-
ber of boys or one boy among a number of girls, expresses itself in a definite 
psychic manner. It is from such facts and positions that children develop 
their attitude. Frequently it is possible to pick out the oldest or youngest child 
by his behaviour. I have always found that the first-born possesses a sort of 
conservative tendency. He takes the element of power always into consider-
ation, comes to an understanding with it and exhibits a certain amount of 
sociability. Compare with this, for example, Fontane’s biography where he 
states that he would give much if anyone could explain to him why he always 
had a certain tendency to side with the stronger. I in­ferred from this and 
rightly, that he must have been a first-born child who regarded his superiority 
over his brothers and sisters as his inviolable possession.
The second-born always has before and behind him some one who can do 
more, of more importance, who generally possesses greater liberty of action 
and is superior to him. If a second-born child is capable of any development 
he will unquestionably live in a condition of continuous endeavour to sur-
pass his elder brother. He will work restlessly as if under full steam. In fact, 
the restless neurotics are, to a preponderating degree, second-born children, 
the first-born rather un­willingly tolerating rivals.
In the attitude of the type perhaps most prominent found among last 
born, we find something infantile, a reserve and hesitation, as if not trust-
ing oneself to perform praiseworthy acts that others are either seen to do 

	
	
Individual Psychological Education	
135
or are assumed as doing. Such people easily infer that the whole question is 
one of stabilizing a situation originally existing. He is always surrounded by 
people who can do more, meets only people who are more important than 
himself. On the other hand, he is as a rule able to attract to himself all the 
love and tenderness of the environment without giving anything in return. 
There is no need of his developing his powers for he is automatically forced 
into the centre of his environment. It is easy enough to understand all the 
injury this entails to his whole psychic development, for he thus learns to 
expect to have everything done for him by others. A second type of last-born is 
the “Joseph type.” Rest­lessly pushing forward, they surpass everyone by their 
initiative (Kunstadt) frequently transcending the normal and become path-
finders. Both in the Bible and in fairy-tales, people’s knowledge of mankind 
has gener­ally given to the youngest with the greatest gifts, the possession of 
magic boots, etc.
The behavior of an only girl among a number of boys is also important. 
Here so many tense situations develop that we may assume that an oppor-
tunity for abnormal attitudes to develop will arise; I am not speaking here 
of absolutely final results. It is made clear to the girl at an early age, that her 
nature is utterly different from that of the boy and that much will remain 
forbidden to her that is boy’s right by nature, which he may claim as his privi-
lege. It is not easy in such a case to have either praise or pampering serve as 
a substitute. For we are concerned here with emotional values that to the 
child represent something essential and irreplaceable. The girl is continually 
bothered, receives orders and instructions at every step. In such children, 
we find a special sensitiveness to criticism, continual attempts to show the 
strong side, to appear free from all vices; and at the same time a fear lest her 
unimportance be discovered. These girls frequently furnish the material for 
future neurotic diseases.
The same holds true in the case of an only boy among a number of girls. It 
is just here that the contrast seems even greater. The boy is generally provided 
with special privileges. In consequence the girls work in unison against their 
only brother. Such boys often suffer as if at the hands of an extensive conspir-
acy. Every word he utters is marked by the sisters; he is never taken seriously; 
his good traits are decried, his defects made prominent, and as a result the 
boy frequently loses his self-control and self-con­fidence and generally shows 
but poor progress in life. Then people speak of his indolence and laziness. 
How­ever this is only an external manifestation which with its consequences 
is based upon a pathological abnor­mality of temperament, on a fear of fac-
ing life. The important point to remember is that we are dealing with people 
who have either lost their belief in themselves or are prone to lose it. Such 
boys will habitually recoil from action, are afraid of being made fun of, even 
when there is no reason for such an attitude. They soon give up all real work, 

136	
Guy J. Manaster
devote themselves to killing time, and become demoralized. Difficulties of 
the same order are frequently encountered where an older brother is brought 
up together with a younger sister.
Another point to be taken up by the physician is the explanation of sexual 
questions to children. No single answer covering all cases can as yet be given 
because of the differences in various nurseries, of individuals and of the envi-
ronment in which children grow up. One point should however be remem-
bered, that it is an injustice that is very easily visited upon children, if they are 
kept in ignorance of their sex role longer than necessary. Strangely enough 
this happens all too often. Patients have not infrequently told me that even 
up to their tenth year they were not quite certain to which sex they belonged. 
Throughout their develop­ment a feeling manifests itself as if they had not 
been born like other people as boys or girls and would not develop like them. 
This gives these children a tremen­dous feeling of uncertainty noticeable in all 
their actions. The same is true of girls. There are some who up to the eighth, 
ninth, tenth, twelfth and even fourteenth year grow up with considerable 
uncertainty as to their sex and who in phantasy always imagined that, in 
some fashion or other, they might still be transformed into men. This fact is 
also supported by certain descriptions in the literature on the subject.
In all these cases the normally certain evolution is interfered with. The years 
of childhood are spent in endeavouring to supplement their sex role artificially, 
to develop along masculine lines and to avoid making any decisions that might 
result in defeat. An un­certainty of a fundamental character is either clearly 
shown or to be inferred from the pretentious and exaggerated actions in which 
they indulge. Girls adopt a masculine attitude and force themselves preferably 
to a behaviour that seems to them and their whole en­vironment as characteris-
tic of boys. They prefer’ to romp about, not merely in the wild harmless fashion 
which we gladly concede to children, but in an emphatic manner as if under 
some constraint, and do it so con­sistently that it very early impresses even their 
parents as of a pathological character. Boys too show them­selves as if possessed 
by some wild turmoil, but, taught by the obstacles they encounter, they gener-
ally soon desist and develop an hesitating attitude or turn their attention to 
girls. The awakened eroticism then takes on in both sexes unnatural and fre-
quently perverse traits that run parallel to their general attitude.
Let me now speak of certain manifestations that are commonly regarded 
as acts of defiance. A large number of signs are assigned to defiance that the 
physician considers indications of illness. As such are to be reckoned the fre-
quently found form of refusal to take nourishment and even those types of 
rebellion connected with defaecation and micturition. All the pathological 
symptoms which in more pronounced forms we have found in enuresis, or 
in an inexplicable or unchangeable kind of constipation, are frequently based 
upon some deeply-rooted defiance in children, who would like to utilize every 

	
	
Individual Psychological Education	
137
opportunity for escaping from the com­pulsion to which they are subjected, 
because they feel force, in any form, as an encroachment and humiliation. 
They derive a feeling of satisfaction from their refusal to adapt themselves 
easily to the demands of their environment as though this were a measure of 
their importance. We interpret it as a sign of revolt. It is simple enough to test 
the matter for we will always find other signs of defiance. The same is true for 
harmless bad habits like nose-picking, slobbering, and nail-­biting. Bad habits 
clearly indicate a development in a direction antagonistic to the demands of 
the com­munity. Someone with the role of an opponent is never absent. The 
symptom itself is almost always due to inferior functioning.
It is exceedingly interesting to follow the whole chain that is formed when 
we take into consideration the various transformations in the nature of a 
child’s choice of profession, as, for example, in the case of a small girl passing 
successively from the role of princess, dancer, teacher and finally, somewhat 
resignedly, to that of the house-wife. We frequently find that the choice of 
profession in the case of grown-up children, is dictated by the desire to do 
the opposite of that suggested by the father. Naturally this opposition does 
not develop openly. The logical faculty is con­strained by the pressure exerted 
by the nature of the final objective. The advantages of one profession will be 
especially emphasized and the disadvantages con­nected with another just as 
markedly underlined. In this way it is possible to argue both for and against 
every point. This attitude must likewise be definitely taken into consideration. 
But from another angle the physician is also concerned, both in regard to the 
advice he hazards about the profession as in regard to what he says about the 
actual choice of a profession. He must primarily be guided by his knowledge 
of the person’s physical fitness; yet realize on the other hand, that the psychi-
cal factor is just as important and may, in some cases, be more fundamental.
It is, of course, an exceedingly disagreeable task to pursue every individual 
who has gone wrong or who is afflicted with a neurotic illness or a psychosis, 
in order to improve or heal him. That would constitute a tremendous waste 
of energy and it is about time that we seriously turn our attention more defi-
nitely to prophylaxis. There are already an ample number of secured points 
of vantage. We have for instance, constantly been trying to work toward 
the goal by educating both parents and physicians. Better results are, how-
ever, imperatively necessary in view of the tre­mendous increase of neurotic 
and psychotic phenomena in connection particularly with demoralization. 
Perhaps the first requirement would be to disseminate the ideas derived from 
a knowledge of men and the educational ideas obtained through individual-
psychology; then to apply them so that all can aid us with their strength and 
in every possible manner. The psychic anomalies of development which at 
first seem but minor bad habits afterwards lead to the forms of neurotic dis-
ease and crime.


139
12
The Problem of Distance 
19
Robert McBrien
Reading Adler’s The Problem of Distance (1925/1983) is similar to browsing 
through a museum of psychotherapy. The sentence structure, constructs, and 
technical terms (i.e., neurosis and psychosis), developed in the early 1900s, are 
rarely used in professional literature today. We remind ourselves that the knowl-
edge base for someone studying human behavior during the 1920s was limited 
when compared to our current knowledge base.
As we read Adler’s words the question arises, are these constructs about safe-
guarding tendencies and the problem of distance useful today? By studying lit-
erature, old and recent, we can review the key constructs developed by Adler and 
his followers as they created Individual Psychology. Further, we learn how con-
temporary Adlerians have updated these basic teachings and are applying them 
in their work with clients.
Beginning in 1902 and continuing until 1911, Adler was an active member of 
Freud’s Wednesday Psychological Society. This circle of professionals was invited 
by Freud because they shared an interest in his theories (I think of the group as 
an earlier form of a think tank), and was instrumental in the creation of psycho-
analysis. Over time it was apparent that Adler’s thinking was not in harmony 
with Freud’s. These basic differences came to light in February 1911 when Adler 
presented to the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society three papers that described his 
theories. The Ansbachers report that the end result of these presentations was 
Adler’s “complete separation from Freud” (Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1956, p. 56).
According to Dreikurs (1953) their irreconcilable differences developed due 
to a basic difference between psychoanalysis and Adler’s psychology of the indi-
vidual. Dreikurs wrote, “For Freud human conflicts are intra-personal caused 
by opposing conflicts with the personality structure, i.e., between the person’s 
Ego, Super Ego and Id, the unconscious. For Adler, all problems and conflicts are 
interpersonal. This implies a different emphasis on both the origin of conflicts 
and on the therapeutic procedure” (p. 3).
19	A basic feature of neurosis and psychosis.

140	
Robert McBrien
In The Problem of Distance, Adler (1925/1983) continues to contrast his 
Individual Psychology with “the so-called sexual psychology” (p. 101). A con-
struct that Freud and Adler disagreed upon, and challenged each other on, was 
Adler’s (1925/1983) the masculine protest. Taking my museum trip metaphor a 
step further would be to find in the museum a room filled with 100-year-old 
artifacts and discover in a corner an ancient movie machine. Imagine viewing 
a flickering faded film of Adler and Freud playing tennis. On the ball is written 
neurotic and Adler’s racket is labeled masculine protest, while Freud’s racket is 
labeled penis envy. We can watch this tennis match that represents a continuation 
of the rivalry that existed between them.
Adler’s Psychology of the Individual
How important is the masculine protest today? Grounded in the early develop-
ment of Adler’s theories on understanding human behavior, at first this concept 
focused on the experience that girls had living in a time when their brothers were 
placed in a position of privilege and being a girl meant having a second-class 
citizen’s status.
Of the daughter who is being pampered Adler (1931/1980) wrote,
Many girls who have been pampered find it difficult to adjust themselves to the 
feminine role. There is always the impression in our culture that men are superior 
to women; and in consequence they dislike the thought of being women. Now they 
reveal what I have called “the masculine protest.” (p. 191)
Later Adler (1931/1980) expands on this construct. He wrote, “It is not only 
girls who suffer from a ‘masculine protest,’ but all children who overvalue the 
importance of being masculine see masculinity as an ideal and are dubious 
whether they are strong enough to achieve it” ( p. 192). Today we consider ear-
lier discussions about masculine protest as the roots for current theories on the 
environment’s (especially society’s) contribution to symptoms, a key principle 
of Adler’s psychology. Recall that Adler (1925/1983) highlights this construct to 
drive home his “fundamental and at the same time, the determining factor in 
the psychic life of both healthy and nervous people—‘the feeling of inferiority’” 
(p. 100).
For Adler, both healthy and neurotic individuals experience feelings of inferi-
ority. What is the difference between the healthy person and the neurotic person 
in overcoming the doubts connected to succeeding with the pursuit of life goals? 
It is private logic.
Private logic, also known as apperception, when rooted in feelings of inferior-
ity prompts the person to set lofty goals. Pursuing lofty goals is also known as 

	
	
The Problem of Distance 	
141
striving for superiority. During the formative years of Individual Psychology this 
striving for superiority to compensate for one’s sense of being inferior was con-
sidered to be neurotic behavior. It may be helpful for our understanding of this 
term to use Shulman’s (1930/1995) definition: Neurotic means “a person who has 
become discouraged by the interaction between life events and his own lifestyle” 
(p. 5). Today we think of this construct as self-actualization.
In healthy individuals, this sense of overcoming encourages positive actions 
that result in goal achievements. We describe these successful persons as self-
actualizing and as optimistic. Adlerians describe them as having social interest 
and recognizes their positive contributions to the community. Adlerians would 
describe the person’s lifestyle as moving on the useful side of life.
Adler (1925/1983) wrote, “Every psychic expression of the neurotic possesses 
within itself two presuppositions—the feeling of inferiority on the one hand, and 
the compelling, hypnotizing striving toward the goal of godlikeness on the other” 
(p. 102). Adlerians say the person’s life path is moving on the useless side of life.
The striving principle and motivations for choosing the useless side of life are 
constructs that highlight Adlerian views on the impact of the environment on 
human behavior. For Adlerians, the motivations for someone moving along the 
useless side of life explain the need for and uses of safeguarding tendencies. In 
addition, our understanding of the usefulness of safeguards provides the founda-
tion for our understanding of how distancing functions as a “safety mechanism 
of the ego consciousness” (Adler, 1925/1938, p. 100).
Safeguarding Tendencies
Safeguarding tendencies are an Adlerian construct that helps us understand the 
purpose for employing a self-defeating pattern of actions prompted by feelings of 
inferiority. These actions are intended to avoid threats of exposing perceived defi-
ciencies. These discomfort-dodging behaviors are repeated despite the person’s 
experiencing problems
We return to the tennis match again. This time Adler switches to a new racket 
labeled safeguarding tendencies and Freud picks up one labeled defense mecha-
nisms. These constructs are described in Ansbacher and Ansbacher (1956). We 
understand the source of the Adler-Freud rivalry when the Ansbachers describe 
Freud’s defense mechanisms as protecting the ego against instinctual demands 
while Adler’s safeguards served to protect the self-esteem from perceived exter-
nal threats and problems of life. They wrote, “These respective explanations are 
consistent with Freud’s biological and Adler’s social orientation” (p.265).
Can contemporary therapists make use of these constructs from the last cen-
tury? Contemporary uses of safeguards, especially distancing, have been updated 
by Clark (2000). His contribution answers the question in my title. It is yes. 

142	
Robert McBrien
Adler’s safeguarding and distance constructs are definitely useful for students of 
Individual Psychology and Adlerian counselors today. We turn to Clark’s update.
Apparently Adler did not provide a definition of his construct, but Clark offers 
this: Safeguarding refers to “a self-deceptive evasion that deters functioning in 
experiences which evoke threat and feelings of inferiority” (p. 192). Clark contributes 
to the usefulness of the safeguarding construct by offering a counseling model to use 
with discouraged clients who are employing safeguarding strategies inappropriately.
We are reminded that we all use a safeguarding strategy on occasion. Think of 
an alibi you used or you heard someone use to explain being late for an appoint-
ment. According to the theory this use of an alibi would be to protect our self-
esteem. However, the discouraged person using safeguards consistently finds that 
nothing changes and a goal is not reached or a problem is not solved. Recall that 
safeguards are not known. This was Adler’s term for the unconscious (Ansbacher 
& Ansbacher, 1956, p. 1).
A key theme in all safeguards that counselors can investigate is the evasion 
of responsibility. Because the person’s private logic hides the purpose for the 
self-defeating behaviors, any success with positive changes will probably require 
effective counseling. Effective counseling strategies would guide discouraged cli-
ents to move away from their chronic use of safeguards and move toward over-
coming obstacles as they move to the useful side of life.
The Problem of Distance
Adler’s essay on the distancing safeguard calls for the reader’s awareness of the 
Northern European culture he lived in, his classic education, and the reality of 
the phenomenon known as lost in translation. What we read in English was trans-
lated from his native German language. To better understand Adler’s message, I 
found it necessary to gather background on the meanings implied in unfamiliar 
terms and references. Thanks to Google I was able to learn the term denouement 
(p. 101), a term used in theater and film today that refers to the final outcome of 
a complex sequence of events. Adler refers to Kraft-Ebing, a psychiatrist, educa-
tor, and author. He published a controversial book on human sexology in the 
1880s. Controversy arose when he described homosexuals as normal people with 
a different sexuality. Adler (1925/1983) recognized that Kraft-Ebing’s unpopular 
views on homosexuality were in alignment with Individual Psychology theory (p. 
102). It seems that Adler’s reference to Kraft-Ebing was to point out the therapist’s 
need to look for the purpose for any symptom.
When Adler (1925/1983) mentions Penelope (p. 105) he refers to Odysseus’s 
wife, in Greek mythology. She wove a garment by day and then undid her weav-
ing at night, thus never finishing the garment. This reference can serve as a meta-
phor for any task someone undertakes but never finishes. Thus hesitating and 

	
	
The Problem of Distance 	
143
marking time are safeguards and these actions serve some useful purpose for the 
actor. Adler is using a literary term in discussing the lifeline of the tragic hero. He 
uses perpetitia (p. 108) to describe the interplay of ambition or vanity (superior-
ity) and inferiority with the result that the problem of distance prevents the hero 
from decisive action.
Clark (2000) expands these understandings of distancing tendencies with the 
insights of Dreikurs, Mosak, and other second-generation Adlerians. Clark states, 
Through the employment of safeguarding tendencies, individuals consequently 
demonstrate an outward appearance of attempting tasks or appear to endure suf-
ferings in pursuit of obligations, when in actuality they are avoiding situational 
demands through withdrawal tactics that serve as alibis. (p. 192)
Evidence counselors look for to uncover a distancing complex includes the 
person’s avoidance behaviors when faced with challenges and problems, expres-
sions of doubt and pessimism regarding success with problem solving, and the 
evasion of responsibility. This description reflects Adler’s (1925/1983) fourth mode 
of distancing, “Construction of obstacles and their mastery as an indication of ‘dis-
tance’” (p. 106).
I recall the client who was a university senior in his last semester who had 
only his student teaching assignment left before graduating, obtaining his BS and 
teaching credentials, and entering the profession he spent 4 years preparing for. 
His presenting problem was his inability to get to his classroom on time each 
morning. In trouble with his supervising teacher, his education department fac-
ulty, and his family, he sought counseling. After studying Adler’s construct on 
the distancing safeguard, I now have a better understanding of why this young 
man was late for the three appointments we set, dropped out of counseling, took 
an incomplete grade for his student teaching credits, and failed to graduate on 
time.
Clark (2000) presents a progressive three-stage counseling model for help-
ing clients identify and modify inappropriate safeguarding tendencies. Clark’s 
sequence begins with the initial stage where encouragement and assessing the 
lifestyle are key strategies. During the integration stage the process focuses on the 
clarification of conflicts associated with safeguarding tendencies and developing 
new frames of reference for their approach to life. Stage 3, the accomplishment 
stage, involves action-oriented strategies that help the client gain control over 
habitual safeguarding and create alternative actions that lead to positive outcomes.
Clark’s (2000) systematic counseling process is developmental, strengths-
based, and encouraging. Clark’s system of structured counseling might have 
guided me to be more effective counseling my persistently tardy student teacher. 
Listed are 15 counseling “tools” I could have used with him.

144	
Robert McBrien
Stage Me—The Relationship Stage
Goals: Enhance client’s self-worth, find strengths and abilities, and build 
hope through developing the power of choice and decision-making.
Counseling Strategies
	
1.	Active listening and empathy
	
2.	Encouragement
	
3.	Self-disclosures
	
4.	Focus on resources, assets, and strengths
	
5.	Assess the lifestyle
	
6.	Sentence completion
	
7.	Early recollections
	
8.	Dreams (Adler comments on dreams, p. 106)
Stage II—The Integration Stage
Goals: Focus on conflicts connected to the use of safeguards. Protect against 
exposure to perceived defects. Explore life convictions. Guide the client to 
understand the purpose of safeguarding tendencies and related patterns of 
lifestyle. Teach the client to reframe negative schemas.
Counseling Strategies
	
9.	Confrontation
	
10.	Cognitive restructuring	
	
11.	Reframing
	
12.	Interpretation
Stage III—The Accomplishment Stage
Goals: Guide the client’s readiness for change, promote an action orientation, 
teach strategies for eliminating self-defeating habits.
Counseling Strategies
	
13.	Task setting and obtaining commitment
	
14.	Breaking it down by dividing tasks into manageable steps
	
15.	Catching oneself
Clark (2000) describes his progressive stage model as “a framework for a client’s 
change from safeguarding tendencies to socially constructive directions” (p. 201).
Readers may recognize the Adlerian counseling methods woven through the 
15 counseling strategies listed above. Additionally we can take advantage of other 
contemporary counseling strategies that have taken advantage of Adler’s keen 
insight into human behavior. His recognition of the impact of pessimism on safe-
guarding and his use of the terms scheme and schema prompt me to invite readers 

	
	
The Problem of Distance 	
145
to learn about the optimistic explanatory style in Peterson and Steen (2005) and 
Young and Klosko’s (1993) schema-focused therapy. These sources may prove 
useful for counselors seeking to expand their knowledge of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy strategies.
A Case Study
To further make a case for how distancing is useful in the 21st century, Stewart 
(2007) describes how the environment is used in constructing safeguards. He 
cites Adler’s description of people who gain distance from others when winter 
interferes with face-to-face meetings. With warmer weather there is more contact 
with others and the people reported their symptoms got worse (p. 346).
Stewart lists five prominent features about weather that make it usable as 
a safeguard:
	
1.	It can facilitate or deter the opportunities for interacting with others.
	
2.	The conditions serve as elegant safeguards since these events offer 
excuses for canceling or delaying responsibilities that are not the actor’s 
fault.
	
3.	It serves as a trigger of a physical or psychological symptom. This safe-
guard provides an acceptable alibi for distancing since the weather can 
be blamed for the various symptoms.
	
4.	With reference to personal priorities (see Pew, 1976) Stewart identifies to 
detach and to avoid as the two personality priorities that make weather-
focused safeguarding most prominent (p. 347).
	
5.	Our American society today is highly mobile and weather changes 
impact on travel plans. Weather reports are important for the traveler’s 
actual plans for taking a trip and with regard to safeguarding. Weather 
is important as an attribution for the person as they make excuses and 
achieve their safeguarding goal.
Stewart (2000) discusses four key implications for counselors for the process 
of counseling the client using weather as one of their safeguards. The four impli-
cations are as follows:
	
1.	Weather-based safeguards serve to protect the self that allows a small 
amount of functioning despite the person’s pursuit of mistaken goals 
rooted in self-interest rather than social interest.
	
2.	For those whose personality priorities involve detachment or avoidance 
counselors may find the use of encouragement strategies are needed 
throughout the stages of counseling. With the goal of guiding the indi-
vidual to develop social interest and learn the benefits of having positive 

146	
Robert McBrien
relationships with others, support and encouraging tactics will build the 
individual’s confidence in their ability to take perceived risks to make 
social connections.
	
3.	During the integration stage (Clark, 2000) of counseling clients may be 
assigned the task of recording the weather, their activities, and the emo-
tions experienced each day for a period of time. The log of these events 
permits counselor and client to identify patterns where weather safe-
guards may have been employed. Identifying triggers for the safeguard’s 
use permits the client to learn to “catch oneself.”
	
4.	Counselors are reminded to sort out uses of weather safeguards to 
determine if their use is occasional (e.g., students and teachers celebrat-
ing a snow day) or more significant due to their widespread, repeated, 
and pervasive use.
Stewart’s case study shows how Mary, his client, used a combination of weather 
and physical symptoms as a safeguard, thus causing problems with social relation-
ships, in particular a romantic relationship. He described how Adlerian counseling 
guided Mary to become aware of how her private logic impacted on her struggle. 
Finally Stewart’s counseling methods included most of Clark’s strategies. For 
example, he had Mary keep a daily log of the weather and how it influenced her 
mood and behavior. Completing this task helped her move toward the useful side 
of life.
Summary and a Challenge
The problem of distance involves the evasion of one’s responsibility to succeed 
with the challenges of life. Adler’s view of success in life is rooted in social inter-
est and one’s contribution to the community. Distancing as a safeguard to self-
esteem and a barrier to success with life’s challenges was reviewed. To update 
Adler’s 90-year-old theory Clark’s three-stage counseling process, designed to 
use with clients challenged with chronic use of distancing safeguard tendencies, 
was presented. Finally Stewart’s case study involving a client’s use of weather as 
a distancing safeguard offers an example of counseling the client who has the 
problem of distance.
Now a challenge for readers. Counselors are invited to discover in their cli-
ents’ life stories how successful they are moving along the useful side the life. 
How are clients handling the challenges life gives them? Is there evidence of a 
use of distancing as a safeguarding tendency? Readers using distancing-focused 
counseling in their work will find it quite helpful for their clients. A personal 
benefit will be the professional satisfaction gained by adding the effective strate-
gies described here to their counseling toolkit.

	
	
The Problem of Distance 	
147
References
Adler, A. (1925/1983). The problem of distance. In A. Adler, The practice and theory of indi-
vidual psychology (pp. 100–108). Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Allanheld.
Adler, A. (1930/1995). The pattern of life (2nd ed.). Chicago: Adler School of Professional 
Psychology.
Adler, A. (1931/1980). What life should mean to you. New York: Perigee Books.
Ansbacher, H., & Ansbacher, R. (1956). The individual psychology of Alfred Adler. New York: 
Basic Books.
Clark, A. J. (2000). Safeguarding tendencies: Implications for the counseling process. 
Individual Psychology, 56, 192–204.
Dreikurs, R. R. (1953). Fundamentals of Adlerian psychology. Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute.
Peterson, C., & Steen, T. (2005). Optimistic explanatory style. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez 
(Eds.), Handbook of positive psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pew, W. L. (1976). The number one priority. Retrieved April 30, 2011, from Adler Graduate 
School Web site: http://www.alfredadler.edu/pdf/NumberOnePriority.pdf
Shulman, B. H. (1995). Appendix II in A. Adler, The pattern of life, 2nd ed. Chicago, IL: 
Adler School of Professional Psychology.
Stewart, A. E. (2007). The use of weather as a safeguarding strategy. Individual Psychology, 
63, 345–352.
Young, J. E., & Klosko, J. C. (1994). Reinventing your life. New York: Plume.

148	
Robert McBrien
The Problem of Distance20
Alfred Adler
The practical importance of Individual-psychology is to be sought in the 
degree of certainty with which an individual’s life-plan and life-lines can be 
determined from his attitude toward life, toward society, toward the normal 
and necessary problems of communal life, his plans of obtaining prestige and 
the nature of his group consciousness. Assuming the acceptance of many of 
my conclusions let me direct your attention to the fundamental and at the 
same time, the determining factor in the psychic life of both healthy and 
nervous people—“the feeling of inferiority.” Similar in nature must be reck-
oned the “urge toward the positing of a goal, toward the heightening of ego 
consciousness,” a “compensatory” function as well as the “life-plan” obtrud-
ing itself upon the individual for the attainment of his goal through the 
employment of various “aggressions” and “deviations,” along the line of the 
“masculine protest” or the “fear of taking a decision.” I shall further assume 
a knowledge of the neurotic and psychotic psychic life, the fixation upon a 
“guiding fiction” in contrast to its absence in the healthy man, who regards 
his ideal “guiding principle” as giving only an “approximate orientation” and 
to be used as a means only. Finally, I assume the acceptance of the fact that, 
regarded as a whole, neurosis and psychosis are to be interpreted as a “safety 
mechanism” of the ego consciousness.
The manner in which the uninterrupted strivings of mankind “upward,” 
have conditioned, a cultural progress, perfecting at the same time, both a 
method and technique of life in which all possible eventualities and organic 
realities become of some utility even if not put to their proper use, must 
by this time, have assumed sufficient definiteness to place in a proper light 
the importance of the denouement in psychic life as contrasted with causal 
attempts at explanation. The concrete evidence for the untenability of the 
so-called sexual-psychology—in which the sexual attitude of the neurotic is 
quietly seized upon by many people as a factor to be thought of as an “anal-
ogy” of the life-plan, is clearly presented and the untenability of this view is 
to be regarded as one of the fundamental principles of individual psychology.
In our investigations, we found the tendency to seek the “attainment of 
pleasure” to be a variable and in no way determining factor, adjusting itself 
completely to the orientation of the life-plans. Traits of character and affects, 
contrary to the almost generally accepted belief, were there shown to be well-
tested and, in consequence, tenaciously fixed preparations for the attainment 
of a fictive goal of superiority. The theory of the “inherited” sexual components, 
20	Translated by P. Radin.

	
	
The Problem of Distance 	
149
perversions and criminal tendencies,” naturally becomes untenable as soon 
as this fact is disclosed. We are then justified in defining the general subject 
of psycho-neurosis to include the study of all those individuals who had pos-
sessed from childhood—be it in consequence of organ inferiority, an erro-
neous system of education or a bad family tradition—a feeling of weakness, 
a pessimistic perspective, and all those familiar and similar contrivances, 
prejudices, tricks and states of exaltation that develop in connection with 
the construction of an imaginary and subjective feeling of predominance. 
Every trait, every facial expression is so definitely connected with the prom-
ised goal of peace and triumph that we can justifiably claim that all neurotic 
manifestations show a belief in an all-powerful ambition linked with deficient 
strength if personality, to be a necessary presupposition of their condition. Only 
when so viewed are they intelligible.
Exactly similar psychic over-exertions as our school has demonstrated 
hold true for phantasies, dreams and hallucinations. The driving power is 
always something in the nature of a preparation, a groping; in the nature of 
an “if it were” tendency toward expansion, of a striving for power over oth-
ers, of search for an outlet, of security against danger. Here we always have to 
remember that the second purpose lies nearer at hand, that the consequences 
of an act do not flow from the taking of a decision and that frequently, the 
social after-effects of the proof of really being ill or its imagined belief, suffice 
to satisfy the urge toward recognition. To what an extent, however, all experi-
ence is to the neurotic, merely the material and means for obtaining, through 
the employment of his life-perspective, renewed stimulations along the path 
of his neurotic leanings, that is proven by his utilization, at one and the same 
time, of apparently contradictory attitudes21—in “double vie,” dissociation, 
polarity, ambivalence. To which we should add, the falsification of the facts 
of the external world, that may go so far as complete exclusion, the wilful and 
purposeful shaping of an emotional life and sensations with the externally 
directed reactions derived from them, and the planned interplay of memory 
and amnesia, of conscious and unconscious stirrings, of knowledge and of 
ignorance.
Once having reached this point and made certain that every psychic 
expression of the neurotic possesses within itself two presuppositions—the 
feeling of inadequacy, inferiority on the one hand, and the compelling, hyp-
notizing striving toward the goal of godlikeness, on the other—then the “mul-
tiple meaning” of the symptom which Kraft-Ebing had already pointed out, 
need no more deceive us. In the development of the psychology of the neu-
rosis this multiple meaning represented no small obstacle. To this is largely 
21	We wonder whether it really is so difficult to understand the “semblance” in the so-called introver-
sion and its opposite, to conceive both as means to an end? (Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)

150	
Robert McBrien
due the fact that phantastic systems and narrow restrictions were permitted 
to dominate neurology, the first method leading to insoluble contradictions 
and the second to sterility (in results). The individual-psychological school 
is committed, on principle, to investigate the “scheme” of a psychic disease 
consisting in adhering to the route repeatedly taken by the patient. Our work 
has demonstrated the great importance to be ascribed to the actual material, 
and even more, to the patient’s evaluation of it. A proper understanding of 
the individual and an individualistic discussion was, for that reason, a neces-
sary preliminary. The perfecting of the life-plan, on the other hand, the rigid 
insistence upon complete superiority, bring to light its contradiction with the 
demands of reality—i.e. with society; shake the patient free from his help-
less behavior and experiences and compel him to oppose the normal deci-
sions inherent in social life with a revolt in the form of an illness. A clear-cut 
psychological-social element thus enters the neurosis. The neurotic’s life-plan 
is always operating with his own individualistic interpretation of society, the 
family, the relations of the sexes, and discloses in its perspective the uncriti-
cal assumption of his own inadequacy in life and of the hostile attitude of 
his fellowmen. The recurrence of generalized human traits, although with-
out inward adjustment and in an intensified degree, should impress us again 
with the fact that both neurosis and psychosis are not far removed from the 
essence of psychic life, that they are indeed but variants of it. He who ques-
tions this must be prepared then to deny, now and for all time, the possibility 
of any understanding of psychological phenomena, for the methods of nor-
mal psychical life alone are at our disposal for investigation.
Adhering to the conception of a determining neurotic line, rooted in a 
feeling of inferiority that has as its goal an “upward movement” as posited 
by our school, we obtain a ceaseless “here and there,” a “half and half,” as a 
sort of neurotic hybrid; the attitude found in a state of exaltation deprived 
of all force, in which traits either of fainting or exaltation generally come 
to the front. As in the case of neurotic doubt, compulsion-neurosis or pho-
bia, the terminal effect is either a “nothing” or almost a “nothing.” At best it 
represents the preparations connected with an apparently difficult situation 
and a certification of illness, an arrangement to which—in more favorable 
instances—the actions of the patient seem bound. We shall see why later on.
This peculiar occurrence, demonstrable in all neuroses and psychoses, in 
melancholia, paranoia, and dementia praecox, has been described by me in 
detail under the term “hesitating attitude.” Favourable circumstances enable 
me to deepen this conception.
If we follow the patient’s life-line in the direction indicated by us and try 
to understand how in his own individual manner—(that means simply by 
his manipulation of individually-gained experiences and personal perspec-
tive)—he is intensifying his feeling of inferiority and yet freeing himself from 

	
	
The Problem of Distance 	
151
responsibility by attributing this inferiority to heredity, the fault of his par-
ents or to other factors; and if finally, we recognize both by his demeanor 
and his maneuvers, his insistence upon impeccability, then it must be all the 
more astonishing to notice how, at a given place in his aggressiveness, his 
behavior deviates from the direction expected. To enable the reader to get a 
better idea of this I shall subdivide it into four modes, each one challenging 
attention by the fact that the patient attempts unerringly to interpose a “dis-
tance” between himself and the anticipated act or decision at that particular 
point. As a rule the whole disturbance appears as a sort of stage-fright con-
fronting us in the form of a symptom or neurotic disease. Coincident with 
this purposeful “distance,” frequently expressing itself in some bodily sign, the 
patient is giving shape, in varying degrees of intensity, to his separation from 
the world and reality. Every neurologist will be able to dovetail this disease-
habitus with his own experiences, especially if he take into consideration the 
manifold gradations.
	
I.	Retrogressive movement.—Suicide, attempted suicide; severe attacks 
of agoraphobia with great “distance”; fainting, psycho-epileptic 
attacks; compulsion—blushing and severe compulsion neurosis; 
asthma nervosum; migraine and severe hysterical pains; hysteri-
cal paralyses; aboulia; mutism; severe anxiety attacks of all kinds; 
refusal to take food; amnesia; hallucination; alcoholism, morphin-
ism etc.; vagabond habits and tendency toward crime. Anxiety and 
falling dreams as well as criminal ones are frequent and indicate 
what exaggerated precautions are at work—the fear of what might 
conceivably happen! The concept of external compulsion is tre-
mendously extended and every communal as well as humanitarian 
demand, rejected with exaggerated sensitiveness. In severe cases, 
which must be included here, every useful activity is interdicted. 
The sickness-certification naturally has its positive side in the asser-
tion of one’s own will-power and triumphs negatively likewise over 
the normal communal demands. This holds true for the other three 
categories too.
	
II.	Cessation.—The impression obtained is that of some magic circle 
drawn around the sick person preventing him from coming into 
closer contact with the facts of life, of confronting truth face to 
face, of permitting either an examination of his worth or a deci-
sion. The direct cause (for the neurosis) is furnished by professional 
tasks, examinations, society, love or marriage relations, as soon as 
they take the form of problems bearing on life. Anxiety, weakness of 
memory, pain, insomnia with subsequent incapacity for work, com-
pulsion-phenomena, impotence, ejaculatio praecox, masturbation 

152	
Robert McBrien
and completely disqualifying perversions, asthma, hysterical 
psychosis etc.—these are all safety arrangements to prevent any 
regional over-stepping. The same applies to the less violent attacks 
of the first category. Dreams of being confined, of impossibility of 
attainment as well as examination dreams, occur frequently and 
outline concretely the patient’s life-line, how he breaks off at a defi-
nite point and then constructs his “distance”. Niebuhr in his History 
of Rome, III, 248, says: “National like personal vanity is ashamed 
of non-success for it is a greater confession of limitation in powers 
than the most shameful disgrace, which carries in its train, slothful 
and cowardly cessation of all energy: the former utterly destroys all 
court-like pretensions while the latter permits them to survive.”
	
III.	Hesitation and mental or actual (oscillations) “to and fro,” make 
the “distance” secure and terminate ‘with an appeal to the above 
mentioned diseases, to the doubt that is often combined with 
them or to a “too late” (fatal delay). We find definite exertions to 
kill time. This is an inexhaustible field for compulsion-neuroses. 
Generally the following mechanism is discernible:—a difficulty is 
called into life, sanctified and then an attempt made to master it. 
Washing-compulsion, pathological pedantry, fear of contact (found 
likewise as a spatial expression of arrangements of distance), tardi-
ness, retracing one’s steps, destruction of work begun (Penelope), 
always leaving something untouched—all these traits are frequently 
encountered. Just as often do we find work or decisions postponed 
because of “irresistible” compulsion toward unimportant activi-
ties, pleasures, until action is too late; or a difficulty, generally self-
constructed (e.g., stage-fright), makes its appearance just a moment 
before a decision is to be taken. This behavior is clearly related to the 
former category but with the difference that in the above instances, 
the act of decision is prevented. A frequent type of dream consists 
in any kind of a “to and fro” movement or in tardiness employed as 
provisional attempts at a life-plan. The superiority and safety striv-
ings of the patient betray themselves in a fiction, frequently men-
tioned, never unmentioned and never understood. The patient “says 
it but does not know it!” It begins with an “if” clause:—“if I didn’t 
have (this disease), I would be the first.” That as long as he main-
tains his life-line, he never frees himself from this life-falsehood is 
intelligible enough. As a rule, the if-clause contains some unfulfill-
able condition or the patient’s arrangement, and any change of it lies 
entirely in his own hands.
	
IV.	Construction of obstacles and their mastery as an indication of 
“distance.”—Here we encounter less severe cases always operative 

	
	
The Problem of Distance 	
153
in life and occasionally taking on brilliant aspects. At times they 
arise spontaneously or (secondarily) out of the more severe cases, 
by the aid of some medical treatment. At times both physician and 
patient are under the credulous belief that a “remnant” is nothing 
but the old “distance.” But the patient is then utilizing it differently, 
with a stronger social meaning. As formerly he constructed “dis-
tance” in order to break off, so now he creates it in order to triumph. 
The “meaning,” the goal of this attitude is now easily guessed: The 
patient is now protected both against his own judgment and, in the 
main, against others’ evaluation of his self-complacency and pres-
tige. If the decision goes against him, then he can fall back upon his 
difficulties and upon his (self-constructed) sickness-certificate, if he 
emerges as victor then his thoughts will read “What might he not 
have accomplished had he been well, he who has accomplished so 
much though ill, with one hand it might be said !” The arrangements 
of this category are:—slight conditions of anxiety and compulsions; 
fatigue (neurasthenia); insomnia; constipation; stomach and intes-
tinal disabilities consuming both strength and time and demanding 
a pedantic and time-killing regime; headaches; poor memory; irri-
tability; moodiness; pedantic insistence upon a submissive environ-
ment and uninterrupted preparations of hostility against the latter; 
masturbation and pollution with superstitious conclusions etc.—
throughout, the patient is testing himself to determine whether he 
really is efficient, and arrives consciously, or without admitting it 
to himself unconsciously, at the conclusion of pathological inade-
quacy. Frequently this conclusion, unexpressed but easily recogniz-
able, inheres in the very neurotic arrangement under the protection 
of the patient’s life-plan. Once the “distance” has been effectively 
constructed, the patient can permit himself to appeal either to some 
“other will-power” or battle against his own attitude. His line is 
then composed of the following factors:—unconscious arrangement 
of “distance”—a more or less unfruitful attack against it. We must 
clearly recognize that the battle of the patient against his symptom, 
and his complaints, his desperation and possible sense of guilt in the 
stage of the developed neurosis, are primarily designed to accentu-
ate the importance of the symptom in the eyes of the patient and his 
environment.
In conclusion, let me point out in these neurotic methods of life that all 
responsibility in connection with success appears to be cancelled. To what far 
higher degree this factor is concerned in psychoses I shall attempt to pres-
ent later on. So the life of the neurotic, as is consistent with his atrophied 

154	
Robert McBrien
community sense, is spent predominantly within the circle of his immediate 
family. If the patient frequents wider circles he always exhibits a tendency for 
and a retrogressive gravitation toward his immediate family.
It is but in agreement with the views of the individual-psychological school 
that the analogy of neurosis with the behavior of healthy persons, should 
obtrude itself markedly. The psychic demeanor of either type is to be under-
stood, in the last analysis, as a prepared answer to the questions suggested 
by society. We consequently regularly find the following constituent, imma-
nent presuppositions and safety devices: a life-plan whose goal is unification, 
operating with a special purposeful self-evaluation; a goal of superiority and 
psychic manipulation which—in an integrated connection—has developed 
out of an infantile, perspective.
Quite as convincing is the similarity of our types with the creations of 
mythology and poetry. This is not surprising. They are all creations of the 
human psyche born of the same types of ideas and method of thought. They 
have naturally influenced each other. In the life-line of these artistic figures 
the indication of “distance” is again perceptible, most clearly in the figure 
of the tragic hero where it begins as “peripetia,” and is then linked with the 
“hesitating attitude.” This “technique” has palpably been taken from life, and 
the idea of “tragic guilt” points as an “illuminating intuition” at the same 
time to activity and passivity; to “arrangement” and the vanquishing of the 
life-plan. Not merely fate, but predominantly, some prepared experience is 
portrayed in the person of the hero, whose sense of responsibility is only 
apparently extinguished, in reality persisting, for he has overheard the ever-
insistent question about his adjustment to the demands of society, so that as 
hero he may emerge victorious over the rest of the world.22
Thus he who seeks new, strange paths for society is threatened with an 
intensified danger of losing touch with reality. The interplay of vanity and 
insecurity, common to all these types, brings to the front the peripetia and 
within its individual “distance” constrains it to decisive action.
22	The “chorus,” on the other hand, represents the voice of the community, which, in the later phase 
of dramatic evolution, is transferred to the hero.

155
13
Dreams and Dream-Interpretation
Dorothy E. Peven
A dream which is not understood is like a letter which is not opened.
—The Talmud
At night we enter another world, down the wormhole, through the dark matter, and 
into a parallel universe. A world we create for ourselves full of wonder, creativity, and 
imagination—sometimes peaceful, sometimes frightening, but always wondrous, a 
place where the rules of time, space, and logic are suspended: the world of dreams.
Why do we dream? What function does the dream serve?
From the beginning of recorded history there is evidence that all cultures have 
sought to understand dreams and dreaming. And all believed that the correct 
interpretation of the dream will lead to understanding the future. The Hebrews, 
ancient Egyptians, early Greeks, and the Romans all believed that dreams are 
prophetic: Dreams predict the future. The interpretation of dreaming symbols 
and the meaning of each dream has fascinated the peoples of the world and in 
modern times has produced thousands of hours of research and miles of books 
and articles.
Our current interest in dreams has less to do with prophecy and more to do 
with the brain and its functions. The discovery of rapid eye movement (REM) 
during sleep opened a whole new world of research. The neuroscientific version 
of sleep and dreaming is now investigated with technology instead of shamans. 
The physiology, chemistry, and structure of the brain are currently subject to 
examination by machines like the EEG.
The science of dreams began in 1953 when researchers at the University of 
Chicago noticed that rapid eye movements (REM) and certain brain wave pat-
terns are physical signs that a dream is in progress. Subjects, upon being awak-
ened during REM sleep, could relate the dreams they were experiencing.
Later, researchers learned that people go through four or five REM stages 
nightly at about 90-minute intervals and that we can also dream when in non-
REM (NREM) sleep.

156	
Dorothy E. Peven
To answer the question of why we dream and what function it serves, 
researcher Jonathan Winson looks to the spiny anteater, the only mammal that 
does not exhibit REM sleep. Winson believes that the large prefrontal cortex of 
the echidna formulates memories and strategies for the future in the waking 
state. For humans to learn in the same way would require an oversized prefrontal 
cortex larger than the skull could accommodate. Instead, we experience REM 
sleep, which allows us to incorporate new information. Since theta waves are 
active in the hippocampus during REM, there is some evidence for this theory 
(Guiley, 1993, p. 7).
The Activation-Synthesis Hypothesis of Hobson proposes that whatever is 
happening in the dream has to do with what is happening physically in the brain. 
Neurons receive messages from the brain stem instead of from the usual sources 
and interpret the signals that get to the brain in unique ways: thus, the dream 
(Guiley, 1992, p. 4).
Sleep deprivation studies lead to the conclusion that dreaming is a necessary 
physiological function. People continually awakened from REM sleep become 
anxious, fatigued, and irritable and have difficulty concentrating and remember-
ing. If deprived of REM sleep for 4 or 5 days they hallucinate. When the subjects 
sleep normally, REM is greatly increased (as if they were making up for lost time).
For Flanagan, a professor of philosophy at Duke, dreams are the result of our 
need to create meaning. He demonstrates how brain stem activity during sleep 
generates a profusion of memories, images, thoughts, and desires, which the 
cerebral cortex attempts to make into a coherent story. “These narratives shed 
light on our mental life and our sense of self” (Flanagan, 2000, p. 115).
When Adler wrote the following article research on the brain had not begun. 
However, the meaning and interpretation of dreams had been given a giant boost 
from the appearance in 1900 of Freud’s The Interpretation of Dreams. In that 
book Freud suggested that dreams are primarily “wish fulfillment,” that they 
employ the same dynamisms used in slips of the tongue and daydreams, and 
arise from the unconscious.	
Carl Jung, a decade later, believed that dreams were a true expression of the 
individual unconscious, the collective unconscious, and contained universal 
symbols like archetypes. He believed dreams were to be understood as having 
meaning and messages and “that the unconscious mind is capable at times of 
assuming an intelligence and purposiveness which are superior to actual con-
scious insight” (as quoted in Fromm, 1974, p. 96).
Adler differed from Freud in many important ways but accepted Freud’s idea 
that dreams come from the unconscious and show hidden tendencies and per-
sonal conative patterns. Both Adler and Freud believed that dreams reveal the 
self and are subject to interpretation. But Adler had a much different concept 
about the nature of humans and how and why humans behave the way they do. 
Contrary to Freud, Adler believed that

	
	
Dreams and Dream-Interpretation	
157
human beings are first of all, social animals and human behavior is best understood 
in a social setting. Within the social setting each human being . . . (is) an organism 
traveling through time and space to meet a destiny. This destiny is imagined by the 
individual as an ideal state of being. Since the organism is always moving as if there 
is an end point [a final goal . . . telos]. It is possible to examine behavior from the 
point of view of the direction of the movement. . . . The movement toward a . . . goal 
is continuous, it is constant, and it is maintained throughout life. (Peven & Shulman, 
2002, p. 9)
Adler’s view of dreams and dreaming contains his theory that all of a person’s 
behavior is organized according to an ideal goal. The goal is unconscious and 
can be interpreted from the varieties of behaviors people exhibit including their 
dreams, and “that behind the dream exist forces at work striving toward a given 
goal,” and “in dreams all the transitional phases of anticipatory thinking occur 
as if directed by some previously determined goal and by the utilization of per-
sonal experiences” (Adler, 1912, p. 222).
People go through life holding a set of convictions about themselves and the 
world outside of the subjective self, which lead to judgments about behavior. We 
form ideas and ideals about the significant issues of life and how to go about liv-
ing successfully; we create a goal. “One may value honor above all else, another 
may value prestige or money. And still another will make safety and security 
important” (Peven & Shulman, 2002, p. 24).
Once the goal is formed, Adler believed that it underlies all behavior includ-
ing dreams. Later Adlerians, however, do not believe that every dream has a 
psychological purpose, nor does every dream reveal the dreamer’s goal in life.
Shulman focused on other aspects of the dream. For example, he lists the 
various functions of dreaming: (1) Dreams originate in unsolved problems 
about which the individual is concerned; (2) people dream to rehearse for future 
activity (the prophetic function); (3) the dream is meant to evoke feelings and 
emotions that lure the dreamer from the path of common sense (the dreamer 
commits self-deception); and (4) dreams purposefully create an emotional state 
in the dreamer.
Uniquely in the world of psychology Adlerians understand the dream as pur-
poseful, creating an emotion. The purposive nature of the dream is the emotion 
created. Emotions are energizers of behavior, dynamic forces that produce move-
ment. We learn to use emotions as strategies in the pursuit of our private goals. 
Thus, we summon anger to intimidate another to display bravery or to win an 
argument by overpowering another (Peven & Shulman, 2002).
Perlis and Nielsen conducted experiments at the University of Arizona and 
came to a similar conclusion: “[We] hypothesize that REM sleep and dreaming 
serve a mood regulatory function . . . [and] There is presently experimental evi-

158	
Dorothy E. Peven
dence that daytime mood influences REM sleep and dreaming and that the latter, 
in turn, influence daytime mood” (Perlis & Nielsen, 1993, p. 243).
Adlerians will be delighted to know that Adler and his followers had insights 
that later research finds reasonable.
Insofar as Adler discussed the future orientation of dreams he did not believe 
that dreams were prophetic. While dreams can be a preparation for future behav-
ior, they are not to be understood as predicting the future. But insofar as dreams 
reveal the dreamer’s goal, they can be understood as future oriented. To demon-
strate this, Adler gives us the dream of a businesswoman as follows: “I enter [my] 
shop and find the girls playing cards.” Then Adler proposes:
The interpretation is simple. The dreamer put herself into the future situation in 
which she would be . . . on the lookout for transgressions of rules . . . Her whole 
psychic life is permeated with the conviction that without her nothing could pos-
sibly be in proper order. . . . she degrades everyone . . . [and she demonstrates] her 
over-strained goal of superiority. (Adler, 1912, p. 218)
Here Adler finds both the future orientation of the dream and the goal of the 
dreamer’s behavior: to degrade others so that she may feel superior. The goal is to 
put others down so that she may feel morally superior.
The psychology of dreams is often confused with the biology of dreaming. 
What we do know is that something is happening in the brain during sleep that 
leads to dreaming. Yet we still do not know why dreaming takes place and what 
function it serves. However, Adlerians believe that dreams must have an adaptive 
function, that all behavior has a purpose, and that, therefore, the dream must 
have a purpose.
Adler’s view of dreams and dreaming contains his theory that all of a per-
son’s behavior is organized according to a plan of salvation (an ideal goal). The 
goal is unconscious and can be interpreted from the varieties of behaviors people 
exhibit including their dreams.
The future of scientific research may well lead us to confirm Adler’s theory of 
the dream demonstrating an unconscious goal of the dreamer just as the research 
has confirmed that dreams produce emotions and can be considered the fuel that 
drives behavior.
References
Adler, A. (1912). Dreams and dream interpretation. (Lecture delivered in September 1912).
Guiley, R. E. (1993). The encyclopedia of dreams. New York: Crossroad Publishing.
Flanagan, O. (2000). Dreaming souls. New York: Oxford University Press.
Freud, S. (2000). The interpretation of dreams. New York: Modern Library.
Fromm, E. (1951). The forgotten language. Canada: Holt, Reinhart and Winston.

	
	
Dreams and Dream-Interpretation	
159
Perlis, M. L., & Nielsen, T. A. (1993). Mood regulation, dreaming and nightmares: Evaluation 
of a desensitization function for REM sleep. Dreaming, a3, 243–257.
Peven, D., & Shulman, B. (2002). “Who is Sylvia?” and other stories: Case studies in psycho-
therapy. New York: Taylor & Francis.
Shulman, B. H. (1977). Contributions to Individual Psychology. Chicago: Alfred Adler Institute.

160	
Dorothy E. Peven
Dreams and Dream-Interpretation23
Alfred Adler
This is an age-old problem that can be traced back to the cradle of mankind. 
Fools and wise men have tried their hands at it and kings and beggars have 
attempted to extend the limits of their world knowledge by dream interpreta-
tion. How does the dream arise? What does it do? How are its hieroglyphics 
to be deciphered?
Egyptians, Chaldeans, Jews, Greeks, Romans and Teutons listened eagerly 
to the mystic language of the dream and in their myths and poems, we find 
indicated many traces of their arduous research for its understanding, for its 
interpretation. We hear them repeatedly insist as though obsessed; the dream 
can disclose the future! The famous dream-interpretations of the Bible, the 
Talmud, Herodotus, Artemidorus, Cicero, and the Nibelungen-Lied, impress 
upon us with undeniable certainty the conviction that the dream is a peering 
into the future. Even up to the present day the idea of obtaining knowledge 
of the unknowable is always brought into connection with reflections upon 
dreams. That our rationalistic age externally repudiated the hope of unveil-
ing the future and laughed at such attempts is intelligible enough and it is 
this attitude that has made any occupation with the problem of the dream 
open to ridicule.
In order to circumscribe our field let me insist that I do not hold the view 
that the dream is a prophetic inspiration, that it can unlock the future or give 
knowledge of the unknowable. My extensive preoccupation with dreams has 
taught me one thing, that the dream like any other psychic manifestation 
comes into being through powers inherent in each individual. At the very 
threshold of any investigation there appear problems indicating that the pos-
sibility of dreams being prophetic was not easy to posit and that dreams are 
more likely to confuse than clarify the situation. The question to be asked 
clothed in all its difficulties is:—Is it really impossible for the human mind, 
within certain definite limits, to look into the future?
Unbiased observations lead to the strangest results. If the question (of the 
dream peering into the future) is put directly, an individual will generally 
deny it. But let us not pay any attention to mere external words or thoughts. 
If I were indeed to question the other portions of his body, (i.e. not his mouth 
or brain) for example, his movements, carriage, his actions, then we would 
receive quite a different impression. Although we deny the possibility of look-
ing into the future, our whole manner of life is such that it betrays exactly to 
23	Translated by P. Radin.

	
	
Dreams and Dream-Interpretation	
161
what an extent we would like to obtain certainty with regard to future events. 
Our behavior clearly shows that, right or wrong, we do adhere to a possibility 
of obtaining knowledge of the future. Indeed it can further be shown that we 
would not be able to do anything if the future complexion of things—either 
those we desire or fear—did not determine the direction to be taken, fur-
nish us with the incitement to act and disclose to us both the evasions and 
obstacles. We continually act as if possessed of fore-knowledge of the future, 
although we realize that we can know nothing.
Let us start from the petty things of life. If I buy something I obtain an 
anticipatory sensation, taste and pleasure. Frequently it is only this steadfast 
belief in an anticipated situation, with its pleasures and inconveniences, that 
makes me act or refrain from action. The fact that I am open to error will not 
deter me. On the other hand I refrain from acting in order, if doubt develops,24 
to weigh two possible future situations without coming to any decision. If I 
go to bed to-night I do not know that on the morrow when I awake there will 
be daylight, but I prepare myself for it.
But do I really know it? Do I know it in the same sense as I know that I am 
standing in front of you? No, my knowledge is of an entirely different order. 
It is not to be found in my conscious thinking. Yet its traces are indirectly in 
my bodily attitude, at my command. The Russian scientist Pavlov was able 
to show that in the stomach of animals when they expect a certain food, the 
juices necessary for digestion are secreted as though the stomach had fore-
knowledge of what foods it was to receive. That means, however, that our body 
must be operating, like our mind, with some knowledge of the future if it 
wishes to play its role and be adequate; that it makes preparations as though 
it could foretell the future. This reckoning with the future is as in the last-
mentioned instance quite foreign to our conscious thinking. Let us however 
ponder on this question! Would we ever act if we consciously grasped the 
future? Would not reflection, criticism, the constant weighing of pro and con 
constitute an insuperable obstacle to what we really desire to do, to act? Our 
apparent knowledge of the future must consequently remain in our uncon-
scious. A condition of diseased psychic make-up exists—it is common and 
expresses itself in manifold ways—extreme doubt, compulsion-­brooding, 
folie de doute—where the inward suffering actually drives the patient into 
the only path for properly safeguarding his importance and his feeling of 
individuality. The painful examination of one’s own future prospects so 
prominently emphasizes its uncertainty and the anticipatory thinking is so 
definitely of a conscious kind that a set-back follows. The impossibility of 
24	The function of doubt in life and in the neurosis is, as I have shown, always to obtain a cessation 
of aggressiveness, to evade decisions and to conceal this fact from one’s self. (Original footnote by 
Alfred Adler.)

162	
Dorothy E. Peven
knowing the future either consciously or with certainty fills the patient with 
indecision and doubt and thus everyone of his activities is interfered with by 
considerations of a different character. The contrast is given by that mania 
which manifests itself where a secret and otherwise unconscious future goal 
expresses itself impetuously, overwhelming reality with evil intent and entic-
ing the conscious self to irresistible assumptions in order to protect the path-
ological self-consciousness from making mistakes in its co-operation with 
society.
That conscious thinking plays but a minor role in dreams hardly needs 
proof. Similarly the critical faculty and the contradictions brought about by 
the inactive sense organs are also inoperative. Is it conceivable that the expec-
tations, wishes, and fears connected with the given situation of the dreamer 
should manifest themselves undisguisedly in the dream?
A patient had been brought to the hospital after he had taken ill with a 
severe attack of tabes; his mobility and sensibility was in consequence of his 
disease markedly limited and he had in addition become blind and deaf. As 
there was no means of communicating with him, his situation was indeed a 
very remarkable one.
When I saw him he was continually demanding beer and abusing the 
nurse in all sorts of obscene language. His real strivings, as well as his method 
of enforcement remained untouched. If, however, we were to imagine one of 
his sense-organs as functioning it is evident that not only his statements but 
likewise his thought-connections would have taken a different turn. The non-
functioning of touch during sleep is felt in many ways particularly in the 
displacement of the realm of action and in the less hampered emergence of a 
goal. This necessarily leads as compared with the waking stage, to an inten-
sification and stressing of conation and in content to analogical but more 
sharply outlined characterizations and suggestions. These latter, however, in 
consequence of the dreamer’s caution may be accompanied by restrictions 
or obstacles. Even Havelock Ellis (The World of Dreams) who offers other 
explanations mentions this problem. Looked at from other view-points we 
can understand why in the case of the above patient, as in dreams, only an 
under-standing of the true situation of affairs could bring about a rational-
ization (Nietzsche) and a “logical interpretation.”
Nevertheless the direction of the activity and therefore the anticipatory, 
prescient function of the dream is always clearly discernible; it foreshadows 
the preparations developed in connection with actual difficulties encoun-
tered by the dreamer’s life-line, and the safe-guarding purpose is never lost 
sight of. Let us attempt to trace these lines by an example. A patient with a 
severe case of agoraphobia, who had taken ill with haemotropia, dreamt the 
following as she lay in bed incapacitated from pursuing her duties as a busi-
ness woman: “I enter a shop and find the girls playing cards.”

	
	
Dreams and Dream-Interpretation	
163
In all my cases of agoraphobia I found this symptom used as an excel-
lent means of forcing upon the environment, relations, husband or wife, 
employees, certain duties and dictating laws to them like a kaiser or deity. 
This tyranny is accomplished by preventing any person from being absent 
or withdrawing from business on such excuses as attacks of anxiety, dizzi-
ness or nausea. I always in such a case think of the similarity of this attitude 
to that of the Pope, the deputy of God, who regards himself as a prisoner 
(in the Vatican) and who by this very renunciation of his personal freedom, 
intensifies the worship of the believers and forces all potentates to come to 
him (“The journey to Canossa”) without their being able to expect a return 
visit. The dream of my patient occurred at a time when this trial of strength 
had already become manifest. The interpretation is simple. The dreamer put 
herself into the future situation in which she would be out of bed and on the 
look-out for transgressions of rules. Her whole psychic life is permeated with 
the conviction that without her nothing could possibly be in proper order. 
This conviction she adheres to in other phases of life, for she degrades every-
one and tries pedantically to improve everything. In her ever-wakeful distrust 
she is always endeavouring to discover errors in others. So thoroughly is 
she filled with experiences emphasizing mistrust that she really developed 
greater acuteness in detecting mistakes than others. She knew exactly what 
employees would do if they were permitted to. She also knew what men do 
when they are alone. “All men are alike!” For that reason her husband always 
has to remain at home.
Unquestionably considering the nature of her preparations she will, as 
soon as she recovers from lung-trouble, discover quite a number of omis-
sions in her business, which is situated right near her home. She may even 
discover that the employees have played cards. The day after her dream she 
had the servant bring her the cards and on some pretext or other, had the 
girl-employees called to her bed-side repeatedly in order to give them new 
directions and to supervise them. In order to obtain light on the future she 
only has to ferret out in her sleep-consciousness, in consonance with her 
over-strained goal of superiority, some fitting analogies and to take literally 
and seriously the fiction of the recurrence of similar25 manifestations in indi-
vidual experiences. Indeed in order to prove herself to have been in the right 
all she need do is, after her recovery, to increase the standard of her demands. 
Mistakes and omissions would then certainly be found to exist.
As another example of dream interpretation, I would like to use the dream 
of the poet Simonides as handed down by Cicero, a dream interpretation that 
25	The deeper knowledge of this “fiction of similarity,” one of the most important assumptions of 
thought and of the causality principle, I owe to my friend and collaborator A. Hautler. (Original 
footnote by Alfred Adler.)

164	
Dorothy E. Peven
I have already used to develop a part of my theory of dreams (cf. the chap-
ter “On the Concept of Resistance”). One night shortly before embarking on 
a journey to Asia Minor Simonides dreamt “a dead person whom he had 
piously buried warned him from taking the contemplated journey.” After this 
dream Simonides discontinued his preparations for the journey and stayed at 
home. According to our experiences in dream-interpretation we may assume 
that Simonides was afraid of this journey, that he used this dead person26 who 
was under obligations to him, to frighten and protect himself by the thought 
of the horror of the grave and by presentiments of meeting a frightful end. 
According to the narrator the boat capsized, an event that probably presented 
itself to the dreamer’s mind on the analogy of other shipwrecks. If the boat 
had really arrived safely at its destination what would have prevented super-
stitious natures from assuming that it would have gone down had Simonides 
not heeded the warning and been on board?
We find consequently in dreams two types of attempts of pre-interpreting, 
of solving a problem, and of initiating what the dreamer desires to put into a 
given situation. This he will seek to accomplish along lines best adapted to his 
personality, his nature and character. The dream may depict a situation which 
is anticipated in the future as already existing, (the dream of the patient with 
agoraphobia), in order in the waking state to put this arrangement into effect 
either openly or surreptitiously. The poet Simonides apparently employed an 
old experience to prevent him from travelling. If you firmly believed that this 
is an experience of the dreamer, that it is his own interpretation of the power 
of the dead man and that it is his own situation that demands an answer as 
to whether he is to go or not, if you take all these possibilities into consid-
eration then you get the unmistakeable impression that Simonides dreamed 
this dream in order to give himself a hint that he could clearly and without 
hesitation remain at home. We may assume that even if he had not had this 
dream our poet would have remained at home. What then about our patient 
with agoraphobia? Why did she dream of the carelessness and disorderliness 
of her employees? We may detect in her behaviour the following assump-
tions: “When I am not present everything goes to pieces and as soon as I 
regain my health and take charge of affairs I shall demonstrate to everyone 
that nothing can get along well without me.” We may consequently be certain 
26	I intend further on to discuss in detail the employment of such very broad emotion-provoking 
reminiscences that serve the purpose of inducing affects and their consequences, cautions actions 
and at the same time, loathing, dizziness, anxiety, fear of the sexual partner, fainting, and other 
neurotic symptoms. Much of these I have discussed in my book, The Neurotic Constitution, and 
have been able to reduce it either to a likeness (e.g., incest-likeness, crime-likeness, godlikeness, 
megalomania, smallness-mania) or to what I have described as a “junktim.” As far as I know only 
Prof. Hamburger has arrived at even approximately similar results. (Original footnote by Alfred 
Adler.)

	
	
Dreams and Dream-Interpretation	
165
that upon her first appearance in the shop she will discover all sorts of der-
elictions of duty and of carelessness for she will be looking about, argus-eyed 
in order to show her superiority. She will probably be able to prove she was 
right and that is why she anticipated the future in her dream.27 The dream 
therefore like character, affect and the neurotic-symptom is arranged by the 
dreamer in accordance with a predesigned purpose.
Permit me now to interpolate here a discussion so that I can meet an 
objection which very likely has occurred to many of you. How am I to 
explain the fact that the dream attempts to influence the future complexion 
of things when most of our dreams appear so clearly to contain unintelligible 
and often enough, stupid and meaningless matters? The importance of this 
objection is so distinctly felt that most of our authorities have looked for the 
essence of the dream in these bizarre, unoriented and unintelligible mani-
festations and have tried to explain them; or stretching the unintelligibil-
ity of the dream-life they have denied to them all importance. Schemer and 
Freud in particular among the newer men must be given the credit of having 
attempted the interpretation of the mystery of the dream. Freud in order to 
give a foundation to his dream-theory, according to which the dream rep-
resents a kind of revelling in infantile unfulfilled sexual wishes, regarded 
this unintelligibility as a purposive distortion, as though the dreamer in 
spite of the restrictions imposed upon him by civilization, did nevertheless 
desire, in phantasy at least, to gratify his forbidden wishes. To-day this view 
has become as untenable as that of the sexual basis of neurotic diseases or 
the sexual basis of our civilization. The apparent lack of intelligibility in the 
dream is to be accounted for primarily by the circumstance that the dream is 
not a means for the attainment of a future position but an accessory phenom-
enon, an indication of power, a sign and a proof that both body and mind 
are making an attempt at anticipatory thinking and at anticipatory groping 
in order to justify the personality of the dreamer in connection with some 
approaching difficulty. In other words we have here a synchronous move-
ment of our thought, one running in the same direction as the character 
and the nature of the personality demand and expressing itself in a difficult 
language which even when understood, is not at all clear. Yet this language 
indicates the direction toward which the path tends. As necessary as is intel-
ligibility for our waking thought and speech, preparing as it does our actions, 
so superfluous does it become in the dream, for the dream is to be compared 
27	It may be surmised that Simonides, who as a poet yearned for immortality, was according to this 
dream possessed of a fear of death, whereas the patient with agoraphobia, pursuing her fictive goal 
of domination, had a queen ideal. Cf. also for the first, “Individual-psychologische Ergebnisse uber 
Schlaflosigkeit” (Fortschritte d. Medizin; Leipzig, 1913), where, among other things, the relation 
of the infantile fear of death to the choice of a medical profession is emphasized. (Original foot-
note by Alfred Adler.)

166	
Dorothy E. Peven
with the smoke of a fire which but points out to us in what direction the wind 
lies.
On the other hand the smoke may serve to tell us that a fire is to be found 
in a certain place and experience teaches us to infer the presence of wood 
from the fire and from that the fact that something is burning.
If we break up a dream into its constituent parts and if we can discover 
from the dreamer what these individual parts mean then a moderate expen-
diture of industry and a certain degree of penetration will indicate to us that 
behind the dream exist forces at work striving toward a given goal. This direc-
tion is adhered to by man in other aspects of life besides those of the dream 
and is conditioned by his ego-ideal and by those difficulties and inadequacies 
felt by him as oppressive. From this view-point then, which can rightly be 
called an artistic one we obtain a knowledge of man’s life-line or, at least, 
of part of it and we get a glimpse of that unconscious life-plan by means of 
which he strives to dominate the pressure of life and his own feeling of uncer-
tainty. We also get a glimpse of the detours he makes in the interests of this 
feeling of insecurity so that he may avoid defeat. We have the right to employ 
the dream as much as any other psychical manifestation and just as much as 
the whole life of man, for the purpose of drawing conclusions concerning his 
position in the world and his relation to other people. In dreams all the tran-
sitional phases of anticipatory thinking occur as if directed by some previously 
determined goal and by the utilization of personal experiences.
We thus arrive at a better understanding of the initially unintelligible 
details found in dream-structure. The dream rarely gives a presentation of 
facts—and even when it does, this is conditioned by a specific trait of the 
dreamer—in which recent happenings or pictures of the present occur. For 
the solution of an undecided question simpler, more abstract and infantile 
comparisons are at hand, comparisons frequently suggesting more expres-
sive and more poetical images. For example, an impending decision may 
be replaced by an impending school examination, a strong opponent by an 
older brother, the idea of victory by a flight to the sky, and a danger by an 
abyss or a fall. Affects that play a role in dreams always arise from prepara-
tions and anticipatory thinking, and from the protective devices for the actu-
ally threatening problem.28 The simplicity of the dream scenes—simple in 
comparison with the complex situations of life—represent to such an extent 
the attempts of the dreamer to find some outlet by excluding the confusing 
multiplicity of powers present in any given situation, that he is willing to 
pursue a guiding-line that resembles these simple situations. Just as a pupil 
who does not understand a teacher’s question, for example, often looks quite 
28	These may gain tendentious strength from the dream picture if this is necessary for the sake of 
safety. (Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)

	
	
Dreams and Dream-Interpretation	
167
bewildered when asked with regard to the propulsion of energy, “What takes 
place when you are pushed?” If a stranger were to enter the room, as this last 
question was asked, he would look at the teacher with the same lack of com-
prehension that we exhibit when told a dream.
Lastly, the unintelligibility of a dream belongs together with the problem 
first discussed. There we saw that in order to obtain protection for an act we 
require a belief in the future that is steeped in the unconscious. This basic atti-
tude for human thoughts and actions, according to which an unconscious 
guiding-line leads to a personality ideal within the unconscious, I have dis-
cussed in detail in my book The Neurotic Constitution. The construction of 
this personality ideal and the guiding lines leading to it contain the same 
cognitive and emotional material as does the dream and the emotional pro-
cesses that lie behind it. The same necessity that forces one kind of psychic 
material to remain within the unconscious presses at the same time so heav-
ily upon the thoughts, pictures and auditory impressions of the dream that 
the latter, in order not to endanger the ego’s unity of personality must likewise 
remain in the unconscious, or better, must remain unintelligible. (Think, for 
example, of the dreams of the patient afflicted with agoraphobia). What she 
tried to achieve by means of her unconscious personality was the domination 
of the environment. If she could have understood her dream then her des-
potic strivings and actions would have had to give way to the criticism of her 
waking thoughts. But as her real desire was to rule, her dream must remain 
unintelligible to her. From this point of view it is also possible to understand 
that psychic illness and all forms of nervousness become untenable and are 
bound to improve if we succeed in bringing into consciousness and blunting 
the over-strained goals of the neurotic.
Let me now show partially how, with the help of the patient herself, the 
interpretation of a dream was conducted. The patient came under my treat-
ment on account of irritability and suicide-mania. I wish to stress particu-
larly the fact that the analogical aspect of the dream-thought is always found 
to be prominent in the supposition29 with which the dreaming individual 
begins. The difficult nature of the situation lay in the fact that she was in love 
with her brother-in-law. The dream follows:—
29	Cf. Vaihinger, The Philosophy of As If, whose theory of knowledge is in complete agreement with 
my beliefs on the psychology of the neuroses. (Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)

168	
Dorothy E. Peven
A Napoleon Dream30
“I dreamt that I was in the dancing-hall, wore a pretty blue dress, had my hair 
dressed nicely and danced with Napoleon.”
“In this connection” (said the patient) “the following occurs to me:
“I have raised my brother-in-law to the role of Napoleon for it would oth-
erwise hardly be worth while taking him away from my sister (i.e. her neurotic 
nature is not at all fixed on the man but on the desire to be superior to her 
sister). In order to cover the whole matter over with the mantle of righteous-
ness and further, in order not to give the impression as though I had been 
instigated by revenge because I had come upon the scene too late, I have of 
necessity to imagine myself as the Princess Louise so that it appears quite 
natural for Napoleon to divorce his first wife Josephine in order to take a wife 
of equal rank.
“With regard to the name Louise, I had been using it for some time. On 
one occasion a young man asked for my Christian name and my colleague 
knowing I did not like Leopoldine, said simply that I was called Louise.
“That I was a princess I dreamt frequently (guiding-line) and this is indeed 
my most intense ambition, which in dreams permits me to construct a bridge 
over the gulf separating me from the aristocrats. Furthermore this illusion 
is calculated to make me feel, when awake, all the more painfully, the fact 
that I was brought up away from home and that I am alone and thrown upon 
myself. The sad thoughts that come over me, enable me to behave harshly and 
cruelly to all people who have the good fortune to be connected with me.
“As far as Napoleon is concerned, let me point out that since I am defi-
nitely not a man, I want to bend the knee only before such as are greater 
and more powerful than all the others. Incidentally this would not prevent 
me from stating that Napoleon was a burglar (burglar-dreams). Then again I 
should only bow before him and not really submit to him, for I would like to 
hold the man by a string, as is to be inferred from another dream—and then, 
and then I would dance.
“Dancing must be a substitute for many things to me because music exerts 
a tremendous influence upon my soul.
“How frequently during a concert was I seized with the intense longing to 
run over to my brother-in-law and almost suffocate him with kisses.
“In order not to allow this desire for a stranger to rise up before me, I must 
throw myself passionately into dancing or if I have no partner, remain seated 
30	Napoleon, Jesus, Jeanne d’Arc, the Virgin, as well as the Kaiser, father, uncle, mother, brother, 
etc., are frequent compensation-ideals of the intensified lust for superiority and represent, at the 
same time, the directive and emotionally steeped preparations of the psychic life of the neurotic. 
(Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)

	
	
Dreams and Dream-Interpretation	
169
with compressed lips and stare gloomily into the distance in order to prevent 
any one else from approaching me.
“I did not wish to succumb to love, and yet in my opinion balls and love 
belong together.
“I selected the blue color because it is most becoming to me and because I 
had been actuated by the desire of making a good impression upon Napoleon. 
I had now the desire to dance, something I formerly was not able to do.”
From this point on the interpretation might proceed much further and 
finally disclose the fact that the unconscious life-plan of this girl had as its 
purpose the will to rule, a purpose now altered and weakened to the extent 
that she no longer regards dancing as a personal humiliation.
I have come to the end. We have seen that the dream represents a subsid-
iary psychic manifestation as far as action is concerned, but that as in a mir-
ror it may betray events and bodily attitudes that are related to subsequent 
acts. Is it therefore to be wondered at the folk-soul at all times with the infal-
libility that holds true of all universal feelings, accepted the dream as a point-
ing toward’ the future? A very great man, one who united within himself the 
focal points of all the sensations of man, Goethe, has expressed the dreamer’s 
“glimpse into the future” and the help and strength flowing from it in a won-
derful ballad. The count returning to his castle from the Holy Land finds it 
empty and desolate. At night he dreams of a dwarf’s wedding. The conclusion 
of the poem is: “And were we now to sing of what happened later on, then all 
the noise and dot would have to cease. For what he saw so nicely in miniature, 
he became acquainted with and enjoyed on a larger scale. Trumpets and the 
jingling, ringing peals of music rang out, and rider, chariot, bridal throngs, 
all approached “and bowed before him, an innumerable happy lot. Thus it 
was and thus it will ever be.”
The feeling that this poem of the dreamer is directed toward thoughts of 
marriage and children is quite sufficiently stressed by the poet.


171
14
Life-Lie and Responsibility 
in Neurosis and Psychosis
A Contribution to Melancholia
Mary Frances Schneider
You are about to read Adler’s classic essay “Life-Lie and Responsibility in Neurosis 
and Psychosis: A Contribution to Melancholia.” You should be able to walk away 
from this reading with a detective-like curiosity for sniffing out the “life-lie” 
and an understanding of how safeguarding works to evade life task responsi-
bilities. In this article, Adler buttresses his constructs by offering the reader case 
study examples of hypochondria and depression, which are still among our most 
common presenting issues. This article models understanding key constructs 
through exercising them within the context of therapy—still the best way to get 
your mind around a psychological construct.
This essay is a classic, which means it presents seminal ideas that have formed 
the development of Individual Psychology. We are rereading this work to experi-
ence the emergence of these key ideas. Just a few words about classics:
My nephew, a junior at the University of Chicago, is living with us this sum-
mer because he received a grant to write a curriculum for grade school children. 
The purpose of this curriculum is to teach philosophy to Grade 4 students in the 
Chicago school system. Sam’s goal is to have students read “key selections from 
philosophers” and “reflect on what these ideas could mean today.” Sam is strug-
gling with the task of pulling student attention away from ____________ (insert 
favorite distraction here: electronic gadgets, basketball hoops, open fire hydrant 
spray, street dance practice for America’s Got Talent, etc.) and placing that atten-
tion for a sustained period of time on a set of historically important ideas about 
the meaning of life. Dinner conversation during the first week of his summer 
school experience had to do with the challenges of reflection. “My students are 
finding the act of reflection to be a very new experience,” he said. “They are not 
used to thinking about big ideas.” Well, it’s Sam’s third week on the project and 

172	
Mary Frances Schneider
armed with 2 years of undergraduate philosophy and 21 years of wisdom, in 
today’s lesson Sam is encouraging enactments of the Socratic dialogues.
My agenda in this introduction to Adler’s essay “Life-Lie and Responsibility” 
is similar to Sam’s—I’d like to point out a few golden ideas in this text and then 
encourage you to mull over these ideas by applying them to your own lived expe-
rience and practice. Reflective integration of the depth of these ideas comes with 
applied practice. I also want to mention that you are reading a classic piece of 
writing and while it may not be as Greek as what Sam is teaching, the form, style, 
and syntax of Adler’s journal article can challenge the reader. In spite of the thick-
ness of text, the key ideas, just like Sam’s curriculum, are historical treasures.
In this essay the reader is introduced to cognitive schemata that are central in 
Adler’s perspective on how the neurotic or psychotic client constructs a holistic, 
highly individualized system of strategies for avoiding personal responsibility 
and applying the life-lie in the life task areas. This essay begins by laying out 
the importance of the “individual life-lines” (p. 235), which are not discussed 
in depth in this essay but instead the reader is directed to recall this founda-
tional Adlerian idea of lifestyle—the style of life—which is going to be key in 
both understanding and predicting client movement and choice.
Pull from this essay the stunningly brilliant idea of the life-lie. The life-lie is 
essential to understanding the client and client’s lifestyle. Adler is poetic in his 
description of the life-lie. “The individual helps along with all the powers at his 
disposal and thus the calming hypnotizing safeguarding currents of the life-lie 
permeate the whole content of life” (Adler, p. 236). The life-lie is a central inte-
grated theme—an individual perspective—around which safeguarding mecha-
nisms are organized to achieve a private goal, avoid social responsibility, and 
often place blame on or simply use others. This life-lie always has social implica-
tions—avoiding responsibility to others while placing others or the resources of 
others in the service of the unhealthy individual. It is the major headline culled 
out of the lifestyle analysis and certainly helps the therapist both understand and 
predict the client’s ongoing choices and line of movement. Mulling this idea of 
life-lie as it relates to each of your clients would be a most useful exercise.
As an example, let us take the very public and not so subtle case of Bernard 
Madoff. His life-lie probably involved beliefs around financial powers so omnip-
otent that he could beat high-risk odds—a sort of “mega-gambler” lie. Certainly, 
in his mind, his greatness entitled him to use the resources of others—retire-
ment savings, charity resources, institutional funds—toward his own private 
economic goals. Safeguarding and distancing himself from reality, he bought his 
own delusion and felt little or no responsibility toward these individuals, fami-
lies, groups, and institutions. Rather, he most likely felt that he had the right to 
use these resources to fuel his powerful goals and visions. The “calming hypno-
tizing safeguarding currents of the life-lie” certainly encompassed the whole of 
Bernie’s life. Not only was he hypnotized regarding these powers, but so were 

	
	
Life-Lie and Responsibility in Neurosis and Psychosis	
173
his victims. Whistle-blowers blew in the wind. No amount of reality-based data 
on the improbability of his high rates of return seemed to break the trance. 
The trance was both powerful and popular, a trance that even affected the U.S. 
Securities and Exchange Commission’s (SEC) ability to competently investigate 
Madoff’s firm. Madoff did create greatness—he created the greatest Ponzi scheme 
in history. This was a man devoted to and prominently known for economic 
wizardry—wizardry which turned out to be a life-lie. Too good to be true was, 
indeed, too good to be true.
These words—“calming hypnotizing safeguarding currents of the life-lie”—
are densely packed brilliance not only for those of us who are engaged in indi-
vidual therapy but also for those practicing marriage and family therapy. This 
“calm trance” permeates the client’s entire life—those in relationship with the 
client deal with deeply held beliefs that rub up against the realities of daily social 
interactions. The trance affects others; it is the source of behaviors that we often 
term codependent in partners, family members, and friends. The client presses on 
with behaviors supporting a life-lie and significant others react, that is, buy into, 
are at the mercy of, cope with, accommodate, try to cure, and at times even sup-
port the lie. Everyone around the client is affected by the life-lie and makes some 
type of accommodation to it. And as Adler notes in this essay, any attempts to get 
the client to “face the truth” only engender the client’s wrath.
So let us talk about the idea of the “safeguarding tendency,” which is the 
“inclination to resort to detours, truces, retreats, tricks and stratagems as soon 
as the question of socially necessary decisions comes up” (Adler, p. 236). The neu-
rotic lifestyle, especially the life-lie, encompasses safeguarding mechanisms that 
relieve the individual of personal responsibility both to the self and to others. 
While other theories call these defense mechanisms, Adler views the mecha-
nisms in the service of the lifestyle—protecting and guarding the belief system 
from any reality-based experiences that might challenge it. Carlson, Watts, and 
Maniacci (2006) offer both history and description of safeguarding in their work 
Adlerian Therapy. In the following essay, Adler describes case study examples 
of the safeguarding mechanisms in operation and how safeguards relate to the 
relief of responsibility. The life-lie relieves the client of authentic responsibilities, 
excusing or exempting the client from standard expectations regarding what we 
now call the life tasks.
Just a few more words on responsibility before you dive into this essay: As Adler 
has pointed out, the neurotic’s goal within the line of movement of the lifestyle cre-
ates safeguards around authentic expressions of responsibility. It is so fixed in its 
safeguarding agenda that it cannot participate in authentic responsibility, which is 
actually a cooperative act. Meeting the life task responsibilities in marriage, work, 
or friendship requires creative collaboration with others—a give-and-take in the 
moments of life with an eye on fulfilling specific tasks. The neurotic’s individually 
fixed agenda makes collaboration around responsibilities impossible.

174	
Mary Frances Schneider
I hope you enjoy reading this essay and, in the process, spin your own set of 
associations to the work. I hope you walk away with ideas that resonate in your 
therapeutic work as well as your life experience. Enjoy this classic.
References
Adler, A. (1924). Life-lie and responsibility. The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology.
Carlson, J., Watts, R. E., & Maniacci, M. (2006). Adlerian therapy: Theory and practice. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

	
	
Life-Lie and Responsibility in Neurosis and Psychosis	
175
Life-Lie and Responsibility in Neurosis and Psychosis: 
A Contribution to Melancholia (1914)31
Alfred Adler
This essay is essentially based on the belief that all psychogenic diseases, 
which we reckon as belonging to neuroses and psychoses, are symptoms 
of a higher kind and consequently constitute the technique, representation 
and products of individual life-lines. The detailed proof I reserve for another 
essay. However it is impossible even here not to take into consideration this 
provisional assumption. In doing so I gladly acknowledge my indebtedness 
to the views of some well-known scholars. To mention but one psychiatrist, 
Raimamn has pointed out clearly the connection between individuality and 
psychosis. The development of psychiatry likewise shows the progressive 
blurring of boundaries. Ideal types are disappearing both from literature 
and practice. Let me also mention here the “unity of neurosis” upon which I 
have laid emphasis. In general it may be said that we are approaching a point 
of view to which individual psychology has made important contributions. 
That view-point is that the neurotic methods of life seize with an apparently 
unalterable regularity, based upon individual experiences, upon the means 
of a utilizable neuroses or psychoses, in order to triumph.
Psychological results of individual psychology are well adapted to cor-
roborate this view-point. For they suggest as one of their final results that the 
patient is constructing an inner world of his own on the basis of a defective 
individual perspective in definite contrast with reality. Nevertheless this per-
spective which dictates his attitude to society, is from a human point of view 
easily understood and is in other connections quite general. We frequently 
call to mind individuals who in life or in poetry have skirted around such an 
abyss. Up to the present there is not the slightest proof that either heredity, 
experience or the environment necessarily lead to a general or specific neu-
rosis. This etiological necessity, which is never free from personal tendencies 
or personal connivance, exists simply in the rigid assumption of the patient 
who thus safeguards his neurotic or psychotic inference and with it the integ-
rity of his disease. He might be able to think, feel and act in a less etiological 
manner if he were not impelled onward upon this journey by his goal, by that 
imagined final scene. However it is a categorical command of his life-plan 
that he should fad either through the guilt of others and thus be freed from 
personal responsibility, or that some fatal trifle should prevent his triumph.32 
The essentially human nature of this longing is strikingly manifest. The indi-
31	Translated by P. Radin.
32	Cf. the chapter on “The Problem of Distance.” (Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)

176	
Mary Frances Schneider
vidual helps along with all the powers at his disposal and thus the calming 
hypnotizing safeguarding currents of the life-lie permeate the whole content 
of life. Every therapeutic treatment and certainly every clumsy and tactless 
attempt to tell the patient the truth, deprives the patient of the very source of 
his irresponsibility and must expect to encounter the most violent resistance.
This attitude which we have so often described originates in the “safe-
guarding tendency” of the patient and exhibits his inclination to resort to 
detours, truces, retreats, tricks and stratagems as soon as the question of 
socially necessary decisions comes up. The analyst is well acquainted with all 
the excuses and pretexts used by the sick man in order to evade his tasks 
or his own expectations. Our contributions have thrown a clear light upon 
these problems and exposed them to view. There are very few instances in 
which the attribution of guilt to others appears to be missing. Among these 
instances, the disease-pictures of hypochondria and melancholia force them-
selves most upon our attention.
I should like to raise the question of the “opponent” which can be employed 
as a very useful guide in making the nature of the psychogenic disease picture 
more transparent. The solution of this question no longer exhibits the psycho-
genically diseased individual in his artificial isolation but in his socially deter-
mined system. It is easy to understand from this fact the belligerent tendency 
of the neurosis and psychosis. What might otherwise be regarded as the ter-
mination namely, the specific disease, now takes its proper place as a means, a 
method of life, a symptom indicative of the path taken by the patient either to 
attain his goal of superiority or to feel his right in possessing it.
In many psychoses and also in neurotically-diseased individuals the attack 
as well as the accusation fall not simply upon one person but upon a number 
of people, occasionally upon the whole of humanity, hetero-sexuality or the 
whole world order. This behavior is unusually clearly apparent in the case of 
paranoia. The complete withdrawal from the world which means, of course, at 
the same time, condemnation of it, is expressed in dementia praecox. In a more 
concealed fashion and limited to only a few persons do we see the struggle of 
the hypochondriac and the melancholic. Here the view-point of individual-
psychology allows us a sufficiently wide field of vision for understanding even 
the artifices used in these cases. Thus, for example, when an ageing hypochon-
driac succeeds in freeing himself from work in which he fears disappoint-
ments, at the same time forcing some relative to take charge of his house and 
make sacrifices for him. The “distance” to the decision—in this case his liter-
ary talent—is sufficiently great not to be overlooked. He emphasizes this “dis-
tance” by resorting to an unusually effective agoraphobia. Who is at fault? He 
was born in the revolutionary year (1848) and insists that this is a hereditary 
stigma. His digestive disturbances represent in the enumeration of the means 
he adopts (Stern) important aids to his lust for dominating his environment. 

	
	
Life-Lie and Responsibility in Neurosis and Psychosis	
177
This lust for domination is thus incited to increased work. These disturbances 
are caused by air-inhaling and purposive constipation.
A craftsman fifty-two years old has an attack of melancholia one evening 
when his daughter before going out on a visit, forgets to take leave of him. 
This man had always insisted upon his family looking up to him as the head 
of the family and forced definite services and strict obedience upon them by 
means of his hypochondriacal troubles. His neurotic stomach could stand no 
restaurant food. His wife was consequently compelled when he went upon 
his vacation, “necessitated by his condition of health,” to prepare his food 
in a kitchen which she rented in the country. The fact that he was ageing he 
attributed to the “unfilial” actions of his daughter and he regarded it as an 
indication of weakness. When his prestige was threatened, his impending 
melancholia was to bring home to his daughter her guilt and to show his 
family the full significance of his capacity for work. Now he had discovered a 
way of acquiring and enforcing that prestige which he seemed to have failed 
to obtain in the world in spite of his achievements. He was thus on the road to 
irresponsibility if for any reason his personal role should fail him.
A manufacturer twenty years old, was as he grew older, subject every two 
years to a fit of melancholia which lasted a few weeks. As in the case men-
tioned above, he also began to take ill when through, an unfortunate event, 
his prestige was threatened. He also neglected his work and frightened his 
family, who were dependent upon his work, by continual complaints about 
impending poverty. The situation he thus called into existence resembled in 
every detail an overwhelming of his environment. All complaints and criti-
cisms stopped in his presence, he was freed from the responsibility for his reck-
less adventures and his importance as the maintainer of the family became 
clear to everyone. The stronger his melancholia became, the more bitterly he 
complained, the higher did he rise in value. He became well when the resent-
ment against his adventure had disappeared. Subsequently, his melancholia 
always recurred whenever he found himself in a financially insecure position 
and on one occasion because of the intervention of the tax officials. His con-
dition always improved as soon as his troubles were over. It was quite easy to 
see that he was carrying on a policy of prestige-attainment within his fam-
ily, seeking safety in his melancholia whenever discussions on vital matters 
came up. In this way he could excuse himself and also relieve himself of any 
responsibility if anything went wrong and if everything ended well, receive 
increased recognition. Our example thus shows clearly the symptom of the 
“hesitating attitude” we have described and also the creation of “distance” 
wherever a decision is to be taken.
Before I enter upon a description of the last-mentioned example of mel-
ancholia, let me attempt to define more sharply from the view-point of indi-
vidual psychology the mechanism of melancholia and to throw some light 

178	
Mary Frances Schneider
upon that aspect in which it is in marked contrast with paranoia. If we once 
admit the social-conditioning and the belligerent attitude of melancholia we 
shall easily discover what it is in the goal of superiority that hypnotizes the 
sick man. The path he takes in the beginning is certainly rather strange. For 
instance, he minimizes himself, anticipates situations of intense misery and, 
identifying himself with them, acquires a feeling of sorrow and the outward 
expression of being completely broken up.33 This seems a contradiction of his 
affirmation of a goal of greatness. As a matter of fact his exhausting physical 
weakness became in his hands a rather fear-inspiring weapon for securing 
recognition and escaping responsibility. For anyone to be able to achieve a 
true melancholia is, to my mind, something in the nature of a work of art 
except that, of course, the creative consciousness is wanting and that the 
patient’s attitude represents a condition with which he has been acquainted 
since early childhood.
Tracing it back to his earliest childhood we find that this attitude is in 
reality an artifice, an automatically conditioned method of life, taking the 
form of a rigid life-line when he is passing through a period of uncertainty. 
Actually this consists in the desire to force his own will upon others and in 
safeguarding his prestige by threats of becoming ill.34 He bends all his ener-
gies with their accompanying bodily and psychic possibilities, towards the 
achievement of this purpose. He disturbs his sleep, his nourishment, his stool 
and urinary functions so that he may lose strength and prove that he is ill. He 
is quite willing to follow this course to its logical conclusion of suicide. An 
additional proof of the aggressive nature of melancholia is furnished by the 
occasional appearance of the murder impulse and by the frequent presence 
of paranoiac traits. In these cases the attribution of guilt to others becomes 
prominent as for example in the case of the woman who believed herself to 
be suffering from cancer because her husband had forced her to visit a rela-
tive suffering from that disease. Summarizing we may say that the difference 
between the melancholic and paranoidal attitude seems to consist in the fact 
that the melancholic feels himself to be guilty whereas the paranoiac accuses 
somebody else. To make the matter clearer let me add that these individuals 
resort to this procedure only if they find no other method of establishing their 
superiority. We might incidentally point out that both these types represent 
universal human traits and as soon as we look for them they will be seen to 
have an extensive distribution.
33	Just as, for example, the actor in Hamlet. “He weeps for Hecuba! What’s Hecuba to him or he to 
Hecuba that he should weep for her?” In his complaints the psychotic individual betrays in much 
the same way as the neurotic, the nature of his “arrangement.” (Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)
34	Often the melancholic type of procedure shows itself to be either incidentally or predominantly 
the revenge impulse of impotent rage. (Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)

	
	
Life-Lie and Responsibility in Neurosis and Psychosis	
179
The psychical susceptibility to psychoses is frequently diminished by the 
fact that the goal of superiority35 possesses even greater strength. The asserted 
impossibility of correcting “maniacal” ideas is partially true but flows logi-
cally from the compelling nature of the goal. We were able to show above how 
the psychotically diseased individual protects his personality-feeling at all 
times by creating “distance” which he attains by the subterfuge of a life-false-
hood. In order to cure his neurosis it is necessary for the patient to “temporar-
ily” weaken his guiding ideals. A success running counter to his symptoms 
will only then be really efficacious if the patient is disposed to let himself be 
healed or if he is able gradually and unnoticed to slacken the rigidity of his 
goal. As far as we can see the maniacal idea commits no mistakes. It is under 
the compelling influence of the guiding idea and fulfils its ultimate purpose 
which is to make itself irresponsible and protect the ego-consciousness by 
the creation of “distance.” A logical examination hardly touches the mania 
because in its capacity as a well-tested modus vivendi et dicendi, it fulfils its 
purpose and because, moreover, the patient runs for protection to his limited 
appreciation of that communal sense of reality which we all share.
The melancholic individual we have just been describing betrayed the 
whole arrangement of his illness in a dream which he had at the very begin-
ning of the treatment. He had become ill when removed from a place where 
he occupied the principal position to one where he would have to prove his 
worth. Twelve years before, at the age of twenty-six, under similar circum-
stances he had also had an attack of melancholia. His dream was as follows:—
“I am at a pension where I eat my mid-day meal. A girl in whom I have 
been interested for some time, serves the meals. I realized suddenly that the 
world was coming to an end, and at the same time the thought occurred to 
me that I might now be able to rape the girl, for I could not be held account-
able. However, after I had committed the rape it became evident that the 
world was not going to end.” The interpretation is simple. The patient wishes 
to evade all decisions relating to love because he is unwilling to shoulder 
the responsibility. He has often toyed with the idea of a world-catastrophe 
(enemy of mankind). The dream, in a sexual disguise, indicates that he would 
have to believe in a world-catastrophe in order to be able to conquer, for in 
this manner a sense of irresponsibility could be created. His final act (the 
rape) shows him on the way to the attainment of his goal through a fictitious 
arrangement, an “as if,” a provisional testing of a method of attack which 
consists in doing violence to others.36
35	I am not here considering the intermediate conditions ranging from marked incapacity for fixing 
attention to idiocy produced by inactivity of the reasoning powers, of long duration. (Original 
footnote by Alfred Adler.)
36	Cf. Dream and Dream-Interpretation, in this volume and the author’s dream-theory in his The 
Neurotic Constitution. (Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)

180	
Mary Frances Schneider
We are now in a position to examine the guiding line of the patient. He 
shows himself to be a man with no trust in himself, and one who does not 
expect to succeed by a direct line of attack. We should therefore expect to find 
from the facts of his early life and from the study of his present melancholic 
stage, that he is going to attempt to attain his goal along some circuitous path. 
We may also assume that he is going to create “distance” between himself 
and the direct approach to his goal. Perhaps we are even justified in assuming 
that should he have to decide he will lean toward an “ideal situation” because 
in such a situation, confidently anticipating a threatening catastrophe, he will 
himself be free from all responsibility. He will only regain his confidence, it 
may be assumed, when certain of victory. This idea obtained from the dynam-
ics of the dream coincides with the view expressed above about melancholia. 
Now this attitude, be it remembered, is typical, to a certain extent, for the 
majority of mankind and is frequently encountered among neurotics. It is 
part of the essence of the specific power, the singleness of the guiding supe-
riority-belief and the defective connection with the logical demands of life, 
when irresponsibility and its related ideas are driven into the realm of the 
psychotic. To account for this we might provisionally assume a special degree 
of stubbornness and an unsocial craving for domination in our patient, 
although he denied possessing these traits when asked.
Let me now mention a few of this patient’s reminiscences. Once in boy-
hood when dancing he fell down pulling his dancing-partner down with him 
and losing his glasses. Before raising himself he reached out for his glasses 
but carefully held his partner down with his other hand, a fact that led to an 
unpleasant scene afterwards. In this occurrence we may already detect his 
unsocial attitude, his tendency to violence. His customary means of enforc-
ing his will are also clearly perceptible from other childhood reminiscences. 
For example, he remembers lying on the sofa and weeping for an unconscio-
nably long time.37 He did not know how to account for this last reminiscence. 
His older brother, who corroborated the patient’s stubbornness and will to 
dominate, informed me quite spontaneously when interrogated, that his 
younger brother (our patient) had on that occasion forced him by his inces-
sant crying to surrender the whole sofa to him.
I cannot discuss in detail here the manner in which the patient disturbed 
his sleep, his nutrition, his nutritive and excretory functions, how he lost 
strength and thus gave proof of being ill. Nor can I dwell on the manner in 
which by positing unfulfillable conditions and guarantees he attempted to 
demonstrate both to himself and to others the hopelessness of his condition; 
37	I have discussed the purposive molding and survival of childhood reminiscences in The Neurotic 
Constitution, and in a paper delivered before the congress of psychotherapy at Vienna in 1913. 
(Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)

	
	
Life-Lie and Responsibility in Neurosis and Psychosis	
181
nor how he felt the steps taken by his family and the interference of the physi-
cian as an additional affront. He went so far as to deny to himself all ability 
and all possibility of making a living, in that way forcing his family and his 
friends into his service and into his power, using them then in connection 
with attempts to make his business superiors more amenable to his wish, 
which was that he should be transferred to a place where he could again play 
the role of master. His hostility was therefore directed against all the officials 
under him, and it took the form of interfering with all their demands. His 
plan was to pass from a condition of irresponsibility to one of violence. Then 
having finally attained his goal he would allow himself to be convinced that 
the world was not coming to an end.
In my book, The Neurotic Constitution, I found the necessary condi-
tions for the development of mania, to judge from selected cases, to be the 
following:
	
1.	An intensified feeling of uncertainty and inability to face an immi-
nent decision.
	
2.	The mechanism is a marked deflection from and devaluation of 
reality. (Among other things this means a denial of the value of 
rationality as a function of society.)
	
3.	Intensification of the guiding-line leading to the fictive goal of 
superiority.
	
4.	Anticipation of the guiding ideal.
With regard to its bearings on melancholia I would like to add to this last 
trait, the fact that the sick man tried to approximate to this well-tested picture 
of a helpless weak, needy child for he discovered from personal experience 
that it possesses a great and most compelling force. His attitude, symptoms 
and his irresponsibility are formed with them in mind.
Psychiatrists insist that the essential character of psychosis is to be found 
in the absence either of a motive or at least of an adequate motive, for an 
act. This manner of presenting the problem is almost incomprehensible. The 
problem of “motive” we individual psychologists are well aware of and it is 
never absent from our discussions. The vital role assigned to-day to individu-
ality and character in modern psychiatry is a real sign of progress, and leads 
directly to our own problems.
We must remember that the most important question for the sound or the 
diseased psyche to answer is not the where-from? but the whither? For it is 
only after we are acquainted with the impelling goal and with a knowledge 
of its direction that we can attempt to understand its various movements, 
movements which we take to be in the nature of individual and special 
preparations.

182	
Mary Frances Schneider
According to the Viennese psychiatric school melancholia is defined as fol-
lows (Pilz, Spezielle gerichtliche Psychiatrie; 1910): “The essential trait of mel-
ancholia is a primary (i.e. not induced by external circumstances), depression 
in the nature of sadness and anxiety accompanied by thought interference.” 
It is a natural conclusion from our view to lay stress upon those motivations 
caused either by the nature of the goal or by those special guiding lines that 
we interpret individualistically. This motivation is synonymous with the dis-
guised activity of melancholia. In melancholia we find in complete form the 
“hesitating” attitude and the “progressive advance backwards,” both condi-
tioned by the “fear of taking a decision.” Melancholia is thus an attempt, a 
contrivance for conducting in a round-about way what we have designated as 
the “remnant” and the “distance” of the individual, to its true goal of supe-
riority. As in all Cases of neurosis and psychosis this is accomplished by the 
voluntary assumption of the “cost”. Thus this illness resembles an attempt 
at suicide in which it frequently actually terminates. Thought interferences, 
speech-disturbances, stupor and bodily carriage enable us to visualize con-
cretely the “hesitating attitude” which as intentional disturbances of social 
functions, point to a decreased community feeling. Fear at all times serves 
the purposes of security, a weapon of defense and a proof of illness, and par-
oxysms of rage and the raptus melancholicus break out occasionally in the 
form of expressions of a fanaticism of weakness, an indication of disguised 
emotions; maniacal ideas point to sources of purposive phantasies which 
both furnish and “arrange” the patient’s affects in the interests of his illness. 
The mechanism of anticipation and absorption in the role of a person about 
to perish is unmistakable. The illness always seems to be most intense in the 
morning i.e. as soon as the patient enters upon the activities of life.
The experienced observer has unquestionably not overlooked the “bellig-
erent attitude” of the melancholic individual. Pilz, for example (l.c.), shows 
among other things, that the conscience-qualms of the sick man often have 
as their consequence the bestowal of senseless gifts or of testamentary pro-
visions. We object only to the phrase “senseless.” An apparently passive 
psychosis is always teeming with feelings of hate and with tendencies toward 
depreciation. The sick man, for that reason, after having satisfied his desire to 
punish his family, is seized with the proper conscience-qualms accompany-
ing his act, so that he may be freed from responsibility.
The previous history of our patient shows very clearly that all persons 
afflicted with melancholia belong to a certain type who are not intensely 
interested in anything, who easily become uprooted and who easily lose 
their belief in themselves and in others. Even when quite well they exhibit 
an attitude of ambition, of hesitation; they recoil before responsibility or they 
construct a life-falsehood whose content is their own weakness and whose 
inference leads to a struggle against others.

183
15
Physical Manifestations 
of Psychic Disturbances
Len Sperry
It is surprising to some that Adler’s initial theoretical work focused on psycho-
somatics (i.e., organ inferiority) rather than on some psychotherapeutic topic. 
In fact, his first book was titled Study of Organ Inferiority and Its Psychical 
Compensation (Adler, 1907/1917). This chapter provides a context for read-
ing Adler’s seminal paper, “Physical Manifestations of Psychic Disturbances.” 
It begins with a definition and description of organ inferiority and describes 
Adler’s personal and professional interest and involvement with the concept. 
Then, it contrasts Adler’s view of psychosomatics with that of Freud’s. It ends 
with the recognition accorded Adler for his seminal contribution to psychoso-
matic medicine.
Psychosomatic Medicine and Organ Inferiority
Adler’s contribution to psychosomatic medicine involves the concept of organ 
inferiority. He described organ inferiority as an inherited defect, weakness, 
or deficiency of an organ or organ system. Adler noted that an inferiority trig-
gered a compensation, and depending on the attitude taken by affected individu-
als, the compensation would be satisfactory or unsatisfactory. One of Adler’s 
favorite examples of organ inferiority and compensation was the Greek orator 
Demosthenes, who became a great speaker in compensation for an early speech 
defect.
Adler later recognized that while some individuals experienced organ infe-
riorities, everyone experienced psychological inferiorities. He concluded that 
individuals are motivated by feelings of inferiority to strive for greater things. 
Accordingly, his overall view of inferiority evolved. In its final formulation, an 
individual with an organ inferiority could compensate at the somatic level, a 
sympathetic or neurological level, or the psychic level (Driekurs, 1948). Of the 

184	
Len Sperry
three, psychic compensation is most likely to influence the formation of the life-
style (Carlson, Watts, & Maniacci, 2006).
Adler himself was troubled by organ inferiorities and reportedly exerted con-
siderable effort in compensating for them. Not surprisingly, his early recollec-
tions are reflective of this and involve themes of illness and death. He suffered 
from rickets from birth and, on one occasion while experiencing an exacerba-
tion of symptoms related to rickets, recalls his older brother moving around 
effortlessly while Adler struggled to walk. In another recollection he nearly dies 
of pneumonia at age 5. He recollects hearing the doctor tell his parents that he 
would probably die. Although very fearful of dying, he miraculously overcame 
the infection and made a full recovery, and “then and there decided his future 
occupation. He vowed to become a doctor” (Hoffman, 1994, p. 8).
Another indication of the influence of psychosomatics on his life is Adler’s 
early career choice. After completing medical school Adler’s medical practice 
involved working with individuals with physical and psychosomatic problems 
including tailors, laborers, and circus performers.
Psychosomatic Theories: Adler vs. Freud
There are various theories of how brain-body interactions result in psychoso-
matic symptoms, whether they be asthma, pain, migraine headaches, scoliosis, 
flat feet, or gastrointestinal disturbances. Throughout history many attempted 
to explain brain-body interactions. Among these was Freud, who believed that 
physical symptoms were “organic,” meaning that they resulted from a disease 
process and were then “used” by the psyche to serve some neurotic purpose. In 
contrast, Adler’s final formation of organ inferiority went well beyond Freud’s 
formulation. In fact, Adler’s formulation of psychosomatics “was the first to rec-
ognize that the psyche could induces physical symptoms by initiating physiologi-
cal pathology” (Sarno, 2007, p. 69). In other words, the mind can actually activate 
physical condition, and the physical expressions of emotions indicate that the 
mind is acting and reacting to situations it interprets as favorable or unfavorable.
Physical Manifestations of Psychic Disturbances
In his landmark paper, “Physical Manifestations of Psychic Disturbances,” first 
published in 1934 (Adler, 1964), Adler posited that individuals express them-
selves through their organ systems—for example, the endocrine system, the 
cardiovascular system, the muscular system, and the nervous system. Adler 
provided psychosomatic explanations for a wide variety of medical conditions 
including pseudopregnancy, scoliosis, and flatfeet. In explaining flatfeet, Adler 
insists: “There can be but one explanation of this, namely, that depression can 
cause a loss of muscle tone. . . . he shows by his bearing what goes on inside him; 

	
	
Physical Manifestations of Psychic Disturbances	
185
he speaks with his muscular apparatus. We must learn to understand the organ 
dialect” (Adler, 1934/1964, p. 231).
Utilizing the construct “organ dialect,” Adler insisted that every organ is 
capable of expressing emotions and physical symptoms. He also noted that the 
organs most likely to be expressive were those that were somehow weaker or defi-
cient. This organ expression in which the lifestyle is expressed through the body 
rather than with words is called “organ dialect” or “organ jargon.” For example, 
the organ jargon in an individual with arthritis might be: “I can’t stand it. I’m 
freezing up. I’m rigid. I can’t change” (Griffith, 2006, p. 87).
Recognition of Adler’s Contribution 
to Psychosomatic Medicine
Adler has been recognized for inaugurating the field of modern psychosomatic 
medicine (Ellenberger, 1970, p. 645). Walter Langdon-Brown, MD, Emeritus 
Professor of Medicine at Cambridge University, is quoted as saying, “There is 
hardly an aspect in medicine which has not undergone some change as the result 
of Adler’s teaching. It has even had effect upon the views of many who have never 
read him, but who are conscious of a change in the medical atmosphere that sur-
rounds them” (Orgler, 1976, pp. 67–68). Not only has Alder been recognized for 
his seminal theoretical contribution to medicine, but his basic theory of psycho-
somatics has been experimentally verified as well. “He would have been delighted 
and astonished to learn of the elaborate peptide network that connects brain and 
body, validating his psychosomatic concepts” (Sarno, 2007, p. 70).
Concluding Note
Adler’s personal and professional interest in psychosomatics has been described 
along with his conceptualization and formulation of organ inferiority. It is note-
worthy that Adler’s final conceptualization formulated several decades ago has 
now been empirically validated. Within this context the reader can better under-
stand Adler’s paper, “Physical Manifestations of Psychic Disturbances.”
References
Adler, A. (1910/1917). Study of organ inferiority and its psychical compensation: A contribu-
tion to clinical medicine. (S. Jellife, Trans.). New York: Nervous and Medical Diseases 
Co. (Original work published in German in 1907)
Adler, A. (1964). Physical manifestations of psychic disturbances. In A. Adler (H. Ansbacher 
& R. Ansbacher, Eds.), Superiority and social interest (pp. 224–232). Evanston, IL: 
Northwestern University Press.
Carlson, J., Watts, R., & Maniacci, M. (2006). Adlerian therapy: Theory and practice. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

186	
Len Sperry
Driekurs, R. (1948). The socio-psychological dynamics of physical disability. Journal of 
Social Issues, 4, 39–54.
Ellenberger, H. (1970). The discovery of the unconscious: The history and evolution of 
dynamic psychiatry. New York: Basic Books.
Griffith, J. (2006). Adler’s organ jargon. In S. Slavik & J. Carlson (Eds.), Readings in the 
theory of Individual Psychology (pp. 83–92). New York: Routledge.
Hoffman, E. (1994). The drive for self: Alfred Adler and the founding of Individual Psychology. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Orgler, H. (1976). Alfred Adler. International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 22, 67–68.
Sarno, J. (2006). The divided mind: The epidemic of mind-body disorders. New York: 
HarperCollins.

	
	
Physical Manifestations of Psychic Disturbances	
187
Physical Manifestations of Psychic Disturbances
Alfred Adler
Some day it will probably be proved that there is no organ inferiority which does 
not respond to psychic influences and does not speak their language, a language 
which corresponds to the problem confronting the individual. This is important 
in regard to symptom selection, particularly in regard to what we still call hys-
teria, or functional neurosis. It also justifies one of the basic tenets of Individual 
Psychology: Men a transitory or permanent defect becomes apparent in an organ, 
this organ must be scrupulously examined, so that it may be determined in what 
way it is characteristic of the individual himself. Sometimes one organ, some-
times another, is more influenced by outside impressions. In this paper I will deal 
chiefly with those psychological influences which transmit the excitation to the 
body through the arousal of feelings and emotions.
Psychic influences are being accepted more and more today. Even from the 
standpoint of general medicine it is no longer denied that the uniqueness of 
the individual causes variations in every illness. The doctors of yesterday real-
ized that a child who was always subject to infectious diseases was a hyper-
sensitive child. But only recently has it been discovered that in less sensitive 
children also, organs such as the endocrine glands can become involved.
It is important to observe whether these general phenomena induce tran-
sitory or lasting changes. For instance, people usually respond to shock with 
heart symptoms, but what is important is the duration of this change in the 
functioning of the heart. Only occasionally is it lasting, as in certain neurotic 
cases. But we know very definitely that an inferior heart, or a heart that has 
been injured through illness, is more susceptible to such influences, and that 
they can open the door to subsequent lasting and serious illnesses. You must 
not forget that the organism is a unit, and that through a shock in one place 
the entire organism is set to vibrate. We know too little to lay down any rules, 
but it is fairly certain that through such a shock an organ may be damaged.
Not much is known as to how a psychic impression reaches the organs, but 
without doubt its effect is a general one. The organism has a strong tendency 
to preserve its equilibrium. There is plenty of evidence that disturbances can 
be caused by affects. Here the uniqueness of the individual must be consid-
ered and must first be explored. Individual Psychology finds this not too dif-
ficult. We usually succeed during the first interview.
I may point out how frequently we are dealing with people who expect oth-
ers to step in for them, who seek help, alleviation. This disposition can almost 
always be traced back to their training in early life. In a world such as ours it is 
such individuals who appear to be the most heavily burdened, for to them the 

188	
Len Sperry
world is a place of enmity, a place in which difficulties cannot be overcome, 
but must be avoided. If we wish to see this in relation to organic disturbances, 
I hardly know of any organ which cannot be used as an example.
Menstruation
For instance, most gynecologists agree that many disturbances during men-
struation can be attributed to emotional reasons. The patient herself under-
stands little about her feeling of irritation, her frame of mind. She does not 
comprehend why she should feel so oppressed by such an insignificant event. 
She is reconciled to the fact that something happens once a month, but she 
does not realize that her whole disposition exerts the greatest influence upon 
this relatively minor occurrence.
We must realize that many girls quite instinctively oppose menstrua-
tion by adopting a defensive attitude. They are not helped if we merely tell 
them this. We all know from experience in other walks of life that good 
suggestions are not necessarily accepted. What we must do is to study the 
patient so as to find out why she is not prepared to face her difficulties, and 
then explain this lack of preparedness to her. Wherever there are menstrual 
troubles we will find a certain disposition, one which occasions a defensive 
attitude and leads to some kind of occlusion. We must consider that perhaps 
this instinctive defensive attitude of a girl would not be of such significance 
if her uniqueness would not have to be taken into account. The peculiar 
idiosyncrasy of a particular girl can give us an important key as to why the 
customary defensive attitude was intensified. Perhaps the girl has learned of, 
or experienced, the difficulties in which a girl can become involved during 
and after puberty. This is a point which must be given serious consideration; 
it is the exogenic situation which releases the trigger, which affects the whole 
disposition.
Pseudopregnancy
This also belongs here. Today we still know very little of how pseudo-
pregnancy is caused. But I once had a case which was most revealing. The 
patient had had sexual relations with a man for many years and he had told 
her he would marry her if she should ever become pregnant. Her abdomen 
began to swell just as in pregnancy and continued to do so for six or seven 
months. It was then that I saw the woman and became suspicious; I advised 
her to consult a gynecologist. An hour later she returned; her abdomen 
had shrunk to its normal size. The gynecologist had found that she was not 
pregnant at all. Under heavy manipulations the flatus had been expelled 
through mouth and anus. It had been a case of meteorism [flatulent dis-
tention of the abdomen] the non-conscious creation of the woman herself, 
possible only in the case of a person desirous of taking on this symptom.

	
	
Physical Manifestations of Psychic Disturbances	
189
Air Swallowing
I have found that many men and women are able to develop meteorism. They 
swallow air. This is a fact which is too often neglected in internal medicine. 
There may be various other accompanying manifestations, and the gulping 
down of wind can cause symptoms of anxiety neurosis. This I have frequently 
observed. It is plain that a person with a tendency to anxiety symptoms can 
be seized by a state of giddiness arising from inflation of the stomach. Other 
symptoms, as well, can be caused by this. It should be understood that the 
swallowing of air takes place when the patient does not feel able to face a 
certain situation, when the inferiority feeling is intensified and a sense of 
oppressiveness arises. If we study these individuals, quite apart from their 
symptoms, we always find that from their earliest childhood they have been 
well aware of the social significance of anxiety, i.e., of how other people can 
be impressed by a display of anxiety.
Endocrine Glands
In recent years I have had plenty of opportunity for studying the influences of 
the feelings and emotions upon the endocrine glands. It has been very clear to 
me that the endocrine glands can be affected by the emotions, and it seems to 
me that the sex glands, also, can be put in a passive state by emotional influ-
ence. Here again we must not fail to take the individual’s opinion into account.
Take for instance the case of a youngster who feels he is unmanly and, 
accordingly, does not live a life conducive to the development of the sex 
glands. He eliminates certain activities which the normal glandular develop-
ment demands. Some boys are kept in an environment in which only girls 
are found as a rule; they are made to sit quietly at home, interest themselves 
in dolls and cooking, and are prevented from behaving actively. This can 
result in their having feminine appearance in later years. I have seen such 
youngsters become more masculine looking once they have been brought 
into proper contact with other boys.
The New York anthropologist Boas has pointed out that sports have made 
the American girl approach closer to the masculine type. There can be no 
question that, apart from whether the individual takes the sexual role seri-
ously or not, the sex glands and thereby the physical structure are influenced 
by athletics. We also find that the sex glands of individuals who have an 
unusually strong leaning toward the other sex develop an increased activity 
and efficiency if this attitude persists.
When we consider how effective such influences can be we realize the 
nature of what we call “functional inadequacies.” For instance, the retro-
gression of the woman during the c1imacteric is by no means an unvarying 
occurrence, but is also conditioned by the woman’s mood—she may regard 

190	
Len Sperry
the climacteric as a danger or an illness. We physicians are particularly obli-
gated to remove damaging beliefs.
Thyroid Gland
A most important role is played by the thyroid, particularly in the case of 
Graves’ disease (Basedow’s disease, exophthalmic goiter). I once had an 
opportunity to examine a number of such patients in Zondek’s clinic in 
Berlin. Zondek claims that Graves’ disease cannot be investigated without 
the individuality of the patient being taken into consideration. Now this is 
not always easy. For instance, there was one patient, a mechanic of 26, who 
had suffered from Graves’ disease for two years. The symptoms were distinct; 
the basic metabolism was increased 30 per cent. I found that the patient had 
been the only boy in the family and was most hypersensitive. He said to me: 
“When a person’s ill, he’s put under observation because human beings are 
always suspicious.” He spoke reproachfully, in a tone which suggested that he 
was very sensitive and found it difficult to make contact with other people. I 
could see that he was very impatient and probably prone to outbursts of emo-
tion. He would tell me no dreams, but his earliest recollection showed that he 
greatly disliked any change of situation. Nothing would have induced him to 
leave the place in which he was working.
These details told little about the exogenic factor, the situation which had 
provoked the illness. I asked him if anything had happened which might 
have contributed to his trouble; whether he had been upset by anything. 
But he made little response. Finally he mentioned a love affair. Six months 
before he fell ill, the woman had gone off with another man, but he assured 
me that this break had been a very trifling matter. “On the whole I was 
rather glad,” he said. “She did not suit me.” Knowing that nervous persons 
want to keep their hold on another person and feel deeply injured if a third 
person is preferred, one will regard this break as the exogenic factor, espe-
cially since it occurred at the same time as the first symptoms of trembling 
set in.
Other Organs
Let us now discuss what little we know about the influence of the psyche on 
the organs. It is obvious that the psychic force must pass through the sphere 
of consciousness; there must be a transformation of the absorbed influences, 
followed by irritation of the vegetative system. Through the latter the irri-
tation is transmitted further in very diverse ways, in accordance with the 
uniqueness of the individual and the uniqueness of the organs. His organs 
begin to respond.
The irritation always excites the whole organism; however we are able to 
observe the excitation only in those parts of the organism which manifest 

	
	
Physical Manifestations of Psychic Disturbances	
191
it more clearly. Many glands can be affected, including the liver, which like 
other organs responds differently in each individual case. There are some 
persons who, while one might expect the irritation to induce anger, respond 
with attacks of pain in the liver area. It has been demonstrated that the irrita-
tion also causes a change in the bile outflow, and that it can affect the pan-
creas and the Islands of Langerhans. Certain people respond to the irritation 
by hyperglycemia and glycosuria, and it is obviously the physician’s duty to 
put such patients in a frame of mind which does not expose them to distur-
bances of this nature.
When the vascular system is affected by the psyche, the skin is often 
affected too. It is recognized that skin diseases may be provoked by psycho-
logical influences. Of course this does not apply rigorously to all patients 
with skin troubles.
The Brain
Psychosis and epilepsy are still more complicated problems, and no sensible 
psychiatrist can fail to realize that here, too, a part is played by the exogenic 
situation. (The same applies to melancholia and schizophrenia.) To touch 
on but a single aspect of the problem, we can state that in psychogenic epi-
lepsy a part of the brain responds to the irritation. It is possible that there are 
also certain organic changes. E.g., old cases of schizophrenia show changes 
of the brain substance. This can in part be regarded as a variation of the 
brain structure which characterizes the uniqueness of the individual from 
the start. Perhaps edema can affect the brain. Neurotic manifestations can be 
conditioned through the tissues’ being influenced by the retention of water, 
as demonstrated in cases of sudden withdrawal of morphine (Alexandra 
Adler).38 This aspect is significant for the study of other similar processes, 
and is not in contradiction to the views of Individual Psychology.
Scoliosis and Flatfoot
Structural changes, resulting from psychic irritation, are seen particularly 
clearly in cases of scoliosis and flatfoot. Such eases as I have seen were pre-
disposed to these troubles; they had not always had them, but began to be 
troubled at some definite time—usually when the patient lost his poise and 
self-confidence on being confronted by a particular situation.
We have known now for twenty-five years that pains in the spine are 
more complicated than appears at first glance. There are pains which become 
localized on the anterior wall of the chest and begin when the patient is in 
38	Adler, Alexandra. “Die Storung des Wasserhaushaltes Wahrend der Morphiumentziehung und 
dere therapeutische Beeinflussung durch Euphyllin.” Klin. Wschr., 1930, 9, 2011–2015. (Original 
footnote by H. & R. Ansbacher.)

192	
Len Sperry
a depressed state. This we find, for instance, among melancholics, but also 
among nonmelancholics when they feel unfairly treated.
I do not believe that the simple explanation of the nerves being pinched is 
correct; it is too naive an idea. Also, I have little faith in the idea of radiating 
pains, say according to the theory of Head’s segments. Long before people 
began talking about “orthostatic albuminuria” I drew attention to the fact of 
how often curvatures of the spine are connected with manifestations in the 
kidneys. It is possible that the whole segment is irritated during embryonic 
development. All curvatures indicate very clearly that a congenital defect 
exists, which is characterized by the naevus (birthmark) at the top of the 
curvature or in the segment. I have had astonishing experiences in regard to 
this and have been able to predict where the naevus lay.
Cases of flatfoot are very similar; the sufferers of such pain are often 
depressed individuals. There can be but one explanation of this, namely, that 
depression can cause a loss of muscle tone. You can see this on the entire 
person; whether he is flatfooted or not, he shows by his bearing what goes on 
inside him; he speaks with his muscular apparatus. We must learn to under-
stand the organ dialect.
Predisposition, Illness, Accident
If a person is endogenously predisposed for an illness, is he bound to contract 
it? Say, for instance, that he is predisposed to schizophrenia (we have par-
tial knowledge of the physical make-up of a schizophrenic), does that mean 
that he is really bound to contract schizophrenia? The answer is: As long as 
the physical peculiarity of the patient would be brought under conditions 
in which he maintained his equilibrium, he would not have to fall ill. We 
can influence him so that psychological influences will not have this decisive 
effect upon him.
On the other hand, it seems that even if an organ is subject to psychologi-
cal influences over a long period of time, it can be lastingly harmed only if 
it is already inferior. Here again we are faced with the question: Where does 
the inferiority of the organ begin? Perhaps one must think more of injury 
through the whole system which manifests itself in “the place of least resis-
tance” (locus minoris resistentiae).
There are many examples which show injury in the physical sphere. 
Accidents belong here. E.g., a man was run over by a car on the day on which, 
through his malicious disposition, he had been trying to force his attentions 
on a girl in his office. She mobilized friends to consult what should be done 
with him. Such coincidences being possible—which to us are not mere coin-
cidences—one can imagine that in the difficulties which always surround 
man, those persons will be more likely to be injured who are psychologically 
not strengthened. We see the same also in epidemics.

	
	
Physical Manifestations of Psychic Disturbances	
193
Physiognomy
I wish to mention one other phenomenon—the external formation of the 
human body, the physiognomy. Although we cannot say how much, there is 
some value in physiognomy, because it is shaped by movement; it is movement 
which has become form. We recognize this transition all too little. We judge 
by external appearances, often most rashly, but without always realizing that 
moods affect the physical substance, making the features appear pleasant or 
unpleasant. Anyone who has observed the appearance of a melancholic dur-
ing his melancholic phase and afterwards will be amazed. Similarly in every-
one the mood leaves its aftereffects in the expression.
We are returning to our fundamental view, to the foundation of all proper 
functions: the proper embeddedness in the evolution of mankind. Only in this 
way can we understand how we assume that one man is sympathetic, another 
not; that this takes place automatically; that we understand this better only 
when we succeed in formulating this process into concepts. This is a thought 
which fits only in an evolutionary view. From this vantage point we shall 
understand what is to be regarded as erroneous and as approximately correct.
A widespread error exists regarding the concept of society. To understand 
it correctly we must realize how strongly it is interlinked to the evolution 
of mankind as something to strive for. The physiognomy is bound up, far 
more than we have ever realized before, with the degree of harmony existing 
between the individual and the society for which to strive.


195
16
What Is Neurosis?
Timothy S. Hartshorne
What is neurosis? Does anyone care? The term left mainstream psychiatry/psy-
chology with the DSM II. So why read a paper on neurosis? For that matter, why 
read a paper by Alfred Adler? Not for his brilliant prose. While noting the need 
for a “clear and straightforward answer” to the question of “What is neurosis?” 
Adler is anything but clear and straightforward. So, why read this chapter?
In 1971 I was promoted from orderly to psychiatric technician. To earn this 
promotion I had to take a class offered by the hospital where I worked. In this class 
we were taught about the ego, id, and superego. There was no mention of Freud by 
name. There was no need, because this model was fact. Psychoanalysis and psy-
chiatry were tightly linked, and neurosis was understood from the psychoana-
lytic model. When the DSM III was developed, a decision was made to move away 
from diagnoses that were linked to theory. Instead disorders would be described 
by their symptoms only. This was considered a victory for the behaviorists.
The world of empirically supported treatments and manualized therapy is a 
natural evolution from this move to understand psychiatric conditions on the 
basis of symptom lists. There is no need to understand where a client’s agorapho-
bia, for example, comes from. You only have to diagnose it and then treat it using 
the current best practice. This makes a great deal of sense. It is hard to argue that 
if there is research to suggest that a particular treatment is effective for a par-
ticular disorder you should nevertheless ignore that and do something different.
It is not that all interest in etiology has been lost. However, much of the work 
today focuses on brain-behavior relationships and genetics. For example, a quick 
search shows 412 journal articles on the genetic basis for obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Once again, this is not unimportant, but the genetics of a disorder are of 
somewhat limited use in treatment and many therapists continue to be convinced 
that understanding the roots of a disorder is extremely helpful in its treatment. 
Such an understanding might actually better guide the choice of a particular sup-
ported intervention or manualized therapy.

196	
Timothy S. Hartshorne
Adler does two things in the chapter. One is to provide an understanding of 
the dynamics and development of neurosis. The other is to distinguish neurosis 
from other non-psychotic conditions. I will describe these and then return to the 
question of why these might be relevant and the chapter worth reading.
To understand neurosis, Adler beings with feelings of inferiority. Of course 
everyone experiences feelings of inferiority, but in some cases events take place in 
early childhood convincing children that they cannot cope with the tasks of life. 
They then become hypersensitive about their experiences and they reduce their 
attempts to actively deal with life problems. In other words, they retreat from the 
problems they face.
A second concept that must be understood is that all problems in living require 
cooperation with others, or what Adler calls in this chapter “social preparation.” 
A person lacking social preparation struggles with friendships and may avoid 
social contact and react with embarrassment around other people. This person 
may experience work or business failings as supporting their conviction that they 
cannot succeed. Most people experience some rejection in their love relation-
ships, but those individuals with no preparation for social living retreat and, as 
Adler says, “come to a standstill.” Problems with friendship, work, and love are 
normal life experiences, but “neurotic” individuals react with heightened emo-
tion and withdrawal from the life tasks, because they realize they do not have the 
skills to solve these life problems.
The suffering of the neurotic, Adler claims, is preferred by that individual over 
the threat to their self-esteems if their basic worthlessness as a person is disclosed. 
The symptoms that develop, the obvious suffering, protects the person from this 
great fear. So in plain language, if children do not learn early on how to cooper-
ate and navigate their social world, they come up against the problems of making 
friends, being productive, and falling in love without the necessary skills. This 
becomes a particular difficulty for them when they encounter an event that they 
find they cannot manage. They then retreat into a state of chronic inaction and 
develop the neurotic symptoms as a mask for their complete sense of personal 
failure and worthlessness. By their symptoms they are saying, “Look how I suf-
fer. If it were not for my suffering I could manage and solve the problems of life.”
Not all non-psychotic problems are actually neurosis, and Adler makes the 
distinction between those with neuroses and those others who fail to cooperate 
with the social world and life tasks. He provides various terms to describe these 
others: criminal, suicidal, drunkard, “bad” child, arch-reactionary, ultra-radical 
fanatic, and the voluptuary (hedonist). While neurotics reduce or constrict their 
level of activity by their retreat to the rear, these others instead increase their 
activity as they attack the front. Their approach to life problems is to fight. Like 
the neurotic they do not know how to cooperate, but unlike the neurotic they 
believe that they can cope with the demands of living. Of course they do not 
succeed.

	
	
What Is Neurosis?	
197
Adler provides a case study in this chapter which helps to illustrate many of 
his concepts. Running through this chapter is the central concept of retreat, or as 
he puts it, the “advance to the rear.” Retreat, Adler says, is a “Law-of-Movement” 
or lifestyle. It comes to characterize the way these individuals step forward only 
to fall back due to their suffering.
Adler does not focus a great deal in this chapter on treatment, other than to 
note it must focus on developing insight and community feeling. The major con-
tribution of this chapter is to understand the movement of the person with a neu-
rosis. This is what is so often missing in the world of the DSM and manualized 
therapy. The DSM lists symptoms in a static system. Manualized therapy focuses 
on the elimination of those symptoms. Adler shows individuals with a neurosis 
in their dynamic state. Understanding their movement, and catching them in the 
act, is the foundation for helping them to change directions.
Therapists looking for an understanding of those mental health issues that at 
one time fell under the “neurosis” classification, but who are not interested in the 
traditional psychoanalytic model, will find in this chapter another way of mak-
ing sense out of the dynamics of the person with one of these disorders. Such an 
understanding may be fundamental to choosing an intervention strategy.
References
Adler, A. (1912). Uber den nervosen Charakter: Grundzuge einer vergleichenden Individual-
Psychologie und Psychotherapie [The nervous character: Outline of comparative indi-
vidual psychology and psychotherapy]. Wiesbaden, Germany: Bergmann.
Adler, A. (1933). Der Sinn des Lebens [The meaning of life]. Vienna: Leipzig: Passer.
Adler, A. (1935a). What is neurosis? (E. B. Menser & I. C. Stark, Trans.). International 
Journal of Individual Psychology, 1(1), 9–17. Original work published in 1933 as Was 
ist wirklich eine Neurose? [What is really a neurosis?], Internationale Zeitschrift fur 
Individual Psychologie, 11, 177–185.
Adler, A. (1935b). Prevention of neurosis. International Journal of Individual Psychology, 
1(4), 3–12. Original work published in 1935 as Vorbeugung der Neurose [Prevention 
of neurosis], Internationale Zeitschrift fur Individual Psychologie, 13, 133–141.
Adler, A. (1938). What really is a neurosis? In J. Linton & R. Vaughan (Trans.), Social inter-
est: A challenge to mankind (pp. 156–181). London: Faber & Faber.
Ansbacher, H. L. (1990). Alfred Adler, pioneer in prevention of mental disorders. Journal of 
Primary Prevention, 11(1), 37–68.
Ansbacher, H. L. (1992a). Alfred Adler, pioneer in prevention of mental disorders. Individual 
Psychology, 48(1), 3–34. (Reprint of 1990 with some changes and corrected references)
Ansbacher, H. L. (1992b). Alfred Adler’s concept of community feeling and of social inter-
est and the relevance of community feeling for old age. Individual Psychology, 48(4), 
402–412.

198	
Timothy S. Hartshorne
What Is Neurosis?39
Alfred Adler
Anyone who has occupied himself with this problem year in, year out, will 
understand that the question “What then is the real nature of neurosis?” has 
to receive a clear and straightforward answer. If we explore the literature on 
the subject with the objective of finding an explanation, we discover such a 
confusion of definitions that, in the end, a uniform conception of neurosis 
can scarcely be reached.
Whenever there is a lack of clarity concerning a question, there are a great 
many explanations and much contention. So it is in this matter of neuro-
sis. Some of the many explanations are: that neurosis is irritability, sensitive 
weakness, a disease of the endocrine glands; the result of infection of the nose 
or teeth, of genital disease; the result of weakness of the nervous system; the 
result of certain glandular diatheses, of the birth trauma; the result of conflict 
with the outer world, with religion, with ethics, with the bad unconscious and 
the compromising conscious; the suppression of sexual, sadistic, and criminal 
drives; the result of the noise and dangers of the big city; of a sheltered or strict 
upbringing, of family training in general; of certain conditioned reflexes; etc.
There is much in these views that is pertinent and that can be taken as 
the explanation of more or less significant partial manifestations of neurosis. 
Most of the factors given in the foregoing list as explanations for neurosis 
are found more frequently, however, in the lives of people who are not suffer-
ing from neurosis than of those who are. There is very little in them which 
can lead to clarification of the question: “What really is neurosis?” The great 
frequency of neurosis, its extraordinarily bad social effects, the fact that only 
a small portion of nervous people are ever treated, and that they carry their 
burden of suffering all through life as immense torture: these, together with 
the great interest in this question of neurosis which has been stirred up in the 
lay world, justify a dispassionate scientific clarification, before a large forum, 
of the question: “What is neurosis?” One will see that much medical knowl-
edge is necessary for understanding and treating this illness. It should be kept 
in mind that prevention of neurosis is both possible and necessary. But such 
prevention can only be expected through a clearer recognition of the root 
of the trouble. The measures used for preventing and recognizing the small 
beginnings of neurosis are derived from medical knowledge. However, the 
help of the family, the teacher, the educator, and other assistants is indispens-
able. This justifies a wide dissemination of the knowledge as to the nature and 
the origin of neurosis.
39	Translated by John Linton and Richard Vaughan; additional translations by Heinz Ansbacher.

	
	
What Is Neurosis?	
199
Arbitrary definitions such as have existed for a long time (e.g., that it is a 
conflict between the conscious and unconscious) must be unconditionally 
rejected. There can be little discussion on this point, for the authors who sup-
port this view must ultimately have realized that nothing at all can take place 
without conflict; so this statement sheds no light on the nature of a neurosis. 
Nor, too, is any light to be received from those who take up a lofty scientific 
standpoint and want to mislead us by attributing those organic changes to 
chemical action. They will find it difficult to make any contribution in this 
way to solving the problem, since we can make no pronouncements about 
chemical action. Neither do the other current definitions tell us anything 
new. What is understood as a nervous state is irritability, suspicion, shyness, 
etc.—in short, any kind of manifestations that are marked by negative quali-
ties, by character traits that are not suited to life and seem to be loaded with 
affects. All authors agree that the nervous state is connected with a life of 
intensified affects.
Hypersensitivity and Impatience in Neurosis
When, many years ago, I set about describing what we understand by the 
nervous character, I brought to light the hypersensitivity of the nervous per-
son. This trait is certainly to be found in every nervous subject—although 
in some exceptional cases it cannot be discovered very easily, since it is con-
cealed; closer examination, however, shows that such persons are nonetheless 
acutely sensitive.
Individual Psychology, by its more thorough research, has shown the 
source of this sensitivity. Anyone who feels at home on this poor earthcrust 
of ours (who is convinced that he has to share not only its delights but its 
drawbacks, and is resolved to make some contribution to social well-being) 
will not exhibit any undue sensitivity. Exaggerated sensitivity is an expres-
sion of the feeling of inferiority. From this, there follow quite naturally the 
other traits of the nervous person, such as, for example, impatience. This, too, 
is not shown by the person who feels himself secure, who has self-confidence, 
and has reached the point of coming to terms with the problems of life. When 
these two character traits of hypersensitivity and impatience are kept in view, 
it will be understood that there are people who live in a state of intensified 
emotion. And when we add that this feeling of insecurity leads to a violent 
struggle for a state of repose and security, then it can be seen why the ner-
vous person is spurred on in his striving for superiority and perfection. It can 
be understood, too, that this trait with its implication of a struggle for pre-
eminence takes the form of ambition—an ambition that is solely concerned 
with the person himself. This is intelligible in the case of a person who is 
in [difficult] straits. Occasionally, this striving for preeminence takes other 
forms, such as greediness, avarice, envy, and jealousy, which, as a matter of 

200	
Timothy S. Hartshorne
course, are universally condemned. Here it is a question of persons who are 
violently straining every nerve to outwit their difficulties, because they have 
no confidence in their own powers to find a straightforward solution. Add 
to this that the intensified feeling of inferiority goes hand in hand with an 
imperfect development of courage (that instead of this [courage] we find a 
number of cunning attempts to evade the problems of life, to make existence 
easier, and to throw the load on the shoulders of other persons). This evasion 
of responsibility is bound up with a lack of interest in other people. We are 
far from setting out to criticize or condemn the large number of people who 
to a greater or lesser extent show this attitude; we know that even the worst 
mistakes are not made with a conscious sense of responsibility, but that the 
person in question has become the victim of a wrong attitude toward life. 
These persons have before them a goal, the pursuit of which brings them into 
conflict with reason.
The Development of Neurosis and a Reduced Range of Action
Still, nothing has been said yet of the nature of the nervous state, of the way in 
which it has been brought about, or of the factors which go into its formation. 
We have, however, taken one step in advance; and, taking into account the 
defective courage of the nervous person and his hesitant attitude toward the 
tasks of life, we are able to show the meager result of his life process in facing 
the problems of life. It is certain that we can trace this meager amount of activ-
ity back to the period of childhood. As Individual Psychologists, we are not 
surprised at this because the lifestyle is developed in the earliest years of child-
hood and is only accessible to change if the person in question understands the 
error in his development and has the power to come once more into contact 
with other people [and] with a view to the welfare of humanity as a whole.
It may be assumed that a child who shows more than the normal amount 
of activity of the wrong kind, if he becomes a failure in later life, will never 
be a nervous subject. His failure will take another form, and he will become 
a criminal, commit suicide, or become a drunkard. It is possible that he may 
be a “difficult” child of the worst sort, but he will never develop the traits of 
a nervous person. We have approached, then, a little nearer to the solution of 
our problem. We can assert that the range of action in the case of the nervous 
subject does not extend very far; it is much more restricted than that of a 
more normal person.
It is important to know the source of the greater amount of activity in the 
other cases. If we can prove that it is possible either to develop or restrict a 
child’s range of action—if we can understand that in a wrong education there 
are means of reducing this [action] to a minimum—then we also understand 
that the question of heredity does not influence us in this direction, but that 
what we see is the product of the child’s creative power. The condition of the 

	
	
What Is Neurosis?	
201
body and the impressions of the external world are the building materials 
which the child uses for the construction of his personality.
Neurosis as a Chronic State
The fact to be noted in connection with symptoms of nervousness is that they 
are all chronic. These symptoms can be classified as physical disturbances 
of certain bodily organs and as psychic shocks—manifestations of anxiety, 
obsessive thoughts, signs of depression (these seem to have a special signifi-
cance), nervous headaches, compulsory blushing and washing, and similar 
forms of psychic expressiveness. They persist for a long time; and if we do 
not remove ourselves to the obscure region of fantastic ideas, if we are will-
ing to admit that their development has some meaning, and if we seek their 
connection with one another, we shall discover that the task which confronts 
the child has been too difficult for him. In this way, the permanent nature of 
nervous symptoms seems to be established and explained.
The outbreak of these symptoms is due to the reaction that follows on 
a certain definite task. We have made extensive investigations in order to 
discover what constitutes this difficulty in solving problems; and Individual 
Psychology has offered a permanent contribution to this whole issue by 
establishing the fact that human beings are always confronted by problems, 
the solution of which requires a social preparation. The child must obtain 
this preparation in his earliest years, for any augmentation of it is only pos-
sible given this early foundation. When we have undertaken the task of mak-
ing it clear that such a problem actually results always in a shock, then we 
can speak about the effects of shock. Such shocks can be of various kinds. In 
some cases, it may be a social problem, say, a disappointment in friendship. 
Which of us has never experienced this or has not received a shock from it? 
But the shock itself does not signal a nervous disease. It is a sign of nervous 
disease, and actually becomes nervous disease, only when it persists, when it 
develops into a chronic condition. In that case, the person in question avoids 
suspiciously all personal intimacy and shows clearly that he is always pre-
vented from coming into closer contact with other persons by shyness or 
embarrassment or by bodily symptoms like a quickened pulse, perspiration, 
gastro-intestinal troubles, and urgency of micturition (urination). This is a 
condition that has an unmistakable significance in the light thrown upon 
it by Individual Psychology. It tells us that this person has not sufficiently 
developed a sense of contact with other people; and it follows from this that 
his disillusionment has brought him to a position of isolation. We are now at 
closer grips with the problem, and we can give some idea of the nervous state. 
When, for example, someone loses money in business and feels the shock of 
this loss, he has not yet become a nervous subject. This happens only when he 
remains in that state, when he feels the shock and nothing else. This can only 

202	
Timothy S. Hartshorne
be explained if we understand that a person in this state has not acquired a 
sufficient degree of cooperative ability and that he goes forward only on con-
dition of being successful in everything he attempts.
The same holds true for the problem of love. Certainly the solution of this 
problem is not a trifling affair. For its solution, some experience and understand-
ing are required, and a certain sense of responsibility. If anyone becomes excited 
and irritated on account of this problem (e.g., if after having been rejected once, 
he makes no further advances, if all the emotions that secure his retreat from 
the problem in question play a part in that retreat, if he has such a conception of 
life that he keeps to his path of retreat), then, and not until then, is he a nervous 
subject. Everyone feels a shock when he is under fire, but the effects of the shock 
will only become chronic if the person who has suffered them is not prepared 
for the tasks of life. In that case, he will come to a standstill.
Neurosis as an Avoidance of the Appearance of Worthlessness
We have already substantiated this complete halt when we said that there are 
people who are not properly prepared for the solution of every problem, who 
from their childhood have never been real co-workers. But there is some-
thing more than this to be said. It is suffering that we see in the nervous state, 
and not something that the victim enjoys. If I were to propose to anyone that 
he should give himself headaches like those that result from confronting a 
problem for the solution of which he was unprepared, he would not be able 
to do so. We must therefore reject at once all explanations which imply that a 
person produces his own suffering, or that he wants to be ill. Without doubt, 
the person concerned does suffer, but he always prefers his present sufferings 
to those greater sufferings he would experience were he to appear defeated in 
regard to the solution of his problem. He would rather put up with these ner-
vous sufferings than have his worthlessness disclosed. Both nervous and nor-
mal people offer the strongest opposition to the exposure of their defeats, but 
the neurotic carries his opposition much farther. If we try to imagine what 
is meant by hypersensitivity, impatience, intensified emotion, and personal 
ambition, then we shall be able to understand that such a person, so long as 
he thinks himself in danger of having his worthlessness revealed, cannot be 
brought to take a single step forward.
What, then, is the mental state that results from these effects of a shock? 
The sufferer has not caused them; he does not want them: they do exist, 
however, as the consequences of a psychic shock, as the result of his sense of 
defeat and of the fear of being unmasked in all his worthlessness. He has no 
real inclination to struggle against the result, nor does he understand how he 
is to free himself from it. He would like to have it removed. He will persist 
in saying, “I should like to get well again. I want to get rid of the symptoms.” 

	
	
What Is Neurosis?	
203
Accordingly, he even consults a doctor. But what he does not know is that he 
is still more afraid of something else: of being proved worthless. Somehow, 
the sinister secret might come to light, the fact that he is of no value. We see 
now what a nervous state actually is. It is an attempt to avoid a greater evil, 
an attempt at all costs to keep up the appearance of being of some value, to 
spare no expense in the attainment of this goal; at the same time, there is also 
the desire to reach it without any cost at all. Unfortunately, this is impos-
sible. There is nothing else that will help, but to supply the person in question 
with a better preparation for life, to encourage him, and give him a firmer 
footing. This cannot be done by driving him on, by punishing him, by being 
severe with him, or coercing him. We know how many people there are who, 
when they have a certain amount of activity at their disposal, would rather 
do away with themselves than solve their problems. That is clear. We cannot, 
therefore, expect anything from coercion; a systematic preparation must be 
taken in hand, so that the sufferer shall feel himself secure and in a position 
to approach the solution of his problem. Otherwise, we have a person who 
imagines he is standing before a deep abyss and is afraid that he is going to be 
pushed into it, i.e., that his worthlessness is going to be revealed.
A Case Illustrating the Uses of Neurosis
A thirty-five-year-old attorney complained of nervousness, continuous pain 
in the back of the head, various pains in the region of the stomach, dullness 
in the whole head, and general weakness and fatigue. Further, he was contin-
ually excited and restless. Often he had a fear of losing consciousness when he 
had to speak with strangers. In the family circle, at home with his parents, he 
felt relieved—although even there the atmosphere did not quite satisfy him. 
He was convinced that his symptoms would keep him from success.
The result of the clinical examination was negative, except for a scoliosis, 
which, with loss of muscle tone as a result of depression, can be taken as an 
explanation of the pain in the back of the head and the pains in the back. The 
tiredness can be ascribed to his restlessness, and certainly the dull feeling in 
the head can be understood as a partial manifestation of depression and of 
continuous emotion.
From the general diagnosis which we here employ, the discomfort in the 
stomach region is more difficult to understand. It could come from nerve 
irritation as a result of the scoliosis. But it could also be the expression of 
a predilection, the answer of an inferior organ to a psychic irritation. The 
frequency of stomach disorder in the patient’s childhood and a similar com-
plaint of his father’s, likewise without organic findings, speak in favor of the 
latter explanation. The patient stated that whenever he was excited, he lost his 
appetite and occasionally vomited.

204	
Timothy S. Hartshorne
Neurosis as a Mistake in Striving for Success
One complaint, perhaps regarded by him as a trifle, makes it possible for us 
to perceive the lifestyle of the patient a little more closely. His restlessness 
speaks clearly in favor of the fact that he has not completely given up the 
battle for “his success.” His statement that he does not feel well even at home 
speaks [perhaps] less clearly for the same conclusion. His fear of meeting 
strangers (therefore his fear of stepping out into life) cannot leave him, even 
at home.
The fear of losing consciousness affords us a peep into the workroom of 
his neurosis. He tells us (though he is not aware that he is saying it) how, 
when he has to meet strangers, he artificially increases his excitement by pre-
conceived ideas of losing consciousness. We can name two reasons why the 
patient, “as if” by intention, artificially increases his excitement to the point 
of confusion.
One reason is clear, although not commonly understood: the patient, so 
to speak, “squints” closely only at his symptoms, and not at their connection 
with his whole lifestyle. The second reason is that the relentless retreat, the 
“advance toward the rear,” is not allowed to be interrupted. This I described a 
long time ago as the most important neurotic symptom (Adler, 1912).
Neurosis as a Retreat From the Tasks of Life
In the case of this patient, the retreat was connected with weak attempts to 
pull himself together. The excitement into which the patient falls when he is 
confronted by the three problems of life—society, occupation, and love (for 
which he evidently is not socially prepared)—affects not only the body, pro-
ducing functional changes in it, but also the psyche. This excitement has to 
be proved (for up to now it has only been guessed) with the aid of general 
diagnosis, medical-psychological intuition, and Individual Psychological 
experiences. The functional disturbances of soma and psyche are the conse-
quences of the faulty preparation for life of this personality. The patient, who 
formerly has experienced smaller failures, recoils from the exogenic factor. 
He now feels himself continuously threatened by defeat. The more so since, 
as a pampered child (a fact which we later have to prove), he finds his self-
erected goal of personal superiority—a goal which is without sufficient inter-
est in others—more and more unattainable. This state of heightened emotions 
always springs from the fear of a final defeat. Fear, in the ordinary sense of the 
word, however, need not always be clearly evident. Those symptoms which 
we find in psychosis and neurosis originate, as we know, in accordance with 
the physical constitution (for the most part inborn), and in accordance with 
the psychic constitution (always acquired). These physical and psychic fac-
tors are always mixed together and influence each other reciprocally.

	
	
What Is Neurosis?	
205
Neurosis as a Lack of Preparation in Community Feeling
But is this yet neurosis? Individual Psychology has truly done much to show 
that, for the solution of the tasks of life; one can be either badly or well pre-
pared; that, in between the extremes of good and bad, there are thousands of 
varying degrees of preparation. Individual Psychology has also done much 
to make us understand that the inability to solve the problems of life cause 
the vibration of the whole soma and psyche to increase incalculably in the 
presence of disturbing exogenic factors. It has also shown that poor prepara-
tion originates in earliest childhood, and that it cannot be corrected through 
experience, nor through emotion, but only through understanding. It also 
has discovered community feeling (Gemeinschaftsgefühl) as the integrating 
factor of the lifestyle that must be present to a decisive degree for the solution 
of all the problems of life. The physical and psychic phenomena which accom-
pany and characterize the feeling of failure I have described as the inferiority 
complex. The manifestations of shock, in the case of inferiority complex, are 
greater in those individuals who are socially less prepared than in those who 
are better prepared; less in those who are more courageous than in those who 
are discouraged and who constantly look for help from the outside. Everyone 
has conflicts which upset him more or less. Everyone feels them, physically 
and psychologically. Due to the kind of bodies we have, and to the external 
social circumstances, no one living is spared from the feeling of inferiority 
toward the outside world.
Hereditary organ inferiorities are all too frequent in human beings for 
them to avoid the probability of attack by the harsh demands of life. The 
factors of the outside world which affect the child are not of a nature which 
makes it easy for him to build up a “right” lifestyle.
Pampering or neglect (imagined or real)—but especially pampering—lure 
the child all too often to set himself in opposition to the community feel-
ing. To that, add the fact that the child finds its “law-of-movement” for the 
most part without correct guidance: He strives according to the deceptive 
law of trial and error, according to his own free will, within his limits as a 
human being, but always he strives towards a goal of superiority, of which 
there are innumerable varieties. The creative power of the child takes and 
uses all its impressions and sensations as impulses toward a final attitude, 
toward its individual, unique “law-of-movement.” The fact, emphasized 
by Individual Psychology, was later called Einstellung (Attitude) or Gestalt 
(Form, Configuration), without, however, doing full justice to the whole of 
the individual and to the fact of his inseparable “connectedness” with the 
three great problems of life.
Are these conflicts—of the “bad” child, of the suicidal, of the criminal, 
of the arch-reactionary, of the ultra-radical fanatic, of the voluptuary whose 

206	
Timothy S. Hartshorne
comfort is disturbed by the misery which he sees in the world—are these 
conflicts, including their physical and psychic consequences, neurosis? In 
their persistent mistaken “law-of-motion,” these people all run counter to the 
idea of cooperation as emphasized by Individual Psychology. They come into 
contradiction with what is “right” (sub specie aeternitatist), that is, accord-
ing to the relentless demand of an ideal community. Of course, they feel the 
manifold consequences of this collision. To be sure, there are countless physi-
cal and psychic variations of these consequences. But is this neurosis?
Were it not for the relentless demands of the ideal community, everyone 
could, in the course of life, satisfy his wrong “law-of-motion.” Speaking more 
imaginatively, it might even be said that he could satisfy his “drives,” his 
“instincts,” his “conditioned reflexes”—then there would be no conflict. No 
social (normal) person could make such an absurd demand. Such a demand 
dares to stir timidly only when one overlooks the “connectedness” of the indi-
vidual and the community or tries to separate them. Everyone bows more or 
less willingly to the iron law of the ideal community. Only a child, pampered 
to the utmost, will expect and demand, “res mihi subigere conor,” as Horace 
says reproachingly—freely translated: “to make use of the contributions of 
the community for myself, but without contributing in return.” Even such a 
question as “Why should I love my neighbor?” springs from the inseparable 
connectedness of mankind and arises out of the stern criterion of the com-
munity ideal.40 Only he who carries within himself; in his “law-of-movement,” 
a sufficient degree of the community ideal, and lives according to it as easy as 
he breathes, will be in a position to solve, in the sense of the community those 
conflicts which are inevitably his.
Neurosis: The Individual in Full Retreat
Everyone experiences his conflicts, the neurotic as well as other people. 
However, it is the way in which the neurotic attempts to solve them which 
differentiates him from others. Among the manifold variations of these 
attempts, there are constantly to be found partial neuroses and mixed forms 
of neurosis. Within his “law-of-movement,” the neurotic trains, from child-
hood on, for the retreat from social tasks. These tasks, because he fears defeat, 
threaten his vanity, threaten his striving toward a personal superiority which 
is too much separated from community feeling. These tasks threaten his 
striving to be the center of attention, to be first. His life motto, “All or noth-
ing” (usually moderated very little); the oversensitivity of one constantly 
threatened by defeat; his impatience the heightened emotion of one living 
as if in an enemy country; his greed: all these bring out more frequent and 
40	Alfred Adler, “Der Sinn des Lebens”-Dr. Passer, Vienna, 1933. (Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)

	
	
What Is Neurosis?	
207
more severe conflicts than would be necessary. They make the retreat, pre-
scribed by his lifestyle easier for him. The tactics of retreat, trained and tested 
from childhood, can easily appear to be a “regression” to infantile wishes. But 
these wishes are not the important things to the neurotic.
To the neurotic, the thing of importance is not so much such infantile 
wishes as it is his retreat. For this retreat he gladly pays with sacrifices of all 
sorts. But here, too, one might be misled into confusing these sacrifices with 
“forms of self-punishment.” However, it is not the self-punishment that is 
important; it is rather the feeling of relief that he gets through the retreat, 
which saves him from a collapse of his vanity and his great pride.
Now, finally, it will be understood what the problem of “securing” (safe-
guarding) means in Individual Psychology. It can only be understood in its 
whole connection: not as something “secondary,” but as the chief concern. 
The neurotic “secures” himself by his retreat, and “secures” his retreat by 
aggravating the physical and mental manifestations of shock. These shock 
manifestations arise when he finds himself confronted with a problem which 
threatens him with defeat. He prefers his suffering to the collapse of his great 
personal pride. The strength of that pride Individual Psychology has dem-
onstrated repeatedly. Often that exalted pride becomes clearly visible only 
in psychosis. His superiority complex, as I have called it, is so strong that the 
neurotic himself senses it only from afar with shuddering awe. So strong is 
it, that he gladly turns his attention away from it, when a test of it in real life 
seems imminent. It impels him forward, but he dare not risk the test. Only 
in retreat is there security for his prestige. For the sake of the retreat, he has to 
discard everything, forget everything that could hinder his retreat. He gives 
room only to retreat ideas, retreat feelings, and retreat actions.
The neurotic turns his whole interest toward the retreat, until it becomes 
an elaborate “Retreat Complex.” Every step forward becomes for him a fall 
into an abyss, which seems full of all sorts of horrors, because he sees before 
him no possibility of success. With all his might, with all his feelings, with 
all his tested devices for retreat, he tries to keep himself securely in the back-
ground. There are two things which permit him to cling to those securities 
which save him from defeat. The first of these is the building up and glorifica-
tion of his shock experiences, to which he devotes all his interest; at the same 
time, he turns away from the one important factor, namely, his fear of rec-
ognizing how far he is from his high egoistic goal. The second of these is the 
display of feeling, metaphorically clothed and artificially stirred up as they 
are in dreams, in order to allow him, contrary to common sense, to persist in 
his own lifestyle. These securities he has ready at hand so as not to be driven 
toward the defeat which he fears.

208	
Timothy S. Hartshorne
The Neurotic Use of “Yes-But”
The greatest danger to the neurotic is the disapproval of others. At the outbreak 
of the neurosis, extenuating circumstances are acknowledged by others—and 
with approval. Were it not for these extenuating circumstances, the people 
around him would not give recognition to the trembling prestige of the neu-
rotic. In short, neurosis is: the utilization of shock experiences for the protection 
of the threatened prestige. Still, shorter, we can summarize the neurotic’s whole 
frame of mind in the phrase: “Yes-but.” In the “yes” is imbedded the recogni-
tion of the community feeling; in the “but” the retreat and its securities.
When our patient left the university, he found employment as an assistant 
in an attorney’s office. He stayed there only a few weeks, leaving, as he said, 
“because his field of activity was too insignificant.” After he had changed jobs 
several times for this or some other reason, he decided to devote himself pref-
erably to theoretical studies. He was invited to give lectures about questions 
of law, but he declined “because he could not speak before a large audience.” 
At this time (he was then thirty-two years old), his symptoms appeared. 
A friend who wanted to help him offered to give a joint lecture with him. 
Our patient consented on the condition that he be allowed to speak first. He 
stepped upon the platform, trembling, bewildered, and in fear that he would 
lose consciousness. He saw only black spots before his eyes. Shortly after the 
lecture, his stomach trouble set in, and he imagined he would die if he had to 
speak again before so many people. After this, he occupied himself only with 
the instruction of children.
A doctor whom he consulted told him that in order to get well he would 
have to become active sexually. We could readily have foreseen the absurdity 
of such advice. The patient, who already was in retreat, answered this advice 
with the fear of syphilis, with ethical considerations, with the fear of being 
betrayed and of being accused of being the father of an illegitimate child. His 
parents counseled him to marry. They chose a girl and he married her. She 
later became pregnant and left the house to go back to her parents, because, 
as she said, she could not endure his constant criticism from “above”—as 
though he were the “superior” one.
Now we see how arrogant our patient could be when he was offered an easy 
opportunity, but how he began a retreat at once when matters seemed to him 
uncertain. He did not bother himself about his wife and child. His only con-
cern was, always, not to appear inferior, and this concern was stronger than 
his striving for the success he longed for so much. He went to pieces when 
he came to the battlefront of life. He fell into a tide of feeling which closely 
resembled extreme anxiety, with its physical and mental consequences. He 
strengthened his retreat by setting up phantom scarecrows, because in this 
way the retreat was made easier for him.

	
	
What Is Neurosis?	
209
A motorist can easily imagine such a mechanism. He has his goal, he is on 
his way; now he steps on the gas in order to reach his goal more quickly and 
more surely. His goal in this case was the retreat.
Retreat as a “Law-of-Movement” (Lifestyle)
Stronger proofs? We want to supply them in two ways: first, by going back to 
his early childhood in order to establish the fact that he was misled into the life-
style which we have found to be his; second, by gathering out of what we know 
of his later life more incidents which resemble each other. I always consider it 
the strongest proof of the correctness of a finding of this nature, if it turns out 
that the incidents which contribute further to the characterization of a person 
agree perfectly with those already found. Should they not agree, then the con-
ception of the person under examination must be altered accordingly.
As the patient states, his mother was a meek, yielding woman, to whom 
he clung tenaciously, and who pampered him thoroughly. Also, she always 
expected great achievements from him. The father was less inclined to spoil 
him, but gave in to him every time the patient cried when he wanted some-
thing. Among the children of the family, the patient preferred a younger 
brother, who worshipped him, fulfilled his every wish, and who ran after him 
like a little puppy, and whom he easily managed. Our patient was the hope of 
his family; he always got his own way with the other brothers and sisters. This 
unusually easy, warm home situation unfitted him for the outside world, and 
he created for himself the “pampered” style of life.
This became apparent at once when he went to school for the first time. 
He was the youngest in the class and used this fact as his motive for chang-
ing schools twice and for the purpose of expressing his dislike of this outside 
position. Then, however, he studied with tremendous zeal in order to surpass 
all other pupils. When he was not successful in surpassing them, he retreated. 
He frequently stayed away from school on account of headaches and stomach 
aches and often was tardy. When he was not among the best pupils, he and 
his parents ascribed it to the circumstance that he was frequently absent. At 
the same time, our patient strongly emphasized that he knew more and had 
read more than all the other pupils.
On the slightest provocation, the parents put him in bed and nursed him 
with great care. He had always been a timid child and often cried out in his 
sleep in order to occupy his mother with him, even in the night.
It should be understood that he was not clear about the meaning and the 
connection of all these manifestations. They all were the expression of his 
lifestyle.41 Neither did he know that he read in bed at night until early morn-
41	Neither in the conscious, nor the unconscious, but in the “non-understood.” (Original footnote by 
Alfred Adler.)

210	
Timothy S. Hartshorne
ing in order to enjoy the privilege of getting up late, and so rid himself of a 
part of his day’s work. He was more shy with girls than with men. And this 
behavior extended over the whole time of his development into manhood. 
It can easily be understood that in every situation of life, he lacked courage; 
that under no consideration would he risk his vanity. The uncertainty as to 
whether he would be well received by girls was in strong contrast with the 
certainty with which he could expect devotion from his mother. In his mar-
riage, he wanted to establish the same mastery which he enjoyed at home over 
his mother and brothers. Such an attempt must meet failure.
Early Recollections, Attitudes, and Dreams: 
Avenues to Understanding Neurosis
I have established the fact that the lifestyle of an individual is to be found in 
the earliest childhood recollections. To be sure, it is often well hidden. Our 
patient’s earliest recollection is as follows: “A little brother had died and the 
father sat in front of the house and wept.” We remember in this connection 
how the patient fled home before a lecture and pretended to die.
One’s attitude toward the question of friendship characterizes very well 
one’s ability to be a social human being. Our patient stated that all during 
his life he had friends for a short time only and that he always wanted to rule 
them. Friendship, to him, was an opportunity to exploit others. When this 
circumstance was pointed out to him in a friendly manner, he answered, “I 
do not believe that anyone exerts himself for the community; everyone does 
it only for himself.”
The following shows how he armed himself for the retreat. He wanted 
very much to write an article or a book, but when he sat down to write he 
became so agitated that he could not think. He declared that he could not 
sleep unless he read beforehand. But if he read, he got such a pain in his head 
that he couldn’t sleep.
At the time the patient was visiting another city, his father died and he 
returned home. Shortly afterward, he had the opportunity to accept a posi-
tion in the city where he had been visiting. He refused the position under 
the pretext that he would die if he should enter that city again. When he was 
offered a position in his own city, he refused that upon the ground that he 
would not be able to sleep the first night, and for that reason would fail the 
next day. He would have to get well first.
To show that his “law-of-movement”—this “Yes-but” of the neurotic—
is to be found even in the dream of the patient, we will give an example. 
With the technique of Individual Psychology, one can find the dynamics of a 
dream. The dream says nothing new, nothing which we could not recognize 
otherwise from the behavior of the patient.

	
	
What Is Neurosis?	
211
From the contrivances of the dream, when rightly understood, and from 
the choice of dream content, one can recognize how the dreamer, guided 
by his “law-of-movement” (his lifestyle), endeavors to enforce his own way, 
contrary to common sense, by artificially arousing appropriate feelings and 
emotions. Often one finds hints as to how, under stress of a fear of defeat, the 
patient produced his symptoms. Our patient told the following dream: “I was 
supposed to be going to visit friends who lived on the other side of a bridge. 
The railing was freshly painted. I wanted to look in the water and leaned 
against the railing. This pushed against my stomach which began to hurt. I 
said to myself: ‘You should not look down in the water below. You could fall.’ 
But I risked it nevertheless, went again to the railing, glanced below, and fell 
back again quickly, as I reflected that it was after all better to be safe.”
The visit to friends and the freshly painted railing indicate the trace 
of some community feeling and the building up of a new style of life. The 
patient’s fear of falling from his heights, his “Yes-but,” are emphasized clearly 
enough. His stomach troubles as a result of his feeling of fear are, as described 
earlier, always constitutionally present. The dream shows us the patient’s 
rejecting attitude toward the efforts of the doctor up to that time, and the 
victory of the old lifestyle. This was accomplished by the aid of a vivid picture 
of danger, when the security of his retreat was jeopardized.
The neurosis is the automatic use of functional symptoms which have 
their origin in the effect of shock, and whose utilization is not understood 
by the patient.
Those who are too fearful about their prestige and who even in childhood 
(usually as pampered children) have been enticed to this way of utilization 
are more inclined to neurosis than are others. The cure can only come about 
by way of understanding, through the growing insight of the patient, and 
through the development of his community feeling.


213
17
The Structure of Neurosis
Jill D. Duba
Perhaps you are a counselor or a coach. Or perhaps you are a teacher working 
with a group of many children. When you reflect upon the many people that 
you are in contact with each day, namely the ones you are striving to help, is 
there one or two that strikes you as “nervous” or particularly anxious, fearful, 
and/or unsettled? For many of us, we have encountered such individuals and 
have worked diligently at helping them overcome their anxieties, worries, and 
the accompanying physiological responses. According to Adler the cure for such 
nervous states is twofold. First, the individual must develop social interest or 
“community feeling.” Second, one must come to an understanding of the use and 
functionality of the symptoms. In “The Structure of Neurosis” Adler presents a 
concise explanation of how such neurotic symptoms came to be in the first place, 
as well as how the symptoms service the individual. While his article does not 
focus on how to help clients increase awareness, insight, and community feeling, 
“The Structure of Neurosis” does provide an informative baseline for how today’s 
counselors can begin to understand the self-defeating behaviors, mistaken goals, 
and movement of clients who are struggling with neurosis.
To illustrate how these concepts can be applied to a present-day scenario, I am 
going to frame the ideas that Adler presents within the context of a client case. 
As in any counseling context, Adler would argue that it is important to gather as 
much information about the client prior to coming to any definite conclusions 
about their presenting problem and lifestyle. For the purposes of brevity, how-
ever, we will use this short case example as a backdrop for understanding how 
Adler’s principles might be applied.
Let’s consider “Ellen,” a 44-year-old female. Her presenting concern includes 
complaints of persistent headaches, excessive appetite, and weight gain. She also 
worries every day about “dying too early.” Ellen has seen multiple medical doc-
tors who have all confirmed that besides needing to lose at least 50 pounds, she 
is healthy. She is finding it increasingly difficult to socialize with anyone. She 
reports that it is easier to come home after work, eat, and retreat to her bedroom 
to drown out her worries by watching TV. Although she insists that she would 

214	
Jill D. Duba
never harm herself, she is beginning to question her worth in society—as a fam-
ily member, coworker, and community member. She tells herself that “no one 
notices I am gone anyway.” Ellen is a high school librarian. She has worked for 
the same school for the last 18 years. Last year she became increasingly wor-
ried when word got out that the school district was cutting various staff posi-
tions. Ellen confesses that although she has thought about switching schools and 
even moving, she is “comfortable” and very afraid of change. After a couple of 
sessions, Ellen reports that she has been dating a very “obese” man for the last 
3 years whom she is neither attracted to or in love with. She explains, though, 
that “this situation is better than being alone.” After exploring her childhood 
we find that what Ellen remembers most is that she “was overweight.” Although 
she knows that her mother and grandmother meant no harm, they would say to 
her, “Come here, my chubby girl.” She also recalls being ridiculed at school. She 
tried to be as quiet as possible so that the other students would not notice her. 
Ellen remembers being happy when another “fat girl” came to her school in the 
third grade. This was her only friend throughout elementary school. Ellen broke 
her leg during the summer when she was 5 years old. She recalls feeling excluded 
from the activities the rest of the children were involved in. She says that after 
that summer she never could “quite get back to a normal size.” After a couple of 
years, she began to think that she would “always be fat” and as a consequence she 
would never have “real friends.”
Life as Movement
Adler suggested that all individuals have a “capacity for motion . . . as long as life 
exists.” This movement is understood in terms of the direction and goal. Adler 
argues that everyone is striving to “overcome all imperfections and achieve com-
pletion.” What varies among individuals is the direction or movement toward 
this goal of overcoming feelings of inferiority. So, in the case of Ellen, we can 
assume that she is striving to overcome feelings of inferiority. For example, 
instead of experiencing “less than” among family or friends, she drowns herself 
in the TV, overeats, and tells herself that she may play or have a significant role 
in social settings. What we need to know more about is the nature of her move-
ment—namely the way in which she strives to overcome feeling inferior.
Intensified Minus Situations
What is the nature of one’s insecurities? As previously mentioned Adler argued 
that everyone experiences a certain degree of insecurity and thus works through 
life to try to overcome this (either by becoming courageous or by ignoring it 
and/or taking manipulative measures). However, Adler also recognizes that some 
individuals experience severe or “intensified” cases of inferiority. In modern-day 

	
	
The Structure of Neurosis	
215
terms, this would be an example of psychopathology or any given mental health 
“disorder.” Such “intensified minus situations” originate from three different 
early life experiences: organ inferiority, pampering, or neglect. In the case of an 
organ deficiency (i.e., physical shortcoming, physiological limitation or flaw), the 
child “experiences the weakness of his organic equipment” and “feels impelled 
to reorganize it accordingly.” Essentially, the child takes the position that he/
she is “less than” and behaves according. Pampered children, on the other hand, 
develop “like parasites” who are either always looking for assistance and influ-
ence or “extremely disinclined to accept any suggestion.” Finally, neglected chil-
dren will likely grow up feeling neglected and will find situations in his/her adult 
life that will “make him feel neglected.”
For a moment, let’s consider the case of Ellen again. When Ellen was a child, 
how did her weight impact the way she felt about herself? How did this interpre-
tation impact how she made sense of who she could be as a student, daughter, 
and friend? When she faces current situations that induce feelings of insecurity, 
what does she do to overcome those feelings? The way in which she developed 
movement to overcome her feelings of insecurity as a child is the same way (or 
movement) she overcomes feelings of insecurity as an adult.
Exceptions: Creative Power and Social Interest
Adler was a hopeful individual and thus saw exceptions to any explanation of 
behavior. That is, not all children who have organ deficiencies are spoiled or 
neglected and will grow up to feel especially nervous, anxious, and unhappy. As 
mentioned in the above section, Adler believed that how children make sense of 
(attitude and interpretation) a given organ deficit or environment (being spoiled 
or neglected) will impact how they strive to overcome any and all future imper-
fections or feelings of inferiority. We already have considered how Ellen’s attitude 
toward her organ deficit (overweight) transformed itself into how she overcomes 
feelings of insecurity even as an adult (law of movement).
Might there have been another route for Ellen, another way of interpreting her 
weight as a child? Adler suggested two other ways in which children can create 
a response that is courageous and will likely contribute to the formation to a law 
of movement that does not contribute to pathology later in life, namely creative 
power and social interest. In “The Structure of Neurosis” Adler explains that it 
is the “creative power of the individual” or how the child makes “use . . . of that 
equipment” that will impact how the child overcomes his/her inferior position. 
Consider Ellen. What if as a child she decided that children who judge her on her 
appearance are not worth being friends with anyway? What if she decided that 
although she was overweight, she would work to simply enjoy activities despite 
the discomfort of the extra weight? What if she saw this “deficit” as a challenge 
that she was determined to cope with? Finally, if Ellen responded to her weight in 

216	
Jill D. Duba
these ways, how might this have molded how she dealt with other challenges in 
her life as an adult? That is, her “creative power” to find ways of overcoming her 
weight as a child would directly impact how she would “strive to overcome” all 
imperfections throughout her life.
In “The Structure of Neurosis” Adler explained that although all three groups 
of individuals “face life with a feeling of insecurity,” the solution depends on how 
they are “prepared to make contact with . . . fellow human beings.” Further, he 
suggested that “only the individual who is socially prepared for cooperation can 
solve the social problems which life imposes.” This is because the “insecure indi-
vidual is always more concerned with himself than others.” Although we may not 
have a report of how Ellen was raised and prepared to connect with and interact 
with others, we can make some speculations. What we do know is that she is 
very self-focused. She is more concerned about what her contributions may be 
than the people that she would be impacting in a positive way. Instead of look-
ing for and believing in the support that other people can provide her, she with-
draws from any human contact and remains depressed, worried, and anxious in 
her bedroom. What if Ellen was prepared and encouraged to interact with oth-
ers? What if she was taught the value of social interaction and of relationships? 
Further, how might this have contributed to her law of movement?
Adler Today
Many of us have encountered Ellen. Unfortunately Ellen has likely been diagnosed 
with a disorder or two, has been overmedicated with anti-anxiety medications, and 
has been limited in talk therapy because of reimbursement limitations. Adler’s per-
spective, on the other hand, is a holistic and systemic one. Furthermore, his message 
about the cure for one’s emotional and mental “pathology” is clear. That is, the solu-
tion must involve others. The client must have a desire to be a part of and a contrib-
uting member of a group. In addition, the individual must be courageous enough 
to change and reconsider his/her attitude about challenges and the problems of life. 
Finally, Adler’s perspectives are quite fitting for the counselor or helper who is inter-
ested in empowering and motivating individuals, for helping persons find valor and 
bravery that lies within, and for looking at “problems” as an opportunity for change.
References
Adler, A. (1914). Das Problem der “Distanz”: Uber einen Grundcharakter der Neurose 
und Psychose [The problem of “distance”: A basic trait of neurosis and psychosis]. 
Zeitschrift fur Individual Psychologie, 1, 8–16.
Adler, A. (1932). Die Systematik der Individualpsychologie [The systematics of individual 
psychology]. Internationale Zeitschrift fur Individual Psychologie, 10, 241–244.
Adler, A. (1935). The structure of neurosis. International Journal of Individual Psychology, 1(2), 
3–12. (Original work published in 1932; reprinted in Ansbacher & Ansbacher, 1979)

	
	
The Structure of Neurosis	
217
Ansbacher, H. L., & Ansbacher, R. R. (Eds.). (1979). Superiority and social interest: Alfred 
Adler—A collection of later writings (3rd ed.). New York: Norton. (Original work pub-
lished in 1964)

218	
Jill D. Duba
The Structure of Neurosis
Alfred Adler
The subject I have chosen to discuss here, namely, the structure of neurosis, is 
one of the most difficult problems in psychology. We frequently observe fear 
in people without considering it as a manifestation of neurosis. Frequently, 
also, there may be found a certain inelasticity or rigidity of thinking in peo-
ple who are not neurotic; in individuals, for instance, who lay great stress on 
rules and formulae. But we cannot take this as characteristic of neurosis. The 
same applies to other neurotic symptoms. The symptom of fatigue occurs in 
the neurasthenic as well as in so-called normal people. The symptoms found 
in functional neurosis may also be found outside of a neurosis. Every human 
being under certain psychic tensions will react according to his individual 
makeup. In one suffering from fear, we may notice various reactions such 
as heart palpitation, breathing difficulties, etc. Normal human beings may 
be subject to these symptoms. Contractions of the throat may be brought 
on in them by a feeling of insecurity. Other individuals will, under stress of 
fear, react with stomach symptoms, or intestinal disorders, or bladder irregu-
larities. There are a great number of individuals whose fear manifests itself 
through the sexual organ. There is a special type in whom fear creates sexual 
excitement. Individuals of this type consider such a reaction normal, and 
even go so far as to construct theories about it. We want to keep in mind that 
phenomena beyond the range of human psychological life do not occur in 
neurosis either.
The Soul as Part of Life
Here, I must briefly touch on the basic views of Individual Psychology, espe-
cially the concept of the soul or mind. It is quite clear that, thereby, we ven-
ture into transcendental territory.
Watson and his school, who refuse to do this, ignore the existence and 
meaning of the soul. There are other schools, also, which take a purely mech-
anistic viewpoint on these matters, thus eliminating the mind and psychic 
life. In the true sense, this is impossible since the very word “psychology” 
means science of the soul. Many call themselves psychologists who, in fact, 
are physiologists and, according to the structure of their scientific training, 
eliminate the concept of the soul or think of it in a mechanistic way. The psy-
chologist, however, takes it for granted that a basic conception of psychic life 
includes the various manifestations of the personality. These manifestations 
are arranged in definite order and direction.

	
	
The Structure of Neurosis	
219
Speculative insight is necessary to understand the context data which may 
lead beyond the province of experience. But even here, in the sphere outside 
immediate or tangible experience, there is no evidence which precludes the 
assumption of psychic life or disproves the existence of it. Let us assume, 
therefore, that the soul is a part of life.
Life as Movement
Now the most important characteristic of life is motion. That does not mean 
that living things cannot be in a state of immobility, but that the capacity 
for motion is present as long as life exists, and that all psychic life can be 
interpreted in terms of movement. Hence, all phenomena which pertain to 
the psychic life can be seen in space-time relationships. We observe these 
movements and see them as if in a congealed state—as forms in repose, so to 
speak. Once we see psychic expression as movement, we approach an under-
standing of our problem; for the chief characteristic of a movement is that it 
must have direction and, therefore, a goal. Moreover, this direction toward 
which every psychic movement proceeds could not exist if the entire psychic 
life did not have a goal, which, as must be stressed at this point, is, in the case 
of every individual, determinable and capable of formulation, even though 
the individual himself cannot formulate it. In relation to this we may note 
that we have in our consciousness a great number of impressions which are 
not clearly defined concepts and which, under certain circumstances, we can 
formulate. In this connection, it is sometimes erroneously concluded that if 
we clothe the non-understood in words, we have moved it from the realm of 
the unconscious to the conscious, which is certainly not the case.
The Goal of Overcoming
I have said that every movement has a goal. “Drives” and “natural tendencies,” 
such as sexual drives, for instance, have no direction. These abstract concepts 
cannot, therefore, be well utilized in the understanding of psychic occurrences. 
The direction which we seem to observe in these drives is merely the direction 
imparted to them by the movement of the individual-as-a-unity toward his 
goal. The movement toward a goal shows a unified pattern. It is this goal of the 
psychic life which makes the whole psychic life a unity. The result is that the 
aspiration toward this goal is immanent in every part of the psychic movement; 
therefore, the goal becomes a part of the unity. We must conclude, then, that 
we understand a part of the psychic life only when we conceive it as a part of a 
unity which proceeds along the same course toward the same goal with other 
characteristics of the individual. In the practical application of Individual 
Psychology, this viewpoint is of the greatest importance. Hence it is essential to 
the understanding of psychic life to explain how the goal originates.

220	
Jill D. Duba
Striving toward a goal, toward an objective, we find everywhere in life. 
Everything grows “as if” it were striving to overcome all imperfections and 
achieve completion. This urge toward perfection we call the “goal of over-
coming,” that is, the striving to overcome.
Language is inadequate to express the full range of interpretations of what 
“overcoming” means. The interpretation varies with each individual because 
the goal of each individual is different. If we say that such a striving is for 
“power” or “force,” or a “running away from reality,” we have made typical 
generalizations which do not give a clear insight into a particular, individual 
case. But we have gained one point. We have illuminated the field under con-
sideration, and must then narrow down the meaning so that we are able to 
perceive the particular direction of movement of the individual in question. 
For this we need experience, alertness, and a closely ‘critical, objective, unbi-
ased examination of each individual case.
The phenomena to which we allude imply the existence of a minus and 
plus situation simultaneously in the same individual—that is, an inferiority 
feeling and at the same time a striving to overcome this inferiority. The infe-
riority feeling can show itself in a thousand ways, for instance, as a striving 
for superiority. The question, then, arises as to how the fictitious goal or guid-
ing fiction, which is different in each individual and which he carries within 
himself from the beginning to the end of life, is established.
The Creative Power of the Individual
We concede that every child is born with potentialities different from those 
of any other child. Our objection to the teachings of the “hereditarians” and 
every other tendency to overstress the significance of constitutional disposi-
tion is that the important thing is not what one is born with, but what use one 
makes of that equipment. Still, we must ask ourselves: “Who uses it?” As to 
the influence of the environment, who can say that the same environmental 
influences are apprehended, worked over, digested, and responded to by any 
two individuals in the same way? To understand this fact, we find it neces-
sary to assume the existence of still another force: the creative power of the 
individual.
We have been impelled to attribute to a child creative power, which casts 
into movement all the influences upon him and all his potentialities—a 
movement toward the overcoming of an obstacle. This is felt by the child 
as an impulse that gives his striving a certain direction. There is no doubt 
that all phenomena in the psychic life of a child tend toward overcoming 
his inferior position and consequently, the views of those who believe in the 
“causative” influence of “heredity” on the one hand, or “environment” on 
the other, are, as complete explanations of his personality, made untenable 

	
	
The Structure of Neurosis	
221
by the assumption of this creative power of the child. The drive in the child 
is without direction as long as it has not been incorporated into the move-
ment toward the goal which he creates in response to his environment. This 
response is not simply a passive reaction but a manifestation of creative activ-
ity on the part of an individual. It is futile to attempt to establish psychology 
on the basis of drives alone, without taking into consideration the creative 
power of the child which directs the drive, molds it into form, and supplies it 
with a meaningful goal.
There are, however, certain factors which affect the child and allure him to 
mold his life in a certain direction. These factors are not primarily causative 
agents, but rather alluring, stimulating phenomena. The attitude toward these 
factors varies very widely in different individuals. No mathematical rule is con-
ceivable that could teach us how to make the proper use of anything which 
we possess. However, unprejudiced research cannot observe the disposition or 
constitution individuals possess, only the “use” they make of what they pos-
sess. These factors, as I have indicated, appear as alluring or stimulating oppor-
tunities to the individual. It would be erroneous to assume that they act as 
causes, for, with deepened understanding, we see that a different use is made 
of the same stimuli by different individuals, and therefore we are justified in 
assuming, merely, that it is probable on a statistical basis that they will evoke in 
an individual certain seemingly typical uses of them. So much we may under-
stand. Any assertion beyond that we may regard as a bit unscientific. In other 
words, it is the creative factor that comes into play here, and it is this factor 
which we have to train ourselves to understand better in its working.
Intensified Minus Situations
Organ Inferiority
As a result of our experience we understand that children with inferior 
organs will feel inadequate for the tasks of life and that the minus situation 
will be felt by a child with inferior organs more intensely than by the average 
child. This is very significant because our experience confirms the fact that 
where a situation is felt to be especially insecure, the results are very strik-
ing and they show a greater striving for a plus situation. These observations 
apply to children who are born with inferior sense organs, with inferior brain 
structure, (and with) inferior endocrine glands. The organic weakness does 
not necessarily function as a “minus” situation, but the child experiences 
the weakness of his organic equipment for average social tasks, and he feels 
impelled to reorganize it accordingly.
There are innumerable forms of life in which we may observe the striv-
ing to overcome the sense of inadequacy rooted in an experience of organ 

222	
Jill D. Duba
inferiority. Some individuals seek to eliminate problems; some act so as to 
avoid them. By the avoidance of problems, some feel relieved and so more 
secure. Others wrestle and struggle with their problems—such, for instance, 
as that of left-handedness—and accommodate themselves more courageously 
to outside influences.
The outcome depends on the creative power of the individual, which 
expands outwardly according to no rule except this: that the determining 
goal is always “success.” What constitutes success for him depends upon the 
individual’s own interpretation of his position.
During the first three or four years of life, the child forms his way of life 
(Lebensform). He has then shaped his concrete goal, determining the way 
in which he overcomes his problems. From then on one may perceive in his 
attitude the result of this process of creative goal formation. There are mil-
lions of variations of such goals. They differ from each other, metaphorically 
speaking, in color, shape, rhythm, and intensity.
Pampering
A second group of individuals will show a life pattern very similar to that 
of children affected by organ inferiority. I have in mind those individuals 
who have been pampered in childhood. The more deeply I have delved into 
the problem of neurosis and searched the cases presented, the more clearly 
have I come to see that in every individual with a neurosis some degree of 
pampering can be traced. Dependence on another person for the solution 
of a problem or the carrying out of a task has a determining influence on an 
individual.
But we must not think too loosely of pampering. When we speak of a 
pampered child we do not simply mean a child who is loved and caressed, 
but rather a child whose parents are always hovering over it, and assume all 
responsibilities for it, who take away from the child the burden of fulfilling 
any of the tasks and functions it could fulfill. Under such circumstances the 
child develops like a parasite and emerges as one of innumerable varieties of 
individuals, ranging from those who are extremely disinclined to accept any 
suggestion or influence from others to those who are always seeking assis-
tance. Between these extremes, there are, as I have indicated, thousands of 
differences in type and kind.
I would like to prevent an easily made mistake, however, by stating here 
that the pampered style of life should not be understood as simply resulting 
from the attitude of parents or grandparents, but that it, too, is the creation of 
the child himself. This creation may be arrived at even in cases where there is 
no question of pampering by other persons. It is the exacting attitude of the 
child which induces pampering.

	
	
The Structure of Neurosis	
223
Neglect
A third group consists of neglected children, those who are, for instance, 
illegitimate, undesired, or ugly. The feeling of being neglected is, of course, 
relative. External circumstances can contribute to it, and every pampered 
child will automatically find himself, later in life, in situations which will 
make him feel neglected.
Insecurity Feelings and Lack of Social Interest
What we want to get at now is the basic, underlying structure which unites 
all these types. All three groups face life with a feeling of insecurity. This 
feeling of insecurity and inadequacy is characteristic of all failures. From the 
way they attempt to solve their problems we may judge how well individuals 
in the three categories with which we are dealing are prepared to meet these 
problems, which are always of a social nature. All problems with which we 
are confronted are of a social nature. For the purpose of clarification we may 
classify them as problems of social, occupational, or love relationships. Their 
solution depends, consequently, upon how well an individual is prepared to 
make contact with his fellow human beings.
All failures—problem children, criminals, suicides, neurotics, psychotics, 
drunkards, sexual perverts, etc.—are products of inadequate preparation in 
Community-Feeling (Gemeinschaftsgefühl). They are all noncooperative, soli-
tary beings who run more or less counter to the rest of the world; beings who 
are more or less asocial, if not antisocial.
This viewpoint tends to make of Individual Psychology a value psychol-
ogy. What does this signify? The very far-reaching implication is that only 
the individual who is socially prepared for cooperation can solve the social 
problems which life imposes. By this we mean that there should exist a cer-
tain degree of contact feeling (Kontaktgefühl)—of striving for cooperation 
(Streben nach Kooperation)—in the “law-of-movement” of the individual. 
Where it is lacking we meet with “failures.” I have already shown that this 
inclination for cooperation and social achievement has not been properly 
developed in children who feel insecure. These insecure ones build a lifestyle 
which shows a lack of social interest (soziales Interesse), because an insecure 
individual is always more concerned with himself than with others. He can-
not get away from himself.
We cannot stress too much that in the neurotic there is a lack of interest in 
others, a lack of social interest (sociales Interesse). We must not be confused 
by the fact that some neurotics seem to be benevolent and wish to reform the 
whole world. This wish to reform the whole world can be merely a response to 
a keenly felt minus situation. Where the minus situation is strong, the striving 
to overcome will also be strong. We can perceive this also in the organs of the 

224	
Jill D. Duba
human body, for where the obstacle to be overcome is great the tension is also 
great. The neurotic places the goal of his overcoming high. It is related, just as 
in the case of a normal individual, to the feeling of personal value. The feeling 
of personal worth can only be derived from achievement, from the ability to 
“overcome.” A lack of social feeling (sociales Gefühl) prevails, in the law-of-
movement of the neurotic and decreases his ability to “overcome.” This lack is 
not as great in the neurotic as it is in the criminal. The criminal is more actively 
aware of his fellow creatures but opposes them at the same time. The neurotic 
does not oppose them openly, but his efforts are bent toward testing and utiliz-
ing, or exploiting, the community feeling (Gemeinschaftsgefühl) of others.
This is characteristic of all neurotics, so that in the structure of a neuro-
sis we find the utilization of the community feeling (Gemeinschaftsgefühl) of 
others and simultaneously the arresting of an individual’s cooperative par-
ticipation by a “but.” This “but” is the epitome of all neurotic symptoms. It 
offers an alibi to the neurotic. The neurotic lives according to the formula 
“yes-but.” All the symptoms which hinder the neurotic from going forward 
to achievement are found to be covered by this formula. His estimate of his 
value, therefore, depends upon how much another person contributes to it, 
and not upon his ability to overcome—not upon his own achievements.
Even in considering functional neurosis we maintain the foregoing view-
point. In such cases we have to deal with an arrangement of emotions, such as 
anxiety, insecurity, hyper-sensitivity, rage, impatience, greediness, etc. These 
emotions all arise from living outside the scope of cooperation. The tension 
in which the neurotic lives makes it easy to work himself up into a state of 
heightened emotion.
This tension makes itself felt at the point of “least resistance,” and the 
characteristic effects show up in such places as I have mentioned before, for 
instance, the stomach, bladder, intestines, heart, etc.
So we come to see that functional neurosis can be understood only when 
we recognize the individual as a unity.
Unpreparedness in the Face of Life Problems
When scrutinized, the neurotic will be found to be an individual placed in a 
test situation who is attempting to solve his problems in the interest of his own 
personal ambition rather than in the interest of the common welfare.
This holds true of all neuroses. All neuroses grow out of the psychic 
tension of an individual who is not socially well prepared, when he is con-
fronted with a task which demands for its solution more community feeling 
(Gemeinschaftsgefühl) than he is capable of.
The true nature of the so-called endogenic factors in neurosis becomes 
more clearly marked when the individual finds himself placed in a test situ-
ation. Here the individual’s interpretation of his own qualities plays a great 

	
	
The Structure of Neurosis	
225
role. We do not share the opinion that a neurotic is incapable of solving those 
problems before which he breaks down, but we recognize that he has not yet 
acquired that ability to join (Anschlussfähigkeit) necessary for him to make 
an approximately correct solution of them. He does not possess sufficient 
“contact ability,” that is, capacity for making contact with others. There then 
develops in him that psychic tension which can be found in everyone who 
feels insecure. This tension affects the whole body and the whole psychic life 
and always differs in different individuals.
There are individuals—those who are greatly concerned with rules, for-
mulae, and ideas—whom this tension affects intellectually. We can observe 
this most clearly in compulsion neurosis and in paranoia. With others, 
another sphere of psychic life is set in motion—namely, the emotional sphere. 
This is seen for example in anxiety neuroses and phobias.
I want to lay some stress, also, upon the exogenic factor. Both endogenic 
and exogenic factors play a part in every neurotic symptom. The true bearing 
of the exogenic factor on the individual can, however, only be understood 
when we understand the whole individual in the expression of his lifestyle. 
The therapist has to put himself in the individual’s place in order to see that 
for this particular individual a certain situation seems too difficult.
Recently, a patient came to me who had been previously treated with 
success up to a certain point by another Individual Psychologist. Before his 
previous treatment, he was sexually stimulated only when he saw animals 
(platonic). It would be interesting to discuss why he chose animals, but I can-
not go into that part of his lifestyle here. Anyway, he had, due to a strong 
inferiority feeling, excluded the normal phase of love relationship. This exclu-
sion I find is characteristic of all sexual perversion. When he came to me he 
was planning to get married. He said, “I want to marry,” the problem now 
arises of confessing to my future wife what has gone on before. If I do this, I 
am sure that she will refuse me. This refusal is just what he was aiming at. He 
wanted another excuse for evading the solution of the love problem. I said to 
him, “You should not confess to everybody all the disagreeable happenings in 
your life for which you are not really to blame. It is unfair and not good taste 
to speak of certain things. It is only the last remnant of your cowardice which 
makes you think of talking about it to your fiancée. You must expect that 
other people are apt to misunderstand what/you wish to tell.” He perceived 
this and understood the purpose of his determination to confess to his fian-
cée. I hope that his increased understanding has enabled him to rid himself 
of his fear of the love problem.
Neurotic Types of Movement
If one understands the law-of-movement of neurotics, one will always find 
that in each patient the mental phase (compulsion neurosis), or the emotional 

226	
Jill D. Duba
phase (anxiety neurosis), or the motor phase (hysteria), is predominant, 
although the other psychic processes, too, are always dynamically present. 
In the treatment of such cases, however, the whole psychic process must be 
clearly and definitely determined. There are no pure cases. There are only 
mixed cases in which it can be seen that at one time one aspect, at another 
time another aspect of the whole psychic process comes to the foreground.
People who do not sufficiently understand this predominance of one 
aspect of life over the other frequently talk about the “unconscious.” The 
unconscious, however, is nothing other than that which we have been unable 
to formulate in clear concepts. These concepts are not hiding away in some 
unconscious or subconscious recesses of our minds, but are those parts of 
our consciousness the significance of which we have not fully understood.
If we focus our attention on the goal, direction, and form of an individ-
ual’s “movement,” which alone gives us true understanding of him, we find 
among neurotics several different types of “movements.”
Distance
There is first the distance complex. This first type of movement characteristic 
of neuroses shows an attempt to establish distance as a safeguard. There are 
neurotics, then, in whom the most striking characteristic is that they keep 
themselves at a significant distance or apartness from the solution of the 
problem with which they are confronted. This distance may be produced by 
means of hysteria, fainting, indecision, a tendency to doubt, etc., but all these 
symptoms mean nothing more than an attempt to stand still in a world that 
is moving. If an individual cannot decide whether he should do this or do 
that, one thing is certain—namely, that he does not move. This keeping one-
self at a distance can also be seen very clearly in anxiety neuroses. Functional 
neuroses, too, are capable of hindering a person from solving social prob-
lems. Thus an individual may be compelled to urinate just when he is about 
to go to a party. Also, the compulsion neuroses are well designed to effect this 
“distance,” and consequently bring about a standstill, whenever the neurotic 
feels himself forced to do something.
Hesitating Attitude
The second form of movement manifests itself in a hesitating attitude: the 
neurotic advances, but advances hesitatingly. An example of this is stutter-
ing. Any problem may be met with a “stuttering approach.” This hesitation 
may lead to a postponement of a solution of one’s problems by means of 
insomnia. The patient with this symptom is so tired that he can solve his task 
only very hesitatingly. In neurasthenia, the symptom of fatigue is one of the 
chief characteristics. In agoraphobia it is obvious that the neurotic hesitates 
to solve his problem without the assistance of another person.

	
	
The Structure of Neurosis	
227
Detour
The third form of movement characteristic of all neurotic symptoms is the 
detour around the solution of a problem and the refuge in a secondary field 
of operation. This becomes especially clear in a compulsion neurosis. The 
patient sets up a countercompulsion in opposition to the compulsion of 
social demands. In doing this he only postpones the solution of his problems. 
An example of this is the washing compulsion.
Narrowed Path of Approach
The fourth form of movement is the most complicated and the most strik-
ing. I might call it the narrowed path of approach. The person does not give 
himself up fully to the solution of a problem; he takes up only part of it and 
eliminates other parts, generally those which are most pertinent. This is the 
case in perversions. Another phase of this same form of movement is one that 
sometimes leads to great cultural achievements.
Concluding Summary
The goal of “overcoming” is approached by each individual differently. 
Proceeding toward a general diagnosis, we may recognize traits of uncon-
cealed despotism purposing to make the other person a slave to the patient, 
as is the case of anxiety neurosis. Such individuals have learned in their child-
hood to force others to come to their rescue by frightening them. Another 
group of individuals use the “alibi” as the chief form of movement toward 
the goal of “overcoming.” Their ambitious tendency becomes obvious when 
we see them insisting upon their point of view. For instance, they will say: 
“If I only could sleep, I could be the first or among the first.” But they con-
tent themselves with having this alibi. Of course, not everyone will present 
that alibi in such an easily understandable form; therefore we have to take 
into account the whole of a patient’s attitude toward his problems. In a third 
group we find individuals who create fictitious values within themselves. 
Neurotics, for instance, pride themselves on how much they have attained in 
spite of their neurosis.
I want to stress only one thing more: in psychic processes the single 
spheres are not as separated as some schools of psychology tend to assume. 
There is no area where only the emotional or the mental side, either action 
or volition, can be found to be present. The psychic process comprises the 
whole of an individual. When we observe a part of it, we should feel forced 
to search for the rest of it. So, if an individual tells us his first childhood 
recollections, we may gather from it the mental, emotional, and attitudinal 
aspects, and only after that may we arrive at an understanding of the unity of 
his personality. By virtue of our experience we are, with all due precaution, in 

228	
Jill D. Duba
a position to ascertain the dynamic value of mental, emotional, and attitudi-
nal movements as movements directed toward or determined by a goal that, 
for the individual, has the meaning of securing for him what he regards as 
his position in life. It is in such a way only that we become capable of under-
standing these goal-directed movements as the individual’s efforts to secure 
for himself what he interprets, or misinterprets, as success, or as his way of 
overcoming a minus situation so as to attain a plus situation.
We thus come to the understanding: all neurotic symptoms are safe-
guards of persons who feel too weak to face the problems of life, but have a 
certain platonic appreciation of social feeling (Sozialgefühl). This apprecia-
tion often becomes apparent only in that they count on the community feel-
ing (Gemeinschaftsgefühl) of others, to claim it for themselves.
As soon as, after long toil and great experience, one has recognized the 
meaning of this connection, the real expert has the insight that in neurosis 
one always deals with the pampered type, the type of individual who has not 
become a cooperative fellow-being because in his earliest childhood he was 
trained to count on others for the solution of his problems.

229
18
Trick and Neurosis
Daniel Eckstein
My first comment on Adler’s article relates to the creative title itself. On 
Halloween, Western children all dressed up in costumes utter the classic phrase 
“trick or treat” as they open their bags in hopes of obtaining a treat. Adler takes 
the term trick and creatively uses it to illustrate the many ways in which we trick 
ourselves by devising various ways of coping with life.
Consistent with Adler’s commitment to encouragement he makes a special 
point of noting that “nothing depreciatory” is meant by that term. Indeed, he 
asserts that most discoveries and advances in science utilize such tricks.
Although contemporary clinical diagnosis avoids the actual term neurosis, 
one way to translate that into contemporary counseling practice could be to con-
sider “how we make trouble for ourselves.” Adler gives several case studies, all 
illustrating how clients have tricked themselves in creative ways.
Tricks, of course, are not all self-destructive. Mark Twain’s classic 1876 story 
of how Tom Sawyer tricked a boyhood friend into painting a fence comes to mind 
(2010). The boxer Mohammed Ali utilized the “rope a dope” phenomenon, where 
his trainers loosened the ropes so he could lean into them and absorb the early-
round punches of George Foreman in the Heavyweight Championship match 
held on October 30, 1974, in Kinshasa, Zaire. Many of the best-selling novels and 
Hollywood movies also involve a trick of some sort. And of course tricks are the 
trade of magicians.
Adler’s focus is on how one uses a trick in a purposive nature. The goal-
directed purposeful nature of human behavior is one of Adler’s most enduring 
legacies. In his several case studies he describes how various individuals adopted 
a strategy to gain them special significance in one way or another. Some of these 
strategies included being pampered and overprotected, payoffs for nervousness, 
and advantages gained by what he called a “flight into illness.”
In all his case studies the adopted trick was at the expense of the commu-
nity. In other writings Adler used the concept of “social interest” to refer to the 
connection as contrasted to utilizing a trick to be disconnected from the group. 
Contemporary existentialists and socialists use the term anomie to refer to the 

230	
Daniel Eckstein
sense of footlessness and disconnectedness that comes from utilizing what Adler 
calls tricks in this article.
Adler also utilizes the concept of “private intelligence,” which later was called 
“private logic,” whenever a person uses a “personal, private view of the world to 
assert his own sense of superiority” over someone else. In this context the term 
private was used in contrast to a more general public view of human behavior. 
Later the concept of private logic became more synonymous with George Kelly’s 
(1970) concept of “personal constructs.” Understanding the inner personal world 
of another person through empathy, for example, meant to understand Piaget’s 
(1971) concepts of personal schemes, or ways we all organize our own inner world.
While Adler does not mention how counselors can trick clients, often the con-
cept of reframing, for example, is one intervention where another equally true 
hypothesis is offered. A counselor might trick a client into changing the negative 
label of “stubborn” into a more positive one of “persistent,” for example. Since 
Adler mentioned the private ways a criminal goes about getting things for him-
self or herself, another trick, as it were, was in this writer’s own experience in 
juvenile corrections. One of the incarcerated young men was an expert at break-
ing into homes. He could pick any lock. He was so good that he would not break 
into any house; rather, he specialized in the ones with large warning signs of 
“Protected by Brinks,” for example.
My trick as his counselor was to get him a job after his sentence was completed 
working for the very security systems he had helped dismantle. Moving from a 
more socially useful application of his skills was the trick instead of the previous 
socially useless strategy.
Adler also spoke about what he called “the providence of guesswork.” His pro-
tégé Rudolf Dreikurs (1975) later used a similar phrase, “digging gold mines.” A 
contemporary application of a similar concept was in Malcolm Gladwell’s book 
Blink (2005). His term was “thin-slicing”; it refers to the idea that we often make 
decisions based on just small amounts of information.
Another similar concept shared by both Adler and Gladwell is what Adler 
called the style of life. In the various case studies Adler presents, he notes the 
consistent personality themes that later became called lifestyle. Gladwell intro-
duces a concept similar to the notion of lifestyle in his description of what are 
called “fists.” He notes that “Morse code is made up of dots and dashes, each of 
which has its own prescribed length. But no one ever replicates those prescribed 
lengths perfectly. When operators send a message . . . they vary the spacing or 
stretch out the dots and dashes or combine dots and dashes and spaces in a par-
ticular rhythm. Morse code is like speech. Everyone has a different voice” (p. 27).
In World War II Gladwell notes that such recognition of individual differ-
ences in sending Morse code was a valuable way the Allies were able to track Nazi 
troop movements. A person sending out Morse code messages was assigned to 
each Nazi troop. But through the concept of individual fists, the Allies learned 

	
	
Trick and Neurosis	
231
to distinguish the individual style of each man sending out the messages. Even 
in the simple act of sending a Morse code message, each person has a personal 
typing style, as it were. Some would strike a certain letter harder than others, for 
example. By knowing who was sending the message from what troop the Allies 
correctly predicted where troops were being assembled in the war.
Adler also uses such metaphors in his descriptions such as “like a motorist who 
feeds more gas to speed up his car.” In a contemporary adaptation of that concept, 
Kopp and Eckstein took Adler’s suggestion of using metaphors and suggested the 
following six types of metaphors clients can use. They include the following:
	
1.	Self—“I am a teakettle about to explode.”
	
2.	Other—“My husband’s a locomotive barging into the house.”
	
3.	Situation—“I am a barren wasteland.”
	
4.	Relationship of self to self—“I keep beating myself up.”
	
5.	Relationship of self to other—“Dealing with him is like trying to tame a 
wild tiger.”
	
6.	Relationship of self to a situation—“I am slowly sinking into quicksand.” 
(p. 165)
Another contemporary counseling application is the concept of a therapeutic 
double bind. While Adler does not use that term himself, he richly describes the 
dual “push-pull” tensions of one of his case studies of a man who wants to be 
happy and yet that would mean having to take a test he dreads if he is well enough 
to do so. “This means that he must not strengthen the impulse to rid himself of 
his symptoms even though he suffers from them. They are useful to him in aiding 
him to postpone the test he fears . . . He is on the way to eluding his problem, not 
solving it” (p. 7). Gregory Bateson (1972) later used the actual term double bind 
and also paradoxical communication to describe how schizophrenia often occurs, 
for example.
Not only does this again point out the payoff for the trick of negative behav-
ior but Adler also points out several times in his article the holistic connection 
between the mind and the body. Somatization is the term used today to describe 
how people manifest the disease of cancer in their bodies as one consequence 
of such negative emotions of anger, for example. Adler was one of the original 
therapists who noted such a mind-body connection.
In summary, it is the author’s contention that Adler’s “Trick and Neurosis” has 
the following eight contemporary applications:
	
1.	The purposeful goal-directed nature of tricks
	
2.	A feeling of being connected or of being disconnected with others
	
3.	“Private intelligence,” later called “private logic” and similar to George 
Kelly’s concept of personal constructs

232	
Daniel Eckstein
	
4.	“The providence of guesswork,” which later was called “digging gold 
mines” by Dreikurs and then “thin-slicing” by Gladwell
	
5.	The style of life, which later became lifestyle and was described as “fists” 
by Gladwell
	
6.	The therapeutic use of metaphors
	
7.	Therapeutic double binds, in which to gain more happiness clients have 
to give up a behavior that has useful payoffs for them
	
8.	The interrelationship of mind, body, and spirit, an essential component 
of holistic medicine today
References
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to ecology of mind: Collected essays in anthropology, psychiatry, 
evolution, and epistemology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dreikurs, R. (1975). Fundamentals of Adlerian psychology. Chicago: Adler School of 
Professional Psychology.
Gladwell, M. (2005). Blink. New York: Time Warner.
Kelly, G. (1970). A brief introduction to personal construct theory. New York: Academic Press.
Kopp, R, & Eckstein, D (2004). Using early memory metaphors and client generated meta-
phors in Adlerian therapy. Journal of Individual Psychology, 60(2), 163–174.
Piaget, J. (1971). Biology and knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Twain, M. (2010). The adventures of Tom Sawyer (135th anniversary ed.). San Francisco: 
University of California Press.

	
	
Trick and Neurosis	
233
Trick and Neurosis
Alfred Adler
The topic that I shall discuss here really requires a philosophical explanation 
at the outset, by way of introduction. I shall restrict myself, however, to point-
ing out that we human beings, with our limited understanding, can never do 
more than draw lines of connections and relationships between things; that 
we really know very little of the reality, of the facts that lie behind our impres-
sions. If you compare this brief statement with the title, you will surmise the 
point that I am trying to get at—the fact that actually the greater part of our 
lives is characterized by something that we might call “tricki­ness” or the use 
of device, if we think of the term “trick,” not as something reprehensible, not 
as something conflict­ing with the spirit of community and fellowship, but 
something upon which human nature has come to be absolutely dependent. 
That is, we must enter the province of guesswork if we hope to make any 
progress. I could prove this fact by illustrations drawn from art.
To anticipate criticism, I wish to make clear the fact that “trickiness” is 
some­thing universal and general, and that we must first determine whether 
the use of a particular “trick” or device is compati­ble or incompatible with 
the aims of the communal spirit. You will soon realize that it is my purpose 
to show that our entire lives are marked by a certain “tricky” quality, which 
becomes appa­rent as soon as we consider our relation­ship to the natural 
forces that compel us to adapt ourselves successfully to our environment.
The course of evolution demonstrates that, in the life of the senses, there 
is a something that does not operate by the rules and formulas of logic, but 
which works through a process of adaptation effected by guesswork. All 
inventions are based upon a trick. Now anyone who thought he saw in the 
title of this article a condemnation in the offing, can set his mind at rest—
there is nothing depreciatory in the term “trick.” I might call attention to 
Hegel, who says, “The human mind is crafty.” This is true not only as it 
applies to art, to discoveries and inventions, to every instance of progress in 
science; it is equally true in narrower applications. For example, the ability 
to catch and hold the evanescent word through the craft of book-printing 
was not bestowed by nature. We cannot suppose that some powerful agency 
implanted in the evo­lution of the human race a natural talent that led a priori 
to the art of print­ing. If anyone grants such an assump­tion, he only expresses 
a pious wish that cannot be verified with facts. Similarly, we can show that all 
achievements, of whatever sort, have led to progress, not through the forms 
of logic, but by a device or trick—through the discovery of a strategem for 
evading the difficulty in order to solve it.

234	
Daniel Eckstein
We could mention many provinces in which tricks are common—in lit-
erature for example. There trickery is at its height—in, for instance, the trick 
of representing a man who never lived, but from whom we can learn, who 
arouses our emotions, and so on. All these phenomena provide us continu-
ally with evidence that tricks play a considerable part in life.
When you think of the development of a child, you will have difficulty 
in supposing that his development pro­ceeded according to conscious laws 
of logic, through equation of cause with effect. Even the smallest child pos-
sesses the quality of trickiness—the ability to find a strategem with which to 
meet his difficulties. So it seems certain that this quality (described variously 
as in­stinct, reflex, the unconscious, intuition, etc.) has its basis, is inherent 
in the development of human life; and that the ability to guess (a power that 
cannot be further explained) is not supervised and regulated by the reason 
until later on—the exact time cannot be determined. The power of reason 
develops only with experience, but the talent for tricks has, to some degree, 
an organic foundation.
A young child does not think and reflect when subjected to a test in the 
course of an experiment—when he is pricked, tickled, left by himself, and 
the like. It is not the understanding that produces the result, but the cun­ning 
of the child’s personality. Our inquiries must begin at this point if we are to 
understand the nature of trickiness—the use of device—and its development.
With regard to poetry, for instance, a consideration of metaphor is in place 
here: if a poet views an object in an exaggerated form and clothes it in meta­
phorical garb, he succeeds in producing an effect. I might also refer to the 
interpretation of dreams in Individual Psychology: the dreamer, deceiving 
himself, employs a trick to fortify his position, which seems to be threatened 
from without; he strengthens his incentive toward a certain kind of behavior 
by awakening appropriate feel­ings and emotions. He will do quite the same 
thing that he ordinarily would do without the dream, but with the dream 
a stronger impulse is added—like a motorist who feeds more gas to speed 
up his car. The same destination, the same direction—only more energy is 
brought into play.
Tricks are interesting, too, in many other connections. Take the case, for 
instance, of the professional conjurer. Children never tire of the tricks in their 
magic games. And magicians in many different fields arouse our interest—in 
photography, radio, motion pictures, etc. Through a trick the illusion of real-
ity is produced. Then consider the way a locksmith can open a door with a 
pick­lock; not everybody can do that. But if you ask a locksmith how he does 
it, he scratches his head and answers, “Why, I guess you just have to have the 
knack of it.” He cannot explain it; you have to find out the trick for yourself.
Mathematics abound in tricks. The mathematicians do not hesitate to 
reveal artful dodges like this:

	
	
Trick and Neurosis	
235
	
x2 + px = q
In that form the equation cannot be solved; no mind could ever puzzle it out. 
But it can be solved by this trick.
	
x2+ px +(p/2)2 = (q + p2/2)
And the same sort of thing occurs in life. Years ago I began to reflect on 
the nature of jokes. In jokes, too, it is a trick that steers away from com-
mon sense and presents the “private intelli­gence” of a human being. Take, for 
instance, the anecdote of the man who wanted to attend the synagogue on a 
high Jewish holiday, but had brought no admission-card. He announced to 
the temple official at the entrance, “I only want to look for Mr. Miller,” and 
received the indignant answer: “You swindler, you! You want to pray!” Here 
we see the sharp distinction be­tween the private intelligence and com­mon 
sense, and here we see the quality of the trick that renounces the spirit of 
community and goes its own private ways. We must understand reason as 
being connected with common sense—the sense that can be shared.
Now I have arrived at my subject proper: the part that tricks play in psy-
chic aberrations. In discussing this problem I shall continually speak of the 
“private intelligence” according to which one may attempt, through a per-
sonal, private view of the world, to assert himself and enhance his own sense 
of superiority by injuring that of someone else. “Private intelligence” is at 
work whenever a person tries, unfair­ly, to turn to his own advantage the 
social contributions of another. But here, too, we shall have to add a quali-
fication: the injury inflicted is not deliberately intentional. I should like to 
extend this assertion to the criminal, despite the stress laid by the legal codes 
upon the element of premeditation in crime. Since it is not in keeping with 
the criminal’s style of life to make a distinc­tion between good and evil, we 
must adhere to the conviction that he simply represents a mode of living that 
goes its private ways in order to attain its ends by means which to him seem 
easier than those that have social value.
But we will begin with other types of aberration in which an intent to 
injure is out of the question. Here we are con­fronted with a style of life that 
refuses to be changed as long as the person con­cerned fails to realize that 
he is in the snare of a trick. To clarify this point I shall describe a few cases, 
divested of their factual circumstances. Take, for instance, a difficult child, 
who wishes to make himself the center of attention without earning this 
position by his con­tributions; he is not yet convinced that he can win atten-
tion and recognition by contibuting his share, and is deluded into believing 
that he can meet the requirements of life only by being pampered. If you 
are looking for the quintessence of this child’s behavior, you will find that 

236	
Daniel Eckstein
it consists in his use of a trick—a trick, by which he is at­tempting to achieve 
his purpose by evading reason. Every person must decide in favor of one or 
the other—either the tricks of his individual style, or the spirit of comminity. 
We are citing extreme cases here, but we must not forget that between the 
extremes lie thousands of variations; and we must always be prepared to find 
extremely divergent forms of the same phenomenon.
By way of a brief general diagnosis, we can say that in “bad” children we 
recognize a type that hopes through naughtiness to become the center of 
attention. Such a child does not act according to abstract laws of cause and 
effect, but by direct intuition; he stum­bles upon the trick of getting what 
he wants through naughtiness and con­tinues to use it as long as it works. 
Another example, a boy may be domi­nated by a severe, nagging mother; and 
finally, to avoid similar oppressive situa­tions, he hits upon a trick and says, 
“I’ll cut out women altogether.” And so we are led to the opinion that even 
what we call a “principle” is in reality a trick.
Now let us glance at a case that comes within the province of neurosis. 
Let us suppose that we have a man who has a splendid record of achievement 
behind him. Let us suppose that he is an only child, pampered and burdened 
with hopes and expectations that actu­ally have been fulfilled and attained. 
He is now a successful business man, well-educated, esteemed by his friends. 
But he takes a partner into his firm, a man of great force and energy, who 
begins to outstrip him. Our young man’s purpose in life, his highest ideal, is 
to be the first in everything. He is possessed by a morbid spirit of ambition, 
which is not generally apparent as long as he is on the up-grade. But now 
be­cause of his new business relationship he is confronted with an obstacle. 
At first he falls into a state of mental ten­sion; he stops short, and hesitates 
to proceed in his usual way for fear the outcome might be against him. This 
process is not conscious, but intuitional. He senses it in his physical condi-
tion and in his daily experiences. His agita­tion increases. He begins to suffer 
from insomnia and a continual feeling of tiredness—all this the result of 
the strain of not finding a way to maintain his high position and of his fear 
of falling from it. But suddenly the man begins to realize that people are 
treating him with unusual delicacy and tactfulness; that they are concerned 
about him and are making allowances for his nervous strain. This gives him 
a feeling of relief, assures him a certain importance, and helps him bear up 
more easily under the tension; and, like a clever, cagey lawyer who defers 
the verdict, he post­pones the decision regarding his own potentialities and 
importance. Although he feels insecure, he is actually secure de facto; for 
even if he gives up the race, his own attention, and that of his asso­ciates, 
will remain focussed on his nerv­ous condition and not on the essential 
question of his ability and capacities. He will, by the trick of “nervousness,” 

	
	
Trick and Neurosis	
237
have maintained his importance and position when he felt himself unable to 
maintain it otherwise.
The puzzle of psychoneurosis has always been the question: What really 
has happened here? In attempting to answer it many people have grasped at 
the idea of an advantage to be gained through illness (“flight into illness”), a 
theory originated by the ingenious Griesinger—which is accepted today by 
many psychologists, but which can be shown to be untenable.
The nervous symptom is not pro­duced by a desire for an advantage attain-
able through illness, but arises from the tension and shock produced when 
the potentially neurotic patient is confronted with a new problem to which he 
does not feel equal. This would not constitute a neurosis. A neurosis begins 
a step farther on, when the individual affected begins to make use of this 
tension and the resultant symptoms as a trick—not deliberately, it must be 
understood, but as an element in his general life-process—in order to evade a 
difficulty and produce the illusion of being able to overcome it. The impulse 
to obviate the nervous symptom is wanting.
The question whether such a person enjoys a feeling of happiness, a sense 
of advantage gained through illness, is naive. He would be glad to give up his 
neurotic symptom—we must give the patient that much credit. But his work 
is cut out for him: in order to maintain his prestige and self-esteem he must 
evade the decision regarding his ability, for fear he will be shown to be worth-
less—and that no human being can endure. This means that he must not 
strengthen the impulse to rid him­self of his symptoms even though he suffers 
from them. They are useful to him in aiding him to postpone the test he fears. 
He lacks this impulse to rid himself of his symptoms because he is setting 
out on a course which is incom­patible with common sense and com­munity 
feeling. He is on the way to eluding his problem, not solving it. The manner 
in which he does this, the results of the strain that we observe in him—these 
evidence his personal style of life revealed in his effort to postpone a decision.
There are innumerable styles of life, hence the many divergent forms of 
neurosis. But a neurosis is produced only when a person stabilizes the tension 
and excitement that arise from a situa­tion in order to give the appearance of 
getting through it more successfully. The neurosis is the holding on to the 
shock-effects, the symptoms.
And now let us consider a case of compulsion neurosis. A married woman, 
who has always been a little morose and irritable, is living in moder­ate cir-
cumstances. She has a good husband, but a child that causes her considerable 
difficulty. The family finances are more limited than they once were, and she 
is depressed because she has to do the housework. Let us remember that, as 
the oldest child in the family, she was forced by her mother to stay at home 
and look after the other children. From early childhood on she had literally 

238	
Daniel Eckstein
cursed her fate, using strong language; and now she has a whole diction-
ary full of profanity at her dis­posal. After her husband’s financial failure, 
this woman is forced to live in a very poor district, and her time is taken 
up, as it had been in her child­hood, with housekeeping and the care of her 
child. Suddenly she becomes obsessed with the idea that she is going to cut off 
someone’s head. She is terri­fied and goes to a psychiatrist.
Anyone who has followed my narra­tive can see how this symptom was 
produced. Ever since she was a child the woman had been accustomed, 
when­ever a difficult situation arose, to follow up the painful excitement with 
a stream of profanity dictated by a striving for a seeming superiority. She 
learned this as a child; and now, whenever such a situation arises, she simply 
overflows with invective. But this, in itself, would not be a neurosis. If it were, 
we should have to consider every Viennese cabman an obsessional neurotic. 
The neurosis is produced when the woman affirms, “I’m at the end of my 
tether; these thoughts are a torment, and someone must help me”—when she 
cries over herself. Here the neurosis begins. To wish someone death, suffer-
ing, defile­ment is the mildest sort of an attack. The neurosis did not begin 
until the woman, through her obsession elevated herself to a rank of impor-
tance and dignity; when she began to turn it to her advantage, to utilize it 
for the bet­terment of her situation; when she allowed herself to give way to 
these grisly thoughts whenever anything hap­pened that did not please her, 
and came to expect others to grant her a special indulgence for the exertion 
of pelting them with abuse.
And we cannot overlook the fact that she actually obtained these indul-
gences. She let her housework slide, put her child into a children’s home, and 
in­sisted on circulating in good society, on dressing better, and so on. She 
achieved all this; but she could preserve her advantageous position only so 
long as she continued to raise a very common, vulgar practice—the use of 
profanity—to a place of importance; so long as she turned her swearing to 
good advantage. Thus she employed a trick, the obsession; though she really 
was not conscious that she was using it as a device.
And now another case—this time one in which sexuality is turned into a 
trick. In all instances of sexual perversion, it must be realized, we have to do 
with a trick: a strategem to evade normal sexual life and to snap one’s fingers 
at common sense and community feeling.
A young man, extremely pampered, has been under the constant surveil-
lance of his father. The father was kind, but a little too critical; yet the son 
had great respect for him. The father, however, could not help reproaching 
the young man for incompetency. The son was not on good terms with his 
mother. Moreover, he had an older sister who had turned out splendidly, and 
her suc­cess seemed to him a handicap. With his character formed in this 
pattern—too much respect for his father, too great a fear of women—the 

	
	
Trick and Neurosis	
239
boy reached an age when the sexual impulse called for satisfaction. Since 
his father had robbed him of all self-confidence, he naturally could not rely 
on himself in love—especially since his mother and his sister had exerted 
an injurious influ­ence on him from the other side. We can guess what form 
of sexuality he would adopt. In the urgency of his desire, and with his fear 
of life, he will be thrown on his own resources, and will have to be content 
with self-gratifi­cation. There are thousands of varia­tions of this mistaken 
way of attempting to solve the problem of love. Individuals who make such 
mistaken attempts ap­proach the problem as if love were a task for only one 
person when it is really a task for two.
The boy arrives at puberty; yet he shows no signs of interest in girls. A 
great many boys are in this predicament, and their only possible means of 
sexual satisfaction is auto-eroticism. But onan­ism is not neurotic; it is a sim-
ple act, in the practice of which there is no implication of neurosis. The neu-
rosis does not begin until the individual learns the trick of making a strength 
out of a weakness and stabilizes the process with a definite end in view. Later 
on we find the young man in this very situation. In his feeling of inse­curity he 
must elude his sense of inferi­ority and assert his self-importance. So he prac-
tices masturbation in such a way as to attract attention to himself. He spends 
whole nights in coffee-houses, in the company of women, but indulging only 
in auto-eroticism, until people finally realize what he is doing. And now his 
family and associates have to grant him a place of importance, be­cause they 
feel they must attempt to reform him. He has forced them to it by the trick of 
turning to his advantage the conduct to which his style of life impelled him.
His stock rises. Now his father has nothing more important to worry about 
than his son. The boy relieves himself of all the pressure formerly brought to 
bear upon him. His mother and sister treat him nicely. These are the external 
influences generally brought into play when a family attempts to overcome a 
trick of this sort in one of its members. But do you believe that this does any 
good ? No. The boy rightly fears that, if he changes himself, if he gives up his 
symptoms, he will no longer be able to enforce this pampering and solicitous­
ness. As long as he sticks to his old ways he can feel certain that the others 
will tag after him; and there is little danger of anyone’s hitting upon the idea 
of giving him up and letting him ruin himself if he so chooses. He is afraid 
that he could accomplish nothing, could not amount to anything, through 
the normal social channels of contribu­tion and co-operation. The only way 
to change him is to give him new courage to try the useful social channels; he 
will be able to see through his old delu­sions and errors once he is made to see 
through the trick that he has employed.
And now I have arrived at the last point of my discussion. These all are 
matters that lie close to the root of the human psyche. We need not make 
lengthy reference to diplomacy and politics in this connection. The best 

240	
Daniel Eckstein
diplomat is the one who turns the best trick. The quality of trickiness, the use 
of device, plays an unbelievably impor­tant role in our lives. In neurosis the 
trick is always at some odds with com­mon sense and is employed according 
to the particular life style of the indi­vidual. Since the person employing the 
trick has eyes only for his own weakness and his distressing symptom and 
fails to see the larger context of his trouble, he cannot by himself be expected 
to rid himself of his symptom. What must be done is to help him see things 
in their true relationships and understand that he is using a trick, making 
an excuse, seeking relief from a situation which he fears and maintaining a 
prestige and position that he believes he can secure in no other way.
Now we can readily see how analysis through the methods of Individual 
Psychology achieves its result. It shows the individual his trick and convinces 
him that he has employed this trick without knowing it. It shows him that 
he has been utilizing symptoms in an attempt to maintain his high position 
and to avoid a “defeat.” It makes him realize that, in his feeling of insecurity, 
the earliest impressions of his childhood have led him to the use of the trick. 
And it shows him that his insecurity is not real; that childhood impressions 
are not an adequate foundation on which to build a whole life. It throws light 
upon his life-style and makes him see how, in his desire for relief, he has 
attempted to play tricks on life.
With that accomplished the task of the Individual Psychologist is well 
under way, even though he may not at once succeed in convincing the patient, 
who may then confidently be left to his own thoughts and reflection. And if 
he asks, “What is going to become of me?” you can answer: “Go on using 
your trick if you honestly think that it marks the limit of your powers. At 
the best you will be deceiving yourself; at the worst, deceiving others; but in 
no case will it be a neurosis any longer. For neurosis is the use of psychical 
impulses and of symptoms for the purpose of ex­ploiting others by means of a 
trick—but without understanding that the symptoms are being so used. But 
now you understand.”
No therapist can say, with truth, “The patient understood everything, but he 
still has his symptoms.” If a therapist says this, he has not done enough. He has 
not seen through the whole trick nor brought the patient to see through it. The 
point is always to illuminate the field of vision until you yourself see the con-
nections clearly enough to con­vince the patient and make him see them too.
It is the use of trick whenever a person commits suicide to elude the press-
ing duties of life; when an individual be­comes a sexual pervert to avoid 
the difficulty of fulfilling the normal social requirement of communal life; 
when­ever a problem child attempts to secure advantages through unsocial 
behavior; or when a criminal so underestimates the importance of others 
that he does not hesitate to take the shorter route of acquiring something that 
belongs to someone else.

	
	
Trick and Neurosis	
241
We must not forget that tricks play a most prominent and important part 
in the evolution of mankind. The element of trickiness, the use of device, 
explains, for instance, what others have called intuition or the faculty of 
guessing. Returning to our point of departure, we can easily show that the 
trick of guess­ing is indispensable to evolution and progress since everything 
that lives really receives nothing but sensations and impressions, without 
ever grasping clearly what lies behind impressions; for life is activated by the 
physical and can never be quite certain of the meta­physical.


243
19
Nervous Insomnia
Paul R. Rasmussen and Kevin P. Moore
Adler begins this 1914 paper with the following statement: “A description of the 
symptoms of insomnia will not give any essentially new information” (p. 163). 
Now, 96 years later, in reference to Adler’s report, we come to the same general 
conclusion; there is, essentially, no new information to report. Adler was clearly 
ahead of his time and we might argue, certainly in the case of insomnia, we are 
still waiting for others to catch up. But, such a claim may be presumptive. There 
is no doubt that research conducted into the nature of insomnia over the last 96 
years has led to a more complete and detailed understanding of this pervasive 
condition. As an introduction to this 1914 report, we will summarize our sense of 
Adler’s contribution, putting our own spin on the ideas, and then compare these 
ideas to some of the most recent findings from the contemporary literature.
At the core of Adler’s argument is the belief that the symptoms of insomnia 
reveal efforts by the afflicted individual to manage life challenges and crises; or 
they serve to protect the individual from failures brought about by lack of abil-
ity, lack of effort, or lack of opportunity for success—any of which would reveal 
the individual’s basic inferiority fears. Adler makes his argument convincingly . 
. . at least to those couched in the holistic and teleologically oriented model pre-
sented by Adler. To those not grounded or well versed in the model, the ideas may 
appear superficial (e.g., failing to understand the biological complexity of insom-
nia), accusatorial (e.g., suggesting an intentional manipulation by the “sufferer”), 
or fanciful (e.g., referring to an outdated concept of unconscious influences). 
Arguing Adler’s point to the first group is preaching to the choir. Convincing 
the second group is more difficult. However, to those willing to suspend precon-
ceived notions, Adler’s perspective can be quite accessible.
We all do what works. This is a basic tenet of the Adlerian approach to under-
standing the human experience. As a function of conditioning, nonverbal learn-
ing, and adaptive regulatory mechanisms, which are not immediately accessible 
to conscious awareness, we humans strive to maximize the quality of our experi-
ences. This is the teleological model. The notion of “maximal experience” sug-
gests that we are oriented toward enhancing outcomes—referred to by Adler as a 

244	
Paul R. Rasmussen and Kevin P. Moore
“felt plus”—and oriented to move away from (i.e., resolve) aversive states, which 
can include physical threats, integrity threats, or simply comfort threats—states 
referred to by Adler as “felt minus.” The validity of this perspective is supported by 
considering the basic premises of models in evolutionary psychology (see Millon, 
1990). Thus, we live our lives moving toward perceived enhancements and away 
from disturbing experiences. As a function of our experiences, we have devel-
oped strategies that “work,” which means they give each individual some sense 
of control over the events in life that he or she finds desirable and those he or 
she finds threatening. These factors can be sufficiently explained by considering 
basic learning principles associated with classical, operant, and vicarious mod-
els of learning. The “sense” that the individual develops is explained in cognitive 
theory as “schemes” and in Adlerian psychology as “private logic.” While the two 
concepts might appear interchangeable, subtle difference in the theories render 
them unique. Schemes are generally referred to as “the organizational processes 
that provide a guiding frame of reference for how events will be interpreted and 
processed relative to situational demands” (Rasmussen, 2005, p. 22). Private logic 
refers to how one has come to interpret situations relative to one’s desire to maxi-
mize outcomes. Therefore, private logic is more consistent with the understanding 
of goals than are schemes—at least as they are generally described. Thus, as the 
result of experiences early in life, the individual has determined what he or she 
likes and what he or she does not like, and has subsequently developed strategies 
for bringing about those desired outcomes. Taken together, these qualities, along 
with the compelling and validating role of emotion, come to define an individual’s 
style of life—lifestyle. The notion of lifestyle is similar to the concept of personal-
ity, yet the idea of lifestyle better captures the goal orientation of the individual.
With this basic foundation, we can talk about the case of insomnia. Let us 
begin this discussion with a simple description of the nature and consequences 
of insomnia. First, the person, despite efforts to induce sleep, which may include 
various forms of distraction (counting, music, podcasts, etc.), either cannot fall 
asleep or cannot maintain sleep, thereby decreasing the hours of restorative sleep 
attained and impairing maximal functioning. Of course, this presumes that 
the individual is required by circumstance to awaken at a particular time in the 
morning. It is probably the case that those who do not need to get up are not as 
impaired by their sleep onset difficulties as are those who do need to get up in 
the morning. The second problem, related to the first, is that the individual either 
cannot stay awake during the day or must endure the consequences of subopti-
mal performance secondary to one’s fatigue.
Considering the sleep onset difficulties, except in the case of primary insom-
nia, which is less common and more typically the result of various metabolic 
conditions rather than a psychological problem (Morin, 2010), the problem typi-
cally emerges when the issues contemplated while trying to sleep are issues that 
are not readily resolved and are of such importance to the person to be obsessive. 

	
	
Nervous Insomnia	
245
Therefore anxiety frequently accompanies, and often precedes, cases of insomnia 
(Ebben & Spielman, 2009). Worry tends to occupy an individual’s mind anytime 
that individual is not forced by some external saliency to attend to something else. 
Also, the issues are typically those that have some intensity (are important to the 
person’s physical or psychological welfare) and urgency (need quick resolution).
What is important to consider at this juncture is why the issue or issues are 
of such urgency and intensity and are not readily resolved. This brings into the 
equation a variety of idiosyncratic factors. The issue may include an outcome 
that, if sought, while difficult to attain, would provide worth validation for an 
individual struggling with inferiority feelings or it may reflect a sense of obliga-
tion and burden that the individual dreads. While the specific parameters for the 
individual may differ, we can generalize the nature of the problems. In one case, 
the problems can be so great that they cannot be ignored and must be resolved. 
In these cases, most individuals would likely experience some degree of distress 
and subsequent insomnia. This can be explained by the physiological parameters 
of obsessional thought and sleeplessness. In fact, excessive worry has been shown 
to be an accurate predictor for the symptoms of insomnia (Kallestad, Hansen, 
Langsrud, Hjemdal, & Stiles, 2010). The onset of sleep requires a reduction in 
residual tension in the body, which requires a quieting of the mind. When the 
mind remains active, particularly with distressing thoughts, the body is not able 
to reduce the body tension sufficiently to allow the physical processes of sleep 
to take over. Insomnia disrupts sleep either by creating a state of physical and 
mental hyperarousal or by disrupting the non-REM/REM sleep cycle. Physical 
arousal can be triggered by the activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adre-
nal axis responding to anxiety. This results in the secretion of cortisol as well 
as epinephrine and norepinephrine, excitatory neurotransmitters that prevent 
sleep onset by preventing the body from relaxing (Perlis, Gehrman, Pigeon, 
Findley, & Drummond, 2009). Additionally, patients presenting with insomnia 
have been shown to spend significantly less time in restful REM sleep than their 
non-insomniac counterparts (Feige et al., 2008) and this contributes to daytime 
drowsiness. In some cases, life demands are such that they are not resolved dur-
ing the day and are brought to the bedroom and occupy the mind at a time when 
it would be better that the mind not be so occupied.
In other cases, situations that might not be universally or culturally defined as 
distressing may be disturbing to the individual because they hold some impor-
tance to that individual. For instance, the individual may be distressed about a 
personal, financial, or job crisis. It may be that the problem (or problems) occu-
pying the individual’s mind is beyond his or her control; thus resolution is not 
immediately available. Common here would be those situations that require 
some specific response, action, or change in another person or group of individu-
als. Because the situation is one of urgency and intensity for the individual, the 
mind becomes occupied, anxiety emerges, and insomnia ensues.

246	
Paul R. Rasmussen and Kevin P. Moore
In some situations, the circumstance occupying the individual’s thoughts 
might relate to personal dreams or expectations, or the expectations of others, 
which may include expectations of quality performance at some task by the 
sleep-deprived individual. The individual may believe that he or she does not 
possess the skills necessary for success (and is unwilling to admit it and face 
the consequences) or does not desire (whether admitted or not) to put forth the 
effort necessary for success, this latter possibility being common among those 
who as children failed to develop the psychological muscle necessary for success-
ful adulthood. Psychological muscle (Walton, 1980) refers to the ability to endure 
the hardships and sacrifices necessary for most successes.
In any of these situations, the person’s mind is going to become occupied 
when not constrained by external demands. That the person will often have these 
thoughts during wakeful hours when not immediately occupied by external con-
strains underscores the urgency and intensity of the issue for that individual. The 
mind will orient itself to the most pressing issues in the individual’s life when 
not constrained by the demands of other circumstances. Of course for some, the 
ability to deny and resist the pressure is more present and may not disrupt sleep 
onset; for others, the realities of the life challenges are realized in hidden forms. 
For these individuals, the consideration of dreams that may or may not disrupt 
sleep may be important as they might reveal current issues that are not a part of 
the individual’s conscious processes.
Understanding the sources of the problem is not too challenging. Determining 
the benefit of the problem is somewhat more difficult; however, it is far from 
beyond an available grasp. To be sure, for some facing insomnia, benefits may not 
occur. For others, benefits may emerge and sustain the difficulties. It is typically 
during the daytime hours that one is faced with the realities of most life chal-
lenges. Unless the individual has determined a resolution, or external realities are 
changed in some way, the stress during the day is less the result of obsessional, 
evening ruminations and is more direct. What is the person to do when faced 
with the crisis? One option is to do what needs to be done for resolution! This 
would appear simple enough; however, for those reasons previously mentioned 
(e.g., lack of perceived skills, unwillingness to put forth necessary effort, lack of 
beneficial options), resolution may not be so “immediately” achievable. To have 
success and resolve the issue, it may be necessary for others to accommodate the 
sleepless one’s desires (e.g., not expect him or her to fulfill an agreement or expec-
tation or to provide critical assistance) and those others may not be inclined to 
make those accommodations. The sleepless one may have to perform at a level 
beyond his or her perceived abilities or may have to admit personal inadequacies 
and then be forced to face the self-esteem- and career-damaging consequences 
associated with such an admission; or he or she may have to sacrifice engagement 
in more appealing activities (e.g., recreational activities) to meet the obligation. 
While asserting more effort or acknowledging inadequacies would be better in 

	
	
Nervous Insomnia	
247
the long run, doing so is associated with unpleasant, “immediate” consequences 
that one would want to avoid if possible. And here we find a secondary benefit 
of insomnia. Via the insomnia the individual is able to derive relative resolution 
of life challenges and is able to manage, albeit ineffectively, the consequences of 
one’s lifestyle and associated choices. For these individuals, via the insomnia, 
they are able to avoid meeting critical life-task obligations (related to work and 
to social and intimate relationships). Unfortunately, the benefit is not optimal 
and is associated with many unpleasant consequences—most notably anxiety, 
anguish, depression, sleeplessness, and task failure (Peterson, Rumble, & Benca, 
2008), all of which function to exacerbate the cycle of sleeplessness and daytime 
drowsiness and various personal and interpersonal failures. For instance, by giv-
ing into one’s drowsiness and taking naps during the day (which may suggest the 
emergence of depressive symptoms), the individual successfully escapes imme-
diate task demands and, for a period, avoids the consequences of task failure. In 
addition, there may be others willing to assist the individual and even resolve 
the crisis for him or her or take the responsibility for it. This would then serve to 
reinforce insomnia and increases the likelihood of future episodes of insomnia. 
To be sure, avoiding stress and failure and getting others to assist can be an effec-
tive resolution, yet if the individual experiences insomnia each time he or she is 
confronted with an unpleasant issue, rescue may become less reliable as others 
begin developing resentments and refuse to assist. Further, by way of the daytime 
naps, the individual fulfills his or her sleep deficit and, as Adler suggests, is not 
sleep deprived.
This benefit of insomnia emerges as the individual is able to elicit sympathy and 
accommodations from others. The fact is that humans have a natural tendency to 
help those in an expressed state of need. The help that might be provided could be 
any of many possible options; the critical point is that another’s distress elicits in 
most others feelings of concern, compassion, or perhaps guilt if one feels person-
ally responsible for the distress of the other. As a result of our inherent capacity 
for compassion, nurturance, and guilt, the distress experienced and expressed by 
others elicits our sympathies and often our accommodations, and this sets the 
foundation for the usefulness of insomnia. If, for instance, an individual is in a 
relationship, he or she can elicit sympathy and various forms of accommodation 
from a relationship partner as an outcome of his or her sleep troubles. Further, if 
the individual him- or herself feels some degree of guilt for his or her relationship 
shortcomings, that person is able to rationalize his or her failures by ascribing 
them to insomnia rather than to his or her unwillingness to meet or negotiate 
relationship goals or expectations. For example, the spouse who fails to fall asleep 
at night while lying next to his or her partner may be obsessing over the failure 
of the relationship, while failing to accept his or her partner’s disengagement or 
resentments or his or her need to be personally more committed to the success of 
the relationship. Via the sleeplessness and subsequent drowsiness he or she is able 

248	
Paul R. Rasmussen and Kevin P. Moore
to advertise his or her state of dissatisfaction with the relationship without hav-
ing to be assertive and subsequently run the risk of eliciting a conflict or hearing 
feedback that is hurtful and/or discouraging.
The good news for the insomniac is that the prognosis for treating an insom-
niac improves when, as Adler suggests, the individual accepts responsibility for 
his or her role in perpetuating the disorder. Specifically, what is it about the indi-
vidual’s lifestyle and current life circumstance that is creating the opportunity 
for insomnia? While there may be limits on how the circumstance can change, 
there are most typically aspects of the person’s lifestyle and private logic that can 
be altered. Typically, this will include a renewed orientation to the circumstance 
or a renewed stance toward the challenges faced. When the individual is able to 
derive some sense of control over the situation prompting the sleeplessness, the 
obsessive thoughts are lessened and the natural process of sleep is able to return. 
Recent reports of effective strategies fit well an Adlerian perspective. For instance, 
Kaplan, Talbot, and Harvey (2009) discuss safety behaviors, suggesting that the 
insomnia dwells on threat and the need for safety. Adler argued that successful 
treatment cannot be achieved without accepting responsibility for the disorder 
and consciously changing one’s own maladaptive behaviors and confronting the 
challenges that life provides. In other words, one must decrease the focus on safety 
behaviors and be willing to meet challenges, which can at times be daunting. This 
is consistent with findings that indicate the shortcomings of purely physiological 
treatments for insomnia (Morin, 2010), because in such a situation the onus is on 
the physician and the patient resumes a state of irresponsibility. The challenge to 
those struggling with insomnia is to face life, however difficult it may be at times.
As a final point, humans periodically face significant challenges and crises 
and immediate solutions are not readily available. Adler recognized the social 
embeddedness of each person, understanding that we need one another. In the 
face of stress, humans need to reach out to those who can provide emotional 
support and practical assistance. Often those struggling to sleep are hesitant to 
seek assistance and this perpetuates the sleep disturbances by preventing effec-
tive solutions. With the help of others, one is able to face and manage challenges 
contributing to insomnia.
References
Ebben, M. R., & Spielman, A. J. (2009). Non-pharmacological treatments for insomnia. 
Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 32, 244–254.
Feige, B., Al-Shajlaw, A., Nissen, C., Voderholzer, U., Hornyak, M., Spiegelhalder, K., 
Kloepfer, C., Perlis, M., & Riemann, D. (2008). Does REM sleep contribute to subjec-
tive wake time in primary insomnia? A comparison of polysomnographic and sub-
jective sleep in 100 patients. Journal of Sleep Research, 17, 180–190.
Kaplan, K. A., Talbot, L. S., & Harvey, A. G. (2009). Cognitive mechanisms in chronic 
insomnia: Processes and prospects. Sleep Medicine Clinics, 4, 541–548.

	
	
Nervous Insomnia	
249
Millon, T. (1990). Toward a new personology: An evolutionary model. New York: John Wiley 
& Sons.
Milner, C. E., & Belicki, K. (2010). Assessment and treatment of insomnia in adults: A guide 
for clinicians. Journal of Counseling & Development, 88, 236–244.
Morin, C. M. (2010). Chronic insomnia: Recent advances and innovations in treatment 
developments and dissemination. Canadian Psychology, 51, 31–39.
Kallestad, H., Hansen, B., Langsrud, K., Hjemdal, O., & Stiles, T. C. (2010). Psychometric 
properties and the predictive validity of the insomnia daytime worry scale: A pilot 
study. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 39, 150–157.
Perlis, M., Gehrman, P., Pigeon, W. R., Findley, J., & Drummon, S. (2009). Neurobiologic 
mechanisms in chronic insomnia. Sleep Medicine Clinics, 4, 549–558.
Peterson, M. J., Rumble, M. E., & Benca, R. M. (2009). Insomnia and psychiatric disorders. 
Psychiatric Annals, 38, 597–605.
Rasmussen, P. R. (2005). Personality-guided cognitive behavior therapy. Washington: 
American Psychological Association.
Walton, F. X. (1980). Winning teenagers over in home and school: A manual for parents, 
teachers, counselors, and principals. Columbia, SC: Adlerian Child Care Books.

250	
Paul R. Rasmussen and Kevin P. Moore
Nervous Insomnia42
Alfred Adler
A description of the symptoms of insomnia will not give any essentially new 
information. The complaint of the patient will refer either to decreased dura-
tion and insufficient depth of the sleeping state or to the time of wakefulness. 
The main emphasis, and it seems rather trite to mention it, always falls on the 
insufficient rest and its resultant tiredness and inability to work.
For the sake of accuracy let me state that quite a number of patients com-
plain of the same fact (i.e. tired­ness, etc.), although enjoying undisturbed or 
even more than normally lengthened slumber.
The nature of the illness of which insomnia is a symptom can be easily 
circumscribed. There is no psychic disease and no accompanying group of 
symptoms in which this suffering is not to be found either of long-standing 
or intermittent. The most serious forms of psychic diseases, the psychoses, 
are generally heralded by exceptionally severe types of insomnia.
The attitude of the patient to his symptoms is inter­esting. He markedly 
stresses the tormenting nature of his disease and the numerous remedies 
taken against it which are always of no avail. One man spent half the night 
ardently trying to conjure up sleep, while another did not retire till past 
midnight in order to fall asleep from extreme tiredness. Others repeatedly 
attempt to remove even the gentlest noises or count up to one thousand a 
number of times, occupy them­selves with long trains of thought or experi-
ment and changing from one position to another until day­break.
In some instances—in milder forms of insomnia—sleeping rules are 
formulated and adhered to. In one case sleep could be obtained only if the 
patient drank some alcoholic beverage, took some bromide; if he ate a little or 
a good deal, early or late at night; after his card-game; if he had company or 
was alone; had taken neither black coffee nor tea; or on the contrary imbibed 
one of these drinks. The not infrequent anti­thetic nature of the conditions 
propitious for sleeping is a striking fact; all the more so because a fairly large 
number of explanations are given for their attitudes, some insisting that 
sexual intercourse is a well-proved expedient, others that on the contrary, 
abstinence is.
It is easier to snatch an afternoon sleep, but here too there are a series 
of conditions (“if no one disturbs me,” “if I can retire at the proper time,” 
“immediately after eating,” etc.). It may, on the other hand, tire a person or 
cause headache or drowsiness.
42	Translated by P. Radin.

	
	
Nervous Insomnia	
251
If we look over the descriptions given by the patients, we get the impression 
not only of being in the presence of sick people—especially if we consciously 
fix our atten­tion upon the effect of the disturbance—but of individuals with 
diminished, increased or nullified capacities for work, of there being some 
obstacle in life for which they lack all sense of responsibility.
For the sake of simplicity let us dismiss older examples where alcoholic 
intemperance or misuse of narcotics have gained control over the patient and 
engendered new symptoms and obstacles. The examina­tion of insomnia due 
to organic causes does likewise not fall within the compass of this work.
It deserves to be mentioned, however, that frequent use of narcotics aids 
the patient in gaining the same excuse for increased difficulty of his work as 
does insomnia. He will get up later, suffer from a feeling of drowsiness, lack 
of concentration, and waste, as a rule, a good part of the day trying to recu-
perate from his slumber.
The “harmless methods” on the other hand, have a bad reputation. They 
either are only efficacious at the beginning of the treatment or not at all. They 
work initially with those patients who, in all walks of life, are characteristi-
cally known by their external obedience and good-natured amiability. The 
stopping of a successful cure always shows the patient’s attitude to the new 
treatment, as if he wished to demonstrate the uselessness of the physician’s 
endeavours. More obstinate and unwilling neurotics occasionally begin the 
treatment by insomnia and try to put the blame upon the physician. Generally 
during their anamnesis we discover that they have on past occasions, like-
wise” employed insomnia as a means and as a sign of increased aggravation 
of their condition, in order thus to be able to demand that they be spared 
certain work and to be able to force their own will upon other people.
All that we can infer from the patient’s descriptions, or all we ourselves 
can feel intuitively, indicates the pronounced estimation in which sleep is 
held. No physician will underestimate the importance of sleep but those 
who obtrusively force into the foreground self-understood facts should be 
asked the object of their procedure. What, in the long run, is meant by this 
marked stressing of sleep, and what here manifests itself definitely enough, is 
this—that the patient demands recognition of his difficult position. For only 
if this acquiescence is obtained will he be excused from respon­sibility in his 
mistakes of life and be permitted to attach double importance to his success.
If, one follows the psychic trial of strength lead­ing to the arrangement of 
insomnia which develops later into a weapon and protection for the threat-
ened personality-feeling, we soon learn to understand how insomnia has 
taken its proper place in connection with the endangered situation of the 
patient. The feeling of the applicability of the means (insomnia) used the 
patient obtains from experiences either of his own or others, or from the 
effect of the suffering inflicted upon his environ­ment and upon himself. We 

252	
Paul R. Rasmussen and Kevin P. Moore
should not be surprised then, if the physician or any other method adopted, 
are frequently designed to serve no other purpose but that of confirmation, 
i.e. as long as the psychic situation of the patient is unknown and remains 
unchanged.
Here it is where Individual-Psychology can set in. Its therapeutic purpose 
should be that of bringing the patient to the realization of the true nature of 
the inter­connections of his symptoms and his giving up of his secret desire 
of not being held responsible for his plans. He will be impelled to assume 
responsibility, to take definite action or to renunciation, as soon as he 
acknow­ledges to himself and the physician that his insomnia is a means to 
an end, and when he refuses to see any mysterious destiny in it. Its coinci-
dence with other nervous symptoms such as compulsion and doubt, in so far 
as their technical employment in the neurosis is concerned, is clearly visible.
We are quite clear now as to the type of person who will develop the symp-
tom of insomnia and we can describe him to the patient with astounding 
accuracy. Such a type exhibits lack of faith in his own powers and an ambi-
tious personal goal. Traits like the over­valuation of success and of the dif-
ficulties of life, of a certain unwillingness to face life, will never be found 
missing any more than the hesitating attitude and the fear of making deci-
sions. Generally the minor means and artifices of the neurotic character 
are clearly mani­fested, such as pedantry, depreciating tendency and lust for 
domination. Occasionally the tendency to self­-depreciation appears, as in the 
hypochondriac and melancholic attitude. In short, insomnia may represent 
an important connecting link in the chain of every neurotic’s method of life.
Speedy success in treatment is not to be obtained with any certainty. If 
such a success is imperatively required it is possibly best accomplished by 
informing the patient directly and tactfully, that insomnia is a favourable 
sign of a curable psychic disease. The next step would be to endeavour, by 
showing great interest, to discover the nature of the patient’s thoughts at 
night and to pay no further attention to the insomnia. Occasionally insom-
nia is then displaced by a very deep sleep extending far into the day—which, 
like insomnia, prevents him from accomplishing his task.
The patient’s thoughts during his sleepless hours are, in my opinion, of 
great significance from two aspects. They are either a method of remain-
ing awake or contain the basis of the personally conceived psychic difficulty 
for whose sake insomnia has been called into existence. The latter I shall 
discuss in the following chapter, “Individual-psychological Conclusions on 
Sleep Dis­turbances.” I always detected the following meaning in the train of 
thoughts of a sleepless person, obtaining some object without incurring any 
responsibility, other­wise either apparently unattainable or attainable only by 
the employment of one’s whole personality and conscious responsibility. This 
meaning was frequently to be read “between the lines,” at other times to be 

	
	
Nervous Insomnia	
253
inferred as the purpose, but occasionally appeared quite clearly from the 
context. Insomnia thus fits easily into the group of psychic manifestations 
and arrangements that have as their object the construction of a “distance” 
between the imagined goal and the patient, the initia­tion of an “actio in 
distans.”
The task of individual-psychology is to describe this “actio,” to furnish us 
with an understanding of the patient’s attitude to his world and to demon-
strate the connection of insomnia with individual difficulties. The therapeu-
tic and truly valuable part of such a study lies in the fact that it discloses to the 
patient his fictive, misunderstood and logically contradictory leading idea, 
and frees him from the obstinate immobility of thought derived from it. At 
the same time the patient is care­fully forced out of his position of irrespon-
sibility and compelled to accept responsibility even for his un­conscious fic-
tions. That this gradual clarification is to be attempted only with the kindliest 
of attitudes’ on the part of the physician, our school has frequently enough 
emphasized.
The means for engendering insomnia are com­paratively simple and eas-
ily understood as soon as the utility of the symptom has once been demon-
strated. The methods coincide absolutely with those a person would employ 
who purposely desired to be sleepless. To mention only a few: card-playing, 
paying visits or in­viting people to the house; restless movements in bed; 
occupying one’s thoughts with business; thinking of difficulties of all kinds 
and exaggerating them; planning, counting, indulging in phantasies; insis-
tent desire to sleep; counting the strokes of the hour when awake and per-
mitting them to wake one up; falling asleep and permitting one’s self to be 
awakened by a dream or by a pain or fright; getting out of bed and walking 
up and down the room; waking up at an early hour. They are always acts that 
almost anyone would be able to accomplish after some practice if they were at 
all necessary to free him from responsibility. For example, a patient makes up 
his mind to get up early the next morning in order to study for an examina-
tion. He is terribly afraid that his insomnia may interfere with his plan which 
thus proves his sincerity. He wakes up, i.e., wakes up at three in the morning, 
remains sleepless, complains bitterly about his mysterious fate and is thus 
quite freed from any guilt in connection with his examination. Is there any-
one who doubts the possi­bility of waking up at any predetermined hour?
More puzzling is the disturbance of slumber through pain. In my exam-
ples it was always a question of pain in the leg, abdomen, back of the head 
and the back. My explanation of the first is that it is caused by spasmophilic 
susceptibility induced by unconscious but planned over-reaching. The last I 
found in people who were accustomed to inhaling of air and who generally 
had scoliolithic curvature of the spinal column. Incident­ally, these anomalies 
in position play a great role in the symptomology of neuroses and can easily 

254	
Paul R. Rasmussen and Kevin P. Moore
be employed by unconscious tendencies for engendering pain, par­ticularly 
in the group of symptoms connected with neurasthenia and hypochondria. 
Frequently the patient can be lifted out of his fixated susceptibility to pain, 
provided one has a certain degree of luck, by persuading him that he has a 
segmental naevus in his head (a sign of inferiority).43 Subsequent orthopedic 
treatment is im­portant and valuable. Frequently the patient’s carriage tells us 
of the existence of such an interconnection.
Of much rarer occurrence but very illuminating are those instances where 
according to the patient and his family, sleep can be obtained by the patient’s 
allowing his head to hang downwards over the edge of the bed, of making 
movements with the head or striking it against the wall. Many people will 
perhaps regard as less certain. the method adopted by patients with purpose-
ful intensified hyper-sensibility who attempt to prevent every conceivable 
noise or glimmer of light, and being almost inevitably defeated, in view of 
the impossibility of their task, awake up (that being their object).
I shall now give a few examples to illustrate my views. A patient whose 
illness and conscious behaviour was to dominate and annoy his wife, began 
to suffer from insomnia due to the fact that (as he says), the slightest noise 
awoke him. Even the breathing of his sleeping wife annoyed him. The house-
physician thereupon advised him to sleep alone. A painter whose frightful 
conceit prevented him from ever finishing a painting and placing it before the 
public, is attacked at night by spasms in the leg, which compel him to jump 
out of bed and walk up and down his room by the hour. On the following day 
he is, of course, incapable of work. A female patient suffering from agora-
phobia developed in order to dominate her household more effectively,44 was 
nevertheless not able to prevent her husband from going to the tavern in the 
evening. She developed the habit of waking up at night a number of times, 
frightened and groaning, and annoyed her husband to such an extent that 
on the following evening, he became sleepier earlier and came home earlier. 
She thus attained her object. Another patient who was compelled against his 
will to travel occasionally and who in general wished to prove to himself and 
others that illness incapacitated him for his profession, interrupted his sleep 
continually by means of stomach-ache and pains in the back as de­scribed 
above, and slept consequently far into the day, increasing his tiredness and 
consequently his inability to work in the day-time, by taking sleeping potions. 
His condition had hardly improved when he discovered two valuable ideas 
that would in similar fashion, excusably make him incapable of work. He 
found that riding in the morning was very beneficial for his health and he 
43	Cf. my Studie uber Minderwertigkeit von Organen. (Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)
44	Cf. chapter on “Dreams and Dream Interpretation,” in this book. (Original footnote by 
Alfred Adler.)

	
	
Nervous Insomnia	
255
had himself consequently awakened at six o’clock. Never­theless he retired at 
midnight. In order to harden himself for the bad beds in which he slept when 
away from home, he bought a field-bed and slept very poorly until two in the 
morning and then crept into his comfortable bed. In both cases the result 
was inability to work. Another patient wished by conscious exaggeration to 
make his rich relatives shoulder the blame for the bad state of his business. 
Although according to him, the cause of his illness they refused to help him. 
He had learned the trick of pressing his arm, on which he lay when asleep, so 
hard that it would wake him up. Now that in addition to everything else he 
had also become sleepless, the guilt of his relatives was self-evident.
The physiology of sleep has, as its main specific trait, the piling up of ener-
vating materials and the flooding of the blood vessels in the brain. There 
certainly are forms of insomnia caused by primary disturbances of the 
sleep-regulating mechanisms (painful vascular and kidney diseases, psychic 
shocks, etc.). Neurotic insomnia is of an entirely different nature. Like other 
nervous symptoms it helps the nervous expansion tendencies and to a certain 
extent this nervous insomnia forces its way through, irrespective of the physi-
ological con­dition of insomnia.
Appendix
On Positions Assumed in Sleep
The individual-psychological methodology thus shows us that the phenomena 
in sleep are adapted to the individual life-line and as long as these phenomena 
are, according to the superstitions of mankind, regarded as the effects of pow-
erful causes, they are quite removed from the influence of human caprice and 
responsibility. We are convinced, however, that the actual and real founda-
tions for dream-building and the desire for sleep, never manifest themselves 
in an un­diluted physiological manner but that they are always understood by 
the tendency of each individual and utilized and elaborated in the interests of 
an individual’s expansion-tendency. A careful examination based on exten-
sive data will certainly show that the sleeping-posture of a person indicates 
his guiding-line. A few examples follow below. Generally it is possible to tell 
an individual who has been thoroughly analysed by individual-psychology, 
what his sleeping-posture is. The following are a few examples. I respectfully 
invite psychiatrists, neurologists and teachers to increase this list.
	
1.	K. F. sixteen years old, apprentice, suffering from hallucinatory 
confusion. An examination of his sleep-­posture showed that he was 
accustomed to sleep on his side with drawn-up arms, a rather pro-
vocative position. I frequently met him in the day with his arms 
drawn up. His psychic condition showed complete dissatis­faction 

256	
Paul R. Rasmussen and Kevin P. Moore
with his profession. He had wanted to become either a teacher or 
a pilot. When asked whether he knew how he had developed the 
habit of holding his arms drawn up, he stated that that was the way 
in which his favourite teacher M. had always walked. It was this M. 
likewise who had made him think of the idea of becoming a teacher, 
a plan that had to be abandoned owing to the poverty of his parents.
	
	 	
His sleep-posture consequently very clearly indicated hostility to 
his present occupation and was an imitation of Napoleon arrived at 
by the circuitous route of the imitation of the teacher who had the 
same psychical make-up. The obsession of young Kellner, we should 
remember, was that he was destined to be the field-­marshal in the 
attack on Russia, an idea that in the following year was taken up by 
other apprentices.
	
2.	S. suffering from progressive paralysis. In sleep he drew him-
self together covering even his head. From his medical history I 
extracted the following—“No megalomania, apathetic, helpless, 
without initiative.”
Let me in conclusion on the basis of personal obser­vations of sleep-pos-
tures taken by children, again insist upon the great significance their proper 
understanding might have for teaching. 

257
20
Neurotic Hunger Strike
Alan E. Stewart
At slightly less than 700 words, “Neurotic Hunger Strike” is the briefest chapter 
in The Practice and Theory of Individual Psychology (Adler, 1925). This work orig-
inally appeared in Zeitschrift für Individualpsychologie in 1914 under the title of 
“Zur Sitophobie” (“Eating Phobia”) before becoming a chapter in Adler’s (1920) 
Praxis und Theorie. Despite the brevity of this chapter, it effectively conveys the 
Individual Psychological position about the etiology of what would be referred 
to today as an eating disorder, specifically anorexia nervosa. With his custom-
ary directness and emphasis on practical applications, Adler convincingly dis-
cussed the neurotic hunger strike from the perspective of his theory. A synopsis 
is provided below followed by a discussion of the contemporary relevance of the 
“Neurotic Hunger Strike.”
Adler (1925) began the chapter with a rather bold statement that the neurotic 
hunger strike occurs almost invariably in women and usually has its first onset at 
approximately age 17 years. As is characteristic of all neurotic striving that Adler 
described, the person responds to the one-down, felt-minus, or inferior position 
in concrete and self-defeating ways en route to making a dramatic attempt to 
secure a sense of power and safety and, ultimately, belongingness. In the case of 
the hunger strike, young women choose the transaction of eating as a vehicle for 
garnering power. From childhood onward the lesson is learned that eating, along 
with its restriction and regulation, can be used to focus the attention of parents 
and siblings. The parents attend to the woman who is beginning to refuse or 
restrict food for fear of her health. The parents attend to the food to try to make it 
more palatable, and they attend to the atmosphere of the home so that its favor-
able nature may lead to the resumption of eating. Of course, these responses by 
the family are doomed to failure because the hunger strike is pursued as a way 
to gain power.
In this chapter, Adler (1925) discussed restrictive eating behavior (anorexia) 
as well as overeating and purging (bulimia) because the latter also becomes 
a focusing mechanism for giving the young woman some degree of power. If 
the young woman is not sickly, gaunt, and thus unattractive, she may become 

258	
Alan E. Stewart
obese, unhealthy, and thus similarly unappealing. But, the pursuit of power over 
self and especially others remains. Wrapping and concealing the symptom are 
socially recognized rationales that are above reproach, such as a weakened or 
diseased digestive system. Present along with such rationales for restriction of 
eating are fleeting efforts by the young woman to resolve it, which have to fail. As 
Adler (1925) terms it, the to and fro between restrictive eating, binge eating, and 
attempts to resolve both, at one level protect the self and also represent nascent, 
fleeting attempts to engage reality. This result underlies a hesitating attitude and 
a frittering away of time and opportunities. The person attempts to psychologi-
cally stand still while the flow of life moves onward. Thus the position of the per-
son pursuing the hunger strike becomes, I could do__________ or be __________ 
but for my problem with food.
Following the appearance of “Neurotic Hunger Strike,” in 1925, Adler 
(1930) provided a somewhat more lengthy presentation of the topic along with 
a case study in his chapter “The Hunger Strike” in The Pattern of Life. Early 
contributors to the International Journal of Individual Psychology wrote about 
children’s relationships with food, eating, their parents, and the need to obtain 
a sense of power over their social environments (Friedmann, 1937; Grubl, 
1936; Kennleyside, 1937). In addition, contemporary scholars in Individual 
Psychology have addressed very similar themes (e.g., Strauch & Erez, 2009). 
In each of these contributions one can discern the original, core etiologi-
cal and therapeutic principles that appeared originally in “Neurotic Hunger 
Strike.” Overall, 30 theoretical and empirical articles have appeared in Journal 
of Individual Psychology and its predecessors since Adler’s first contribution to 
this topic.
Contemporary scholars working outside of Individual Psychology both echo 
and reinforce Adler’s (1925) original ideas about the development of eating dis-
orders (Altman & Shankman, 2009; Wade et al., 2008; Wilksch & Wade, 2010). 
Specifically, using a variety of modern psychological and biologically based 
research methods, these researchers have found temperament risk factors in 
young women that predispose them to the development of an eating disorder. 
These risk factors include striving for perfectionism, a higher need for order and 
control, and a heightened sensitivity to praise and reward (Wade et al., 2008). 
These researchers also provide evidence from twin studies that some of the tem-
peramental risk factors are biologically based while others emerge from psy-
chosocial origins. The consistency of such contemporary perspectives on the 
etiology of eating disorders with the Individual Psychological perspective that 
Adler articulated some 83 years earlier illustrates the prescience of Adler’s theory 
and methods. Such observations also provide an impetus for contemporary clini-
cians and researchers to consult the works of Adler and other clinician-scholars 
within Individual Psychology for the valuable and timeless insights that they may 
provide.

	
	
Neurotic Hunger Strike	
259
References
Adler, A. (1925). The practice and theory of Individual Psychology. London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul.
Adler, A. (1930). The pattern of life. New York: Cosmopolitan Book Corp.
Altman, S. E., & Shankman, S. A. (2009). What is the association between obsessive-com-
pulsive disorder and eating disorders? Clinical Psychology Review, 29, 638–646.
Friedmann, A. (1937). Is your child a fussy eater? International Journal of Individual 
Psychology, 3, 46–47.
Grubl, M. A. (1936). A case of nervous vomiting. International Journal of Individual 
Psychology, 2, 105–109.
Kennleyside, M. C. (1937). Masculine protest by feminine methods. International Journal of 
Individual Psychology, 3, 171–178.
Strauch, M., & Erez, M. (2009). The restrictive personality: Anorexia nervosa and Adlerian 
life tasks. Journal of Individual Psychology, 65, 203–211.
Wade, T. D., Tiggemann, M., Bulik, C. M., Fairburn, C. G., Wray, N. R., & Martin, N. 
G. (2008). Shared temperament risk factors for anorexia nervosa: A twin study. 
Psychosomatic Medicine, 70, 239–244.
Wilksch, S. M., & Wade, T. D. (2010). Risk factors for clinically significant importance of 
shape and weight in adolescent girls. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119, 206–215.

260	
Alan E. Stewart
Neurotic Hunger-Strike45
Alfred Adler
The fear of eating begins as a rule at the age of seven­teen and almost always 
with girls. Its adoption is generally followed by rapid decrease in weight. The 
goal, to be inferred from the whole attitude of the patient, is the rejection 
of the woman’s role. In other words it is an attempt by means of an exag-
gerated abstinence—as is so generally the case—to retard the development 
of the female bodily form. One of these patients painted her whole body, in 
addition, with tincture of iodine in the belief of inducing decrease of weight 
in that manner. At the same time she re­peatedly impressed upon her younger 
sister the import­ance of eating and was always inciting her to eat. One patient 
finally reduced herself to a weight of twenty kilo and looked more like a ghost 
than a young girl.
In all these instances we are dealing with girls who as children had already 
tested the value and significance of the “hunger-strike” as a means of attain-
ing power. In every developed neurosis this pressure upon the patient and 
upon the physician is always present. By doing this everything is at once cen-
tered about her and her will dominates the situation in every respect. We can 
now understand why patients of this type lay so much value upon the nature 
of the food and why they must safeguard this evaluation by means of a “fear 
arrangement.” This process of nourishment cannot be stressed too much, for 
its over-evaluation permits them to logically pursue their goal to rule over 
others (like a man I like a father I). It is only then that they feel the right 
to criticize everything for they have now arrived at the point of view which 
allows them to make efforts to look down upon the cooking skill of their 
mother, to dictate the choice of foods, to insist upon punctuality in meals, to 
force people at the same time to direct their attention to them and to solici-
tously inquire whether they are not going to eat.
One of my patients changed her attitude after some time, and insisting 
suddenly upon the importance of eating, began to crave and devour huge 
quantities of food, a behaviour that evoked the same solicitude from her 
mother. She was engaged and apparently desired to marry as soon as she 
was “well.” However she obstructed the progress of her female role by all 
sorts of nervous symptoms (depressions, outbursts of rage, insomnia) and 
particularly by resorting to continual “fattening cures,” thus developing into 
a monstrosity. She continually consumed bromide and declared that with-
out it she felt worse; she complained at the same time of marked bromide 
acne, which disfigured her just as much as her excessive fatness. (Nervous 
45	Translation by P. Radin.

	
	
Neurotic Hunger Strike	
261
constipation, desire for defaecation, tic, cutting of grimaces or com­pulsion-
neurosis frequently serve the same purpose.) Many patients attain the same 
goal by eating in public and fasting in private. The enormous importance 
of hunger-strike in melancholia, paranoia. and dementia praecox, where by 
means of negativism the will of the environment is rendered impotent, is well 
known.
The artifice of “To and Fro” is analogous to many other neurotic arrange-
ments. By means of it the symptom of “frittering away time” is developed. 
This is quite intelligible when it is remembered that the patient through “fear 
of making a decision”—in the above instance, through “fear of his partner”—
has decided upon the “hesitating attitude,” “retreat” or suicide. The impor-
tance of the nourishment is first over-evaluated and then we have the fear 
of the taking of nourishment so that finally, as might have been expected, 
there is no other alternative but that of either adopting the hesitating atti-
tude, of a truce, or of retreat­ing before the normal demands of society. In this 
behaviour we see definitely reflected the old infantile feeling of inferiority in 
connection with the demands of life. Other “artifices of the weak” are easily 
enough detected. Impulses toward revenge are always present just as is the 
exercise of tyranny over the other members of the family. 


263
21
Melancholia and Paranoia
Gerald J. Mozdzierz
In his paper on “Melancholia and Paranoia,” Adler demonstrates an extraordi-
narily clear understanding of these fascinating clinical aberrations. In making 
their way through Adler’s description of the cognitive “logic” of both melancholia 
and paranoia, readers will be well advised to be mindful of two competing forces. 
The first of these forces is that the paper was written almost 100 years ago and 
yet Adler’s understanding of these psychiatric syndromes and abnormal psycho-
logical behaviors is as though it could have been written today. While soon to be 
centennial, they uncannily ooze with contemporary relevance. In Adler’s time, 
psychology and psychiatry were absolutely new frontiers only a few years old per-
haps in some ways akin to the strides being made today in understanding the 
complexities of the human brain by neuroscience research and imaging studies.
The second of the two competing forces is the somewhat awkward use of 
language and sentence construction. Long sentences and complex phrases are 
more uncommon in today’s literature but quite common in German. These con-
siderations most likely are a reflection of the fact that Adler wrote the paper in 
German (his native language) for a meeting to be held in Berne, Switzerland, and 
it was translated into English at a later date.
Rereading this article for the task at hand instilled a resurgence of the admi-
ration I hold for Adler’s powers of observation and clinical reasoning. His 
“nonlinear”46 understanding of melancholic and paranoiac attitude and disposi-
tion astutely reveals the desperate and oftentimes feeling of doom that permeate 
such individuals’ psyches. His understanding is apt preparation for the thera-
peutic challenges to be faced in working with patients (“clients,” if you prefer) 
demonstrating these conditions.
While some decry the publication of DSM-V and others sing its praises, Adler 
anticipated some of its current thinking. His use of the term melancholia as a 
distinct clinical syndrome presages its return in DSM-V. Some may quibble over 
46	A reference to the dialectical, contrasting, and oppositional nature of human behavior. See 
Mozdzierz et al. (2009).

264	
Gerald J. Mozdzierz
what Adler’s intention was when he used the term melancholia. It is less arguable 
that his depiction of its clinical manifestations is that of a profound condition, 
which is exactly that described by DSM-V—something quite different than major 
depression and vastly different from the garden-variety “adjustment disorders 
and depressions as a result of everyday life discouragements.” Consider what 
Adler is saying in his depiction of the categorical imperative of the melancholic: 
“act, think and feel in such a way as if the horrible fate that you have conjured up, 
had already befallen you and was inevitable” (Adler, 1959/1914, p. 250). No clini-
cian worth their salt can deny how accurately that depiction of the melancholic 
represents the internal workings of their distorted private logic. Such accurate 
depiction also contains within it a foretelling of the realities of what it is to work 
therapeutically with someone so disposed and intensely depressed.
It’s not just that Adler keenly observes and describes the “unconscious” moti-
vations of these conditions. Interestingly, he analyses these abnormal behaviors 
using both a dichotomy and principles of scaling. Both of these principles are 
incredibly useful in developing a foothold of understanding in the quagmire that 
represents how to get started in therapy with such patients—after, of course, a 
“connection” (i.e., some sort of human contact) is established. Adler dichoto-
mizes according to whether a patient is more active or more passive in their 
“movement,” a favorite term he uses to depict our progress toward fictional goals 
in life. Among the “passive” he describes the suicide and the complaining accusa-
tory paranoiac; among the “aggressive” are those whom he “scales.” That is, there 
are those who, along a scale, demonstrate varying degrees of cowardice from 
avoiding the demands of life, to those who turn to alcohol (and we can assume 
drugs), to those involved with crime.
No therapist who has ever worked with the severely paranoiac (non-schizo-
phrenic) and heard the racial slurs, the outspoken accusations, and the protesta-
tions decrying victimization by allegedly malignant others that emanate from 
such a person can deny Adler’s depiction. Such indictments of fellow human 
beings simultaneously shout accusation and desperation. Herein lays Adler’s 
genius. Using the principles inherent in his theoretical formulations (i.e., the 
concepts of “private logic,” the value of dialectics, and the understanding of goals 
in behavior and motivation), the paranoiac’s pronouncements become under-
standable for the contemporary clinician. This is a patient in retreat from life, 
who feels blameless and avoids responsibility. Here is someone desperately pro-
claiming the guilt of others who simultaneously harbors feelings of an imminent 
ultimate and total collapse. In this exciting description Adler implicitly dem-
onstrates not only his knowledge of the unconscious thinking of the paranoiac 
but also a profound empathic understanding (i.e., “putting oneself in another’s 
shoes”) of their condition.

	
	
Melancholia and Paranoia	
265
When we put aside the hundreds of schools of psychotherapy, the innumer-
able psychological movements, fads, and trends, and the “technique du jour,” 
Adler’s description of melancholia and paranoia represents pioneering and stay-
ing power that is nothing short of breathtaking. Truly remarkable.
References
Adler, A. (1959/1914). Individual psychology. New York: Littlefield, Adams & Company.
Mozdzierz, G. J., Peluso, P., & Lisiecki, J. (2009). Principles of counseling and psychotherapy. 
New York: Routledge.

266	
Gerald J. Mozdzierz
Melancholia and Paranoia (1914): Individual Psychological 
Results Obtained from a Study of Psychoses47
Alfred Adler
Preliminary remarks:—The following are the forces conditioning neuroses 
and psychoses discovered and described by me:—infantile feeling of infe-
riority; safeguarding tendencies; automatically tested methods; character-
istic traits, affects, symptoms and attitudes taken toward the demands of 
communal participation; the employment of all these methods for the pur-
pose of an imaginary increase of the feeling of personality as against that 
of the environment; the search for a circuitous method and for the creation 
of “distance” between themselves and the expectations of the community 
in order to evade both a true evaluation of life and personal responsibility 
and accountability and finally the neurotic perspective and the purposive, at 
times insane devaluation of reality. All these facts led me and a number of 
other investigators to posit some principle of explanation, a principle that has 
in a very wide sense proved itself both valuable and essential for an under-
standing of neuroses and psychoses.48 The above-mentioned mechanisms are 
described in detail in the author’s books The Neurotic Constitution, Studie 
über d. Minderwertigkeit von Organen, and the present work.
My later conclusions about the mechanism of psychosis can be put in the 
following way. There are first the three essential meanings of mania already 
emphasized; the anticipatory and hallucinatory representations of a wish or 
the fear whose purpose is to secure safety; the purposive devaluation of real-
ity and the resultant heightening of the ego consciousness. To these should be 
added two more of great significance the struggle against either the immedi-
ate or the larger environment and the transference of the scene of activities 
from the main sphere of action to a subsidiary one.
All these five conditions of mania stand in a logical and psychological 
relationship to one another.
In the statements that follow, prepared for the Congress of Psychology and 
Psychiatry, which was to have met in Berne in 1914, and which I now print 
unchanged, I shall attempt to present the psychological structure of melan-
cholia and paranoia in accordance with the above conclusions.
47	Translation by P. Radin.
48	Bleuler strangely enough speaks deprecatingly of the fact that “people attempt to explain every-
thing thereby.” To me and to others its value consists just in this fact. (Original footnote by Alfred 
Adler.)

	
	
Melancholia and Paranoia	
267
I.  Melancholia
Attitude and life-plan of individuals disposed to melancholia; outbreak of 
the disease and the struggle against the environment; transference to sub-
sidiary sphere of action from fear of taking decisions that might bring about 
humiliation.
	
1.	Melancholia develops among individuals whose method of living 
has, from early childhood, been dependent upon the acts and the 
aid of others. Defective activity and manifestations of a non-mascu-
line type are predominant. Such people are generally found to limit 
themselves to the society either of their family or of a small persis-
tent circle of friends; always try to rely upon others and are not even 
above forcing others to submit to them and to accommodate them-
selves to them by making exaggerated references to their own inabil-
ity. That their tremendous egoism in times of prestige worship like 
that of our own, occasionally brings them external success does not 
in any way contravene our statement. The fundamental questions 
in their own life, their progress, development, even their adherence 
to their own spheres of action, these they either evade or approach 
only hesitatingly, especially if difficulties present themselves. The 
typical manic-depressive on the contrary can be broadly character-
ized by the fact that he begins every act enthusiastically but loses 
interest very soon after. This characteristic rhythm which holds for 
their movements and attitudes when they are well is intensified and 
reinforced during the period of their illness by calling up maniacal 
ideas and by their ostentatious and purposeful elaboration.
	
	 	
Between these two forms lies intermittent melancholia whenever 
the patient’s fluctuating belief in his success is called upon to ward 
off some demand of life (marriage, profession, society).
	
2.	The whole life-conduct of the “melancholy type” shows its presup-
position and starting point to be a fictive but all-permeating stand-
point, a melancholic perspective rooted in infantile psychic life, a 
perspective according to which life resembles a difficult frightful 
game of chance in a world full of obstacles and in which the major-
ity of men are hostile. We recognize in this attitude of antagonism 
to the community-feeling an intensified sense of inferiority, one 
of the contrivances that lie at the basis of the neurotic character 
as described by me. When protected by their special aggressive 
tendencies which are transformed into traits of character, affects, 
preparations and acts (crying !), these people feel themselves able 
to cope with the facts of life and they try when “sane and healthy” 

268	
Gerald J. Mozdzierz
to achieve a reputation among a small number of friends. By letting 
their subjective feelings of inferiority take a concrete shape they are 
in a position to insist from childhood either openly or secretly, upon 
an increase in their “disablement grant.”
	
3.	From the incessant attempts made from early childhood to gain 
prestige it can be inferred that their self-assessment is quite low 
and yet all their actions seem to suggest—and these disguised hints 
disclose the psychical affinity with paranoia—that some neglected 
opportunity for an extraordinary development had somehow been 
missed. They indicate familiar unfavourable circumstances (as the 
source of their failure) or betray in their maniacal melancholic ideas 
the ineradicable assumption of super-human, even divine powers. It 
is on such an assumption that are based the complaints in which the 
sick individual bewails, in what really represents a disguised idea of 
greatness, the terrible fate which will overwhelm his family when he 
is gone; or he speaks in a self-accusatory way about his part in the 
destruction of the world; in the outbreak of the world-war or in the 
death and ruination of certain people. Often there is found in this 
enforced complaint about his own unworthiness, a warning refer-
ence to real material and moral dangers for his family circle and 
that of his friends and an equally marked stressing of the personal 
significance of the patient. Such then is the goal of victims of mel-
ancholia and with such an object do they accuse themselves openly 
of all kinds of inferiority and take upon themselves ostentatiously 
the blame for all failures and errors. The success of their behaviour 
is such that, at the very least, they become the centre of attention 
of their limited circle and are able to induce those individuals who 
feel obligated to help them to increased activity, to note-worthy sac-
rifices on their behalf, and always to make advances to them. On 
the other hand they themselves have become freed from even the 
slightest feeling of obligation or tie, a condition fitting well into their 
ego-centric guiding-ideal, for this ideal causes them to feel every 
connection with others, every adaptation to others or the interfer-
ence of others with their rights, as an unbearable compulsion and as 
a serious loss of personal prestige.
	
	 	
Together with these self-accusations and self-reproaches we 
always find disguised references to heredity, to parents’ errors in 
bringing them up, and to wilful lack of consideration on the part 
of relatives and superiors. This accusing of others—another phe-
nomenon related to paranoia—can be deduced from the initial 
melancholic situation. To give examples; if for instance an outbreak 
of melancholia occurs in a younger daughter when the mother has 

	
	
Melancholia and Paranoia	
269
decided to go on a lengthy journey with the elder daughter, or if a 
business man is suddenly afflicted with the disease after he has been 
persuaded against his will to come to certain decisions by the deci-
sive vote of his partner.
	
	 	
References like the above, to melancholia, body anomalies, etc., 
serve also to establish the fact that, according to the patient, we 
are here dealing with an unalterable and incurable disease, this of 
course enormously increasing its importance.
	
	 	
Melancholia thus like every neurosis and psychosis, helps the 
patient’s object of heightening the social value of his own will and 
personality, at least in his own opinion. Its special compulsory 
nature, among individuals of infantile mentality, is due to the pres-
sure of a deeply felt dissatisfaction and a feeling of inferiority which 
objectively considered is unjustifiable. It is an incomprehensibly 
great payment that these people make for a behaviour in the difficult 
crises of life which, after all, is inherently consistent. Their sensitive 
ambition which spurs them on persistently, although with secret 
trembling, to seek superiority, forces them likewise to retreat or 
waver before the more important social tasks. By means of system-
atic self-restriction they thus reach a subsidiary track represented by 
a circle of friends strictly limited, and by tasks to which they adhere 
until threatened by what appears to them a change fraught with dif-
ficulties. Then the scheme that was constructed in childhood, never 
revived and which has always remained untested interposes itself 
and they minimize their own importance in order to gain power 
through weakness and illness.
	
4.	The most prominent offensive weapon of the melancholic type 
which he uses for raising his position and which he has employed 
from childhood on, consists in complaints, tears and depression. He 
shows his weakness and the necessity for helping him in the most 
agonizing manner so that he may either force or mislead others to 
aid him.
	
5.	These patients obtain in their own way, the appearance and con-
viction of irresponsibility for their lack of success in life, because 
they repeatedly insist upon the unalterable nature of their weak-
ness and their lack of external help. The psychic affinity with the 
phobic and hypochondriac type is clearly discernible. However it is 
characteristic of melancholia that with the object of a more power-
ful attack and because of a more extensive feeling of inferiority, the 
realization of inferiority disappears and all criticism of the mania-
cal ideas is excluded, by means of a marked anticipation of an inevi-
table tragedy and a determined absorption in the imminent danger. 

270	
Gerald J. Mozdzierz
The categorical imperative of melancholia is “act, think, feel in such 
a way as if the horrible fate that you have conjured up, had already 
befallen you and was inevitable.” The main presupposition of mel-
ancholia-mania is to possess a prophetic insight, to be like a God.
	
	 	
It is only by following up this recognition that, when measured in 
terms of the common bond of the pessimistic perspective, the interre-
lation between neurosis and psychosis becomes clear. To take simple 
examples:—In enuresis nocturna it is “Act as though you were in the 
lavatory!” Pavor nocturnus: “Act as though you were in great danger.” 
So-called neurasthenic and hysterical sensations, conditions of weak-
ness, paralyses, dizziness, nausea, etc.: “Imagine you have a circlet 
around the head, something sticking in your throat; that you were on 
the verge of a fainting-spell; that you could not walk; that everything 
was in a whirl around you; that you had eaten some bad food,” etc.
	
	 	
It is always a question of effect upon the environment. This is 
true, as I have already insisted for some time, in case of “genuine 
epilepsy,” in which as if in pantomime, death, impotent rage, mani-
festations of poisoning, warding off danger and defeat, are repre-
sented. The nature of the material presented is dependent upon the 
organism’s possibilities often deducible from inherited manifes-
tations of inferiority (cf. Adler, Studie üb. d. Minderwertigkeit v. 
Organen, 1917), and they begin to play a role as soon as they are able 
to benefit and to be of benefit to the higher ideals of the neurotic. 
In every case, however, either the patient’s symptom or the attack 
signify that he has withdrawn either from the present, (by means of 
anticipation) or from reality (by absorption in his role). The success 
of this withdrawal is probably most definitely expressed in genu-
ine epilepsy. One of the commonly recurring features of one of the 
types seems to be the fact that the patient is the last-born (occasion-
ally a person followed at a long interval by another child); an asym-
metrical lower displacement of the right side of the face; increase in 
the protuberance of the parietal bone and traces of left-handedness.
	
	 	
The psychosis discloses, corresponding with the more deter-
mined attitude of the patient who is on the point of giving up all 
honest strivings, a more marked withdrawal from the world and a 
more extensive depreciation and overwhelming of reality.
	
6.	 In the psychosis as in the neurosis, the intensified reference to the 
unchangeability of the weaknesses and sad destiny awaiting us, 
prove to be necessary in new and apparently difficult situations, pro-
fessional decisions and tests of all kinds devised with the object of 
developing hesitation or abandoning a certain course, as in the rather 
complicated instance of stage-fright. The investigator must be very 

	
	
Melancholia and Paranoia	
271
careful not to over-emphasize his own impression of the difficulties 
of the situation. For what guides the man afflicted with melancholia 
in his fears, what makes his maniacal ideas “incurable” is not the 
lack of intelligence or logic, but the lack of desire, the methodical 
unwillingness to apply this logic. The patient will feel and even act 
illogically if he can only in this way, and only by means of mania, 
approach nearer to his goal and heighten his personality conscious-
ness. Anyone who attempts to tamper with his mania appears to 
him, consequently, as an enemy and he therefore regards all medical 
measures and attempts at persuasion as directed against his position.
	
7.	It is one of the peculiar traits of the melancholic type that it suc-
ceeds in establishing its disease-picture by continuing old well-
constructed preparations and that, by freely expressed, intensified 
reference to its own weakness, it extends the compulsion of con-
tinuous and useless helping and the solicitude of the environment. 
The uselessness of every external pacification after melancholia has 
manifested itself, is not the result of any lack of logical deduction 
but flows from the unbendable purpose of the sick man to increase 
the shock to his environment to the highest degree, to limit the 
action of all concerned and deprive them of all their prospects. A 
cure will take place, depending upon the degree of confidence in life 
still remaining in the patient, as soon as he has enjoyed the satisfac-
tion of having demonstrated his superiority. Promising results have 
also been obtained by tactful reference to real connections made 
with no suspicion of posing as superior or a desire always to be in 
the right. The prophecy when the termination of any melancholic 
arrangement will take place is certainly not any easier than to fore-
tell when a child will stop crying. Hopeless situations, an unusual 
degree of lack of interest in life evidenced from early childhood, 
provocations, and an ostentatious lack of respect on the part of the 
environment may lead to attempts at suicide as an extreme act of 
revenge for activity continually directed against one’s own person.
	
	 	
The fear of lack of success, anxiety, competition, or expectation 
of not being able to cope any longer with society or the family, force 
this type in case of subjectively-felt trouble, to resort to anticipat-
ing their ruin. The melancholic view-point growing out of this self-
absorption, which by reason of its purposive achievement in waking 
life and dreams always becomes more and more deeply rooted, in 
its influences upon the whole organism, is the continual motive for 
a poorer functioning of the organs. If carefully done the functions 
of the organs, the carriage, sleep, muscular strength, heart-activity, 
intestinal manifestations, etc. can be prognostically evaluated. The 

272	
Gerald J. Mozdzierz
psychological connections militate against the etiological interpre-
tation of Abderhalden’s discoveries in psychosis. From our view-
point they must represent definitely conditioned manifestations or 
simply intensified symptoms, appearing in psychosis, of an inher-
ited organ inferiority. We must, among other things, emphasize the 
fact that organ inferiority may represent the final stage of an impor-
tant basis of etiologically significant infantile inferiority feelings.
	
8.	Organs, in so far as they can be influenced, come consequently, 
under the power of the melancholic goal, adjust their functions to 
the need of the whole situation and thus help to establish the physi-
ognomy of clinical melancholia (heart, body-carriage, appetite, 
stool, urine activities, trend of thought). In so far as they obey com-
pulsory stimulations they are forced into a melancholic mood. Or it 
may be that the function remains approximately normal but is felt 
by the sick person to be diseased and is complained of. At times a 
disturbance and an irritable condition are induced by the sick man 
by means of a clear and meaningless behaviour (by sleep distur-
bances, by enhanced inducing of stool and urine activity).
	
9.	In the last case as well as in connection with the acceptance of 
nourishment, the patient often shows a series of disturbances 
automatically induced and which then follow systematically and 
methodically without sufficient self-criticism. These manifestations 
as well as the patient’s exhaustive demands on the functions of his 
organisms and his erroneous evaluation of a fictive norm lacking 
in him, indicate his purpose of visibly procuring a real proof of 
illness.
	
10.	The acceptance of nourishment is restricted by the calling up of 
thoughts suggestive of disgust or anxious suspicions (poison) and 
besides, like all other functions, is under the pressure of purposive 
melancholic self-absorption (“as if nothing were of use, as if every-
thing must end badly”). Sleep is disturbed by compulsory brood-
ing, by thinking of not sleeping and also by resorting to distinctly 
purposeless means. Stool and urinary functions can become dis-
eased either by contrary influences or by making continual claims 
upon them, in some cases by producing a condition of irritation 
in the respective organs. Heart-activity, breathing, the attitude of 
the diseased personality, the tear-glands occasionally, come under 
the pressure of the melancholic fiction tending to a ceaseless self-
absorption in a situation of despair.
	
11.	A closer view, one that is made possible only by means of an indi-
vidual psychological synthetic approach, shows the melancholic 
attitude to be the picture of a condition which may appear, at the 

	
	
Melancholia and Paranoia	
273
same time, an offensive weapon among people who find themselves 
in the position described above, people in whom we otherwise 
might expect angry perhaps raging and revengeful outbursts. The 
early acquired deficiency of the social activity conditions that pecu-
liar attitude of attack which, resembling suicide, proceeds from an 
injury inflicted upon one’s self to a threatening of the environment 
or to acts of revenge.
	
	 	
Occasionally in raptus melancholicus or suicide, which always 
represents an act of revenge, the affect to be expected is clearly 
manifest.
	
12.	The presupposition of all activity, the concealed reference to the 
importance of one’s own person, expressed in the demand for the 
subordination, in the claim upon the services of others, is never 
absent. Since the insistence upon the guilt of others is likewise 
always present, the melancholic attitude thus establishes the fictive 
superiority and irresponsibility of the sick man. By reinforcing the 
last-mentioned traits (insistence upon the guilt of others), paranoiac 
nuances are enabled to force their way into melancholia.
	
13.	Since his fellow-man merely serves him as a means for heighten-
ing his own personality-consciousness (the pose of friendship and 
attentive interest is at his disposal as well as disease), the melan-
cholic individual recognizes no limits to the extension of his tyr-
anny over others, robs them of all hope, and will proceed either to 
suicide itself or the thought of suicide if compelled to surrender his 
main object of being freed from the demands of others, or actually 
commit suicide when he comes upon invincible obstacles.
	
14.	In other words an outbreak of melancholia represents the ideal 
situation for individuals of this type whenever their position is 
threatened. The question why, nevertheless, he does not enjoy this 
condition, is unnecessary. The fact is, that melancholia does not per-
mit any other mood to arise and since the patient’s object is success, 
there is no place for any feeling of joy that might interfere with his 
compulsion-attitude of depression.
	
15.	Melancholia vanishes as soon as the patient has attained, in some 
manner or other, the imaginary feeling of having regained his supe-
riority and a protection against possible misfortunes by a proof of 
illness.
	
16.	The attitude of persons who are likely to succumb to melancholia is 
one of distrust and criticism of society from childhood on. In this 
attitude likewise we can recognize as one of the primary assump-
tions a feeling of inferiority with its compensation, and a cautious 
search for superiority in spite of all statements to the contrary.

274	
Gerald J. Mozdzierz
II.  Paranoia
	
1.	Paranoia attacks people whose attitude toward society is character-
ized by the fact that after a fairly mild upward tendency of their 
activity or life-line they come to a halt at some distance from the 
goal that either they or their environment had expected, and that 
then generally by means of extensive intellectual or, at the same 
time, active operations in an imaginary struggle directed against 
self-created difficulties, they obtain an unconscious excuse for 
either covering up or justifying, or indefinitely postponing, their 
possible or anticipated defeat in life.
	
2.	 This attitude both in toto and in individual questions is prepared early 
in childhood, tested, blunted and protected against the most serious 
objections of reality. That is why the paranoiac system possesses, to a 
greater degree than other psychoses, definite methodical traits and 
can be influenced only at the beginning and under propitious circum-
stances. In paranoia neither the communal feeling nor its function, 
the “universally valid” logic of reality, is ever entirely destroyed.
	
3.	One of the presuppositions of this attitude is shown to consist in a 
profound feeling of dissatisfaction with life, felt to be unalterable 
and which compels the patient to try to conceal his lack of suc-
cess both to himself and others in order not to wound his pride or 
self-consciousness.
	
4.	To this activity always present and perceptible—as a rule of a bel-
ligerent type and, owing to the nature of its devices, directed toward 
a goal of superiority—is due the fact that the break-down generally 
takes place in later years. The maniacal idea thus likewise obtains 
traits of an externally more mature type.
	
5.	 This activity whose goal is that of an ideal of superiority, must in its 
development, automatically lead to an attitude of criticism and hostil-
ity toward the patient’s fellowmen, an attitude that in the last analysis, 
is directed against others, against influences and situations behind 
which humanity as such is suspected of being concealed. In this way 
others are made responsible for that part of the patient’s over-empha-
sized plans that did not succeed. In paranoia the anticipation of the 
goal of superiority (megalomania) also serves to put on a firm basis 
the feeling of superiority and permit the patient to evade responsibil-
ity for failure in society by creating secondary regions of activity.
	
6.	In the paranoiac’s attitude we find reflected the hostile attitude 
toward his fellowmen which goes back to earliest childhood. This 
flows automatically from his active striving for universal superiority 
which finds expression in the form of the idea that he must be given 

	
	
Melancholia and Paranoia	
275
consideration, in the persecution-mania and megalomania. In all 
three of these situations the patient pictures himself as the centre of 
his surroundings.
	
7.	In the pure form of paranoia, to be taken into consideration only as 
a boundary case, there is consequently always an upward tendency, 
which is brought to a halt by the creation of the mechanism of the 
mania. This is true also of dementia praecox where the fear of life and 
its demands seem to be greater and which consequently manifests 
itself earlier. On the boundary line can be noticed cases of zyclothy-
mia, hysterical aboulia, depressive manifestations of a neurasthenic 
type and conflict-neuroses (cf. The Neurotic Constitution) which 
show a more marked repression of a temporary kind, following an 
initial aggression. Dynamically the behaviour of psychogenic epi-
lepsy, chronic alcoholism, morphinism and cocainism, shows great 
affinity with the above. The differences seem to exist in the more 
tenacious and intermittent repression of the latter after more exten-
sive activity or a lower degree of connection.
	
8.	Both in the forward as in the backward movement of the psychotic 
wave, a hostile belligerent trait often ending in suicide, is clearly rec-
ognizable. Indeed psychosis may be regarded as the intellectual sui-
cide of an individual who feels himself unequal to the demands of 
society or of attainment of his own goal. In his backward movement 
there is discoverable a secret actio in distans, a hostility toward real-
ity, while the forward movement indicates its inward weakness at 
the time of its exaltation.
	
9.	The self-evaluation of the paranoiac is intensified to the point of 
similarity to the deity. It is built up on a compensatory feeling of 
inferiority and shows its weakness in its speedy renunciation of 
being able to fulfil the demands of society, the surrender of plans, 
the transference of the field of action to the domain of the non-real, 
in the marked tendency toward constructing paranoidal excuses 
of a preoccupational nature and in the insistence on accusing oth-
ers. The patient clearly lacks faith in himself and his mistrust and 
unbelief in men, and in the knowledge and ability of men, force him 
toward the construction of cosmogonic and religious ideas of gov-
ernment as well as to the inherent contrast of these phantasies to 
the general views. These are all necessary to enable him to get his 
balance and his additional ballast.
	
10.	The ideas of the paranoiac are very hard to correct because the 
patient needs them just in this particular form if he is to establish 
his point of view, the attainment of irresponsibility as an excuse 
for his lack of success, and if he is to force his activity in society 

276	
Gerald J. Mozdzierz
to become arrested. These ideas permit him, at the same time, to 
adhere to his fiction of superiority without necessitating a test for he 
can always ascribe the blame to the hostility of others.
	
11.	If melancholic passivity is an actio in distans for coercing others to 
subordinate themselves, the purpose of the paranoiac’s active phan-
tasy can, on the other hand, be said to consist in obtaining a time-
consuming pre-occupation and an excuse that will relieve him from 
responsibility for his lack of success.
	
12.	In contrast, melancholia is, at least externally, based more on the 
guilt of others than on that of external circumstances.
	
13.	Every discernible outbreak of paranoia occurs when the patient 
finds himself in a dangerous situation where he feels his demands 
for a social position definitely lost. This happens as a rule when on 
the eve of some undertaking, during its course, or when anticipat-
ing either a demotion or the coming on of old age.
	
14.	The final condition results from the intermediate creation of a pre-
paratory mania-mechanism by whose action the patient’s feeling 
of responsibility is destroyed. His feeling of importance is, how-
ever, increased by means of his self-identification with his persecu-
tion mania, his respect-demanding mania and megalomania. This 
mechanism represents a compensatory activity that has grown out 
of his expectation of depreciation and develops in the direction of 
the “masculine protest” just as we have shown in the case of the 
psychology of neuroses (cf. The Neurotic Constitution).
	
15.	The construction of maniacal ideas can be traced back to childhood 
where, in an infantile fashion, they are connected with day-dreams 
and phantasies relating to situations of humiliation.
	
16.	The paranoiac attitude gives both the soul and body its adequate 
position in the mania system. Stereo-typed expressions, attitudes 
and movements are associated with the guiding idea and inciden-
tally are also found abundantly on the confines of the disease and in 
dementia praecox.
	
17.	Melancholic traits are frequently intertwined with those of para-
noia. In particular do we find that complaints about poor sleep, 
deficient nourishment tend when subsequently amplified, in the 
direction of ideas of persecution, poison and megalomania. This last 
path is at times, taken only to emphasize the special nature of the 
patient’s disease.
	
18.	Hallucinations are connected with marked self-absorption in 
the role to be played and represent both encouraging or warning 
admonitions. They occur whenever the patient’s will-direction is to 
be regarded as final and yet he is not to be held responsible. These 

	
	
Melancholia and Paranoia	
277
admonitions are to be taken as analogies like the dream, need not be 
intelligible to the patient but should be characteristic of the policy 
he wishes to adopt on certain definite problems. Both hallucinations 
and dreams thus prove to be contrivances for objectifying those sub-
jective impulses to whose apparent objectivity the patient uncondi-
tionally surrenders himself (cf. dream theory of the author in the 
chapter on “Dreams and Dream Interpretation” in this book, and in 
his Neurotic Constitution 1.c.). The coercion toward irresponsibility 
prevents the will from being under one’s own direction and substi-
tutes in its place apparently strange faces and admonitions.
	
19.	We must add to the above the fixing of the mania-system by means 
of a purposive, i.e. a favourable selection of reminiscences, and an 
evaluation of experiences as viewed from their final object. From our 
view-point the tendency of this establishing of a system and its vital 
necessity owing to the nature of the goal-positing, emerges quite 
positively. (This goal consists in an order for retreat; an arrangement 
of non-responsibility; that of the guilt of others and the conceal-
ment of the personal and evident collapse.)
	
20.	Our attitude thus shows that paranoia makes its appearance at the 
point where normal human beings lose their courage, where more 
susceptible natures commit suicide or querulously complain about 
others, and where the more aggressive types by cowardly avoid-
ing the demands of life, turn to crime or alcoholism. Only people 
well prepared for adaptation to society maintain their equilibrium. 
Occasionally we encounter mixtures of the above tendencies.
	
21.	The single-handed struggle of the paranoiacally disposed individual 
to conquer, results in every person being treated as an enemy or as 
a figure in a chess game. A feeling of real good-will toward his fel-
lowmen is absent as much in the paranoiac as in all those affected 
by neurotic and psychotic diseases. Such a person is never a depend-
able participant in the life of society and enters into normal human 
relationships (love, friendship, occupation, society, etc.), with an 
incorrect attitude. This anomalous attitude arises from a low self-
evaluation and an over-evaluation of life’s difficulties. This it is that 
misleads him into the creation of an arrangement like neurosis and 
psychosis. His hostile attitude toward society is, in no sense, inher-
ited or ineradicable but merely a tempting outlet in an extremity.
	
22.	Paranoia rarely disappears because it manifests itself just at that 
part of the life-line where the patient suspects his inevitable col-
lapse will occur. However, quite senseless subjective exaggerations 
are amenable to correction in the beginning, and on such occasions 
the disease may be cured.

278	
Gerald J. Mozdzierz
	
23.	The attitude of a person predisposed to paranoia, already exhibits in 
childhood an active aspect which brings the person quite easily to a 
halt before difficulties. We often discover in the life of a patient fre-
quent interruptions of an apparently puzzling nature, of the direct 
line of development. All enterprises that retard progress (including 
therein frequent changes of occupation and vagabondage), are in 
reality coercions of the guiding idea which demand that time be 
wasted in order to gain time.
	
	 	
Love of domination, insufferability, lack of fellow-feeling, absence 
of love relations or the selection of a few docile persons are regularly 
recurring manifestations in the person’s life. He is recognizable by 
his querulous and unjustly critical nature.
Appendix
Excerpts From the Dreams of a Patient With Melancholia
An official forty years old is transferred to another bureau. Thirteen years 
before that he had developed signs of melancholia on a similar occasion. As 
on the earlier occasion he found himself incapable of performing the neces-
sary duties. Incidentally there appeared certain thoughts in which he hinted 
at the responsibility of others for his condition. According to him he was 
neglected and difficulties were put in his way. We have, in short, as is almost 
always the case in melancholia, the path leading to paranoia vaguely sug-
gested. He asked me for poison in order to escape his torments. No matter 
what the event was he always succeeded in seeing its worst side. Insomnia, 
digestive troubles, uninterrupted depression and extreme fears of the future 
increasing from day to day, allowed us to diagnose the case with certainty.
Above I have shown why melancholia is to be regarded as a “remnant 
problem” where the sick person, to prove his illness falls back upon the device 
of accusing and depreciating himself in order to escape taking a definite deci-
sion. Our patient, for example, will, in his own way, either try to circumvent a 
success unfavourable to his plans or weaken it by proving himself to be ill or 
finally, by having his success interpreted as a part payment for an imagined 
deficiency transcending everything the world has hitherto known. There is 
always present the compulsory demand that he be assisted by others whose 
kindness is to be taken advantage of and they themselves incited to mak-
ing greater efforts in his behalf by the patient’s insistence upon his illness. 
Interpreting this situation in its infantile meaning we come to the picture of 
the weeping child. The following are the earliest childhood reminiscences of 
this patient:—He pictures himself as a little boy lying on the sofa and weep-
ing. When eight years old, an aunt strikes him; he runs into the kitchen yell-
ing, “You have deprived me of my honour!” With this special contrivance, 

	
	
Melancholia and Paranoia	
279
i.e. to shatter the nerves of bystanders by weeping and complaining (to over-
power?) he now faces every new situation. Let us not overlook the fact that 
this contrivance is only intelligible if we assume that we are in the presence 
of a very ambitious man, one however, who does not believe in himself to 
the extent of imagining he would be able to attain his goal of superiority by 
direct methods. It is quite apparent how—and this belongs together with the 
above—under the pressure of his secret idea of god-likeness he would like to 
be freed from the responsibility of his achievements in real life so as not to 
put his god to a test. This explains his “hesitating attitude” and his uncon-
scious arrangement of the “remnant” and his “distance” from the goal of 
superiority which he is afraid of losing whenever a new situation arises.
In the first week of the treatment, the patient dreamt his dream of the 
world catastrophe narrated in Chapter 19. If you remember we also found 
there the mechanism of melancholia. He posits the possibility of a complete 
lack of responsibility interpreted in his own sense and discloses himself as 
a strong person, in phantasy playing with the fate of the world like a god. 
When everything is about to end he may do anything.49 Is not the same sen-
timent present in his “You have robbed me of my honour”? When he under-
rates himself may we not have the continuation read, “Now I am going to 
approach with my strongest move”? Is not suicide in the air here and is not 
depression being employed for the purpose of extortion?
All must submit to his will! That is the object of his melancholia. The 
following is a second dream: “A girl I saw on the street comes to my room 
and gives herself up to me voluntarily.” What is behind this dream? Simple 
enough. How far removed am I removed from open aggressiveness! There 
must be a magical power that compels everyone to submit to me! Like a 
sleight-of-hand performer he helps things along by a threat of world destruc-
tion and by the influence of his depression.
A third dream exhibits the arrangement of his depression. “I find the work 
easy in another post which I had refused. Everything is pleasant and in the 
best of order.” In other words “Where I am not present there I shall find 
happiness.”50 This is an assumption suggested by his attitude so that he may 
make the present situation appear painful. To disprove it is impossible, for if 
he chooses to imagine himself somewhere else we are dealing with an unful-
fillable condition. Unquestionably could we transport him to that place he 
would discover some other subterfuge. 
49	Freeing himself at the same time from the community feeling. (Original footnote by Alfred Adler.)
50	This is the last line of Schubert’s famous song “Der Wanderer” (Original footnote by P. Radin).


281
22
Suicide
Sharyl M. Trail
The topic of suicide is as relevant today in the United States of America as it was 
in 1937, when Adler wrote an article devoted to the understanding of suicide in 
the lives of individuals, family and friend survivors, and society as a whole. It is 
clear throughout Adler’s writing that he was committed to understanding the 
purposefulness of people’s decisions and behaviors. This interest in etiology and 
the purposefulness of behavior is noted throughout Adler’s chapter on suicide. 
Understanding the causes or origins of suicidal thoughts, feelings, and actions is 
the key to true primary prevention. Currently there are many government and 
nongovernment agencies that are devoted to the prevention of suicide. Suicide 
prevention programs work to identify target groups in the population who are at 
higher risk for suicide as well as overall risk factors that increase an individual’s 
risk of suicide. Adler’s paper on suicide identifies three major factors, outside of 
mental illness, which increase a person’s risk for suicide. It is quite remarkable to 
review Adler’s paper on suicide and find that many of his assertions about the etiol-
ogy of suicide have been confirmed through modern-day research on the subject.
According to the National Institute on Mental Health (NIMH), in 2007 sui-
cide was the tenth leading cause of death in the United States, and for every com-
pleted suicide an average of 11 additional people attempted suicide (NIMH, n.d.). 
Most alarming, suicide is the third leading cause of death for young people ages 
15–24, with the overall suicide rate increasing over 300% in the United States 
since the 1950s (Miller & Eckert, 2009). Along with youth, other groups includ-
ing Native Americans/Alaskan Natives and non-Hispanic White men over the 
age of 85 are at higher risk for completing suicide (NIMH, n.d.). Research also 
shows that individuals with specific mental health and substance abuse disorders, 
specific personality traits, and family history are at increased risk for suicidal 
behavior and suicide completion (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration [SAMHSA], 2006; Sarchiapone et al., 2009).
Adler begins his paper by making the connection between suicide and “men-
tally disordered individuals, especially depressed persons,” thus coming to the 
conclusion that the “approximately normal person is inclined to regard suicide 

282	
Sharyl M. Trail
as an entirely pathological phenomenon.” Current research is in full support of 
Adler’s assertion of the connection between mental illness, especially depression, 
and increased risk for suicide. Depression is the most prevalent mental health 
disorder in the United States, with 9.5% or 20.9 million American adults expe-
riencing depression in any given year (NIMH, n.d.). Major depression is the 
most common diagnosis associated with suicide. Individuals who have multiple 
episodes of depression are at greater risk for suicide as well as individuals who 
are depressed in conjunction with dependence on drugs and alcohol (American 
Association of Suicidology [AAS], 2010). NIMH (n.d.) reported 90% of people 
who die by suicide also had depression, other mental disorders, or substance 
abuse disorder at the time of their death. Often both mental health and sub-
stance abuse disorders are co-occurring in individuals who complete suicide. The 
statistics stated above compel mental health professionals as well as public health 
officials to prioritize the identification and treatment of mental health and sub-
stance use disorders to reduce the rates of suicide in this country.
After the discussion of mental disorders, Adler begins his paper by identify-
ing “situational factors” related to suicide. Adler asserts that even the “normal 
person” can at times be faced with situations that make them feel suicide is the 
only way to solve the problem. The most relevant situations include money prob-
lems and unhappiness or disappointment in romantic relationships. Adler states 
that although many people experience distressing and unalterable situations, the 
actual number of suicides committed for this reason is “not so great.”
Adler was correct in his statement that environmental or situational risk fac-
tors do not in isolation increase an individual’s risk for suicide. According to 
the stress diathesis model, suicide is thought to be a multi-determined act with 
both distal and proximal risk factors (Roy, Sarchiapone, & Carli, 2007). Adler’s 
understanding of situational factors could be compared to our current under-
standing of proximal, or trigger, factors, many of which Adler identified in his 
original paper on suicide. The Suicide Prevention Resource Center (SPRC, 2001) 
has identified the following environmental or proximal risk factors related to 
increase in suicide risk: job or financial loss; relational or social loss; easy access 
to lethal means; and local clusters of suicide that have a contagious influence. 
Acute stressors do provide a heightened period of risk, but only if someone is 
already vulnerable to suicide due to distal risk factors such as childhood trauma, 
family history, or personal history of mental illness/substance abuse and/or is 
lacking in protective factors (Roy, Sarchiapone, & Carli, 2007; SPRC, 2001).
Adler provided two additional situations he believed increased suicide, 
one being when women and girls are menstruating and two when individuals 
become over age 50. In my research for this introduction, I was unable to find a 
connection between time of menstruation and increase in suicide, but there is a 
large body of evidence pointing to the significant increase in suicide risk among 
the elderly. In the United States in 2004 14.3 of every 100,000 people age 65 and 

	
	
Suicide	
283
older died by suicide, higher than the rate of about 11 per 100,000 in the general 
population. When looking at all elderly, those at highest risk to complete suicide 
are non-Hispanic White men over the age of 85, yet the rate of suicide declines 
for women after age 60. Non-Hispanic White men have a rate of almost 50 sui-
cide deaths per 100,000 (NIMH, 2007; AAS, 2009). Adler stated in his paper that 
Individual Psychology is capable of explaining these facts, but he did not go on 
to provide a conceptualization of the problem. Risk factors identified in current 
research include the recent death of a loved one; physical illness, uncontrollable 
pain, or the fear of a prolonged illness; perceived poor health; social isolation 
and loneliness; and major changes in social roles (e.g., retirement) (AAS, 2009). 
Although Adler did not expound on his conceptualization of the problem, it is 
quite interesting how current research identifies a negative change in the three 
life tasks as a possible explanation for the increased suicide rate among elderly 
White men. Therefore mental health professionals and community supports for 
the elderly could look to increasing elderly men’s social engagement as a possible 
prevention of depression and suicide.
Adler goes on in his paper to identify “interpersonal factors” connected to 
increased suicide risk. Adler conceptualizes the problem of suicide through the 
concepts of lifestyle, feelings of inferiority, and lack of social interest. He begins 
by explaining that when an exogenous cause (environmental trigger/risk factor) 
is experienced by individuals, they may be inadequately prepared to manage the 
crisis due to impairments in lifestyle, including inadequate social interest. To this 
end, studies have shown a well-established connection between family history of 
suicide and increased risk for suicidal behavior. It is estimated that up to 40% of 
the variance of suicidal behavior may be genetic (Sarchiapone, Vladimir, Janiri, 
Marchetti, Cesaro, & Roy, 2009). Again, heredity is not a single cause or factor in 
suicidal behavior but should be considered as a distal risk factor.
Along with heredity, environmental factors have also been identified as 
increasing risk of suicide later in life. Childhood trauma, problematic parenting 
and family environments, and history of childhood abuse have all been proven 
distal risk factors for the later development of suicidal behavior (Miller & Eckert, 
2009; Roy, Sarchiapone, & Carli, 2007; SPRC, 2001). These experiences early in 
life inform the lifestyle and provide messages to the individuals that they have an 
inferior position in the family and in society. Therefore, individuals with feelings 
of inferiority can potentially develop a lack of social interest due to a fear that 
other people and society as a whole are a threat to their safety and well-being. 
Impairments in the lifestyle can then lead to a decrease in resilience when faced 
with a situational/proximal risk factor.
Adler concluded that individuals who attempt and complete suicide are par-
ticipating in an active movement away from themselves and others, believing 
individuals who complete suicide disregard the pain this will cause others. A 
recent research study has looked at personality style and impulsivity in relation 

284	
Sharyl M. Trail
to suicidal behavior (Fazaa & Page, 2009). Fazaa and Page (2009) identified two 
subgroups of people, self-critical and dependent, which were at heightened risk 
for suicide. Their findings showed that dependent individuals were more likely 
to attempt suicide as a means of communication and their attempts were fre-
quently related to interpersonal stressors. They were more impulsive in their 
attempts and used less lethal means. In contrast, self-critical individuals viewed 
suicide as a means of escape, with attempts frequently related to intrapsychic 
stressors. Self-critical individuals were more active in making a suicide plan 
and used more lethal means. In both subgroups, individuals were ill equipped to 
manage either situational stressors of intrapersonal feelings of emotional pain 
and inferiority.
It could be hypothesized that both groups are lacking in social interest and 
managing their stress or emotional pain takes priority over concern about the 
impact their suicide or suicidal behavior will have on others. If indeed suicidal 
individuals are lacking in social interest, experience inferiority feelings, and have 
inadequate coping abilities based on mistaken lifestyle beliefs, it is imperative 
to focus our efforts on parent education and the prevention of child abuse and 
neglect as a way to prevent suicide in this country.
Adler’s final section of his paper addresses the “predisposing factors” for sui-
cide. In this section, Adler states, “We are prepared for failures and try to prevent 
them, always in the conviction that the origin of a misconception of life and its 
organization can be traced back into early childhood. Therefore we must try and 
find the type of child, which can be regarded as the potential suicidal type.” He 
concluded that suicidal people combine a lesser degree of social interest with 
a large degree of activity. Adler identified suicidal adults as problem children, 
spoiled, oversensitive, and tantrum with willful self-injury. Adler only identi-
fied the pampered child who thinks “too much of himself, too little of others” 
as one who develops suicidal behavior. Throughout Adler’s paper he has made 
statements of fact, which still today are supported by research; unfortunately 
throughout my literature review I found no evidence that the spoiled or pam-
pered child is at heightened risk for suicide. In actuality, it seems the exact oppo-
site seems to be true.
Research indicates that 90% of youth experienced at least one mental disorder 
at the time of their death. These included most commonly mood disorders, fol-
lowed by substance-related disorders and disruptive behavior disorders (Miller & 
Eckert, 2009). Although it is true pampered children can develop these disorders, 
research indicates neglectful and harmful/abusive parenting is a greater risk fac-
tor for developing these disorders in childhood. Risk factors for youth suicide 
include feelings of hopelessness; peer victimization (bullying); sexual and/or 
physical abuse; multiple comorbid psychiatric disorders; parental mental illness/
substance abuse; family instability and significant family conflict; and exposure 
to violence (Miller & Eckert, 2009; AAS, 2007; Mullany et al., 2009).

	
	
Suicide	
285
Although research does not support Adler’s identification of the pampered 
individual as one most at risk for suicide, he did have keen insight that events 
in early childhood have a deep impact on the potential for an individual to 
develop suicidal behaviors in the future. Adler was ahead of his time, taking 
into consideration the multifaceted development of the lifestyle and how early 
childhood experiences shape adult thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Adler 
stands correct that stressful life events alone cannot cause a person to become 
suicidal. The etiology of suicidal thoughts and behavior is multifaceted and 
complex. We now understand that a combination of chronic risk factors, acute 
risk factors, protective/resiliency factors, and situational stressors all com-
bine to either increase or decrease an individual’s risk of completing suicide. 
Understanding the lifestyle and how a person developed inferiority beliefs can 
be a useful intervention when working with suicidal clients. Adler also stands 
correct in understanding that the primary prevention of any mental illness is 
developing a child’s sense of belonging in the world. The belief of being an equal 
and important contributing member of society allows people to feel capable of 
handling a crisis and therefore decreases the risk of seeing suicide as the solu-
tion to life’s problems.
References
American Association of Suicidology. (2010, June). Some facts about suicide and depression 
[Fact Sheet]. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved October 5, 2010, from http://www.
suicidology.org/web/guest/stats-and-tools/fact-sheets
American Association of Suicidology. (2009, June). Elderly suicide fact sheet [Fact Sheet]. 
Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved October 5, 2010, from http://www.suicidology.
org/web/guest/stats-and-tools/fact-sheets.
American Association of Suicidology. (2007). Youth suicide fact sheet [Fact Sheet]. 
Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved October 5, 2010, from http://www.suicidology.
org/web/guest/stats-and-tools/fact-sheets
Fazaa, N., & Page, S. (2009). Personality style and impulsivity as determinants of suicidal 
Subgroups. Archives of Suicide Research, 13, 31–45.
Miller, D. N., & Eckert, T. L. (2009). Youth suicidal behavior: An introduction and overview. 
School Psychology Review, 38(2), 153–167.
Mullany, B., Barloe, A., Goklish, N., Larzelere-Hinton, F., Cwik, M., Craig, M., & Walkup, 
J. T. (2009). Toward understanding suicide among youths: Results from the White 
Mountain Apache tribally mandated suicide surveillance system, 2001–2006. 
American Journal of Public Health, 99(10) 1840–1848.
National Institute of Mental Health. (n.d.). Suicide in the US: Statistics and prevention 
(NIH Publication No. 06-4594). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
Retrieved October 5, 2010, from http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/
about-nimh-publications.shtml
National Institute of Mental Health. (2007). Older adults: Depression and suicide facts (NIH 
Publication No. 4593). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. Retrieved 
October 5, 2010, from http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/about-nimh-
publications.shtml

286	
Sharyl M. Trail
Roy, A., Sarchiapone, M., & Carli, V. (2007). Low resilience in suicide attempters. Archives 
of Suicide Research, 11, 265–269.
Sarchiapone, M., Vladimir, C., Janiri, L., Marchetti, M., Cesaro, C., & Roy, A. (2009). Family 
history of suicide and personality. Archives of Suicide Research, 13, 178–184.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2006). Suicidal thoughts, 
suicide attempts, major depressive episode, and substance use among adults (Office of 
Applied Studies Report, Issue 34). Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Suicide Prevention Resource Center. (2001). Risk and protective factors for suicide [Fact 
Sheet]. Newton, MA: Author. Retrieved October 5, 2010, from http://www.sprc.org/
library/srisk.pdf

	
	
Suicide	
287
Suicide
Alfred Adler (1937)
The frequent fact of suicide is surrounded by mystery for the average observer. 
When he is not personally touched by the suicide of someone near to him, he 
usually resorts to a superficial explanation which occasionally makes the sui-
cide comprehensible, but usually leaves it incomprehensible. The members of the 
suicide’s intimate and wider circles also usually find the occurrence strange and 
inexplicable. This does not seem very significant, since, in general, an under-
standing of human nature and thinking directed toward prophylaxis cannot be 
taken for granted. Attempts at explanation often being with the frequency of sui-
cide among mentally disordered individuals, especially depressed persons, to all 
of whom suicide appears as a way out of their distress even if by their words they 
seem to reject it. Thus the approximately normal person is inclined to regard 
suicide as an entirely pathological phenomenon.
Situational Factors
Even so, there are certain situations from which the normal person regards 
suicide as the only way out. These are situations which are too distressing 
and unalterable, such as torment without any prospect for relief, inhumanly 
cruel attacks, fear of discovery of disgraceful or criminal actions, suffering 
of incurable and extremely painful diseases, etc. Surprisingly enough, the 
number of suicides actually committed for such reasons is not great.
Among the so-called causes for suicide, disregarding the cases of the psy-
chologically ill, loss of money and unpayable debts take the first place. This 
gives us much to think about. Disappointed and unhappy love follow in fre-
quency. Further frequent causes are permanent unemployment, for which 
the individual may or may not be responsible, and justified or unjustified 
reproaches.
Another cause is suicide epidemics which, puzzling as this may be, do 
occasionally happen. Harakiri, although on the decline, still exists among 
the Japanese. Among women and girls, suicide or attempted suicide takes 
place relatively frequently at the time of menstruation. Lastly, suicides 
increase strikingly after the age of fifty. All these facts ought to be explicable 
through Individual Psychology.
It is not surprising that qualified and unqualified circles often endeavor to 
work for the reduction of suicides. So far as we can see, such attempts have 
not succeeded in reducing the suicide rate. This is because individuals who 
turn to associations for the prevention of suicide would only be those who 

288	
Sharyl M. Trail
still regard the future with a certain amount of hope. In our time, the number 
of suicides is unchanged, possibly even increasing.
The Interpersonal Factor
The frequency of suicide is a serious accusation against the none-too-great 
social interest of mankind. In view of this, a comprehensive exploration of 
this puzzling phenomenon is urgently needed.
Among inner, endogenous causes, Individual Psychology considers only 
the style of life which is established out of heredity and environmental influ-
ences by the individual’s own creative power with his incomplete, humanly 
limited insight. In addition, one must determine the external, exogenous 
cause which reveals the inadequate preparation of the individual in question 
for the urgent situation before him. When the self-consistent life style thus 
clashes with the external situation, the extent to which the individual stands 
the test of living with others in society becomes apparent.
Observations of Individual Psychology have shown that every step of an 
individual is directed toward the successful solution of a presently imminent 
task in accordance with the total conception of his self-consistency. What 
the individual considers success is always a matter of his subjective opinion. 
Our experience has also shown that all tasks which the individual may have 
to meet require, without exception, adequate social interest for their cor-
rect solution. Each individual is so joined to society that he can make no 
movement, think no thought, and express no feeling without testifying to 
the degree of his connectedness with society, to his social interest. From this 
it follows that suicide is a solution only for one who in the face of an urgent 
problem has arrived at the end of his limited social interest.
This coming to the end of their limited social interest shows itself in all 
failures, be they active or passive, in their greater development of the inferi-
ority complex. That the suicide departs from the line of social interest is quite 
obvious. All forms of working together, of living together, and of fellowship 
are lacking. Further, it must certainly be admitted that this departure occurs 
in an active way. The activity has a particular curve, however, in that it runs 
apart from social life and against it, and that it harms the individual himself, 
not without giving pain and sorrow to others.
The suicide generally gives little or no (conscious) thought to the shock 
which he causes others. But this difficulty in the way of a further understand-
ing can be resolved. Could it not be that he would have to eliminate others 
from his thoughts before he could commit suicide? In some cases his social 
interest might well be great enough for that. Moreover one finds quite fre-
quently, by contrast, that in his last letter or words the suicide hints at asking 
forgiveness for the sorrow he has afflicted. The movement and the direction 

	
	
Suicide	
289
of the suicide cannot avoid the fact of sorrow to another. And perhaps there 
are many on the brink of suicide who, through greater social interest, are 
deterred from afflicting this sorrow to another.
The “other” is probably never lacking. Usually it is the one who suffers 
most by the suicide.
Predisposing Factors
Individual Psychology continuously seeks to understand the unity and self-
consistency of the individual. We are prepared for failures and try to prevent 
them, always in the conviction that the origin of a misconception of life and 
its organization can be traced back into early childhood. Therefore we must 
try to find the type of child which can be regarded as the potential suicide 
type. Studies of the past life always bring to light those traits which we have 
found in similar forms in all those failures who combine lesser social interest 
with a relatively large degree of activity. Suicidal persons have always been 
problem children, spoiled at least by one side of the family, very complacent, 
and oversensitive. Very often they showed hurt feelings to an unusual degree. 
In case of a loss or defeat, they were always poor losers. While they seldom 
made a direct attack against others, they always showed a life style which 
attempted to influence others through increased complaining, sadness, and 
suffering. A tendency to collapse under psychological pain when confronted 
with difficult life situations often stood out, in addition to increased ambi-
tion, vanity, and consciousness of their value for others. Fantasies of sickness 
or death, in which the pain of others reaches its highest degree, went parallel 
with this firm belief in their high values for others, a belief which they usu-
ally acquired from the pampering situation of their childhood. I have found 
similar traits in the early history of cases of depression, whose type borders 
on that of the suicide, and also of alcoholics and drug addicts.
Among the early childhood expressions of the suicide one also finds the 
deepest grieving over often negligible matters, strong wishes to become sick 
or to die when a humiliation is experienced, tantrums with willful self-injury, 
and an attitude toward others as if it were their duty to fulfill his every wish. 
Occasionally inclinations toward self-accusation come to the fore which 
elicit the sympathy of others, deeds of exaggerated foolhardiness which are 
performed to frighten others, and at times stubborn hunger strikes which 
intimidate the parents. Sometimes one finds ruses in the nature of a direct 
or indirect fantasies, wishes, and dreams which aim at a direct attack while 
suicide follows later.
Examples of suicide in the family have an attraction for those of similar 
tendency, as do the example of friends and well-known persons and special 
places associated with suicide.

290	
Sharyl M. Trail
Summary
Reduced to the simplest form, the life style of the potential suicide is char-
acterized by the fact he hurts others by dreaming himself into injuries or 
by administering them to himself. One will seldom go wrong in determin-
ing against whom the attack is aimed when one has found who is actually 
affected most by it. We find in the suicide the type who thinks too much of 
himself, too little of others, and who is unable sufficiently to play, function, 
live, and die with others. Rather, with an exaggerated consciousness of his 
own worth, he expects with great tension results which are always favorable 
for him.
The idea of suicide, like all other mistaken solutions, of course always 
breaks out in the face of an urgent confronting exogenous problem for which 
the individual in question has an insufficient social interest. His greater or 
lesser activity then determines the direction and development of the symp-
toms. The symptoms can be done away with through an understanding of 
the context.
The psychiatrist will do well to keep his diagnosis of a potential suicide to 
himself, but to take all precautions. He must not tell it to others, but must see 
to it that something is done for the patient to enable him to find a better, more 
independent, socially oriented attitude toward life.

291
23
Demoralized Children
JoAnna White
In April 1920, Dr. Alfred Adler presented a lecture titled “Demoralized Children.” 
It was only a few years after Dr. Adler had completed his military service in World 
War I. This experience, having had a tremendous impact on his life and his con-
cern for the common good, led him to study societal issues of great concern. One 
of these concerns was the increase in the number of demoralized youth. These 
youth were later in the literature referred to as juvenile delinquents. Current lit-
erature does not so much employ the term juvenile delinquent but rather refers 
to the concerns related to the topic with terms such as juvenile justice, juvenile 
crime, and gangs/juvenile vigilantism. This last term refers to the fact that chil-
dren who cannot rely on adults to protect them will turn to their peer group to 
feel safe. These group (gang) members resort to vandalism and other types of 
violence (Garbarino & Bedard, 2001).
In his lecture, Dr. Adler shared with the group that the published statistics of 
the day indicated that the number of demoralized youth was significant enough 
to cause alarm. He went on to say that the majority of cases would go unreported 
and “run their course in silence” until it was too late to turn things around for the 
struggling youth. Those youth, who were untreated, would eventually resort to 
criminal behavior. One need look no further than government and agency statis-
tics of today regarding discouraged juveniles, crime, school crime and safety, and 
juvenile arrests to know that Dr. Adler was accurately predicting the future. We, 
the wealthiest nation in the world, have not yet put into place programs to assist 
parents and educators, policies, laws, and financial support that could prevent 
our children from becoming “demoralized youth.”
In 2008, juveniles accounted for 16% of all violent crime arrests and 26% of all 
property crime arrests. In that same year, 11% of all murder victims were younger 
than 18 (United States Department of Justice, Juvenile Justice Bulletin, December 
2009). In the 2007–2008 school year, 85% of public schools reported one or more 
incidents of crime in the schools while 75% of public schools reported one or 
more incidents of violent crime (Indicators of School Crime and Safety, 2009). 

292	
JoAnna White
In 2008 5.7 million children lived in extreme poverty with 1 in every 12 children 
in a household with an income below 50% of the federal poverty line (Southern 
Education Foundation, 2010).
Marian Wright Edelman, founder of the Children’s Defense Fund, asks how 
it is possible that more than half a million of our youth drop out of school each 
year. She believes that adults have let children down by not providing safe and 
nurturing environments for them so that later problems are prevented (Children’s 
Defense Fund, 2010). She states that adults, rather than preventing problems, find 
it easier to punish children after they get in trouble. This approach requires much 
less work on the part of the adult so it may be more attractive. However, the rami-
fications of avoiding early guidance with children are overwhelmingly negative.
The recent statistics and the comments of Dr. Wright Edelman clearly illus-
trate the main points that Dr. Adler was attempting to make in his lecture 90 
years ago: Early experiences and children’s interpretations of those experiences 
are critical in their development, children with feelings of insignificance will find 
ways (usually negative) to protect themselves and strive for significance, parents 
and schools play a critical role, children living in poverty are at risk, and persons 
making decisions about children should be trained to understand their social/
emotional development. These issues are as immediate and in need of attention 
today as they were in 1920.
Dr. Adler’s emphasis in his lecture on the importance of positive childhood 
experiences for healthy development reminds us of what we know to be true. 
However, our society tends to ignore this fact when it comes to funding for chil-
dren’s physical and mental health needs, parent education and support, and vio-
lence prevention. Adler stated that “in the early stages most of the demoralization 
takes place within the family circle,” yet families continue to struggle because of 
lack of information, lack of support, and poverty.
With close to 6 million children living in extreme poverty in the United 
States, we can also learn from Dr. Adler’s concerns for the differences in the 
social classes and the tremendous impact that living in poverty can have on a 
family and the children. Adler cautions that children living in poverty often view 
the world with hostility and as a place where difficulties cannot be overcome. 
These children grow up with a fear of life that develops into extreme pessimism. 
Thus the demoralized child will find solace in a peer group that also views the 
world from a negative vantage point. Gang membership today, as it did in 1920, 
meets a need for youth who have not had experiences in cooperation and have 
not been encouraged. They feel powerless and are striving for power in ways that 
fit their life experiences.
Schools can be a toxic place for demoralized youth. Most professionals in 
schools are not trained to understand these children and teens, and often educa-
tors have a strong need for power, which only reinforces a demoralized youth’s 

	
	
Demoralized Children	
293
view of the world as a dangerous place. Adler believed that “the greatest drawback 
of the school is the prevailing ignorance about the psychic development of the 
child.” An emphasis on academics and obedience at the sacrifice of understand-
ing the whole child is typical in most schools, especially with the constraints 
placed on teachers regarding performance-based assessments of their students. 
Students with a positive view of the world and a strong sense of self-efficacy can 
survive this type of system. Demoralized youth cannot.
There are pockets of educational excellence in which children without means 
are treated with respect and encouraged. These children are able to learn and 
contribute to the group. Most go on to college. These unique schools have many 
of the components of “curative pedagogy” that are essential to a school based on 
the principles of Individual Psychology. We can learn from these educational 
successes so that children are saved from a life of poverty, discouragement, and 
possibly incarceration.
In conclusion, Adler warned that “the feeling of cooperation must suffer 
where the craving for power exists.” All children crave significance/prestige. If 
they are not afforded experiences that move them toward positive behaviors, they 
will “choose a side path.” Demoralized youth do not easily adjust to society and 
are not able to engage in meaningful relationships. They are on guard and suspi-
cious. They are unable to trust, which is the most basic element of healthy devel-
opment. For the sake of these youth and society at large, it is critical that those 
who make decisions that affect our children view the crisis of demoralized youth 
from a preventive and holistic approach. Adler’s emphasis on the importance of 
understanding that all children want to feel significant and all children make 
early lifestyle decisions within the context of their families cannot be ignored if 
we hope to save children from a life of despair.
References
Children’s Defense Fund. (2010). Marian Wright Edelman’s child watch column: Children 
drop out and into lives of poverty and imprisonment. Retrieved June 23, 2010, from 
http://www.childrensdefense.org/child-research-data-publications/data/marian-
wright-edelman-child-watch-column/drop-out-into-poverty.html
Garbarino, J., & Bedard, C. (2001). Parents under siege. New York: The Free Press.
National Center for Education Statistics. (2009). Indicators of school crime and safety: 2009. 
Retrieved June 23, 2010, from http://nces.ed.gov/programs/crimeindicators/crimei-
ndicators2009/key.asp
Southern Educational Foundation. (2010). The worst of times. Retrieved June 24, 2010, 
from http://www.southerneducation.org/pdf/SEF%20Child%20Poverty%20Sp%20
Summary-Final.pdf
United States Department of Justice, Juvenile Justice Bulletin. (2009, December). Juvenile arrests 
2008. Retrieved June 21, 2010, from http://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/ojjdp/228479.pdf

294	
JoAnna White
Demoralized Children50
Alfred Adler
Of the “blessings” that came in the wake of the Great War perhaps no one 
thing is of such importance as the tremendous increase in the demoralization 
of youth. Everyone has noticed it and many have taken cognizance of it with 
horror. The published statistics were significant enough and their signifi-
cance must become greater to all who stopped to think that only a small part 
of the damage inflicted comes to our knowledge and that a large number of 
other cases are destined to run their course in silence for months and years, 
until finally we are confronted with individuals no longer to be reckoned as 
among the demoralized but among the criminals. The numbers are large and 
the number that never finds its way into statistics, still greater. In the early 
stages most of the demoralization takes place within the family circle. An 
improvement is expected from day to day and certain measures are applied. 
As there are quite a number of transgressions that occur among the demor-
alized youth that are not directly punishable by law or juvenile courts, and 
although they inflict extensive damage upon the family, they are covered up 
without leading to any change in the nature of the culprit. It is, of course, 
not at all necessary to give up all hope about the mistakes and transgressions 
of youth, but considering the remarkably deficient knowledge and under-
standing with which these matters are approached, optimism is not justified. 
Nevertheless we should point out that in the developmental stages of man, 
particularly during youth, not everything takes its course along ideal lines, 
that deviations occur, and if we were to transport ourselves back to our own 
youth and our youthful companions, we would be able to rake up a num-
ber of transgressions committed even by children, who subsequently became 
either tolerably efficient people or even distinguished men. How extensively 
youthful transgressions spread, a cursory summary may perhaps show you. 
I have occasionally attempted to make investigations in schools in such a 
tactful manner that no one could possibly be hurt. On a sheet of paper on 
which no names appeared, answers were to be written to the following ques-
tions: Has anyone ever lied or stolen? The general results showed that all the 
children confessed to petty thefts. One of the interesting episodes was the 
participation of a female teacher in the answers and her recollection of hav-
ing committed a theft in childhood. But now let us call attention to the com-
plicated nature of such a question! One child may have a kind and intelligent 
father who knows how to come to an understanding with him and in many 
cases may succeed. Another child may have done the same thing but perhaps 
50	Translated by P. Radin.

	
	
Demoralized Children	
295
more clumsily, conspicuously or brazenly and he will then immediately feel 
the whole brunt of the family discipline descend upon him and the convic-
tion impressed upon his mind that he is a criminal. We should therefore not 
be surprised that the difference in the nature of the punishment is correlated 
with a difference in the subterfuges adopted. It is the worst of all pedagogical 
principles to tell a child that he will never amount to anything, that he pos-
sesses a criminal nature; conceptions that belong to the domain of supersti-
tion, although there are scientists who also speak of hereditary criminals. 
We have thus reached that point at which current educational systems cease 
to have any method which they can apply for the control of the initial or 
later stages of demoralization. That ought not to surprise us for we are here 
concerned with facts in the child’s psychic life, whose understanding is as yet 
confined to an extra-ordinary small circle of people.
Generally when we speak of demoralization we think of the school years. 
The expert observer will, however, be able to point out a number of cases 
where the demoralization began before the school days. It is not always pos-
sible to attribute them to the bringing-up. Parents must be told that no matter 
how careful they are that part of the education of which they know or notice 
nothing and which emanates from other circles, influences the child more 
than their consciously superior education.
These extraneous influences that find their way into the nursery repre-
sent all the events and conditions of life and of the environment. The child 
is impressed by the difficulties with which he sees his father beset in order to 
make a living, and he realizes the hostility of life even if he does not speak of 
it. He will develop a conception with the inadequate means at his disposal, 
with childish interpretations and experiences. This view of the world then 
becomes for the child a measure of evaluation; he makes it the basis for his 
judgments in every position in which he finds himself and will draw the cor-
respondingly necessary inferences. These are in large measure wrong because 
we are here dealing with an inexperienced child whose reasoning powers are 
undeveloped and who consequently is liable to make false deductions. But 
just visualize the tremendous impression made upon a child whose parents 
live in a poor dwelling under depressing social circumstances, and contrast 
it with that of a child who does not feel life’s hostility so definitely. These two 
types are so distinct that it is possible to infer from every child’s expression 
and manner of speaking to which group he belongs. How differently will this 
last-mentioned child’s attitude toward life be, with his self-confidence and 
courage, and how markedly will this be reflected in his whole carriage. The 
second type makes friends’ with the world easily because he knows noth-
ing of life’s difficulties or can overcome them more easily. I have asked chil-
dren among the proletariat of what they were most in fear and practically 
all answered of being struck—in other words, of occurrences taking place in 

296	
JoAnna White
their own family. Children who grow up in fear of a strong father, stepfa-
ther or mother, retain this feeling of fear till puberty, and we must remember 
that on the average the proletarian does not give us the same world-satisfied 
impression as the average bourgeois who is more courageous. A good deal of 
this pitiable bearing can be traced back to the fact that he has grown up in an 
atmosphere of fear of life and punishment. This is the most venomous kind 
of poison for developing pessimism in children, for they retain this perspec-
tive throughout life, have no self-confidence and are indecisive. To gain a 
courageous attitude afterwards requires both time and energy. The children 
of well-to-do parents generally answered the question of what they feared 
most, by saying school-work. This shows that neither individuals nor their 
own environment frighten them and they feel themselves to be in the midst 
of life where tasks and work exist of which they are afraid. This of course 
makes us assume the existence of untenable conditions in the schools, which 
instead of training them to face life gladly and courageously merely filled 
them with fear.
Let us now go back to the question of demoralization before the school-
days. We ought not to be surprised to find, in view of the excitable state of 
the moods called up by all the disturbing relations that create fear of life, 
and in view of the envisaging of one’s neighbour as hostile, that children will 
make a persistent effort to gain prestige and not to appear as the insignificant 
personages to which people often try to reduce them. It is one of the most 
important principles in any educational system to take the child seriously, 
to regard him as an equal and not to humiliate and make fun of him; for the 
child feels and must necessarily feel all those expressions of his immediate 
surroundings as oppressive, just as the weaker person possesses a sensibility 
different from that of an individual who finds himself in an assured position 
of a mental and bodily superiority. We are not even in a position to state 
exactly how a child is affected by the fact that it cannot do the things that 
he wonderingly see his parents and brothers perform daily. This should be 
remembered. Everyone who has developed a capacity for reading the child’s 
soul, must have realized that every child possesses an extraordinary craving 
for power and importance, for increased self-consciousness; that he wishes to 
exert influence and appear important. The young would-be hero represents 
but a special case of the power that all wish to have.
Differences between them can be easily explained. In one case the child 
may be living in harmony with his parents, in another he may fall into a 
hostile attitude and develop antagonism to the demands of society in order 
not to utterly succumb to the feeling that he is nothing, plays no role, is quite 
disregarded. If such a stage of development is actually reached, where chil-
dren realize their insignificance and their loss of importance, they set imme-
diately to work to protect themselves—all children do it—and then indications 

	
	
Demoralized Children	
297
of demoralization may appear very early. I once met a five-year-old abomi-
nation who had killed three children. This somewhat mentally-retarded girl 
always resorted to the following method in her “crimes.” She would look for 
girls smaller than herself—she lived in the country—take them along to play 
with her and then push them into the stream. It was only when the third 
child had been killed that the perpetrator was discovered. She was placed 
in a lunatic asylum. She did not show the slightest realization of the deprav-
ity of her actions. She cried, but passed easily over to other subjects, and it 
was only with the greatest difficulty that any information could be obtained 
about the nature of the whole situation and her motives. For four years she 
had been the youngest child among a number of boys and had been exces-
sively petted. Then a younger sister had appeared upon the scene and the par-
ents lavished all their attention upon the newcomer while she, the elder, was 
pushed into the background. This could not however endure and she devel-
oped a hatred of her younger sister that she was, under the circumstances, 
unable to gratify because the baby was very careful1y guarded, and because 
she possibly realized that she could be easily detected. She thereupon gener-
alized and transferred her hatred to younger girls, all of whom she regarded 
as potential enemies. In all of them she saw her own young sister on whose 
account she was no longer being petted. In this mood she now progressed to 
the point of even killing them. Attempts made to bring such children back 
to normal paths, within a short time, go awry, because these children are at 
times mentally defective, oftener than one believes. One must be prepared 
for a treatment of long duration, and by using infinite tact and a special kind 
of training, render the child capable of again taking part in the life of soci-
ety. But these cases, which are exceedingly common, are of lesser interest 
to us because of their connexion with mental deficiency and we must, in a 
way, accept them as instances of biological sports, for they probably would 
never fit entirely into human society. But the great mass of our demoralized 
youth is free from any taint of mental inferiority. On the contrary we often 
find extraordinarily gifted children who for a time progress quite well and 
develop capabilities up to a certain point, but once they have broken down 
they are utterly unable to prevent a catastrophe overtaking them along one 
of the main lines of life. In every case we find the same regularly recurring 
traits:—a marked development of ambition although not outwardly expressed; 
sensitiveness to being pushed aside or ignored; cowardice consisting not simply 
in running away but in sneaking away from life and its demands. From these 
few traits we can draw a picture of the whole. Only an ambitious child is 
capable of being frightened away from a task that threatens to extend beyond 
its powers and of striking out along another path as though covering up its 
weakness. This is the ordinary course of demoralization found in schools. 
This demoralization is connected with some failure that either has taken place 

298	
JoAnna White
or is about to take place, and shows itself at first in absence from school. But 
as truancy must, of course, be concealed, we naturally find that at first notes 
of excuse are forged and then signatures. But what is the child to do with its 
free time? An occupation must be found. As a rule a union takes place of all 
children who have gone along the same road, all who have been overtaken by 
the same fate. These children are, as a rule, all tremendously ambitious and 
desirous of playing a role, but do not trust themselves to attaining if along 
the main lines of human endeavour, and in consequence seek activities that 
will give them satisfaction. Some individual is always found to be best fitted 
for leadership and competition then ceases. Each one has some idea of what 
should be done. Imitating forms employed by their elders, they will develop 
a code of ethics applicable to a demoralized group. They try hard and with 
great ingenuity to think of deeds to perform that will enhance their impor-
tance in the eyes of their comrades. These are always carried out by decep-
tion, or hyper-deception, for they do not trust themselves to act openly—in 
consequence of their cowardice. Once on this road there is no turning back. 
Occasionally mentally defective boys join the group. They are made fun of, 
have tricks played on them and their pride, then incite them to exceptional 
efforts and actions. Or it may be that being accustomed to a definite kind of 
treatment they are specially trained to obedience and their task becomes one of 
receiving orders and carrying them out. It frequently happens that some one 
plans a specific transgression and the younger, inexperienced, inferior ones 
undertake it. I shall pass over other temptations although something might 
be said about them too, such as vicious books, the cinema, but they do not 
become directing forces until later. The cinema could never survive if it were 
not for the cleverness and the special skill displayed in selecting subject mat-
ter, whether criminal or detective, that stimulates the audience. In this over-
evaluation of guile and subterfuge, the cowardice to face life is manifested.
The formation of bands is so common that it is the first thing that comes 
to mind when thinking of demoralized youths. But the demoralization of an 
individual distinct from a group is quite frequent. Such a person’s life is simi-
lar to that we have described above, though apparently the directly impelling 
motives are different. Let us keep before us the fact that in the cases of group 
demoralization described above, the fate of the individuals is foreshadowed 
as soon as they have suffered some set-back or expect one. The same is true of 
a single individual. The simple, almost unwitting, persons come under this 
rule to the same extent as the more complicated. It is always some offence to 
one’s amour propre, the fear of making a fool of one’s self, the feeling of some 
decline in power or the will to power, that becomes the occasion for a devia-
tion to some side-line of development. It looks almost as if these children were 
seeking for some subsidiary field of action. Frequently demoralization shows 
itself in a special form of laziness, which must then be looked upon neither 

	
	
Demoralized Children	
299
as hereditary nor as the acquisition of a bad habit, but rather as a method of 
preventing any of them being put to tests. A lazy child can always fall back 
upon laziness as an excuse. If he fails in an examination it is the fault of his 
laziness, and such a child prefers to attribute his failure to laziness than to 
inability. Thus, like an experienced criminal, he is forced to prove an alibi; he 
must in each case demonstrate that his lack of success is due to laziness. And 
he succeeds. His laziness covers his failures, and from one point of view, that 
of sparing his conceit, his psychic situation has improved.
We know the demerits of our schools. The crowded classes, the insufficient 
training of many of the teachers, occasionally their lack of interest, for they 
suffer intensely from cramped economic conditions and more is hardly to be 
expected of them. Primarily, however, the greatest drawback of the school is 
the prevailing ignorance about the psychic development of the child: and that 
is the reason why hitherto the relations of the teacher and pupil have been 
so much more hopeless than those existing anywhere else in life. If the pupil 
makes a mistake he is either punished or given a poor mark. That is about 
the same as if a doctor called to treat someone who has broken a bone, say-
ing: “You have a bone-fracture! Good-bye!” That assuredly is not the purpose 
of education! In the main the children take care of themselves under these 
horrible conditions and progress, but what of the gaps in their development? 
Children will proceed until they finally come to a point where their deficien-
cies assume such a form that a halt must be called. It is sad enough to realize 
how difficult it is even for the best child to progress, how under the weight 
of the accumulated difficulties he is afflicted with there emerges the painful 
feeling of being unable to perform the tasks others achieve, and finally to be 
a witness of his wounded and offended self-esteem! Many pass beyond this 
stage too, but many prefer to develop for themselves some subsidiary field of 
action.
Individual demoralization thus develops in the same manner as group 
demoralization. Here, likewise, the feeling of inferiority, of inadequacy and 
of humiliation tower above everything else. Let me quote the case of a boy, 
an only child, whose parents devoted great pains in educating him. At the 
age of five he already regarded the locking of chests, when the parents were 
absent, as a great insult and succeeded somehow in procuring a skeleton key 
and ransacking the chests. He was impelled to this conduct by his striving 
for independence, his will to power asserting itself in antagonism to his par-
ents and the laws of society. Even to-day, at the age of eighteen, he indulges 
in household thefts unknown to his parents, although they believe they are 
aware of all of them. When his father tells him, “Of what use are these acts 
to you? As often as you steal I discover the fact,” then the boy has the proud 
realization of knowing that his father does not know one in twenty and con-
tinues his thefts in the conviction that all that is necessary is to be clever 

300	
JoAnna White
enough to escape detection. Here we have an example of the frequent strug-
gle between a child and its parents that induces the former to resort to acts 
contrary to the moral code of society. When fully grown-up this young man 
will undoubtedly provide himself with these psychic aids and supports that 
will enable him to transgress without feeling any pricks of conscience. His 
father is a business man, and even though the son is not permitted to visit his 
father’s factories, he knows that the latter is engaged in the manufacture of 
chains, etc. When conversing with people he calls his father’s attacks upon 
him unjust, because the latter is simply doing what he does, simply on a larger 
scale. So here again we have an example of the educative influence of the 
environment of which the parents are totally ignorant.
Let me now give one case from proletarian circles. An illegitimate six-year 
old boy is taken to the home of his mother who is married. His real father 
has disappeared and his step-father, a cranky old man, although not really 
interested in children, is very demonstrative to his own daughter, fondles her, 
brings her sweets while the boy is forced to look on. One day, a fairly large 
sum of money belonging to the mother disappears without a trace. Shortly 
after that, after further sums had disappeared, she discovered the culprit to 
be her son, and that he had spent the money in purchasing sweets, occasion-
ally sharing it with his comrades with the object of showing off. So here we 
have another example of the secondary field of action, serving as usual the 
old main object of triumphing and gaining prestige at any cost. These thefts 
happened a number of times, whippings followed, and his step-father did not 
spare him. I saw the boy myself, covered with stripes, his whole body full of 
scratches and cicatrices. In spite of the punishments, however, the thefts, as 
might have been expected, did not cease. The mother, it is true, was rather 
clumsy, for she had made the thefts rather easy for the child. But how many 
mothers show any intelligence in such cases? The analysis showed that the 
boy had been taken care of by an old peasant woman who, when visiting the 
adjacent villages, had always taken him with her and had given him some 
sweets from time to time. The child was then transferred to a new environ-
ment where he found himself at a great disadvantage compared to his for-
mer home. His little sister he sees petted and fondled, given sweets denied 
him. It is she, not he who attracts attention. He was very good at school. 
His transgression is found exactly there where he would be expected to look 
for an enemy and appeared almost as inevitable. And so it is in many cases. 
Demoralization has the effect of an act of revenge and brings to the child a 
psychic relief.
Let me again emphasize the fact that the transgressions of demoralized 
people are not of an active, courageous kind, except when they operate in 
large numbers and this would again point to cowardice. Their most frequent 
dereliction is theft, which is essentially the crime of cowardice.

	
	
Demoralized Children	
301
If we wish to understand clearly both all the interrelations and the posi-
tion of the children to society we should bear two things in mind. First that 
their ambition and vanity are signs of their craving for power and superior-
ity so that in consequence they try to obtain prestige along some side-path 
as soon as the main-line of development is closed to them. Secondly, their 
relation to their fellows is somehow deficient; they are not good companions, 
they do not easily adjust themselves to society, have something of the dog-in-
the-manger attitude and exhibit little contact with the outer world. At times, 
nothing but a meaningless pretence or a mere habit is all that remains of 
their love for their own people; often even this is missing and they may then 
even attack their own family. They play the role of people whose feeling for 
society is defective, who have not discovered the point of contact with their 
fellowmen and look upon them as hostile. Traits of suspicion are very com-
mon among them; they are always on guard lest someone take advantage of 
them and I have often heard these children exclaim that it is necessary to be 
unscrupulous, i.e., that superiority must be attained. Suspicion creeps into 
all their relations and adds to the difficulties of living with them. Cowardly 
subterfuges develop automatically through this lack of trust in themselves.
The question now to decide is whether this craving for power, this deficient 
social consciousness is due to different causes? We can definitely answer in 
the negative for they do but represent two sides of the same psychic attitude. 
The feeling of co-operation must suffer where the craving for power exists, for a 
person possessed by the latter thinks only of himself, of his power, of his pres-
tige, acts in utter disregard of others. If an individual succeeds in developing 
a feeling of cooperation the best guarantee against demoralization is given.
I am quite at sea as to what can be done in an age of intensified demoral-
ization like ours. The correct and proper thing is clearly to act immediately. 
Even in times of complete peace our civilization was not able to gain effec-
tive control over demoralization and crime; she could merely punish, revenge 
herself, frighten people, never solve the problem. She kept the demoralized at 
elbow distance. Visualize, if you can, the frightful fate of these people, whose 
loneliness must in itself drive them to crime; people who are criminals only 
because they have lost contact. From that they develop into habitual criminals. 
It is a piece of utter stupidity, for instance, to herd together during examina-
tion, demoralized individuals with their own kind or with criminals.
We must reckon with about 40 percent of the crimes remaining undis-
covered. Among the demoralized the percentage is even higher. A short time 
ago, a youthful murderer was convicted and his lawyer knew that this was 
the second murder for which he had been tried. When criminals meet they 
discuss the number of times they have not been caught and this naturally 
increases the difficulty of combating crime and constantly renews the crimi-
nal’s courage.

302	
JoAnna White
Evils are also noticeable in the type of attitude taken by society. Both 
courts and police work to no purpose because they always centre their atten-
tion upon questions other than the really radical and determining ones. To 
improve the situation the first requirement is to have a different and a more 
humane personnel. Institutions ought to be erected for taking care of these 
demoralized children, for bringing them back to life; not shutting them off 
from society, but, on the contrary, making them more adapted for it. That can 
only happen if we have a full understanding of their peculiarities. Nothing 
can be accomplished if any kind of person whatsoever (e.g., a retired officer 
or a subaltern) can be appointed director of an institution of this kind merely 
because he enjoys political protection. Only such people are to be considered 
for these posts who have a strongly developed community-sense and a full 
understanding of the people entrusted to their care. The essential point of 
my argument is this, that in a civilization where one man is the enemy of the 
other—for this is what our whole industrial system means—demoralization 
is ineradicable, for demoralization and crime are by-products of the struggle 
for existence as known to our industrialized civilization. The shadows of this 
struggle fall very early across the soul of the child, destroy its poise, facilitate 
its craving for greatness and render it craven and incapable of co-operation.
To limit and do away with this demoralization a chair of curative peda-
gogy should be established. It is indeed hard to understand why such a chair 
does not already exist. Today a true understanding of the problem is exceed-
ingly rare. All persons in any way connected with this problem should be 
compelled to take an active part. The institution itself should be in the nature 
of a central exchange bureau which would give information on all matters 
relating to the prevention and combating of demoralization.
In addition, county institutions of an advisory nature should exist for the 
lighter cases. For the more severe forms the relatives of the patients must 
suggest a method of treating them, for the patients themselves would never 
be able to find one.
In conclusion teachers should be made acquainted with individual-­
psychology and curative pedagogy, so that from the very beginning they 
might be in a position to recognize the signs of demoralization and to inter-
vene helpfully themselves and nip the danger tactfully and lovingly in the 
bud. A model school for the practical education of the personnel should also 
be founded.

303
24
Significance of Early Recollections
Arthur J. Clark
In the “Significance of Early Recollections,” Alfred Adler (1937) presents a cul-
mination of his evolving ideas relating to the projective technique and his theory 
of Individual Psychology. The paper was originally published in a book chap-
ter (Adler, 1929) and, with the addition of a concluding paragraph and minimal 
revisions, was reprinted in the International Journal of Individual Psychology. In 
Adler’s view, early recollections provide perhaps the most important means for 
understanding the style of life or basic personality functioning of an individual. 
Through brief case illustrations, Adler demonstrates how essential concepts of 
Individual Psychology are integral to the therapeutic utilization of early recol-
lections in treatment settings. These recollections serve an organizing function 
in the cases for the purposefulness of behavior, the style of life, striving for supe-
riority, holism, and birth order. Each of these uniquely Adlerian theoretical for-
mulations extends the potential richness of his observations and is basic to his 
discussion of early recollections.
In the introduction to the article, Adler immediately makes reference to the 
principle of the purposefulness of behavior as it relates to personality dynam-
ics. Through case material, he proceeds to illustrate how a goal-directed process 
enables individuals to seek adaptive or maladaptive pursuits in life. Adler also 
suggests that persons often lack awareness of the goal-striving quality of their 
functioning. In one case, a young adulthood client recalls an early memory: “I was 
running round the whole day in a kiddy car.” From this brief remembrance, Adler 
empathically infers that the individual’s tacit goal-directedness is toward motor 
activity and movement in general. Among other problems, the man had been 
having difficulties in adjusting to sedentary occupations. In a somewhat humor-
ous conclusion to the case, he finds a satisfying career as a traveling salesman.
Although Adler emphasizes how early recollections clarify goals and signifi-
cant strivings, he also points out that when persons recall their memories they 
usually view them only as experiences from their first years of life. Because the 
potential meanings of early remembrances are tacit or largely unknown to indi-
viduals, they are less subject to the heightened response distortions commonly 

304	
Arthur J. Clark
associated with other self-report measures. Adler also acknowledges that per-
sons largely have a conscious awareness of their first memories, and, as a conse-
quence, it is possible to readily elicit the recollections in a treatment situation or 
in everyday life. It is apparent in this context that Adler is referring to a contrast-
ing application in psychoanalytic treatment which emphasizes uncovering latent 
childhood memories through intensive analysis.
In a further discussion, Adler asserts that the full value and meaning of early 
recollections cannot be estimated until they are viewed in the context of an indi-
vidual’s style of life or lifestyle, and his or her goal of superiority. The lifestyle 
functions as a sustaining reminder and an enduring guide by epitomizing a per-
son’s feelings about life. In the paper’s most lengthy case illustration, a young 
woman came to Adler in conflict over both her desire and her fear of having 
a child. She expresses that bearing a child would be a potential danger to her 
health. In Adler’s formulation, he thought that the client had been pampered as 
a child and was fearful of having a baby who would be a rival to her for atten-
tion. Indeed, the individual’s early recollection involves a dangerous situation 
in which she is the center of attention of her mother. As in this instance, Adler 
feels the lifestyle illuminates a person’s current perspectives and ingrained long-
term beliefs. Related to the lifestyle, an individual’s striving for superiority is an 
inherent tendency to seek a significant goal through a basic motivational process. 
Consistent with the client’s lifestyle and her early recollection, seeking attention 
is a major quest or goal in the life of the young woman.
Social interest or an identification and kinship with humanity is another 
prominent construct in Adler’s theoretical orientation. Characteristically, a per-
son who demonstrates excessive self-centeredness and isolation from the activi-
ties of others has not developed a healthy level of social interest. In another case 
illustration, Adler discusses the situation of a 30-year-old student who is socially 
withdrawn and anxious. In a brief early recollection, the client recalls lying on 
a cot and looking at the wallpaper and curtains. Adler relates that although the 
man had developed a strong visual capacity, he was not prepared on a human 
level for an active pursuit of cooperation and intimacy. Further, the client’s avoid-
ant pattern of living does not engender a sense of belonging and emotional well-
being that is inherent in social interest.
Although Adler does not directly make reference to the prominent Individual 
Psychology concept of holism in the early recollections paper, he frequently 
alludes to the holistic quality of an individual’s thoughts, feelings, and actions in 
the case examples. In one instance, a philosophy student complains about a prob-
lem of blushing that makes it uncomfortable and stressful for him to participate 
in social activities. Adler states that the physical manifestation of erythrophobia 
has a holistic effect on inhibiting his actions and eliciting feelings of tension. In 
his early recollection, the client was slapped by his parents for wandering away 
from the family home with his little brother, but his younger brother was not 

	
	
Significance of Early Recollections	
305
punished. Since childhood, the man felt that his parents favored his younger 
brother, and he was unable to satisfactorily compete with him. In encountering 
the tasks of life involving intimate relationships, work, and friendships, the cli-
ent felt inferior and trapped. In turn, his blushing appears to provide a safeguard 
or pretext that enables him to avoid those situations where he feared that others 
would be preferred to him.
Given the importance that Adler attributes to birth order and the broader 
dimension of the family constellation in influencing a person’s development, it 
is not surprising that he relates both conceptions to early recollections. Citing 
another case, Adler discusses the situation of a child who felt displaced and 
dethroned within his family by the birth of a younger sibling. The client, who 
experiences difficulties with trust and feelings of being let down by others, recalls 
an early recollection that takes place during a rainstorm in which his mother 
picks him up and then places him down to hold his younger brother. In such 
renderings, early recollections provide a brief glimpse into the perceptions of an 
individual’s first years during this formative developmental period.
Beyond the present article, among Adler’s extensive commentaries on early 
recollections, he dedicated three chapters in separate books to the subject (Adler, 
1929/1969, 1931/1958, 1964/1933). Since Adler’s initial work, early recollections 
have been a primary focus of hundreds of publications in the professional litera-
ture (Clark, 2002). Much of this scholarship relates to practical applications of 
the projective technique in a treatment context. In this regard, Munroe (1955) 
states, “Adler’s notion of comparing people on the basis of their spontaneous 
‘conscious’ reaction to the fairly simple but dynamic question is the very core 
of contemporary projective techniques” (p. 429). Other wide-ranging research 
relates the function of early recollections or the first memories of life to human 
development, personality, psychopathology, career development, and various 
other psychological domains. An enduring interest continues in early recollec-
tions today, and Adler’s original formulations provide a viable theoretical and 
practical framework for extending knowledge about the topic. In a biography of 
Adler, Orgler (1939/1965) writes, “the realisation that first memories allow a deep 
insight into the human soul is one of Adler’s greatest discoveries” (p. 29).
References
Adler, A. (1969). The science of living (H. L. Ansbacher, Ed.). Garden City, NY: Anchor 
Books. (Original work published 1929)
Adler, A. (1958). What life should mean to you (A. Porter, Ed.). New York: G. Putnam. 
(Original work published 1931)
Adler, A. (1937). Significance of early recollections. International Journal of Individual 
Psychology, 3, 283–287.
Adler, A. (1929). Problems of neurosis: A book of case histories (P. Mairet, Ed.). New York: 
Harper & Row. (Original work published 1929)

306	
Arthur J. Clark
Adler, A. (1964). Social interest: A challenge to mankind (J. Linton & R. Vaughan, Trans.). 
New York: Capricorn Books. (Original work published 1933)
Clark, A. J. (2002). Early recollections: Theory and practice in counseling and psychotherapy. 
New York: Brunner-Routledge.
Munroe, R. L. (1955). Schools of psychoanalytic thought: An exposition, critique, and attempt 
at integration. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Orgler, H. (1965). Alfred Adler: The man and his work. New York: Capricorn Books. 
(Original work published 1939)

	
	
Significance of Early Recollections	
307
Significance of Early Recollections51
Alfred Adler
The discovery of the significance of early recollections is one of the most 
important findings of Individual Psychology. It has demonstrated the pur-
posiveness in the choice of what is longest remembered, though the memory 
itself is quite conscious or the recollection is easily brought out upon inquiry. 
Rightly understood, these conscious memories give us glimpses of depths 
just as profound as do those which are more or less suddenly recalled during 
treatment.
We do not, of course, believe that all early recollections are correct records 
of actual facts. Many are even fancied, and most perhaps are changed or 
distorted at a time later than that in which the events are supposed to have 
occurred; but this does not diminish their significance. What is altered or 
imagined is also expressive of the patient’s goal, and although there is a dif-
ference between the work of fantasy and that of memory, we can safely make 
use of both by relating them to our knowledge of other factors. Their worth 
and meaning, however, cannot be rightly estimated until we relate them to 
the total style of life of the individual in question, and recognize their unity 
with his main line of striving towards a goal of superiority.
In recollections dating from the first four or five years we find chiefly frag-
ments of the prototype of the individual’s life-style, or useful hints as to why 
his life-plan was elaborated into its own particular form. Here also we may 
gather the surest indications of self-training to overcome the deficiencies felt 
in the early environment or organic difficulties. In many cases, signs of the 
person’s degree of activity, of his courage and social feeling are also evident 
in the early recollections. Owing to the great number of spoiled children who 
come under treatment, we find that the mother is rarely absent from the ear-
liest remembrance; indeed, if the life-style is one of a pampered child, the 
guess that the patient will recall something about his mother is usually cor-
rect. If the mother does not appear in the early recollections that, too, may 
have a certain significance; it may, for one thing, indicate a feeling of having 
been neglected by her. However, he will never have understood the meaning 
of his early remembrances. In answer to my question he may, for instance, 
simply say, “I was sitting in a room playing with a toy, and my mother was 
sitting close to me.” He regards a recollection as if it were a thing by itself 
and as if it had no significance; he never thinks of its coherence in the whole 
structure of his psychic life. Unfortunately many psychologists do the same.
51	Originally edited by Philip Mairet; additional editing by Heinz Ansbacher.

308	
Arthur J. Clark
To estimate its meaning we have to relate the early pattern of perception to 
all we can discover of the individual’s present attitude, until we find how the 
one clearly mirrors the other. In the example just given we begin to see this 
correlation when we learn that the patient suffers from anxiety when alone. 
The interest in being connected with the mother may appear even in the form 
of fictitious remembrances, as in the case of the patient who said to me, “You 
will not believe me, but I can remember being born, and my mother holding 
me in her arms.”
Very often the earliest memory of a spoiled child refers to its dispossession 
by the birth of a younger brother or sister. These recollections which record 
the feeling of being dispossessed vary from slight and innocent reminis-
cences, such as, “I recollect when my younger sister was born,” to instances 
highly significant of the particular attitude of the patient. A woman once told 
me, “I remember having to watch my younger sister, who was lying on a table. 
She was restless and threw off the coverlets. I wanted to adjust them and I 
pulled them away from her, whereupon she fell and was hurt.” This woman 
was forty-five when she came to me; at school, in marriage, and throughout 
life she had felt herself disregarded, just as in her first childhood when she 
had felt herself dethroned. A similar attitude, even more expressive of suspi-
cion and mistrust, was expressed by a man who said, “I was going to market 
with my mother and little brother. Suddenly it began to rain, and my mother 
took me up in her arms, and then remembering that I was the elder, she put 
me down and took up my younger brother.” Successful as he was in his life, 
this man distrusted everybody, especially women.
A student thirty years of age came to me in trouble because he could not 
face his examinations. He was in such a state of strain that he could neither 
sleep nor concentrate. The symptoms indicate his lack of preparation and of 
courage, and his age shows the distance at which he stood from the solution 
of the problem of occupation. He had no friends and had never fallen in love, 
because of his lack of social adjustment; and his sexuality was expressed in 
masturbation and nocturnal emissions. His earliest memory was of lying in 
a cot, looking round at the wallpaper and curtains. This recollection reflects 
the isolation of his later life, and also his interest in visual activity. He was 
astigmatic, and was striving to compensate for this organic deficiency. We 
must remember, however, that any function which is strongly developed but 
which is not also related to a fair degree of social interest may disturb the har-
mony of life. For instance, to watch is really a worthwhile activity, but when 
the patient barricades himself against all other activities arid wants only to 
gratify his eyes all day, it is possible for watching to become a compulsion-
neurosis. Some people are interested primarily in seeing. But there are only a 
few positions in which interest in seeing is the chief one to be employed. Even 
those positions cannot be found by a person who is socially maladjusted. This 

	
	
Significance of Early Recollections	
309
patient, as we have seen, had not been a real fellow man to anyone, so that he 
had found no use for his peculiar interest.
The earliest remembrances not infrequently disclose an interest in move-
ment, such as: traveling, running, motoring, or jumping. So far as we can 
see this is often characteristic of individuals who encounter difficulties when 
they find it necessary to begin work in sedentary occupations. I found this in 
the case of a man of twenty-five, the oldest son of a very religious family, who 
was brought to me because of misbehavior. He was disobedient, idle, and a 
liar, and he had contracted debts and stolen. His sister, three years younger 
than himself, was a familiar type—striving, capable, and well-educated, an 
easy winner in the race with him. His misconduct began with his adoles-
cence, and I am aware that many psychologists would ascribe it to some sort 
of emotional “flare-up” caused by the growth of the sexual glands—a theory 
which might seem all the more plausible in this case because of the exis-
tence of premature and mischievous sexual relations, as is found in many 
other similar cases. But we ask: Why should the perfectly natural period of 
puberty be the cause of a crisis and of a moral disaster in this case but not 
in another—not in the sister’s case, for example? We answer: Because the 
sister was in a more favorable position. The brother’s situation was one which 
we know, from experience of very many cases, to be one of special danger. 
Furthermore, when we go more deeply into the history of this case, we find 
that he wanted always to be first, in every situation, and that adolescence did 
not create any change in this young man’s style of life. Before that time the 
boy had gradually been losing hope of being “first” in a life of social useful-
ness, and the more hopeless he grew there, the more he had wandered into 
the easier ways of useless compensation.
This young man’s earliest remembrance gives a clear hint of his great 
interest in motor activity and in movement in general. It was: “I was running 
round the whole day in a kiddy car.” After treatment, when he was improved, 
he was taken back into his father’s office, but he did not find the sedentary life 
there to his liking. He finally adapted himself to life as a traveling salesman.
Many first remembrances are concerned with situations of danger, and 
they are usually told by persons with whom the use of fears is an important 
factor in the style of life. A married woman once came to ask me why she was 
terrified whenever she passed a pharmacy. Some years previously she had 
spent a long time in a sanatorium undergoing treatment for tuberculosis, and 
a few months before I saw her a specialist had pronounced her cured, entirely 
healthy, and fit to have children. Shortly after this plenary absolution by the 
doctor she began to suffer from her obsession. The connection is obvious. The 
pharmacy was a warning reminder of her illness, an employment of the past 
in order to make the future seem ominous. She was connecting the possibil-
ity of having a child with danger to her health. Though she and her husband 

310	
Arthur J. Clark
had agreed that they wanted a child, her behavior clearly showed her secret 
opposition. Her secret objection was stronger than any reasonable and com-
mon sense logic which said that for her there really was now no danger in 
bearing children. The doctor, as a medical expert, could minimize the danger 
to her health, but he could not remove the symptom of fear. In this as in many 
similar cases we know in advance that the real reasons for the symptoms are 
deeply rooted, and are only to be found if we can discover the most important 
strivings in the style of life.
Seldom is it true that resistance to having children is based upon objec-
tive fears of childbirth or illness. In this case it was easy to discover that the 
woman had been a pampered child who, herself, wanted to be in the center of 
the stage. Such women do not wish to bring a little rival on to the scene, and 
they argue against it with every variety of reason and unreason. This woman 
had trained herself perfectly to be on the lookout for danger, and to perceive 
opportunities for taking the center of attention. Asked for her earliest recol-
lection she said, “I was playing before our little house on the outskirts of the 
town, and my mother was terrified when she saw me jumping on the boards 
that covered the well.”
A student of philosophy came to consult me about his erythrophobia. 
From earliest childhood he had been teased because he blushed so easily, and 
for the past two months this had so much increased that he was afraid to go 
to a restaurant, to attend his lectures, or even to go out of his room. I found 
that he was about to take an examination. He was a faint-hearted man, timid 
and bashful, and whether he was visiting in society, working, or in company 
with a girl, in all situations alike he suffered from feelings of tension. His 
blushing had recently worried him more, and he began to use it as a pre-
text for retreat from life. From childhood this man had had a strong antipa-
thy towards his mother, who, he felt, was partial to his younger brother. He 
had lived in the greatest competition with his brother; and he now no longer 
believed that he, himself, could achieve any success if he went on. Here is 
his earliest remembrance: “When I was five years old I went out with my 
three-year-old brother. My parents were much excited when they found we 
had left the house, because there was a lake near by, and they were afraid that 
we had fallen into it. When we returned I was slapped.” I understood this to 
mean that he did not like his home, where he felt that he was slighted, and 
this opinion was corroborated when he added, “I was slapped, but not my 
brother.” But the discovery that he had been in a dangerous situation had no 
less impressed him, and this was reflected in his present behavior, which was 
dominated by his guiding idea—not to go out, not to venture too far. Such 
persons often feel as though life were a trap.
It is easy to imagine this patient’s painful experience when in company 
of a girl. We can understand how he put his blushing between himself and 

	
	
Significance of Early Recollections	
311
women, thus did not allow himself to come into a relationship with any of 
them. In this way he avoided coming into a situation where he ran the risk of 
losing out to another man. He always feared other men would be preferred to 
him, as he felt his mother had preferred his brother.
When rightly understood in relation to the rest of an individual’s life, his 
early recollections are found always to have a bearing on the central interests 
of that person’s life. Early recollections give us hints and clues which are most 
valuable to follow when attempting the task of finding the direction of a per-
son’s striving. They are most helpful in revealing what one regards as values 
to be aimed for and what one senses as dangers to be avoided. They help us to 
see the kind of world which a particular person feels he is living in, and the 
ways he early found of meeting that world. They illuminate the origins of the 
style of life. The basic attitudes which have guided an individual throughout 
his life and which prevail, likewise, in his present situation, are reflected in 
those fragments which he has selected to epitomize his feeling about life, and 
to cherish in his memory as reminders. He has preserved these as his early 
recollections.


313
A
Abuse, 102–105, 237–238, 284
Accidents, 192
Accomplishment stage, 144
Accusations of others, 268–269
Activation-synthesis Hypothesis, 156
Activity, 16–17, 289, 290; see also Lifestyle
Adaptation effected by guesswork, 233
Adler, Alfred
biographical sketch of, 1–2
as clinician, 60–61
evolution of thinking of, 115–117, 129–130
Freud and, 3–4, 19, 139, 156–157, 184
Individual Psychology movement of, 4–5
organ inferiority of, 184
social psychology and, 5–6
theoretical model of, 7–10
as theoretician, 58–60
writings and translations of, 6, 263
Adler, Alfred and Freud, Sigmund; see also 
Differences between Individual 
Psychology and psychoanalysis
common background, 19
coworkers and rivals, 3–4
on dreams, 156–157
psychosomatic theories, 184
separation of, 139
Affection and warmth, 103–104
Aggression
drive toward, 115–116, 124
imitation and, 118
melancholia and, 178, 180–181
spanking and, 13
Agoraphobia, 162–163
Air swallowing, 188, 189
Anomie, see Trick and Neurosis
Anorexia nervosa, see Neurotic Hunger Strike
Anteater, 156
Anxiety
air swallowing and, 189
early recollections and, 308, 310
insomnia and, 244–245
Aphasia, 9
Apperception, see Private logic
Aptitude assessment, 100, 109
As if, 204, 220
Assessment of aptitude, 100, 109
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, 11–12
Attitudes toward life; see also Hesitation 
attitude
of first children, 77
homosexuality and, 85
melancholia and, 182, 267, 279
menstruation and, 188
neurosis and, 210–211, 216
paranoia and, 274, 278
relationship to world and, 15–17
suicide and, 284
Authoritarian parenting styles, 118–119
Automatic processing, 59
Avoiding type
clinical practice and, 67
distancing complex and, 143
exposure of worthlessness and, 202–203
hesitation attitude and, 75–76, 78–79, 
142–143, 150, 152
physical manifestations of psychic life and, 
187–188
as ruling attitude, 16–17
safeguards and, 145–146, 172
B
Bad habits and defiance, 137
Bands (gangs)
cooperation and, 292, 293
demoralized youth and, 291, 298
Index

314	
Index
Battle of sexes, 117–118, 125, 126
Beethoven, Ludwig van, 112–113
Beggar case study, 68–69
Behaviorism
Adler on, 62
DSM-III and, 195
on Freudian speculators, 5
soul and, 218
Belligerent attitude of melancholia, 182
Biblical characters and position in family, 81, 
135
Binet, Alfred, 100, 111–112
Binge eating, 257–258, 260
Birth order, see Position in family constellation
Black sheep and context, 110
Blushing, 304–305, 310
Bodily health, see Physical health
Bodily organs, see Organ deficiencies
Brain, 191
Bulimia, 257–258, 260
C
Calm trance, 172–173, 175–176
Cancer of tongue, 81–83
Case studies, see specific topics
Castration complex, 27
Censorship, 25
Cessation and distance, 151–152
Character, see Character and Talent; On the 
Essence and Origin of Character
Character and Talent (Adler)
case studies, 102–105, 107
commentary on, 99–101
development and, 107–109
education and, 111–113
heredity and, 104–107
organic defects and, 109–111
Charlemagne, 112
Child’s Inner Life and a Sense of Community, 
The (Adler)
commentary on, 115–119
development of, 122–124, 127
education and, 124–126
Choice of profession, 137
Choking, 75, 81–83
Circumstances, 17
Clark’s three-stage counseling model, 142, 
143–145
Classification and diagnosis
Adler on, 12, 15–16
clinical practice and, 195, 197
melancholia and, 263–264
Climacteric, 189–190
Clinical practice
child’s health/family situation and, 130
Clark’s three-stage model for, 142, 
143–145
DSM-III and, 195, 197
early recollections and, 304, 305
errors in judgment and, 60, 63–64
goal attainment and, 104–105
insomnia, 248, 252–254
lifestyle and, 11, 60–61
melancholia and paranoia, 264
movement and, 90–91
neurosis
definition of, 195, 197, 203, 204, 208, 
209, 211
structure of, 213, 216, 226, 227–228
organ inferiority and, 187
origin of conflicts and, 139
personality as unity and, 67–70
positive psychology and, 43, 44–45
problems of life and, 92–93
projective techniques in, 305
relationship to outside world and, 15
safeguards and, 145–146
selection of intervention strategy, 197
suicide and, 285, 290
theory and, 9
therapeutic double bind, 231
tricks and, 239–241
Clinicians, 60–61
Codependency, 173
Cognitive schemata, see Scheme/schema
Collaboration, 35, 173
Community feeling; see also Social interest
character and, 93–94, 96
child’s inner life and (see Child’s Inner Life 
and a Sense of Community)
clinical practice and, 61
education and, 124–125
insomnia and, 248
neurosis and, 205–206, 208, 211, 223, 224, 
228
psychic life and, 68
social interest and, 42–43, 54–55, 93–94
tricks and, 235–236
Compensation
Adler’s life and, 2
case study, 309
culture of mankind and, 39
digestive troubles and, 132–133
dreams and, 168
early recollections and, 308, 309

	
	
Index	
315
feelings of inferiority and, 42, 123, 140–141, 
148, 183–184
narcissism and, 26–27
organ defect and, 110, 115–116, 183–184
paranoia and, 276
Competition
position in family and, 77–78
social interest and, 119
striving for superiority, 125
Compulsion
case study, 237
detours and, 227
digestive troubles and, 132
hesitation attitude and, 152
melancholia and, 273
position in family and, 79
Conscious, see Unconscious and conscious
Constipation, 136–137
Context and black sheep, 110
Cooperation
demoralized youth and, 292, 293, 301
feelings of inferiority and, 223
neurosis and, 196, 202
pampering and, 12–13
social interest and, 20
Counseling, see Clinical practice
Counseling model (Clark), 142, 143–145
Courage
case study, 107–108
demoralized youth and, 296, 300, 301
development and, 112
digestive troubles and, 132
feelings of inferiority and, 123
neurosis and, 200, 205, 209–210, 215, 216
pampering and, 118–119
paranoia and, 277
position in family and, 78, 79, 81
social interest and, 21
Cowardice, 81, 300, 301
Creative force/power
emotional contexts and, 101
environment and heredity, 99–100, 101, 
102, 106, 220–221
lifestyle and, 59–60
neurosis and, 200–201, 215–216, 220–221, 
222
progress of mankind and, 39–40
in psychic life, 62–63
Criminal development
case study, 86, 102–105
community feeling and, 224
demoralized youth and, 291–292, 294–295, 
296–297, 298–300, 301
neurosis versus, 200
private logic and, 235
tricks and, 230
Critical attitude and paranoia, 274, 278
Culture, 39, 91–92
Curative pedagogy, 293, 302; see also Education
D
Death wish, 27
Deceitfulness, 126
Defense mechanisms, 141, 173
Defensive attitude, 188
Defiance and education, 130, 136–137
Deliberate practice, 100–101
Delinquency, 102–105; see also Demoralized 
Children
Democracy and social interest, 35–36
Demoralized Children (Adler)
case study, 297, 299–300
commentary on, 291–293
criminal behavior and, 294–295, 296–297, 
298–300, 301
curative pedagogy for, 302
educational system and, 296, 297–298, 
299
Dependency and suicide, 284
Depression; see also Melancholia
case study, 203–206, 237
melancholia versus, 263–264, 267
suicide and, 282, 287
Detachment, 145–146
Dethronement effects
case study, 297
early recollections and, 308
first children, 76–77, 78, 111
Detours and neurosis, 227
Development
Adler on, 91
behavior patterns and, 103
criminal (see Criminal development)
of demoralized youth, 292
education and, 299
elements necessary to, 112
errors in judgment and, 126
evolution and, 49–50
evolution of thinking on, 115–117
feelings of inferiority and, 117, 122–123
heredity versus environment, 105
of homosexuality, 83–87
Individual Psychology and, 64
of inner life and community feeling, 53, 
122–124, 127

316	
Index
life as, 49–50
of lifestyle, 101, 200, 222, 244
of mania, 181
negating individuals and, 52
of neurosis, 200–201
of paranoia, 274–275, 276, 278
parenting style and, 118–119
position in family constellation and, 
134–135
poverty and, 295–296
social interest and, 53, 56
of talent, 107–109
trickiness and, 234
trust and, 293
Diagnosis
Adler on, 12, 15–16
clinical practice and, 195, 197
melancholia and, 263–264
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-III (DSM-
III), 195, 197
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-V (DSM-V), 
263–264
Dictaphone metaphor, 59, 62
Differences between Individual Psychology and 
psychoanalysis
Adler’s article on (see Differences Between 
Individual Psychology and 
Psychoanalysis)
character, 96–97
holistic personality, 65–66
masculine protest, 140
origin of conflicts, 139
safeguarding and defense mechanisms, 
141
Differences Between Individual Psychology 
and Psychoanalysis, The (Adler)
commentary on, 19–23
dream interpretation, 30–32
overview, 27–30, 32–33
term interpretation, 25–27
Digestive troubles, 132–133, 258
Digging gold mines, 230
Direction and psychic life, 62–63
Disease and idea of disease, 133, 153
Dispossession, see Dethronement effects
Distance
of Adler to writing, 6
Adler’s article on (see Problem of Distance)
example of, 172–173
feelings of inferiority and, 126, 140–141, 
142, 148–151
hypochondria and, 176–177
insomnia and, 253
melancholia and, 180
neurosis and, 226
psychosis and, 179
suicide and, 182
Domination and sadistic conduct, 77
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor M., 80
Dreams and dream-interpretation
Adler’s article on (see Dreams and 
Dream-Interpretation)
distance and, 152
function of, 155–158
Individual Psychology and psychoanalysis 
on, 30–32
insomnia and, 246
melancholia and, 179–180, 278–279
mood and, 31
neurosis and, 210–211
paranoia and, 276–277
personality and, 70
position in family and, 83
trickiness and, 234
Dreams and Dream-Interpretation (Adler)
case studies, 162–165, 167–169
commentary on, 155–158
future knowledge, 160–162, 164–166, 169
striving for superiority, 163, 164–165, 
168–169
unconscious and, 160–162, 167
unintelligible content, 165, 167
Drives
aggressive, 115–116, 124
creative power and, 221
ego and, 32, 66
imitation and, 125
Individual Psychology versus 
psychoanalysis, 28–29, 32
neurosis and, 206, 219
repression and, 3
Drop outs, 292
DSM, see Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-III; 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-V
E
Early recollections, 210–211; see also 
Significance of Early Recollections
Eating disorders, see Neurotic Hunger Strike
Echidna (spiny anteater), 156
Education
behavior patterns and, 110–111
demoralized youth and, 292–293, 296, 
297–298, 299
feelings of inferiority and, 123

	
	
Index	
317
Individual Psychological (see Individual 
Psychological Education)
injury from, 87–88
prevention and, 45, 130, 284
role of, 118, 119, 124–125
social interest and, 13–14, 17, 21, 22, 68, 
124–126
talent and, 107, 111–113
Ego
character and, 97
creative force and, 63
defense mechanisms and, 141
drives and, 32, 66
Individual Psychology versus 
psychoanalysis, 27
unconscious/conscious and, 66–67
Elderly and suicide, 282–283, 287
Eldest children, see First children
Emotions
creative power and, 101
dreams and, 157, 164, 166
impatience and, 199–200
intellectual processes and, 69–70
neurosis and, 224
Encouragement in clinical practice, 44–45
Endocrine glands, 189–190
Endogenic factors in neurosis, 224–225
Enuresis and defiance, 136–137
Environmental influences
case study, 107–108
creative power and, 99–100, 220–221
demoralized youth and, 300
development and, 105
hunger strike and, 258
Individual Psychology and, 62
masculine protest and, 140–141
position in family and, 111
safeguards and, 145–146
shock from individual with melancholia, 
271
social interest and, 68
on suicide, 282, 283
Epilepsy, 191, 270
Equalization process, 38–39
Errors in judgment, 60, 63–64, 126
Erythrophobia, 304–305, 310
Etiology of psychiatric conditions, 195
Evasion of responsibility
distancing and, 143
insomnia and, 250–253
life-lie and, 173, 175–176, 177–178, 179–181, 
182
melancholia and, 269
neurosis and, 200
paranoia and, 274, 275–276, 277
safeguards and, 142
Evolution
adaptation and, 233
Adler and, 91
development and, 49–50
felt plus and felt minus, 244
mastery of environment and, 55
physiognomy and, 193
tricks and, 241
Exceptional performance, 100; see also 
Character and Talent
Exogenic factors in neurosis, 224–225
Experience of body, 53–54
Extinction
social interest and, 35, 39, 52
striving for superiority and, 51
F
Family constellation, see Position in Family 
Constellation Influences Life Style
Fear
of choking, 75
demoralized youth and, 296
early recollections and, 309–310
of eating (see Neurotic Hunger Strike)
melancholia and, 270–271
neurosis and, 218
Feelings and intellectual processes, 69–70
Feelings of inferiority
case study, 238–239
compensation and, 42, 123, 140–141, 148, 
183–184
cooperation and, 223
demoralized youth and, 299
development and, 117, 122–123
distance and, 126, 140–141, 142, 148–151
goals and, 148, 220
hunger strike and, 257, 261
hypersensitivity and, 199–200
Individual Psychology versus 
psychoanalysis, 27
insomnia and, 243, 245
love and, 225
melancholia and, 267–268, 269, 270, 273
movement and, 214
neurosis and, 140–141, 142, 148–151, 196, 
208, 223–224
paranoia and, 275
punishment and, 304–305
social interest and, 29, 223–224

318	
Index
suicide and, 283
tricks and, 240
Felt minus, 244; see also Feelings of inferiority
Felt plus, 244
Feminism, 117–118, 125
Fictions, 8
First children
attitude toward authority, 77
case studies, 75, 76–77
dethronement effects, 76–77, 78, 111
power and, 134
traits of, 71, 73, 74–75
Fists and Morse code, 230–231
Flatfeet, 184–185, 192
Flatulent distention of abdomen, 188
Flight into illness, 229, 237
Freud, Sigmund
Adler and, 3–4, 19, 139, 156–157, 184
Adler on, 33
on dreams, 156, 165
on psychoanalysis, 9
theoretical model of, 7
Friendships
melancholia and, 267–268, 269
neurosis and, 210, 213–214
Frittering away time, 261
Fundamental Views of Individual Psychology, 
The (Adler)
Adler on, 15–18
commentary on, 11–14
Future knowledge and dreams, 155, 160–162, 
164–166, 169
G
Gangs
cooperation and, 292, 293
demoralized youth and, 291, 298
Gay individuals, see Homosexuality
Gemeinschaftsgefuhl, see Social interest
Gemelli, Agostino, 89, 96
Gender, see Sex identification; Sex roles
Getting type
case study, 60–61, 68–69
as ruling attitude, 16–17
striving for superiority and, 50
Glands, 189–190
Goal setting
clinical practice and, 104–105
development and, 123–124
dreams and, 157, 158, 162, 166–167
early recollections and, 303, 307
feelings of inferiority and, 148, 220
inner life and, 122
lifestyle and, 90–91, 172
melancholia and, 268, 271
overcoming and, 219–220
paranoia and, 274
personality and, 90
private logic and, 244
self-actualization and, 141
social interest and, 116–117
striving for significance and, 29
suicide and, 281
tricks and, 229
God and movement toward perfection, 50
Growth model, 44, 90
Guilt of others, 273
H
Hallucinations, 276–277
Health, see Mental health; Physical health
Heart health and shock, 187
Helicopter parents, 118–119; see also 
Pampering
Here and now emphasis, 90–91
Here and there, 150
Hereditary influences
clinical practice and, 195
creative power and, 99–100, 101, 102, 106, 
220–221
development and, 105
homosexuality and, 84–85
imitation and, 125
Individual Psychology and, 62, 64
Individual Psychology versus 
psychoanalysis, 28–29
position in family and, 79–80
social interest and, 53–54
striving for superiority and, 49–50
on suicide, 283
superstition regarding, 87–88, 106, 107–108
on talent, 104–107
Hesitation attitude
in artistic figures, 154
case study, 177
distance and, 150, 152
hunger strike and, 258, 261
melancholia and, 182, 279
neurosis and, 200, 226
position in family and, 75–76, 78–79
as safeguard, 142–143
History, importance of, 104
Holistic viewpoint
on character and talent, 102

	
	
Index	
319
demoralized youth and, 293
early recollections and, 304–305
of Gemelli, 89
Individual Psychology as, 48, 59
insomnia and, 243
on personality, 65–66, 90–91
somatization and, 231
Homosexuality
case studies, 83–87
misunderstandings on, 66
position in family and, 72, 83–87
purpose of symptoms and, 142
Hopelessness, 78–79
Hostility
neurosis and, 126
paranoia and, 274, 275
poverty and, 292
Human nature, 8, 28
Hunger strike, see Neurotic Hunger Strike
Hypersensitivity in neurosis, 199–200
Hypnotizing safeguarding, 172–173, 175–176
Hypochondria and distance, 176–177
I
Ideal
ego, 27
end form, 30
normative, 51–52
If clause, 152
Illegitimate children, 110–111
Illness, 133, 153, 192; see also Mental health; 
Physical health
Imitation, 79, 118, 125
Impatience in neurosis, 199–200
Individual Psychological Education (Adler)
commentary on, 129–130
defiance, 136–137
position in family, 134–136
prophylaxis, 137
psychic health and bodily health, 
131–133
sexual questions to children, 135–136
Individual Psychology
development and, 64
fundamental views of (see Fundamental 
Views of Individual Psychology)
as holistic viewpoint, 48, 59
metaphysics in, 51–52, 62–63
movement toward, 4–5
origins of, 7–10
practical importance of, 148
progress of mankind and, 37–38
psychoanalysis compared to (see 
Differences between Individual 
Psychology and psychoanalysis)
transcendentalism and, 62, 218–219
as value psychology, 223
Inferiority feelings, see Feelings of inferiority
Innate influences/striving, see Hereditary 
influences
Insomnia
Adler’s article on (see Nervous Insomnia)
clinical practice and, 248, 252–254
nature and consequences of, 244–245
Integration stage, 144, 146
Intellectual capacity, 100
Intellectual disability
case study, 102–105, 297
development of criminals and, 297, 298
talent and, 105
Intellectual processes, 69–70
Intensified minus situations, 214–215, 221–224
Intimacy task, 92; see also Love
Irritability and dreams, 167–169
Isolation, 201
J
Joseph type, 135
Jung, Carl, 4, 156
Juvenile delinquents, 102–105; see also 
Demoralized Children
K
Keeping position, 76–77
Knowledge of future and dreams, 155, 160–162, 
164–166, 169
L
Last born, see Youngest children
Law of Movement, see Lifestyle
Laziness of demoralized youth, 298–299
Leadership, 35–36
Lesbians, see Homosexuality
Life as development, 49–50
Life task(s), see Problems of life
Life task responsibility, see Evasion of 
responsibility
Life-goals, 90; see also Goal setting
Life-Lie and Responsibility in Neurosis and 
Psychosis (Adler)
case studies, 176–178, 179–181
commentary on, 171–174

320	
Index
evasion of responsibility, 173, 175–176, 
177–178, 179–181, 182
striving for superiority, 176, 177–179, 180, 
182
Life-plan
melancholia and, 267
scheme/schema and, 148–149, 150
Lifestyle; see also Personality
clinical practice and, 11, 60–61
creative force and, 59–60
development of, 101, 200, 222, 244
early recollections and, 303, 304, 307–308, 
311
insomnia and, 247, 248
movement toward goals and, 90–91, 172
neurosis and, 197, 205–206, 207, 209–210, 
211
organ dialect and, 185
position in family and (see Position in 
Family Constellation Influences Life 
Style)
problems of life and, 15–16
psychic life and, 67
social interest and, 16–17
suicide and, 283, 285, 288, 289, 290
tricks and, 230, 240
Logic, see Private logic
Love
character and, 92
feelings of inferiority, 225
mental health and, 134
narcissism and, 26
retreat and, 202
self-gratification and, 238–239
M
Madoff, Bernard, 172–173
Magicians, 234
Mania
development of, 181
meanings of, 266
melancholia and, 271
paranoia and, 275, 276, 277
Manic-depressive, 267
Masculine protest
development and, 116
paranoia and, 276
women and, 3–4, 116, 125, 140–141
Masochistic attitude, 85
Masturbation, 238–239
Mathematicians, 234–235
Meaning and social interest, 22
Megalomania and paranoia, 274, 275, 276
Melancholia
Adler’s articles on (see Life-Lie and 
Responsibility in Neurosis and 
Psychosis; Melancholia and 
Paranoia)
aggression and, 178, 180–181
attitudes toward life and, 182, 267, 279
dreams and, 179–180, 278–279
paranoia compared to, 178, 276
psychological structure of, 267–273
spinal pain and, 191–192
Melancholia and Paranoia (Adler)
commentary on, 263–265
melancholia, 267–273
overview, 266
paranoia, 274–279
Memories, see Significance of Early 
Recollections
Menstruation, 188, 282, 287
Mental health
character and, 92, 93
dreams and, 161–162
etiology of psychiatric conditions, 195
insomnia and, 250, 252
intensified minus situations and, 214–215
life-lie and, 176
loveless atmospheres and, 134
psychic life and, 150
social interest and, 93–94
striving for superiority and, 43, 55, 177–179
suicide and, 281–282, 284, 287
talented individuals and, 112
Mental retardation, see Intellectual disability
Metaphors
client use of, 231, 234
dictaphone, 59, 62
Metaphysics, 51–52, 62–63
Meteorism, 188, 189
Mood and dreams, 31; see also Emotions
Morse code and fists, 230–231
Motivation
drives and, 115–116
early recollections and, 304
melancholia and, 181–182
Nietzsche on, 8
safeguarding and, 141
social interest and, 35, 39
Movement
clinical practice and, 90–91
feelings of inferiority and, 214
goals and, 90–91, 172
life as, 219

	
	
Index	
321
perfection and, 50
retrogressive, 151
socially useful type and, 16–17
suicide and, 283–284
types of, 225–227, 264
Murder case study, 86
Musical genius, 112–113
N
Napoleon dream, 168–169
Napping, 247, 250
Narcissism, 26–27
Nature versus nurture, see Environmental 
influences; Hereditary influences
Neglect
early recollections and, 307
intensified minus situations and, 223
neurosis and, 215
suicide and, 284
Nervous Insomnia (Adler)
case studies, 254–256
clinical practice, 252–254
commentary on, 243–248
evasion of responsibility, 250–253
overview, 250–251
Nervousness, trick of, 236–237
Neurosis; see also Melancholia and Paranoia
adversity and, 126
case studies, 81–83, 176–178, 179–181, 
203–206, 213–214, 215–216, 
235–239
definition of (see What is Neurosis?)
feelings of inferiority and, 140–141, 142, 
148–151, 196, 208, 223–224
hunger strike and, 257–261
individual psychology and psychoanalysis 
on, 140
insomnia and, 252
life-lie in (see Life-Lie and Responsibility in 
Neurosis and Psychosis)
loveless atmospheres and, 134
other non-psychotic conditions versus, 196, 
200, 205–206
position in family and, 79, 81–83, 134, 135
prophylaxis and, 137, 198
schemata and, 172
sexual identification and, 135–136
structure of (see Structure of Neurosis)
tricks and (see Trick and Neurosis)
Neurotic Character: Fundamentals of 
Individual Psychology and 
Psychotherapy (Adler), 4–5, 8
Neurotic Hunger Strike (Adler)
Adler on, 260–261
commentary on, 257–258
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 8, 9, 30
Normative ideal, 51–52
Nourishment and melancholia, 272
O
Obsession, 244–245
Obstacles construction, 152–153
Occupation, 81–83, 92, 251
Oedipus complex, 25–26
On the Essence and Origin of Character 
(Adler)
Adler on, 96–97
commentary on, 89–94
On the Origin of the Striving for Superiority 
and of Social Interest (Adler)
commentary on
positive psychology, 41–42, 43–46
social interest, 42–43
striving for superiority, 39–40
overview, 48, 54–56
social interest, 51–53
striving for superiority, 48–51
One-down position, see Feelings of inferiority
Only children
case studies, 83–87
homosexuality and, 72
reason for being, 71, 83
sex identification and, 135
traits of, 71, 73, 83, 86
Opportunity and talent, 100
Oppositional individuals, see Defiance
Organ deficiencies; see also Physical health
case study, 203–206
clinical practice and, 187
compensation and, 109–111, 115–116, 
183–184
early recollections and, 308–309
intensified minus situations and, 221–222
melancholia and, 271–272
neurosis and, 201, 202, 205, 215, 224
weakness and, 132–133, 149
Organ dialect, 185
Oscillations to and fro, see Hesitation attitude
Overcoming
goal of, 219–220
movement and, 214
neurosis and, 224, 227
self-actualization and, 141
striving for superiority and, 63–64

322	
Index
Overeating and purging, 257–258, 260
Overindulgence, see Pampering
Over-parenting, 118–119; see also Pampering
Overvalued ideas, 81–83
P
Pain and insomnia, 253–254
Pampering
case studies, 76–77, 81–83, 102–105, 297, 310
courage and, 118–119
digestive troubles and, 132–133
early recollections and, 307, 308, 310
Individual Psychology versus 
psychoanalysis, 33
intensified minus situations and, 222
masculine protest and, 140
neurosis and, 205–206, 209, 215
position in family and, 74–75, 76–77, 78, 80, 
81–83, 86
social interest and, 12–13
suicide and, 284–285, 289
tragedy of, 104
trickiness and, 235–236, 239
Paranoia
Adler’s article on (see Melancholia and 
Paranoia)
melancholia compared to, 178, 276
psychological structure of, 274–279
retreat from life and, 264
Parents
of demoralized youth, 295–296
development and style of, 118–119
hunger strike and, 257
prevention and, 137
Penal systems, 13; see also Criminal 
development
Perfection, 50–51; see also Striving for 
superiority
Personal constructs, see Private logic
Personality; see also Lifestyle
creative force and, 59–60
dreams and, 70
Gemelli on, 89, 96
holistic perspective on, 65–66, 90–91
social interest and, 37–38
as unity (see Personality as a Self-
Consistent Unity)
Personality as a Self-Consistent Unity (Adler)
case studies, 60–61, 68–69
clinical practice, 67–70
commentary on, 57–61
misunderstandings on, 62–67
Pessimism
death wish and, 27
of demoralized youth, 292, 296
digestive troubles and, 132
distancing complex and, 143, 144–145, 149
Petted children, see Pampering
Phobia, see Fear; Neurotic Hunger Strike
Physical health; see also Organ deficiencies; 
Physical Manifestations of Psychic 
Disturbances
clinical practice and, 130
defiance and, 136–137
heart health and shock, 187
psychic health and, 131–133, 151–154, 
192
somatization and tricks, 231
Physical Manifestations of Psychic 
Disturbances (Adler)
air swallowing, 188, 189
brain, 191
commentary on, 184–185
consciousness and, 190–191
endocrine glands, 189–190
menstruation, 188
organ inferiority, 183–184
overview, 187–188
physiognomy, 193
predisposition, illness, accident, 192
pseudopregnancy, 188
psychosomatic theories, 183–184, 185
scoliosis, 191–192
thyroid gland, 190
Physicians, 131–132, 133, 137; see also 
Individual Psychological Education
Physics, 7
Physiognomy, 193
Pleasure and social interest, 22
Pleasure principle, 29–30
Position in family constellation
Adler’s article on (see Position in Family 
Constellation Influences Life Style)
clinical practice and, 130
early recollections and, 305, 309
environmental influences and, 111
psychic development and, 134–135
social difficulties and, 110
Position in Family Constellation Influences 
Life Style (Adler)
case studies, 75, 76–77, 78–79, 81–88
commentary on, 71–73
evaluation of women and men, 87–88
first child, 74–77
homosexual development, 83–87

	
	
Index	
323
only child, 83, 86
second child, 77–80
youngest child, 80–83
Positive psychology, 41–42, 43–46
Poverty, 292, 295–296
Power; see also Creative force/power
demoralized youth and, 296, 298, 299–300, 
301
first children and, 134
hunger strike and, 257–258, 260
striving for, 48
Predisposition, 192
Pregnancy, false, 188
Preoccupations and neurosis, 81–83
Preparation for life
neurosis and, 203, 205–206
social preparation, 196, 201, 216
Prestige-attainment policy, 177
Prevention
of demoralized youth, 292, 293
education and, 45, 130
of neurosis and psychosis, 137, 198
of suicide, 281, 284
Pride and neurosis, 207
Private logic
definition of, 244
feelings of inferiority and, 140–141, 142
insomnia and, 248
melancholia and, 264
striving for superiority and, 230
tricks and, 235
Problem of Distance, The (Adler); see also 
Distance
case study, 145–146
Clark’s counseling model, 143–145
commentary on, 139–143, 146
feelings of inferiority, 140–141, 142, 
148–151
psychic and physical health, 151–154
striving for superiority, 140–141, 148–150
Problem solving
dreams and, 164
insomnia and, 245–247
neurosis and, 202–203
over-parenting and, 118–119
social preparation and, 201
Problems of life
attitudes and behaviors toward, 15–16
clinical practice and, 92–93
eluding, 237 (see also Evasion of 
responsibility)
impatience and, 199–200
insomnia and, 245–247
intimacy task, 92 (see also Love)
neurosis and, 196, 204, 205, 216, 223–224
preparation and, 216, 224–225
progress and, 109
social interest and, 38
social task, 92, 206, 247–248
striving for superiority and, 20
suicide and, 282, 283
work task, 81–83, 92, 251
Profanity case study, 237–238
Profession selection, 137
Progress of Mankind, The (Adler)
assumptions of Individual Psychology and, 
37–38
commentary on, 35–36
prospective considerations, 38–40
Progressive counseling model, see Clark’s 
three-stage counseling model
Projective techniques, 305
Prophetic insight and melancholia, 270
Prophylaxis, see Prevention
Providence of guesswork, 230
Pseudopregnancy, 188
Psychic development, 134–135; see also 
Development
Psychic health and bodily health, 131–133, 
151–154; see also Mental health
Psychic life
education and, 299
heredity and, 79–80
mental health and, 150
as unity, 219–220
Psychoanalysis
Adler on, 96–97, 139–140, 148–149
DSM-III and, 195
Freud on, 9
Individual Psychology compared to (see 
Differences between Individual 
Psychology and psychoanalysis)
Psychoanalytic society, 3, 4
Psychological constitution, 29
Psychological muscle, 246
Psychosis; see also Melancholia and Paranoia
life-lie in (see Life-Lie and Responsibility in 
Neurosis and Psychosis)
loveless atmospheres and, 134
mechanisms of, 266
organ inferiority and, 271–272
pride and, 207
prophylaxis and, 137
psychic life and, 150
schemata and, 172
weaknesses and destiny of, 270

324	
Index
Psychosomatic medicine, 183–184, 185
Punishment
demoralized youth and, 295, 296, 300
feelings of inferiority and, 304–305
of self, 207
Push-pull, 231
R
Rapid eye movements (REM), 155–156, 
157–158, 245
Recollections, see Significance of Early 
Recollections
Reflective integration, 171–172
Refusal of nourishment, 136–137
Regression, 207
Relational contexts, 101
Relational theory, 42
Relationship problems, 247–248
Relationship stage, 144
REM (rapid eye movements), 155–156, 
157–158, 245
Repression, 4
Responsibility, see Evasion of responsibility; 
Life-Lie and Responsibility in 
Neurosis and Psychosis
Retreat
as lifestyle, 206, 209–210
love and, 202
neurosis and, 196, 197, 204
paranoia and, 264
regression and, 207
yes-but use, 208–209
Retrogressive movement, 151
Revenge, 261, 273, 300
Rothenburg ob der Tauber, Germany, 22–23
Ruling type
case study, 76–77
insomnia and, 254
as ruling attitude, 16–17
striving for superiority and, 50
Run aways, 102–105
S
Sadistic conduct, 77
Safeguards; see also Distance; Evasion of 
responsibility
case study, 145–146
counseling model for, 142, 143–145
feelings of inferiority and, 141–142
life-lies and, 172–173, 175–176
neurosis and, 207
Scheme/schema
definition of, 244
life-plan and, 148–149, 150
neurosis and psychosis, 172
resources on, 144–145
Scoliosis, 191–192, 203–206
Second children
case studies, 76–77
homosexuality and, 85
restless neurosis and, 134
traits of, 71, 73, 77–80
Secondary benefits of insomnia, 246–247, 251, 
254–255
Securing, see Safeguards
Self-actualization, 140–141
Self-confidence
development and, 112
digestive troubles and, 132
impatience and, 199–200
position in family and, 78
Self-consistent unity, see Personality as a Self-
Consistent Unity
Self-critical attitude and suicide, 284
Self-deception, 31–32
Self-esteem
development and, 112
insomnia and, 246
neurosis and, 196
safeguards and, 141
Self-gratification, 238–239
Self-love, 26
Self-punishment, 207
Sense of community, see Community feeling
Sensory organs, 109–110, 162
Sewing case study, 107
Sex identification, 130, 135–136
Sex roles
battle of sexes and, 117–118, 125, 126
education and, 130, 135–136
endocrine glands and, 189
Sexual orientation, see Homosexuality
Sexual perversion, 225, 238–239
Sexual psychology, see Psychoanalysis
Sexual self-love, 26
Shakespeare, William
Adler compared to, 57–58
influence of, 8, 9, 60, 68
Shock
heart health and, 187
from individual with melancholia, 271
neurosis and, 201–203, 205, 207, 208
of suicide, 288–289
Sidestep type, see Avoiding type

	
	
Index	
325
Significance of Early Recollections (Adler)
case studies, 308–311
commentary on, 303–305
lifestyle and, 307–308, 311
Similes and symbols, 31
Simplification and dreams, 31–32
Sleep deprivation, 156, 272
Sleeping postures, 255–256
Sleeping rules, 250
Social classes, 292; see also Poverty
Social context, 53
Social interest
Adler’s article on (see On the Origin of 
the Striving for Superiority and of 
Social Interest)
character and, 93–94, 97
clinical practice and, 44–45, 61
community feeling and, 42–43, 54–55, 
93–94
competition and, 119
definition of, 51, 52
democracy and, 35–36
development and, 42–43, 56
early recollections and, 304
education and, 13–14, 17, 21, 22, 68, 
124–126
extinction and, 35, 39, 52
feelings of inferiority and, 223–224
goal setting and, 116–117
heredity and, 53–54
Individual Psychology versus 
psychoanalysis, 20–21, 26, 27, 28, 
29–32
lifestyle and, 16–17
meaning and, 22
neurosis and, 215–216, 228
pampering and, 12–13
parenting styles and, 118–119
personality and, 37–38
progress of mankind and, 39–40
psychic life and, 68
self-actualization and, 141
striving for superiority and, 43, 54, 116–117
suicide and, 283, 285, 288–289
Social preparation, 196, 201, 216
Social psychology, 5–6
Social task, 92, 206, 247–248
Socially necessary decisions, 176
Socially useful type, 16–17
Society for Free Psychoanalytic Research, 4
Somatization, 231; see also Physical 
Manifestations of Psychic 
Disturbances
Soul as part of life, 218–221
Spanking, 13; see also Punishment
Speeders, see Youngest children
Spiny anteater, 156
Spirit of community, see Community feeling
Spirituality and social interest, 93–94
Spoiled children, see Pampering
Stealing, 102–105, 294, 299–300
Stepfamilies, 72
Stress
insomnia and, 247
suicide and, 282, 284, 285
Striving for significance
Individual Psychology versus 
psychoanalysis, 25, 26, 28–29
problems of life and, 20
Striving for superiority
Adler’s article on (see On the Origin of 
the Striving for Superiority and of 
Social Interest)
case studies, 237–238
character and, 94, 97
competition and, 125
demoralized youth and, 301
development and, 123–124
distance and, 140–141, 148–150
dreams and, 158, 163, 164–165, 168–169
early recollections and, 304
extinction and, 51
feelings of inferiority and, 140–141
heredity and, 49–50
ideal end form and, 30
Individual Psychology versus 
psychoanalysis, 25, 28–29
life-lie and, 176, 177–179, 180, 182
melancholia and, 269, 273, 278–279
neurosis and, 199–200, 204, 206, 209
overcoming and, 63–64
overview, 55–56
paranoia and, 274, 275–276
private logic and, 230
problems of life and, 20
social interest and, 43, 54, 116–117
superego and, 27
Structure of Neurosis, The (Adler)
case study, 213–214, 215–216
commentary on, 213–216
insecurity and social interest, 223–224
intensified minus situations, 221–224
movement types, 225–227
overview, 227–228
soul as part of life, 218–221
unpreparedness for problems, 224–225

326	
Index
Substance abuse and suicide, 282
Suicide
Adler’s article on (see Suicide (Adler))
distance and, 182
dreams and, 167–169
melancholia and, 271, 273, 279
neurosis and, 203
paranoia and, 275
risk factors for, 281–285, 287–290
Suicide (Adler)
commentary on, 281–285
interpersonal factors, 288–289
overview, 290
predisposing factors, 289
situational factors, 287–288
Superego, 27, 32
Superiority as goal, see Striving for superiority
Swallowing difficulties
air swallowing, 188, 189
choking, 75, 81–83
Symbols and dreams, 31
Systemic theory, 91–92
T
Talent, see Character and talent
Tardiness as safeguard, 143
Tasks of life, see Problems of life
Team approaches and education, 130
Teleological stance; see also Striving for 
superiority
of Gemelli, 89
insomnia and, 243
on personality, 65–66, 90–91
striving for superiority and, 117
Temperament and eating disorders, 258
Terman, Lewis, 100
Theft, 102–105, 294, 299–300
Therapeutic alliance, 44–45, 61
Therapeutic double bind, 231
Therapists, 60–61
Therapy, see Clinical practice
There and then emphasis, 90–91
Thievery, 102–105, 294, 299–300
Thin-slicing, 230
Three-stage counseling model (Clark), 142, 
143–145
Thyroid gland, 190
To and fro, see Hesitation attitude
Traits and position in family, see Position in 
Family Constellation Influences 
Life Style
Transcendentalism, 51–52, 62–63, 218–219
Transference, 33
Translation of Adler’s work, 6, 263
Trick and Neurosis (Adler)
case studies, 235–239
clinical practice, 239–241
commentary on, 229–231
part tricks play in life, 233–235, 241
private logic and, 235
Truancy case study, 102–105
Trust and early recollections, 305, 308
U
Unconscious and conscious
Adler on, 58–59
dreams and, 32, 156–157, 160–162, 167
early recollections and, 307
ego and, 66–67
melancholia and, 264
neurosis and, 199, 226
paranoia and, 264, 274
physical manifestations of psychic 
disturbances and, 190–191
safeguards and, 142
United States of America, 35–36
Unity, 219–220; see also Holistic viewpoint; 
Lifestyle; Personality as a Self-
Consistent Unity
V
Vaihinger, H., 8
Violence and melancholia, 180–181; see also 
Aggression
W
Warmth and affection, 103–104
Washing compulsion, 79, 227
Weakness
melancholia and, 269
organ deficiencies and, 132–133, 149
psychosis and, 270
Weather safeguards, 145–146
What is Neurosis? (Adler)
avoidance of appearance of worthlessness, 
202–203
case study, 203–206
chronic state, 201–202
commentary on, 195–197
development and range of action, 
200–201

	
	
Index	
327
hypersensitivity and impatience, 199–200
overview of, 198–199
recollections, attitudes, dreams, 210–211
retreat of individual, 206–210
Women
hunger strike and, 257, 260
masculine protest and, 3–4, 116, 125, 
140–141
menstruation and, 188, 282, 287
position in family and, 87–88
social devaluation of, 117–118, 125
Work task, 81–83, 92, 251
Worry and insomnia, 245
Worthlessness, 202–203
Y
Yes-But, 208–209, 210, 211
Youngest children
case study, 68–69, 102–105
psychic development and, 134–135
traits of, 71, 73, 80–83


