 

 
An Introduction 
to Cognitive
Linguistics

 
Learning About Language
General Editors:
Geoffrey Leech & Mick Short, Lancaster University
Already published:
Analysing Sentences (2nd edition) Noel Burton-Roberts
Words and Their Meaning Howard Jackson
An Introduction to Phonology Francis Katamba
Grammar and Meaning Howard Jackson
An Introduction to Sociolinguistics (2nd edition) Janet Holmes
Realms of Meaning: An Introduction to Semantics Th. R. Hofmann
An Introduction to Psycholinguistics (2nd edition) Danny D.
Steinberg and Natalin V. Sciarini
An Introduction to Spoken Interaction Anna-Brita Stenström
Watching English Change Laurie Bauer
Meaning in Interaction: An Introduction to Pragmatics Jenny
Thomas
An Introduction to Cognitive Linguistics (2nd edition) Friedrich
Ungerer and Hans-Jörg Schmid
Exploring the Language of Poems, Plays and Prose Mick Short
Contemporary Linguistics: An Introduction William O’Grady,
Michael Dobrovolsky and Francis Katamba
An Introduction to Natural Language Processing Through
Prolog Clive Matthews
An Introduction to Child Language Development Susan 
Foster-Cohen
The Sounds of Language: An Introduction to Phonetics Henry
Rogers
An Introduction to Foreign Language Learning and Teaching
Keith Johnson
Varieties of Modern English Diane Davies
Patterns of Spoken English Gerald Knowles
The Earliest English Chris McCully and Sharon Hilles

 
An Introduction
to Cognitive
Linguistics
Second Edition
Friedrich Ungerer
Hans-Jörg Schmid

 
PEARSON EDUCATION LIMITED
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow CM20 2JE
United Kingdom
Tel: +44 (0)1279 623623
Fax: +44 (0)1279 431059
Website: www.pearsoned.co.uk
First published 1996
Second edition published in Great Britain in 2006
© Addison Wesley Longman Limited 1996
© Pearson Education Limited 2006
The rights of Friedrich Ungerer and Hans-Jörg Schmid to be identified as authors of this work
has been asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
ISBN-13: 978-0-582-78496-3
ISBN-10: 0-582-78496-4
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book can be obtained from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
An introduction to cognitive linguistics / Friedrich Ungerer & Hans-Jörg Schmid. -- 2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-582-78496-3 (pbk.)
ISBN-10: 0-582-78496-4 (pbk.)
1. Cognitive grammar. I. Ungerer, Friedrich. II. Schmid, Hans-Jörg.
P165.159 2006
415--dc22
2006040863
All rights reserved; no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,
or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording,
or otherwise without either the prior written permission of the Publishers or a licence permit-
ting restricted copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd,
90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP. This book may not be lent, resold, hired out or
otherwise disposed of by way of trade in any form of binding or cover other than that in
which it is published, without the prior consent of the Publishers.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
10
09
08
07
06
Set by 71
Printed and bound in Malaysia
The Publisher’s policy is to use paper manufactured from sustainable forests.

 
Contents
Publisher’s acknowledgements
x
Preface to the second edition
vii
Typographical conventions
ix
Introduction
1
1
Prototypes and categories
7
1.1 Colours, squares, birds and cups: early empirical research 
into lexical categories
7
1.2 The internal structure of categories: prototypes, attributes, 
family resemblances and gestalt
24
1.3 Context-dependence and cultural models
45
2
Levels of categorization
64
2.1 Basic level categories of organisms and concrete objects
64
2.2 Superordinate and subordinate categories
76
2.3 Conceptual hierarchies
85
2.4 Categorization and composite word forms
92
2.5 Basic level categories and basic experiences: actions, 
events, properties, states and locations
101
3
Conceptual metaphors and metonymies
114
3.1 Metaphors and metonymies: from figures of speech to 
conceptual systems
114
3.2 Metaphors, metonymies and the structure of emotion 
categories
132
3.3 Metaphors as a way of thinking: examples from science 
and politics
144
3.4 Thinking in metonymies: potential and limitations
154
4
Figure and ground
163
4.1 Figure and ground, trajector and landmark: 
early research into prepositions
163
4.2 Figure, ground and two metaphors: a cognitive 
explanation of simple clause patterns
176
4.3 Other types of prominence and cognitive processing
191

 
v i
C O N T E N T S
5
Frames and constructions
207
5.1 Frames and scripts
207
5.2 Event-frames and the windowing of attention
218
5.3 Language-specific framing and its use in narrative texts
230
5.4 Construction Grammar
244
6
Blending and relevance
257
6.1 Metaphor, metonymy and conceptual blending
257
6.2 Conceptual blending in linguistic analysis and description
268
6.3 Conceptual blending in advertising texts, riddles and jokes
280
6.4 Relevance: a cognitive-pragmatic phenomenon
288
7
Other issues in cognitive linguistics
300
7.1 Iconicity
300
7.2 Lexical change and prototypicality
312
7.3 Cognitive aspects of grammaticalization
321
7.4 Effects on foreign language teaching
328
Conclusion
343

 
Preface to the second edition
This new edition of the book is more than the usual update of information
and references. In response to recent developments in cognitive linguistics
we have made some major changes and have introduced new topics
extending the number of chapters from six to seven.
Our presentation of conceptual categorization has become more differ-
entiated. With regard to individual categories, the notion of context-
dependence has been strengthened. The presentation of cognitive models
and cognitive hierarchies now emphasizes the importance of part-whole links
as opposed to type-of relationships.
The third chapter now provides an innovative description of the role
played by metaphors and metonymies based on the notion of ‘mapping
scope’. Generally metonymy has been given more prominence to accom-
modate recent research; the section on ‘Metaphor as a way of thinking’ has
been complemented by an additional section ‘Thinking in metonymies’c.
While Chapter 5 includes a section on ‘Construction Grammar’, a new
Chapter 6 has been inserted providing a careful introduction of blending
theory as an online processing strategy. The chapter includes many detailed
analyses of lexical and grammatical phenomena, and also of ads, riddles
and jokes. The last section of this chapter takes a look at ‘Relevance Theory’
exploring its potential to stimulate cognitive-linguistic approaches.
The final chapter of the book has almost doubled in size as two of the
four sections, the sections on iconicity and on cognitive linguistics in for-
eign language learning, have been massively expanded and now contain a
large amount of new material and original ideas.
The conclusion of the first edition has been reshaped into an ‘Outlook’
section which surveys some current attempts to put linguistic theorizing
on a safer psychological and neurological footing.
We are indebted to Maura Bresnan-Enders, Kirsten Buchholz, Eva
Drewelow, Sandra Handl, Susanne Handl, Nick Jacob-Flynn and Anne-Kristin

 
Siebenborn for their invaluable assistance in checking and proofreading
manuscripts and generating the index. As the text of the first edition still
makes up a substantial part of this book we want to renew our thanks to
Ingrid Fandrych, Wolfgang Falkner, Nick Jacob-Flynn, Geoffrey Leech, Len
Lipka, Andreas Mahler, Arthur Mettinger and Kieran O’Rourke for their con-
tributions to the success of the first edition.
F. Ungerer and H.-J. Schmid
Rostock and Munich, Summer 2006

 
Typographical conventions
Cognitive categories, concepts, 
small capitals
cognitive and cultural models
e.g. BIRD, VEHICLE, LOVE, ON THE BEACH
Attributes
single quotes
e.g. ‘juicy’, ‘has legs’
Members of categories
arrows and small capitals
e.g. >ROBIN<, >PARROT<
Image schemas
single quotes
e.g. ‘in-out’, ‘part-whole’
Metaphors/metonymies
+ signs and small capitals
e.g. +ANGER IS HEAT+, +PRODUCER FOR
PRODUCT+
Basic correlations
single quotes and arrows
e.g. ‘cause<>effect’, 
‘action<>motion’
Frames
small capitals in brackets
e.g. [COMMERCIAL EVENT]

 
Publishers’ acknowledgements
The publishers are grateful to the following for permission to reproduce copy-
right material:
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. for the ‘Smith brothers’ illustration from
page 269 of Sharon L. Armstrong, Lila R. Gleitman and Henry Gleitman
(1983) ‘What some concepts might not be’ Cognition 13; Georgetown
University Press for our Figures 1.4 (repeated as Figure 1.9), 1.5 and 1.6,
being Figures 5 and 7 from William Labov ‘The Boundaries of Words and
Their Meanings’, pp. 354 and 356 in Charles-James N. Bailey and Roger W.
Shuy, Editors, New Ways of Analyzing Variation in English (1973); Linguistic
Society of America and the author Ronald W. Langacker for our Figure 4.20,
being an adaptation of a diagram on p. 69 of ‘Nouns and Verbs’ which
appeared in Language 63 (1987); Pearson Education for two illustrations (our
Figure 1.12) of a ‘bungalow’ and ‘a typical English cottage’ from the fourth
edition of the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English (LDOCE); Max
Niemeyer Verlag GmbH & Co. KG for our Figure 1.10, being Figures 4.10, 4.11
and 4.9 (pp. 151 and 152) in H.-J. Schmid’s Cottage and Co., start vs. Begin.
Die Kategorisierung als Grundprinzip einer differenzierten Bedeutungbeschreibung
(1993) and our Figure 1.17, being (12) on page 292 of Leonard Lipka’s
‘Prototype semantics or feature semantics: an alternative?’ in W. Lorscher
and R. Schulze’s (eds) Perspectives on language in performance. Studies in lin-
guistics, literary criticism, and language teaching and learning. To honour
Werner Hullen on the occasion of his sixtieth birthday (1987); Stanford
University Press for our Figure 4.21, being an adapted composite of Figures
3.11 (p. 144) and 7.1 and 7.2 (p. 245) from Ronald W. Langacker’s
Foundations of Cognitive Grammar, Volume I: Theoretical Prerequisites (1987).

 

 
Introduction
I
f someone says to you ‘Our car has broken down’, your reaction
may simply be to feel sorry. For the linguist, though, even such a
simple utterance calls for quite an elaborate explanation. As far as the mean-
ing and the grammar of the sentence are concerned, a traditional descrip-
tion would try to paraphrase the meanings of the words used; it would analyze
the clause pattern (here a simple combination of subject and verb or predi-
cate), and would probably go on to discuss the use of the present perfect tense.
Another approach involves asking language users to describe what is going
on in their minds when they produce and understand words and sentences.
As experiments have shown, people will not only state that a car has a box-
like shape, that it has wheels, doors, and windows, that it is driven by an
engine and equipped with a steering wheel, an accelerator and brakes, and
that it has seats for the driver and the passengers – more likely than not,
they will also mention that a car is comfortable and fast, that it offers mobil-
ity, independence and perhaps social status. Some people may connect the
notion of car with their first love affair, or with injury if they were once
involved in an accident.
By adding these attributes, people include associations and impressions
which are part of their experience. While the last two items (‘first love affair’,
‘injury’) point to a very personal, subjective experience, attributes like
‘comfort’, ‘speed’, ‘mobility’ and ‘independence’ seem to be part of our com-
munal experience of cars. Taken together, the attributes collected from
laypersons seem to reflect the way we perceive the world around us and
interact with it. The wide and varied experience that we have of cars is also
helpful when it comes to identifying and naming car-like objects that we
encounter for the first time. For example, we do not hesitate to use the word
car for vehicles with only three wheels or strange-looking safari jeeps, because

 
we can compare them with the idea of a typical car we have stored in our
minds. In other words, a description that takes account of our experience
of the world – or more technically, an experiential view of words and
other linguistic structures – seems to provide a rich and fairly natural descrip-
tion of their meanings, and this is one of the goals of the cognitive-lin-
guistic approach presented in this book.
Experiential aspects of meaning do not only emerge in experiments and
personal interviews. Our shared experience of the world is also stored in
our everyday language and can thus be gleaned from the way we express
our ideas. In order to open this mine, however, we have to go beyond the
‘logic’ of clause patterns and examine figurative language, especially
metaphors. Looking again at our initial example Our car has broken down,
it is evident that a car does not really break down just like a chair collapses
so that its parts come apart. Nevertheless the conceptual background of this
expression is clear enough. Since most of us do not know an awful lot about
cars and how they work, we use our knowledge of chairs or other equally
familiar objects collapsing to understand what happens when the car’s engine
suddenly stops working.
This transfer of our experience of well-known objects and events is even
more important where abstract categories like emotions are involved.
Imagine that someone describes the car owner’s reaction to the breakdown
of his car with the words Dad exploded. In order to get a full grasp of this
utterance and the notion of anger expressed, we will call up our knowledge
of actual explosions of gas stoves, fireworks and even bombs. This means
that we will make use of our experience of the concrete world around us.
Considering the wealth of observations, impressions and associations
underlying metaphors, it is not surprising that they have joined tests and
interviews as the second major basis of the experiential view of language.
Another important aspect of linguistic utterances concerns the selection
and arrangement of the information that is expressed. For example, con-
sider the sentence The car crashed into the tree which might be a description
of the circumstances that led to the car’s breakdown. Visualizing the acci-
dent situation sketched in this example, you will probably agree that the
sentence seems to describe the situation in a fairly natural way. In com-
parison, other ways of relating the accident such as The tree was hit by the
car seem somehow strange and unnatural. The reason is that the moving
car is the most interesting and prominent aspect of the whole situation,
and therefore we tend to begin the sentence with the noun phrase the car.
What this explanation claims is that the selection of the clause subject is
determined by the different degrees of prominence carried by the elements
2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
I N T R O D U C T I O N
3
involved in a situation. This prominence is not just reflected in the selec-
tion of the subject as opposed to the object and the adverbials of a clause,
but there are also many other applications of what may be called the
prominence view of linguistic structures.
The prominence view provides one explanation of how the information
in a clause is selected and arranged. An alternative approach is based on
the assumption that what we actually express reflects which parts of an event
attract our attention, and it can therefore be called the attentional view.
Returning once more to the road accident, the sentence The car crashed into
the tree selects only a small section of the event that we probably conjure up
in our minds: how the car started to swerve, how it skidded across the road
and rumbled onto the verge. Although all this happened before the car hit
the tree, it is not mentioned because our attention is focused on the cru-
cial point where the path of the car ended, i.e. when the vehicle collided
with the tree, resulting in a severely damaged car and most likely causing
injuries to its passengers. Analyzing the sentence in terms of attention allo-
cation, the attentional view explains why one stage of the event is expressed
in the sentence and why other stages are not.
The experiential, the prominence and the attentional view are three
interlocking ways of approaching language via its relation to the world
around us, which between them describe the core areas of cognitive linguis-
tics. An additional aspect that has increasingly captured the attention of cog-
nitive linguists is concerned with the mental processing of cognitive
input, and in particular with the online processing of our conceptualizations.
To add another example from the field of vehicles, consider the slogan of an
advertising campaign for a well-known brand of cars: Unleash a Jaguar.
Exploiting the origin of the brand name, this ad brings together ideas from
the two conceptual domains of cars and wild animals; it amalgamates them
into a powerful message suggesting an image of a car that is impatiently wait-
ing for the customer, to be set free and allowed to act out its power, speed
and ferocity. This happens although the relationships between the wild ani-
mal domain and the car domain are not really clarified, let alone permanently
fixed. Technically speaking, the expression Unleash a Jaguar instructs the read-
ers to simultaneously construct two ‘mental spaces’: a ‘car’ space containing
associations like powerful engine, high maximum speed, attractive design,
etc.; and a ‘wild animal’ space including associations normally attributed to
jaguars, such as their ferocity, speed of running, litheness and elegance. To
understand the message of the slogan, readers have to go through a process
of conceptually blending the two mental spaces, a process resulting in a
blended notion of ‘car-as-a-wild-animal’. With regard to its meaning, this

 
4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
conceptual blend is somewhat vague and open-ended, and it is this quality
that is exploited in ads and many other text-types.
If these examples and their analysis have provided you with a first
impression of cognitive linguistics, you should perhaps now proceed to the
individual chapters of the book to find out more about the issues raised. The
remaining part of the introduction is primarily addressed to readers who are
already more familiar with cognitive linguistics and want to get a concise
overview of the topics dealt with in the book and their research background.
The first of the seven chapters will pursue the experiential view by look-
ing at early psychological studies of cognitive categories (most of them
conducted by Eleanor Rosch), which led to the prototype model of cate-
gorization. This will take us to a discussion of attributes, family resemblances
and gestalts. Contrary to what one might assume, prototypes and cognitive
categories are not static, but shift with the context in which a word is used
and depend on the cognitive and cultural models stored in our mind.
The second chapter concentrates on the predominance of the ‘middle’
level of categorization, called basic level. It is argued that basic level cat-
egories for objects and organisms, such as DOG, RABBIT or KNIFE, are cogni-
tively more important than either superordinate categories like ANIMAL or
CUTLERY or subordinate categories like GREYHOUND or PENKNIFE, but it will also
be shown that part–whole relationships like TABLE–KITCHEN–HOUSE–TOWN are
just as important for the organization of our mental lexicon as the type-
of hierarchies (GREYHOUND–DOG–ANIMAL) traditionally focused on. The
notion of basic level categories can also be transferred from organisms and
objects to the domain of actions. For the description of properties, it com-
petes with another cognitive notion, the image schema, which is rooted
in our bodily experiences.
Still within the framework of the experiential view, the third chapter
starts out from the conceptual potential of metaphors (which was first pointed
out by Lakoff and Johnson and has already been illustrated for the break-
down of the car). As a cognitive process it is understood as a mapping from
a source to a target concept monitored by a conceptual mapping scope.
Together with metonymies, conceptual metaphors make a significant con-
tribution to the cognitive content and structure of abstract categories, espe-
cially emotion categories.
This view implies that metaphors and metonymies are no longer
regarded as ornamental figures of speech (as in traditional stylistics), but are
understood as important conceptual tools. The category-structuring power
of metaphors is not restricted to lexical categories, but can also contribute

 
I N T R O D U C T I O N
5
to our understanding of complex scientific, political and social issues, and
this is also true of metonymies, whose fundamental importance for human
thinking has only been gradually realized.
The fourth chapter is devoted to the prominence view. At the heart of
this approach lies the principle of figure/ground segregation, which has its
origin in the work on visual perception by gestalt psychologists. This prin-
ciple is first applied to locative relations underlying prepositions like out or
over. Then it is extended to describe other syntactic relations, in particular
the prominence of subject versus object. The chapter ends with a rough sketch
of Langacker’s view of cognitive processes, which is shown to be based on
a multiple application of the figure–ground contrast.
In the fifth chapter the potential of the attentional view will be demon-
strated. The chapter (which owes much to the ideas of Fillmore, Talmy and
Slobin) starts out from the notion of ‘frame’. Basically, a frame is an assem-
blage of the knowledge we have about a certain situation, e.g. buying and
selling. Depending on where we direct our attention, we can select and high-
light different aspects of the frame, thus arriving at different linguistic
expressions. Although elementary types of frames, for instance the ‘motion
event-frame’, are presumably shared by all human beings, they are expressed
in different ways in different languages; this will be illustrated with English,
German, French and Spanish examples. Closely related to event-frames is the
notion of construction as a meaningful linguistic element, which, following
mainly Fillmore and Goldberg, is exemplified for verbal and nominal con-
structions as well as syntactic idioms.
The sixth chapter deals with the analysis of online cognitive processing,
as represented by Fauconnier and Turner’s theory of conceptual blending. This
approach is applied to a wide range of lexical, grammatical and pragmatic
phenomena as well as to ads, riddles and jokes to test its versatility. For exam-
ple, it explains how we bring together information expressed in the head-
line of a print ad with the message of the picture by linking and blending
the mental spaces evoked by them. Finally, the blending theory and other
cognitive principles are related to some of the tenets of Sperber and Wilson’s
Relevance Theory, which is characterized as a cognitive-pragmatic approach
capable of stimulating cognitive-linguistic thinking.
The seventh chapter brings together a number of issues that have not
originated in cognitive-linguistic research. Although three of them, iconic-
ity, lexical change and grammaticalization, can look back on a long tradi-
tion in linguistics, they have benefited considerably from being put on a
cognitive basis. The final section discusses the potential of a cognitive

 
6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
approach to foreign language learning, focusing on the potential of basic
level, metaphor and metonymy, figure and ground as well as gestalt, to facil-
itate cognitive access to the language learning process.
To return to the general question of how ‘cognitive linguistics’ can be
understood, the book will focus on the experiential aspects and the prin-
ciples of prominence and attention allocation underlying language. By
including cognitive online processing we want to emphasize the ties link-
ing cognitive linguistics to psycholinguistic and pragmatic approaches.

 
C H A P T E R  1
Prototypes and categories
1.1 Colours, squares, birds and cups: early
empirical research into lexical categories
The world consists of an infinite variety of objects with different substances, shapes
and colours. How do we translate this variety into manageable word meanings and
why do we succeed even where no clear-cut distinctions seem to be available, such as
between the colours ‘red’ and ‘orange’ or ‘green’ and ‘blue’? Experimental psychology
has shown that we use focal or prototypical colours as points of orientation, and
comparable observations have also been made with categories denoting shapes,
animals, plants and man-made objects.
Moving through the world we find ourselves surrounded by a variety of dif-
ferent phenomena. The most eye-catching among them are organisms and
objects: people, animals, plants and all kinds of everyday artefacts such as
books, chairs, cars and houses. In normal circumstances we have no diffi-
culty in identifying and classifying any of them, and in attributing appro-
priate class names to them. However, it is not so easy to identify, classify
and, as a consequence, to name other types of entities, for instance parts
of organisms. Knees, ankles and feet of human beings and animals or the
trunk, branches and twigs of a tree belong to this type. It may be fairly
clear that one’s kneecap belongs to one’s knee and that the trunk of a tree
includes the section which grows out of the ground. Yet at which point
does one’s knee end and where does one’s thigh start? Where does a trunk
turn into a treetop and where does a branch turn into a twig? Similar prob-
lems arise with landscape names, and words denoting weather phenomena.
Who can tell at which particular spot a valley is no longer a valley but a
slope or a mountain? Who can reliably identify the point where drizzle turns
into rain, rain into snow, where mist or fog begins or ends?
When we compare the two types of entities mentioned, we find that
they differ with respect to their boundaries. Books, tables, cars and houses

 
*Suggestions for further reading are given at the end of each chapter.
are clearly delimited objects. In contrast, the boundaries of entities like knee,
trunk, valley and mist are far from clear; they are vague. This vagueness has
troubled philosophers and linguists interested in the relationship between
word meanings and extra-linguistic reality, and has given rise to various the-
ories of vagueness’.* Yet in spite of their vagueness, we have the impression
that these boundaries exist in reality. A kneecap cannot be included in the
thigh, and a mountain top will never be part of a valley. So classification
seems to be forced upon us by the boundaries provided by reality.
However, there are phenomena in the world where this is not the case.
Take physical properties such as length, width, height, temperature and colours,
all of them uninterrupted scales extending between two extremes – how do
we know where to draw the line between cold, warm and hot water? And
how do we manage to distribute the major colour terms available in English
across the 7,500,000 colour shades which we are apparently able to dis-
criminate (see Brown and Lenneberg 1954: 457)? The temperature scale and
the colour continuum do not provide natural divisions which could be com-
pared with the boundaries of books, cars, and even knees or valleys.
Therefore the classification of temperature and colours can only be con-
ceived as a mental process, and it is hardly surprising that physical properties,
and colours especially, have served as the starting point for the psychological
and conceptual view of word meanings which is at the heart of cognitive
linguistics. This mental process of classification (whose complex nature will
become clearer as we go on) is commonly called categorization, and its prod-
uct are the cognitive categories, e.g. the colour categories RED, YELLOW, GREEN
and BLUE, etc. (another widely used term is ‘concept’).
What are the principles guiding the mental process of categorization and,
more specifically, of colour categorization? One explanation is that colour
categories are totally arbitrary. For a long time this was what most researchers
in the field believed. In the 1950s and 1960s, anthropologists investigated cross-
linguistic differences in colour naming and found that colour terms differed
enormously between languages (Brown and Lenneberg 1954; Lenneberg
1967). This was interpreted as a proof of the arbitrary nature of colour cate-
gories. More generally, it was thought to support the relativist view of lan-
guages, which, in its strongest version as advocated by Whorf, assumes that
different languages carve up reality in totally different ways.2
A second explanation might be that the colour continuum is structured
by a system of reference points for orientation. And indeed, the anthro-
pologists Brent Berlin and Paul Kay (1969) found evidence that we rely on
8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
9
so-called focal colours for colour categorization. Berlin and Kay’s main
target was to refute the relativist hypothesis by establishing a hierarchy of
focal colours which could be regarded as universal. To support the univer-
salist claim they investigated 98 languages, 20 in oral tests and the rest based
on grammars and other written materials. In retrospect, their typological
findings, which in fact have not remained uncriticized, have lost some of
their glamour. However, the notion of focal colours, which emerged from
the experiments, now appears as one of the most important steps on the
way to the prototype model of categorization. We will therefore confine
our account of Berlin and Kay’s work to aspects relevant for the prototype
model, at the expense of typological details.3
Focal colours
Like other researchers before them, Berlin and Kay worked with so-called
Munsell colour chips provided by a company of the same name. These chips
are standardized for the three dimensions which are relevant for our per-
ception of different colours, namely hue, brightness and saturation, of which
mainly the first two were tested. The advantage of using such standard-
ized colour samples rather than pieces of dyed cloth is that anthropolog-
ical and psychological tests become more objective, since they can be
repeated by other researchers and the findings of different tests can be com-
pared. The set of chips used by Berlin and Kay was composed of 329 colour
chips, 320 of which represented 40 different colours, or, more precisely,
40 hues, each divided up into eight different levels of brightness. The remain-
ing nine chips were white, black, and seven levels of grey. The chips were
set out on a card in the manner shown in Figure 1.1. The vertical axis in
the figure displays the various shades of brightness of one identical hue.
On the horizontal axis the chips are ordered in such a way that starting
from red the hues move through yellow-red to yellow through green-yellow
to green and so on.
With the help of the colour card Berlin and Kay set about testing how
speakers of the 20 selected languages categorized colours. In doing so, they
were not so much interested in the colour vocabulary in general, but rather
in a particular set of colour terms which met the following criteria: the terms
should consist of just one word of native origin (as opposed to greenish-blue
and turquoise); their application should not be restricted to a narrow class
of objects (as opposed, e.g., to English and German blond); the words
should come to mind readily and should be familiar to all or at least to
most speakers of a language (as opposed to, say, vermilion, magenta or indigo).

 
1 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
1
red
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
brightness
yellow-red
yellow
green-yellow
green
blue-green
blue
purple-blue
purple
red-purple
5
bright
white
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
dark
black
grey
Figure 1.1
Arrangement of Munsell colour chips used by Berlin and Kay
(numbers and letters added)
Colour terms which fulfilled these criteria were called basic colour terms.
In the first stage of the experiments, Berlin and Kay collected the basic colour
terms of the 20 languages. This was achieved by means of a ‘verbal elicita-
tion test’, which is just a more complicated way of saying that speakers of
the respective languages were asked to name them. In the second stage, these
speakers were shown the colour card and asked to point out
1. all those chips which [they] would under any conditions call x
2. the best, most typical examples of x.
(Berlin and Kay 1969: 7)
The questions show that, unlike Lenneberg and other anthropologists before
them, Berlin and Kay were not only interested in the extension of colour cat-
egories, but also in their best examples. One might even say that what was
later called ‘prototype’ is anticipated in the wording of their second question.
What were Berlin and Kay’s findings? In categorizing colours, people rely
on certain points in the colour space for orientation. For example, when
speakers of English were asked for the best example of the colour ‘red’, they
consistently pointed to colour chips in the lower, i.e. darker, regions under
the label ‘red’ (f3 and g3 in Figure 1.1; of course, in the tests no colour terms
were given on the card). For yellow, informants consistently selected chips
with the second degree of brightness under the label ‘yellow’ (b9 in Figure 1.1).
These chips (or regions in the colour space), which were thought of as best
examples by all or by most speakers of English, were called ‘foci’ by Berlin
and Kay.

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
1 1
Foci or focal colours were also found for the other 19 languages. When
the focal colours were compared, the result was amazing. Focal colours are
not only shared by the speakers of one and the same language but they are
also very consistent across different languages. Whenever a language has colour
terms roughly corresponding to the English colour terms, their focal points
will be in the same area. And even in languages with a smaller number of
basic colour terms than English, the best examples of these fewer categories
will agree with the respective focal colours of ‘richer’ languages like English.
In sum, there is compelling evidence that instead of being arbitrary, colour
categorization is anchored in focal colours. While the boundaries of colour
categories vary between languages and even between speakers of one lan-
guage, focal colours are shared by different speakers and even different lan-
guage communities.
As is often the case with important scientific findings, the discovery of
focal colours not only helped to solve one problem but also raised a num-
ber of new questions. Are focal colours to be treated as a phenomenon which
is a matter of language or of the mind? What, assuming the latter, is their
psychological status? And finally, are ‘foci’ (focal points) restricted to
colours or can they be found in other areas as well? These questions will
be taken up in the following sections.
The psychological background of focal colours
From a psychological standpoint the categorization of natural phenomena
is a rather complex task involving the following processes:4
1. Selection of stimuli Of the wealth of stimuli which are perceived by our
sensory systems (visual, auditory, tactile, olfactory), only very few are
selected for cognitive processing, i.e. they attract our attention.
2. Identification and classification This is achieved by comparing selected
stimuli to relevant knowledge stored in memory.
3. Naming Most cognitive categories are given names though some remain
unlabelled, e.g. ‘things to eat on a diet’, ‘things to pack in a suitcase’.
(Barsalou 1987: 102)
Most of these aspects were investigated by Eleanor Rosch, who in the early
1970s set out to explore the psychological background of focal colours.5 As
a psychologist, her primary aim was to find out whether focal colours were
rooted in language or in pre-linguistic cognition. Her idea was that a cogni-
tive status might be claimed for focal colours if they could be proved to be
prominent in the cognitive processes involved in categorization.

 
1 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Starting out from the most basic of the three cognitive processes, Rosch
first examined whether focal colours are perceptually salient. To eliminate
the influence of purely language-based categorization, she required infor-
mants who had stored as little knowledge of colour names and related colour
categories as possible. So she decided to work with pre-school children and
with members of a non-Westernized culture in Papua New Guinea, the Dani.
Earlier research had shown that Dugum Dani, the language spoken by the
Dani, contained only two basic colour terms, in contrast to the 11 basic
colour terms available to speakers of English (Heider 1971). Like children,
the Dani were therefore particularly well suited as uncorrupted informants
for colour-categorizing experiments. English-speaking adults, who were
supposed to have the full system of basic colour terms at their disposal, were
only used as control groups in some of the tests.
Rosch’s first experiment (Heider 1971), which was to test the arousal of
attention (or stimulus selection), was dressed up as a ‘show me a colour’
game. She gave 3-year-old children arrays of colour chips consisting of one
focal colour, as found by Berlin and Kay, and seven other chips of the same
hue, but other levels of brightness. The children were told that they were
to show the experimenter any colour they liked. The reasoning behind this
game was that young children’s attention would be attracted more readily
by focal colours than by other colours. In fact, it turned out that the chil-
dren did pick out focal chips more frequently than non-focal chips. The
preponderance of the focal chips was particularly strong for the colours yel-
low, orange and green, where 22, 21 and 11 respectively out of the total of
24 children selected the focal chip from the array. For the other five hues,
the numbers were smaller, but still statistically significant.
The second experiment which Rosch conducted with children was a
colour-matching task. The children, this time 4-year-olds, were given focal
and non-focal chips one at a time in random order and asked to point to
the same colour in an array of colour chips which were identical to those
used in the earlier experiment. As predicted by the test hypothesis, focal
colour chips were matched more accurately than non-focal chips, and this
again supports the perceptual salience of focal colours. In terms of cog-
nitive processes, this second test involves identification and classification;
both the test chip and one or several possible target chips have to be iden-
tified and classified so that they can be compared. Comparison in turn
presupposes that the data collected about the chips are temporarily stored
somewhere, and this is where memory comes into play.
Matching situations where both the test item and the target items are
simultaneously present are rather the exception. Normally we are confronted

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
1 3
with an item (i.e. a colour which has to be identified and classified) but
have to rely fully on data stored in memory for comparison. This raises the
question whether focal colours are salient in memory as well, whether they
are recognized more accurately, learned more easily and recalled more read-
ily than other colours. Investigating these aspects Rosch used specific mem-
ory tests: recognition tasks to test the short-term memory and learning tasks
aimed at the long-term memory (Heider 1972).
The recognition task was similar to the matching task discussed above,
but demanded more concentration from the informants. As this proved too
difficult for children, Rosch used Dani informants who, as already mentioned,
have only two basic colour terms. The same test was conducted with a con-
trol group of Americans. Both the Dani and the English-speaking informants
were shown eight focal and eight non-focal colour cards in random order
each for five seconds. Each single presentation was followed by an interval
of 30 seconds, after which the subjects were asked to point out the match-
ing colour chip on a colour card of the Berlin and Kay type. For both groups
the matching accuracy for focal colours was significantly higher than for
non-focal ones. The conclusion one may draw is that focal colours are remem-
bered more accurately in short-term memory than non-focal ones. Another
result was that the English-speaking control group surpassed the Dani in
matching accuracy both for focal and non-focal colours. This may be due
to the fact that the larger set of basic colour terms available to speakers of
English facilitates colour recognition.
The second experiment consisted of a learning task testing retention of
previously unknown colour names in long-term memory. This experiment
exploited the fact that, because of their limitation to two basic colour terms,
the Dani could be taught additional ones under controlled conditions. Before
the test began, the Dani informants were told that the experimenter would
teach them a new language. When learning was completed, they were paid
for their help. At the start, the 16 colour cards (again eight focal colours
and eight non-focal colours) were laid out in random order and the Dani
were told the name for each card. (The names used were the names of Dani
clans.) After their first display the cards were gathered into a pack, shuffled
and presented one by one to the Dani, who were asked to produce the name
of each colour. They were praised for every correct response and told the
correct name when they were wrong. This procedure was repeated five times
a day until the Dani managed to get all 16 answers right and the learning
process was considered completed. A detailed record was kept of the whole
learning process, which took three and a half days on average. This record
supplied the means of measuring the ease of retention of focal and non-focal

 
1 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
colours because it allowed a computation of all the correct and incorrect
answers. Whereas, on average, the Dani gave 9.9 incorrect answers per colour
for non-focal colours before they produced their first completely correct run,
the mean number of errors per colour for focal colours was only 7.3. Even
without previous knowledge of the colour names, the Dani associated focal
colours more rapidly with their names than non-focal colours.
As well as perception and memory work, naming was mentioned as the
third component of categorization. Given the salience of focal colours we
would expect the following results: first, names should be produced more
rapidly for focal colours than for non-focal ones; second, children should
acquire the names of focal colours earlier than the names of non-focal colours.
Empirical evidence, again provided by Rosch, suggests that both assump-
tions are correct.
Let us now review Rosch’s findings:
• Focal colours are perceptually more salient than non-focal colours. The
attention of 3-year-olds is more often attracted by focal than by non-
focal colours, and 4-year-olds match focal colours more accurately to a
given display of other colours than non-focal colours.
• Focal colours are more accurately remembered in short-term memory
and more easily retained in long-term memory.
• The names of focal colours are more rapidly produced in colour-naming
tasks and are acquired earlier by children.
All in all, focal colours appear to possess a particular perceptual–cognitive
salience, which is probably independent of language and seems to reflect
certain physiological aspects of man’s perceptive mechanisms (Kay and
McDaniel 1978). These results encouraged Rosch to extend the notion of
foci – or prototypes, as she now called them – beyond colour categories,
e.g. into the domains of shapes, organisms and objects.
Prototypical shapes
Let us start our discussion of shapes with a little experiment based on the
drawings in the top row of Figure 1.2 (set 1). Imagine you were asked to
describe what you see in this figure to someone who is not allowed to inspect
it. Presumably you would proceed more or less like this: ‘There is a row of
little drawings depicting a square and a number of variations of it. The
first drawing is a proper square. The second square has a gap in the right-
hand side. The right-hand side of the third square has an indentation. The
fourth square . . . .’

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
1 5
Set 1
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Set 2
Set 3
Figure 1.2
Shapes used by Rosch in prototype experiments (Rosch 1973) (Sets
2 and 3 reconstructed from Rosch’s description, letters added)
Such a description would be in full agreement with the notion of ‘good
forms’ as proposed by gestalt psychology (a school of psychology discussed
in more detail in Section 1.2). These good forms, i.e. squares, circles and
equilateral triangles, are assumed to be perceptually salient among geometrical
shapes.
Thus it is only natural that in a situation like the one described above
people will single out the square as a reference point for characterizing the
other drawings. Squares and the other good forms are therefore prime can-
didates for ‘natural’ prototypes in the domain of geometrical shapes, simi-
lar to the focal colours in colour space.
Using the kind of line drawings shown in Figure 1.2, Rosch (1973) sought
confirmation for the notion of prototypes in the domain of shapes. Prior
to the actual tests, she had to make sure that, as with colours, the Dani
had no category names or even conventional paraphrases at their disposal
which could bias them towards the supposed prototypes. This was veri-
fied in a pilot study, which used the description method demonstrated
above: one test subject explaining the line drawings to another subject
who was sitting behind a screen and could not see them. Unlike educated
Western speakers, the Dani did not talk of squares and variations, but used
expressions like ‘It’s a pig’ or ‘It’s a broken fence’ for their description of
the drawings.
For the actual experiment, Rosch contrasted set 1 (the set with the proto-
type) with other sets which were derived from the variations of set 1. Sets 2
and 3 in Figure 1.2 show two of the possible six alternative sets. Set 2 is

 
1 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
based on the principle of gapping (gap on the right-hand side). Considering
this principle, the prototype which appears as (b) in set 2 is indeed a very
extreme case because it represents the absence of the gap. Set 3 is based on
the principle of indenture, and again the square is just a marginal member
of the set.
As in the earlier colour-learning experiments, the Dani had to learn names
which were again borrowed from Dani clans. This means they had to asso-
ciate sets of drawings with names. The result fully confirmed Rosch’s assump-
tion that the prototype is associated with a name and also judged best example,
no matter whether it is presented in a natural category (set 1) or as a marginal
realization of the principle underlying one of the other sets.
Combined with the findings from the earlier colour experiments, these
results suggest that prototypes have a crucial function in the various stages
involved in the formation and learning of categories.
Prototypical organisms and objects
It could still be argued at this point that prototypes ultimately depend on
the perceptual nature of the categories examined so far (colours, shapes)
and are therefore a very limited if not exceptional phenomenon. The ques-
tion is whether the notion of prototype can be extended to entities which
are less obviously perceptual. Granted there are good and bad examples of
reds and squares. Are there also good and bad examples of dogs, cars and
houses? According to Rosch and her informants there are. In a series of exper-
iments (Rosch 1973, improved version 1975) she confronted informants,
this time American college students, with the following test instructions:
This study has to do with what we have in mind when we use words which
refer to categories. Let’s take the word red as an example. Close your eyes and
imagine a true red. Now imagine an orangish red . . . imagine a purple red.
Although you might still name the orange red or the purple red with the term
red, they are not as good examples of red (as clear cases of what red refers to)
as the clear ‘true’ red. In short, some reds are redder than others. The same is
true for other kinds of categories. Think of dogs. You all have some notion of
what a ‘real dog’, a ‘doggy dog’ is. To me a retriever or a German shepherd is
a very doggy dog while a Pekinese is a less doggy dog. Notice that this kind of
judgment has nothing to do with how well you like the thing. [. . .]
(Rosch 1975: 198)
In the remainder of the instructions the students were asked to judge
the goodness (or typicality) of category members, i.e. to decide how good

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
1 7
an example of the category BIRD a sparrow, a parrot, a penguin and about
50 other candidates were. Rating was based on a 7-point scale of goodness
(one point for very good, seven points for very poor examples). Altogether
ten categories were tested: in addition to BIRD, the categories were FRUIT, VEHI-
CLE, VEGETABLE, SPORT, TOOL, TOY, FURNITURE, WEAPON and CLOTHING.
Admittedly, Rosch’s test instructions show a certain bias towards the
notion of prototypicality (‘. . . some reds are redder than others. The same
is true for other kinds of categories’). Yet this should not have distorted
the test results too much. As Rosch stresses, the rating test was readily
accepted by the student informants and there was a high level of agree-
ment among them as to what were good and bad examples of the cate-
gories. To give an impression of what the results were like, the best, some
intermediate and the poorest examples of five out of the ten categories are
assembled in Figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3
A selection of examples from Rosch’s goodness-of-example rating
tests (Rosch 1975)
category
rank
BIRD
FRUIT
VEHICLE
FURNITURE
WEAPON
top eight
1
robin
orange
automobile
chair
gun
2
sparrow
apple
station wagon
sofa
pistol
3
bluejay
banana
truck
couch
revolver
4
bluebird
peach
car
table
machine gun
5
canary
pear
bus
easy chair
rifle
6
blackbird
apricot
taxi
dresser
switchblade
7
dove
tangerine
jeep
rocking chair
knife
8
lark
plum
ambulance
coffee table
dagger
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....
middle ranks
26*
hawk
tangelo
subway
lamp
whip
27
raven
papaya
trailer
stool
ice pick
28
goldfinch
honeydew
cart
hassock
slingshot
29
parrot
fig
wheelchair
drawers
fists
30
sandpiper
mango
yacht
piano
axe
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....
.....
last five
51*
ostrich
nut
ski
picture
foot
52
titmouse
gourd
skateboard
closet
car
53
emu
olive
wheelbarrow
vase
glass
54
penguin
pickle
surfboard
fan
screwdriver
55
bat
squash
elevator
telephone
shoes
* Since the total number of listed items varied between 50 and 60, the numbers of middle and
bottom ranks are not identical with the original ranks for all categories.

 
1 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
The goodness ratings were also confirmed in matching experiments in
which the ‘priming’ technique was used (Rosch 1975). In one of these tests,
subjects were shown pairs of names or pictures on a screen. The subjects
had to press a ‘same’ key when pairs of identical names or pictures of items
appeared on a screen (e.g. a word sequence like eagle–eagle or two identical
pictures of an eagle); the time between the presentation and the reaction
was measured (it was in the range of 500 to 1000 milliseconds). Two sec-
onds before the presentation, subjects were given the category name (in this
case BIRD) as advance information, so they were ‘primed’ with the category
name. (There was also a control group that performed the test unprimed.)
The hypothesis was that advance knowledge of the category name would
influence the speed with which the matching task was performed and that
it might influence the matching of good and poor examples in different
ways. Indeed, priming had a twofold effect which nicely supported the good-
ness ratings. Primed informants were faster in reacting to identical pairs of
items that had been rated as good examples (both words and pictures).
Conversely, reaction was slowed down by priming where poor examples were
involved. Reaction to pairs of intermediate examples was not noticeably
affected by priming. Without getting lost in speculations about the cogni-
tive representations of categories at this point, we can still support Rosch’s
claim that the advance information which is called up by the primed cat-
egory name is most readily applied to good examples; sparrows, oranges or
cars (automobiles in American English) simply fit the expectations called up
by the names of the categories BIRD, FRUIT and VEHICLE. However, this advance
information is not helpful with poor examples. In fact, priming with the
category name tends to confuse test subjects when they are confronted with
pairs of penguins, olives or wheelbarrows, which can at best be placed at
the periphery of the BIRD, the FRUIT or the VEHICLE category.
Good examples, bad examples and category boundaries
As the categorization of colours, shapes, birds and vehicles suggests, cate-
gory membership is not, as was for a long time assumed by philosophers
and linguists, a yes-or-no distinction. Rather it involves different degrees of
typicality, as is supported by goodness-of-example ratings, recognition,
matching and learning tasks.
Rosch’s main concern was to prove that categories are formed around
prototypes, which function as cognitive reference points. As far as the
boundaries of categories are concerned, she leaves us with the impression

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
1 9
that at some unspecified point or area beyond their periphery the categories
somehow fade into nowhere. This is not the idea we have when we talk
about categories in a naive way. Normally, we tend to imagine them as boxes,
drawers or some sort of fenced compound – certainly as something which
has boundaries. With regard to the category BIRD, the allocation of bound-
aries seems to be easy enough, even though a little knowledge of zoology
might be required.
Yet our confidence will be undermined when we follow the philosopher
Max Black and consider the imaginary ‘chair museum’ he invented. According
to Black it consists of
a series of ‘chairs’ differing in quality by least noticeable amounts. At one 
end of a long line, containing perhaps thousands of exhibits, might be a
Chippendale chair: at the other, a small nondescript lump of wood. Any
‘normal’ observer inspecting the series finds extreme difficulty in ‘drawing the
line’ between chair and non-chair.
(Black 1949: 32)
What Black’s interpretation of his chair museum suggests is that the col-
lection of chairs could and should be regarded as a continuum with a kind
of transition zone between chairs and non-chairs but no clear-cut bound-
aries. This view seems to be in conflict with what we observed at the begin-
ning of the chapter: that concrete objects like houses, books and also chairs
are clearly delimited and easy to identify, and that vague boundaries and
transition zones are restricted to items like knees, fog and valleys and to
scales like length, temperature and colour.
Here one must be careful not to confuse two different types of boundaries
and transition zones. One type of transition zone arises from the observation
that some concrete entities do not have clear-cut boundaries in reality –
this is the case with knee and other body parts; it applies to fog, snow and
similar weather phenomena and to landscape forms like valley or moun-
tain. In Black’s chair museum, however, the visitor is confronted with a dif-
ferent type of transition zone, since each exhibit in the museum is an entity
with absolutely clear boundaries. In the chair museum, it is not entities that
merge into each other, but categories of entities, and these categories are the
product of cognitive classification. Consequently, it is not the boundaries of
entities that are vague, but the boundaries of these cognitive categories (here:
chairs and non-chairs). To distinguish the two types of vagueness we will
restrict the terms ‘vague entity’ and ‘vagueness’ to the first type (knee, fog,
valley) and use ‘fuzzy category boundaries’ or fuzziness for the second, i.e.
for the category boundaries of CHAIR etc.

 
2 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
The issue is, however, even more complicated because there are in fact
cases where vagueness and fuzziness coincide. This is true of the second
type of entities, as already observed by the philosopher Willard Quine, who
found that the category MOUNTAIN is
vague on the score of how much terrain to reckon into each of the indisputable
mountains, and it is vague on the score of what lesser eminences to count as
mountains at all.
(Quine 1960: 126)
In other words, entities like mountains are vague because they are not clearly
delimited as individual entities; the cognitive category MOUNTAIN (or KNEE or
FOG) is fuzzy because it does not have clear boundaries either.
Summing up, we can say that our deeper understanding of the cognitive
background of categorization has considerably changed our original idea about
the threefold classification of entities into clearly delimited organisms and
objects, into entities with vague boundaries and into scales – a view which
is based on a kind of ‘naive realism’.6 From a cognitive perspective these dis-
tinctions and the discussion of vagueness arising from them are of minor
importance. What is important is that all types of concrete entities and nat-
ural phenomena like colours are conceptually organized in terms of proto-
type categories, whose boundaries do not seem to be clear-cut, but fuzzy.
How can the fuzzy nature of category boundaries, which intuitively seems
to be a convincing notion, be investigated empirically? This was the task
which William Labov set himself in a series of experiments involving cups
and cup-like containers (Labov 1973, 1978).7 Starting from Black’s inter-
pretation of the chair museum, Labov drew the following conclusion:
The subjective aspect of vagueness [i.e. fuzziness in our terminology] may be
thought of as the lack of certainty as to whether the term does or does not
denote; and this may be transformed into the consistency with which a given
sample of speakers does in fact apply the term.
(Labov 1973: 353)
If all informants in a test call an object chair, the consistency is 100 per cent.
If half the informants have doubts whether a certain object is still a chair and
therefore do not call it chair, the consistency value will drop to 50 per cent. If
hardly any of the informants regard an object as a chair and refuse to call it
a chair, the consistency value will approach zero. The actual test procedure of
Labov’s experiments was very simple: informants were shown line drawings
of cups and other vessels, as collected in Figure 1.4. The drawings were pre-
sented one by one and the informants were asked to name them (additional
descriptive details supplied by the informants were neglected in the analysis).

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
2 1
The results of the naming task were analyzed in terms of consistency
and presented as ‘consistency profiles’. Figure 1.5 presents the consistency
profile for the vessels shown in the top row of Figure 1.4. As the graph for
the use of cup indicates, consistency is 100 per cent for vessel no. 1 but
decreases as we proceed towards vessel no. 5. In addition, Figure 1.5 also
contains the complementary graph for the use of bowl. This graph demon-
strates that Black’s chair museum was rather unrealistic in that he only
compared ‘chairs’ with ‘non-chairs’. In contrast, Labov’s test shows that in
experimental and everyday categorizing situations, we normally do not just
make a division between the two categories ‘X’ and ‘not X’, but that we
have two or several names at our disposal which allow us to choose between
neighbouring categories, in this case between CUP, BOWL, MUG and VASE, etc.
Therefore, it is more realistic to think of fuzzy category boundaries as fringe
areas between adjacent categories than as transitions to a conceptual vacuum.
Figure 1.5 shows that as the consistency value for cup drops dramatically for
vessels 4 and 5, the use of bowl slowly begins to pick up. It is for these fringe
1
2
6
7
8
4
3
prototype
9
5
Figure 1.4
A selection of the drawings of cup-like objects used by Labov
(1973: 354); (no. 5 reconstructed; alternative drawings without a handle or with
two handles were also used in the tests)
Figure 1.5
Consistency profile for neutral context
(Adapted from Labov 1973)
100
cup
%
75
50
25
0
Vessel no.
1
2
3
4
5
bowl

 
2 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
areas between the two categories that the term ‘fuzzy boundaries’ seems to
be particularly appropriate. Labov’s tests can therefore be taken as a first exper-
imental proof of the fuzziness of category boundaries.
However, this fuzziness assumes a new dimension when one considers
the full range of Labov’s experiments. In the first test (the one discussed
so far) the informants were only confronted with the drawings, but not
given any background information (this was called ‘neutral context’ by
Labov). In the subsequent three tests they were asked to imagine one of
three different scenes: (a) a coffee-drinking situation, (b) a dinner table sit-
uation with the object filled with mashed potatoes (‘food context’) and (c)
a scene where the objects were standing on a shelf with cut flowers in them.
In later experiments different materials like china and glass were introduced
as well.
The result of including these variables was a massive shift of category bound-
aries. To give just one example, in a food context, vessel no. 3 was no longer
a cup for the majority of the informants. As indicated in Figure 1.6, half the
informants called it bowl in spite of its unchanged shape, and this switch
towards bowl was even more pronounced for vessel no. 4. In this way Labov’s
experiments show that the fuzziness of category boundaries has many facets,
of which context-dependence is one of the most important. (This issue will
be taken up in Section 1.3; another aspect of Labov’s tests, his carefully con-
trolled use of scalar properties like width, depth and shape, will be discussed
in the next section.)
Let us now relate Labov’s findings to what has already emerged about
the nature of cognitive categories in the preceding sections:
• Categories do not represent arbitrary divisions of the phenomena of the
world, but should be seen as based on the cognitive capacities of the
human mind.
100
cup
food
food
neutral
cup
%
75
50
25
0
Vessel no.
1
2
3
4
5
bowl
bowl
Figure 1.6
Consistency profile for neutral and food contexts (Labov 1973)

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
2 3
• Cognitive categories of colours, shapes, but also of organisms and con-
crete objects, are anchored in conceptually salient prototypes, which
play a crucial part in the formation of categories.
• The boundaries of cognitive categories are fuzzy, i.e. neighbouring cat-
egories are not separated by rigid boundaries, but merge into each other.
• Between prototypes and boundaries, cognitive categories contain mem-
bers which can be rated on a typicality scale ranging from good to bad
examples.
If we accept that cognitive categories consist of prototype, good examples
and bad examples, and have fuzzy boundaries, this suggests that the inter-
nal structure of categories is indeed rather complex and that it deserves a
more detailed examination.
To conclude this section a word of caution is in order. Cognitive cat-
egories, as we have discussed them, are stored in our mind as mental con-
cepts and signalled by the words of a language, so one might come to
think that they are equivalent with the meanings of these words. Yet if
we consider that colour terms do not just denote colours, but can also
stand for political parties, that bird does not only refer to a creature with
wings but, at least occasionally, also to a pretty girl, that chair can denote
the president of a meeting and that cups and bowls can be trophies in
sport, it is clear that there is no one-to-one relation between categories
(or concepts) and words. In fact it is quite normal that one word denotes
several categories, or in conventional linguistic terminology, that words
are polysemous.8 As the later chapters will show (especially Chapters 3
and 4), cognitive linguistics is not only concerned with the exploration
of individual categories, but also has something to say about the rela-
tionship between the categories which are signalled by one and the same
word.
Exercises
1. List basic colour terms in English (or your native language) by check-
ing which colour terms consist of only one short word and are freely
applicable to different kinds of objects and organisms. Describe the
colour of sweaters, T-shirts, etc., using basic colour terms as points of
reference.
2. Select typical examples of the categories T-SHIRT, LONG-SLEEVE (T-SHIRT), SWEATER
and JUMPER. Can you think of items of clothing which illustrate the fuzzi-
ness of the boundaries between these neighbouring categories?

 
2 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3. Draw pictures of prototypical examples and of objects on the border-
line between the categories BOTTLE, GLASS, VASE and BOWL, and use them
as stimuli for a naming task with your friends or family.
4. As we have found, the vagueness of objects and the fuzziness of cate-
gories must be kept apart. Look at the following examples and discuss
which of them involve fuzziness or vagueness or both aspects:
mountain, hill, summit, plateau, valley;
tree, shrub, flower;
hedge, bush, forest, park;
street, road, avenue, drive, highway;
river, stream, brook, torrent, firth, estuary, spring.
5. The names of category prototypes tend to come to mind before those
of peripheral examples. Check this hypothesis with two informal tests:
ask one group of friends to name as quickly as they can five types of
dogs, birds, trees and cars. List the items mentioned by the informants,
add other suitable items and present this extended list to a second group
for a goodness-of-example rating. Compare the results and discuss rea-
sons for discrepancies between the two tests.
1.2 The internal structure of categories:
prototypes, attributes, family resemblances 
and gestalt
If cognitive categories are made up of prototypes and periphery, of good and bad
examples, how do these differ and how are they related to each other? The listing
and the analysis of attributes seem to provide a good approach to these aspects of
internal category structure, while the notion of family resemblances is helpful as a
theoretical explanation. A fascinating though less well explored factor in
categorization is the ‘gestalt’ of organisms and concrete objects, which will also come
up for discussion.
Cognitive categories are, as we have just seen, labelled by words, and words
are listed in dictionaries. It is therefore only natural to look for informa-
tion about the contents of categories in dictionary entries. Here are some
examples of dictionary definitions for types of birds:
robin
A small brown European bird with a red breast. (OALD)

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
2 5
parrot
A tropical bird with a curved beak and brightly coloured
feathers that can be taught to copy human speech.
(LDOCE4)
ostrich
An ostrich is a large African bird that cannot fly. It has long
legs, a long neck, a small head and large soft feathers.
(COBUILD)
In terms of categorization, these dictionary definitions yield two types of infor-
mation. To start with, they supply the name of the category to which the
robin, the parrot and the ostrich belong (in this case BIRD). This category name
in turn suggests the properties which are shared by most birds: that they have
feathers, two legs, two wings and a beak, and that they lay eggs. The main
body of the dictionary entries lists properties which are specific to the item
in question. Thus the robin is characterized by small size, brownish colour
and red breast-feathers. These properties clearly set the robin apart from other
members of the category BIRD, such as parrots and ostriches. So robins, par-
rots and ostriches have properties which serve to tie them to a common
category as well as properties which distinguish them from each other.
Collecting both the shared and the distinctive properties seems to provide a
feasible way of describing the internal structure of categories.
However, there are some problems. Dictionary definitions are written for
a practical purpose and not with a systematic linguistic and cognitive anal-
ysis in mind. Lexicographers can afford to skip some properties that are to
be taken for granted, or they can modify their definitions by limiting
expressions or ‘hedges’, like usually (parrots ‘usually’ have brightly coloured
feathers). A more systematic linguistic approach not only has to fill in gaps,
e.g. by adding to the definition of robin that it chirps and to the definition
of ostrich that it can run very fast. A linguistic analysis will also have to clar-
ify the notion of property or attribute (to use the more technical term).
Regarding the attributes used in dictionary entries, it may be quite suf-
ficient to understand them in the rather vague sense of ‘characteristics’ or
‘typical aspects’. From a more theoretical stance, an additional question
must be asked: are attributes to be regarded as obligatory or not? This dis-
tinction was first suggested by Aristotle, who contrasted the ‘essence’ of
things with the ‘accidence’. The notion of essence gave rise to what has
been called the ‘categorical view’ or ‘classical view’, a position which was
vigorously defended by structuralist and transformationalist linguists.9
According to this view, a category is defined by a limited set of necessary
and sufficient conditions. These conditions are conceived as clear-cut, ‘dis-
crete’ features (or essential features, as they will be called here), which

 
2 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
can be either present or absent. In the case of the category BIRD, this means
that a creature is only a bird if it has two wings and two legs, a beak,
feathers and lays eggs (these are the necessary conditions). If, on the other
hand, a creature has all these essential features, this is also sufficient for
classifying it as a bird.
Such a rigid view of attributes and categorization is bound to run into
difficulties when it is applied to cognitive categories consisting of good and
bad examples and equipped with fuzzy boundaries, as introduced in
Section 1.1. To cope with these experiential prototype categories we need
a much more differentiated notion of attributes than is supplied by the clas-
sical view. The following discussion of attributes for birds will exemplify
the problems.
Attributes, good birds and bad birds: an example
Our starting point is a list of attributes collected for >ROBIN<, which was rated
best example of the category BIRD in Rosch (1975; see Figure 1.3). The idea
is that this list is the closest approximation available of the ‘prototypical’
attribute list for BIRD and that it would be very suitable for comparisons with
lesser category members:
1. ‘lays eggs’
2. ‘has two wings and two legs’
3. ‘has a beak’
4. ‘has feathers’
5. ‘can fly’
6. ‘has thin, short legs’
7. ‘is small and lightweight’
8. ‘has a short tail’
9. ‘chirps/sings’
10. ‘has a red breast’
The list is based on dictionary definitions of robin and bird, but is also sup-
ported by attributes collected from informants (Hampton 1979). More pre-
cisely, it assembles what dictionary makers and ordinary people (the
informants) find worth mentioning about robins. Such a list will never be
complete (for example, our description does not mention what kind of food
a robin eats) and the items will tend to overlap (in our case this applies to
nos 2 and 6, which both refer to the bird’s legs, and to nos 4 and 10, which
are both concerned with the bird’s plumage). Yet while these deficiencies
may be confusing to the linguist raised in the classical tradition, they still
seem, for the time being, to provide the best empirical way of describing
the properties that can be used in categorizing a robin.
When trying to apply the attributes collected for robins to other examples
of the category BIRD which scored high in Rosch’s rating test, e.g. >SPARROW<,

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
2 7
>CANARY< and >DOVE<, one will find that, with the exception of the red breast,
sparrows and canaries share all the attributes assembled for robins. Doves
do not chirp or sing and surpass the other three types of birds in size and
weight; otherwise they share the attributes listed. It seems, therefore, that
at least the attributes ‘lays eggs’, ‘has a beak’, ‘chirps/sings’, all the attributes
concerning wings, feathers and the ability to fly, and, finally, the ‘thin, short
legs’ and the ‘short tail’ are somehow related to a central position within
the category BIRD.
Now take a less good example of a bird, say >PARROT<. Going through
our list again, you will find that a parrot resembles a robin in that it lays
eggs, has a beak, two wings, two legs and feathers and can fly. However,
compared to a robin a parrot has rather strong legs, most parrots are much
larger than robins and have quite long tails. And a parrot certainly does
not chirp or sing.
Finally, when considering the attributes of >OSTRICH< (which was, of course,
rated a poor example of the category BIRD), the result will be that the only
attributes an ostrich shares with our short list are that it lays eggs, has two
legs and feathers, and that it has some kind of beak.
All in all, there seems to be a bundle of attributes that represent impor-
tant aspects of ‘birdiness’. These attributes tend to correlate in nature, i.e.
they appear together. A creature that has wings and feathers is more likely
to be able to fly than one that has fur and four legs. Types of birds quali-
fying for these attributes have a particularly prominent position in the cat-
egory. Intermediate and bad examples of the category BIRD differ from these
prototypical examples in two ways: either they deviate to a moderate
degree with regard to one or more attributes (think of the parrot’s legs and
tail) or some attributes are missing altogether (e.g. ostriches cannot fly).
This distribution is illustrated in matrix form in Figure 1.7, where a plus
sign stands for an attribute which is present, a minus sign for a missing
attribute, and a plus/minus combination for a greater or lesser deviation
from the expected form of the attribute. The matrix thus reflects the fact
that a yes/no representation of attributes (which would correspond to the
classical view) cannot adequately render the attributes of birds and has to
be modified to include intermediate judgements.
Though this may not be obvious at first glance, ‘deviant’ and ‘missing’
attributes can be seen as different problems and have been addressed in dif-
ferent ways in cognitive research. Since the absence of attributes (as in the
case of >OSTRICH<) seems to be the more serious problem, it will be tackled
first, while the deviant attributes (as observed with >PARROT<) will be taken
up later.

 
2 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Figure 1.7
Goodness-of-example and distribution of attributes in the category BIRD
The principle of family resemblances
The paradox in the case of the ostrich is that we are quite prepared to call
it a bird though it shares only few attributes with prototypical birds like the
robin. Yet as the above dictionary definition suggests, there is no lack of
attributes to describe >OSTRICH<, and while some of these attributes (‘is very
tall’, ‘runs very fast’) seem incompatible with our idea of a bird, some are
less so. Take the attribute ‘long neck’ and you will find that this applies to
birds as far apart from ostriches as are flamingoes and storks (though not
to robins). Or take the attribute ‘large soft feathers’ and it may remind you
of swans, while the alternative version offered by other dictionaries for this
attribute, i.e. ‘decorative feathers’, suggests links with peacocks and perhaps
even with parrots (though not with sparrows).
However, in other categories the items are even more dissimilar, as the
philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein showed in his much-quoted passage
about the category GAME:
Consider for example the proceedings that we call ‘games’. I mean board-games,
card-games, ball-games, Olympic games, and so on. What is common to them
all? – Don’t say: ‘There must be something common, or they would not be called
“games” ’ – but look and see whether there is anything common to all. – For if
you look at them you will not see something that is common 
to all, but similarities, relationships, and a whole series of them at that. To
repeat: don’t think, but look! – For example at board-games, with their
multifarious relationships. Now pass to card-games; here you find many
correspondences with the first group, but many common features drop out, and
Category members
Attributes
>ROBIN<
>SPARROW<
>DOVE<
>PARROT<
>OSTRICH<
lays eggs
+
+
+
+
+
beak
+
+
+
+
+
two wings &
two legs
+
+
+
+
+/
feathers
+
+
+
+
+
small &
lightweight
+
+
+/
+/

can fly
+
+
+
+

chirps/sings
+
+
+
+/

thin/short legs
+
+
+
+/

short tail
+
+
+
+/

red breast
+





 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
2 9
others appear. When we pass next to ball-games, much that is common is
retained, but much is lost. – Are they all ‘amusing’? Compare chess with noughts
and crosses. Or is there always winning and losing, or competition between
players? Think of patience. In ball-games there is winning and losing; but when a
child throws his ball at the wall and catches it again, this feature has
disappeared. Look at the parts played by skill and luck; and at the difference
between skill in chess and skill in tennis. Think now of games like ring-a-ring-
a-roses; here is the element of amusement, but how many other characteristic
features have disappeared! And we can go through the many, many other groups
of games in the same way; we see how similarities crop up and disappear.
(Wittgenstein 1958: 66f)
Wittgenstein’s conclusion was that games are connected by a network of
overlapping similarities, which he called family resemblances. On a some-
what more abstract level, the principle of family resemblances has been
defined as a set of items displaying the following kind of distribution:
In the words of Rosch and Mervis (1975: 575), ‘each item has at least one,
and probably several, elements in common with one or more other items,
but no, or few, elements are common to all items’.
Wittgenstein’s explanation and the definition supplied by Rosch and
Mervis both pursue the same aim: to show that the principle of family resem-
blances opens up an alternative to the classical view that attributes must
be common to all category members, that they must be ‘category-wide’. This
could be most impressively demonstrated with the analysis of ‘superordi-
nate categories’ like GAME (Wittgenstein’s example) and FURNITURE, VEHICLE, FRUIT,
etc., which were investigated by Rosch and Mervis (1975). As will be shown
later in Section 2.2, it is not surprising that superordinate categories largely
depend on family resemblances.
The picture changes when one considers categories like BIRD or other more
concrete categories like CAR, TRUCK, AIRPLANE, CHAIR, TABLE and LAMP. As observed
in the case of BIRD, even very bad examples of the category like >OSTRICH<
(and we might add >PENGUIN<) have some important attributes in common
with all the other category members. And, of course, the good examples such
B
A
AB
Overlapping similarities
Attributes
B
BC
C
C
CD
D
D
DE
Item
1
2
3
4
E

 
3 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
>OSTRICH<
>SWAN<
>DUCK<
>GOOSE<
>COCK<
>DOVE<
>SWALLOW<
>SPARROW<
>BUDGERIGAR<
>PARROT<
>PEACOCK<
l,m
l,m
Selected category-wide attributes
Selected family resemblance attributes
(a)  lays eggs
(b)  has a beak
(c)  has two wings and two legs
(d)  has feathers
(e)  can fly
(f)   is small and lightweight
(g)  chirps/sings
(h)  legs are thin/short
(i)   kept in a cage
(j)   reared for the use of its meat, eggs and feathers
(k)  has long neck
(l)   has decorative feathers
(m) has exotic colours
l,m
m
i
a−d
a−d
a−e
a−e
a−e
k,l
a−e
a−e
a−e
a−f
a−e
k
k
k
k
j
j
a−h
a−h
>ROBIN<
>HEN<
>STORK<
>FLAMINGO<
Figure 1.8
Selected common attributes and family resemblances of the 
category BIRD
as >ROBIN< and >SPARROW< all share whole bundles of attributes, so that only
a few of their attributes rely on the family resemblance principle. This situ-
ation is illustrated in Figure 1.8, where attributes are indicated by lines.
Just as with birds, members of categories like CAR and CHAIR (i.e. differ-
ent types of cars and chairs) share many more attributes than the members
of the superordinate categories VEHICLE and FURNITURE (i.e. different types of
vehicles and different items of furniture). Here Section 2.1 will provide an
explanation.
Yet however much the significance of family resemblances may vary for
individual categories, this does not affect the explanatory potential of the
underlying principle. What is decisive is that family resemblances can
explain why attributes contribute to the internal structure of the category
even if they are not common to all category members, i.e. if they are not
essential features according to the classical view. An ostrich is a bird not
only because it has feathers and lays eggs, like a robin (indicated by bold

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
3 1
lines in Figure 1.8); category membership is also supported by the fact that
the ostrich has a long neck like a flamingo, and decorative feathers like a
peacock (see thin lines in Figure 1.8). In defining the position of a category
member in its category, we are thus justified in considering any sensible
attribute proposed for this item. This is the theoretical background of the
attribute-listing experiments carried out by Rosch and her associates and
the typicality ratings that were based on them.
Attribute listing and attribute-based typicality ratings
Given the ease with which we seem to be able to call up the attributes for
familiar objects and organisms, attributes can be collected in a fairly sim-
ple test procedure that can be easily administered to a large number of sub-
jects. In the attribute-listing experiments conducted by Rosch and Mervis
(1975), each of the subjects (400 American psychology students) was given
six sheets of paper with the test item written on the top of the page. The
subjects had a minute and a half to write down all the attributes that they
could think of. To eliminate answers that were obviously false or wrongly
attributed to an item or too general in meaning, the attribute lists were
checked by two judges.
The test items used were selected from the lists obtained in the goodness-
of-example ratings described in Figure 1.3 and consisted of sets of 20
graded category members, one set for each of the categories FURNITURE, VEHI-
CLE, FRUIT, WEAPON, VEGETABLE and CLOTHING. Altogether, 120 items from >CHAIR<
to >TELEPHONE< (for FURNITURE), >CAR< to >ELEVATOR< (for VEHICLE) and from
>ORANGE< to >OLIVE< (for FRUIT) were tested.
The experiment had two aims: to demonstrate the notion of family resem-
blance (see above) and, more important for Rosch and Mervis, to supply
attribute-based typicality ratings (this neutral term seems preferable to Rosch
and Mervis’s own term ‘measure of family resemblance’). These typicality rat-
ings could then be used to verify the earlier goodness-of-example ratings.
How were the attribute-based ratings calculated? Leaving aside mathe-
matical details, two stages can be distinguished. First, the attributes were
‘weighted’, that is, it was established for how many of the 20 tested category
members each attribute had been listed. The top score of 20 was given if
an attribute was shared by all category members (‘means of transport’ in
the case of vehicles). An attribute listed for only one category member (think
of ‘installed in buildings’, which would only fit >LIFT< or >ELEVATOR<) received
the score 1; attributes applying to several but not all category members were
assigned intermediate scores. The result was a list of weighted attributes.

 
3 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
In the second stage the weights of all the attributes listed for each cate-
gory member were added up and rank-ordered (the actual procedure was some-
what more complex).10 Category members with many shared and therefore
highly weighted attributes, such as >ORANGE< or >APPLE< in the FRUIT category,
achieved high overall ratings; category members like >OLIVE<, which shared
only few, if any, attributes with other category members, scored low. When
this attribute-based rank order was compared with the goodness-of-example
ratings, the two types of ratings showed a high degree of correlation.
This correlation could be used to support the notion of prototype cat-
egories in two ways. On the one hand, the hypothesis that these categories
consist of good and bad members was no longer solely dependent on the
intuitive judgements of the goodness-of-example ratings, but could now
be related to a large range of attributes. On the other hand, the notion of
good and bad examples could be used to explain why attributes are so
unevenly distributed among category members. While good examples
have many attributes in common with other members of the same cate-
gory, bad or marginal examples share only few attributes with members of
the same category.
Yet as we know from the dictionary entries discussed at the beginning
of this section, the intra-categorial links of attributes represent only one side
of the coin. Equally important is the question of distinctive attributes, i.e.
whether the members of a category, both good and bad examples, share
attributes with members of neighbouring categories. This was tested in a
further attribute-listing experiment in which good and bad examples of the
category CAR were contrasted with members of the categories TRUCK, BUS and
MOTORCYCLE. As it turned out, the overlap of attributes is smallest between
the good examples of the different categories, but is much larger in the case
of bad or marginal examples. In other words, a prototypical car, say a saloon,
has fewer attributes in common with a prototypical truck than an estate
car does; the saloon also shares fewer attributes with a prototypical motor-
cycle than a three-wheeler does.
Looking now at both sides of the coin we can summarize the attribute
structure of prototype categories as follows:
• Prototypical members of cognitive categories have the largest number
of attributes in common with other members of the category and the
smallest number of attributes which also occur with members of neigh-
bouring categories. This means that in terms of attributes, prototypical
members are maximally distinct from the prototypical members of other
categories.

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
3 3
• Bad examples (or marginal category members) share only a small num-
ber of attributes with other members of their category, but have sev-
eral attributes which belong to other categories as well, which is, of
course, just another way of saying that category boundaries are fuzzy.
Attributes and dimensions
Returning to the matrix of bird attributes in Figure 1.7, it is clear that Rosch
and Mervis have indeed solved the problem of ‘missing’ attributes as observed
with >OSTRICH< and other bad examples of the BIRD category. This still leaves
the ‘deviant’ cases, that is category members whose attributes do not comply
with the expected norm. Most of these ‘deviant cases’ involve attributes
related to dimensions, such as ‘size’ and ‘weight’, ‘length (of tail)’ and ‘thick-
ness (of legs)’. This takes us back to Labov’s cups and bowls, which were already
discussed in the context of fuzzy category boundaries in Section 1.1. In
choosing cups and cup-like containers for his experiments Labov could rely
on ‘width’, ‘height/depth’ and ‘shape’, i.e. on generally accepted ‘logical’ prop-
erties of the dimension type, and did not have to expose himself to the vagaries
of empirical attribute listing. In this respect he is more in line with traditional
linguists than Rosch and Mervis are. The dimensions had the advantage that
they could be varied under controlled conditions, and these variations could
be easily and unequivocally represented in line drawings. This was illustrated
in Figure 1.4, which is here repeated for convenience as Figure 1.9.
In this figure the variation of the dimensions is based on the ‘proto-
typical’ cup no. 1. In the top row the height (or depth) of the vessels is
kept constant while the width is extended systematically from vessel to ves-
sel. Conversely, in the second row the width of vessels is identical, but from
left to right the vessels become deeper and deeper. Other scalar variations
used by Labov (and not illustrated in Figure 1.9) concerned the shape of
the vessels and involved cylinders, truncated cones, etc. In addition, he used
1
2
6
7
8
4
3
prototype
9
5
Figure 1.9
A selection of the drawings of cup-like objects used by Labov (1973:
354, no. 5 reconstructed)

 
3 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
attributes like ‘context’ or ‘function’ (‘neutral/coffee/food/flower context’),
‘material’ (glass, china) and ‘presence/absence of handle(s)’, all of them ‘non-
scalar’ attributes at first sight.
To bring these diverse attributes in line with dimensions, Labov defined
the specific width/height ratios of his test vessels as discrete values on the
width and height dimensions. In the same way the attributes involving con-
text, material and handles were interpreted as values on a dimension: the
neutral, coffee, food and flower contexts as values on the ‘context’ dimen-
sion; glass and china as values on the ‘material’ dimension; presence and
absence of handles as two values on the ‘handle’ dimension.
How did these attribute values show up in the actual test results, i.e. the
use of cup or bowl or mug for certain vessels? According to Labov, the use
of these words reflected the ‘weighted’ acceptability judgements of test sub-
jects. These judgements were weighted in the sense that the different val-
ues of the attributes involved led the subjects to choose different names for
the test vessels. If the ‘prototypical’ cup (vessel no. 1) was called cup by all
test subjects, this judgement could be related to the fact that vessel no. 1
represented the favourite width/height ratio in a neutral context. Vessel no.
2 was still overwhelmingly called cup because it represented a very similar
width/height ratio. In contrast, vessel no. 4 was assessed as a borderline case
of cup because its width/height ratio differed markedly from the favoured
value. If the use of cup was extended by the test subjects in a coffee con-
text and reduced in a food context, this was due to the interaction of the
width/height ratio with the respective values on the ‘context’ dimension.
While such three-variable constellations could still be documented in
consistency profiles (as shown in Figure 1.5 and 1.6), the more complex
interactions could only be mastered by mathematical formulas and prob-
ability calculation which are beyond the scope of this introduction (see
reading note 7).
Nevertheless, the aims and the methods employed by Labov should have
become clear. Starting out from attributes which could, at least theoretically,
be regarded as values on dimensions, he overcomes the limitations implicit
in the discrete attributes of the logical view, and this is where he seems to
go further than Rosch and Mervis. The scalar values are then related to each
other in a weighting process, and here his method comes closest to Rosch
and Mervis’s procedure.
Internal category structure and gestalt
When comparing attribute-based typicality ratings with the goodness-of-
example ratings (i.e. direct typicality ratings), we suggested that the latter are

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
3 5
based on intuition. The question is, however, what this intuition might be
derived from. Does it perhaps rely on some internal attribute-based rating?
From a ‘naive’ point of view, this seems unlikely. When we encounter an
animal we will hardly begin categorizing by evaluating specific attributes, unless
we are struck by a very salient one like the stripes of a zebra or the trunk of
an elephant. With most organisms and concrete objects, especially those that
are familiar to us, we seem to proceed in a different way. We simply take in
an overall picture of the whole and use it for a first assessment of its good-
ness. The consideration of specific attributes can then be left until later.
The problem with this quite plausible conception is that it seems impos-
sible to investigate it in controlled test situations or, to put it more point-
edly, to exclude experimentally that people categorize and evaluate the
goodness of items on an attribute-by-attribute basis. To return once more to
Labov’s naming tests, it does indeed make sense to assume that informants’
judgements are based on the overall impression of a cup or bowl rather than
on an internal computation of the width/height ratio, material and context,
but this alternative cannot be ruled out. For the time being, we have to be
content with results of more informal test interviews.
A series of such interviews was conducted in the context of the catego-
rization of houses (Schmid 1993: 121ff). The starting point was Labov’s
method of eliciting category names for the drawings of objects, which was
applied to the buildings shown in Figure 1.10. The aim of the interview
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1.10
Examples of houses used for a categorization task (Schmid 
1993: 151f)

 
3 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
part of the test was to collect information about how the categorization pro-
cess was carried out and how it was experienced by the informants.
After a first glance at the drawings (which were presented one by one
with other pictures interspersed) the informants named the buildings. At
this stage, pictures (a) and (b) were quite readily categorized as cottages,
while picture (c) was assigned to adjacent categories which were labelled
house in the country or villa. Just as with Labov’s cups and bowls there was
no total agreement among the informants. While 10 of the 12 informants
did not call picture (c) cottage, two were prepared to do so. When asked to
give the reasons for their categorizing decision, the informants explained
they had judged on the basis of a general impression of the drawings. This
can be taken as an indication that an internal goodness-of-example scale
was already established on the basis of the first overall impression. Only on
second thoughts were the informants able to pinpoint certain individual prop-
erties that might have led them to select the name they did. The choice of
cottage seems to have been influenced by the material (‘made of stone’) and
the simple but sturdy construction in the case of picture (a), and by the
thatched roof for picture (b). The deviant width/height relation (‘too big’)
and the numerous extensions of building (c) may have helped to rule out
cottage as an appropriate name for the majority of the informants.
As far as these interviews go, they support the initial assumption that cat-
egorization and goodness ratings may indeed involve two stages: the perception
of an object as a whole as the first step (the so-called holistic perception),
and a kind of decomposition of the perceived whole into individual proper-
ties or attributes as a second (optional) step.11
The idea of ‘perceived whole’ comes close to the notion of gestalt as
advocated by gestalt psychologists,12 so it may be helpful to look at some of
their findings. Their major claim is that gestalt perception can be traced back
to ‘gestalt laws of perceptual organization’, or ‘gestalt principles’, which are
usually demonstrated with line drawings and dot patterns. The most impor-
tant of these principles are:
• ‘principle of proximity’: individual elements with a small distance
between them will be perceived as being somehow related to each other;
• ‘principle of similarity’: individual elements that are similar tend to be
perceived as one common segment;
• ‘principle of closure’: perceptual organization tends to be anchored in
closed figures;
• ‘principle of continuation’: elements will be perceived as wholes if they
only have few interruptions.

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
3 7
The more a configuration of individual elements adheres to these princi-
ples, the more it will tend towards a clear-cut and cogent organization (called
Prägnanz by the gestalt psychologists), which lends itself to gestalt percep-
tion. Examples which show a high degree of Prägnanz are called ‘good gestalts’
or ‘good forms’. Among them are circle, square and equilateral triangle, which
we already encountered in our discussion of shapes in Section 1.1, where
they appeared as prototypes of shape categories.
However, shape is just one aspect of the gestalt of organisms and objects,
although such an important one that it is sometimes, inaccurately, treated
as equivalent with gestalt. The question is whether the gestalt principles are
not only valid for dot patterns and geometrical shapes, but can also be applied
to the much more complex configurations of organisms and objects.
As it seems, a central role in providing an object with a gestalt is played
by its constituent parts.13 Consider once more the cottages (a) and (b) in
Figure 1.10. It is obvious that they consist of walls, windows, a door, a roof
and a chimney. Yet when we look at these drawings for the first time, the
cottages are not visually ‘deconstructed’ into these parts, but are perceived
as an integral whole. This holistic visual perception is possible because the
parts are organized according to the gestalt principles of proximity (all the
parts are close together), of similarity (identical windows), of closure (all
the parts are included in one overall outline) and continuation (all the lines
are uninterrupted).
Similarly, if you look at some everyday object that is in your view at
the moment, maybe a chair, a table or a bookshelf, you will realize that the
salient parts make an important contribution to the whole without at first
being noticed as individual parts. Other perceptual aspects such as the over-
all proportions, the material and the colour of objects interact with the over-
all shape and the parts to complete the holistic impression of a gestalt.
Having established that objects are perceived as integral wholes, we can
go on to ask ourselves what makes one gestalt more prototypical for a cat-
egory than another. Here one enters new ground, because apart from the
good forms among geometrical shapes, this question was not really the con-
cern of gestalt psychology. We would like to argue that it is again the parts
of an object that play an important role in establishing a prototypical gestalt.
Parts do not only contribute to the overall shape of an object, but are also
related to its function, which for most artefacts is the raison d’être of the
object. Likewise, the existence of most parts of an object is motivated by
the particular purpose the object serves.
Consider a chair, for example. The functionally relevant parts of a chair are
the legs, the seat and the back. Our assumption now is that the prototypical

 
3 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
gestalt of a chair relies predominantly on the presence of these three func-
tional parts in optimally functional proportions. Looking at the drawings
of chairs shown in Figure 1.11, the prototypical chair gestalt is best repre-
sented by picture (a).
An analogous explanation can be attempted for the gestalts of organisms
such as birds if we understand the ‘function’ of a bird to mean the enact-
ment of a certain form of organic life. This prototypical mode of life would
be characterized by the ability to live on trees and shrubs, to fly, and to pick
nuts, seeds, worms, etc., for food. Assuming a functional design of the parts,
we would expect from a prototype gestalt that parts like the beak, the legs,
and especially the wings, have the appropriate form: the legs should have
claws which allow the bird to cling to branches, the beak should be protruding
and sharp to facilitate food picking, wings should be shaped aerodynamically.
Even more important, the parts would have to have the right proportions
(large wings in comparison to the remaining part of the body etc.). This may
read like a replica of the attributes listed in the matrix at the beginning of
this section (see Figure 1.7). The decisive difference is that these functionally
balanced parts are all integrated into one gestalt, and are perceived as a whole.
All this might suggest that for concrete objects as well as for organisms
the prototype gestalt should be conceived as a kind of reduction to the rel-
evant and mainly visual essentials, though perceived as a whole. Such a notion
is supported by the experience of how easy it is to grasp and categorize
reduced illustrations, as have been increasingly used in dictionaries over the
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.11
A prototypical chair gestalt and other chairs

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
3 9
last few years.14 (The case of pictograms, as used in traffic signs, is more
complex because here the drawings are used as a vehicle for instructions
and will therefore be neglected.)
We would hold the position that the effectiveness of reduced drawings
is not a general phenomenon even with concrete objects and organisms,
but depends on the kind of lexical category to be illustrated. Just look at
the drawings of a bungalow and a cottage in Figure 1.12, which are both
taken from the same dictionary (LDOCE2, 1987). The bungalow is reduced
to the functional parts (one-storey building with walls, roof, windows, door),
and can still be readily identified. In contrast, the illustration of the cot-
tage contains a wealth of detail, and this seems to be necessary for easy
recognition, so it is in fact more easily categorized than some of the plainer
drawings of cottages in Figure 1.10.
From this it can be deduced that the prototype gestalt of a cottage com-
prises more than the complete and well-proportioned parts of a house, impor-
tant as all this may be. The function of a cottage includes notions like creating
warmth and cosiness and being embedded in natural rural surroundings.
In other words, all sorts of emotional and attitudinal properties are involved.
Similarly it is difficult to imagine a line drawing of an English pub (and,
incidentally, none of the major dictionaries provides one); the wealth of
gestalt properties applying to a pub is simply too great.
Or take another simple case, the teddy bear. To approximate the proto-
type gestalt of a teddy bear it is certainly not enough to give the outline
drawing of a teddy that coincides with its natural model, the brown bear.
What is also needed is an indication of its softness (something that takes
us beyond the visual to the tactile properties of the gestalt), and, perhaps
most important, the teddy should be hugged by a child to round off the
general impression of its function.
This shows that even in the domain of concrete objects we are not just
confronted with a single kind of gestalt prototype (the ‘reduced type’) but
bungalow
Figure 1.12
Bungalow and cottage: examples of reduced and ‘rich’ dictionary
illustrations (from LDOCE2, 1987)

 
4 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
have to take into account that certain lexical categories require richer visual
representations, which in turn suggest richer underlying gestalt prototypes.
The situation becomes even more complex when we consider that for many
lexical categories – those loosely called ‘abstract’ categories – gestalt perception
is largely excluded.
Summing up at this point, our discussion of gestalt has shown mainly
two things:
• Gestalt perception seems indeed to play an important part in catego-
rization and goodness ratings. For the categories discussed it seems to
be as essential as the possibility of studying attributes and family
resemblances and computing attribute-based typicality ratings.
• The role of gestalt in the categorization of objects and organisms need
not be completely left to intuition; it can be studied by making selec-
tive use of the principles of gestalt psychology and by considering addi-
tional aspects like parts and function.
Any research into gestalt properties, and even the preliminary sketch
attempted here, is intimately bound up with questions of mental repre-
sentation and processing, just as the notions of good and bad examples, of
attributes, and of prototypicality in general cannot be isolated from their
cognitive background. So it seems appropriate to conclude this section with
a few more general remarks about the cognitive status of categories and of
the notions involved in categorization.
The cognitive status of categories, prototypes, 
attributes and gestalt
For the linguist, categorization is an important issue because it underlies
the use of words and the use of language in general. Since producing and
understanding language undoubtedly involve cognitive processes, catego-
rization is necessarily something that takes place in our minds, and the cat-
egories resulting from it can be understood as mental concepts stored in
our mind. Taken together they make up what has been called the ‘mental
lexicon’.15 Unfortunately, we do not have direct access to cognitive phe-
nomena, so everything that is said about the categories of the mental lex-
icon can only have the status of a more or less well-founded hypothesis.
Such a hypothesis can be supported by philosophical argument, by physi-
ological research into the human sensory apparatus and by experimental
evidence based on linguistic and other human behaviour.
To avoid misunderstandings, two things should be kept in mind. First,
the number of hypotheses about cognitive categorization is theoretically

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
4 1
unlimited; it is definitely not restricted to the two paradigms which will be
discussed in this section. Second, the postulated category paradigms need
not apply indiscriminately to the whole domain of human categorization,
but may be restricted to certain areas and perspectives.
Let us start with the ‘classical’ model of categorization, a hypothesis with
a very long tradition. This hypothesis claims that categories come as homo-
geneous units with clear-cut borderlines and that all members are charac-
terized by a limited number of essential features (a set of necessary and
sufficient conditions, as discussed above). This beautifully simple model is
often accompanied by the philosophical speculation that this type of cat-
egory mirrors, or is even predetermined by, the constitution of the
organisms and objects in the ‘real’ world. The problem is that this hypoth-
esis is not in accordance with the evidence collected by physiologists and
psychologists.
In contrast with the classical model, the experiential prototype hypoth-
esis of categorization claims that categories are not homogeneous, but have
a prototype, good and bad members, and have fuzzy boundaries. Category
members do not all share the same discrete attributes, but may be linked
by family resemblances. In the case of colours and shapes, prototype the-
ory is supported by both physiological and psychological evidence. As sug-
gested in Section 1.1, colour categories and focal colours seem to be based
on the nature of the human perceptual apparatus. Their prototype struc-
ture was also confirmed by psychological tests. In the case of organisms and
concrete objects only this second type of evidence is available. As this short
survey of the classical and the prototype paradigms has shown, it does indeed
help to take the strictly cognitive view, the view that categorization is some-
thing that underlies the mental processes of language comprehension and
language production. This view provides us with a vantage point from which
we can now delve deeper and examine the main elements of the prototype
hypothesis: the notions of prototype, category membership and typicality,
attributes, family resemblances and gestalt.
Prototype
Basically, there are two ways to understand the notion of prototype. It can
be deduced from categorization experiments. For instance, some members of
a category first come to mind in association experiments and are recognized
more rapidly as category members in verification tasks. If one takes these mem-
bers as prototypes of the respective categories, this leads to definitions like
‘best example of a category’, ‘salient examples’, ‘clearest cases of category mem-
bership’, ‘most representative of things included in a class’ or ‘central and
typical members’ (see Rosch 1978; Lakoff 1986; Brown 1990; Tversky 1990).

 
4 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
But this is not the conception of prototype that we would advocate.
Instead we would claim that if one takes the cognitive view of categories
seriously, one is justified in defining the prototype as a mental representa-
tion, as some sort of cognitive reference point. Thinking of prototypes in
this genuinely cognitive way still leaves open the nature of the mental rep-
resentation, so that definitions may range from the more concrete notion
of ‘image’ or ‘schema’ to the more abstract ‘representation of a category’ or
‘ideal’ according to the categories to which they are applied (definitions from
Rosch and Mervis 1975; Coleman and Kay 1981; Lakoff 1986).
Category membership and typicality
Unlike the homogeneous categories postulated by the classical hypothesis,
cognitive prototype categories always consist of good and bad members and
include marginal examples whose category membership is doubtful.16 This
not only applies to attested cases of prototype categories, such as colour
categories or CUP, BOWL, MUG and CHAIR, but also to categories like BIRD, where
category membership seems to be safely based on discrete attributes such
as ‘laying eggs’. But do ordinary language users have the encyclopaedic knowl-
edge to decide whether a penguin lays eggs or not? If they do not, the issue
whether the penguin is a bird will remain undecided, and >PENGUIN< will be
a doubtful member of the prototype category BIRD.
Even for prime cases of apparently discrete homogeneous categories, such
as ODD NUMBER, SQUARE and kinship categories (MOTHER, UNCLE, etc.), a prototype
structure cannot be completely excluded. As experiments have shown
(Armstrong et al. 1983; Fehr and Russell 1984), informants do in fact distin-
guish between good and bad examples of odd numbers and squares, and sim-
ilar reactions can be assumed for MOTHER (Lakoff 1987) and other kinship terms.
However, this only applies to ‘everyday’ categorization. In a mathemati-
cal or scientific context the classical view comes into its own. In such a con-
text ODD NUMBER, SQUARE, kinship categories and even BIRD can be established as
clear-cut and homogeneous categories by an act of definition. In other words,
the classical paradigm of categorization has a wide field of application wher-
ever there is a need for precise and rigid definitions as in the domain of sci-
entific categorization or in the legal field. And there is no reason why the
discrete categories of science and the everyday prototype categories should not
coexist in the mental lexicon and even influence each other.
Attributes and family resemblances
Attributes as collected from informants by Rosch and others are statements which
provide information about the members of a category. In this sense attributes
are part and parcel of the empirical investigation of category structures.

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
4 3
When the attribute lists for individual category members are compared,
this is assumed to reflect the similarity relations between category mem-
bers. Such similarity relations may encompass all category members
(‘category-wide attributes’) or they may establish links only between some
of the members. In the latter case, category coherence is produced by fam-
ily resemblances.
Since similarity relations between good and bad members of a category
are part of the hypothesis of prototype structure, this implies that they are
also part of the mental representation of a category. This is not necessarily
so for the empirically collected attributes which are elicited from informants
and which may be fragmentary and overlapping. So attributes are best con-
sidered as a descriptive tool and not as part of the mental representation
of the category. Such a cautious position is even more advisable when
attributes are treated as values on dimensions. For such dimensions as ‘size’,
‘width’ and ‘shape’ may be imposed on the attributes by the logically minded
researcher and are not necessarily a reflection of our natural way of think-
ing about the objects in the world around us.
Gestalt
As originally conceived by gestalt psychologists, the notion of gestalt was
intended as an explanation of holistic perception. We have suggested a link
between gestalt and the notion of prototype categories. If a gestalt is orga-
nized according to the gestalt principles and includes the functional parts
of an item in functionally balanced proportions, it may be regarded as a ‘pro-
totype gestalt’. This ties in with the definition of prototype as an ‘image’,
which was quoted above. In fact, in the case of organisms and concrete objects
where visual perception seems to be important, the prototype gestalt con-
tributes considerably to the ability of the prototype to function as a model
or cognitive reference point.
This is where we think we should leave the psychological issues of cate-
gorization, moving on in the following section to look at some sociological,
or, more broadly, cultural factors that influence the formation of prototypes
and prototype categories.
Exercises
1. Collect attributes for the following categories and try to distinguish
between objective properties and subjective associations:
MAN, WOMAN, BOY, GIRL;
MANSION, PALACE, COTTAGE, CASTLE;

 
4 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
BICYCLE, MOTORBIKE, CAR, VAN, LORRY;
JEANS, LEGGINGS, TUXEDO, TAILCOAT, MINISKIRT.
2. Look at the picture of the ‘Smith brothers’ devised by Armstrong et al.
(1983: 269).
In what way is the principle of family resemblances illustrated by this
drawing? Which attributes are shared by all the brothers?
3. Have a look at how Wierzbicka (1985: 19–36) explains the difference
between CUP and MUG and discuss whether you find her arguments plau-
sible. Wierzbicka claims that the difference in meaning boils down to
the difference in the intended use of the respective objects; apply this
idea to the categories VASE, BOWL and PLATE.
4. Discuss the attributes ‘fun’, ‘no purpose other than the game itself’,
‘uncertain outcome’ and ‘governed by rules’ as candidates for the sta-
tus of category-wide attributes for the category GAME. Try to come up
with other possibilities and discuss possible counterexamples.
5. Pictograms are more than simple line drawings. Look at some traffic
signs and some of the signs in railway stations, bus terminals or air-
ports and explain whether they make use of gestalt perception. What
additional information do they convey?
6. Ask a friend or two to draw simple pictures of a car, a bus, a telephone,
a book, a bottle, a tree, a house and a church. Discuss to what extent the
principles of gestalt psychology can be applied to their drawings. Does the
perspective or vantage point from which the objects are viewed play a role?
7. Discuss the difference between the classical view of categorization and
the prototype model with reference to legal categories like MURDER,
MANSLAUGHTER; VANDALISM, LOOTING; ASSAULT, ASSAULT AND BATTERY; NEGLIGENCE,
GROSS NEGLIGENCE. What are the problems a judge faces when he has to
deal with unclear cases?

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
4 5
8. In the context of the acquisition of the meaning of words Aitchison
(2003: 193) writes about a child’s use of the word qua (‘quack’) as dis-
cussed by the Russian psychologist Vygotsky:
The child began with qua as a duck on a pond. Then the liquid element
caught the youngster’s attention and the word was generalized to a cup of
milk. But the duck had not been forgotten, and this surfaced in qua used
to refer to a coin with an eagle on it. But then the child appeared to
ignore the bird-like portion of the meaning and focus only on the
roundness of the coin, so reapplied the word qua to a teddy-bear’s eye.
Discuss how the strange assembly collected by the child in the cate-
gory QUA can be explained with the principle of family resemblances.
1.3 Context-dependence and cultural models
The prototypes of cognitive categories are not fixed, but may change when a
particular context is introduced, and the same is true for category boundaries. More
generally, the whole internal structure of a category seems to depend on the context
and, in a wider sense, on our social and cultural knowledge, which is thought to be
organized in cognitive and cultural models.
Reading the sentence He opened the door to face a pretty young woman with a
dog in her arms, what kind of dog would first spring to your mind? Would
it be an Alsatian or a collie, which would presumably turn out to be 
prototypical dogs in a goodness-of-example rating? Or would you not rather
think of a Pekinese or some other kind of small lapdog? The chances are
that you would. Though this may look like a rather trivial example, it has
far-reaching implications for the theory of prototypes. What it suggests is
that prototypes are not after all the fixed reference points for cognitive cat-
egories that we have assumed them to be, but that they are liable to keep
shifting as the context changes.
The context-dependence of prototypes and of the whole
internal category structure
Let us first expand the lapdog example and, by way of a little experiment,
compare it to other examples involving references to dogs. Read the fol-
lowing four sentences one by one, pausing for a second after each exam-
ple to check what kind of dog is suggested to you:
1. The hunter took his gun, left the lodge and called his dog.
2. Right from the start of the race the dogs began chasing the rabbit.

 
4 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3. She took her dog to the salon to have its curls reset.
4. The policemen lined up with the dogs to face the rioters.
We can safely assume that for each of the four sentences you will have formed
a different image of the kind of dog that is denoted. In a hunting context
like example (1), the most likely dog would probably be some kind of retriever;
in the dog racing context of example (2), it would certainly be a greyhound
that would first come to mind. In examples (3) and (4), you will presum-
ably have imagined a poodle and an Alsatian respectively. These examples
suggest that what turns out the most likely member of a certain category
depends on the context. Since we may expect the prototype to be our first
choice, the result of our little experiment indicates that, depending on the
context, the prototype shifts. The ‘context-dependent’ categories thus
evoked may be completely different from the non-contextualized prototypes
elicited in goodness-of-example experiments.
However, more than a shift of prototypes is at stake in these examples.
Let us assume that in a goodness-of-example test >ALSATIAN< would be rated
as a prototypical dog, with >GREYHOUND<, >SETTER< and >POODLE< being just
slightly less prototypical. >PEKINESE< would presumably be a rather peripheral
dog because of its small size, flat face and somewhat ‘undoggy’ behaviour.
Taking this category structure as a starting point, it seems clear that the sen-
tences above do more than just shift the prototype. In some cases the cat-
egory structure of the context-dependent category is much leaner than that
of the non-contextualized category. For example in sentences (2) and (3) the
context-dependent prototypes are >GREYHOUND< and >POODLE< respectively; vir-
tually all other types of dogs are so unlikely that, for all practical purposes,
they are highly peripheral members of the context-dependent category.
In contrast, in sentence (1) the internal category structure of DOG is retained
to a larger extent. One could certainly imagine an Alsatian or a setter being
used as a hunting dog. Nevertheless they are clearly less typical members
of the context-dependent category (HUNTING) DOG than retrievers. Thus the
principle of different degrees of goodness-of-example is still valid in this
case, and the same is true for examples (3) and (4). The main point, how-
ever, is that the context-dependent category structure is different from the
structure that was obtained in non-contextualized goodness-of-example
ratings. Altogether, it seems that the context not only determines the
choice of the category prototype, but that it also leads to an adjustment of
the position of other category members. How can this be explained?17
One way is to use attributes as an explanatory tool. As shown in Section
1.2, weighted attributes can be employed to explain the typicality structure

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
4 7
of a category. When viewed in terms of attributes, context seems to have
a twofold effect: first, the context can change the weight of attributes that
seem to be relevant for a certain category. Attributes of the category DOG that
seem to be decisive in the goodness-of-example ratings and attribute-based
typicality ratings (e.g. ‘barks’, ‘has four legs’, ‘wags tail when happy’, ‘likes
to chase cats’, etc.) apparently lose weight in specific contexts; second, the
context can emphasize attributes that are not prominent and even introduce
new attributes which would not be mentioned at all in non-contextualized
attribute-listing experiments. In the hunting-dog context, attributes like
‘brings back the kill’ or ‘points out the position of animals for shooting’
increase in importance. In the dog-racing context, ‘has long, thin legs’, ‘can
run fast’, ‘is enduring’ and others become crucial. With the introduction of
new attributes and the re-evaluation of the weights of existing ones the
attribute list for a member of a category changes completely. The result is
that previously peripheral examples are equipped with large bundles of heav-
ily weighted attributes and turned into good examples or even prototypes,
while well-established good examples are reduced to the status of marginal
members.
Context, situation and cognitive models
Once we have acknowledged that the context can completely reshuffle the
positions of members within the category structure, we must ask ourselves
what the context is. How can we grasp this rather elusive notion, which is
nevertheless one of the most widely used terms in linguistics?
‘Context’ has been defined in many ways by scholars with different back-
grounds and various aims in mind. From a purely linguistic point of view
the context has been regarded as the linguistic material preceding and fol-
lowing a word or sentence. Language philosophers and pragmalinguists,
most notably Searle (1979: 125), have defined context as the set of back-
ground assumptions that are necessary for an utterance to be intelligible.
In discourse-oriented approaches to language the context has been related
to the situation in which an utterance is embedded. Originating in the work
of the anthropologist Malinowski, the term ‘context’ has been extended still
further to include the so-called ‘context of culture’. Malinowski had argued
as early as 1923 that both the ‘context of situation’ and the ‘context of cul-
ture’ were necessary for a proper understanding of an utterance or text
(Halliday and Hasan 1989: 5ff).
For cognitive linguists it is important that the notion of ‘context’
should be considered a mental phenomenon. This requirement is stressed

 
4 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
by Langacker, for example, who defines his central notion of domain ‘as a
context for the characterization of a semantic unit’ (1987a: 147).18 This very
general interpretation of ‘context’ will be discussed in Chapter 4 alongside
other basic tenets of Langacker’s theory. In this section we will try to pre-
sent a more tangible, but still cognitive, view of the notion of ‘context’.
To do this it will be helpful to distinguish ‘context’ from ‘situation’ and
a few other related terms. Figure 1.13 illustrates our suggestion for a mean-
ingful terminological distinction between the notions ‘context’ and ‘situation’
with reference to the example sentence The boy was building a sandcastle with
his bucket and his spade. The figure shows that we will treat the ‘context’ as
belonging to the field of mental phenomena, while the ‘situation’ refers to
some state of affairs in the ‘real world’. (The quotation marks around real
world are necessary in view of the age-old debate among philosophers as to
whether there is such a thing as a ‘real world’ at all; see reading note 6).
As Figure 1.13 indicates, we define the term situation as the interac-
tion between objects in the real world. In the exemplary situation described
by the sentence above, the situation is made up by four objects, namely a
boy, a sandcastle, a bucket and a spade, which interact through the activi-
ties of the boy. When the sentence is being processed by the hearer or reader,
the words call up the corresponding cognitive categories, or to put it more
simply, the mental concept we have of the objects in the real world. In
addition, a cognitive representation of the interaction between the concepts
The ë real’ world
object 1
object 2
object 3
object 4
The mind
concept/category 1
concept/category 2
concept/category 3
concept/category 4
‘a young male
human being’
‘a small model of a
castle built of sand’
‘open container made
of plastic or metal’
‘tool for digging
earth, sand, etc.’
cognitive
representation
of interaction
between
categories
=
=
context
‘building a
sandcastle’
interaction
between
objects
situation
‘a boy
builds a
sandcastle
with
a bucket
and a
spade’
Figure 1.13
‘Situation’ and ‘context’ illustrated with reference to the sentence
The boy was building a sandcastle with his bucket and his spade

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
4 9
is formed, and it is for this cognitive representation that the term context
will be used. In Figure 1.13, we have characterized the context for the exam-
ple sentence roughly as ‘building a sandcastle’. It should be emphasized that
in contrast to most pragmatic and/or sociolinguistic approaches to context,
our notion does not focus on the speech event in which an utterance is
made, but on the cognitive representation of the situation depicted by the
utterance.19
Of course, this cognitive representation, or context, does not remain an
isolated mental experience, but is immediately associated in at least two ways
with related knowledge stored in long-term memory. On the one hand,
context-specific knowledge about the categories involved is retrieved.20
This leads to the selection of >PLASTIC BUCKET< as the most typical member
of the context-dependent category BUCKET and of >CHILDREN’S SPADE< as the
most typical member of the context-dependent category SPADE.
On the other hand, the currently active context calls up other contexts
from long-term memory that are somehow related to it. In our example, expe-
riences about other aspects of sand and sandcastles, besides those expressed
in the sentence above, might be evoked. Related categories like WATER, HANDS,
SHELLS, TURRET or MOAT, and frequent interactions between all these categories
like ‘digging sand’ or ‘shaping turrets’ are good candidates for such associ-
ated contexts.
It stands to reason that for all kinds of phenomena that we come across
in everyday life, we have experienced and stored a large number of inter-
related contexts. Cognitive categories are not just dependent on the imme-
diate context in which they are embedded, but also on this whole bundle
of contexts that are associated with it. Therefore, it seems quite useful to
have a term which covers all the stored cognitive representations that belong
to a certain field. We will use the term cognitive model for these knowl-
edge bases; other related terms like ‘frame’ or ‘script’ will be taken up again
in Chapter 5.21
Figure 1.14 shows one of the two cognitive models (ON THE BEACH and IN
THE SANDPIT) in which the context ‘building a sandcastle’ could possibly be
embedded. When we consider this example, two important properties of
cognitive models become immediately apparent. First, as indicated by the
reference to ‘other contexts’ in Figure 1.14, cognitive models are basically
open-ended. A practical consequence of this property is that it is very hard
to describe the cognitive model of a domain and that descriptions of cog-
nitive models are never exhaustive, but always highly selective.
Second, just like the contexts that build the basis for cognitive models, cog-
nitive models themselves are not isolated cognitive entities, but interrelated.

 
5 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
In our example, it can be seen that the categories PEOPLE, SEA, SAND and others
keep occurring in various contexts that make up the model ON THE BEACH.
Consequently, the cognitive models of PEOPLE, SEA and SAND are closely
related to the model ON THE BEACH. In line with theories of the mind which
emphasize its so-called ‘connectionist’ architecture, one can argue that cog-
nitive models combine to build networks.22 This tendency can probably best
be explained using a visual representation. Figure 1.15 gives an idea of a
network which consists of various cognitive models that are interrelated
through multiple connections.
So far, two aspects of cognitive models have emerged from the exem-
plary representations that we have provided: their incompleteness and
their tendency to build networks. There is a third, although not so obvi-
ous, property of cognitive models that should not be neglected, namely the
SUN
WEATHER
PEOPLE
EATING
WORK
MONEY
CARS
HOLIDAYS
BOATS
BEACH
WEEKEND
FISHING
SAND
SEA
Figure 1.15
Exemplary network of cognitive models
context 2
context 1
‘swimming’
(PEOPLE, SEA,
WAVES; walk,
swim, dive)
context 5
‘walking along the beach’
(PEOPLE, SAND, WAVES, SHELLS;
walk, talk, look, pick up)
context 4
‘picnicking’
(PEOPLE, SANDWICHES,
COKE, ICE-CREAM;
eat, drink)
context 3
‘building a sandcastle’
(PEOPLE, SAND,
BUCKET, SPADE,
dig, shape, build)
cognitive
model
ON THE BEACH
(PEOPLE, SUN, SAND, TOWEL,
DECKCHAIR, SUNGLASSES;
lie down, sleep)
‘sunbathing’
other
contexts
Figure 1.14
Schematic illustration of the cognitive model ON THE BEACH (the
major categories and the way they interact are indicated in brackets)

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
5 1
fact that cognitive models are omnipresent. In every act of categorization
we are more or less consciously referring to one or several cognitive mod-
els that we have stored. Only in the very rare case when we encounter a
totally unfamiliar object or situation will no appropriate cognitive model
be available, but even then we will presumably try to call up similar expe-
riences and immediately form a cognitive model. Imagine the case of a for-
eign visitor to Britain who goes to watch a cricket game for the first time
in his life. Having no cognitive model of the situation at his disposal he
will have no idea what is going on on the field. Nevertheless the visitor
will try to relate what he sees to similar cognitive models perhaps about
games in general or about his knowledge of baseball.
Clearly, then, we can neither avoid the influence of cognitive models
nor function without them. Even in the rather artificial situation of goodness-
of-example ratings, the cognitive model of the field that the subjects are
being asked to rate is at work. Therefore, it would be misleading to say
that such experiments take place in an uncontextualized vacuum. What
these experimental situations generate is a very neutral or zero-context which
can be compared to sentences like When she looked out of the window she
saw a . . . or She thought of the . . . . Uncontextualized language in the sense
of ‘language without cognitive models’ is apparently unthinkable.
Cultural models
Cognitive models, as the term suggests, represent a cognitive, basically psy-
chological, view of the stored knowledge about a certain field. Since psy-
chological 
states 
are 
always 
private 
and 
individual 
experiences,
descriptions of such cognitive models necessarily involve a considerable
degree of idealization. In other words, descriptions of cognitive models are
based on the assumption that many people have roughly the same basic
knowledge about things like sandcastles and beaches.
However, as the cricket example has shown, this is only part of the story.
Cognitive models are of course not universal, but depend on the culture in
which a person grows up and lives. The culture provides the background
for all the situations that we have to experience in order to be able to form
a cognitive model. A Russian or German may not have formed a cognitive
model of cricket simply because it is not part of the culture of his own coun-
try to play that game. So, cognitive models for particular domains ultimately
depend on so-called cultural models. In reverse, cultural models can be
seen as cognitive models that are shared by people belonging to a social
group or subgroup.

 
5 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Essentially, cognitive models and cultural models are thus just two sides
of the same coin. While the term ‘cognitive model’ stresses the psychologi-
cal nature of these cognitive entities and allows for inter-individual differences,
the term ‘cultural model’ emphasizes the uniting aspect of its being collec-
tively shared by many people. Although ‘cognitive models’ are related to cog-
nitive linguistics and psycholinguistics while ‘cultural models’ belong to
sociolinguistics and anthropological linguistics, researchers in all of these fields
should be, and usually are, aware of both dimensions of their object of study.
Our earlier reference to Malinowski’s ‘context of culture’ has already shown
that to include cultural aspects in linguistic considerations is not really a
recent invention. Yet although the cultural background has long been part
and parcel of investigations in sociolinguistics and anthropological linguistics,
only few semanticists have bothered to deal with such matters.23 In the fol-
lowing we will discuss three examples of categories where cultural models
are highly relevant for a proper understanding of cognitive categories and
their structure.
The English and French prototypes of the category FIRST MEAL OF THE DAY
can serve as first illustrations. The prototypical attributes of the meal in the
two countries are listed in Figure 1.16. The two lists in Figure 1.16 show
how different the French and the English prototype of the category are. While
the French >PETIT DÉJEUNER< is a rather frugal affair consisting of a large bowl
of coffee and a croissant, the >ENGLISH BREAKFAST< includes a whole array of
things to eat and drink. Since the French breakfast needs much less crock-
ery, cutlery and atmosphere, French hotels often do not provide a breakfast
room, but serve breakfast on a tray in the bedroom or ask you to have your
coffee and croissant in a nearby café or bar. In contrast, the English break-
fast is never served in the bedroom, but in a breakfast room. The reasons
why the two types of breakfast are so different, and this is our point here,
Figure 1.16
Prototypical attributes of the category FIRST MEAL OF THE DAY in
Britain and France
>PETIT DÉJEUNER<
>ENGLISH BREAKFAST<
Components:
Components:
coffee
cereal and milk
croissant
tea or coffee, orange juice 
toast, butter, marmalade 
bacon, eggs, baked beans, sausages, 
tomatoes
served at bedside 
served in breakfast room
or local café or bar
not included in room rate
included in room rate

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
5 3
(a)
(c)
(b)
is that they reflect different cultural models concerning the function and
relevance of the meals of the day. According to the French MEALS OF THE DAY
model, breakfast is of minor importance because the midday meal is sup-
posed to be rather solid and will be followed by another substantial evening
meal. In contrast, the English cultural model is based on a substantial first
and last meal, while the midday meal or lunch is a rather slender affair.
What this example also illustrates is that cultural models are not static but
changing. In fact, what we have described as the English prototype may still
be practised in hotels and bed and breakfast places, but can no longer be regarded
as standard routine in families. Conversely, many continental hotels which
used to serve a ‘Continental breakfast’ modelled on the French prototype (though
normally replacing croissants by something else) are now offering ‘buffet break-
fasts’, which have many of the attributes of an English breakfast.
The differences between cultural models and their effects on the struc-
ture of a category become more obvious when cultures of countries as far
apart as Europe and Japan or China are compared. Consider the objects
depicted in Figure 1.17. The desks illustrated in (a) and (b) represent tradi-
tional European desks at which people used to work either standing or
seated on a chair. In contrast, in China and Japan writing was tradition-
ally performed sitting cross-legged or on one’s heels on the floor. Within
Figure 1.17
Illustration of European and traditional Japanese prototypes of
the DESK category (idea based on Lipka 1987: 292, but extended)

 
5 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
this traditional cultural model of writing, object (c) in Figure 1.17 is proto-
typical while objects (a) and (b) would have been rather peripheral mem-
bers of the desk category. Yet this cultural model is also changing under
the influence of modern communication; computer and telecommunica-
tion equipment are erasing the traditional Japanese and Chinese cultural
writing model in favour of ‘international’ business standards for categories
like DESK.
Our last example is perhaps more intriguing because it documents that
different cultural models must be assumed even where the same language
and the same words are used. This is quite common in languages that are
spoken in many parts of the world such as English. Employing Rosch’s meth-
ods of goodness-of-example ratings (see Sections 1.1 and 1.2), Schmid and
Kopatsch (forthcoming) show that the conceptual structures underlying every-
day words in the English spoken by students in Northern Nigeria differed
significantly from those elicited at two universities in the USA. English is
an official language in Nigeria, which is spoken as a second or third lan-
guage by all people with tertiary education. One of the categories investi-
gated was FOOD. The experiment was based on interviews with 75 Nigerian
students at the University of Maiduguri, Northern Nigeria, and 74 students
from two American universities in Santa Barbara, California and Lexington,
Massachusetts. The informants were asked to give typicality ratings based
on a list of 48 food items which included not only meat, bread, beans or
pizza and chips, but also items such as millet, yam (a tuber similar to pota-
toes), cassava (a flour made from a tropical plant) and colanut (seeds of the
cola tree containing caffeine which play an important cultural role in cel-
ebrations). A selection of the results is presented in Figure 1.18.
Although some correspondences can be observed – cf. e.g. the similar
ratings for chicken and meat – each of the two lists is characteristic of the
disparate cognitive models of FOOD prevalent in the respective culture. The pro-
totypical items heading the lists read like plans for the week’s dishes, with
chicken, fish, bread, pizza, salad and meat featuring most prominently on the
American table, and beans, rice, yam, chicken, meat and cassava on the Nigerian.
Common Western items like apple, orange and sausage with good rankings by
the American students have their places much lower down in the Nigerian
list, while Nigerian staple food, especially basic foodstuff like millet, maize –
admittedly not a very common term in American English – and wheat are trail-
ing behind in the American list and illustrate the differences between the dis-
parate living conditions in the USA and Nigeria.
In sum, these examples indicate that the cognitive models shared by the
members of a culture are similar and distinct from the cognitive models

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
5 5
stored in the minds of people from other cultures. They also show that cul-
tural models have an enormous influence on the conceptual structures of
categories. This is not only true when one compares distant cultures like the
(traditional) Japanese or Chinese cultures and European cultures, it also applies
to the relationship between native varieties of English (like American
English) and New Englishes (like Nigerian English). In fact even different
native varieties of English are affected: an internet-based attribute-listing test
fully endorsed the assumption that the category BUS elicits attributes like ‘yel-
low’, ‘school’ and ‘kids/children’ in the US, while in Britain the attributes
‘red’, ‘public transport’ and ‘work’ are more prominent and yield a different
conceptualization of BUS.† 
Naive models and expert models
As they are based on our everyday experiences of the phenomena around
us, cultural models may include assumptions that, from a strictly scientific
point of view, may be questionable or even inaccurate. For example, it is
part of our cultural model of ‘dogs’ that wagging their tails means ‘I am happy’
Figure 1.18
Selected results of goodness-of-example ratings for the category FOOD
by Nigerian and US-American students (from Schmid and Kopatsch, forthcoming)
† We are indebted for these results to Elisabeth Friedrich, Bayreuth.
Rank
Nigeria
Rank
USA
Rank
Nigeria
Rank
USA
1
beans
1
chicken
15
millet
15
pie
2
rice
2
fish
16
bread
16
cheese
3
yam
3
bread
17
salad
17
beans
4
chicken
4
pizza
18
apple
18
chips
5
meat
5
salad
19
porridge
19
toast
6
cassava
6
meat
20
groundnut
20
tomato
7
macaroni
7
apple
…
…
8
maize
8
orange
27
orange
26
yam
9
egg
9
banana
…
…
10
fish
10
potato
35
sausage
33
maize
11
banana
11
rice
36
tomato
…
12
wheat
12
biscuit
37
toast
39
wheat
13
chips
13
sausage
…
40
cassava
14
potato
14
egg
41
pizza
…
47
millet

 
5 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
and growling means ‘I am angry’. When cats are purring they are said to
be enjoying themselves. For an ethologist or biologist, all these beliefs are
highly dubious, because it is by no means clear that animals have emotions
at all in the sense that humans do. In their expert models which are based
on hard scientific facts and the rules of logic, these types of assumptions
would have no place. Naive cultural models, on the other hand, are based
on informal observations, traditional beliefs, and even superstitions, and have
therefore also been called ‘folk models’.
For obvious reasons, the discrepancy between the scientifically founded
models of experts and the naive models of laypersons is particularly notice-
able in scientific and technical domains. Consider for example the case of
the naive model of the physical phenomenon of motion. McCloskey (1983)
carried out experiments and interviews to elicit the cultural model of motion
prevalent in America. He asked his informants to imagine an airplane flying
at constant speed and altitude. In addition, the informants should assume
that at one point during the journey a large metal ball is dropped from the
plane, which continues flying at the same speed and altitude and in the
same direction. The task was to draw the path the ball will follow until it
hits the ground, ignoring wind and air resistance. Its final position in rela-
tion to the plane should also be indicated. Before you read on, you should
perhaps try to solve the task yourself, i.e. make your own drawing of the
paths followed by the plane and the metal ball.
Now compare your drawing with the scientifically correct answer to the
problem. As physicists tell us, the ball will fall in a kind of parabolic arc
and hit the ground directly below the point the plane has reached in the
meantime. The ball will take this kind of path because it will continue to
travel horizontally at the same speed as the plane while acquiring constantly
increasing vertical velocity.
If your drawing does not agree with the scientific explanation, you are
in good company, with 60 per cent of the informants, because no more
than 40 per cent of McCloskey’s informants gave the scientifically correct
response. The majority of the subjects thought that the ball would take a
different course (for instance that it would drop in a straight line or would
fall in a diagonal), revealing a ‘naive’ cultural model of motion that differs
from the expert model current in physics.
What this experiment shows is that the cultural models held by the major-
ity of the people need not be, and often are not, in line with the objectively
verifiable, scientific knowledge available to experts. If we consider that cul-
tural models are based on the collective experience of a society or social group
this does not come as a surprise. To get through everyday life, laypersons
†

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
5 7
do not need scientifically correct models, but functionally effective ones.
This means that as long as a model is in line with what we perceive and
enables us to make functionally correct predictions, it can have widespread
currency although it may be technically inaccurate.
Another illuminating example is provided by Kempton (1987). When
she studied the American cultural model of home heat controls or thermostats
by means of interviews and behavioural records, she found two competing
theories.
One, the feedback theory, holds that the thermostat senses temperature and turns
the furnace on and off to maintain an even temperature. The other, which I call
the valve theory, holds that the thermostat controls the amount of heat. That is,
like a gas burner or a water valve, a higher setting causes a higher rate of flow.
(Kempton 1987: 224)
The feedback theory is technically correct, while the valve theory is wrong.
What is of special interest about the two theories is that even though the
valve theory is wrong, it also enables us to make the right predictions for
the control of temperature in a house and therefore there is no reason why
laypersons should not espouse it.
It seems, then, that many naive cultural models, especially in the scien-
tific and technological domain, are inaccurate from a scientific point of view,
but usually correct as far as their functional predictions are concerned. In other
domains of everyday life the question of the accuracy of a model does not
seem to be as relevant. For example, for the cultural models of SANDCASTLE, BEACH,
DESKS and BREAKFAST which have been singled out in this section for illustrative
purposes, it would not be appropriate to speak of correct or inaccurate mod-
els, although experts with particularly refined cognitive models could certainly
be found for all spheres. What counts is that ‘ordinary’ everyday experiences
do not follow the doctrines laid down for scientific research and the rules of
formal logic, but have other, more genuinely cognitive, principles behind them,
some of which will be discussed below in Chapters 3 and 4.
To conclude this section, here is a summary of the main issues that have
been addressed:
• Cognitive categories interact with and influence each other and this
can cause a shift of category prototypes, of boundaries and of the whole
category structure.
• Over and above the actual context in which the use of categories is
embedded, the internal structure of categories depends on cognitive and
cultural models which are always present when language is processed.

 
5 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
• A number of terminological distinctions seem necessary for a differen-
tiated view of the context-dependence of categories. Thus we have defined
–
situation as the interaction of objects in the real world;
–
context as the cognitive representation of the interaction
between cognitive categories (or concepts);
–
cognitive model as the sum of the experienced and stored con-
texts for a certain field by an individual;
–
cultural model as a view of cognitive models highlighting the
fact that they are intersubjectively shared by the members of
a society or social group.
• ‘Naive’ cultural models, especially those for technical domains, need
not be in line with the scientifically accurate knowledge of experts, but
may be based on what is communal experience, and strictly speaking
even ‘wrong’ assumptions. Nevertheless these naive cultural models can
be shared by most laypersons in a society as long as the functional pre-
dictions they make are correct.
Exercises
1. In pragmatics and sociolinguistics the participants of a speech event
are often seen as part of the wider ‘situational context’. Discuss this
notion of ‘context’ in relation to the one put forward in this chapter.
2. Object categories like CAR are characterized by attributes relating to their
form, size, material, parts, functions, and the associations and emotions
they call up. Discuss which of these attributes are more likely to change
their ‘weight’ when the context changes, let us say from ordinary traf-
fic to a car race context.
3. Repeat the two-stage test in exercise 5 of Section 1.1 with special con-
texts like The estate agent climbed out of his . . . (Jaguar, Rolls-Royce, BMW,
Mercedes, etc.) or The children loved to climb the . . . (apple tree, pear tree,
cherry tree, etc.) in the orchard given before the association and the good-
ness-of-example rating task.
4. Eskimos have many words for different types of snow, Aborigines for
different types of sand, and in Arabic one must choose from a whole
range of words which are subsumed under the Western category CAMEL
(cf. Lyons 1981: 67). Can you explain these phenomena with the help
of the notion of ‘cultural model’?
5. Compare the cultural model BACHELOR with that of its apparent counter-
part SPINSTER. Discuss the parallel examples GENTLEMAN–LADY, MASTER–MISTRESS
and BOY–GIRL.

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
5 9
6. When Nigerian and US-American students were asked to list attributes
for TOMATO, the survey yielded the following results (Schmid and
Kopatsch, forthcoming):
Nigerian informants: ‘used for making stew/soup’ 61%; ‘red (when
ripe)’ 54%; ‘planted/grows on farm/in garden’ 50%; ‘round’ 29%;
‘leaves’ 29%; ‘fruit’ 25%; ‘root’ 18%, ‘kind of vegetable’ 18%.
American informants: ‘red’ 88%; ‘fruit’ 72%; ‘vegetable’ 60%,
‘salad’ 55%; ‘green (when not ripe)’ 49%; ‘seeds’ 49%; ‘sauce’ 45%;
‘juicy’ 45%; ‘round’ 45%; ‘pasta/spaghetti’ 28%; ‘pizza’ 19%, ‘soup’
17%; ‘plant’ 17%; ‘sandwiches’ 15%; ‘sliced’ 15%.
What conclusions would you draw from these results with regard to
the prevailing cultural models?
7. Ask your friends and family how they imagine the various processes
are carried out by the components of a personal computer and extract
the naive cultural model from their answers. If you happen to be a spe-
cialist in the field, compare the naive model to the expert model.
8. It can be claimed that naive cultural models are regarded as valid as long
as they make the right predictions. Look for linguistic examples that reflect
either wrong or outdated naive models like the sun rises in the east (of
course the earth revolves) or the apple fell to the ground (it is attracted by
the force of gravitation). Discuss examples of so-called folk etymologies
like sparrow-grass for asparagus, causeway for chausée, cowcumber for
cucumber, and the compounds crayfish, starfish and jellyfish.
Suggestions for further reading
Section 1.1
For an overview of the early development of research into categorization
see Lakoff (1987, ch. 2) and Taylor (2003, ch. 3.2). Kleiber (1998) provides
a discussion of the development of prototype theory, though on a fairly
abstract level. The shortest description of Rosch’s important contributions
to the field is available in Rosch (1978). Rosch (1988) is an informal retro-
spect of the early stages of prototype theory from her own point of view,
which is definitely worth reading. Recent concise accounts of categoriza-
tion accompanied by critical comments of prototype theory are provided
by Cruse (2000: 130–40) and Croft and Cruse (2004: 74–91). Geeraerts
(1997) surveys the implications of prototype theory for the explanation of
diachronic changes in meaning.
1. Ullmann (1962: 116–28) discusses the sources of vagueness with
many examples from different languages. Quine (1960: 125f) puts

 
6 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
forward some interesting thoughts on vagueness from a philosophical
perspective. More recent publications on the topic from a cognitive
perspective are Geeraerts (1993) and Tuggy (1993). For critical
comments on the notion of fuzziness see Croft and Cruse (2004: 93–5).
2. Lakoff (1987, ch. 18) discusses Whorf and relativism in some detail.
Wider philosophical implications of relativist theories can be found
in Putnam (1981: 103–26, esp. 119–24). The continuing interest of
cognitive linguists in Whorf’s theories is documented in collections
edited by Niemeier and Dirven (2000) and Pütz (2000).
3. The introductory section of Berlin and Kay (1969: 1–5, 14ff;
republished several times) certainly makes good reading. A concise
survey of various reactions to Berlin and Kay (1969) is provided by
Taylor (2003: 9ff). Kay and McDaniel (1978) present
neurophysiological data which support part of Berlin and Kay’s
claims. See also Kay (1999) on the evolution of basic colour lexicons.
4. Smith and Medin (1981) provide a survey of various theories of
categorization. Though not the most recent psycholinguistic
textbook, Clark and Clark (1977) is still helpful for the basic
psychological and psycholinguistic aspects of categorization.
Medin, Ross and Markman (2001, ch. 10) take a critical stance
towards prototype theory, which is presented in our chapter.
Aitchison (2003) focuses on the storage of categories in the 
‘mental lexicon’.
5. Up to 1972, E. Rosch published under her earlier name Heider. So
Heider (1971, 1972) and Heider and Oliver (1972) are written by the
same author as the publications in the bibliography under the name
of Rosch.
6. Lyons (1977: 109ff) is helpful to get a first idea of realism,
nominalism and conceptualism, i.e. theories of status of the world.
Discussions of the realist–conceptualist model that provides the basis
for much thinking in the paradigm of cognitive linguistics can be
found in Johnson (1987, ch. 8), Lakoff (1987, ch. 16) and Lakoff and
Johnson (1999, chs. 6 and 7). An important source for these chapters
is Putnam (1981, esp. ch. 3), which makes some fascinating but not
very easy reading.
7. Being the later article, Labov (1978) is more comprehensive;
however, the developments mainly concern the mathematical
technicalities involved in formalizing fuzziness.

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
6 1
8. For discussions of polysemy and the problem of keeping it apart from
homonymy in the structuralist tradition see Lyons (1977: 550ff), Leech
(1981: 227ff), Lipka (2002: 152–7). For the lexicographical treatment of
polysemy from a prototype perspective see Geeraerts (1990).
Section 1.2
9. For a psychologically oriented account of the classical view of cate-
gories see Smith and Medin (1981, ch. 3); for a description from a
linguistic and philosophical point of view, Lakoff (1987, ch. 11).
Lakoff (1987) also has a chapter (ch. 9) on ‘Defenders of the classical
view’, which in fact has the function of defending his own proto-
typical view of categories. As regards the notion of ‘essential fea-
tures’, the classic is Katz and Postal (1964, ch. 2). Wierzbicka (1985)
considerably extends the notion of essential features and gives inter-
esting, but very detailed, feature definitions for organisms and every-
day objects. Lipka (2002: 114–34) gives a concise introduction, which
also integrates non-necessary features. See also Croft and Cruse for a
short survey (2004: 76–82).
10. For details on the statistical method used see Rosch and Mervis
(1975) and Rosch et al. (1976). These articles are also interesting
because the statistical notion of ‘cue validity’ is introduced to
measure what we call attribute-based ratings. Explanatory remarks
are provided in Smith and Medin (1981: 78ff) and Geeraerts
(1988a).
11. For a similar view of categorization illustrated with the category
UNCLE see Langacker (1987a: 19ff).
12. Most books of the major proponents of gestalt psychology,
Wertheimer, Köhler and Koffka, are still available in reprints. For
original sources of ‘gestalt’, ‘Prägnanz’ and ‘gestalt principles’ see
Koffka (1935; republished 2002); Köhler was republished in the 
1990s (Köhler 1992), while Wertheimer is the subject of a recent
book (King and Wertheimer 2005). For recent surveys of the 
more theoretical aspects of gestalt psychology see Gordon 
(2004, ch. 2).
13. Other cognitive implications of the part–whole relationship will be
discussed in Section 2.3 and Section 3.1. See Chapter 2, reading
note 11 and Chapter 3, reading note 9 for references to the
literature.

 
6 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
14. Illustrations in dictionaries are discussed by Stein (1991) and Lipka
(1995), though from a lexicographic rather than a cognitive point of
view. For an account of psychological research into the perception of
shapes using ‘templates’ see Smith and Medin (1981, ch. 6) and
Medin, Ross and Markman (2001: 104–8).
15. Aitchison (2003) is a very palatable survey of empirical and
theoretical approaches to the mental lexicon, which is
predominantly based on linguistic and psycholinguistic work. A
critical discussion from a psychological point of view can be found
in Smith (1978).
16. Opinions about how to interpret typicality effects have changed with 
the development of the prototype model. For Rosch’s later position
see Rosch (1978) and (1988). For more extensive discussions of the
issue see Lakoff (1987: 40ff and ch. 9) and Kleiber (1998). These
texts, as well as Croft and Cruse (2004: 79f), include discussions of
the distinction between goodness-of-example and degree of category
membership, which is irrelevant in our framework, since we rely 
on cognitive categories based on everyday folk models rather than
scientific classifications. Geeraerts argues that prototypicality itself
should be regarded as a prototypical notion (1988a) and discusses
potential sources of prototypicality (1988b).
Section 1.3
As mentioned in the text, the notion of context has a long research tra-
dition in diverse disciplines. See Schmid (2003) for a very brief survey.
Two recent interdisciplinary collections on context are Bouquet et al.
(1999) and Akman et al. (2001).
17. For an empirical examination of the context-dependence of
prototypes and the category structure see Roth and Shoben (1983),
who investigated the effects of sentences like The bird walked across
the barnyard on the internal structure of the category BIRD.
18. See Langacker (2001: 144) for an alternative view of context as a part
of ‘current discourse space’.
19. The closest approximation to our conception of the terms ‘context’
and ‘situation’ that we know of is van Dijk (1981: 222, 269 passim)
who emphasizes the selective or ‘abstractive’ nature of the cognitive
context. See van Dijk (1999: 142) for his more recent cognitivist and
subjectivist notion of context.

 
P R O T O T Y P E S  A N D  C A T E G O R I E S
6 3
20. An attempt to provide experimental support for a distinction
between context-dependent and context-independent information in
categories can be found in Barsalou (1982).
21. Dirven, Frank and Pütz (2003) is a recent collection of articles on
cognitive models in language and thought and their relations to
ideologies. For notions which largely correspond to our conception
of ‘cognitive models’ see Johnson (1987: esp. 28f, 101ff) on ‘image-
schemata’; Lakoff (1987: 68ff, 118ff) on ‘idealized cognitive models’;
Gentner and Stevens (1983) and Johnson-Laird (1983) on ‘mental
models’; and Holland and Quinn (1987) on ‘cultural’ and ‘folk
models’. Langacker’s notion of ‘domains’ is discussed in Section 4.3,
and the notion of ‘frames’ in Section 5.1.
22. A good introduction to the connectionist theory of the mind is
provided by Bechtel and Abrahamsen (2002).
23. For German-speaking readers interested in differences between
cultural models current in Britain and on the Continent, a very
interesting and readable source is Leisi (1985: 87ff). He discusses the
British models for such spheres as the ACADEMIC FIELD, HOUSEHOLD ITEMS,
FOOD and SPORTS.

 
C H A P T E R  2
Levels of categorization
2.1 Basic level categories of organisms 
and concrete objects
Scientific classifications may be fascinating in their complexity and rigidity, but are
they really suitable for human categorization? So-called folk taxonomies suggest that
we approach hierarchies from the centre, that we concentrate on basic level categories
such as DOG and CAR and that our hierarchies are anchored in these basic level
categories.
Let us return for a minute to the naive view of the world sketched at the
beginning of Chapter 1. This view suggests that we are on the whole sur-
rounded by readily identifiable organisms and objects such as dogs, trees,
houses and cars. Yet when it comes to categorizing these entities, we nor-
mally have a choice between categories on different levels of generality. Thus,
we can think of the creature comfortably stretched out on the hearth rug
as a ‘dog’, a ‘terrier’, a ‘Scotch terrier’ or, more theoretically, as a ‘mammal’
or an ‘animal’. Obviously all these cognitive categories are connected with
each other in a kind of hierarchical relationship. Dogs are regarded as super-
ordinate to terriers, and terriers as superordinate to Scotch terriers and bull
terriers; looking in the other direction, dogs are seen as subordinate to mam-
mals, and mammals as subordinate to animals.
The principle underlying this hierarchical structure is the notion of class
inclusion, i.e. the view that the superordinate class includes all items on
the subordinate level. The class ‘animal’ includes not only mammals, but
birds and reptiles as well. On the next level, the class ‘mammal’ comprises
not only dogs, but cats, cows, lions, elephants and mice. Still further down,
the class ‘dog’ includes terriers, bulldogs, Alsatians, poodles, and various other
kinds of dogs. If viewed from below, class inclusion appears as a type-of
relationship: a terrier is a type of dog, a dog a type of mammal, a mam-
mal a type of animal. Similar hierarchies exist for man-made objects like

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
6 5
vehicles, which embrace cars, vans, bicycles, sledges, etc., and their respec-
tive subdivisions. All in all, it seems that the whole range of concrete enti-
ties in the world can be hierarchically ordered according to the principle
of class inclusion. Starting from this notion of hierarchy, the detailed type-
of classifications (or taxonomies) which have been developed in many sci-
entific fields may simply appear to be an extension of the basic human faculty
of categorization.
Scientific classifications
The prime example of scientific taxonomies is the classification of plants
and animals based on the proposals made by the Swedish botanist Linnaeus
(Carl von Linné) in the middle of the eighteenth century. Linnaeus’s origi-
nal conception has been considerably expanded and has grown into a very
complex system which today contains 13 major levels of generality (see the
list in Figure 2.2).1
More general in scope and closer to our linguistic concerns is the clas-
sification proposed by Mark Roget in his still widely used Thesaurus of English
Words and Phrases, which was first published in 1852. Roget, a physician
with wide-ranging scientific interests and a writer as well, approaches the
age-old dream of organizing human knowledge with a claim to scientific
rigidity. The knowledge of the world is divided up in six ‘classes’ which are
rigorously subcategorized into sections, heads and further subdivisions.
Part of his system is illustrated in Figure 2.1, which gives an impression of
the monumentality of his conception.2
What these classifications have in common is that, apart from their claim
to class inclusion, they do not seem to be tailored to the human mind in
at least two respects. First of all, scientific taxonomies simply consist of too
many levels. Normally the sole aim of setting up such a taxonomy is to
classify all the ‘objects’ on hand, e.g. the two million or so kinds of plants
and animals which have been discovered around the world, or the hun-
dred thousands of words of a language. If in the process of classifying it
seems necessary to expand the taxonomic grid, new levels and sublevels of
classification are introduced no matter how bulky and complex the taxon-
omy will grow.
In addition to being too complex, scientific classifications do not consider
the fact that we are in constant contact and involvement with the organisms
and objects of the world around us. As a consequence of this interaction, organ-
isms and objects are evaluated and assume different degrees of importance in
our eyes. In contrast with these subjective judgements, scientific classifications

 
CLASS
Abstract
relations
Space
Matter
Intellect:
the exercise
of the mind
Volition:
the exercise
of the will
Emotion,
religion
and
morality
SECTION
Existence
Quantity
Order
etc.
Dimensions
Form
Motion
etc.
Inorganic
matter
Organic
matter
etc.
Reasoning
processes
etc.
Prospective v.
Voluntary
action
etc.
Personal e.
Morality
etc.
HEAD
Motion
Quiescence
Land travel
Water travel
Carrier
Vehicle
Ship
Organisms
Life
Death
Killing
Corpse
Interment
Animality
Vegetability
1st SUB-
DIVISION
2nd SUB-
DIVISION
Vehicle
Sled
Bicycle
Pushcart
Carriage
Stagecoach
Automobile
Bird
Cattle
Dog
Cat
Deer
Reptile
Cagebird
Songbird
Pigeon
Parrot
Car
Limousine
Saloon
Estate car
Jeep
Police car
Minibus
.........
.........
.........
.........
.........
.........
Figure 2.1
A selection from Roget’s system of classification
(based on the edition by Betty Kirkpatrick 1987)
6 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
aim to be as objective as possible; they do not favour any one of the items
classified or a certain taxonomic level. Another look at Figure 2.1 will show
how the automobile is more or less hidden somewhere on the fourth level
in the company of pushcart and sled. As for animals, all major kinds are sub-
ordinated to ‘animality’, which ranks together with ‘corpse’ and ‘interment’.
If any of the levels attract more attention than the others, it is probably the
top level and the lowest level because they occupy the salient positions on
the borders of the hierarchy.
However, observations about the use and acquisition of cognitive cate-
gories and their names seem to indicate that intermediate levels are just as
important, if not more so. After all, the cognitive category most naturally
selected for the creature on the hearth rug would be DOG rather than SCOTCH
TERRIER or ANIMAL, not to mention MAMMAL. Describing a traffic accident one

 
would probably start by saying: ‘two cars crashed into each other’ rather
than referring to ‘two vehicles’ or ‘an estate car and a jeep’. This shows that
speakers prefer category names like dog and car in neutral contexts or when
they introduce new items into the conversation. Category names on a mid-
dle level like dog, cat, car or truck are also the ones that are first learned by
children; they tend to be the shortest names in hierarchies and they are
used most frequently (Brown 1958, 1965). All this lexical evidence appears
to invalidate the idea that classification should be objective.
In conclusion, it seems that scientific taxonomies are neither mind-sized
nor mind-oriented. The question is what a more subject-related alternative
of organizing our knowledge of the world would look like. Such an alter-
native would have to take account of the mental capacities and limitations
of ordinary human beings, and would have to be geared to their experi-
ence, their essential needs and interests. Yet so powerful has been the impact
of logical taxonomies on modern Western thinking that it is difficult for
anyone who has been educated in the Western tradition to imagine such
an alternative. This is why, for a fair cognitive evaluation of ‘natural’ hier-
archic structures, we must again (as in the case of focal colours and proto-
types in Chapter 1) leave the domain of Western culture and study the
taxonomies of ‘prescientific’ societies.
Tzeltal plant classification: a case study in folk taxonomies
The most detailed account of a non-scientific taxonomy available is the
description of the plant classification of the Tzeltal people, a Mayan-speaking
community in southern Mexico, which was provided by Brent Berlin and
the botanists Dennis Breedlove and Peter Raven.3 The aim of their research
project (Berlin et al. 1974) was to analyze the ‘folk taxonomy’ used by Tzeltal
speakers for classifying and naming the plants in their environment, and
to discuss how this folk taxonomy is related to scientific Western classifi-
cations. Figure 2.2 presents some of their results. Apart from the obvious
reduction in taxonomic complexity (of the 13 major levels of the scientific
classification a mere five are left in the Tzeltal plant classification), the major
insight to be gained from Figure 2.2 is the numerical superiority of what is
called the generic level, which attracts no less than 471 categories in all.
In contrast, the number of superordinate terms, called ‘life forms’ (level 2),
is exceedingly small; it contains no more than four plant names. Of the
lower levels, the level of ‘species’ (level 4) is comparatively well represented,
though membership is more restricted than on the generic level, while sub-
classification on the level of variety (level 5) is again negligible.
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
6 7

 
The numerical superiority of generic level categories is supported by
their linguistic and cultural significance. Cognitive categories on the
generic level are not only the most numerous, but also the ones most
commonly chosen by Tzeltal speakers even where higher or lower level
categories are available, which means that their names first come to mind.
Thus a certain type of pine would more likely be called ‘pine’ than either
‘tree’ or ‘red pine’ (in the case of pines this is true for Tzeltal, not nec-
essarily for English, as we will see). In addition, Tzeltal names for generic
categories are often short, unanalyzable lexemes, while lower level
names typically consist of adjective + generic name, and this is also true
of our English translations. Compare pine vs red pine, or the more elabo-
rate example of bean (genus) vs common bean (species) and black common
bean (variety). All these findings substantiate to a large degree what was
said earlier about the extraordinary status of the middle level in hierar-
chies in Western culture. Therefore the linguistic evidence both from
English and Tzeltal testifies to the special status of the generic or middle
level in taxonomies.
6 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
SCIENTIFIC
BIOLOGICAL
CLASSIFICATION
TZELTAL PLANT CLASSIFICATION
Levels
number of
categories
inclusion in
superordinate
category
examples
[in translation]
regnum
1 unique
   beginners
(‘kingdom’)
divisio
phylum
1
4
471
273
8
class
ordo
familia
tribus
2 life form
genus
sectio
series
species
varietas
forma
3 generic
4 specific
5 varietal
100%
100%
100%
[plant] unlabelled in Tzeltal
tree, vine, grass, broad-leafed plant
pine, willow, etc. corn, bean
genuine
pine
red
pine
white
bean
common
bean
red
common
bean
black
common
bean
75%
Figure 2.2
Tzeltal plant classification: selected aspects

 
Investigating the cultural significance of the generic level in Tzeltal plant
classification helps to examine how the taxonomy handles the principle
of class inclusion (or type-of relationship), which seems to embody the
very essence of the scientific notion of hierarchy. As shown in Figure 2.2,
the degree of inclusion of categories in their respective superordinate cat-
egories is 100 per cent, with the notable exception of the generic level,
where the figure is 75 per cent. This means that three-quarters of the generic
Tzeltal terms can be clearly related to life forms. For Berlin et al. this is
proof that the principle of class inclusion holds for folk taxonomies as well,
and this judgement has since been tacitly accepted by many researchers.
However, the remaining 25 per cent of ‘aberrant cases’ do not only con-
sist of borderline cases between two possible life forms. Ninety-seven, or
20 per cent, of the generic level categories were found to be ‘unaffiliated
generics’, which means that they are not related to any superordinate life
form in the eyes of the Tzeltal people. These ‘exceptions’ in fact make up
the most interesting portion of the taxonomy because of their ‘economic
importance’ and their ‘cultural significance’ (Berlin et al. 1974: 24, 96).
Included among them are corn and beans, for example, certainly two basic
ingredients of the Tzeltal diet.
The conclusion that can be drawn from these observations adds a fairly
important point to our collection of characteristics of the generic level. As
illustrated by categories like CORN and BEAN, the salience of the generic level
seems above all to be due to its cultural significance; sometimes it is even
rooted in basic biological needs. In other words, generic level categories rep-
resent the preferred cognitive perspective. They seem to meet ‘basic’ cog-
nitive needs because they pinpoint where the focus of human interest lies.
Regarding their position within hierarchies, generic categories are charac-
terized by ‘taxonomic centrality’ (which is not to be confused with the intra-
categorial centrality of prototypes).
To sum up, anthropological research into one folk taxonomy has yielded
a number of interesting cultural and linguistic findings which suggest the
experiential primacy and centrality of the generic level:
• Folk taxonomies focus on the generic level, because it is often
culturally salient and sometimes directly rooted in basic biological needs.
• The names for generic categories are readily available for human inter-
action: they first come to mind in naming situations, and their mor-
phological structure is simple.
• Non-generic levels seem to have a subsidiary status, because they are not
fully developed where there is no need for additional categorization.
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
6 9

 
Basic level categories: psychological factors
How can we support the claim that the centrality of the generic level meets
‘our basic cognitive needs’? Berlin et al.’s anthropological evidence, thor-
ough and informative as it may be, is after all taken from the case study of
a single folk taxonomy. Therefore it is worth reviewing what is known about
the psychological background of the generic level (or basic level, as it is
called in psychology) and examining the relevant experimental findings.
Summarizing early interpretations by Roger Brown and Paul Kay, the pri-
macy and centrality of the basic level can be traced back to mainly three
factors (Brown 1958, 1965; Kay 1971).
First, the generic or basic level is where we perceive the most obvious
differences between the organisms and objects of the world. This becomes
clearer when lower and higher levels of categorization are taken into
account. The subordinate level categories ALSATIAN, COLLIE and GREYHOUND
each contain category items which closely resemble the items in the neigh-
bouring categories. For instance, all specimens of Alsatians, collies and grey-
hounds have a tail, they wag when they are happy, they all bark, all of them
like to chase cats and postmen. Making distinctions between these categories
may therefore seem almost pedantic. The superordinate category ANIMAL, on
the other hand, embraces such a disparate variety of items (elephants, mice,
whales, etc.) that the similarities are very small indeed. Against this back-
ground, basic level categories like DOG seem to strike a balance. Each kind
of dog shows a great deal of similarity with other kinds of dog, yet all dogs
are distinguished from cats, lions, etc., by what seem to be the characteris-
tics of ‘dogginess’ (barking, tail wagging, etc.). In other words, the cognitive
category DOG, and the basic level in general, normally ‘correspond to the
most obvious discontinuities in nature’ (Kay 1971: 878).
A more technical explanation is possible in terms of attributes, which, as
shown in Section 1.2, can be understood as representing similarity relations.
Taking this into account, the claim that basic level categories achieve an ideal
balance between internal similarity and external distinctiveness can now be
rephrased in terms of attributes: the basic level is the level on which the largest
bundles of naturally correlated attributes are available for categorization (e.g.
all the attributes expressing ‘dogginess’ or ‘chairiness’). These bundles of
attributes are as it were earmarked for the members of a certain cognitive cat-
egory (e.g. DOG or CHAIR) and will be accorded to dog-like beings or chair-like
objects in the real world according to their goodness-of-example status; at
the same time these attribute bundles distinguish these categories from other
7 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
categories. Compare Figure 2.3, where the attributes available for the basic level
categories CHAIR and TABLE are schematically represented by lines.
As the figure shows, each of the two cognitive categories commands a
large bundle of attributes that would apply to most chairs or tables respec-
tively. Thus all kinds of chairs (kitchen chairs, living room chairs, garden
chairs) would agree with the attributes ‘has a seat’, ‘has a back’, ‘is used to
sit on’. Only some of the attributes will be shared by both categories, e.g.
‘has legs’, ‘made of wood’ (in the figure these attributes are linked by an
arrow), while most of them are not, and this reflects the ease with which
we distinguish between chairs and tables.
Since attributes convey information, yet another view seems possible.
As the notion of correlation implies, the bundles of attributes available on
the basic level are already presorted, they have been conveniently linked
up and are therefore more easily digestible. This is why it can be claimed
that the basic level is where the largest amount of information about an
item can be obtained with the least cognitive effort. This principle is called
cognitive economy, and it probably explains best why the basic level is
particularly well suited to meet our cognitive needs.4
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
7 1
a
c
b
CHAIR
TABLE
CONCRETE OBJECTS
IN THE ‘REAL’ WORLD
COGNITIVE
CATEGORIES
(a) Speciﬁc attributes,
‘has seat’
‘has back’
‘is used to sit on’
etc.
(b) Shared attributes,
‘has legs’
‘made of wood or metal’
‘goes with chair/table’
(c) Speciﬁc attributes,
‘has plain top’
‘is used to write on’
‘is used to eat on’
etc.
Figure 2.3
Schematic representation of attributes for the basic level categories
CHAIR and TABLE

 
The other two factors that are thought to be responsible for the primacy
of the basic level can be dealt with more briefly. One is the common over-
all shape, which is perceived holistically and can be seen as an important
indicator of gestalt perception (see Section 1.2). If organisms and objects
are categorized on the basic level, it is obvious that all category members
(e.g. all members of the category DOG) have a characteristic shape. This shape
not only unites all kinds of dogs, but also distinguishes them from the mem-
bers of other basic level categories, such as ELEPHANT, MOUSE and WHALE. If we
approach organisms and objects on the superordinate level, the level of
MAMMAL, REPTILE or INSECT, there is no common shape for the category which,
to take the case of MAMMAL, applies to dogs, elephants, mice and whales.
Since a common shape does not exist, it cannot, of course, be used to dis-
tinguish mammals from reptiles and insects. In contrast, categories on the
subordinate level, the level of species like ALSATIAN and TERRIER, do have a com-
mon characteristic shape, just like basic level categories, and this shape is
shared by all kinds of Alsatians or by all kinds of terriers. However, this
shape is less helpful in distinguishing Alsatians from terriers because, both
being dogs, the differences in shape are much smaller than between dogs
and elephants or whales.
The third relevant factor is concerned with the actions or, more precisely,
the motor movements we perform when we interact with objects and organ-
isms. As Brown suggested, it is only on the basic level that organisms and
objects are marked by really characteristic actions. Cats can be stroked, flow-
ers can be sniffed, balls can be rolled and bounced, while it is difficult to
imagine that different kinds of cats are stroked in different ways or that all
animals are stroked like cats.
Experimental evidence for basic level categories
The experimental investigation of these psychological assumptions was
again carried out by Rosch and her associates (Rosch et al. 1976), and the
significance of all three factors for basic level categories was confirmed.
The first aspect, the balance between similarity and distinctiveness
achieved in basic level categories, was tested in an attribute-listing task.
The experiment was similar to the one employed in prototype research (see
Section 1.2), but the perspective was a different one. This time the aim was
to measure the size of the correlated bundles of attributes (which were taken
to reflect both similarity and distinctiveness; see above) and to show that
the size of the bundles was different from those on other levels of cate-
gorization. Informants were asked to list attributes for basic level categories,
7 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
like APPLE, PEACH, GRAPE, for superordinate categories (in this case FRUIT) and for
subordinate categories (e.g. DELICIOUS APPLE, MACINTOSH APPLE). The basic level cat-
egories (APPLE, PEACH, etc.) had an average total of eight attributes in common,
while for the superordinate category FRUIT the number was three. The total
for CAR, BUS, TRUCK (basic level) was 12 against only one common attribute for
VEHICLE (superordinate). Similar scores were obtained for the other artefact cat-
egories tested (TOOL, FURNITURE, CLOTHING and MUSICAL
INSTRUMENT). Attribute
totals for subordinate categories (DELICIOUS APPLE, JEEP, etc.) were somewhat higher
than for basic level categories, a result which will be put in perspective in
Section 2.2.
The results did, however, deviate for the biological categories where,
following Berlin et al., TREE, FISH and BIRD had been chosen as superordi-
nate categories. As it turned out, the total numbers of attributes for these
categories were as high as the average totals for MAPLE, BIRCH, BASS, TROUT,
EAGLE, SPARROW, etc., the assumed basic level categories, so TREE, FISH and BIRD
had to be regarded as the real basic level categories. After what has been
said about cultural models (see Section 1.3), this is not surprising. It sim-
ply shows that cultural models do not only influence the selection of pro-
totypes, but are equally important for the choice of the basic level
perspective. Urbanized American psychology students, who are neither
foresters nor otherwise dependent on the distinctions between maples,
birches, oaks, pines, etc., will have a different perspective from the Tzeltal
people who live agricultural lives and are much more bound up in their
natural surroundings.
The second factor, the common overall shape, was addressed in two ways.
One experiment was based on a comparison of outline drawings of category
members. For the basic level category CAR these were the outlines of >SPORTS
CAR<, >SALOON< and >ESTATE
CAR<, etc., while the superordinate category
VEHICLE was represented by the outlines of >CAR<, >BUS< and >MOTORCYCLE<. These
outline drawings were derived from randomly selected pictures, which had
been normalized for size and canonical orientation (side view for cars etc.).
When these normalized outlines were juxtaposed, overlaps between the shapes
of the various types of car were naturally much greater than between the
outlines of a car, a bus and a motorcycle. This proves that it is easy enough
to produce an average overall shape for basic level categories and to assume
an underlying common gestalt, while this is not the case for superordinate
categories. As for subordinate categories, like SPORTS
CAR, the overlap
between the outlines of category members, e.g. a>JAGUAR< and a >PORSCHE<,
is even greater, and this was again in line with the test hypothesis (see also
Section 2.2).
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
7 3

 
Figure 2.4
Typical motor movements for selected object categories
(after Rosch et al. 1976, Appendix II)
Movement for
FURNITURE
CLOTHING
superordinate
Eyes:
scan
Eyes:
scan
categories
Hands:
grasp
Additional
CHAIR
PANTS
movements
Head:
turn
Hands:
grasp
for basic level
Body:
turn, move
Arms:
extend
categories
back position
Back:
bend
Knees:
bend
Feet:
position
Arm:
extend–touch
Knee:
bend
Waist:
bend
Leg:
raise, extend
Butt:
touch
Foot:
raise, extend
Body–legs:
release weight
Hands:
raise, extend
Back–torso:
straighten,
Knee:
bend
lean back
Leg:
raise, extend
Hands:
extend, raise
Fingers:
grasp
Elbows:
bend
Arms:
pull up
Additional
LIVING ROOM CHAIR
LEVIS
movements
+body:
sink
+toes:
extend
for subordinate
+butt:
rotate
categories
7 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
In a related experiment, an identification task, subjects were shown the
overlapped outlines of basic level categories (e.g. a shape computed from
the outlines of a sports car and an estate car for CAR) as well as similar
combinations for superordinate categories (e.g. a shape combining the out-
lines of a car and a motorcycle for VEHICLE). Again the overlapped shapes of
basic level categories were readily identified, and the combined shapes of
superordinate categories were not.
To investigate the third factor, the motor movements, subjects were asked
to imagine and describe the muscle movements they tend to produce when
interacting with certain objects and organisms. Figure 2.4 provides two exam-
ples that show that motor movements are most diversified on the basic level,
the level of CHAIR and PANTS, where the movements of sitting down and of
putting on pants could be extracted from the informants in great detail. In
contrast, the only human reactions which were considered to be stimulated
by all types of furniture and all types of clothing, i.e. ‘eyes scan’ for FURNITURE
and ‘eyes scan’ as well as ‘hands grasp’ for CLOTHING, are among the most
general form of contact imaginable. On the subordinate level, little was added

 
to descriptions for the basic level categories, although it is interesting to
note that the movements listed for LIVING ROOM CHAIR or LEVIS are exactly those
that would be highlighted in advertisements for these items.
The symbiosis of basic level and prototype categories
As we have seen, some of the tests used in the investigation of the basic level
were very similar to the experiments of prototype research. At first the two
lines of investigation were pursued side by side, often with divergent aims, and
it took some time before the relationship between the prototype structure and
the basic level notion was sorted out and recognized for what it was, a perfect
kind of symbiosis based on the following two interdependent principles:5
1. Prototype categories are most fully developed on the basic level.
2. Basic level categories only function as they do because they are struc-
tured as prototype categories.
To explain the first principle, it should be sufficient to recall two of the
aspects of basic level categories which have just been discussed:
• The basic level provides the largest amount of relevant and digestible
information about the objects and organisms of the world (e.g. infor-
mation about bird-like animals) or, to put it more technically, it offers
the largest bundles of correlated attributes. These attributes are accu-
mulated in their most complete form in the prototype (>ROBIN< in the
case of BIRD) and expressed by the category name (e.g. bird).
• The basic level is where the overlap of shapes is so great that it permits
reliable gestalt perception, which is particularly easy for prototypical
examples (like the >ROBIN<).
The second principle is best explained by claiming that prototypes maxi-
mize the efficiency of basic level categories (Rosch 1977, 1978). In more
detail, this means:
• Prototypes maximize the distinctiveness of basic level categories
because they attract not only the largest number of attributes shared
inside the category, but also the largest number of attributes not
shared with members of other categories (e.g. of all birds, the robin shares
the smallest number of attributes with other kinds of animals).
• Prototypes maximize holistic perception because their gestalts integrate
all functionally important parts.
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
7 5

 
All in all, basic level categories with prototypes seem to be just the kind of
tools needed for the difficult task of categorizing the concrete objects and
organisms of the world around us. Seen in the wider context of categorization
which will unfold in the course of the book, basic level categories contribute
a decisive share to the basic experiences that govern our interaction with
the world around us.
Exercises
1. In Tzeltal plant and animal classification PINE, WILLOW, CORN and BEAN,
and RABBIT, SQUIRREL, SKUNK and POCKET
GOPHER represent the basic or
generic level. Is this also true for your dialect of English or your native
language (if this is not English)?
2. Compare the plan of Section A (Life and Living Things) and Section M
(Movement, Location, Travel, Transport) in the Longman Lexicon (LLCE,
1981) with the respective sections in Roget’s Thesaurus and discuss
them in terms of everyday (or folk) taxonomies.
3. As Rosch showed for chairs and pants (see Figure 2.4), we can name
the largest number of typical movements when we categorize these
objects on the basic level. Find out whether this is also true of bicycles,
racing bikes, mopeds and vehicles, and of drills, hammers, saws, cir-
cular saws and tools.
4. When Rosch carried out her experiments of the basic level she found
that for a former airplane mechanic the basic level had shifted from
the category PLANE to more specific categories. Discuss the influence of
the language user’s personal, geographical and social background on his
choice of basic level categories for plants, animals and technical appli-
ances. Make use of the information about context, cognitive and cul-
tural models in Section 1.3.
5. Discuss whether in your opinion the notion of cognitive economy is only
important for everyday categorization (or folk taxonomies) as opposed
to scientific classifications and information processing in computers.
2.2 Superordinate and subordinate categories
If basic level categories are exceptional in many ways, how do other types of cognitive
categories differ from them? Are other categories just to be regarded as poor relations
or do they have specific functions for which they are uniquely equipped and which
determine their category structure?
7 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
When choosing the cognitive categories for their investigation of prototypes,
early researchers did not consciously distinguish between basic level categories
and other kinds of categories. Quite naturally, they selected the categories
that promised the best results for the demonstration of the individual effects
of the prototype structure they had in mind. As shown in Chapter 1, gestalt
characteristics of categories and the fuzziness of category boundaries could
best be illustrated with basic level categories like CUP and BOWL. Goodness-of-
example ratings and attribute listings involving family resemblances worked
well with cognitive categories such as FRUIT, FURNITURE and VEHICLE, which are
commonly placed on a superordinate level. Yet when basic level categories
were contrasted with the superordinate (and subordinate) categories in the
last section, it became clear that an ideal prototype structure can only be found
on the basic level and that, seen from this angle, superordinate categories are
deficient in many ways.6
The structure of superordinate categories 
and the notion of parasitic categorization
To start with the most obvious deficiency of superordinate categories, there
is no common overall shape and, consequently, no common underlying gestalt
that applies to all category members. However, this does not mean that the
objects categorized as FRUIT or FURNITURE or VEHICLE cannot be approached holis-
tically. Consider what you would do if you were asked to provide a picture
of these categories. You would probably draw an orange, a banana, etc. to
illustrate FRUIT, or a chair, a table and a bed for FURNITURE, or a car, a bus and
a motorbike for VEHICLE. In other words, you would ‘borrow’ the gestalt prop-
erties of the superordinate category from the basic level categories involved –
a first case of what will be called parasitic categorization.7
This principle of parasitic categorization is also reflected in the way in
which attributes are used in categorizing experiments. As already discussed
in Sections 1.2 and 2.1, informants tend to list few category-wide attributes
for superordinate categories. Indeed, in the case of FURNITURE, Rosch’s infor-
mants did not suggest a single common attribute. The most likely reason is
that the common attributes available for FURNITURE are so general and unob-
trusive that informants do not find them worth mentioning – think of ‘large
movable objects’ or ‘things that make a house or flat suitable for living in’.
Apart from category-wide attributes, informants offer the names of basic level
categories which are members of the superordinate category and, in addi-
tion, attributes of these basic level categories. In the case of FURNITURE this
means that informants will name the basic level categories CHAIR, TABLE, BED,
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
7 7

 
etc. and add a number of attributes from the attribute inventory of these
cognitive categories, e.g. ‘has legs’, ‘has a back’, ‘used to sit on’ for CHAIR, etc.
This situation is schematically represented in Figure 2.5.
If one compares the superordinate category FURNITURE with the basic level
categories CHAIR and TABLE, the difference in terms of attributes and categorization
is indeed striking. While both CHAIR and TABLE are largely self-sufficient in terms
of categorizing attributes (as was already illustrated by Figure 2.3), there are
only few attributes that emanate directly from the superordinate category
FURNITURE (e.g. ‘movable objects’, ‘make a room suitable for living in’), and even
these attributes are shared by CHAIR and TABLE, as indicated by the converging
attribute lines in Figure 2.5. The bulk of the attributes are borrowed from the
rich attribute inventories of the basic level categories CHAIR and TABLE – a clear
case of parasitic categorization.
Yet why is it that we normally do not realize that we draw the attributes
for the superordinate category FURNITURE from basic level categories, and in
fact from quite diverse basic level categories, such as CHAIR, TABLE, SOFA, BED,
SHELF and CUPBOARD? This seems to be mainly due to the family resemblances
which can be observed between category members. When the notion of fam-
ily resemblance was introduced in Section 1.2, it was used to justify the cat-
egory membership of poor examples, e.g. to explain why penguins and
ostriches can be called birds or laptops and coffee machines can be seen as
(rather marginal) items of furniture. Starting from superordinate categories
such as FURNITURE, family resemblances appear in a different light.
7 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
CHAIR
TABLE
FURNITURE
a
d
d
b
c
SUPERORDINATE
LEVEL
BASIC
LEVEL
(a) Attributes
of CHAIR,
‘has seat’
‘has back’
‘is used to
sit on’, etc.
(b) Attributes of 
TABLE,
‘has plain top’
‘is used to write
on’
‘is used to eat on’,
etc.
(c) Attributes shared
by CHAIR and
TABLE,
‘has legs’
‘made of wood
or metal’, etc.
(d) Attributes of
FURNITURE,
‘large movable object’
‘makes a house suitable
for living in’, etc.
Figure 2.5
Schematic representation of attributes for the superordinate 
category FURNITURE

 
Looking at the attributes of FURNITURE that are borrowed from the mem-
ber categories once more, we find that there is indeed quite a lot of over-
lap. Both CHAIR and TABLE seem to have attributes like ‘has legs’ and ‘made
of wood, metal or plastic’ in common (this is indicated in Figure 2.5 by the
two vertical bundles of attributes in the centre linked by the double arrow).
Other attributes available for FURNITURE will be shared by CHAIR and SOFA, by
SOFA and BED, by TABLE and SHELF, by SHELF and CUPBOARD. The effect of these
overlaps is that in describing FURNITURE we never think that we are just bor-
rowing isolated attributes from the respective basic level categories like CHAIR,
TABLE or BED. Rather we have the impression that each of the borrowed
attributes is relevant for a large section of the FURNITURE category, though it
may in fact only apply to two or three member categories.
This effect of the family resemblance principle is even more important
in the case of superordinate categories like TOY, for which we can find only
a single category-wide attribute (our proposal for TOY is ‘used to play with’),
not to mention Wittgenstein’s extreme case of the category GAME, where it
is difficult to extract even a single category-wide attribute. (Frequent asso-
ciations are ‘spending time in a basically pleasant way’, ‘leisure activity’,
‘fun’ and others.) Here it is quite obvious that the attributes available for
the description of the superordinate category are overwhelmingly based on
family resemblances between various types of toys or games, all of them
basic level categories, and that these basic level categories are activated by
parasitic categorization.
To round off the picture, one might point out that the non-basic status
of superordinate categories is also reflected linguistically. Many words for
superordinate categories do not belong to the simple one-syllable type which
is dominant among basic level terms; this is true of FURNITURE, VEHICLES, MUSICAL
INSTRUMENTS, for instance. In addition, superordinate terms do not normally
come to mind first, i.e. before the respective basic level terms, and they are
learned by children only after basic level words have been acquired.
Subordinate categories: characteristics 
of category structure
The most frequent type of lexical category apart from basic level categories
are not superordinate, but subordinate categories. There are many kinds of
dogs, of flowers, of cars and boats, of beds and tables, and all of them can
be understood in terms of cognitive categories. In some cases, the structure
of these subordinate categories is very similar to the structure of basic level
categories. Categories like POODLE, TERRIER or ROSE have identifiable gestalts,
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
7 9

 
they are constructed round prototypes, have good and bad members, can
muster substantial lists of attributes and are expressed by simple words.
However, when we follow Brown (1990) and turn to more extreme exam-
ples of subordinate categories, the differences become more marked.
Sticking to flowers, but replacing ROSE with DANDELION or DAISY, we still
have a fairly clear gestalt perception, including the holistic impression of
the overall shape, the jagged leaves, the yellow blossom of dandelions or
the distinction between the yellow disc and the white rays typical of
daisies. The difference between these categories and a category such as ROSE
becomes obvious when we start looking for prototypes of dandelions or
daisies. How does an ordinary language user, someone who is neither a
botanist nor a lexicologist, single out a perfect dandelion or daisy? How
does he or she describe the difference between this perfect specimen and a
poor one? Indeed, the average language user will hardly attempt to distin-
guish prototypical dandelions and daisies from less typical category mem-
bers, both in terms of individual examples and varieties. Moving from natural
kinds to man-made objects, such as coins, we find that subordinate cate-
gories like DIME or QUARTER also do not yield prototypes that can be easily
distinguished from more marginal examples. All dimes and quarters are very
much alike, and can be regarded as equally good examples of the category.
The reason is not that real-life examples of dandelions, daisies, dimes or
quarters are in fact identical, the differences in shape or colour (in the case
of dandelions and daisies) or in newness and gloss (for dimes and quarters)
which might emerge in a thorough scrutiny are simply irrelevant for every-
day categorization and do not influence our holistic perception.
The question is how this obvious indifference towards the details of sub-
ordinate categories squares with Rosch’s findings that informants have no
difficulty in compiling lengthy attribute lists for these categories, lists that
are even more detailed than those provided for basic level categories.
As Rosch herself observed, only some of these attributes are specific to the
subordinate category in question, while the majority are identical with the
attributes of the respective basic level category. Applied to our flower cate-
gories this means that the jagged shape of the dandelion’s leaves and the dis-
tinction between the daisy’s yellow disc and white rays would rank among
the small number of specific attributes. Everything else that can be said about
the bloom, the stem and the leaves, i.e. all the other attributes of DANDELION
and DAISY, will be borrowed from the basic level category FLOWER; this can again
be regarded as a case of parasitic categorization. Compare Figure 2.6.
This figure should be seen in conjunction with Figure 2.5, which illus-
trates the categorization of superordinate categories. In both cases the bulk
8 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
FLOWER
a
b
c
DANDELION
(a) Shared attributes,
‘has stem’
‘has bloom’
‘has leaves’
etc.
(b) Specific attributes,
‘has jagged leaves’
‘has yellow blossom’
(c) Specific attributes,
‘has yellow disc’
‘has white rays’
DAISY
concrete
object
concrete
object
Figure 2.6
Schematic representation of attributes for the subordinate categories
DANDELION and DAISY
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
8 1
of the categorization is carried out through basic level categories while direct
categorization (indicated by bold lines) is limited to a few attributes. Yet there
is a crucial difference which concerns the quality of the attributes available
for direct categorization. In the case of superordinates this is a set of general
attributes that are also shared by all the basic level categories (e.g. the
attributes ‘large movable object’ and ‘makes a house suitable for living in’,
which are shared by chairs, tables and many other items of furniture). In con-
trast, the attributes available for direct categorization of subordinate categories
are specific, i.e. they specify the category in question; they are not normally
shared by other categories: jagged leaves are a characteristic property of dan-
delions and not part of the attribute lists of DAISY, ROSE or TULIP.
The functions of non-basic categories
Specific and general attributes of subordinate and superordinate categories
respectively are a good starting point to explain the cognitive function of
non-basic categories. The reason why we use subordinate categories is that
we want to stress or ‘highlight’ the specific attributes they feature. If we
want to distinguish a flower with jagged leaves and a yellow blossom from
other types of flowers, we choose the relevant subcategory and communi-
cate this by using its label, the word dandelion. If botanists want to go fur-
ther and point out a specific colour of the blossom they may use a term

 
such as white-flowering Japanese dandelion to indicate a more finely graded
subcategorization. Whether the highlighting function of the subordinate
category refers to colour (as in our example) or to shape, material or the
use to which an item is put (e.g. use of dandelions in salads and soups)
does not make any difference. It can be shown that, for different items, all
these aspects are eligible for highlighting.
For superordinate categories, successful highlighting cannot be so eas-
ily deduced from the generality of an attribute, which is shared by a set of
basic level items, e.g. by chairs, tables, beds, etc. or by cars, buses, vans and
trucks. Obviously, only certain of these ‘general’ attributes are judged
salient enough to be highlighted, while others are not. Trying to assem-
ble the attributes for BUS, one would not just want to mention that it is
used to move people and things around; one would probably like to add
that a bus has a box-like shape, that it has wheels, doors and windows and
also seats, and that it holds a large number of people. Or one may even
want to stress that, given the right size, a bus is used by children to play
with. If we survey the linguistic evidence we find that all these attributes
can be easily expressed as sentences or clauses (as has just been done in
fact), yet only some of them have actually sparked off specific superordi-
nate lexical items that can be used freely. Compare Figure 2.7, where the
selected attributes are indicated by single quotes, the superordinate cate-
gories that might be based on them are indicated by capitals, and the actual
linguistic realizations are printed in italics.
As it emerges from Figure 2.7, only the two attributes ‘moves people and
things around’ and ‘used to play with’ have generated freely usable lexemes,
namely vehicle and toy. The words seater and wheeler can only be used in
8 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
toy
vehicle
?seater
?wheeler
* * * 
?box
TOY
VEHICLE
SEATER
WHEELER
WINDOWER
BOX
‘used to
play
with’
‘moves people
and things
around’
‘has seats
for
passengers’
‘has
wheels’
‘has
windows’
‘is box-like’
BUS
Figure 2.7
Highlighting attributes of the basic level category BUS

 
certain collocations, such as a 50-seater or a 6-wheeler (which is more likely
to be used of a lorry or truck), while *windower is not acceptable as a lexi-
cal item, and box would not be readily understood as a superordinate of bus.
The reason why only vehicle and toy (and in numerical compounds seater)
have been established as lexical items seems to be that their underlying
cognitive categories are supported by attributes referring to what may be
regarded as the most salient quality of artefacts: their function or purpose.
Calling a bus vehicle, we automatically stress its function of moving persons
or things around: calling it 50-seater we emphasize that a bus is capable of
carrying a large number of people. Referring to a bus as toy, we again stress
a specific though very different function. Other attributes apart from func-
tion which seem to be so salient that they support names for superordinate
cognitive categories include ‘material’ (for TEXTILES, MINERALS and EARTHENWARE),
‘origin’ (for ANCESTORS), ‘relatedness’ (for RELATIVES, IN-LAWS).
Highlighting attributes, however, is not the only function of superordi-
nate categories. Closely linked with it is a second function, and this becomes
more obvious when we look at Figure 2.8, which shows the attribute links
between superordinate categories like VEHICLE and TOY and related basic level
categories. While it seems quite natural that VEHICLE is related to CAR, BUS,
MOTORBIKE, etc., through the attribute ‘moves people and things around’(and
that, conversely, CAR, BUS, MOTORBIKE can be seen as types of vehicles), the wide
range of links emanating from TOY may be surprising at first sight: relevant
basic level categories include not only CAR and BUS, but also BALL and SWING,
and the list could be extended almost indefinitely; nevertheless, CAR, BUS, SWING
and BALL can all be seen in a type-of relationship to the superordinate TOY.
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
8 3
TOY
VEHICLE
‘used to play with’
‘moves people and things around’
BALL
BUS
VAN
MOTOR
BIKE
SWING
CAR
BIKE
etc.
Figure 2.8
The collecting function of the superordinate categories TOY
and VEHICLE

 
It is with categories like TOY that the enormous potential of what we will
call the collecting function of superordinate categories becomes really
obvious: the faculty to subsume a large number of categories under one
label which makes the whole set of categories available for easy handling.
It is not surprising that this potential has been used for scientific purposes
and that collecting items under a common heading has become a crucial
aspect of scientific work. The extension of the type-of relationship across
ever more levels has led to the establishment of extensive scientific taxonomies.
The detailed biological classifications or Roget’s attempt to organize lexical
categories as a multi-level taxonomy are cases in point. When these scien-
tific taxonomies were introduced in Section 2.1, we found that they differ
widely from folk taxonomies as used by the Tzeltal people for plants. These
differences can now be explained in terms of the highlighting and collect-
ing functions of superordinate categories.
Exercises
1. Ask your fellow-students to list attributes for the following categories:
CHAIR, BED, LAMP;
KNIFE, FORK, SPOON;
RING, BRACELET, NECKLACE;
FURNITURE; CUTLERY; JEWELLERY;
KITCHEN CHAIR, DINING ROOM CHAIR, ARMCHAIR, WICKER CHAIR;
BREAD KNIFE, POCKET KNIFE, JACK KNIFE, PAPER KNIFE, CARVING KNIFE;
EARRING, NOSE RING, WEDDING RING, DIAMOND RING, SIGNET RING.
Test whether your lists support Rosch’s findings about the attribute inven-
tories of basic level, superordinate and subordinate categories.
2. Considering BOOK, JOURNAL, NEWSPAPER, E-MAIL and WEBSITE as basic level cat-
egories, suggest subordinate and superordinate categories related to these
categories. Which of the possible superordinate categories have given
rise to lexical items in English? Which dimensions (shape, colour,
material, origin, function) are highlighted?
3. Compare the ratio of basic level, superordinate and subordinate level
words in a sample of scientific text to that in a sample of a fairytale or
children’s story.
4. The notion of ‘parasitic categorization’ is based on the view that super-
ordinate categories ‘borrow’ attributes from basic level categories.
8 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
8 5
Alternatively, one might say that basic level categories supply the
attributes which are then ‘transferred’ to the respective superordinate
categories. Which view do you find more convincing?
5. How is the notion of parasitic categorization reflected in pictograms for
fruit, vegetables, toiletries, stationary, electrical appliances, luggage,
motorized vehicles and pedestrians?
2.3 Conceptual hierarchies
Basic, subordinate and superordinate categories are the building material 
of type-of hierarchies. However, there is competition from part–whole relationships.
The latter gain in importance if we do not focus on scientific hierarchies, but on the
folk hierarchies observed in ordinary language use.
Scientific and folk taxonomies revisited
Discussing the Tzeltal plant taxonomy in Section 2.1, we found that
while there is a superordinate category TREE for the basic level categories
PINE, WILLOW and other kinds of trees, there is no such category for CORN and
BEAN. Obviously it is convenient for the Tzeltal people to highlight one or
several salient properties common to all the kinds of trees they know,
e.g. ‘consist of a trunk, branches and leaves or needles’, ‘provide shade’ or
‘used as fire wood’. In contrast, the fact that both CORN and BEAN are grown
in fields and used as food is so self-evident that within the cultural model
of the non-Westernized agricultural Tzeltal community they need not be
highlighted. And since there are only few items involved, there is no rea-
son to collect them in a special superordinate category.
The picture changes when we return to industrialized societies and the
cultural model based on them, and when we survey the almost infinite vari-
ety of food items available. In such a context various superordinates such
as VEGETABLES, FRUIT, CEREAL and even FOOD seem to be very useful indeed. Imagine
the chaos that would be created in supermarkets if the food items were not
arranged with respect to these superordinate categories. The same applies
to non-food categories such as STATIONERY, TOILETRIES, CLOTHING and ELECTRICAL
APPLIANCES. How could anybody find their way around one of the larger depart-
ment stores if it were not for the signs carrying these linguistic labels? While
this illustrates the collecting function of superordinates, their highlighting
function is exploited in the labelling of individual goods, especially with
new products. Whether it is a newly introduced kind of exotic fruit or a

 
new type of precooked dish, it will often be necessary to clarify their pur-
pose or function, and this is where the superordinate category label will at
least provide a first clue.
However, although a large number of superordinate categories may be
necessary to cope with the ever-expanding range of goods and services, this
does not mean that ordinary language users are in any way as consistent
in their use of superordinates as scientists are. This is particularly true when
it comes to establishing multi-level hierarchies. While it is the aim of sci-
entific classifications to provide a complete system of taxonomic levels, expe-
riential everyday categorization may very well be prepared to skip some
levels, even if, from a logical point of view, they make sense and have been
lexicalized.
A good example is the superordinate category MAMMAL, which undoubt-
edly highlights the important attributes ‘born from the mother’s womb’ and
‘fed by milk from the mother’s body’. Admittedly mammal is not only used
in scientific discourse, but also in ordinary conversation when these
attributes are focused. Yet as a rule, language users will regard ANIMAL rather
than MAMMAL as the direct superordinate of DOG and CAT. Similarly, INSECT is
not generally seen as a natural superordinate category for BEETLE though it
may be more readily accepted as superordinate for FLY, MOSQUITO, WASP and
BEE. The issue becomes more complex when we consider that for many lan-
guage users BIRD and FISH are not subordinated to ANIMAL, so if we look for a
superordinate category we have to opt for CREATURE, and this raises another
problem. For CREATURE has biblical associations for many language users (‘God’s
creatures’), or at least it highlights the aspect of creation at the expense of
other aspects of ‘animality’. Looking for a more comprehensive superordi-
nate we have to go as far as LIVING BEING, and this is obviously a category
which includes plants as well. From this we may conclude that there is no
satisfactory superordinate for MAMMAL, BIRD, FISH, REPTILE and INSECT or, to put
it differently, that English does not have a comprehensive labelled category
that can be used for ‘animals’ as opposed to plants.8
Yet this wider sense of animal becomes available when we use the com-
posite terms higher animal and lower animal and consider the respective cat-
egories. HIGHER ANIMAL is largely equivalent with the restricted conception of
ANIMAL suggested above and mainly refers to mammals, while LOWER ANIMAL
embraces INSECT and REPTILE. This still leaves us with BIRD and FISH, which can-
not be safely related to either HIGHER ANIMAL or LOWER ANIMAL. Figure 2.9 is an
attempt to sketch this rather confused situation. In this figure the super-
ordinate categories of neutral everyday categorization are printed in bold
letters and linked to basic level categories by bold lines. Other superordinate
8 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
8 7
LIVING BEING
[CREATURE]
(HIGHER
ANIMAL)
[MAMMAL]
PLANT
[REPTILE]
LOWER
ANIMAL
INSECT
DOG
CAT
HORSE
BIRD
FISH
BEETLE
FLY
WASP
SNAKE
Figure 2.9
A cognitive view of superordinate categories of living beings 
in English
categories are given in brackets and linked to the respective categories by
normal lines.
Looking at the diagram one might easily get the impression that this
classification is indeed most unsatisfactory. This may be true if the matter
is approached from a purely logical point of view. Considering the cogni-
tive needs of the ordinary language user, however, one will come to under-
stand that it may be helpful to have the superordinate category ANIMAL (or
HIGHER ANIMAL) to refer to the living beings that seem most relevant to human
beings, such as dogs, cats and horses, and it may also be useful if insects
and reptiles can be treated in a rather summary fashion under the label LOWER
ANIMAL. Birds and fish may indeed hold an intermediate position between
the larger domestic animals and the lower animals, which does not call for
an immediate superordinate category as the other animals do.
Summarizing this cognitive view of lexical hierarchies as employed by
ordinary language users one might say that these ‘folk taxonomies’ are char-
acterized by gaps, inconsistencies and alternative paths (i.e. offering both
MAMMAL and ANIMAL as superordinates for DOG and CAT). What is reassuring is
that this picture is fully supported by the experiences of practically minded
lexicographers, both in the definitions of superordinate terms and in the hier-
archical framework of Thesaurus-type dictionaries.9 Lexicologists and linguists
in general who have been reared in the tradition of rigid classification will
be more sceptical, but even they should be appeased by the fact that in spite
of the obvious differences between lexical folk taxonomies and logical hier-
archies both can be accommodated in a wider cognitive framework.

 
Type-of hierarchies vs part–whole hierarchies
The notion of conceptual hierarchy becomes even more complex when we
consider a relationship that is pervasive in the world around us, but was
somewhat neglected in earlier cognitive studies: the part–whole relationship.10
Nobody will deny that there is a close connection between finger and hand,
hand and arm, arm and body, and this applies to other body parts as well.
Similarly, the link between tyre and wheel, wheel and car (and other com-
ponents of cars) is just one of many examples of part–whole relationships
for artefacts. This suggests that part–whole relationships are directly based
on observable links between things; they can be described in terms of the
spatial contiguity (i.e. nearness) and continuity of individual objects in the
real world, and this is why they seem to be closer to concrete reality than
type-of relationships (Cruse 1986: 178). A cognitive-linguistic view of part–
whole relations will emphasize that they are based on our familiarity with
our own body and its parts, which is clearly one type of basic experience.11
Like other kinds of basic experiences, among them basic level categories,
part–whole relationships may thus have a high cognitive accessibility, and this
is reflected in a short processing time and the immediacy of gestalt percep-
tion, in which the idea of wholes and their parts (body and limbs or chair,
legs, seat and back, etc.) plays a central role (see Section 1.1).
Unlike many taxonomic superordinates such as VEHICLE or MUSICAL INSTRU-
MENT, part–whole ‘superordinates’ like BODY, CAR or HOUSE are not superordi-
nates per se, but basic level categories that can be activated as superordinates
if needed. If one thinks of LIVING ROOM, BEDROOM and KITCHEN, it makes sense
to relate these part categories to their common ‘whole’, the category HOUSE.
With regard to its cognitive function, the superordinate category HOUSE does
not highlight a single or a few attributes of its ‘members’, as is typical of
type-of superordinates (ROOM for LIVING
ROOM, BEDROOM, KITCHEN, etc.). Its
strength is its assembling function, the notion that the category HOUSE is
thought of as being composed of LIVING ROOM, BEDROOM, etc., and the same
assembling function is fulfilled by KITCHEN with regard to COOKER, FRIDGE
and KITCHEN TABLE or by TOWN with regard to HOUSE, SHOP and STREET. While
type-of superordinates collect things on the basis of conceptualized similari-
ties, part-whole superordinates assemble things on the basis of their concep-
tualized co-presence in time and space. It is in this sense that we talk of
part–whole hierarchies or partonomies.12* As the prime example of BODY
8 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
* We avoid the term ‘meronomy’, as it is easily confused with ‘metonymy’, which is dis-
cussed in Chapter 3. ‘Partonomy’ is used to refer to hierarchies while the relationship
between individual parts and wholes is called ‘partonymic’.

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
8 9
shows, we have no difficulty in extending segmental part–whole relation-
ships like FINGER – HAND into longer ‘chains’ (FINGER – HAND – ARM – BODY), as
these combinations have been called (Croft and Cruse 2004: 154), to stress
the fact that the links of the chain do not automatically belong to differ-
ent taxonomic levels of categorization.
Part–whole and type-of relationships are not mutually exclusive ways of
categorizing things in conceptual hierarchies. Rather they are alternatives
from which speakers can choose according to their needs in specific speech
situations. Figure 2.10 illustrates this conceptual interaction for KITCHEN, HOUSE,
TOWN and related categories. Depending on the speech situation, the cate-
gory KITCHEN, for example, can be conceptualized both as a type of ROOM and
as a part of HOUSE. Even with the small selection of items illustrated, the fig-
ure shows how a complex network of interrelated categories emerges. The
type-of links are indicated by dotted lines in Figure 2.10, because they seem
to be less basic than the part–whole links. Indeed there are many examples
where the type-of relationships are based on similarities between categories
that may be more difficult to fathom: just think of the hidden similarity
that joins elephants, mice and whales in the category MAMMAL. It is there-
fore hardly astonishing that children have difficulties understanding the type-
of relationship and long refuse to accept the idea that, for example, a horse
KITCHEN
ROOM
HOUSE 
REFRIGERATOR
KITCHEN
APPLIANCE  
BUILDING
TOWN 
t/o
t/o
t/o
p/w
p/w 
p/w
p/w
p/w
p/w 
COOKER
p/w
t/o
Figure 2.10
Type-of (t/o) and part–whole (p/w) relationships involving the 
categories KITCHEN, HOUSE and TOWN

 
9 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
can be both a horse and an animal at the same time (Aitchison 2003: 196f);
in contrast, children, at least those with a rural background, have no diffi-
culty in enumerating, and thus mentally assembling, the animals found on
a farmyard.
Given the grounding of partonomies in basic experiences, it is not sur-
prising that the part–whole relationship also seems to motivate our under-
standing of many less tangible relations. These range from quasi-partonymic
locative links illustrated above (e.g. TOWN – HOUSE/SHOP/STREET) to much looser
associations (as illustrated in Figure 2.11), where the notion of ‘being a part
of’ has a more or less figurative meaning. Compared with BODY, CAR or HOUSE,
only the SHOPPING partonomy offers an array of predominantly concrete cate-
gories (SHOP, BUYER, GOODS, COUNTER, CASH, DESK, etc.). In contrast, the categories
assembled in the TRAFFIC and DEMOCRACY partonomies are quite abstract and only
few of them permit immediate gestalt perception. Nevertheless, categories like
TRAFFIC or PUBLIC TRANSPORT, DEMOCRACY or ELECTION, whose structures are arguably
based on the part–whole experience, seem to play a more important role in
everyday conceptualization than the somewhat technical categories MOTION or
ACTIVITY and HUMAN RIGHTS or POLITICAL SYSTEM, which might be introduced as type-
of superordinates for the domains of TRAFFIC and DEMOCRACY respectively. This
is due to the assembling potential of partonymic superordinates, which is often
outwardly mirrored in their grammatical status as uncountables. Although they
do not allow the quantification of instances of a certain category, uncount-
able terms like TRAFFIC, DEMOCRACY (or TELEVISION, SPORTS, RECREATION, etc.) are well
suited to absorb everything that we connect with these categories. In this way,
partonymic links contribute an important share to the construction of cog-
nitive models and the networks in which they are assembled (see Section 1.3).
Finally, as will be shown in Section 3.1, partonymic links are the indis-
pensable foundation of metonymies. A metonymic expression like the 
SHOPPING
shop         buyer 
goods 
bargain
ad
counter 
cash desk 
cubicle  
assistant
TRAFFIC
public       car
transport  pedestrians
noise
pollution
bus     train
ferry
DEMOCRACY
election     parliament 
plebiscite
candidate
winner/loser
election party
Figure 2.11
From part–whole links to loose associations: the categories SHOPPING,
TRAFFIC, DEMOCRACY

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
9 1
university needs more clever heads is obviously based on the relation of the
head being a part of the whole person; here the part comes as it were ‘to
stand for’ the whole.
To sum up, we have distinguished two ways of establishing conceptual
hierarchies, one based on the type-of relationship of class inclusion, the other
on the part–whole principle and similar relationships. They can be charac-
terized in the following way:
• Type-of relationships can take the form of extensive and rigid scien-
tific classifications, which are strictly based on one or several salient
attributes.
• Closer to the concerns of cognitive linguistics are experiential type-of
hierarchies emerging from everyday categorization (i.e. the folk tax-
onomies), which also rely on salient attributes, but are neither com-
plete nor fully consistent, and therefore tolerate gaps and alternative
hierarchical paths.
• Part–whole hierarchies (or partonomies) are based on a relationship of
continuity and connectivity between entities in the real world, which
can be arguably traced back to our own basic bodily experiences. The
links may range from genuine connections between parts and wholes to
a loose association of elements. Partonomies seem to provide one of the
major structuring principles for the construction of cognitive models (see
Section 1.3) and play a key role in the explanation of metonymy.
Exercises
1. Check in the Yellow Pages how the goods and services that are offered
are categorized in terms of hierarchies. Check in one of your big local
department stores whether the goods are arranged according to a strict
logical order.
2. Draw a conceptual hierarchy for the following food categories and check
it for hierarchical gaps: SAUSAGE, HAM, BEEF, PORK, CHICKEN, TURKEY, SALMON, TROUT,
MEAT, POULTRY, FISH, FOOD, and MILK, YOGHURT, ORANGE JUICE, MINERAL WATER, SOFT
DRINK, DRINK.
3. Many scientific books and research papers use a decimal system com-
prising four or five digits in their table of contents to achieve a strictly
logical taxonomy. Take one of these publications and check whether
such a system is in fact helpful for the reader and how it could be ren-
dered more ‘digestible’ in the light of our findings.

 
4. Decide which of the following items should be regarded as type-of and
which items as part–whole superordinates: CLOTHES, HOLIDAY, HOUSE, MEALS,
PARTY, SPORTS, TELEVISION, TOOLS. Suggest subordinated categories. Explain why
ROOM, MEAL and SPORTS can be seen as both type-of and part–whole super-
ordinates. Find other superordinates showing this ambiguity.
5. Sketch some of the cognitive models mentioned in Section 1.3 (e.g.
WEATHER, HOLIDAYS, FOOD, MEALS OF THE DAY) by assembling the major cate-
gories they are based on (SUN, WIND, RAIN, SNOW for WEATHER, etc.). Decide
which categories are connected by partonymic links and where the links
are more difficult to define. Create a network containing the cognitive
models mentioned above (and other suitable cognitive models) and com-
ment on the conceptual links between them.
2.4 Categorization and composite word forms
If both type-of and part–whole relationships are decisive for our conceptualization
of the world, it is not surprising to find them reflected in composite word forms
even if a formal analysis of these items suggests a uniform modifier-head
structure.
Type-of and part–whole relationships in compounds
Looking at composite word forms like blackbird, black bean or black hair, it
seems plausible to assume a conceptual type-of relationship for these
items and to claim the status of subordinates for them. In each case the
‘nominal’ category (BIRD, BEAN or HAIR) can be regarded as a basic level item,
commanding a rich category structure, i.e. a prototype, good and bad exam-
ples and a sizeable number of attributes, which are also available for the
conceptualization of the subordinate category. In contrast, the contribu-
tion of the adjectival element to the composite item seems to be restricted
to the attribute ‘black colour’.13 If the category structure of BLACK is to be
defended at all (see Section 2.5 below), it is definitely much leaner than
in the case of BIRD or BEAN or HAIR. These findings are also fully compatible
with the accepted word-formation analysis, which sees compounds like
blackbird as modifier-head constructions, with the first element modifying
the second.14
Turning to noun–noun compounds such as apple juice, word-formation
analysis is the same, but the cognitive set-up is somewhat different. Here we
have reason to assume that two fully developed basic level categories are
9 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
9 3
involved in this type-of relationship, i.e. JUICE and APPLE. Compare Figure 2.12,
which illustrates the categorization for the subordinate category APPLE JUICE
and is a simplified version of the findings of an attribute-listing experiment
(Ungerer and Schmid 1998).15
As shown in the figure, most of the attributes listed by informants for
APPLE JUICE are also named for the head category JUICE, among them ‘liquid’,
‘no alcohol’, ‘thirst-quenching’, ‘supplied in bottle or carton’ and ‘served
in glasses’ (see (a) in Figure 2.12). This supports the impression that APPLE
JUICE borrows these attributes from JUICE and largely depends on JUICE for its
categorization. Also in line with our expectations, the link with the cate-
gory APPLE is first of all established by the specific attribute ‘made from apples’
(represented by the line in bold print; see (b)).
However, this is not the only attribute that links APPLE JUICE with the cat-
egory APPLE, but informants also put the attributes ‘yellow or similar colour’
and ‘fruity’ on their lists (see (c)) for both APPLE JUICE and for APPLE. In addi-
tion, there are three attributes, ‘tastes sweet or sour-sweet’, ‘is healthy’ and
‘tastes good’ (d) which occur on the lists for all three categories so that it
cannot be decided whether APPLE JUICE has taken over these attributes from
JUICE or APPLE. Thus as many as five attributes of the subordinate APPLE JUICE
could be derived from the category APPLE. What this seems to indicate is that
in categorizing APPLE JUICE we make much wider use of the first basic level
category APPLE than is assumed by the traditional analysis, and this should
throw first doubts on the rigidity of the modifier-head arrangement.
APPLE
APPLE JUICE
JUICE
a
d
c
b
e
concrete
object
(a) Attributes borrowed from JUICE,
‘liquid’
‘no alcohol’
‘thirst-quenching’
‘supplied in bottle or carton’
‘served in glasses’, etc.
(b) Salient specific attribute
‘made from apples’
(c) Attributes borrowed from APPLE,
‘yellow or similar colour’
‘fruity’, etc.
(d) Attributes borrowed from both
JUICE and APPLE,
‘tastes sweet or sour-sweet’
‘is healthy’
‘tastes good’
(e) Non-derived attributes
‘mixed with soda water’
‘naturally cloudy’
Figure 2.12
The attributes of the subordinate category APPLE JUICE
(schematic representation)

 
9 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
These doubts are reinforced when we turn to compounds like coat collar
or shoelace. Here the point is reached where the traditionally assumed par-
allelism between type-of relationship and modifier-head structure is no longer
maintained. Most items in the attribute lists supplied for COAT COLLAR estab-
lish links with COAT (i.e. the modifier category) and not with COLLAR (the
head category). Apart from the salient specifying attribute ‘part of a coat’
(see (a) in Figure 2.13), a coat collar is made of cloth (this attribute is also
shared with COLLAR), it keeps warm, it protects against wind, rain and snow
and is worn in winter (see (b)) – all these attributes could be regarded as
essential properties of both coats and coat collars. Compared with them,
the links between COAT COLLAR and COLLAR add little beyond the reference to
the material (c), and this is of course also shared by COAT; most prominent
is the fact that collars tend to get dirty and greasy (d). This distribution of
attribute links is illustrated in Figure 2.13.
Applying the same method to SHOELACE, one may expect to get similar results.
Again more attributes will be derived from the source category SHOE than from
LACE, and there are many other subordinate categories with a similar attribute
distribution, like SHIRTSLEEVE, CHAIRLEG or LAMPSHADE. After what has been said
about the role of part–whole relationships in conceptualization these find-
ings are not difficult to explain. What the attribute lists for coat collar,
shoelace, shirtsleeve, etc. mirror is simply the fact that these categories are con-
ceived as parts or accessories of the wholes represented by the first element
of the compound (COAT, SHOE, SHIRT), whose conceptual weight overrides the
type-of relationship (a type of collar, lace, sleeve) in the minds of the ordi-
nary language user. The result is what from a cognitive perspective may be
called part–whole compounds (as opposed to type-of compounds).
concrete
object
COLLAR
COAT COLLAR
d
c
b
a
COAT
(a) Salient specific attribute
     ‘is part of a coat’
(b) Attributes borrowed from COAT;
     ‘keeps warm’
     ‘protects against wind’
     ‘protects against rain and snow’
     ‘is worn in winter’
(c) Attribute borrowed from both
     COLLAR and COAT;
     ‘is made of cloth’
(d) Attributes borrowed from COLLAR,
     ‘tends to get dirty and greasy’, etc.
Figure 2.13
Attribute links for the subordinate category COAT COLLAR
(schematic representation)

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
9 5
In fact this conceptual overriding effect of the first element can also be
observed with compounds which from a logical point of view do not rep-
resent a part–whole relationship, but would be assigned to a type-of tax-
onomy even by the layman. In this vein, the compound raincoat would be
understood as a coat that is additionally specified by an attribute such as
‘protects against rain’. However, when informants were asked to name
attributes for RAIN, COAT and RAINCOAT (each category name was given to a
different group), it turned out that RAINCOAT and RAIN have much more in
common than RAINCOAT and COAT. As it emerged from the attribute listings,
both raincoats and rain are linked with wetness and water, with thunder-
storms and gales, with cold and bad weather in general. As far as numbers
go, the overlap of attributes between RAINCOAT and the ‘modifier’ category
RAIN was far greater than between RAINCOAT and the ‘head’ category COAT. Some
of the attributes quoted for RAINCOAT and RAIN may not belong to a sober
‘objective’ description of the essential properties of a raincoat, its shape or
material (these attributes are mostly borrowed from the head category
COAT). Yet if we accept the cognitive view that category descriptions include
associative and experiential attributes, the idea that for the ordinary lan-
guage user RAINCOAT is part of a comprehensive cognitive model RAIN rather
than a type of coat (besides other types of coats) cannot be dismissed.
The emergence of new basic level categories 
from compounds
Apart from the findings discussed, the analysis of the category APPLE JUICE
yielded another interesting result: the category APPLE JUICE was credited with
two attributes that were listed neither for JUICE nor for APPLE (‘naturally cloudy’
and ‘mixed with soda water’; see (e) in Figure 2.12).16 Even if these ‘non-
derived’ attributes may be rather marginal for APPLE JUICE, there are many
other compounds where this is not the case. For an item like WHEELCHAIR,
for example, informants do not just list a few, but in fact a large number
of attributes that are not borrowed from either of the two source categories
WHEEL and CHAIR.
Where do these attributes come from? A widely accepted, basically cog-
nitive answer is that we rely on our ‘knowledge of the world’. Indisputable
as it is, this explanation is not really satisfactory because the notion of world
knowledge is very general indeed. Looking at the example again, we find that
most of the attributes are fairly concrete in nature. Some have to do with being
an invalid, others with hospital, still others relate wheelchairs to engines and
brakes. Obviously, the areas just mentioned can also be understood in terms

 
9 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
of cognitive categories (INVALID, HOSPITAL, ENGINE, BRAKE, etc.); so we may assume
that for the categorization of wheelchairs these categories (and other cate-
gories as well) are tapped in addition to WHEEL and CHAIR. In other words, the
cognitive categories underlying compound terms like wheelchair do not only
rely on the two categories suggested by the linguistic form, but draw on a
large number of other cognitive categories. This is indicated in Figure 2.14,
where the attributes emanating from these additional source categories are
represented by broken lines.
As a closer look shows, most of these categories are not just plain person
or object categories. Just think of HOSPITAL and the wealth of persons, objects
and actions involved in its categorization. As suggested in Section 1.3, we
should regard HOSPITAL (and also to a lesser extent INVALID and ENGINE) as com-
plex cognitive structures or cognitive models, and this makes it much eas-
ier to link them with the general notion of world knowledge.
If we accept, as an interim result, the special role played by additional
source categories (or cognitive models), we may take our explanation one step
further. It seems plausible that the more source categories are involved in the
structuring of a composite category, the smaller the contribution of the indi-
vidual cognitive category becomes. In the course of this process it gets
increasingly troublesome to go back to all these diverse categories for para-
sitic categorization. More and more attributes are no longer felt to be related
to the source categories but are linked only with the compound category
WHEELCHAIR (this is indicated by the normal lines connecting WHEELCHAIR with
the real-world object in Figure 2.14), and there is no reason why in the final
stage of this process such a category should be denied basic level status. This
final stage may not quite have been reached in the case of WHEELCHAIR. Yet
CHAIR
WHEEL
WHEELCHAIR
INVALID
HOSPITAL
ENGINE
Figure 2.14
Attribute links of the subordinate category WHEELCHAIR

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
9 7
there are other compounds where this has happened, such as NEWSPAPER and
AIRPLANE, both of which are generally recognized as basic level categories today,
and this is indicated by the ease with which informants supply a substan-
tial number of attributes, obviously without thinking of other categories.
As a linguistic reflection of this change from subordinate to basic level sta-
tus, newspaper and airplane tend to drop the first element, thus assimilat-
ing to the simple form of basic level categories as paper and plane, a stage
which has long been reached by (motor) car.
Another well-known effect of this process is that the linguistic form of
a compound may preserve the reference to a source category which has already
been superseded by conflicting ‘non-derived’ attributes. A famous case is holiday
(from holy + day), which is, of course, also used for non-religious workfree
days. Similarly, blackboard refers to an object that is more often green today
than black, as suggested by the modifier component. Incidentally blackboard
also illustrates the tendency of new basic level compounds to drop the first
element, as in Could you write these words on the board?
Summing up at this point, we can say that the description of compounds
in terms of cognitive categories and informant-based attributes seems to have
several advantages over both traditional word-formation analysis and a rigid
logical view of subordination. The major points are:
• The standard view which posits a basic head item and a strictly speci-
fying modifier element is far too rigid. With many compounds, even
with model cases like apple juice, the modifier category supplies more
than just the specifying attribute; these additional attributes may not
all be ‘objective’ properties, but are often associative and ‘experiential’.
• The basic item, i.e. the conceptually dominant source category, is not
necessarily expressed by the second element of a compound. Depending
on the salience of the categories involved, the cognitive category corre-
sponding to the first element may be equally important (as illustrated
by raincoat) or even dominant, especially if a compound is based on a
part–whole rather than a type-of relationship (as in coat collar and
shoelace). This means that from a cognitive perspective we may distin-
guish type-of compounds and part–whole compounds.
• To some extent, almost all compounds attract additional attributes.
Many of them can be traced back to additional source categories (or cog-
nitive models). The larger the overall number of source categories gets,
the less important the cognitive categories which are expressed by the
linguistic form of the compound becomes. If the number of source cat-
egories reaches a level that makes it difficult to handle them all, parasitic

 
9 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
categorization becomes irrelevant, the attributes are thought to be
attached to the compound category itself and a new, self-supporting
basic level item has been created. The component categories as well as
the additional source categories serve, to use Langacker’s metaphor, 
as a kind of scaffolding which is disposed of when it is no longer
needed.17 This process can be studied in its various stages starting with
items like apple juice and wheelchair and finishing with (motor) car and
(air)plane; it gives a tangible view of what has traditionally been called
lexicalization.18
Perhaps we should add a final remark which throws some light on how
cognitive structures are expressed in language. From a cognitive perspec-
tive, what happens in compounding would be best reflected in blends such
as motel or heliport because here the intersection of two cognitive categories
involving various attributes can be expressed iconically (Ungerer 1999:
313f). However, compounds are much more frequent than blends because,
more than blends, they are safe indicators of the source categories. This is
why they are the first choice when it comes to expressing subordinate cat-
egories. As an acceptable second choice we would expect at least one of the
cognitive categories to be expressed linguistically, and this alternative will
be explored in the next section.
The myth of the ‘simple’ subordinates
In Section 2.2 we described simple or seemingly unanalyzable subordinates
such as daisy, dandelion, poodle, terrier, quarter or dime as relying on the basic
level categories FLOWER, DOG or COIN respectively, but adding one or several
specifying attributes. Considering the fact that compounds and many other
composite forms are based on two source categories (neglecting ties with
additional source categories for the moment) it is strange that daisy and the
other examples should not have this background.
Here a short excursion into the etymology of these words will be help-
ful. Daisy, it turns out, is derived from ‘day’s eye’ which refers to its sun-
like disc, while dandelion is French for ‘lion’s tooth’, an obvious reference
to the jagged shape of its leaves. In other words, though blurred by their
historical development, the two words denote specific attributes of the respec-
tive subordinate categories. They do not do this by directly tapping a mod-
ifier category, but by providing a metaphorical bridge which links the
subordinate category to several source categories (DAY and EYE in the case of
daisy, LION and TOOTH with dandelion), and this is typical of many flower sub-
categories. To mention just two more examples, the word buttercup expresses

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
9 9
metaphorical links with cup (indicating its shape) and with butter (indicat-
ing its yellow colour), and tulip is derived from a Persian word for ‘turban’
(again a reference to shape).
Turning to quarter and dime, we find that they both denote fractions of
a dollar (dime is derived from Latin decimus, ‘the tenth’), so the dollar-related
value ‘stands for’ the coin, establishing a metonymic relationship. With poodle
and terrier the metonymy is less obvious, but dictionaries tell us that poodle
has something to do with puddles of water, and terrier is linked to Latin
terra (‘earth’) because in hunting a terrier would pursue foxes or badgers
into their burrows. Thus most of the examples make use of metaphorical
or metonymic links, whose general eminence in cognitive linguistics will
be discussed in Chapter 3.
But this is only half the story. What is equally noticeable is that the
basic source categories, i.e. FLOWER, DOG and COIN, are not signalled in the
linguistic expression. This is the more surprising since they are, as we have
seen, indispensable for the cognitive identification and categorization of DAISY,
DANDELION, etc. A possible explanation is that basic level categories like FLOWER,
DOG or COIN are such a self-evident part of our cognitive models of nature
and money that they need not be expressed explicitly. The dependence on
cognitive, and more precisely, cultural models becomes clearer when we move
to a more specific context, i.e. the restaurant context, where subordinate
categories like APPLE JUICE or LIGHT BEER are signalled as two apples or two lights,
and this is widespread in all kinds of specialist contexts, e.g. among crafts-
men, athletes, students or teachers, and makes up an essential part of their
group slang.
Summarizing we may conclude that most simple or unanalyzable sub-
ordinates are in fact not simple in terms of underlying cognitive categories,
but are based on an expressed modifier category and an unexpressed
implicit head category. However, there are exceptions. Take the category
ROSE: it has been a simple word right from its assumed Greek origins; it has
an easily identifiable gestalt and a rich attribute inventory, so we might be
tempted to claim basic level status for this cognitive category, even if log-
ically it is subordinate to FLOWER.
To resolve these inconsistencies we have to remind ourselves of two basic
tenets of the cognitive approach. The first is that cognitive units are not
discrete. Just as there are no clear-cut boundaries between categories, the
transition between levels of conceptualization is better regarded as gradual.
This is particularly obvious in the case of part–whole hierarchies, which can-
not be easily attributed to different levels, but it also applies to type-of folk
taxonomies. While QUARTER or DANDELION (or composite terms like BLACK BEAN

 
1 0 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
or BLACKBIRD) are clearly seen as subordinate to their basic level categories,
POODLE, TERRIER and DAISY are probably less so, but are still judged to be more
subordinate than categories like ROSE which border on or actually belong to
the basic level.
The second tenet takes us back to the discussion of conceptual hier-
archies in Section 2.3. Unlike scientific hierarchies, we found, these cog-
nitive or folk taxonomies can be inconsistent by admitting competing
superordinates, such as ANIMAL and PET for DOG. This principle can be
applied to the basic level as well. Ordinary language users seem to be per-
fectly capable of using several competing basic level categories side by side.
While relying on FLOWER as a source category for DANDELION and perhaps
DAISY, roses may be categorized independently (and may serve as a source
category for the various types of roses and rose-like flowers). A similar
coexistence between basic level categories can be observed in other fields,
e.g. between BUILDING and HOUSE, between JEANS and TROUSERS or between PLANE
and JET.19 In some cases the newer category (JEANS, JET) may eventually replace
the other category as basic level category illustrating the principle of lex-
ical change by substitution. But other categories will go on being used simul-
taneously, as they have been for a long time, e.g. FLOWER and ROSE, if this
promises a more economic form of categorization than strictly logical sub-
ordination.
Exercises
1. Look at the following items containing the element shoe and decide in
each case whether the compound is based on a type-of relationship (with
a dominant second element) or a part–whole relationship (with a dom-
inant first element):
ballet shoe
shoe hammer
shoe-shop
canvas shoe
shoe heel
shoe-tip
patent-leather shoe
shoe leather
shoemaker
peep-toe shoe
shoe-boy
sling-back shoe
town shoe
walking shoe
Do any of the type-of compounds suggest that – as with RAINCOAT – the
dominance of the second element is overridden in conceptualization?
2. Traditional word-formation analysis distinguishes between modifier-head
compounds and copulative compounds like actor–manager (also called

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
1 0 1
dvandva compounds). Comment on this distinction in terms of the cog-
nitive analysis put forward in this chapter.
3. Just like WHEELCHAIR the following compound categories cannot be char-
acterized by only relying on the labelled source categories: ASHTRAY, BEER
MAT, TEA POT, NUMBER PLATE, WALLPAPER, HORSE SHOE, SPARK PLUG. Which addi-
tional attributes would you suggest for them and to which other cate-
gories or cognitive models can they be related? Discuss whether these
compounds are already approaching the status of basic level categories.
4. The text suggested that flower names are linked to several source cat-
egories, normally via metaphor or metonymy (e.g. daisy < day’s eye).
Look up the etymological origin of the following flower names and dis-
cuss the cognitive processes that are involved: bugloss, coltsfoot, blue-
bell, harebell, pink and groundsel.
2.5 Basic level categories and basic experiences:
actions, events, properties, states and locations
So far the discussion of the basic level and other levels of categorization has been
restricted to objects and organisms. Yet in Chapter 1 the notion of basicness was
introduced in connection with basic colour terms, which usually take the form of
adjectives. This is why it seems natural to ask the question whether other ‘adjectival’
properties such as tallness and strength and especially many ‘verbal’ activities are
equally basic for human categorization.
Intuitively, most people would probably think that frequently recurring activ-
ities like eating, drinking, sleeping, walking and talking are just as essen-
tial and show as much variation as familiar objects like apples, dogs or cars.
Assuming, as we have done, that apples, dogs and cars are mentally repre-
sented by basic level categories with prototype structures, why shouldn’t
we claim the same kind of cognitive categories for these activities as well?
Surprisingly, cognitive linguists have been slow to support this intuition.
The first attempts to provide evidence for a prototype structure of action
categories were not concerned with eating or sleeping, but with the men-
tal activity of lying. Coleman and Kay (1981), the authors of this study,
took up Labov’s method of using a limited number of given dimensions
for the description of cups and bowls (see Sections 1.1 and 1.2). The dimen-
sions they chose for the cognitive category LIE were:
(a) factual falsehood (an utterance or proposition is false)
(b) falsity of belief (the speaker believes that the utterance is false)

 
1 0 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
(c) intention to deceive (in making the utterance, the speaker intends to
deceive the addressee).
Instead of Labov’s line diagrams of cups and bowls, Coleman and Kay used
fictitious stories describing various combinations of these three criteria. One
story was about a boring dinner party. At the end of the party someone says
to the hostess ‘Thanks, it was a terrific party’ just in order to be polite, a
statement which is obviously false (criterion (a)) and believed to be false by
the speaker (b), but probably not delivered with the intention to deceive (c).
In another story, a nurse had mixed up the diseases of two patients who
were ready to be wheeled into the operating room and therefore gave the
doctor the wrong information. Even though her utterance was again fac-
tually false (criterion (a)), she did not mean to say something that was not
true (b) and had no intention to deceive the doctor (c). These stories were
contrasted with the prototype case in which all three criteria applied, a child’s
blatant denial that she had eaten the cake (which she had).
The stories were presented to informants who were asked to rate on a
7-point scale whether they were sure/not so sure/etc. that the story was a
lie. All in all, Coleman and Kay argue that the meanings of the verb lie can
be understood as a cognitive category with prototypical instances which sat-
isfy all three criteria and less prototypical instances that do not.
A second study, Verschueren’s (1985) investigation of linguistic actions,
is closer to our intuitive suggestions, but not necessarily convincing as a
list of basic actions, since it comprises not only suitable candidates such as
speak and write, but also more problematic items like answer, apologize, ask,
congratulate, name, tell and thank. The reason is that Verschueren mainly
adapts the criteria which Berlin and Kay had established for basic colour
terms (simple linguistic form, cannot be defined in terms of another basic
item, wide range of applicability, psychologically salient and known to most
speakers of the language; see Section 1.1). Though he also mentions
Rosch’s investigation of basic level terms, he does not make much use of
her findings, which, as we have seen in Section 2.1, have added at least
three important criteria to the definition of basic level categories: ‘large bun-
dles of correlated attributes’, ‘structured as prototype categories’ and ‘high
potential for gestalt perception’.
Even if these criteria cannot be easily applied to most of the activities
with which Verschueren is concerned, it seems quite feasible to use them
with the action categories from which we started out, i.e. eating, drinking,
sleeping and walking.

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
1 0 3
Action categories
Starting with the category EAT, we may take it for granted that it has a sim-
ple linguistic form which is known by speakers of English and is learned at
a very early stage by children. We also have no difficulty in calling up a
number of attributes which are quite unique to this cognitive category: ‘pick-
ing food up from a plate’, ‘opening one’s mouth’, ‘putting the food into
one’s mouth’, ‘biting’, ‘chewing’, ‘swallowing’, etc. Note that since the cat-
egory refers to an activity, the attributes tend to denote actions rather than
objects or properties. However, the principle that the part–whole relation-
ship is essential for our conceptualization of categories also holds true for
action categories. For example, stages like ‘biting’, ‘chewing’ and ‘swallow-
ing’ can be regarded as parts of the more complex action of eating.20 As for
prototypicality, it is possible to distinguish the more prototypical instances
>EATING A SANDWICH< or >EATING AN APPLE< from the less prototypical instance
>BEING SPOONFED BY ANOTHER PERSON< and the rather peripheral one >SIPPING SOUP
WITH A STRAW< (e.g. after dental surgery). Finally, it is perfectly plausible that
the action of eating can be perceived, and indeed categorized and concep-
tualized, as one integrated whole, i.e. as a gestalt.
Taking KILL as a second example,21 again all three criteria seem to be met:
in the media-dependent Western societies, the prototypical instance of the
category is probably >SHOOTING DEAD (WITH A GUN)<, which can also serve as
the basis for a gestalt image of the action. Attributes of KILL that could be
expected from informants include major action stages: the raising and aim-
ing of a gun or similar weapon, the firing of a gun and other stages of the
process which are familiar from movies such as fighting, hitting, falling,
tumbling and shedding blood.
Given the unpleasant nature of the example KILL the reader may perhaps
wonder why it was chosen in the first place. The reason is that KILL was
already established as a classic in the linguistic literature in the 1960s when
it was analyzed as consisting of the semantic primitives CAUSE, BECOME and
NOT ALIVE.22 This kind of analysis is very interesting from a cognitive point
of view because of the divergent nature of the three components. While
the attribute ‘not alive’ would certainly crop up in some form or other in
informants’ attribute lists, probably in the form ‘dead’, we would think that
the attributes ‘cause’ and ‘become’ are too abstract to be named. However,
what these attributes remind us of are very general attributes such as ‘used
to play with’ or ‘means of transport’ which can be extracted from basic level
object categories (e.g. DOLL or BUS) and used to conceptualize the superordi-
nate categories TOY and VEHICLE. In other words, what we suggest is that verbs

 
1 0 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Figure 2.15
Some potential subordinates of the action category WALK
like cause or become can be regarded as representing superordinate action
categories because their main function is to highlight one very general
attribute which is part of a whole range of basic level action categories. As
a consequence we assume that in line with the principle of parasitic cate-
gorization informants would revert to basic level actions like KILL, THROW,
PUT in order to conceptualize the more abstract cognitive category CAUSE.
This view is supported by Lakoff and Johnson’s (1980/2003: 70) observa-
tion that direct causation is expressed by verbs like kill and throw, and it is
in accordance with the hypothesis that little children learn about causation
by intentionally throwing bottles and dropping toys. Other candidates for
superordinate action categories with a salient general attribute are HAPPEN,
BECOME, BEGIN and STOP.
It thus seems plausible that both basic level and superordinate categories
can be found in the field of actions. What is more difficult to decide is whether
there are subordinate categories expressing a type-of (and not a stage-of or
part-of) relationship. Along the lines established in the last chapter, assum-
ing a type-of subordinate would mean that we are looking for action cate-
gories that are distinguished from basic level categories by one or several
specific attributes (like the attribute ‘jagged leaves’ for DANDELION). We would
also expect to find it quite difficult to distinguish prototypical examples from
lesser ones (all dandelions look pretty much alike, we found). Finally we would
assume that many subordinate categories are linguistically expressed by com-
pound or composite terms in which one element signals the specification
and the other one the respective basic level term (e.g. APPLE JUICE with APPLE
indicating the specification and JUICE referring to the basic level category).
To test these assumptions, Figure 2.15 gives a selection of words denot-
ing kinds of walking, which is taken from the Longman Lexicon (LLCE, 1981).23
walk ...
Specific characteristics
limp
‘lamely, unevenly, usually because one leg has been hurt’
hobble
‘in an awkward way, like rocking from one side to the other’
amble
‘at an easy gentle rate, in a way suggested by an ambling horse’
stroll
‘slowly and leisurely’
wander
‘around without a fixed course’
stride
‘with long steps’
strut
‘in a proud way, with pompous, erect gait’
march
‘with a regular, esp. forceful step’
pace
‘with even steps’
stamp
‘pushing (one’s foot) down heavily’

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
1 0 5
(The descriptions of the specific characteristics are partly taken from the
Concise Oxford Dictionary, COD 1999.) To start with the linguistic form,
there is not a single compound form in the list, which reflects the fact
that verbal compounds are extremely rare in English. So we get no lin-
guistic clue which category might serve as the source category for the spec-
ification. Indeed, the attributes that can be extracted from the
paraphrases are either complex (walk ‘in a proud way, with a pompous,
erect gait’ for STRUT) or fairly vague (walk ‘around without a fixed course’
for WANDER). Gestalt perception is another problem. Good and bad exam-
ples of limping, striding or strutting are probably more difficult to dis-
tinguish than different kinds of walking; indeed, a uniform gestalt of the
actions of limping or strutting, which we found to be typical of subor-
dinate categories, is more difficult to imagine than a uniform gestalt for
dandelions.24 The result is that the subordinate status of these action cat-
egories is less certain than in the case of object and organism subordi-
nates. Many of the action categories like LIMP, AMBLE, WANDER seem to have
a status comparable to that of ROSE, which puts them closer to the basic
level than we would expect from proper subordinates.
What is the consequence for hierarchy building? Of course, it is possible
to assemble a hierarchy of actions, by arranging categories like STRIDE, WALK,
MOVE or MUNCH, EAT, CONSUME on the subordinate, basic and superordinate
levels respectively, but these hierarchies will more likely than not be sci-
entific constructs and will not necessarily reflect the cognitive framework
of the ordinary language user. In addition, these action hierarchies seem
to be even more patchy than their counterparts in the domain of objects
and organisms.
So we leave action categories with a feeling that they include a number
of basic activities which are probably perceived in terms of prototype cat-
egories, but that the analysis becomes less conclusive as we turn to super-
ordinates and subordinates and, more generally, to lexical hierarchies of action
categories.
Between actions, objects and organisms: event categories
When comparing action categories like EAT or DRINK with related object cat-
egories like BREAD, SOUP or TEA one is struck by the amount of overlap
between the respective attribute lists. The names of some basic level food
categories will be found in the attribute list of EAT, and conversely, the names
of basic level action categories like EAT will certainly rank among the more

 
1 0 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
important of the attributes of the basic level food categories. So it seems
that there is a strong cognitive interdependence between action and object
basic level categories.
However, action and object (or organism) categories are not just related
via the mutual give-and-take of attributes, but they can also be fused into
categories of a secondary, but still very basic, nature. A good example of
such an event category is the category BREAKFAST which was already men-
tioned in the context of the cultural model of MEALS in Section 1.3. Here we
are not interested in the cultural background of the category but in its inter-
nal structure. From this perspective the category BREAKFAST combines basic
level object categories (e.g. BREAD, BUTTER, KNIFE, SPOON, CUP, TABLE and CHAIR)
with basic level action categories (e.g. EAT, DRINK, CUT, SPREAD), and has there-
fore been seen as a complex basic level category. This was claimed by Rifkin
(1985) (who, incidentally, starts out from the notion of frame which will
be discussed in Chapter 5).25 Using an attribute-listing test Rifkin was able
to show that informants could produce large numbers of attributes for basic
level event categories such as BREAKFAST, LUNCH, DINNER, PARTY, SEEING A MOVIE,
TAKING A BATH, BRUSHING ONE’S TEETH, TAKING A SHOWER and THEFT, RAPE, MURDER. For
the related (type-of) superordinates MEAL, ENTERTAINMENT, HYGIENIC ACTIVITY and
CRIME the category structure was much leaner, while subordinates such as
QUICK BREAKFAST, BIRTHDAY PARTY, SHAMPOOING and PICKPOCKETING yielded about the
same number of attributes as basic level categories.
However, this taxonomic set-up is put into perspective when we approach
event categories from the angle of partonomies. If actions are subdivided into
parts or stages (as we have claimed for verbal actions), and if we consider
that action categories form integral constituents of event categories, the
relationship between whole and parts, between MEAL and STARTER, MAIN
COURSE and DESSERT, or between PARTY and WELCOMING, SMALL TALK, BUFFET MEAL,
DRINKING, DANCING and FAREWELL appear more relevant for categorization than
any type-of relationship. In fact what we have already indicated in Section
2.3 is particularly true of event categories: it is these partonymic links that
seem to provide the texture for event categories (or the cognitive models
underlying them).
Properties: basic level categories or basic experiences?
Leaving the ‘nominal’ domain of objects and the ‘verbal’ domain of actions
and turning to ‘adjectival’ properties and especially colour terms, we are
faced with a dilemma. On the one hand there is a strong tradition which
holds that an adjective denotes a single property of an object or organism

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
1 0 7
and does not have the attribute inventory of a basic level category. On the
other hand, informants are capable of selecting focal or prototypical
colours and of distinguishing them from more marginal ones – indeed this
was the starting point of the cognitive notion of prototype categories (see
Section 1.1).
What is also important for linguists is that the varying typicality of colour
terms cannot only be experienced intuitively or described with abstract
scientific terms like hue, brightness and saturation, it is also reflected lin-
guistically in the variety of colour terms available. Words like crimson, pur-
ple, scarlet, vermilion all denote recognizable shades of RED; other examples are
cherry or the compound brick-red. As the last two colour words show, types
of RED are often identified as properties of certain objects, e.g. of cherries or
bricks, and this use is widespread across the colour spectrum – compare chestnut,
olive or lilac, not to mention the numerous colour terms derived from pre-
cious stones such as amber, aquamarine and turquoise. This suggests that
colours are not categorized in isolation, but are experienced as attributes of
categories denoting objects and organisms.
The extent to which the category structure of properties depends on these
object and organism categories becomes even more obvious in the case of
TALL, which has been investigated by Dirven and Taylor (1988). As the authors
see it, the structure of TALL is a matter of collocations with certain nouns,
and it is on the basis of collocations that Rosch’s procedure of goodness
ratings can be applied to adjectival properties like tallness. By asking infor-
mants to judge how well TALLNESS applies to a certain noun, Dirven and Taylor
get the information needed to compile their lists of goodness ratings, as
illustrated in Figure 2.16.26
There can be no doubt that these goodness ratings of collocations with
tall are very helpful for the understanding of collocational possibilities and
restrictions of the adjective. What is less certain is whether they can be
regarded as sufficient proof for Dirven and Taylor’s claim that TALLNESS is a
Figure 2.16
Goodness ratings for objects and organisms in terms of TALLNESS
(excerpts from Dirven and Taylor (1988: 397, Table 3)).
Good
a sky-scraper
Less good
a pyramid
Bad
a door
examples
the Eiffel Tower
or
people
examples
a room
a block of flats
doubtful
a church
a cloud
a spire
examples
.....
.....
a telegraph pole
a book-case
a bird
a tower
a bridge
hair
a pylon
a dog
a baby
.....
.....

 
1 0 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
cognitive category with a prototype and a rich cognitive structure. Indeed,
one might argue that when informants are asked to rate the fit between
the noun phrases a skyscraper or a baby and the adjective tall, what they
have in mind are not specific instances of the category TALL, but instances
of the categories SKYSCRAPER and BABY. Or to put it in a different way: what
would be left if the collocational links with the noun phrases were no longer
considered? It is equally difficult to imagine how, without invoking related
objects, we should be able to call up large numbers of attributes for colours,
dimensional properties like tall, long, small or physical properties such as
smooth, hot or sweet. And likewise, how might we pinpoint good or bad
instances of these properties? And how should we envisage properties like
tallness as gestalts?
The question then is whether properties like ‘tall’ or ‘smooth’ or ‘hot’
should be regarded as cognitive categories comparable to object, organism
and action categories, or whether they represent a different kind of cogni-
tive experience. Such an alternative interpretation would be based on the
assumption that properties consist either of single attributes, or at most of
small clusters of attributes, and this strongly reminds us of the traditional
explanation. What is important in the cognitive context is that these prop-
erties must be understood as representing cognitive phenomena which are
based on sensory events derived from our most immediate interaction with
objects, other people and our own bodies. To take some of the more obvi-
ous cases, one could establish a relationship between the properties ‘sweet’,
‘sour’, ‘bitter’ and ‘salty’ and the respective physiological receptors on our
tongue or between ‘warm’ and ‘cold’ and the receptors registering temper-
ature in our skin, not to mention the links observed between basic colour
terms and physiological colour perception (see Section 1.1). Even if the rela-
tionship with sensory events will be less direct in other cases, e.g. with dimen-
sional properties, the evidence suggests that these adjectival properties
might also reflect basic experiences, which can be seen on a par with the
bodily experiences of wholes and parts, on which our idea of partonomy
seems to be grounded.
Static and locative relations
Closely linked as it is with the domain of adjectival properties, this is another
area in which an interpretation in terms of both categories and basic expe-
riences seems feasible. Apart from verbs with a ‘static’ meaning like be, exist,
resemble or contain, the most common way of expressing these relationships
in language is by means of prepositions and preposition-based adverbs. Since

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
1 0 9
prepositions like in, up, out or off show a strong tendency towards a pro-
liferation of meanings, it is not surprising that they became the favourite
objects of study when cognitive linguists started transferring the prototype
model to fields other than organisms and objects. Especially, the family
resemblance notion could be particularly well illustrated by the relation-
ship between the various senses of up or over for example. (For a detailed
discussion see Section 4.1.)
However, faced with the inherently relational nature of prepositions,
we cannot be sure whether it is necessary to stick to the interpretation in
terms of prototype categories. When viewed in isolation from object cate-
gories, prepositions do not really invite us to think in terms of attribute
lists, typicality gradients and gestalts. Rather we have the feeling that loca-
tive relations like ‘up–down’, ‘in–out’, ‘front–back’, ‘left–right’, reflect basic
experiences as we have suggested them for important adjectival properties.
This interpretation is in accordance with Lakoff’s view that these locative
relations should be regarded as basic image schemas that are directly
derived from everyday bodily experience (Lakoff 1987: 267; see also
Section 4.1).
To sum up what we have discussed in the present chapter, attention
should again be drawn to the following points:
• For our categorization of actions, much of the descriptive apparatus devel-
oped for categories of objects and organisms seems to be available:
–
actions are processed as prototypical categories;
–
there is a psychologically prominent basic level of action cat-
egories within this hierarchy;
–
other hierarchical levels (superordinate and subordinate cate-
gories) exist, but are less fully developed; subordinate categories
often express stages or parts of the action rather than subtypes.
• Although events are secondary in the sense that they represent fusions
of object, organism and action categories, many of them show the fea-
tures of basic level categories. Type-of hierarchies are possible, but quite
often relationships between parts (or stages) and wholes seem to be more
essential for the conceptualization of events.
• For properties, locative and static relations (‘tall’, ‘under/over’, ‘belong’,
etc.), the analysis in terms of prototype categories is only one possibil-
ity. An alternative interpretation of these properties and relations is based
on the notion of image schemas, which are regarded as a different but
related type of basic experience (see Sections 3.1 and 4.1).

 
1 1 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Exercises
1. Find possible subordinates of the basic action categories EAT, DRINK, CLEAN,
COOK, READ and DRIVE in the Longman Lexicon and Roget’s Thesaurus.
Consider items expressing stages or subtypes of the action.
2. Ask fellow-students for their personal gestalt image and for attributes
of basic event categories like LECTURE, TRAFFIC ACCIDENT, CONCERT, AUDITION,
INTERVIEW, CHURCH SERVICE and EXAMINATION.
3. Consider the following collocations with strong and weak:
a strong drink, a strong beer, a strong man
a strong scent, a strong anaesthetic
a weak heart, a weak point, weak eye-sight
a weak dosis, a weak stomach, a weak man
Is it possible to see these uses as members of prototype categories for
STRONG and WEAK? Or should they all be derived from a single dimension,
for example ‘strength’ or ‘intensity’, which represents a basic experience?
4. Compile a list of English prepositions from a grammar book and dis-
cuss why some of them seem to be more basic than others.
Suggestions for further reading
Section 2.1
Lakoff (1987: 46ff) and Taylor (2003, ch. 3.3) supply reasonable but
rather short summaries of the major issues discussed in this section. On
the whole they neglect the basic level notion in comparison with the
notion of prototypes. Kleiber (1998, ch. II.II) gives a more comprehensive
survey of the basic level and Schmid (forthcoming) looks at the basic
level in the context of the notions of salience and entrenchment. Brown
(1990) takes a more differentiated view of types of cognitive categories,
which is further developed by Ungerer (1994).
1. Cain (1958) addresses the question of how psychological
considerations have influenced Linnaeus’s classification. Stuessy
(1990) provides a very comprehensive discussion of the principles
underlying modern plant taxonomies.
2. An informative account of the history of Roget’s Thesaurus and other
attempts to map the world into thematic reference books can be
found in McArthur (1986, ch. 18).

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
1 1 1
3. The gist of the book by Berlin et al. (1974) on Tzeltal plant
classification is more easily accessible in an earlier article (Berlin et
al. 1973). Their account of Tzeltal plant names is complemented by
Hunn’s (1977) study of Tzeltal folk zoology. There is again a shorter
version (Hunn 1975), which includes a more general discussion of
the relationship between folk and scientific classifications.
4. Rosch (1978) introduces the notion of cognitive economy into
theories of categorization and is well worth reading. This issue is
taken up in Geeraerts (1988a). See also our remarks on cognitive
economy in Section 6.4.
5. For more background concerning the relation between the basic level
and prototypes see Rosch et al. (1976), Mervis and Rosch (1981) and
Kleiber (1998, ch. 3.2) . Geeraerts et al. (1994) present the results of a
detailed empirical study of Dutch words denoting items of clothing,
in which they define the notions of basic level and prototypicality in
terms of ‘onomasiological’ and ‘semasiological variation’.
Section 2.2
For a concise summary of the main ideas in this section see Croft and
Cruse (2004: 84–7). Wierzbicka (1985, ch. 4) gives a wide-ranging and
very detailed discussion of different types of superordinate categories
including the part–whole superordinates discussed in Section 2.3 below.
6. Early references to the special status of superordinates can be found
in Rosch (1977) and (1978). Cecil Brown (1990) provides good,
though somewhat technical, background reading for both this
chapter and the opening section of the next.
7. For a concise description of the notion of parasitic categorization see
Ungerer (1994).
Section 2.3
8. For comparison see more traditional views of hyponymy in Lyons
(1977: 291ff), Cruse (1986: 145ff), Lipka (2002: 167ff). Both Lipka
and Cruse stress the limited range of ANIMAL but accept CREATURE as
an unproblematic superordinate category. This position is also taken
by Taylor (2002, ch. 7), who integrates hierarchies into the concept
of schema and instance.
9. See McArthur’s (1981) Longman Lexicon of Contemporary English,
section A30ff.

 
1 1 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
10. This is true of Rosch and her collaborators, but see Tversky and
Hemenway (1984) and Tversky (1990), who report on interesting
studies revealing the importance of attributes describing parts of
objects for basic level categorization. For an up-to-date treatment of
part–whole hierarchies see Croft and Cruse (2004: 150–63).
11. On image schemas see Johnson (1987: 28f) and Lakoff (1987: 267ff),
Turner (1993) and Lakoff and Johnson (1999: 30–6). On the
psychological reality of image schemas see Gibbs and Colston (1995).
12. The notion of partonomy is also used by Seto (1999), who discusses
in detail the relationship between partonomy, taxonomy and
metaphor and also clarifies the relationship between part–whole
metonymy and the classical notion of synecdoche.
Section 2.4
13. This approach is more closely investigated by Smith et al. (1988),
who propose a ‘selective modification model’ for the cognitive expla-
nation of composite forms. For critiques of compositionality from
the perspective of conceptual-blending theory (discussed in Sections
6.1 to 6.3), see Sweetser (1999), and Coulson (2001: 38ff).
14. For reasons of space the analysis of word-formation processes is here
restricted to compounds. For a cognitive analysis of derivation (suf-
fixation and prefixation) see Ungerer (2002), for an overview of other
research in the field see Ungerer (forthcoming (a)), and for an overall
cognitive treatment see Schmid (2005).
15. Ungerer and Schmid (1998) is a more detailed account of attribute-
listing experiments for compounds, which provide empirical support
for the cognitive view of lexicalization that is put forward here.
16. A good introduction to the problem of non-derived attributes is pro-
vided by Murphy (1988), whose position is supported by psychologi-
cal experiments reported in Springer and Murphy (1992).
17. For Langacker’s comprehensive discussion of composition, see
Langacker (1987a, ch. 12). His use of the scaffolding vs the building-
block metaphor will be taken up in Section 3.3.
18. For a discussion of the notion of lexicalization, see Bauer (1983:
42ff), Lipka (2002: 110ff) and Schmid (2005: 73ff). Leech (1981: 225)
invokes the metaphor of the ‘petrification’ of lexical meanings and
discusses the related examples wheelchair and pushchair.

 
L E V E L S  O F  C A T E G O R I Z A T I O N
1 1 3
19. Compare Geeraerts et al.’s (1994) investigation of Dutch items of
clothing as well as Schmid’s (1996c) comments on jeans and trousers.
Section 2.5
20. Compare the discussion of parts of activities and processes in Cruse
(1986: 174).
21. For a cognitive discussion of the category KILL see Lakoff (1987:
54f). See also Fillmore’s (1982) short discussion of the prototype
category CLIMB, which is taken up by Taylor (2003: 108ff), who pro-
poses a (problematic) structure with several prototypes.
22. For an overview of semantic primitives of verbs, see Lipka (2002: 116ff).
23. See also Aitchison (2003: 107f) on walk and some other verbs.
24. The possibility of using the uniform gestalt attributed to subordinates as
a criterion is explored by Ungerer (1994) for momentary verbs like tap.
25. The article by Rifkin (1985) includes a lot of experimental material
on superordinate and basic level event categories.
26. To get an idea which properties should be considered in this con-
text, see Dixon’s (1977) account of elementary adjectives and
Langacker (1987a: 147ff) on basic domains.

 
C H A P T E R  3
Conceptual metaphors
and metonymies
3.1 Metaphors and metonymies: from figures 
of speech to conceptual systems
Traditionally, metaphors and metonymies have been regarded as figures of speech,
i.e. as more or less ornamental devices used in rhetorical style. However, expressions
like the foot of the mountain or talks between Washington and Paris indicate
that the two phenomena also play an important part in everyday language. Moreover,
philosophers and cognitive linguists have shown that metaphors and metonymies are
powerful cognitive tools for our conceptualization of the world.
Metaphor and metonymy as figures of speech
It is common knowledge that words are often used in figurative senses. Even
very young children are adept at using figurative language.1 Nevertheless, the
study of this linguistic phenomenon was for a long time the exclusive domain
of literary scholars and the odd linguist who was interested in rhetoric or
stylistics.2 In view of this it is perhaps appropriate to begin the discussion
of figurative language with some literary examples. Consider the following
five instances of the word eye extracted from Shakespeare’s sonnets
(Kerrigan, 1986):
(1) So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee. (18, 13–14)
(2) Is it for fear to wet a widow’s eye
That thou consum’st thyself in single life? (9, 1–2)
(3) Sometimes too hot the eye of heaven shines,
And often is his gold complexion dimmed. (18, 5–6)

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 1 5
* According to the Penguin commentary, under in this context can mean both ‘below
(on the ground)’ and ‘socially inferior’.
† Note that both metaphors and metonymies will be indicated by small capitals between
‘+’ signs throughout this book.
(4) Lo, in the orient when the gracious light
Lifts up his burning head, each under* eye 
Doth homage to his new-appearing sight
Serving with looks his sacred majesty. (7, 1–4)
(5) Mine eye and heart are at a mortal war
How to divide the conquest of thy sight. (46, 1–2)
If we take for granted that the attribute list of the concept EYE includes prop-
erties like ‘part of the body of people and animals’, ‘located in the head’,
‘organ of sight’, ‘locus for production of tears’, we have no difficulty in inter-
preting the first two instances of the word eye as quite prototypical instances
of this concept. However, the same can certainly not be said of the other
three examples, because they involve figurative uses of the word eye.
Looking at the other examples we will gather that the expression the eye of
heaven in (3) is meant to refer to the sun. In example (4) we will presumably
interpret the image that eyes ‘do homage’ by assuming that the eye stands for
the whole person which behaves in a particularly deferential way. These two
examples are fairly typical of what has traditionally been called ‘metaphor’ and
‘metonymy’ respectively. Example (5) involves both types of figurative use at
the same time: the word eye is used as referring to the whole visual capacity
of a person which is contrasted with the field of affections symbolized by the
heart (both are fairly conventional instances of metonymy); in addition, the
visual and the affective domain are treated as persons or parties engaged in a
war (i.e. personification, a frequent and conventional type of metaphor).
How can these two major types of figurative uses of words, metaphor and
metonymy,† be characterized in more general terms and how can they be dis-
tinguished from each other? To take the latter first, it has been argued that
metonymy involves a relation of ‘contiguity’ (i.e. nearness or neighbour-
hood) between what is denoted by the literal meaning of a word and its figu-
rative counterpart and that one constituent of the metonymic link stands for
the other. Typical examples of such stand-for relations are given in Figure 3.1.3
In contrast, metaphor has traditionally been based on the notions ‘sim-
ilarity’ or ‘comparison’ between the literal and the figurative meaning of
an expression. More specifically, metaphor has been seen as a three-item pat-
tern involving the elements ‘tenor’, ‘vehicle’ and ‘ground’ (Leech 1969: 148),

 
1 1 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
+PART FOR WHOLE+ (all hands on deck)
+WHOLE FOR PART+ (to fill up the car)
+CONTAINER FOR CONTENT+ (I’ll have a glass)
+MATERIAL FOR OBJECT+ (a glass, an iron)
+PRODUCER FOR PRODUCT+ (have a Löwenbräu, buy a Ford)
+PLACE FOR INSTITUTION+ (talks between Washington and Moscow)
+PLACE FOR EVENT+ (Watergate changed our politics)
+CONTROLLED FOR CONTROLLER+ (the buses are on strike)
+CAUSE FOR EFFECT+ (his native tongue is German)
Figure 3.1
Types of stand-for relations in metonymies
or to use less technical language, of ‘explained element’, ‘explaining element’
and ‘base of comparison’. This is illustrated in Figure 3.2 for the eye-of-heaven
metaphor in example (3).
Setting out from such a ‘comparison’ or ‘substitution’ view of metaphor,
I.A. Richards (1936) and Max Black (1962, 1993) developed the so-called
‘interaction theory’ of metaphor. They maintained that the essence of
metaphor lies in an interaction between a metaphorical expression and the
context in which it is used. In our example, the interaction can be
described as a semantic clash or tension between the metaphorically used
concept eye and the context of heaven, and this results in the interpretation
of the expression eye of heaven as ‘sun’.4
Conventionalized metaphors
As the examples of metonymic expressions in Figure 3.1 have shown,
metonymy is not restricted to literary language, and the same is true of
metaphor. Indeed, everyday language is rife with metaphorical expressions.
Staying within the field that has already been opened up with the exam-
ple eye, we find that most words denoting body parts are used in a multi-
tude of metaphorical extensions. Figure 3.3 gives a list of examples of words
denoting body parts in the upper half of the human body (some of which
also involve metonymic components).5
The sun
is
the eye of heaven
(in respect of
shape, radiation,
domination of 
face or sky, etc.)
X
is like
Y
in respect of
Z
TENOR
VEHICLE
GROUND
‘explained element’
‘explaining element’
‘base of comparison’
Figure 3.2
The traditional explanation of metaphor
(after Leech 1969, explanatory paraphrases added)

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 1 7
head
of department, of state, of government, of a page, of a queue,
of a flower, of a beer, of stairs, of a bed, of a tape recorder,
of a syntactic construction
face
of a mountain, of a building, of a watch
eye
of a potato, of a needle, of a hurricane, of a butterfly, in a flower, hooks and
eyes
mouth
of a hole, of a tunnel, of a cave, of a river
lips
of a cup, of a jug, of a crater, of a plate
nose
of an aircraft, of a tool, of a gun
neck
of land, of the woods, of a shirt, bottle-neck
shoulder
of a hill or mountain, of a bottle, of a road, of a jacket
arm
of a chair, of the sea, of a tree, of a coat or jacket, of a record player
hands
of a watch, of an altimeter/speedometer
Figure 3.3
Conventionalized metaphors of body parts
(collected from Wilkinson 1993 and LDOCE4)
Examples from many other fields could easily be provided and some will
be given as this chapter unfolds. What all these examples show is that metaphor
and metonymy are not just figures of speech in literature but also pervasive
in everyday language. To capture the difference between the more inventive,
expressive and unexpected metaphors devised by poets and the head-of-
department type, which is usually not even recognized as being metaphorical
by language users, the latter type has been called conventionalized, lexical-
ized or ‘dead’ metaphor. The logic behind these labels is that through its fre-
quent association with a certain linguistic form, the figurative meaning of a
word has become so established in the speech community (i.e. convention-
alized) that it is entered in the lexicon as one sense of the word in its own
right (i.e. lexicalized). From a cognitive point of view, however, this is highly
misleading. In the words of Lakoff and Turner (1989: 129)
the mistake derives from a basic confusion: it assumes that those things in our
cognition that are most alive and most active are those that are conscious. On
the contrary, those that are most alive and most deeply entrenched, efficient,
and powerful are those that are so automatic as to be unconscious and effortless.
The conclusion from a cognitive perspective is that the metaphors that
have unconsciously been built into the language by long-established con-
ventions are indeed the most important ones.
Metaphors as cognitive instruments
In tracing the development from the traditional to a cognitive conception
of metaphor and metonymy, we have now arrived at a crucial point. As

 
1 1 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
* The term ‘domain’, which is used in the cognitive literature in this context, is also
established as a technical term in Langacker’s Cognitive Grammar and we would there-
fore like to reserve its use for Chapter 4.
already recognized by Black in a precognitive context, metaphors act as ‘cog-
nitive instruments’ (1962: 37). This means that metaphors are not just a
stylistically attractive way of expressing ideas by means of language, but a
way of thinking about things. In the same vein Lakoff and Johnson
(1980/2003: 7f) argue that we do not just exploit the metaphor +TIME IS MONEY+
linguistically, but we actually think of, or conceptualize, what they call the
target concept TIME via the source concept MONEY. In other words, when
we use the following English phrases we establish links between two con-
cepts that do not seem to belong together by their very nature.
You’re wasting my time.
Can you give me a few minutes.
How do you spend your time?
We are running out of time.
Is that worth your while?
The source and target concepts are not conceived in isolation, however, but
are felt to be embedded in ‘cognitive models’ and ‘cultural models’ (see
Section 1.3). What is transferred, then, by a metaphor is not only the prop-
erties inherent in the individual concepts, but the structure, the internal
relations or the logic of a whole cognitive model. Using a metaphor origi-
nating in cartography later taken over by mathematicians, cognitive linguists
have called the transfer a ‘mapping’ from a source to a target. This means
that from a cognitive perspective a metaphor is a mapping of the structure
of a source model onto a target model. As the distinction between concept
and cognitive model is often vague, we will use the more neutral terms ‘source
concept’ and ‘target concept’ in what follows.*
Let us look at another example to illustrate this conception of metaphor
(Lakoff and Turner 1989: 1ff). The human life cycle is conventionally con-
ceptualized as starting with arriving in the world, going through life and leaving
or departing at the time of one’s death. This means that we think of our life
in terms of three journeys: when we are born we arrive from our first jour-
ney, our entire life is the second journey in the world, and when we die
we set out on our last journey. The first and the last journeys are reflected
in language by metaphorical expressions such as the baby is on the way,
the baby has arrived, we bring babies into the world, and he is still with us, they
brought him back, he is gone, he has departed, he has passed away. What we

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 1 9
are really interested in, however, is the middle journey, our journey through
life, which may be described for instance by the following metaphorical
expressions (Lakoff and Turner 1989: 3f): she went through life with a good
heart, he knows where he is going in life, I don’t know which path to take, he
made his way in life, he works his way round many obstacles.
Returning to the traditional explanation of metaphor (the three-element
system presented in Figure 3.2), one finds that the cognitive approach, as pre-
sented so far, focuses on two of its three elements: the tenor (or ‘explained
element’), which is now seen as target concept, and the vehicle (or
‘explaining element’), now regarded as the source concept of the metaphor.
To integrate the third element of the traditional system (the ground or ‘base
of comparison’) into the cognitive view, we extend the descriptive apparatus
by introducing the notion of mapping scope, as shown in Figure 3.4.6
As we see it, the mapping scope of a metaphor is best understood as a
set of constraints regulating which correspondences are eligible for map-
ping from a source concept onto a chosen target concept. These constraints
not only help to avoid just any kind of feature that is transferred from the
source to the target concept but also motivate the range of possible corre-
spondences. Essentially, the mapping scopes of metaphors reflect our con-
ceptual experiences in dealing with the world around us. More specifically,
we can distinguish three major components of mapping scopes:
• image schemas, which are firmly grounded in our bodily experiences.
They include orientational schemas like ‘in–out’, ‘inside–outside’,
‘front–back’ as well as the ‘inside–outside’ (or ‘container–contained)
schema, the ‘part–whole’ (or ‘whole–part’) and the ‘path’ schema;
image schemas are most probably shared by all human beings (see also
Section 2.5).
MAPPING SCOPE
SOURCE
CONCEPT
TARGET
CONCEPT
mapping
Figure 3.4
Basic components of metaphorical mapping: source concept, target
concept, mapping and mapping scope

 
1 2 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
†The sign <> stands for ‘correlates with’.
• basic correlations,7 which we do not experience bodily like image
schemas, but which guide us in understanding the events and
actions in the world around us. Examples are relations of presumably
universal significance like ‘action/change correlates with motion’ (or
short ‘action/change<>motion’†), ‘cause<>effect’, ‘purpose<>goal’
and ‘presence<>existence’; it is likely that they also have a universal
status like image schemas.
• culture-dependent evaluations, which are restricted to the members
of a specific culture. In the Western culture they include for example eval-
uative attributes like ‘rich’, ‘young’, ‘stupid’ or ‘beautiful’ (attributed to
persons); ‘strong’, ‘majestic’, ‘aggressive’ or ‘dirty’ (for animals), and ‘valu-
able’, ‘durable’, ‘useful’ or ‘fragile’ (for objects).
Applying this conception to the metaphors already discussed, the +LIFE
IS A JOURNEY+ metaphor is best activated within a mapping scope that relies
on the image schema of ‘path’ and is supported by the correlations ‘change
<>motion’ and ‘purposes<>goals’; in contrast a mapping scope based on the
‘inside-outside’ or the ‘up-down’ image schemas or on the correlation
‘cause<>result’ would be less suitable. The +TIME
IS
MONEY+ metaphor as
expressed in You’re wasting my time or We are running out of time requires a
mapping scope incorporating the widespread evaluation that money is a
valuable commodity; here the moralist attribute that money is evil would
be less helpful. And to add an example illustrating distinct cultural differ-
ences, the Western culture-specific attributes of pigs as ‘dirty’ and as ‘greedy’
establish that the metaphorical phrase John is a pig is understood as mean-
ing ‘he is untidy’ or ‘he does not eat with good manners’, while in other
cultures pigs may be associated with different attributes. In modern China,
for example, the lexeme pig can have connotations similar to the Western
ones, but it is also used as a term of endearment for a lover and carries
associations of a somewhat straightforward and silly kind of loveliness. In
this culture the metaphor +A PERSON IS A PIG+ has an interpretation entirely
different from the Western one, because attributes like ‘dirty’ and ‘greedy’
are not suggested as part of the mapping scope.
This shows that for the effortless conceptualization of a metaphor the
mapping scope must be well entrenched in the minds of the members of
a given culture. For an innovative literary metaphor, however, such as the
fabricated example +WINTER IS FOOD+, the mapping scope available to the aver-
age (Western) reader will be very hazy indeed. Even with better-known lit-
erary metaphors, as the example quoted from Shakespeare above (+SUN IS

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 2 1
THE EYE OF HEAVEN+), novices may have their problems because the mapping
scope is still less well entrenched than it is for consolidated ‘everyday’
metaphors like +TIME IS MONEY+ or +LIFE IS A JOURNEY+. In other words, the
entrenchment of the mapping scope may vary widely, and this is reflected
from a sociopragmatic angle in the degree of conventionalization (or
social sanctioning) a metaphor has achieved in a speech community.
After this first overview of the cognitive-linguistic conception of
metaphor it seems reasonable to ask what the typical target concepts and
the typical source concepts of conceptual metaphors are. See Figure 3.5,
which assembles a selection of major source and target concepts discussed
in the literature. Comparing the two lists we find that the concepts in the
left-hand column are rather abstract in nature, while those in the right-
hand column are more concrete. What this seems to demonstrate is that
we rely on concepts of the concrete world to conceptualize abstract phe-
nomena. To substantiate this claim, the abstract concepts ARGUMENT and IDEA,
which both command a whole range of metaphors, will be examined in
more detail.
The structuring power of metaphors I: argument
How do we conceptualize the concept ARGUMENT? In traditional semantic terms
we can distinguish three meanings of the word argument. Apart from ‘line
of thought’, an argument can be a ‘disagreement or quarrel’, and finally a
‘reason given to support or undermine something’. However, these paraphrases
do not capture in any way the wealth of information that we have stored
Target concepts
Source concepts
life
journey
death
departure
lifetime
day
time
money
anger
dangerous animal, container
love
war, valuable object
argument
journey, war, building, container
ideas
plants, building, container
understanding
seeing
communication
packing, sending, unpacking
world
theatre
Figure 3.5
Major source and target concepts of metaphorical mappings

 
1 2 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
in relation to the concept ARGUMENT: the stages through which arguments
usually go; the characteristic pattern of exchanges between the participants;
the purposes pursued by the participants; the force of the reason given. These
aspects of the concept may not be very helpful in distinguishing between
different meanings of argument. In fact, they illustrate how closely the var-
ious meanings are linked by a shared conceptual structure, and it is this
structure that cognitive linguists have been interested in. According to Lakoff
and Johnson (1980/2003) our conceptualization of the concept ARGUMENT is
based on the following four related metaphors:
+AN ARGUMENT IS A JOURNEY+
+AN ARGUMENT IS A BATTLE+
+AN ARGUMENT IS A BUILDING+
+AN ARGUMENT IS A CONTAINER+
These metaphors will now be considered in some detail.
+AN ARGUMENT IS A JOURNEY+
The first metaphor mainly serves to conceptualize the progress of an argument.
Expressions based on this metaphor are (Lakoff and Johnson 1980/2003: 90):
We have set out to prove that bats are birds.
When we get to the next point, we shall see that philosophy is dead.
So far, we’ve seen that no current theory will work.
This observation points the way to an elegant solution.
We have arrived at a disturbing conclusion.
As the examples show, we understand the progress of an argument by cre-
ating a structural analogy with the detailed knowledge that we have of the
progress of journeys, which is as it were ‘monitored’ by a mapping scope
based on the image schema ‘path’. Nominal concepts like (STARTING) POINT,
LANDMARK, WAY, PATH and GOAL, and action concepts like SETTING OUT, MOVING
ON, COVERING GROUND, FOLLOWING A PATH and ARRIVING, which play a major role
in supplying a structure for the concept JOURNEY, are mapped onto the con-
cept ARGUMENT. Compare the following expressions:
He strayed from the line of argument.
Do you follow my argument?
Now we’ve gone off in the wrong direction again.
I’m lost.

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 2 3
You’re going around in circles.
+AN ARGUMENT IS A BATTLE+
A second concept, which is particularly useful for the conceptualization of
the structural sequence, but also for the strength or force of an argument,
is the concept BATTLE (Lakoff and Johnson prefer the more general label WAR).
Like a battle, an argument can be divided up into several stages, notably
the initial positions of the opponents, followed by the stages of attack, retreat
and counterattack, and finally the victory of one side or, more rarely, a truce.
Figure 3.6 shows how these structural analogies between BATTLE and ARGUMENT
are reflected in linguistic expressions.
+AN ARGUMENT IS A BUILDING+
The third metaphor can put the content, the progress and the quality of
arguments into perspective by drawing on attributes which the superordi-
nate concept BUILDING inherits from basic level concepts such as HOUSE, TOWN
HALL and CASTLE.
We’ve got a framework for a solid argument.
If you don’t support your argument with solid facts, its whole structure
will collapse.
He is trying to buttress his argument with a lot of irrelevant facts, but
it is still so shaky that it will easily fall apart under criticism.
We will show his argument to be without foundation.
With the groundwork you’ve got, you can construct a pretty solid argument.
Initial positions 
They drew up their battle lines.
of the opponents
I braced myself for the onslaught.
Attack
She attacked every weak point in my argument.
He shot down all my arguments.
Defence
They defended their position ferociously.
She produced several illustrations to buttress her argument.
Retreat
He withdrew his offensive remarks.
Counterattack
I hit back at his criticism.
Victory/defeat/truce
OK, you win.
He had to succumb to the force of her arguments.
Let’s call it a truce.
Figure 3.6
Structural analogies of the concepts BATTLE and ARGUMENT and their
linguistic realizations (some examples from Lakoff and Johnson 1980/2003)

 
1 2 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
+AN ARGUMENT IS A CONTAINER+
Finally, to conceptualize the content dimension of arguments we make use
of the +CONTAINER+ metaphor, which functions within a mapping scope based
on the image schema ‘inside–outside’. From this perspective, which is
mainly focused on the last sense of the word argument (‘reason to support or
undermine something’), arguments are seen as containers holding a substance:
Your argument doesn’t have much content.
That argument has holes in it.
Your argument is vacuous.
I’m tired of your empty arguments.
The structuring power of metaphors II: idea
The examples that Lakoff and Johnson give have shown that they are not
concerned with providing a definition of the meaning or category structure
of ARGUMENT. Instead, their starting point is the concept ARGUMENT and their
explicit aim is to elucidate how people conceptualize it via metaphor. In
the analysis of the concept IDEA (Schmid 1993: 165ff; 1996a: 111ff), a com-
plementary, inductive approach was chosen. Setting out from real occurrences
of the word idea extracted from corpora and the OED, the metaphorical expres-
sions were examined with the aim of analyzing the structure of the con-
cept IDEA. This yielded the following main metaphors:
+THE MIND IS A CONTAINER FOR IDEAS+
+IDEAS ARE OBJECTS+
+IDEAS ARE ANIMATE BEINGS OR PERSONS+
The first metaphor that is very important for our understanding of the
concept IDEA is again a variant of the +CONTAINER+ metaphor. The collected
data clearly reveal that we think of our minds as containers for ideas. This
metaphor is often combined with the second metaphor which treats ideas as
objects, or, more specifically, as goods. In a large proportion of the metaphor-
ical expressions ideas are conceptualized as goods transferred. We talk about
having, getting, borrowing or even selling ideas; something or someone can give
us ideas, we can put ideas somewhere, e.g. into other people’s heads.
The second metaphor, +IDEAS ARE OBJECTS+, also becomes manifest when
properties of objects like extension and form in space, material or substance
are expressed. Ideas can be
big, little, slender, broad or sharp;
rigid, strong or faint;

 
bright, clear or hazy;
supported, dropped, thrown out, shelved or fixed.
The third metaphor establishes a link between IDEAS and ANIMATE BEINGS or
PERSONS. Based on these two fields people say that ideas can be impoverished
or wild; they can be adopted, conceived and killed; they get about; ideas can
be conceptualized as offspring or as combatants. As has already become appar-
ent in the discussion of +AN ARGUMENT IS A BATTLE+, ideas can also be attacked
and surrendered.
Types of concepts, rich and lean mapping
Let us recapitulate what the study of the two examples ARGUMENT and IDEA
has revealed. The evidence strongly suggests that abstract concepts are indeed
based on or ‘grounded’ in more concrete source concepts, in particular in
basic level concepts. Metaphorical mapping may take place directly between
basic level and target concept. Alternatively, the link is established through
superordinate concepts like BUILDING. Looking at the metaphor +AN ARGUMENT
IS A BUILDING+ again, it is easy to see how the salient attributes of individual
basic level concepts like HOUSE, TOWN HALL and CASTLE are used to structure
the abstract concept ARGUMENT. Quite frequently the source concept of such
specific metaphors is an event concept that is in itself composed of sev-
eral other basic object and basic action concepts. For example, the source
concept BATTLE of the metaphor +AN ARGUMENT IS A BATTLE+ is a combination
of basic level object concepts (GUN, TANK, BOMB, etc.) and action concepts (FIGHT,
ATTACK, SHOOT, DRIVE).
However, there are also metaphors such as +IDEAS ARE OBJECTS+, +IDEAS ARE
PERSONS+ and +IDEAS ARE CONTAINERS+ whose source concepts are not specific
basic level concepts or their superordinates. Rather the source concepts
of these metaphors are an assembly of more general conceptual experi-
ences that we have collected about the objects, living organisms and human
beings that we encounter in the world around us, and this is why we call
them generic metaphors (not to be confused with the use of generic level
in biological taxonomies). Among these generic experiences are for
instance that objects can be obtained, given away, shelved or dropped, that
containers can be empty, filled with liquid and overflow, that living organ-
isms can be nurtured or killed, that persons can be adopted, embraced or
attacked. Because these general concepts are extremely familiar to us, they
quite naturally offer themselves as the source of metaphorical mappings onto
abstract target concepts, as the discussion of the concept IDEA has shown.
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 2 5

 
What has been sketched so far is the metaphorical structuring of abstract
target concepts through a combination of specific and generic metaphors. In
this process a large number of metaphorical correspondences are established,
especially between a concrete source concept and a target concept, perhaps
less so between a generic source concept and a target concept. It is this rich
mapping that fascinated the authors of early cognitive studies of metaphor
to the extent that other types of metaphor were neglected. Yet as Ruiz de
Mendoza Ibañez (2000: 111–13) has rightly pointed out, there are many
metaphorical links, in particular links with concrete target concepts, which
focus on a single property of a concrete source concept.8 This applies for instance
to the example John is a pig, where, as shown above, the metaphorical map-
ping is restricted to a few correspondences by a mapping scope focusing on
‘dirtiness’, with aspects like ‘greediness’ playing an additional but subordi-
nate role. With other well-known examples, for instance the animal metaphor
underlying the use of crane for a piece of construction equipment, the num-
ber of correspondences is also much smaller than is assumed in the theoret-
ical discussion, because the mapping scope is restricted by the correlations
‘shape<>object’ and ‘action<>motion’. This lean mapping is sufficient
because the target concept is well equipped with attributes of its own to guar-
antee successful conceptualization and the metaphor is used to highlight
one or a few additional attributes (such as the bad manners of John in John
is a pig, the shape and movements of the crane). Lean mapping may also
occur between a generic source concept (e.g. the PERSON concept) and a con-
crete target concept. These cases – traditionally called personification – are not
only found in fairytales and children’s books, where animals and objects think,
talk and act like persons, but also in everyday life when we talk about (and
to) computers or cars as if they were human beings.
Metaphorical mapping: a summary
Although diagrams tend to oversimplify matters, Figure 3.7 should provide a
final overview of the essentials of cognitive metaphor analysis. It shows that
what metaphors basically do is establish a conceptual link between a source
and a target concept. The diagram also illustrates – visually and in writing –
how the various aspects of metaphor are interrelated: specific source concepts
contribute to both concrete target concepts and abstract target concepts. Yet
in the former case (e.g. +A PERSON IS A PIG+) the metaphorical transfer is restricted
to basically one single correspondence (‘lean mapping’) while abstract target
concepts, such as ARGUMENT, IDEA or ANGER, draw a large number of attributes
from concrete concepts like BUILDING or JOURNEY. These abstract target concepts
1 2 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
are also supported by links with more general source concepts, e.g. the generic
OBJECT concept, as in Ideas can be sold (like objects) or the generic CONTAINER con-
cept as in Anger welled up in his body (like a liquid in a container); these
metaphors may vary between lean and rich mapping. To complete the pic-
ture, concrete target concepts (e.g. animals concepts, objects concepts like TREE,
RIVER or CAR) may achieve personification by drawing on the generic source
concept PERSON, again a case of lean rather than rich mapping.
The different mapping scopes also explain why conceptual metaphors
fulfil different cognitive functions:
• Lean mapping between specific concrete source concepts and concrete
target concepts is primarily used to highlight individual aspects of the
target concept (e.g. the dirtiness attributed to John in John is a pig).
• Rich mapping between specific concrete source concepts and abstract
target concepts, plus additional mapping from generic concepts, is pri-
marily used to supply a tangible conceptual structure for abstract
target concepts (e.g. ARGUMENT, IDEA, emotion concepts).
Metonymies as cognitive instruments
When we turned to a cognitive view of figurative language we somehow
lost sight of the role played by metonymy in our conceptualization of the
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 2 7
Specific concrete
concept
(basic level and
superordinates)
lean mapping
(one or a few correspondences)
lean or rich mapping
SOURCE CONCEPT
TARGET CONCEPT
MAPPING SCOPE
Set of constraints
(image schemas, basic correlations,
culture-specific evaluations)
Concrete concept
(individual persons
and objects)
Generic concept
(person, object,
container)
Abstract concept
(argument, idea,
emotions, etc.)
rich mapping
lean mapping
Figure 3.7
Metaphorical mapping: an overview

 
world. To redress the balance this section will focus on how metonymies
parallel and differ from metaphors as cognitive instruments.
To begin with, it should be emphasized that two major claims made by
cognitive linguists in the description of metaphor also apply to metonymy (Lakoff
and Turner 1989: 103): both are seen as being conceptual in nature and both
can be understood as mapping processes. This means that the set-up chosen
for metaphor (source concept, target concept, mapping scope) is applicable to
metonymies as well. The source concept and the target concept are cognitive
equivalents of the entities linked through a contiguity relation (part–whole,
whole–part, place for person, material for object etc.; see Figure 3.1). In order
to see how the third aspect of mapping processes, the notion of mapping scope,
must be understood in the case of metonymies consider the following sentence
pairs:
(1a) All hands on deck.
(1b) All heads on deck.
(2a) The university needs more clever heads.
(2b) The university needs more hands.
(3a) The White House has launched a tax-cutting campaign.
(3b) The greenhouse has launched a tax-cutting campaign.
The examples illustrate how the mapping scope determines the appro-
priateness of a metonymic mapping by providing a suitable context for its
interpretation. (Recall that the mapping scope was introduced for metaphor
as a set of constraints regulating the correspondences between source and
target concepts.) In the first two pairs (1a/b and 2a/b) the prototypical
part–whole relation of body parts vs. the whole body or person is applied,
yet it is only in the (a) versions that the metonymy is successful. In sen-
tence (1a) this is due to the fact that the context of shipping suggested by
the key word deck is socially sanctioned and situationally relevant. Since it
includes the idea of physical work required on a ship, ‘shipping’ provides
a suitable mapping scope for a part–whole link between HAND and
BODY/PERSON. It seems natural that the concept HAND is used to stand for phys-
ical labour; a metonymic link between HEAD and PERSON, as suggested in (1b),
does not fit the shipping context equally well. In (2a/b) the situation is
reversed: the mapping scope ‘university’ invites a link between HEAD and
BODY/PERSON (2a), which concentrates on the intellectual capacity of human
beings, while the link based on HAND and its physical strength (2b) would
carry little conviction.
1 2 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
This analysis can also be transferred to other types of metonymy, as illus-
trated by example (3a/b), where only (3a) calls up ‘US administration’ as a
suitable mapping scope. Within this mapping scope, which also includes
the notion of tax-cutting, the place concept WHITE HOUSE quite naturally sug-
gests a spatial link with PRESIDENT. The concept GREENHOUSE would probably
be seen in the context of gardening, which does not really embrace the notion
of tax-cutting, and this would make it difficult to establish a convincing
mapping scope sanctioning the metonymic link.
Reviewing what has been offered as mapping scope for the metonymies
expressed by the (a) version of (1)–(3), it is obvious that the number of cor-
respondences between source and target concept is not decisive here – this
link is uniformly reduced to a contiguity relation, often a part–whole rela-
tionship, or some other basic relation, e.g. place for institution or cause for
effect. What is more important and at the same time more variable is the
amount of encyclopaedic knowledge accepted by the community of speak-
ers as mapping scope.9 In the case of ‘shipping’, ‘gardening’, ‘university’ and
‘US administration’ the mapping scope seems to be largely equivalent in
status with the concepts (or cognitive models) discussed in Section 1.3 and
in previous sections of this chapter – think of BEACH, MONEY, JOURNEY, BATTLE
or ARGUMENT. All three aspects of the metonymy (source concept, target con-
cept and mapping scope) are thus part of one cognitive model, and this
explains why cognitive linguists have claimed that metonymies are proto-
typically restricted to a single cognitive model, unlike metaphors, which are
mappings from one model to another.
However, the notion of mapping scope is more flexible than that. Instead
of being tied to a single clearly delineated cognitive model, the mapping scope
may also be constituted as a loose assembly of encyclopaedic cues that can
be associated with different, though related, cognitive models. For example,
when the concept TABLE is the source concept for the target concept PEOPLE
SEATED AROUND THE TABLE, as in the whole table was roaring with laughter, the map-
ping scope can oscillate between the fairly concrete cognitive model DINNER
PARTY and the more general model SOCIAL EVENT. The reason is that both mod-
els supply the necessary cues about the convivial companionship that may
develop among people sitting round a table. Similarly, the metonymic use
of the source concept HOUSE in the house of Windsor thrives on mapping scopes
linked with a range of cognitive models such as ROYAL FAMILY, MONARCHY or even
ENGLISH HISTORY. Frustrating as this can be for linguists bent on the neat assign-
ment of cognitive models, ordinary language users seem to have little diffi-
culty in dealing with this vaguer type of mapping scope (which can be
compared with the ‘folk approach’ to conceptual taxonomies; see Section 2.2).
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 2 9

 
To round off this discussion of metonymy, one could raise the issue of
conventionalization, which was tied to the entrenchment of the mapping
scope in the case of metaphors. Indeed, examples of non-conventionalized
metonymies are feasible, as shown by example (4) (both examples from
Barcelona 2003: 244):
(4) We ate an excellent Mary yesterday.
(5) I have just bought a Picasso.
Compared with (5) it is quite obvious why sentence (4) is doomed as a
metonymy. The mapping scope of ‘pie baking’ is only available for a small
family circle, but not socially sanctioned by the larger community of speak-
ers, so the source concept MARY is not felt to stand for the target concept
EXCELLENT PIES; in contrast the mapping scope ‘famous painters’ fully supports
the +AUTHOR FOR WORK+ metonymy for Picasso. More importantly, there is
little chance that Mary’s pie-baking will become famous enough to justify
the metonymy. This is different from the fate of innovative metaphors, espe-
cially those used first in literature and the media, where the prospects of
conventionalization are much brighter.
Metonymic mapping: a summary
The diagram containing the final overview of metonymic mapping (Figure 3.8)
is designed along the same lines as the summary of metaphorical mapping
(Figure 3.7). As shown in the diagram, metonymy is also understood as a rela-
tionship between a source concept and a target concept. This relationship devel-
ops within a socially accepted mapping scope that prototypically corresponds
to a cognitive model. Compared with metaphor, the range of source and tar-
get concepts in metonymies is normally restricted to concrete concepts.
Metonymic correspondences are directly grounded in image schemas or basic
1 3 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
activated
image schemas
or basic correlations
(part−whole, cause<>effect)
 socially sanctioned
encyclopaedic interpretation
protypically a cognitive model
Concrete concept
(typically person
also objects)
Concrete concept
(object, animal, place)
SOURCE CONCEPT
TARGET CONCEPT
MAPPING SCOPE
Figure 3.8
The mapping of conceptual metonymies: overview

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 3 1
correlations (‘part–whole’, ‘inside–outside’, ‘cause<>result’), which are only
indirectly involved in metaphors as part of the mapping scope. In this sense
metonymies are more elementary than metaphors.
In addition, metonymies are also more straightforward than metaphors:
their major goal is to refer to an entity, prototypically a person, denoted
by the target concept by means of the source concept. This referential func-
tion of metonymies is quite well represented by the simple stand-for notion
(the White House ‘stands for’ or ‘gives mental access’ to the President, the
table ‘stands for’ or ‘gives access’ to the people sitting round it, etc.). Yet there
are metonymies where the referential goal gives way to a highlighting func-
tion based on a predicative use, as in I’m all ears (highlighting as it does one
attribute of a person) and it is not difficult to see that this type of metonymy
is quite close to lean-mapping metaphors like +A PERSON IS AN ANIMAL+. This has
led to suggestions that metaphor and metonymy should be seen as a cline
of cognitive operations (Ruiz de Mendoza Ibañez 2000: 115).
Apart from these transitional phenomena there are many other ways in
which metonymies interact with metaphors.10 This is particularly true of
emotion concepts, which will be discussed in the next section.
Exercises
1. Collect conventionalized metaphors that have body parts in the lower
half of the body (leg, foot, toe, etc.) as their source concepts. Find out
which parts of the human body are particularly productive as source
concepts and try to explain why this is so.
2. According to Quinn (1987) the main metaphors with which Americans
conceptualize MARRIAGE are:
+MARRIAGE IS A MANUFACTURED PRODUCT+,
e.g. we want to work hard at making our marriage strong
+MARRIAGE IS AN ONGOING JOURNEY+,
e.g. we went in a common direction
+MARRIAGE IS A DURABLE BOND BETWEEN TWO PEOPLE+,
e.g. they are tied to each other.
Find other linguistic expressions which reflect these metaphors.
3. Find linguistic expressions in English and another language you know
which illustrate the metaphor +A WORD IS A COIN+.
4. Discuss how the abstract concept TIME is conceptualized via metaphors
in some of Shakespeare’s sonnets (e.g. 12, 15, 16, 19, 104 and 115).

 
What are the prevalent source concepts and which mapping scopes can
be assumed for these metaphors?
5. Collect animal metaphors like He is a real pig or She is a bitch from a dic-
tionary and explain them with the notions ‘source’ and ‘target concept’.
6. Assemble as many metonymies with basic colour concepts as sources
as you can (e.g. feel blue or green with envy). Try to find metonymies
with non-basic colour concepts as sources such as crimson, scarlet,
turquoise, ochre or olive. Why do the results support the basicness of basic
colour terms? For additional examples and classification proposals see
Niemeier (1998).
7. Aitchison (2003: 169f) writes of a child who, when asked to describe an
Afro hairstyle, said: ‘Lots of snakes are coming out of his head.’ Make up
similar inventive metaphors and discuss the source and target concepts
as well as the mapping scopes involved.
8. Look at the following idiomatic expressions using the source concept
HOUSE and their meanings. Analyze the metaphorical and metonymic
mappings licensing these expressions and discuss plausible mapping
scopes:
to keep open house
‘to be at home to visitors all the time; to 
offer them hospitality regardless of who 
they are’
a rough house
‘a fight, a violent disturbance’
a full house
‘a theatre that is fully attended’
a drink on the house
‘a drink that is paid for by the landlord 
of the public house’
in the best houses
‘in the best society’
a house of cards
‘an idea that has no foundation in fact, a
wildly impracticable idea’
3.2 Metaphors, metonymies and the structure 
of emotion concepts
We all know what anger is like: how people get red faces, how they begin to shake,
how they clench their fists, how anger seems to build up inside them until they
explode. With fear, the picture is totally different: the blood leaves the face, the body
is paralyzed, people feel tormented, tortured and overwhelmed. For the cognitive
linguist, all these aspects of anger and fear are reflected in metonymic and
metaphorical expressions.
1 3 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 3 3
Trying to describe what emotion terms mean is anything but an easy task.
This is mirrored in dictionaries where definitions of emotion words tend to
show a considerable degree of vagueness and circularity. Thus anger is para-
phrased as a strong or violent feeling of displeasure and hostility. Love is
defined in terms of fondness while fondness is described as liking or love.
A similar situation of frustration has prevailed among psychologists who
have tried to grapple with the elusiveness of emotions for generations. The
only tangible foothold they were able to find in empirical research was the
impact emotions have on the body. When informants in psychological tests
were asked to describe what they feel when they are angry, sad or happy
they always included physiological experiences, like increase of body tem-
perature, change of pulse rate, palpitations of the heart or the production
of sweat and tears. In other words, they establish a link between emotions
and physiological symptoms, which are regarded as the cause, or more often,
as the effect of the emotions in question.11
Emotions and physiological metonymies
Returning to the framework of conceptual metaphors and metonymies intro-
duced in Section 3.1, we find that the link between emotions and physio-
logical symptoms reminds us of certain metonymic mappings, especially the
cause–effect relationship observed in metonymies like +THE TONGUE STANDS FOR
SPEECH+ or +THE HAND STANDS FOR WRITING+. These similarities make it under-
standable why Kövecses and Lakoff (Lakoff 1987: 382) have postulated a
general metonymy: +THE PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF AN EMOTION STAND FOR THE EMO-
TION+. Figure 3.9 gives an idea of the kinds of bodily symptom that are related
to emotions in linguistic expressions in English. The examples collected are
taken from dictionaries and from informants’ statements in the psychological
tests mentioned above. As a result they reflect the naive view or ‘folk the-
ory’ of the physiological effects of emotions, but not necessarily objective
scientific observations.
Going through Figure 3.9, we can single out three aspects that between
them illustrate both the potential and the limitations of physiological
metonymies. First we find that there are indeed bodily symptoms which
seem to be helpful for a description of the conceptual structure of emotions
because they are peculiar to one particular emotion: drop in temperature,
sweat, dryness in the mouth, blood leaves face for FEAR, erect posture for
PRIDE, drooping posture for SADNESS, jumping up and down for JOY. Obviously
these physiological phenomena help us in conceptualizing the emotions in
question, especially where they are contrasted with opposites as in the case

 
1 3 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Physiological effect (source)
Emotion (target)
Example
Increase in body temperature
ANGER, JOY, LOVE
Don’t get hot under the collar.
Drop in body temperature
FEAR
I was chilled to the bone.
Redness in face and neck area
ANGER, JOY
She was flushed with anger.
Blood leaves face
FEAR
She turned pale/white as a sheet.
Crying and tears
ANGER, SADNESS, 
Tears welled up in her.
FEAR, JOY
She cried with joy.
Sweat
FEAR
There were sweat beads on his 
Dryness of mouth
FEAR
forehead, his hands were damp, 
his mouth was dry.
Increased pulse rate and blood 
ANGER, DISGUST, 
His heart pounded.
pressure, palpitations
FEAR, LOVE
He almost burst a blood vessel.
Lapses of heartbeat
FEAR
You made my heart miss a beat.
Erect posture, chest out
PRIDE
He swelled with pride.
Drooping posture
SADNESS
My heart sank.
Inability to move
FEAR
She was paralyzed with fear.
Flight
FEAR
He ran for his life.
Jumping up and down
JOY
He was jumping for joy.
Hugging
JOY, LOVE
I could hug you all.
General physical agitation
ANGER, DISGUST, 
She was quivering/excited/keyed 
FEAR, JOY, LOVE
up/overstimulated.
Figure 3.9
A selection of physiological metonymies for emotions (based on vari-
ous publications by Kövecses, Davitz 1969 and Shaver et al. 1987)
of erect vs drooping posture. Other examples are the drop of body temperature
(for FEAR), which is juxtaposed with its increase (for ANGER, JOY, LOVE), or the
paleness of the face (again typical of FEAR), which contrasts with a red or
even scarlet face and neck area (for ANGER).
The other two points we would like to draw attention to are less
straightforward. As the example FEAR shows, an emotion concept can attract
conflicting metonymies, and this raises the question: which of them is more
reliable and representative? Do we connect FEAR with paralysis of the body
or with flight? It might be that our preference depends on the situation,
perhaps on the individual person, or it could also be a matter of sequence,
with a state of paralysis functioning as a preface to flight. In any case this
could mean that both metonymies may play a part in the conceptualiza-
tion of FEAR.
The last, and probably the most serious, problem is that many metonymies
apply not just to one or a few closely related emotions, but to a range of
quite different emotions. ANGER, JOY and LOVE can cause an increase in body
temperature (though with ANGER this would be irritating heat, while with

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 3 5
JOY it takes the form of comfortable warmth, and with LOVE both forms are
possible); all three emotions may flush one’s face. ANGER and JOY, but also
SADNESS and FEAR can result in tears, an accelerated heartbeat and palpitations
can be due to ANGER, FEAR, DISGUST and again LOVE, and general physical agi-
tation seems to underlie all the major emotions listed in Figure 3.9. This
means that though they may be helpful, metonymies cannot provide the
conceptual structure of emotions all by themselves. To achieve this goal,
metonymies have to be supported by the conceptual potential supplied by
metaphors.
The interaction of metonymies and metaphors
The classic case of this interaction is the link between the metonymy based
on body heat, and heat metaphors, as described by Kövecses and Lakoff
(Lakoff 1987: 382ff).12 This is illustrated in a simplified way in Figure 3.10.
The basic metaphor which is triggered off by the physiological metonymy
is +ANGER IS HEAT+, but this rather abstract principle is made much more acces-
sible if we imagine the heat in the forms of a fire and a hot fluid. Figure
3.10 makes it quite clear that the first of these two metaphorical applica-
tions (+ANGER IS FIRE+) is less developed than the second one (+ANGER IS THE
HEAT OF A FLUID IN A CONTAINER+). Although FIRE is an important basic level event
concept combining a number of action and object concepts, the various stages
of kindling, maintaining and extinguishing a fire and the fuels involved in
an ordinary fire (wood, coal, oil, gas) do not seem to provide a very rich
concept structure which could be mapped onto the ANGER concept.13
In contrast, the second +HEAT+ metaphor, +ANGER IS THE HEAT OF A FLUID IN
A CONTAINER+, has a much richer conceptual background. One reason is that
many more source concepts are involved, especially highly suggestive basic
level concepts like BOIL, RISE, STEAM, FUME, BURST, EXPLODE, for which most infor-
mants would be able to call up substantial attribute lists. More important
still, this metaphor relies on one of the most important generic metaphors,
the +CONTAINER+ metaphor, here in the guise of +THE BODY IS A CONTAINER FOR
EMOTIONS+.
The result of this powerful metaphorical potential is the large number of
derived metaphors listed in Figure 3.10. In combination with the metonymies
we have discussed in the last section the concept ANGER thus acquires a very
rich conceptual structure. In the case of ANGER the contributions of
metaphors on the one hand and metonymies on the other are quite bal-
anced. The physiological effects mentioned above are counterbalanced by
the heat metaphors and a series of other metaphors, such as +ANGER IS AN

 
1 3 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
+ANGER IS HEAT+
+ANGER IS FIRE+
+ANGER IS THE HEAT OF A FLUID
   IN A CONTAINER+
+INCREASE IN BODY TEMPERATURE STANDS FOR ANGER+
Metonymy
Metaphors
He was seething with anger
Anger made his blood boil
You've added fuel
to the fire.
After the argument
he was smouldering
for days.
He was consumed by
his anger.
He was filled
with anger
+THE BODY IS
  A CONTAINER FOR
  EMOTIONS+
+AS ANGER INCREASES ...
... FLUID RISES IN THE CONTAINER+
His anger welled up inside him.
She was bursting with anger
She got all steamed up/was fuming
He gave vent to his anger
He just exploded/erupted
I blew my top /she flipped her lid
She hit the ceiling
... PRESSURE INCREASES IN THE CONTAINER+
... STEAM IS GENERATED IN THE CONTAINER+
... STEAM IS LET OUT UNDER CONTROL+
+AS PRESSURE GETS TOO INTENSE ...
... THE CONTAINER EXPLODES+
... PARTS GO UP INTO THE AIR+
... INSIDE OF CONTAINER (HUMAN BODY)
COMES OUT+
Figure 3.10
The link between the heat metonymy and heat metaphors for
ANGER (selected from Lakoff 1987: 381ff)
ACTIVE ENEMY+ (you fight, struggle, wrestle with it), +ANGER IS A DANGEROUS AGGRES-
SIVE ANIMAL+ (anger can be ferocious and fierce) and finally +ANGER IS A NATURAL
FORCE+ (anger overwhelms you, engulfs you and sweeps over you).
However, there are also cases where the balance between metaphors and
metonymies is lopsided. The concept FEAR, which commands a large num-
ber of metonymies (by far the largest number of any emotion listed in Figure
3.9), does not seem to attract many conceptual metaphors. Apart from the
+NATURAL FORCE+ metaphor just mentioned for ANGER, Kövecses lists +FEAR IS A
VICIOUS OPPONENT OR TORMENTER+ (fear preys and creeps up on you) and +FEAR IS
A TRICKSTER+ (fear may deceive you).

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 3 7
The opposite extreme is represented by JOY. There are few bodily phe-
nomena that specifically indicate JOY, and, consequently, few physiological
metonymies, but this deficit is made up by a wealth of conceptual metaphors.
JOY can be experienced as a valuable commodity (that is received or bought),
as a hidden object (which one searches or strives for), as an animal that lives
well and has pleasurable sensations (purring with delight, wallowing in
delight). JOY is compared to light (you radiate with joy), JOY is vitality (it is
spry, lively, puts pep into your life). To put it in more technical terms, these
metaphors map a large range of basic level source concepts involving events,
actions and objects onto the abstract emotion JOY. In addition, JOY also makes
use of the +CONTAINER+ metaphor, but with the important difference that the
container does not explode, as is typical of ANGER metaphors, but simply over-
flows. Finally the ‘up–down’ image schema is exploited in the metaphor +JOY
IS BEING LIFTED UP+ (I’m six foot off the ground, I’m on cloud nine, she’s walking
on air).
The concept LOVE is an even more extraordinary case. Again the number
of metonymies is relatively small (prominent, of course, is the metonymy based
on sexual desire), but with regard to the number of conceptual metaphors
LOVE surpasses all other emotions. Many of these metaphors are shared with
JOY. In addition there is, quite naturally, a range of metaphors that is based
on the metonymic relationship with sexual desire (+LOVE IS A NUTRIENT+, +LOVE
IS APPETIZING FOOD+), and there are flattering comparisons with magic and deity
(+LOVE IS MAGIC+, +THE OBJECT OF LOVE IS A GODDESS+), where the poetic source is
still particularly noticeable. What is unusual in comparison with JOY is that
LOVE is not only structured by ‘positive’ metaphors, but that it also seems to
attract a full range of ‘negative’ conceptual metaphors, among them +LOVE
IS
WAR+, +LOVE
IS
HUNTING+, +LOVE
IS
A
DISEASE+. This also applies to the
+CONTAINER+ metaphors, where LOVE is characterized not only as a fluid over-
flowing from the container, but alternatively by the explosion of the con-
tainer, which is also typical of the ANGER concept. While it is easy to see how
these negative metaphors might be (and have in fact often been) used in
poetry to embellish the topic of love, their integration into the conceptual
structure of a single concept is less feasible. The question is whether the con-
cept LOVE consists of several independent categories (e.g. ‘GENTLE’ ROMANTIC LOVE
and PASSIONATE LOVE), or whether we should assume that there is one (perhaps
prototypical) concept with several variations.
What can be said at this point concerning the interaction of metaphors
and metonymies is that there seems to be a principle of compensation at
work which trades off metaphors and metonymies against each other.
While ANGER strikes a balance between the two cognitive processes, FEAR largely

 
1 3 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
depends on metonymies, and JOY and LOVE rely much more on metaphors
for their conceptual structure.
However, in spite of the wealth of metaphors available for LOVE and JOY,
these metaphors alone do not provide a tidy conceptual structure for either
of these emotion concepts, so they do not really compensate for the lack of
metonymies observed for JOY and LOVE. Taken together, metaphors and
metonymies may supply a certain conceptual substance to these emotion
concepts, but they cannot be used as a hard-and-fast distinction between
them in the same way that attributes can help to distinguish between object
concepts like CHAIR and TABLE.
Similar reservations must be expressed for many of the other emotion con-
cepts we have discussed so far. The problem becomes even more serious when
we consider that English has a huge number of emotion words and that there
is probably an equivalent number of emotion categories to be taken into account.
Emotion words and basic emotion concepts
When Johnson-Laird and Oatley (1989) collected the emotion words in
English from various dictionaries, their corpus amounted to no less than
590 items. To give an idea of the variety of English emotion terms, here is
a list of items related to FEAR, which were collected and analyzed by Wierzbicka
(1986, 1988).
fear: afraid, scared, fright, frightened, terrified, petrified, horrified, dread,
alarmed, panic, anguish, anxiety, worried, concerned, apprehension,
shame, embarrassment
In order to cope with this mass of emotion words and underlying emotions,
philosophers and psychologists have long tried to distinguish between
essential and more marginal emotion terms and to set up a system of basic
emotions, perhaps stimulated by a tradition that is already reflected in the
medieval theory of the four tempers (Geeraerts and Grondelaers 1995). While
eighteenth-century proposals, e.g. by Descartes, were based on philosophi-
cal argument, more recent attempts have tried to deduce basic emotions
from neural agitation patterns, from facial expressions, and, closer to our
concerns, from the emotion vocabulary, to mention only a few
approaches.14
This linguistic approach was pursued by Johnson-Laird and Oatley
(1989), whose list of emotion words has already been mentioned. Their
hypothesis was that certain emotion terms are basic and unanalyzable in
the sense that they cannot be broken down into attributes or other even

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 3 9
more basic emotions (a view also supported by Langacker 1987a: 149). This
means that basic emotion concepts like JOY or ANGER will normally be used
as points of reference to describe non-basic ones like EUPHORIA, EXUBERANCE, FURY
or RAGE and not vice versa. Consequently, a good way to identify basic emo-
tions is to look at the emotion vocabulary of a language and to try to describe
its emotion words in terms of attributes. This would filter out all analyzable
emotion terms, so the residue of this process would have to be regarded as
unanalyzable or basic. The result of this procedure was no surprise. The set
of basic emotions that evolved was very similar to other recent proposals
and comprised (in its improved version; Johnson-Laird and Oatley 1992) all
the basic emotions assembled in Figure 3.11.
Plausible as this list of basic emotions may seem, Johnson-Laird and
Oatley’s claim that they are in fact unanalyzable cannot be left uncommented.
This claim may be true as far as discrete, abstract attributes are involved,
and it is exactly this kind of attribute, such as intensity, causation and goal-
orientation, that Johnson-Laird and Oatley use to filter out the non-basic emo-
tion terms. Yet if we consider the conceptual potential of metonymies and
metaphors, we cannot really regard basic emotion terms as unanalyzable. As
we have seen in the previous sections, which were almost exclusively con-
cerned with examples of basic emotions, these concepts are linked with vital
bodily functions by way of metonymy and, in addition, with a wide range of
basic level concepts by way of metaphor. This means that a wealth of bod-
ily sensations and basic level concepts are mapped onto basic emotion con-
cepts, or seen from the other end, basic emotion concepts borrow heavily
from basic experiences by way of parasitic categorization. The problem is
that if in a cognitive context we reject conceptual unanalyzability as a yard-
stick for the basicness of emotions, how do we define their basic status?
At this point it may be helpful to review once more the set of criteria that
has emerged for basic level categories of objects and organisms (Section
2.1). One of these criteria, gestalt perception, will have to be rejected for
SADNESS
JOY/HAPPINESS
negative 
ANGER
positive 
emotions
emotions
DISGUST/HATE
DESIRE/LOVE
FEAR
Figure 3.11
A proposal for basic emotion terms in English (Double labels like
DISGUST/HATE indicate that basic emotions can be viewed as short-lived states
(DISGUST) or dispositions (HATE); see Ungerer 1995: 187)

 
emotion concepts, if we disregard cartoon-like images of jumping up and down
for JOY, exploding for ANGER or a drooping posture for SADNESS. The second
criterion, the existence of large correlated bundles of attributes, cannot be
applied in the same way as with concrete objects such as apples or cars.
The reason is that, as we have seen, observable properties of emotions are
rare and often vague. So we are more or less left with three criteria: good-
ness-of-example ratings, the morphological simplicity of basic level words
and the observation that they come to mind first and are acquired by chil-
dren before they learn related words.
Starting with the last two criteria, we can easily gather from Figure 3.11
that most of the basic emotion terms have a simple linguistic form either
as nouns (anger, hate, fear, joy, love) or as adjectives (sad, happy), while non-
basic emotion terms often have not – compare frightened, terrified, petrified,
horrified, alarmed, anxiety, apprehension and embarrassment in the list given
above. It is also well known that the basic terms first come to mind and are
learned first by children. As for the goodness-of-example ratings, psychological
tests confirm our intuition at least indirectly (because some of these tests
were not aimed at basic emotions but the superordinate concept EMOTION;
Fehr and Russell 1984). The result is indeed that our candidates for basic
emotions have many of the qualities that we have found typical of concrete
basic level concepts: they are recognized as prototypical category members
while other emotions, e.g. the additional variants listed for FEAR above, are
regarded as more marginal. Basic emotions do not necessarily command observ-
able attributes, but they do attract a large range of conceptual metonymies
and metaphors: in sum, they can be regarded as reference points that guide
us through the elusive domain of emotion concepts.
Granted there are basic emotion concepts, it seems quite natural to regard
the more general concept EMOTION as their superordinate concept. Pursuing
the analogy with concrete objects a little further the claim would then be
that the primary function of the concept EMOTION is to single out and high-
light salient attributes shared by the related basic level concepts, or,
viewed from the other end, to ‘collect’ basic level concepts with respect to
these attributes.
In trying to validate this claim we will have to look for properties that
are shared by all major emotions and which are so salient that they are expressed
by the word emotion. Now as we already know, there is no inventory of observ-
able properties for emotion concepts, but rather an array of metonymies and
conceptual metaphors. Sifting this material for items that are shared by most
emotions and might be regarded as equivalent to salient attributes, we arrive
at the list assembled in Figure 3.12. One of the interesting aspects for the
1 4 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 4 1
cognitive linguist in looking at this figure is that the +CONTAINER+ metaphor
is among the shared properties. However, it is only the more general
aspects of the CONTAINER (in itself already understood as ‘generic’ concept;
see above) that seem to be common to all emotions. If we consider the actions
that are carried out in the container, the individual basic emotions differ
markedly: as has been shown, the container may explode to indicate ANGER,
it may gently overflow with JOY, and we may add that it may be drained in
the case of SADNESS. So in order to conceptualize more than a very vague
sensation that the emotion is something that fills us up we have to go back
to one of the basic emotion concepts, and this is again an instance of par-
asitic categorization, this time between the superordinate concept EMOTION
and the basic emotion concepts.
Surveying the metonymy and metaphors of Figure 3.12 as a whole, we
could say that they are all concerned with the development of the emo-
tion, which includes the external source, the onset, which is often over-
whelming, the grip it has on us while it is present and (more tentatively)
its termination. This suggests that what emotions have in common is a
sequence of several phases, and this finding has encouraged both psychol-
ogists and cognitive linguists to develop so-called emotion scenarios.
Emotion scenarios and prototypicality
The idea that cognitive categories should not be seen as isolated static units
has been with us from the first chapter of this book. Categories, we found,
Metonymy
+PHYSICAL AGITATION STANDS FOR THE EMOTION+
Metaphors
+THE EMOTION COMES SUDDENLY FROM THE OUTSIDE+
The emotion strikes, casts, hits you
+THE EMOTION IS A NATURAL FORCE+
It overwhelms you, sweeps over you
+THE EMOTION IS A LIVING ORGANISM+
It grows, wilts and dies
+PRESENCE IS THE EXISTENCE OF EMOTION+
The emotion stays, goes away, comes back
+EMOTION IS A FLUID IN A CONTAINER+
+THE BODY/THE EYES/THE HEART/OTHER ORGANS ARE CONTAINERS FOR THE EMOTION+
I am full of/filled with the emotion
Figure 3.12
Major metonymy and metaphors supporting the concept EMOTION
(collected from publications by Kövecses)

 
1 4 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
ANGER
FEAR
Stage 1:
Wrongdoer offends Self
Dangerous situation, involving 
Cause    
death, physical or mental pain
Offending event displeases Self
Self is aware of the danger
Stage 2:
Anger exists
Fear exists
Emotion
Self experiences physiological 
Self experiences physiological 
and behavioural effects
and behavioural effects
Stage 3:
Self exerts a counterforce in an 
Self makes effort not to display 
Attempt at control
attempt to control anger
fear and/or not to flee
Stage 4:
The intensity of anger goes 
The intensity of fear goes 
Loss of control
beyond the limit
beyond the limit
Anger takes control of Self
Self loses control over fear
Stage 5:
Retribution:
Flight:
Action
Self performs act against
Self flees from danger
Wrongdoer
Figure 3.13
Scenarios for ANGER and FEAR
(based on Lakoff 1987: 377ff and Kövecses 1990)
must be seen in their conceptual context, against the background of larger
cognitive models, and it is obvious that these models will at some point have
to include sequencing in time (see Section 1.3). This line of investigation
has also been pursued by linguists and artificial intelligence researchers and
has led them to postulate notions like ‘frames’, ‘scripts’, ‘stories’ and ‘sce-
narios’, which will be discussed in detail in Chapter 5. For the time being
we will simply look at some of the scenarios developed for emotions, and
this will round off our survey of emotion concepts.
Figure 3.13 presents, in a condensed form, the emotion scenarios
Kövecses and Lakoff offer for ANGER and FEAR. As the figure shows, the prin-
ciple underlying the scenarios is to embed the emotion concept in a larger
sequence including the cause of the emotion (stage 1) as well as its con-
sequences (stage 5). Though these extensions are supported by psychological
emotion theories, the majority of metonymies and metaphors refer to
what Kövecses (1991: 40) has called ‘the essentials’ of the emotion, i.e. stage
2. Control and loss of control (stages 3 and 4) are more closely connected
with the central stage 2 and can claim a number of conceptual metaphors,
at least in the case of ANGER. Indeed, if we again go through the list of ANGER
metaphors presented in Figure 3.10, we find that their sequence neatly
reflects the development from stage 2 to stage 3 and stage 4 of the sce-
nario: ANGER heats up the fluid in the container, the fluid rises, pressure
is increased, steam is generated (all these metaphors refer to stage 2), then

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 4 3
steam is let out under control (stage 3), and if this fails, the container
explodes and parts go up into the air (stage 4). All in all, one may well
claim some plausibility for the view that the concept ANGER can be
described in the format of a sequential scenario in which the central stages
are well supported by metaphors.15
The problem with this view, however, is that this scenario is only really
convincing for ANGER and perhaps for other negative emotions like DISGUST/HATE,
for which similar metaphors apply. In the case of FEAR the scenario only works
smoothly if we concentrate on flight as the resulting action and forget about
the alternative that we may feel paralyzed by fear. More problematic still are
positive emotion concepts like JOY. Here Kövecses argues that control is moti-
vated by social constraints, which keep us from exhibiting JOY. With regard
to LOVE even Kövecses admits that ROMANTIC LOVE, which he propagates as the
‘ideal model’, lacks a cause and also the aspect of control because loss of
control is immediate and unexplainable. To save the blueprint of the emo-
tion scenario, he establishes the ‘typical model’ (LOVE LEADING TO MARRIAGE) as
an alternative to ROMANTIC LOVE, claiming that it includes control and that love
is channelled into the action of marriage. It seems, then, that the scenario
idea is a quite powerful descriptive tool in the case of ANGER and other neg-
ative emotions (though with limitations). For positive emotions like JOY and
LOVE, however, it is much more difficult to cast the structure of the categories
into this format. An additional problem with the scenarios offered by
Kövecses and Lakoff is that they do not account for all the metonymies or
metaphors available for the various emotion concepts.
Finally, taking a more general view of the issue, this discussion of emo-
tion scenarios and prototypicality has made it obvious that the structure of
emotion concepts is far from clear. Nevertheless, cognitive linguistics has
opened up new avenues of investigation which have so far led to the fol-
lowing observations:
• Emotion concepts are structured by metonymic links with physiolog-
ical effects.
• Triggered off by these metonymies, metaphorical links are established
with concrete basic level concepts, which also contribute heavily to the
conceptual structure of emotions.
• The contribution of metaphors is essential with emotion concepts such
as JOY and LOVE, which are supported by fewer physiological metonymies.
• Some emotion concepts, especially concepts of negative emotions like
ANGER and FEAR, can be understood as scenarios involving the stages of
cause, actual emotion, control, loss of control and resulting action. For

 
1 4 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
positive emotions like JOY and LOVE this type of cognitive model is less
convincing.
• There is linguistic and empirical psychological evidence that a set of about
six emotions concepts (SADNESS, ANGER, DISGUST/HATE, FEAR, JOY/HAPPINESS and
DESIRE/LOVE) may be regarded as basic, and that there are certain paral-
lels between this basic status and concrete basic level concepts.
Exercises
1. The introductory passage of this chapter gives a rough sketch of ANGER
and FEAR in terms of metonymies and metaphors. Give a similar account
of SADNESS and DISGUST/HATE. Does your description fit the scenario devel-
oped in Figure 3.13?
2. In Exercise 1 in Section 3.1 you were asked to point out which parts
of the body are favoured as source concepts for metaphors and
metonymies. Focusing now on emotions, analyze the list of metonymies
in Figure 3.9 in terms of source concepts. Try to find reasons why cer-
tain parts and aspects of the body are preferred as source concepts for
emotions.
3. If your native language is not English, try to find out what the basic
emotion terms in your language and culture are and compare them with
the English terms discussed here.
4. Examine the following emotion concepts: PRIDE, ADMIRATION, GRATITUDE, PITY,
EMBARRASSMENT, SHAME, GUILT. Can you see a close relationship between these
concepts and any of the basic emotion concepts? Find reasons why they
are less basic.
5. Look up definitions of emotion terms like anger, rage, hate, disgust, fear,
panic, love, affection in several dictionaries and decide whether they are
helpful as descriptions of these emotions. Do these definitions make
use of metonymies and metaphors?
3.3 Metaphors as a way of thinking: examples
from science and politics
If metaphors are not just stylistic ornaments, but a way of thinking, there is no
reason why this potential should only be used to structure concepts underlying
certain abstract words, and why it should not show up in the way we approach

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 4 5
the complex scientific, political and social issues of our world. So cognitive
linguists have joined philosophers in investigating these more general effects of
conceptual metaphors.
Metaphors are rich in the sense that they do not just link up two isolated
items but rather connect multi-faceted categories or cognitive models. To
pick up just one of the simpler examples we have discussed (see Section 3.1),
the metaphor +AN ARGUMENT IS A BUILDING+ is based on a source concept (BUILDING)
which provides a tangible gestalt and a wealth of attributes. A building has
foundations, it consists of walls, windows and a roof, it is normally con-
structed solidly and will then provide safe protection, yet it may be assem-
bled sloppily, and in this case the walls may come apart and the whole structure
is likely to collapse. All these characteristics of buildings can be mapped onto
the target concept and may help us to conceptualize – and also to explain –
the abstract notion ‘argument’.
This second aspect, the explanatory potential of metaphors, has not escaped
the attention of linguists, who are always looking for explanatory tools.
Metaphors and the description of linguistic phenomena
A striking example of how metaphors are employed in linguistic description
is Langacker’s (1987a: 452ff) use of the +BUILDING BLOCK+ and +SCAFFOLDING+
metaphors, which are part of his analysis of compounds and composite
expressions (a topic discussed in Section 2.3). His starting point is a harsh
criticism of the +BUILDING BLOCK+ metaphor, which, according to Langacker,
‘sees the meaning of a composite expression as being constructed out of
the meanings of its parts simply by stacking them together in some appro-
priate fashion’ (1987a: 452). Applied to compounds like apple juice or
wheelchair (our examples in Section 2.3), the +BUILDING BLOCK+ metaphor sug-
gests that we regard the words apple and juice or wheel and chair as the
building materials from which we construct the compounds just as we use
bricks or concrete or wooden blocks in constructing a house (or perhaps
a toy house). The blocks may be large or small, they may be placed side
by side or on top of each other, they may be linked by a layer of mortar or
nailed or screwed together, but whichever variant we prefer, the essential
explanatory message is that these two words and their underlying concepts
constitute the compound. Since, as we have seen, this is not at all convinc-
ing in the case of wheelchair, it is understandable that Langacker is not pre-
pared to accept the +BUILDING BLOCK+ metaphor as a reliable explanation of
composition.

 
1 4 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
However, being a cognitive linguist, he realizes that this metaphor is a
powerful explanatory tool which cannot be defeated by only offering an
abstract alternative explanation in terms of compositionality and analyz-
ability, which is Langacker’s real goal. This is why he offers an alternative
metaphor, the +SCAFFOLDING+ metaphor, which suggests that the constituents
of the compound (e.g. wheel and chair) and their concepts are to a large
extent mere scaffolding for the construction job at hand. As we know, the
concept WHEELCHAIR has derived so many attributes from other source con-
cepts that the contribution of WHEEL and CHAIR has become less and less impor-
tant. In the case of NEWSPAPER or AIRPLANE this process has reached a stage where
the scaffolding is superfluous and can be removed. Needless to say, the
SCAFFOLDING concept is also rich in detail and well suited to counter and super-
sede the building block explanation.
Word-formation aside, Langacker has also provided important metaphors
for syntactic processes, which will be discussed in Section 4.2. Here we will
have a look at another metaphorical explanation that was crucial in our
description of lexical categories and was then called the principle of fam-
ily resemblance (Section 1.2). It is not difficult to see that this ‘principle’ is
based on the metaphor +THE MEMBERS OF A CATEGORY ARE A FAMILY+, and this
explains both its power and its vagueness. The family resemblance princi-
ple is so powerful because FAMILY is a very rich source concept and also one
that is salient as far as the categorization of persons goes. The FAMILY con-
cept suggests all sorts of resemblances – those concerning the outward appear-
ance of face or body, similar behaviour and similar speech habits, but it
also allows for larger or smaller differences between individual family
members. This makes it easy to see the +FAMILY+ metaphor as a flexible alter-
native to a rigid definition of category membership.
A possible disadvantage is that family resemblance can mean several
things. It may refer to the fact that the members of some categories appar-
ently do not share a single attribute (this is Wittgenstein’s notion), or it
may refer to the rich overall relationship between family members that
includes category-wide attributes (this underlies the interpretation of Rosch
and Mervis’s ‘measure of family resemblance’). If we want to be more pre-
cise, we will have to distinguish between the definition of family resem-
blance as a relationship of the AB BC CD type (with A, B, C, and D designating
attributes) and an alternative interpretation as attcat (i.e. the sum of all
attributes of the category).
Leaving the area of cognitive linguistics we find that many other lin-
guistic approaches make use of explanatory metaphors. The structuralist
notions of ‘distribution’ and ‘immediacy’ are both based on spatial metaphors

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 4 7
(+ELEMENTS DISTRIBUTED ARE OBJECTS SPREAD OUT+, +IMMEDIATE CONSTITUENTS ARE OBJECTS
CLOSE TOGETHER+), transformational grammar has the metaphorical notions of
embedding, nesting and transformation, to mention just a few. Valency gram-
mar has borrowed the metaphor +THE VALENCY OF AN ELEMENT IS THE STRENGTH OF
AN OBJECT+ from an earlier adaptation of this metaphor to chemistry. As with
our examples from cognitive linguistics, the explanation contained in the
metaphors can still be given in an alternative, usually more abstract, way.
This is no longer certain when we turn to what may be regarded as the
most powerful metaphor that has sprung from the description of language,
the +PREDICATE+ metaphor. This metaphor transfers an age-old source con-
cept (predicate means ‘that which is said about the subject’, OED) from gram-
matical description to related disciplines like logic and artificial intelligence.
In its simplest version this metaphor exploits the fact that in a sentence
like Peter is working, the predicate is working makes a statement about the
subject Peter. The concepts PREDICATE and SUBJECT and the relation between
them are so well known that they can certainly be considered as being part
of a naive folk model of grammar as it is taught in schools. The familiar-
ity and richness of the link between PREDICATE and SUBJECT make it possible
that the two concepts can act as source concepts when it comes to describ-
ing the more abstract relationship which is assumed to exist between the
target concepts (LOGICAL) PREDICATE and (LOGICAL) ARGUMENT in the field of logic.
Here the vagueness and openness of a metaphor can be very helpful,
because logical predicates are not necessarily verbs and logical arguments
are not necessarily noun phrases, but both stand for a much more abstract
way of looking at language.
It is by virtue of this abstractness that it may in fact be difficult to find
an alternative explanation for the relationship between a logical predicate
and its arguments that has the same explanatory power as the information
supplied by the +PREDICATE+ metaphor. So we reach a stage where the
metaphor does more than just render an abstract concept more tangible;
the metaphor actually seems to make up the abstract concept. Or, as the
philosopher Boyd has put it, we arrive at a point where metaphors are ‘con-
stitutive of the theories they express rather than merely exegetical’ (Boyd
1993: 486).
Metaphors in science: explanatory or constitutive?
As Boyd and others have shown,16 metaphors are omnipresent in science.
Many of them have primarily been introduced for exegetical (i.e. explana-
tory) purposes. This seems to be especially true of most metaphors used in

 
1 4 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
computer science. Thus many user-friendly programs provide a surface
screen which establishes a metaphorical link with the concept OFFICE. The
screen is a desktop that can be tidied up, there are folders for filing items,
a clipboard where items can be temporarily stored, windows that can be
opened and closed, and a trash can into which superfluous items are
dropped. It is only when we compare these simple but rich explanations of
programming functions with the kind of non-metaphorical, often abbrevi-
ated commands employed in specialist programs (e.g. CLS for ‘clear screen’,
MD for ‘make directory’ or RD for ‘remove directory’) that the pedagogic value
of the metaphor +COMPUTER WORK IS OFFICE WORK+ becomes really obvious.
In addition to metaphors based on the office context, programmes
make use of animal and illness metaphors. An example is the concept COMPUTER
MOUSE, where the metaphor admirably maps outward appearance and pos-
sible movements of the animal onto the concept of this trackball tool (as
it was originally called) without actually explaining the abstract principle
behind it.
Another area of metaphorical explanation is the malfunctioning of
computer programs. Probably the oldest metaphor in this field is the +BUG+
metaphor, which we use quite naturally when something has gone wrong
in the program. More complex and also more threatening is the +VIRUS+
metaphor, which has joined the computer vocabulary together with +WORM+.
In the case of +VIRUS+ what goes wrong with a computer is linked with the
mysterious and invisible spread of viruses which cause an infection in the
body of humans or animals. Though ordinary language users will not know
much about the organism called virus, they may have a rich if indirect expe-
rience of its unpleasant effects on humans and animals, and this source con-
cept is mapped onto the target concept of the computer virus. The result
is similar to what we encountered in the case of the +FAMILY+ metaphor (which
underlies the family resemblance principle). The metaphorical explanation
may ultimately remain vague, but it seems to satisfy the conceptual needs
of average computer users, so for them these metaphors do not just fulfil
an explanatory function but are constitutive for the conceptualization of
computer malfunctioning.
Computer scientists will, of course, look for more precise explanations
and will regard the +VIRUS+ metaphor as a helpful tool when confronted with
lay audiences. So for them, the +VIRUS+ metaphor and other metaphors in
the field of computers are exegetic, not constitutive in Boyd’s sense. Yet as
Kuhn (1993: 538) claims, there are areas of natural science where metaphors
seem to be constitutive not just for popular, but also for scientific mod-
els. His example is the orbit model of the atom consisting of nucleus and

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 4 9
electrons as developed by the physicist Bohr. For a start, this model can be
conveniently explained by comparing the arrangement of nucleus and
electrons with the interaction between the sun and the planets, in other
words, by making use of the metaphor +THE ATOM IS A (MINIATURE) SOLAR SYSTEM+.
This is shown in Figure 3.14, where the metaphorical correspondences are
indicated in more detail.
For the layman the situation is probably similar to the case of the +VIRUS+
metaphor in computer science. The +SOLAR SYSTEM+ metaphor provides a
helpful explanation and may have contributed substantially to the pop-
ular theory about the model of the atom, so for the non-specialist it was
(and probably is) both explanatory and constitutive.
In contrast with the popular explanation, Bohr’s scientific definition
of nucleus and electrons was in terms of bits of charged matter, which
were thought to interact under the laws of mechanics and electromagnetic
theory. It was the task of the physicists to determine which of these laws
applied, and this finally led to the establishment of the quantum theory.
However, the physicists did not work non-metaphorically; they also used a
model which was ultimately based on a comparison of nucleus and elec-
trons with small pingpong or billiard balls, so it looked pretty much like
the one presented in Figure 3.14. The difference from the layman’s view
was that the scientists did not use the crude metaphor +NUCLEUS AND ELEC-
TRONS
ARE
PINGPONG
BALLS+ as an explanation of the atom. Rather the
metaphor was used as a yardstick against which the specific mechanical and
electromagnetic behaviour of nucleus and electrons was measured. As far
as this yardstick function goes, and this is Kuhn’s claim, the +PINGPONG BALL+
metaphor was not just an explanatory tool, but was constitutive to the the-
ory. According to Kuhn, more recent mathematical descriptions of complex
atoms and molecules still depend on this model, which integrates these
metaphorical elements.
All in all, while the explanatory function of metaphors and their con-
stitutive function in popular scientific theories can be taken for granted,
ELECTRON
= PLANET
NUCLEUS = SUN
Figure 3.14
The structure of the atom as explained by the metaphor +THE ATOM
IS A (MINIATURE) SOLAR SYSTEM+

 
1 5 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
there is also some evidence that conceptual metaphors may have a con-
stitutive function in more theoretical scientific approaches. We may even
speculate whether the central scientific issues of today, such as the big
bang theory of the beginnings of the universe, do not incorporate a
metaphorical component, or, in plain words, whether the big bang theory
does not to some extent make use of the mental concept we have of an
EXPLOSION.17
Two cognitive linguists and philosophers who would probably support
this speculation wholeheartedly are Lakoff and Johnson (1999). In their ambi-
tious and provocative book, they propagate, among other things, the
metaphorical explanation of much of traditional philosophy and outline
‘embodied philosophy’ as an alternative, for which metaphors are clearly
constitutive and together with our basic experiences determine our think-
ing and philosophical thought.18
Conceptual metaphors in politics
Much more than science and even philosophy, politics is an area in which
we would expect metaphorical expressions to be used. Indeed, political speech
is one of the recognized types of classical rhetoric, of which metaphors are
an integral part. This rhetorical background is something to keep in mind when
we transfer Boyd’s distinction of explanatory and constitutive metaphors
from science to politics.
Since the purpose of political rhetoric is persuasion, or, more bluntly,
the manipulation of the public, the explanatory potential of metaphors is
often less important than their emotional impact. Indeed, the metaphors
favoured by many politicians combine a very simple explanation with strong
emotional effects. Prime candidates are metaphorical links with simple event
concepts, such as natural force concepts like WIND, which are reflected in
the abundant ‘wind-of-change’ speeches. Another favourite source concept
is ILLNESS; the metaphor +THE COUNTRY IS A PERSON THAT IS ILL+ has been stock-
in-trade for politicians since it was used in Gaunt’s speech in Shakespeare’s
Richard II. Examples from the past decades are the speeches of Neil Kinnock,
former Labour Party leader, who liked to combine the +ILLNESS+ metaphor
with the +PART/WHOLE+ metonymy in a way that strangely fits the present
situation in many European countries:
Ailments in a country gradually stain the whole country.
If limbs are severely damaged the whole body is disabled. If regions are
left to rot the whole country is weakened.

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 5 1
Unemployment is a contagious disease. It doesn’t stop at the borders
of economic regions. It infects the whole economic body.
There is no . . . vaccine to inoculate the country against the spread of
shut down.
As Wilson (1990: 128f), who collected these examples, rightly claims,
we may not be particularly affected by single examples of these metaphors,
but if they are repeated often enough we come to accept their message. In
cognitive terminology this means that political audiences and the public
in general do tend to submit to powerful metaphors like the +ILLNESS+
metaphor, and after some time will regard these metaphors as constitutive
parts of their conceptual framework, especially when faced with complex
political, economic and social problems. In other words, just like the com-
puter user the average voter is often happy with a theory based on a rich,
though rather vague, metaphor.
But what about the ‘specialists’, the politicians? Are they also convinced
of their own metaphors or do they sharply distinguish between explana-
tory metaphors and theories based on non-metaphorical factual analysis,
as is the rule in science? Surely there cannot be a single answer to this ques-
tion. If the icily calculating propagandist is not a mere invention (and there
is little reason to assume that he is), we must conclude that political
metaphors which are designed to structure people’s thinking are not nec-
essarily shared by their creators and do not function as constitutive ele-
ments in their thinking.
Yet we may assume that there are many politicians (and also adminis-
trators and political journalists) whose thinking is in fact influenced by their
own or by other people’s metaphors. The classic study of the problem is Lakoff’s
(1992) analysis of metaphors used to justify the Gulf War in 1991.19 What
he found particularly interesting and at the same time highly dangerous is
that not only the layman’s thinking, but also the argumentation of the spe-
cialist, is structured by a set of conceptual metaphors which he calls ‘expert
metaphors’.
At the centre of this system is a metaphor first coined by the Prussian
general Clausewitz, +WAR
IS
POLITICS
PURSUED
BY
OTHER
MEANS+, and closely
linked to it, the metaphor +POLITICS IS BUSINESS+. Just by looking at these
metaphors it becomes clear that their main effect is to reduce the concept
WAR to the level of two quite normal and essentially harmless human activ-
ities, politics and business. Like politics, war is a matter of formulating posi-
tions, of finding allies and keeping opponents at bay and of convincing
the public, and this again presupposes the notions of selling one’s ideas,

 
1 5 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
of negotiating the price, of providing the goods, and other aspects of doing
business. On a more technical level the +POLITICS+ metaphor and the +BUSINESS+
metaphor fuse into the metaphor +WAR IS A COST/BENEFIT ANALYSIS+, which brings
in the notions of accountancy and sober economic evaluation. The impres-
sion of normality, harmlessness and accountability which is thus created is
further enhanced by a number of additional metaphors. Their purpose is,
among other things, to turn problematic actions like enforcing sanctions
into an innocent give-and-take and the risks of war into a gamble that can
be controlled by mathematical probability calculation and game theory.
Relying on these convenient metaphors, politicians and military com-
manders do not see, or do not want to see, what these metaphors hide: the
reality of pain and death, the long-term health effects for the injured, the
psychological effect on veterans, the environmental effects, not to mention
the moral aspects of war. A second metaphor, again innocent on the sur-
face, is no less dangerous: the metaphor +THE STATE IS A (SINGLE) PERSON+. While
opening up the rich source concept PERSON (or HUMAN BEING) which is healthy,
strong, has a home, neighbours, friends and enemies, the metaphor hides
the internal diversity of the country, the roles played by ethnic and religious
groups, political parties and the big corporations; in other words, it justifies
the claim that there is always an overriding unifying national interest which
is often pursued at the expense of powerless minorities.
Since the early 1990s Lakoff has widened the scope of his politically ori-
ented cognitive analysis in an attempt to capture the different world-views
of American Conservatives and Liberals (Lakoff 2002, 2004). Starting from
two contrasting cognitive models of the family, the STRICT FATHER model and
the NURTURANT PARENT model, he assembles sets of metaphors to explain
Conservative and Liberal morality, which he finds reflected in the stance
taken by Conservatives and Liberals towards major political issues. Thus
the STRICT FATHER model gives rise to metaphors like +MORALITY IS STRENGTH+,
+MORAL AUTHORITY IS PARENTAL AUTHORITY+ and +MORAL ACTION IS A MOVEMENT ALONG
PERMISSIBLE
PATHS+, while the NURTURANT
PARENT model is supported by
metaphors like +MORALITY IS EMPATHY+, +MORALITY IS HAPPINESS+ and +MORALITY IS
FAIR DISTRIBUTION+. Although Lakoff stresses the objectivity of his analysis in
terms of metaphors, the above selection makes it clear where his preferences
lie and that he is concerned about the rise of Conservatism in the US dur-
ing the last decade.20
For someone who has followed our essentially positive account of the
‘structuring power’ of metaphors and metonymies so far, Lakoff’s observations
may come as a surprise. What was at first celebrated as a rich conceptual
contribution to our understanding of the world is now seen as something

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 5 3
more ambiguous, creating not only positive but also negative effects. Like
their more pleasant counterparts, the negative exploitations of metaphors
merely strengthen the view that metaphors are very powerful and natural
cognitive processes which help us to understand the complex issues in nature
and society via simple and often concrete concepts.
To conclude this discussion of explanatory and constitutive metaphors
here is a summary of the main points:
• Conceptual metaphors can aid our thinking in two ways: as explana-
tory or constitutive metaphors. Explanatory metaphors are used to make
it easier for the layman to understand complex scientific, political and
social issues. Constitutive metaphors are an integral part of theorizing
about these problems.
• While popular theories about natural phenomena tend to rely on con-
stitutive metaphors, scientific theorizing is primarily non-metaphorical,
but may also make use of some metaphorical elements.
• In politics, the explanatory function of metaphors is often subjected to
the goal of manipulation, which means that metaphors are often pri-
marily selected for their emotional effects.
• Popular political thinking largely depends on constitutive metaphors,
which are often consciously created and fostered by politicians and
propagandists.
• Political theorizing is also frequently based on constitutive metaphors,
and since these metaphors may disguise important aspects of the issue
that should have been considered, the effect may be negative and
destructive.
Exercises
1. Identify the metaphors underlying the following terms used in word-
formation analysis and (traditional) grammatical descriptions:
clipping, blend, portmanteau word, question tag, cleft sentence, contact clause
(for certain types of relative clauses).
2. Collect explanations from science that are based on metaphors, such
as the heart is a pump, mitochondria are the cell’s power stations and the
DNA is the genetic code, and discuss whether they are mainly used as an
explicatory crutch (explanatory metaphors) or actually make up the
underlying principle of the scientific problem in question (constitutive
metaphors)?

 
3. Consider how certain metaphors influence our approach towards
technological and social problems, e.g. how our view of TRAFFIC differs
depending on whether it is based on the metaphor +TRAFFIC IS A RIVER+
or +TRAFFIC LINKS PLACES+ or +TRAFFIC IS A DANGEROUS ANIMAL+. Try to find
other examples illustrating the influence of metaphors on our way of
thinking.
4. Find examples showing how politicians paraphrase a dangerous or at
least negative situation by using harmless metaphors. Pursue the idea
in newspapers and TV programmes and collect the metaphors.
5. Study the metaphors in the inaugural addresses of American presidents,
starting perhaps with Kennedy’s address, and decide which of the
metaphors are explanatory and which are constitutive.
3.4 Thinking in metonymies: potential 
and limitations
Since, just like metaphors, metonymies can be understood as cognitive instruments,
or less technically, as a way of thinking, the temptation to use them for
explanatory purposes has been great. However, genuine conceptual metonymies are
restricted to stand-for links based on a small range of basic experiences and are
only effective within a suitable mapping scope, and this seems to limit their
explanatory potential.
Like metaphor, metonymy is considered a cognitive process underlying
linguistic phenomena and motivating them. Yet while the wealth of attributes
mapped in the process of metaphor can form themes that can be exploited
and sustained in large sections of texts, the potential of metonymy is more
limited. As shown in Section 3.1, the application of contiguity relations or
image schemas such as ‘part–whole’, ‘place–person or event’, ‘cause–effect’,
‘container–contained’ produces a successful stand-for relationship only if the
metonymic link is established between concepts supporting a suitable map-
ping scope (which is prototypically equivalent with a cognitive model; one
example was the WHITE HOUSE standing for PRESIDENT in the mapping scope
‘US administration’).
This should be kept in mind when we go beyond lexical examples of
the +WHITE
HOUSE+ type, for which metonymies have been traditionally
claimed, and consider recent attempts of applying metonymy to a whole
range of other linguistic phenomena from such diverse fields as word-formation
processes and speech acts.21
1 5 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 5 5
Metonymy and word-formation
One word-formation type that can be plausibly traced back to a
metonymic process are possessive compounds such as skinhead
or
paperback. Here a cognitive approach sees the product of the compound-
ing process as describing an interesting feature of a set of entities (that their
head is bald or that only paper, and not cloth, is used as material for a
book cover). The reason why this particular feature is used to refer to the
whole person or object is due to the metonymy +SALIENT FEATURE FOR PER-
SON/OBJECT+, which can be understood as an application of the ‘part–whole’
image schema. However, for the metonymy to function properly, the rela-
tion between attribute and person/object alone is not sufficient: it is
essential that the person or object must be a member of an identifiable
and socially accepted concept, which serves as mapping scope for the
metonymy. Potential ad-hoc metonymies like *brownhead or *brownhair only
work in specific situations but not in general, because there is no socially
relevant group of brown-haired people (and therefore no accepted map-
ping scope). Skinheads, on the other hand, are not only known for their
bald heads, but what is more important is the social stereotype about their
shared properties (e.g. that they tend to be violent, aggressive and racist).
Thus the concept SKINHEAD is motivated by a salient feature standing for a type
of person, because both the attribute ‘bald head’ and the concept PERSON are
part of a mapping scope based on the cognitive model SOCIAL GROUP. The
concept PAPERBACK is taken to stand for BOOK because both concepts have
something to do with the mapping scope focused on print media.
Another popular metonymy is +BODILY FEATURE FOR SPECIES+ (e.g. redbreast,
bluethroat, longhorn) for which the cognitive model ANIMAL functions as
mapping scope.
Metonymy is also responsible for another linguistic process that has been
traditionally claimed for word-formation: the process of conversion, i.e. occur-
rence of formally identical words in several word classes such as mail (N) –
mail (V) or backup (N) – backup (V). Probably the largest group among them
are noun–verb conversions like author (a book), ski (down a hill), dust (the
room) and the other examples listed in Figure 3.15. As is indicated in the
figure and was first suggested by Dirven (1999),22 conversions of this type
also seem to be based on metonymic stand-for relationships: +AGENT FOR
ACTION+, +INSTRUMENT
FOR
ACTION+, +OBJECT
FOR
ACTION+ and +BODY
PART
FOR
ACTION+. These metonymies, which can be subsumed under the more gen-
eral metonymy +PARTICIPANTS FOR ACTION/EVENT+, are yet another example of
the application of the ‘part–whole’ relation. They function so effortlessly

 
1 5 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
because in each case the activated basic relation creates a link between two
concepts which are safely anchored in familiar and situationally relevant
mapping scopes (see Section 3.1). This can be shown by comparing pairs
of suitable and unsuitable mapping scopes:
(1a) Julia peppered the curry. – Julia dropped pepper on the curry.
(1b) ? Julia peppered the table. – Julia dropped pepper on the table.
(2a) Sue has authored two novels. – Sue has written two novels.
(2b) ? Sue has authored a computer program. – Sue has written a computer
program.
(3a) He fathered a baby. – He is the father of the baby.
(3b) ? He fathered the project. – He is the father of the project.
Examples (1a) and (1b) show that merely dropping pepper somewhere does
not licence a metonymical reading of the substance pepper as an activity.
What seems to be crucial is that the activity is part of a seasoning context
or more generally a mapping scope ‘food preparation’. Similarly the verb
author only lends itself to metonymic uses that are synonymous with the
verb write within the mapping scope ‘print media’ (but not necessarily in
Metonymies
Mapping scopes
Examples
+AGENT FOR ACTION+:
‘kinship’
to father a child
‘teaching’
to tutor a student
‘print media’
to author a new book
+INSTRUMENT FOR ACTION+:
‘winter sports’
to ski down the hill
‘workmanship’ and 
to hammer the nail 
‘do-it-yourself’
into the wall
to saw off a branch
+OBJECT FOR ACTION+:
‘household chores’
to blanket the bed
‘food preparation’ 
to dust the room
and ‘cooking’ or 
to scale the fish
‘seasoning’
to pepper the dish
+BODY PART FOR ACTION+:
‘careful, sympathizing 
to tiptoe
into the room
behaviour’
‘rough and ruthless 
to elbow
s.o. out of the 
social behaviour’
way
Figure 3.15
Examples of +PARTICIPANT FOR ACTION+ metonymies
extracted from Radden and Kövecses (1999: 37) and Schmid (2005, ch. 10)

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 5 7
the mapping scope ‘computer work’ or ‘software engineering’). Kinship seems
to be a necessary ingredient of the mapping scope licensing the metonymi-
cal use of father in (3a), despite the possibility of using the word baby
metaphorically to refer to a plan or project in (3b) which automatically calls
up a different mapping scope (suggesting attributes both of the father and
the business context).
This combination of different cognitive models in an overarching or only
selective mapping scope is possible and explains cases like hammer the nail,
which can be interpreted against a background of professional workman-
ship or amateurish do-it-yourself competence. With examples like tiptoeing
into the room or elbowing s.o. out of the way the mapping scope can no longer
be safely tied to a specific cognitive model (a possibility already indicated
in Section 3.1). What plays a crucial role in the mapping scope of these
metonymies is the motive for the specific way of locomotion, labelled ten-
tatively as ‘careful, sympathizing behaviour’ or ‘rough and ruthless social
behaviour’ in Figure 3.15. One reason why a metonymic conversion of, say,
heel does not work (?she heeled into the room) is that we cannot think of a
plausible motive for such a manner of walking which could serve as an appro-
priate mapping scope. Of course, the discourse context can provide such a
mapping scope licensing an ad-hoc metonymy, e.g. if someone says the doc-
tor asked me to tiptoe and heel through the room because she wanted to see if
my calf muscles were working properly.
To sum up at this point, conversions can be understood as metonymies
supported by mapping scopes which are either identical with a cognitive
model or at least related to one or several of these models – all these vari-
ants are illustrated in Figure 3.15.
The metonymic background of speech acts
Looking back, the examples of word-formation phenomena discussed so far
have still been quite similar to the stock examples of the metonymic use
of simple lexical items or names (hands on deck, White House for president)
in that they have been restricted to a ‘local’ application of metonymy within
familiar or easily available cognitive models. This is different when we move
on to pragmatic phenomena that have also been selected for metonymic
treatment.
A good example is Thornburg and Panther’s attempt to explain con-
ventionalized indirect speech acts like the classic Can you pass me the salt?23
As claimed by the two authors, these speech acts are to be understood as

 
1 5 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
instantiations of the metonymy +ABILITY FOR ACTION+, which is regarded as
an elaboration of the more general metonymy +POTENTIALITY FOR ACTUALITY+.
There can be no doubt that the observation is correct: as already noted
by Searle (1975: 174), one can use a question concerning the ability to
carry out an action (Can you pass the salt?) to ask for the performance of
the action itself (‘pass the salt’). Yet there are two problems: the first is
whether one can really claim that the rather abstract relationship +ABILITY
FOR ACTION+ fulfils the condition of a prototypical conceptual metonymy.
To justify this status one would have to assume a very general mapping
scope indeed, something like ‘our experience of the world’, which could
then be said to include both actions and abilities. The second problem is
that the metonymic explanation would make it difficult to integrate other
speech act conditions, among them intentionality and politeness, which
also deserve consideration. Yet even if we are hesitant to subscribe to the
far-reaching claims of a metonymic explanation of speech acts, it cannot
be doubted that stressing the cognitive link between ability and action con-
tributes its share to a better understanding of this pragmatic phenomenon.
In this chapter, then, we have argued that metonymy appears to be
involved as a cognitive process in linguistic phenomena that have been treated
in diverse ways in different fields of linguistics. Possessive compounds
(skinhead, redbreast), noun–verb conversions (to author a book) and even con-
ventionalized speech acts were shown to be at least describable in terms of
metonymic mappings. What this discussion has confirmed is that the suc-
cess of any metonymy depends on the availability of a cognitive model or
some other kind of conceptual background serving as a mapping scope acces-
sible to the language users (either by retrieval from long-term memory or
by current activation in the discourse situation).
Exercises
1. Which type of stand-for relationship is involved in the following pos-
sessive compounds: greybeard, redskin, redbreast, bluebell, lazy-bones, five-
finger, laptop, pick-up, hide-out and drop-out. Suggest mapping scopes in
which these items seem to function well as metonymies.
2. It has been claimed (Ungerer 2002: 551–4) that the italicized words in
the following expressions should not only be regarded as derivations
(government ‘the act of governing’ < govern + -ment, development ‘the pro-
cess of developing’ < develop + -ment). In addition these items may involve
a metonymy, for example: government ‘the act of governing’ stands for

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 5 9
‘a group of people who do the governing’, (housing) development: ‘the
process of developing’ stands for the result, the housing estate. Analyze
the following examples and suggest metonymic links: the meeting of
the management, the first detachment of the army, the US Administration,
a typed announcement, the introduction of this book, a valuable collection
of Impressionists.
3. In the text the metonymic interpretation of conversion is restricted to
noun-verb transformations. Find out if it makes sense to extend the anal-
ysis to verb–noun conversion as well, e.g. by explaining the noun (tennis)
coach as an application of the metonymy +ACTION FOR AGENT+.
Apart from +ACTION FOR AGENT+, consider the metonymies +ACTION FOR
EVENT+, +ACTION FOR INSTRUMENT+ and +ACTION FOR PLACE+ and try to assign
the following nouns to these metonymies:
cheat, cover, divide, drive-in, hit, laugh, lay-by, retreat, rise, shut-down, stand-
in, swim, turn, walk-out, wrap.
Suggestions for further reading
Section 3.1
To gain a first impression of the cognitive metaphor analysis, Lakoff and
Johnson’s seminal book Metaphors We Live By (1980/2003) is still the
prime choice. The 2003 edition is a reprint of the original book with an
afterword summarizing recent developments in the field. Another book
in the same vein is Lakoff and Turner (1989). A condensed account of
Lakoff’s theory combined with a critical review of his findings is offered
by Croft and Cruse (2004: 194–204), but is more suitable for advanced
students. Kövecses (2002) provides an insightful practical introduction to
the cognitive metaphor theory. For an overview of metonymy see
Barcelona (2003).
1. For interesting aspects of children’s ability and propensity to use
metaphorical expressions see Elbers (1988) and Nerlich et al. (2002).
2. The earliest discussions of metaphor from a linguistic perspective that
we know of are Ullmann (1957, 1st edn 1951) and Leech (1969).
3. Definitions of metonymy in terms of contiguity of referents, and
collections of types of metonymies can be found in Ullmann (1962:
218ff), Lakoff and Johnson (1980/2003: 38f), Lipka (1988: 360f).
4. A useful survey of the major theories of metaphor is provided by
Gibbs (1994: ch. 6). Applications of the interaction theory can be

 
found in Ullmann (1962) and Lipka (1988), and especially Leech
(1969). For the function of metaphor in literary discourse processing
see also Steen (1994, ch. 2).
5. For more information about metaphors arising from body parts in
English and other languages, compare Steen (1994). Kövecses (2002,
chs 12 and 13) as well as Kövecses (2005) delve deeper into the
intriguing question of the universality vs. cultural relativity of
conceptual metaphors.
6. Although mapping scope is a new term, it takes up and integrates
suggestions of early metaphor research and offers easy access to more
recent findings. Compare the discussion of the grounding of
metaphors in Lakoff and Johnson (1980/2003: 61ff, 117ff) and Lakoff
and Turner (1989: 113ff). Also related are the perspectivizing,
highlighting and hiding potential of metaphorical mappings discussed
in Lakoff and Johnson (1980/2003: 10ff), Lakoff and Turner (1989:
64ff) and Croft (1993) as well as the invariance hypothesis proposed
by Brugman (1990) and Lakoff (1990, 1993). See also Croft and Cruse
(2004: 204–6) on the ‘life story’ of a metaphor and Stern (1999: 9ff)
on contextual conditions underlying metaphorical mapping.
7. Compare Hampe’s (2005: 55) concept of ‘experiential correlations’.
Other concepts in the cognitive-linguistic literature that are similar
to basic experiential correlations but serve different functions in the
respective frameworks are Grady’s (1997, 1999, Grady and Johnson
2002) ‘primary metaphors’ and some of Fauconnier and Turner’s
(2002) ‘vital relations’ (see Section 6.1).
8. See Ruiz de Mendoza Ibañez (2000) for details of his distinction
between one-correspondence and many-correspondence metaphors.
9. Using this limited notion of mapping scope seems more helpful for a
first understanding of metonymy than postulating highly abstract
domains (such as ‘production’, ‘causation’, ‘control’, ‘institution’,
‘action’ or ‘whole entity’; Kövecses 2002: 147), and monitoring the
production of successful metonymies by a range of general
constraints (‘human over non-human’, ‘concrete over abstract’, ‘good
gestalt over poor gestalt’, etc.). See Kövecses and Radden 1998 (and
later publications of these authors) as well as Barcelona (2000: 12ff;
2003: 243f).
10. The interaction of metaphors and metonymies has been keenly
investigated during the last few years. Important research on this
1 6 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
C O N C E P T U A L  M E T A P H O R S  A N D  M E T O N Y M I E S
1 6 1
topic is contained in volumes edited by Panther and Radden (1999),
Barcelona (2000), and Dirven and Pörings (2002). The latter volume
also contains revised versions of well-known earlier publications, for
instance Jakobson and Halle’s (1956) paper on metaphorical and
metonymic poles, Goossens (1990) and Croft (1993). For a concise
discussion see Croft and Cruse (2004: 216–20).
Section 3.2
This section is mainly based on publications by Kövecses (1990, 1991,
1995) and on Lakoff’s account of ANGER (Lakoff 1987: 380ff). Basically, all
of them make good, but sometimes repetitive, reading. See also the
overview in Kövecses (2000, ch. 2).
11. For a short overview of various emotion theories see Johnson-Laird and
Oatley (1989). Closer to the concerns of cognitive linguistics are Fehr
and Russell (1984) and Shaver et al. (1987). A more recent account of
the research situation is provided by Kövecses (2002) and (2005).
12. While this system was devised for English, universal aspects of
physiological effects and the cross-cultural use of the container
metaphor are discussed by Kövecses (1995; 2000, ch. 8) and, within her
terminology of cultural scripts, by Wierzbicka (1986, 1988); for a recent
introduction to cultural scripts see Goddard and Wierzbicka (2004).
13. In view of the introductory character of this book we do not want to
give an account of Lakoff’s system of ontological and epistemic
correspondences between the source and target concepts of ANGER
metaphors; see Lakoff (1987: 386ff).
14. For a short (but unnecessarily critical) overview of various approaches
to basic emotions see Ortony et al. (1988: 25ff). See also Johnson-
Laird and Oatley (1989) and the summary in Kövecses (2000, ch. 1).
15. A more recent variant of the scenario conception proposed by
Kövecses (2000, chs 5 and 10) is based on Talmy’s theory of force
dynamics (Talmy 2000/I, ch. 7) and makes use of his terminology of
agonist and antagonist to describe the functioning of emotion
metaphors, calling force the ‘master metaphor’ for emotion.
Section 3.3
16. See Boyd (1993) and Kuhn (1993) and also Schön (1993), whose
notion of ‘generative metaphor’ is very similar to Boyd’s constitutive
metaphor. Gentner (1982) also examines scientific metaphors and,

 
1 6 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
among other examples, discusses the solar system metaphor
described below. See also Gibbs’s overview chapter on ‘metaphor in
thought’ (Gibbs 1994, ch. 4).
17. For discussions of the role of metaphors in the history of science and
in the teaching of science see Gentner and Jeziorski (1993) and
Mayer (1993).
18. Seen from a linguistic angle, chapters 3 to 5 of Lakoff and Johnson
(1999) provide an overview of the conceptual tools used in the
analysis. Ch. 10 offers a detailed case study of the metaphorical
concepts of time. The philosophical provocation is strongest in Part III,
where the authors supply sweeping judgements on philosophers from
the pre-Socractic thinkers to Chomsky and juxtapose their own
metaphor-based ‘embodied philosophy’.
19. Lakoff’s (1992) article is a committed piece of writing, which he
applied to the Gulf War II in a short internet publication (Lakoff
2003). Lakoff (1992) also sparked off other investigations in the field,
among them Gibbs (1994, ch. 4) and Sandikcioglu (2000). Compare
Musolff’s (2001) analysis of +PATH+ and +TRANSPORT+ metaphors used
by newspapers to describe the process of European unification.
20. Lakoff (2002, 1st edn 1996) is divided up into an ‘objective’ first
section (Part I to IV), of which Part II contains the linguistically
relevant discussion of cognitive models and metaphors, and a second
section (Part V), in which (like in his later book, see Lakoff 2004) he
openly supports the liberal stance.
Section 3.4
21. Important publications are Kövescses and Radden (1998) and
Radden and Kövecsces (1999); a summary is provided by Kövecses
(2002, ch. 11).
22. Since Dirven uses this approach to develop a cognitive explanation
of the productivity of noun–verb conversions, he excludes the +AGENT
FOR ACTION+ metonymy. See Dirven (1999) for more details and
Schmid (2005, chs 10.2 and 10.4) for a less restrictive approach and
more examples.
23. This approach has been advocated by Panther and Thornburg in
several publications: Thornburg and Panther (1997), Panther and
Thornburg (1999) and (2003). See also Gibbs (1999).

 
C H A P T E R  4
Figure and ground
4.1 Figure and ground, trajector and landmark:
early research into prepositions
When we look at an object in our environment, we single it out as a perceptually
prominent figure standing out from the ground. The same principle of prominence is
valid in the structure of language. For example, in locative relations like in The book
is on the table the book is conceptualized as the figure.
In Section 1.2, the notion of gestalt was described as a basis for the cate-
gorization of objects. Besides such perceptual principles as the laws of prox-
imity, closure and continuation, the gestalt psychologists were very much
interested in how our visual and auditory input is organized in terms of
the prominence of the different parts. To take an example from the audi-
tory domain, when we listen to a piano concert we can easily make out the
part played by the piano as being more prominent than the accompani-
ment of the orchestra. Similarly in the visual mode of perception, when we
watch someone doing a high jump our eyes will follow the movements of
the high-jumper rather than rest on the crossbar or the ground. In this chap-
ter we will have a closer look at how the findings of the gestalt psycholo-
gists affect the study of language.
Figure/ground segregation and locative relations
To start with, consider the picture of the well-known face/vase illusion shown
in Figure 4.1. You will notice that of the two possibilities of perceiving the
picture (as two faces or as a vase) you can only see one at a time. Still, you
can easily switch between the two ways of looking at the picture, especially
after longer inspection. What lies behind our inability to see both the vase
and the faces at the same time is a phenomenon called figure/ground
segregation. This notion was first introduced into psychology by the Danish
psychologist Rubin almost a century ago and later integrated into the more
comprehensive framework of perceptual organization by the gestalt psy-
chologists (see also Section 1.2).

 
Figure 4.1
The face/vase illusion
(after Rubin)
Examining our visual experience when looking at Figure 4.1 more care-
fully, we notice that what we single out as figure seems to have special prop-
erties. The figure has form or shape whereas the ground is formless and the
shared contour seems to belong to the figure. Besides shape and contour
the figure seems to have other thing-like qualities such as structure and coher-
ence, whereas the ground is unstructured, shapeless and uniform. The figure
appears to lie in front of the ground which extends more or less continu-
ously behind it. All in all, the figure is perceived as being more prominent
than the ground, and psychological research has shown that it is more likely
to be identified and remembered, and to be associated with meaning, feeling
and aesthetic values.1
While a prolonged inspection of Figure 4.1 clearly confirms these aspects
of the perceptual prominence of the figure, it does not really explain
why at one time the vase and at another the two faces assume a figure-like
quality. In other words, it would be interesting to know what factors gov-
ern the choice of the figure. Since the objective input to our visual system
does not change, this choice remains entirely up to the observer; yet it seems
not very plausible that it is just a matter of personal taste or whim.
To answer this question one must realize that the face/vase illusion is
of course an example of a very special nature, because it allows for what is
called a ‘figure/ground reversal’. Most visual scenes that we encounter in
our everyday lives are of a different kind in that they suggest a particular
figure/ground segregation. Thus in the scene depicted in Figure 4.2 the obvi-
ous entity to be chosen as figure is the book, while the table will be given
1 6 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 6 5
Figure 4.2
Figure and ground: book and table
ground status, unless a special and quite unnatural effort is made to see the
table as figure.
According to the gestalt psychologists the principle of Prägnanz, which
was introduced in Section 1.2, plays a major part in assigning the status
of figure to certain parts of a visual scene. Unlike the table, the book in
Figure 4.2 readily fulfils such gestalt principles as the principle of closure
(its contours are closed) and of continuation (it is an uninterrupted whole).
In addition, the relatively small area of dark colour and its balanced pro-
portions attract our attention and make the book a more likely candidate
for the figure than the table. Finally, the book seems more likely to be moved
around than the table (for example to be picked up), and this may also con-
tribute to our natural choice of figure.2
This last aspect is even more important when we turn to examples where
an object is depicted in motion as the balloon is in Figure 4.3. Looking at
the picture we will not hesitate to regard the balloon as figure and the house
as ground because, being conceived as a moving object, the balloon seems
to be much more prominent than the house. From a linguistic point of view
it is interesting to consider how the selection of figure and ground and the
relation the two elements have to each other in our two examples is ren-
dered in words. Describing the situation depicted in Figure 4.2 we would
probably say that the book is on the table, thus claiming a specific locative
relationship for figure and ground. Similarly we would assume that the bal-
loon in Figure 4.3 is above the house, or when we think that the balloon
must in fact be moving, we might prefer the description The balloon is flying
over the house. Such a relationship between balloon and house would take
into account that the position of the balloon changes in time as suggested
by Figure 4.4.

 
1 6 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
stage 1
stage 2
stage 3
Figure 4.4
Visual representation of The balloon is flying over the house
What these two examples show is that the relationship between figure
and ground can be seen in terms of locative relations, which are usually
rendered by prepositions; or to put it the other way round, the meanings
of locative prepositions can be understood as a figure/ground relationship.
It is this second view, the prospect of being able to explain linguistic expres-
sions such as prepositions in terms of figure and ground, that has caught
the attention of cognitive linguists.
Figure 4.3
Figure and ground: balloon and house

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 6 7
vertical
space axis
tr
tr
tr
lm
st1
The balloon is flying over the house
Legend: tr = trajector, lm = landmark, st = stage
st2
st3
horizontal
space axis
Figure 4.5
Representation of the image schema ‘over’
Image schema, trajector, landmark and path: some
fundamental notions of prepositional analysis
Before exploring the link between prepositions and the figure/ground con-
trast more closely let us pick up what was said about locative relations in
Section 2.3. There relations like ‘over’ and ‘under’, ‘up’ and ‘down’, ‘in’ and
‘out’ were characterized as image schemas, i.e. simple and basic cognitive
structures derived from our bodily interaction with the world, and more
specifically, our orientation in the world around us. These orientational
image schemas are definitely less concrete than the rich prototype cat-
egories of specific basic level objects and organisms (see Section 2.1); yet
they are not to be understood as abstract principles either, but as men-
tal pictures, which therefore lend themselves quite naturally to pictorial
representation.3
A good first example is the graphic representation of the image schema
of ‘over’, which underlies our example The balloon is flying over the house
(Figure 4.5). When comparing Figure 4.5 with Figure 4.4, it is obvious that
the representation in Figure 4.5 is less concrete. The balloon (which was
identified above as the figure) and the house (the ground) are now repre-
sented by symbols. The reason is of course that the image schema ‘over’
also applies to other objects apart from balloons and houses (e.g. The bird
is flying over the tree or The kite is flying over the hill). The symbol for the fig-
ure (the circle) appears several times to indicate that what is represented is

 
1 6 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
a process, something that has a dynamic quality. Each circle stands for a
different temporal stage of this process. Moving from stage to stage the fig-
ure follows a path. Since the path of a bullet or missile can be understood
as its trajectory, the figure is called ‘trajector’. The ground functions as a
reference point for orientation and is therefore called ‘landmark’. This
means that the notions ‘trajector’ and ‘landmark’ are specific manifestations
of the more widely applicable notions of ‘figure’ and ‘ground’. This use of
trajector and landmark has been generalized in cognitive linguistics, so
trajector stands for the figure or most prominent element in any relational
structure (and is therefore indicated by very bold lines), while landmark
refers to the other entity in a relation.
Surveying the diagram and the explanations, one might get the impres-
sion that this representation is nothing more than a pictorial illustration
of our model sentence or a set of closely related sentences. Such a view does
not take into account that all the elements involved can be modified in
various ways. Trajector and landmark may vary in size and shape, the tra-
jector can be in contact with the landmark or it can even be part of the
landmark, as will be illustrated in the following sections. The important thing
is that all these variations can be derived from one and the same relation-
ship between trajector and landmark, in our case the ‘over’ relationship. In
other words, the trajector/landmark approach promises to provide a descrip-
tion of the meaning of a preposition revealing the relation between its var-
ious senses. Such a unified cognitive description of the various prepositional
meanings is in strong contrast with earlier views, which regarded them as
an array of unconnected senses.
Unified descriptions need a starting point, a core, a schema that can be
regarded as ‘central’ (we try to avoid the term ‘prototypical’ because it sug-
gests a rich category structure, which is not characteristic of image schemas).
Here we follow Brugman’s (1981) analysis of ‘over’ as summarized by
Lakoff (1987)4 and Lindner’s (1982) study of the meaning of ‘out’ and ‘up’
in verb-particle constructions.
Over, out and up: the central schemas 
and some elaborations
In accordance with Brugman and Lakoff we accept Figure 4.5 as the central
schema for ‘over’. It consists of a trajector moving along a path that is above
the landmark and goes from one end of the landmark to the other and beyond.
As already mentioned, the trajector may stand for a balloon, a plane, a bird,
a kite, while the landmark may represent a house, a wall, a tree, a hill, etc.

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 6 9
lm
tr
st1
st2
st3
She went out (of the room)
Figure 4.6
Central image schema for ‘out’
In addition, there are cases where the landmark is unspecified as in the
sentence The plane flew over. Here it is the position of the speaker or con-
ceptualizer that functions as a landmark, so the example The plane flew over
is similar in meaning to The plane flew over me/us.
Let us next have a look at the central schemas of the prepositions out
and up. Figure 4.6 provides the graphic representation of this central schema
for ‘out’ as used in the sentence She went out (of the room). As the diagram
shows, in the first stage the trajector is included in the space occupied by
the landmark, which can represent an object like a room or can remain unspec-
ified, implying ‘She went out from where we are’. Viewed in isolation, this
initial stage roughly corresponds to what is denoted by the preposition in
and it can therefore be regarded as the image schema of ‘in’.5 The specific
aspect in the schema ‘out’ is that the trajector moves from being included
within the boundaries of the landmark to a location where the two are com-
pletely detached from each other. This is indicated in the diagram by the
three positions of the trajector.
Compared with ‘over’ and ‘out’, the image schema for ‘up’ (see Figure 4.7),
is a more difficult case. Here the path of the trajector has a vertical direc-
tion, the landmark is only relevant as far as its vertical extension is con-
cerned. This is why the landmark is only represented by a vertical line in
the diagram even where it is specified as in The boy climbed up the wall. (After
all, when you climb up a wall you do not think of its thickness, but you
are only interested in its vertical dimension, in the vertical distance that is
involved.) This rather abstract notion of landmark may be more difficult
to grasp and to accept than other types of landmark, but it makes it easier
to imagine that the landmark is unspecified, as in sentences like The rocket
went up.

 
1 7 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
vertical
space axis
tr
lm
st3
st2
st1
horizontal
space axis
The boy climbed up the wall
Figure 4.7
Central schema for ‘up’
Looking back at this point, we can conclude that all three central schemas
represent cognitive configurations consisting of three elements and their
interrelations, namely:
a trajector, which moves along
a path, and is seen as being related to
a landmark.
The relationship between these three elements may be sufficient for a rough
distinction of the meanings of the three prepositions. To account for more
specific meanings or uses, the variations that trajector, path and landmark
can undergo have to be taken into consideration. Such variants which only
specify certain components of a schema, but do not diverge from its general
configuration, are called elaborations.
Figure 4.8 illustrates some of the elaborations observed for the image
schema ‘over’. Variant (a) depicts a very common case, which applies for
many verbs of motion, namely contact between trajector and landmark.
Variant (b) shows that the trajector can assume a size and shape which is
similar to that of the landmark and be located quite close to it so that the
trajector actually covers the landmark. Finally, variant (c) illustrates what
should probably be regarded as a marginal case – the fusion of trajector and
landmark. The fence that collapses (or at least its upper part) is the trajec-
tor that is moved along a path and it is at the same time the landmark
which acts as reference point for the motion.

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 7 1
lm
lm
tr = lm
tr
Schematic representation
Specification of
the schema
Linguistic example
trajector is in contact
with landmark
trajector covers
landmark
trajector and landmark
are identical
Sam drove over
the bridge.
The city clouded over.
The fence fell over.
tr
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.8
Some elaborations of the central schema for ‘over’
(based on Lakoff 1987: 419ff)
Figure 4.9 contains another set of elaborations, this time related to the
central schema for ‘out’. What most of them have in common is that the
variation concerns the initial stage, the way the trajector is (or is not) inte-
grated in the landmark. This initial stage is contrasted with the final stage
Schematic representation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
lm
lm
lm
lm
tr
tr
tr
tr
only part of trajector is
in landmark in the initial
state
trajector is part
of landmark
trajector is a member of a
group which functions as
landmark
landmark has only one defined
boundary; the rest of it may
extend indefinitely
Pluck the feather out.
Carve out the best piece
of meat for yourself.
He picked out two pieces
of candy.
The dog dug the bone out.
Specification of
the schema
Linguistic example
Figure 4.9
Some elaborations of the central schema for ‘out’
(based on Lindner 1982: 86ff)

 
1 7 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
(st1) (st2)
st3
horizontal
space axis
vertical
space axis
tr
lm
Hang the painting over the chimney
Figure 4.10
Schematic representation of superficially static uses of ‘over’
because it is this contrast between the initial and the final stages of the pro-
cess in which the meaning of ‘out’ manifests itself; providing the middle
stage would not add any important information.
By directing the attention to selected stages of the image schema, the
analysis of ‘out’ has pointed the way to how we might approach another
puzzling facet of prepositional use: the fact that essentially dynamic prepo-
sitions like over, out and up are used to render meanings that might at least
superficially be regarded as ‘static’.
Compare the following examples:
1. Hang the painting over the chimney.
2. She stays out.
3. She lived three floors up.
To start with the first example, the position of the painting as described in
the sentence can be easily understood as the final stage of a process of mov-
ing the picture up into its position. This is represented in Figure 4.10. Similarly,
sentences (2) and (3) can be explained as the final stages of the path of the
‘out’ and ‘up’ schemas. See Figure 4.11.
Metaphorical extensions
As it has emerged so far, a fairly general schema of a locative relation can
be employed to explain a considerable variety of uses of prepositions in terms
of elaborations. Yet there are many prepositional meanings that differ from

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 7 3
lm
tr
(st1)
(st2)
She stays out
She lived three floors up
st3
st3
(st1)
(st2)
lm
tr
vertical
space axis
horizontal
space axis
Figure 4.11
Schematic representations of superficially static uses of the ‘out’
and ‘up’ schemas
the central schema in such a way that they cannot be explained by refer-
ence to the schema alone, but only by assuming a metaphorical exten-
sion. This is, for instance, true of the following pair of examples taken from
Lakoff (1987) – the second example has been slightly adapted.6
She has a strange power over me.
The government was overthrown.
In both sentences the use of over can be explained by the metaphor +POWER
RELATIONS ARE SPATIAL RELATIONS+. This metaphorical link is monitored by a map-
ping scope based on the image schema ‘up–down’, which sanctions the
upward movement and a position of power as ‘up’ and the opposites as
‘down’. On a more specific level this metaphor can be understood as
+CONTROL IS A UPWARD MOVEMENT/UPRIGHT POSITION+, and it is this mapping that
quite obviously explains the meaning of over in the first example. For the
second example the explanation is a little more complex. As Lakoff argues
(1987: 439), ‘before the event takes place, the government is in control
(metaphorically upright), and afterwards it is not in control (metaphorically,
it has fallen over)’. One could probably add that another variant of the
metaphor which may roughly be characterized as +PROPER FUNCTIONING IS UPRIGHT
POSITION+ is also involved. From our everyday experience we know that plants,
animals, persons and indeed objects like bookshelves, houses or spires can
only fulfil their respective functions in a satisfactory way if they keep their
upright position. Lying on the ground, or still worse being scattered around,

 
1 7 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
is a clear sign for an organism or object that it is either currently not active
or severely damaged and this may contribute to the rich image evoked by
the expression overthrow the government.
To add just another example, the sentence Harry still hasn’t got over his
divorce can be seen as a realization of the metaphor +LIFE IS A JOURNEY+, which,
as shown in Section 3.1, maps the structure of the event concept JOURNEY
onto the abstract concept LIFE, a process monitored by a mapping scope
based, among other things, on the ‘path’ schema. It lies in the nature of
journeys that the traveller’s progress is sometimes impeded by obstacles
such as rivers, gorges and of course hills and mountains, and this is where
a more specific variant of the journey metaphor comes into play: +PROBLEMS
IN LIFE ARE OBSTACLES IN A JOURNEY+. If bad times, problems or setbacks in one’s
life are seen as vertical obstacles like mountains in one’s life journey, one
has to get over them in order to move on in life (cf. also He is over the
hill). Viewed from the complementary perspective of the schema of ‘over’
(cf. Figure 4.5) this means that Harry is the trajector, who, in order to
pursue his path (= a journey = his life) must get over the landmark (= an
obstacle = the divorce).
In conclusion, the discussion in this chapter has given a first glimpse
of how the principle of prominence, which underlies the figure/ground dis-
tinction, is at work in the structure of language. So far we have confined
ourselves to examples from the area of prepositional meanings, which have
been described in terms of ‘trajector’ and ‘landmark’, ‘path’, ‘central schema’
and ‘elaboration’. While prepositional meanings are still very much related
to the lexical aspects of language, we will now go on to probe a little deeper
into the role of prominence in grammatical structures.
Exercises
1. Consider the situations called up by the following sentence pairs:
The pen is under the table.
The table is over the pen.
The lamppost is in front of the house.
The house is behind the lamppost.
How can the principle of figure and ground be used to explain why
only the first sentence in each pair expresses a natural view of the
situation?

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 7 5
2. As suggested in the text, the first stage of the image schema for ‘out’
can be regarded as the image schema of ‘in’. Sketch the image schema
for ‘in’ making use of Figure 4.6 (‘out’ schema).
Look at the following examples and decide which of them render the
central schema ‘in’ and which express elaborations of this schema.
Compile diagrams for the elaborations, using Figure 4.9 as a source of
information:
The lipstick is in my handbag.
The flowers are in the vase.
There is a hole in your shirt.
Find the mistake in this sentence.
3. Draw diagrams for the image schemas underlying the following sentences:
I met John in the street.
Salesmen spend a lot of time on the road.
How does the difference between the landmarks in the two diagrams
explain the contrasting use of in the street vs on the road.
4. Here are some compound nouns which combine up and a verbal ele-
ment and their definitions in the LDOCE4:
upbringing
‘the way that your parents care for you and teach
you to behave when you are growing up’
upkeep
‘the process of keeping something in good condition’
uproar
‘a lot of noise or angry protest about something’
upstart
‘someone who behaves as if they were more
important than they really are and shows a lack of
respect towards people who are more experienced
or older’
upturn
‘an increase in the level of something, especially in
business activity.’
Which of these diverse meanings can be convincingly derived from the
image schema ‘up’?
5. Draw the diagram for the locative relation ‘down’, which can be
regarded as the reverse of ‘up’, as shown in Figure 4.7. Show how this
schema can be combined with other schemas in order to illustrate the
expressions up and down, down and out (‘destitute’) and down under (‘in
Australia’).

 
1 7 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
4.2 Figure, ground and two metaphors: a
cognitive explanation of simple clause patterns
If the figure/ground distinction could only be used to explain prepositional meanings,
it would be of limited importance. However, it has many other applications in
linguistics. This section will single out one more of them, the description of clause
patterns, which will then be integrated into a larger cognitive framework in the next
section.
Traditional grammar holds that a simple clause normally consists of three
key elements: a subject, a verb element (or predicate) and a complement
(e.g. an object or an adverbial). This standard pattern is illustrated in the
following examples (sentences (4) and (8) from Langacker 1991):
1. Susan resembles my sister.
2. Susan is peeling a banana.
3. Susan loves bananas.
4. The hammer breaks the glass.
5. Susan has a large library.
6. Susan received the present.
7. Susan swam the Channel.
8. The garden is swarming with bees.
9. There was a loud bang.
Though all these examples contain the three said elements, a short glance
will make it clear that they are in fact rather divergent. The subjects refer
to persons, things or places or they are ‘empty’ (as the there–subject in the
last example). Persons, things, and places are also eligible as complements.
In one case (ex. (1)) subject and object can be exchanged, while this is not
possible with the other sentences, and the transformation into passive sen-
tences is also severely restricted. Both traditional grammarians and modern
linguistic schools have recognized these differences and have tried to cope
with them by proposing different verb classes or case frames (a notion dis-
cussed in Section 5.1) or by explaining some of them in terms of transfor-
mations of other patterns (e.g. deriving She swam the Channel from She swam
across the Channel).
In contrast with these approaches, Cognitive Grammar, as developed by
Langacker (1990; 1991, chs 7, 8), suggests that a unified explanation of this
syntactic diversity is possible if one understands the subject–verb–complement
pattern as a reflection of the general cognitive principle of figure/ground

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 7 7
segregation. Or to put it more pointedly: in a simple transitive clause the
subject corresponds to the figure, the object to the ground, and the verb
expresses the relationship between figure and ground.
The influence of the figure and ground principle is most plausible in
symmetrical constructions, as illustrated by the following sentence pair:
(a) Susan resembles my sister. (= ex. (1))
(b) My sister resembles Susan.
Just as in the case of the face/vase illusion, from which we started out in
Section 4.1, the choice of one sentence constituent as the dominant ele-
ment is up to the speaker. Linguistically, the way to manifest prominence
is to put the preferred element into subject position; this is like deciding to
regard the face/vase illusion as either two faces or as a vase. Once this deci-
sion has been made in favour of Susan (sentence (a)) or my sister (b), it is
clear that in either variant the chosen subject is the figure and is more promi-
nent than the other element (the ground). This means that in (a) it is Susan
that is assessed with reference to someone else, while in (b) the situation is
reversed. Though less prominent than the figure, the second element is also
important as a point of reference.
To account for the degree of prominence that resides in both subject
and complement, we will use the terms syntactic figure and syntactic
ground respectively. (Langacker’s favourite terms for this distinction are
‘(clausal) trajector’ and ‘(clausal) landmark’, but he also makes use of a num-
ber of other terms.)
Like reversible visual scenes such as the face/vase illusion, symmetrical
clause structures are exceptional. Normally the choice of syntactic figure is
guided and restricted by a number of other cognitive principles. These addi-
tional principles and their interaction with figure/ground segregation will
be presented in the following sections.
Role archetypes
The most familiar of the cognitive principles evoked by Langacker for the
explanation of clause structure is what he calls role archetypes. For any-
one who has had some grounding in modern linguistics, what lies behind
this notion is by no means a novelty, because role archetypes like ‘agent’,
‘patient’, ‘instrumental’ and ‘experiencer’ will suggest the analysis of sen-
tence elements in terms of ‘cases’ (or ‘actants’, ‘participants’, ‘semantic roles’,
‘theta-roles’), as has been propagated by most linguistic schools current in
the last forty years.7 In fact, two of the roles, agent and patient, have been

 
1 7 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
inherited from traditional grammar. All these attempts to use roles or cases
in syntactic analysis have a common aim, which is to establish a list of seman-
tically based roles that permits a satisfactory classification of all non-verbal
elements of clause patterns. The result has been a large number of differ-
ent inventories of roles, but a definitive list has not yet been assembled.
For Langacker this is not surprising. In his view, the roles are not just a
linguistic construct, but part of the range of cognitive instruments which
we use for linguistic, and also for non-linguistic, mental processing. Role
archetypes emerge from our experience of interacting with the world. From
this experience we know that we are capable of initiating motion or physi-
cal activity in objects or other persons (an approximate definition of the
archetypical agent). Conversely, we experience that objects or organisms
are affected by physical impact from outside and undergo a change of state
or are moved to another location. This defines the patient, which in this
wider definition includes Langacker’s separate role of ‘mover’. The archetyp-
ical role of instrument is characterized as the intermediary between agent
and patient and the experiencer role refers to someone engaged in men-
tal activities, including emotions. Like cognitive categories in general, the
role archetypes are not discrete categories, but gradual phenomena; they are,
as Langacker puts it, ‘not like a row of statues in an art museum, but are
instead analogous to the highest peaks in a mountain range’ (1991: 285).
However, tracing back clause constituents to cognitive archetypes gives
rise to a further problem: how do we know which role is to be put in the
subject slot and which in the complement slot? As an analysis of the fol-
lowing examples shows, under certain conditions all role archetypes can
occur in subject position:
Susan is peeling a banana. (= ex. (2))
subject = agent
Susan loves bananas. (= ex. (3))
subject = experiencer
The hammer breaks the glass. (= ex. (4))
subject = instrument
The glass broke.
subject = patient
Although it is clear that all four patterns are perfectly acceptable, it turns
out that agents are used far more often as syntactic figures than other role
archetypes are. The question is why this is so. Again, Langacker offers an
explanation which is based on our experience of the interaction between
persons and things.
Action chains, energy flow and the billiard-ball metaphor
One of the most elementary kinds of interactions between the objects and
organisms of the world is by way of physical contact. In cognitive linguistics

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 7 9
(a)
(b)
Susan
Susan is peeling the banana
banana
<peel>
Floyd
hammer
glass
<use>
<break>
Floyd broke the glass with a hammer
Figure 4.12
Energy transmission in action chains
(partially based on Langacker 1990)
the study of these encounters has given rise to several important theo-
ries, notably Talmy’s notion of force dynamics8 and Langacker’s concep-
tion of energy transmission, which is part of his explanation of sentence
structure.
Theoretically, the simplest case is an interaction of two entities (objects
or organisms) of the following kind: one entity is charged with energy; it is
the source of the energy; this first entity contacts a second one; energy is
transmitted to and consumed by this second entity. This simple interaction
is illustrated in Figure 4.12(a), where the circles represent objects/organisms,
the double arrows symbolize the interaction between them and the squiggly
line indicates where the energy is absorbed.
As shown by Figure 4.12(b), longer interactions involving several instances
of physical contact are possible, indeed they are the rule. (Even a two-element
structure like Susan is peeling a banana can be said to imply a third unexpressed
element, i.e. with her hand.) This has led Langacker to talk of action chains.
An action chain is characterized by an energetic ‘head’, an object/organism
which is the source of the energy; from this head the energy is transmitted to
the second entity and so on until an entity is reached which no longer emits,
but consumes the remaining energy; this element is called the ‘tail’ of the
action chain. To stress the conception of energy flow, Langacker invokes the
metaphor of a river, using the terms ‘upstream’ (for the head) and ‘downstream’
(for the other elements of the action chain).
Though the notion of energy flow is already metaphorical in itself,
Langacker supports this explanation with an even more tangible metaphor,
the +BILLIARD BALL+ metaphor. After being activated by the touch of the
cue, the white ball is pushed against another ball, and if this physical con-
tact has the necessary force, part of the original energy is transmitted to

 
1 8 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
the second ball, which ideally hits a third ball and transmits energy to it
and so on. The remaining energy is absorbed by the cushioned edges or, if
the balls reach their goals, by the pockets of the billiard table.
In what way do the +ENERGY FLOW+ and the +BILLIARD BALL+ metaphor con-
tribute to our understanding of syntactic patterns? How can they explain the
allocation of role archetypes to slots in the clause structure? In a case where
only an agent and a patient are expressed (as in Susan is peeling the banana),
it seems quite obvious that the agent corresponds to the energetic head of
the action chain and the patient to the tail. Since an agent is the initiator of
the energy flow, he or she is the most prominent element in a situation and
is therefore given the status of syntactic figure, i.e. subject. The patient is rep-
resented as syntactic ground or object. In short, the result is that, at least in
a two-element structure like Figure 4.12(a), agent, head of the action chain
and syntactic figure coincide, as do patient, tail of the action chain and syn-
tactic ground. This explains, in cognitive terms, why agents are favoured as
subjects and patients as objects.
When we now move on to three-element action chains (Figure 4.12(b)),
we can again readily identify the first element as agent and the last element
as patient. The element in between represents the instrument role, which serves
as the intermediate stage in the transmission of energy. This cognitive struc-
ture is linguistically reflected in the sentence Floyd broke the glass with a ham-
mer, in which the agent is selected as syntactic figure, followed by the patient
as syntactic ground or object, and the instrument (here the cognitive sequence
is reversed).
However, as Langacker has shown, this sentence is not the only linguistic
realization of this action chain, but other perspectives are possible (see also
Section 5.1). Compare Figure 4.13, where it is contrasted with two alternative
versions. While sentence (a) provides the overall view of the action chain,
sentences (b) and (c) express only a certain portion, as indicated by the boldly
printed parts of the diagrams for (b) and (c). In particular, the head of the
action chain is not expressed linguistically, which means that the prime can-
didate for syntactic figure or subject is not available. Figure 4.13 shows how
this problem is solved. The status of subject is accorded to the linguistically
expressed element of the action chain which is furthest ‘upstream’. In 4.13 (b)
this is the instrument (the hammer), while in (c) this is actually the last ele-
ment of the chain, the patient (the glass); in the diagram the subject status is
indicated by an extra-bold circle.
With regard to the choice of syntactic ground (or object), sentence
(b) is unproblematic because, as with sentence (a), the patient is available
for this position (The hammer broke the glass; object status is indicated by a

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 8 1
agent
Floyd
(a)
(b)
(c)
instrument
the hammer
patient
obj.
subj.
obj.
subj.
subj.
the glass
Floyd broke the
glass with a hammer
The hammer broke
the glass
The glass
(easily) broke
Figure 4.13
Linguistic realizations of a three-element action chain
(adapted from Langacker 1990: 221, examples integrated)
bold circle). This is different in the case of sentence (c), which is limited to
a single element of the action chain (the glass), and, as we have just seen,
this element functions as syntactic figure. Yet at the same time this element
represents the tail of the action chain, the point where the energy is con-
sumed, the archetypal patient. This means that no energy is emitted, no
attempt is made to establish physical contact with another object and, con-
sequently, no cognitive ground is established. There is no need for a syn-
tactic object, and this is the cognitive explanation why sentences like The
glass broke are intransitive.
Summarizing the analysis of the glass-breaking sentences, we find that it
yields three results: it confirms the link between agent, head of action chain
and syntactic figure or subject, and it supplies a cognitive explanation for
the fact, first observed by Fillmore (1968: 33), that the choice of subject is
governed by a hierarchy of agent > instrument > patient. Finally, it integrates
intransitive uses of verbs like break into the paradigm of figure and ground.
However, these findings are only valid for sentences describing concrete
situations implying physical contact. It remains to be seen whether the
figure/ground interpretation also holds for other kinds of subject–verb–
complement structures, for instance sentences expressing a mental activity
like Susan loves bananas (= ex. (3)) or She remembered her first bike.
Mental interactions and clause patterns
Sentences like the examples just quoted do not express physical contact,
and therefore they cannot be regarded in terms of action chains, of energy

 
transmission and energy consumption. Instead what ‘takes place’ has a men-
tal nature and the person that is involved does not produce physical
energy, but is a sentient creature engaged in a mental activity. For this role
archetype the term experiencer rather than agent seems appropriate. The
main difference, however, between these mental operations and action chains
concerns the second element. While the patient, as the tail of the action
chain, receives and consumes physical energy and undergoes a change or
is at least moved to another location, the second entity in the mental activ-
ity is not really touched or changed by this interaction. To capture this
role archetype, Langacker uses the term ‘absolute’, later replaced by ‘theme’,
but for our restricted discussion the term (the) experienced, which is sug-
gested by its relation to the experiencer, seems more helpful. The relation-
ship between experiencer and experienced is schematically represented in
Figure 4.14.9
In this diagram, the link between the two participants is indicated by a
single arrow (as opposed to the double arrow for the strong energy link in
action chains). This is to indicate that the mental link is in a sense ‘weaker’
than the energy link in action chains, but it is nevertheless clearly direc-
tional. Its source is the experiencer, which is thus marked as the more promi-
nent active initiator, as figure in this mental interaction, while the
experienced functions as ground. This attribution to figure and ground is
faithfully reflected in the choice of subject and object, which means that
the figure/ground explanation is also applicable to mental activity sentences
like Susan loves bananas.
An interesting variant of mental operations is provided by situations imply-
ing the possession of goods, as in the following two examples:
Susan has a large library. (= ex. (5))
Susan received the present. (= ex. (6))
When one first looks at it, the possessive relationship between Susan and
her books in the first example seems to be of a very concrete and physical
nature. However, a closer inspection of what the notion of possession implies
reveals that the crucial point is that Susan and other people have knowledge
1 8 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Susan
banana
<love>
Susan loves bananas
Figure 4.14
Cognitive representation of mental interactions

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 8 3
of the possessive relationship and that she can enjoy its benefits. Since know-
ing and enjoying are of course mental rather than physical activities, it seems
reasonable to apply a role description in terms of experiencer and experi-
enced to this sentence.
For the second example, the interpretation as an essentially mental oper-
ation seems even less convincing at first sight, because it involves the phys-
ical transfer of goods. The verb receive is closely linked with the notion of
giving, which is, of course, most naturally expressed by a sentence with the
verb give and two objects, as for example in Aunt Emily gave Susan the pre-
sent. In spite of this parallel to an agentive verb, the subject in Susan received
the present should be regarded as an experiencer rather than an agent. This
emerges when we compare the cognitive structures of give and receive shown
in Figure 4.15. The two diagrams suggest that both give and receive involve
agent
experiencer
patient and
experienced
instrument
indirect
object
direct
object
subject
(a) give
Aunt Emily gave Susan the present
agent
experiencer
patient and
experienced
instrument
subject
direct
object
(b) receive
Susan received the present
Figure 4.15
Cognitive structure for clause patterns with give and receive
(adapted from Langacker 1990; 1991: 327)

 
1 8 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
two cognitive processes, namely an action chain and a mental operation.
To start with give,10 the action chain is initiated by the agent (Aunt Emily
in our example); the agent transmits energy to the patient (the present) using
the unexpressed instrument (e.g. Aunt Emily’s hand) as an intermediary. The
experiencer (Susan) initiates a mental interaction with the experienced,
which is identical with the patient of the action chain. As a result, the expe-
riencer (Susan) recognizes that she will be the beneficiary of the action of
giving.
If we evaluate the sentence Aunt Emily gave Susan a present in terms
of figure and ground, we find that the agent is most prominent and the
prime candidate for subject; second priority is accorded to the patient,
which is expressed as direct object. This distribution of prominence is iden-
tical with the figure/ground assignment in action clauses with only one
object. The reason why this is so is that the experiencer (which corresponds
to the indirect object) is regarded as an external additional element,
which does not influence the choice of an agent as subject and patient as
direct object.
Turning to receive (Figure 4.15(b)), the cognitive structure is largely
identical with give. Although the same action chain is presupposed, it is
not expressed in words, and this is the major difference. What is ren-
dered linguistically is the mental interaction between the experiencer
(Susan) and the experienced/patient (the present). Figure and ground are
distributed just like in other mental interactions: the experiencer func-
tions as syntactic figure or subject, the experienced (alias patient) as syn-
tactic ground or object.
Undoubtedly, Langacker’s cognitive explanation for the give and receive
paradigms is intriguing, but it is also very radical. One of the things it implies
is a complete reappraisal of actions like giving. Instead of regarding the recip-
ient as the endpoint of the physical action of moving something from one
person to another, it claims that the physical aspect of motion is restricted
to the actor and the thing moved, while the part of the recipient is a mat-
ter of the mental acknowledgement of this physical action. If we want to
express that something actually reaches the position taken up by the recip-
ient in space, we have to use verbs which permit a locative complement,
like put/place the book in his hand (this structure will be discussed in the next
section).
Compared with give, receive is, in Langacker’s opinion, restricted to the expres-
sion of mental operations like control and possession, but does not involve
physical contact with the transferred object. Surprising as this view may be
at first sight, it becomes much more understandable when we consider that

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 8 5
agent and experiencer
instrument
patient and
experienced
Figure 4.16
Cognitive structure for clause patterns with take
the physical contact between the receiving person and the transferred
object can be unequivocally expressed by the verb take, which can even be
used in conjunction with give, as in the following example:
Aunt Emily gave Peter the present. He took it and thanked her excessively.
As with give, clauses with take are based on an action chain. The receiving
person is the agent, the person’s hand is the unexpressed instrument, and
the exchanged present is the patient that is moved. The only thing that is
different is the direction of the movement; with take it runs towards rather
than away from the agent. In terms of the figure/ground segregation in the
action chain give–clauses and take–clauses represent the same pattern: an
agent which functions as syntactic figure or subject and a patient which
takes the part of the syntactic ground or (direct) object. Where they differ,
however, is in the role of the experiencer. While in the case of give the expe-
riencer is of course another person, in the case of take the agent and expe-
riencer coincide, although the agent role is probably much more dominant
than the experiencer role. To illustrate the contrast between give and take,
Figure 4.16 gives the cognitive representation of take. In this diagram, the
lesser salience of the mental operation as compared to the action chain is
indicated by the broken arrow between the experiencer and the experienced.
Participants, setting and the stage metaphor
Action chains and mental interactions, we have found, involve role
archetypes like agent, patient, instrument, experiencer and experienced. All
of them can be, and often are, chosen as figure and ground in a verbal rela-
tion. However, the cognitive intake of a real-world situation also comprises

 
1 8 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
many facets which are not selected as figure, but which are nevertheless
present in our minds as part of what we will loosely call ‘background’ (in
Langacker’s view this ‘background’ is composed of an array of different
domains; see Section 4.3).
To explain the relationship between figure and ground on the one hand
and background on the other, Langacker makes use of another metaphor,
the +STAGE+ metaphor. According to this metaphor, which can already be
found in the work of the French linguist Tesnière (1959, ch. 48), the set-up
of the constituents in a sentence is similar to what happens in a play on the
stage. The background may be compared with the props or setting of the play,
while prominence is reserved for the actors that move around on the stage,
declaiming, fighting and killing, or alternatively, hugging and embracing each
other. Applying the +STAGE+ metaphor to cognitive perception in general, we
may distinguish between the setting of an event, which is comprehensive
and relatively stable, and the participants in the event, which are smaller
and mobile and engaged in physical contact and mental interaction.
Transferred to linguistic expressions, the distinction between participants
and setting seems to be clearly reflected in clause structure. Participants pro-
vide subjects and objects, while the setting is expressed by adverbials, in
particular by adverbials of space and time, as in the following example:
Susan was eating a banana in the kitchen at nine o’clock in the morning.
However, it would be wrong and quite contrary to the spirit of cognitive
explanation to assume that the setting is completely homogeneous.
Prominence is by definition a gradual phenomenon, and there is no rea-
son why it should only be relevant for the selection of figure and ground.
Indeed, just by looking at locative settings we can easily distinguish degrees
of prominence. Compare the following two sentences:11
People drink beer in Munich.
Susan lives in Munich.
In the first sentence the place adverbial in Munich is a true setting for an
action chain involving two participants, an agent (people) and a patient (beer).
Yet in the second sentence the same adverbial is not just a general locative
background, but a necessary part of an interaction with the participant Susan,
which is the syntactic figure. In other words, here the locative setting assumes
the functions of the identifiable ground. However, in Munich is not a par-
ticipant because, unlike the patient, it does not undergo a change of state
or location. This situation is sketched in Figure 4.17. As the diagram shows,

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 8 7
syntactic ground
syntactic
figure /
subject
Susan
<live>
Setting: in Munich
Susan lives in Munich
Figure 4.17
Setting as syntactic ground
the circle denoting the syntactic figure is not accompanied by a spatially
separated unit denoting the ground. This was the set-up in the previous fig-
ures, which illustrated action chains and mental interactions. In Figure 4.17
the circle is placed inside the box denoting the second element; it is as it
were ‘contained’ in the second element, which in this case is the setting.
If we understand syntax in terms of image schemas, we may say that the
syntactic relation underlying sentences like Susan lives in Munich represents
a ‘be in’ or container schema and not a ‘path’ schema, as is typical of action
chains and mental interactions.
A related but more complex case was already mentioned in the last sec-
tion. Clause patterns with put/place/set (e.g. Susan put the bananas into the
basket) reflect an action chain with an agent–subject and a patient–object,
but are also linked with a locative setting of special prominence, which would
have to be integrated into the clause pattern as a third element of promi-
nence. It seems that the problem of how this highlighted facet of setting
is to be evaluated with respect to the syntactic figure and ground has not
been solved so far and thus requires further investigation.
We have seen that the degree of prominence that is given to the set-
ting depends on the choice of the syntactic pattern. For a further illustra-
tion of what is gained by treating the prominence of the setting in terms
of a gradient, consider the following set of examples:
a. Susan swam in the Channel.
b. Susan swam across the Channel.
c. Susan swam the Channel. (= ex. (7))
In sentence (a) the agent and syntactic figure (Susan) initiates an action chain,
for which no patient is invoked, but which takes place in a certain setting
(the Channel); linguistically this is expressed by an intransitive structure with
an optional place adverbial. In (b) the setting is more tangible, it has two
boundaries and it is fully traversed by the agent/figure. All this is implied
by the preposition across; as a result this setting is more prominent than in

 
1 8 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
syntactic ground
bees
syntactic figure /
subject
<swarm>
Setting: garden
The garden is swarming with bees
Figure 4.18
Setting as syntactic figure (subject) 
(adapted from Langacker 1991: 345)
(a). In the last sentence (c) the preposition is dropped. Far from assuming
that this is just a formal variant of (b), a cognitive interpretation will claim
that the Channel has gained in syntactic prominence, that it has moved
further away from being a plain setting. It is treated more like a partici-
pant in an interaction with the agent-subject, for example an enemy that
has to be overcome, and this is reflected in the object-like use of the noun
phrase.
While raising settings to the status of objects (as we have discussed so far)
seems quite natural, the claim that the setting can also occur as subject is
more ambitious. Let us look at the following example (Langacker 1991: 346ff):
The garden is swarming with bees. (= ex. (8))
In this sentence it is not difficult to see the syntactic figure or subject (the
garden) as locative setting, while the slot of the syntactic ground is occupied
by bees. The cognitive explanation is documented in Figure 4.18. The basic
principle is again a container–contained relationship between syntactic figure
and ground. This corresponds to the structure shown in Figure 4.17 for
sentences like Susan lives in Munich, yet with the decisive difference that the
prominence of participant and setting has been reversed. (Compare the rever-
sal of extra-bold and bold lines in the second diagram.) The setting (the
garden) holds the prominent position in the container–contained relationship,
expressing something like ‘be the setting for the swarming activity’, in which
the bees are involved as syntactic ground.
Exceptional as such ‘setting–subjects’ (as Langacker calls them) may
appear because they are not participants, they are still based on an identi-
fiable facet of the setting. This is different with examples like the following:
There was a loud bang. (= ex. (9))
There are at least five Asian takeaways in our town.

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 8 9
The there–element in these well-known structures is normally explained as
a dummy element or as a structural or formal subject, yet all these expla-
nations contradict the basic cognitive tenet that all grammatical elements
have a conceptual content. This is why Langacker, in agreement with other
studies on there–constructions (e.g. Lakoff 1987: 462ff), assumes that there
is used to express a kind of setting, though an ‘abstract’ or unspecified set-
ting, and that this setting functions as subject. The problem is that as a
subject, there should be assigned the greatest prominence in the sentence,
and this runs counter to our intuition about the two sentences above and
similar examples. Another problem, which it seems Langacker has only solved
provisionally, is that verbs in there–constructions are congruent with the
syntactic ground, not with the there–subject (see the second example
above). Our conclusion is that, for the time being, this interpretation of
there–sentences should be approached with some caution.12
Postscript: schematic subject vs prototypical subject
Langacker’s attempt to establish there as syntactic figure must be seen in a
wider context. The enormous impact that the prototype notion has had on
cognitive linguistics has encouraged scholars to use it not only to explain
the structure of lexical categories (see Chapters 1 and 2), but also to
describe grammatical phenomena. As a result, word classes, sentence types,
and clause structure have been analyzed in the prototype paradigm, and more
or less convincing attributes have been assembled to distinguish the best exam-
ple from the lesser examples of nouns, declarative sentences, transitive
clauses, etc.13 For the subject of the clause the result – not unexpectedly –
has been that the prototypical subject is the agent in a transitive clause; all
other subjects deviate from this definition in certain ways.
Yet while the prototype analysis of clause constituents is satisfied with
this description, for Langacker it is only the starting point in his quest for
a cognitive definition of subject that is valid for all kinds of subjects, the
prototypical and the less prototypical instances. Recapitulating his argument
as it has been pursued in this section for active clauses,14 we can distinguish
the following conceptions of the notion of subject:
• subject as realization of the archetypal role of agent (explains agent sub-
jects in transitive action clauses)
• subject as the first expressed element of an action chain, the upstream
element in the energy flow characteristic of action chains (adds instru-
ment and intransitive patient subjects in action clauses)

 
1 9 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
• subject as active participant (adds subjects in mental interactions)
• subject as syntactic figure (adds salient facets of the setting).
The result is (or comes close to) what Langacker regards as a schematic
definition of subject as opposed to the mere description of a prototype.
This notion of schematicity, or general validity, which has, of course,
always been one of the goals of science and philosophy, permeates
Langacker’s whole conception, as we will see in the following section.
Exercises
1. Which of the following sentences express action chains, which render
mental interactions, which combine both types of cognitive structures?
Dad opened the box with a knife.
Little Sue wants a mountain bike.
Jack brings along the most recent CDs.
Tom sold his old Chevy to a friend.
Diana was sipping her long drink.
She was dreaming of her Italian boyfriend.
Sorry, I have forgotten your name.
2. As already mentioned, one could claim that all action chains consist
of at least three elements (agent, instrument, patient). Examine the fol-
lowing two-element structures and try to find the instrument that might
be added:
Susan is picking strawberries.
Susan is reading a book.
Susan turns the key.
Susan kicks the ball.
Susan sings a song.
Explain why the instrument is not expressed in these sentences.
3. To describe action chains, Langacker does in fact offer two metaphors:
the +BILLIARD
BALL+ metaphor and what might be called the +RIVER+
metaphor (on which his notion of energy flow is based). Which of these
two metaphors do you find more helpful?
4. Clause patterns do not only express action chains and mental interac-
tions, they may also reflect a ‘container–contained’ or a ‘part–whole’

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 9 1
relationship. Explain the following examples in terms of these image
schemas:
The bus holds 40 people.
Our village consists of a church and three cottages.
The area abounds with pubs.
This anthology assembles a lot of unknown poems.
5. For grammatical purposes, verbs are often divided up into dynamic and
stative verbal meanings (or situation types). Study this classification (e.g.
in Quirk et al. 1985: 200ff or Greenbaum and Quirk 1992: 55f) and dis-
cuss where it overlaps with Langacker’s distinction of action chains, men-
tal interactions and container–contained structures.
4.3 Other types of prominence 
and cognitive processing
Following two sections with exemplary discussions of the figure/ground contrast, the
aim of this section is to complete the survey and to integrate the results into the
framework of Cognitive Grammar developed by Langacker. In view of the
comprehensiveness of this theory, the section will only discuss some of the central
notions: cognitive units and domains, and profiling, on the level of word class, in
clauses and speech events.
From a cognitive point of view most linguistic expressions are based on
the perception of objects or situations in the real world. Initially this intake
is probably a rather chaotic assembly of perceptual stimuli. Before this
crude cognitive intake can be ‘translated’ into linguistic expressions, it
needs to be structured into more tangible cognitive units. If we try to
investigate the cognitive processes involved in this translation, the most
pressing questions are:
• How are cognitive units established?
• How are these cognitive units translated into the lexical categories under-
lying individual words?
• How are the words combined when a more complex situation is con-
ceptualized and verbalized?
In the following we will try to answer these three questions, basing our
account on Langacker’s framework.

 
1 9 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
CIRCLE
domain: space
(a)
ARC
domain: circle
(b)
Figure 4.19
Cognitive domains and cognitive units: CIRCLE and ARC
(Langacker 1987a: 184)
Cognitive intake, cognitive units and domains15
Even if one assumes, as we have just done, that the cognitive intake of a
situation consists of a huge number of diverse stimuli, this intake is never-
theless brought under control immediately. One way of explaining this con-
trolling process was presented in Chapters 1 and 2. There we argued that
by virtue of their gestalt properties the most salient objects, organisms and
persons are readily identified as members of certain basic level categories.
Langacker, however, takes a more abstract view, claiming that each stimu-
lus is evaluated with respect to what he calls domains. According to him
(Langacker 1987a: 147) domains are ‘contexts for the characterization of a
semantic unit’ (i.e. ‘cognitive unit’ indicated by small italicized caps in the
following). The most elementary domains are space and vision, tempera-
ture, taste, pressure, pain and colour.
The function of these elementary domains, and of the space domain in
particular, is most obvious where geometric figures are involved. Figure 4.19
illustrates this for the cognitive units CIRCLE and ARC, using boxes to indicate
domains and bold lines to symbolize cognitive units. Diagram (a) shows
how the cognitive unit CIRCLE is characterized in relation to the domain of
two-dimensional space. Applying the figure/ground contrast, the circle is
the figure or profile while the domain functions as ground or base. (With
‘profile’ and ‘base’ Langacker introduces another metaphor for figure and
ground, which seems particularly well suited to capture the contrast involved
in these cognitive processes.) Unlike CIRCLE, the cognitive unit ARC cannot
be sufficiently defined only with respect to the space domain. If ARC were
only profiled in relation to the space domain, it would only represent a curved
line and not a segment of a circle. This is why in diagram (b) the domain
is not two-dimensional space, but the conception of a circle. In other words,
the definition of ARC requires two steps, each involving an instance of

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 9 3
figure/ground segregation. On the first level CIRCLE is profiled as a cognitive
unit which, on the second level, provides the domain for ARC. Since ‘circle’
is the more specific and therefore immediately relevant domain for ARC, it
is called its primary domain.
ARC is just a simple example of how more specific domains emerge from
the elementary domains. To turn to a more elaborate example, which also
illustrates how different domains can be evoked simultaneously, let us look
at the cognitive unit BODY. This unit is characterized in relation to the basic
domain ‘space’ as far as its shape is concerned; it is also specified in rela-
tion to other basic domains like ‘colour’, ‘temperature’, etc. These basic
domains thus form the matrix for the cognitive unit BODY. The unit BODY in
turn provides the domain for ARM, the unit ARM the domain for HAND, ELBOW,
etc. The cognitive unit HAND denotes the domain for the more specific cog-
nitive unit FINGER, and finally FINGER can be seen as the (primary) domain for
the profiled unit KNUCKLE.
However, there are cognitive units that cannot be defined in terms of
the basic domains of ‘space’, ‘temperature’ or ‘colour’. Langacker’s example
(1987a: 185) is the unit UNCLE, which is defined with reference to the
domains ’person’, ’gender’, ’birth’ and ’life cycle’, ’parent/child relationship’
and ’sibling relationship’. By considering these we arrive at a more specific
primary domain for UNCLE, which is, to put it somewhat loosely, character-
ized by the notions of person, brother and of mother/father.
From this discussion it emerges that Langacker’s conception of
domain (or context) is more general than the notion of context developed
in Section 1.3. There we defined context as the mental representation of
the interaction of related lexical categories, mostly basic level categories
like BEACH, SAND, SPADE and TOWEL. For Langacker, context includes domains
that are much more elementary or (in the naive sense of the word)
‘abstract’, such as space, vision, temperature, taste and colour. If several
of these domains are applied to the profiling of one and the same cogni-
tive unit, the result is a matrix of elementary domains, which is superfi-
cially reminiscent of orthodox linguistic descriptions of meaning in terms
of features. The difference is that in Langacker’s view these elementary
domains are not ‘derived’ or ‘abstracted’ from the meaning of individual
words, but they are ‘basic’ in the sense that they represent basic human
experiences and are not reducible to other, more fundamental, domains.
In other words, they are the cognitive tools with which we approach and
master the world.
This matrix of domains is the base (or ground) against which cognitive
units are profiled (as figure). The process involved is really pre-linguistic in

 
1 9 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.20
Profiling options for the cognitive unit group
(adapted from Langacker 1987b: 69)
the sense that in principle it does not determine what kind of linguistic expres-
sion will be used to render the cognitive unit. Thus the cognitive unit which
was provisionally labelled KNUCKLE above may be expressed by the noun knuckle,
but in a certain situation it may be subsumed under the verbal action KNOCK
and will then be expressed by the verb knock. Similarly, the cognitive unit
ELBOW can be rendered by the noun elbow, but in the phrase bend one’s arm,
it will be expressed by the verb bend. As these examples show, the transla-
tion of cognitive units into cognitive categories (our second introductory
question) is closely linked with the choice of word class. The governing prin-
ciple is again the principle of prominence, here the selection of what is imme-
diately relevant for the rendering of a certain situation, and this is perhaps
the most impressive application of the figure/ground contrast in cognitive
processing.
Profiling objects, persons and relations: the emergence
of word classes16
To study the process of word class selection more closely let us assume that
we have profiled a complex cognitive unit consisting of three individuals who
somehow belong together. Compare Figure 4.20, where diagram (a) illustrates
the cognitive unit (the individuals are symbolized by the small circles, the
relation of togetherness by the lines connecting them).
Diagrams (b) and (c) represent the two ways in which this cognitive unit
can be turned into a cognitive category. Taking the cognitive unit as base
(or ground), it is possible to highlight the relation between the three indi-
viduals, as suggested by (b). This profiled relation can be expressed by the adverb
together (as proposed by Langacker), and also by the adjective common or by
the verb share, as in the following examples:
The three people were together.
The three people have many common views and hobbies.
The group share their views and hobbies.

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 9 5
In more general terms, we may say that the relation of togetherness and
other cognitive relations can be rendered by verbs, adjectives, certain adverbs
and – to complete the list – by prepositions.
The second profiling option (see diagram (c)) involves the cognitive unit
as a whole, including the individuals involved and their relationship; in
fact a whole cognitive region with all its components and their intercon-
nections is profiled. This profiled cognitive region is rendered by a noun,
the lexical item group; alternatively it might be expressed by a pronoun or
by a more complex nominal phrase like The Haydn Trio.
Admittedly, the kind of profiling options observed with cognitive units
like GROUP (or KNUCKLE or ELBOW) are not all that frequent. Normally, the facets
of a conceived situation are either suited for ‘nominal’ profiles (i.e. those
expressed by nouns and pronouns) or for relational profiles (verbs, adjectives
and prepositions). Consider, for example, the situation of cooking a meal:
it is fairly clear that the ingredients and the pots, pans and bowls in which
the meal is prepared are denoted by nouns; the basic actions of cutting,
turning and putting things into the vessels are rendered by verbs, though
for more specialized activities there may be a choice between a verb denot-
ing the action or a noun denoting the tool (mix vs mixer). What is more
common than a noun/verb alternative is a choice between two relational
profiles, for instance between a verb of motion and a preposition, as in the
following examples:
1. (a) She entered the room
(b) into the room
2. (a) He left the room
(b) out of the room
3. (a) She climbed the tree
(b) up the tree
These pairs of motion verbs and directional prepositions are also the prime
examples for the fact that relational profiles have an internal figure/ground
organization. As discussed in Section 4.1, prepositions like out and up (and
also into) denote a relationship between a mobile trajector (the figure) and
a stationary landmark (the ground), and this is also true of verbs of motion.
The question is: why are identical trajector/landmark relationships
expressed in two ways, by verbs and prepositions? Or, more generally, how
can the variation between word classes be explained? Looking for a cogni-
tive explanation, Langacker suggests that the choice of word class is linked
to and even determined by our cognitive abilities, in particular our ability
to scan the cognitive input.

 
1 9 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Scanning and word class distinction17
The assumed basic procedure of scanning is the identification of similar and
dissimilar items, e.g. of white and black (or coloured) dots (Langacker 1987a:
101ff). Obviously, this is the principle of scanners that record the points of
a picture or some other kind of document. After the scanning operation has
been carried out, the accumulated information is made available on the com-
puter screen or as a printout. Compared with this technical process, cogni-
tive processing by humans, as it is conceived by Langacker, is more flexible
and permits a major distinction between summary scanning and
sequential scanning.
In summary scanning, the facets of a situation, as reflected in a cogni-
tive unit, are examined one after the other, the data are added up, and when
the scanning process has been completed, all the relevant aspects of the
cognitive unit are assembled in the observer’s mind as a whole, as a single
‘gestalt’ (see Section 1.2). This kind of scanning, which largely corresponds
to computer scanning, is suitable for nominal profiles because it is capable
of making a whole cognitive region simultaneously available and explains
the kind of comprehensiveness of meaning that is typical of nouns. Yet, as
we will see, summary scanning can also generate certain relational profiles
which are expressed by prepositions or adjectives.
Compared with the summary approach, sequential scanning is more
restricted in its application; in fact, it is only used for events (i.e. processes
involving change). As with summary scanning, the relevant cognitive units
are examined successively, but the data are only added up for a certain stage
of the event; when this is done a new set of scanning data is collected for
the next stage of the event, and so on. As a result, we are faced with a
sequence of episodes that differ from each other, thus representing the change
implicit in an event. The effect is similar to watching a film or a video. Just
as the speed of the presentation keeps us from distinguishing between the
individual pictures of the film, the even greater speed of cognitive processing
suggests that the perceived event is an uninterrupted action. As this descrip-
tion suggests, sequential scanning is thus suitable for temporal relations and
is predominantly expressed by (finite) verbs. The difference can best be illus-
trated for examples involving a clear trajector/landmark contrast, and this
takes us back to the sets of motion verbs and prepositions listed under (1)–(3).
Figure 4.21 illustrates the different types of scanning underlying the first
pair, the verb enter and the preposition into; also included is the related
preposition in.

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 9 7
....
....
....
....
(a) sequential scanning: enter
(b) summary scanning: into
(c) summary scanning: in
trajector
landmark
trajector
(mobile)
trajector
(stable)
landmark
(stable)
time
Figure 4.21
Sequential and summary scanning: enter, into and in
(adapted from Langacker 1987a: 144, 245)
This diagrammatic representation seems to be more convincing for
sequential scanning. Just as in a film the process is divided up into indi-
vidual pictures, which stand for an indefinite number of processing stages.
Each stage is characterized by a certain relationship of trajector (the person
entering) and landmark (the room), which differs slightly from the neigh-
bouring pictures. Seen in sequence, these processing stages reflect the motion
of the trajector into the landmark.
Summary scanning is more difficult to render by means of a diagram.
Looking at the representation of into in diagram (b), we must keep in mind
that it reflects the result rather than the individual stages of the scanning
process. The various positions of the trajector along the path are, as it were,
added up and projected into a single picture. The configuration of small
circles stands for a total view of the path followed by the moving trajector.
The landmark, though scanned over and over again like the trajector, does
not change and is therefore symbolized by a single (larger) circle. In the
case of in (Figure 4.21(c)) the nature of the scanning operation cannot be
deduced from the diagram at all. Since not only the landmark but also the
trajector is stable, one might easily get the (wrong) impression that this can
be established in a single scanning operation. In fact repeated scanning oper-
ations are necessary to ascertain that the trajector is indeed stable. So figure
(c) must be understood as a summary view of the relationship between tra-
jector and landmark. Similar results are achieved when adjectival relations

 
1 9 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
are scanned (e.g. red, large, parallel). In the case of nouns the scanning oper-
ation is much more complex, since the various elements and interconnec-
tions of the cognitive region must be scanned.18
Syntactic figure and ground revisited
Profiling cognitive regions as nouns and relations as verbs, adjectives and
prepositions provides the raw material from which coherent utterances are
constructed. This means that we can now go on to the last of our three ini-
tial questions and ask ourselves how the words and the underlying con-
cepts combine to form clauses and sentences. This also takes us back to
our discussion of clause patterns in Section 4.2. To give an example of
what cognitive processing has achieved at this stage, let us imagine that
we are dealing with the situation of a girl (Susan) preparing a Greek salad.
To recapitulate the major cognitive processes that have already been car-
ried out, we may make the following assumptions: the Greek salad situa-
tion has sparked off numerous cognitive stimuli; these stimuli have been
profiled in relation to such basic domains as space and taste and with respect
to more specific domains like food, vegetable, and vessel (the latter as a base
for BOWL); the resulting cognitive units have been sifted for situational rel-
evance (filtering out as irrelevant for SUSAN that she is wearing jeans, for
instance, or for OIL that it can be used as fuel); as a final step the cognitive
units have been profiled as cognitive regions (nouns) or relations (verbs and
prepositions). The result is documented in Figure 4.22.
In this diagram, the background, the kitchen with its furniture and equip-
ment and its additional functions apart from preparing salad, is already
marked off as setting and left undifferentiated. The circles indicate the nom-
inal profiles (the person involved, the ingredients, the vessel used, and the
actual product, the Greek salad), while the relational profiles are signalled
by the lines connecting the circles and the respective verbs and preposi-
tions. If we recall the stage metaphor it is easy to see that the profiled nom-
inal elements may be compared with the actors on the stage and the profiled
relations with their interactions or, more generally, that the nouns stand
for the participants of the situation and the verbs and prepositions for their
interaction. It is with this in mind that Langacker talks of an interactive
network.
This introduces another metaphor which suggests that there are many
paths along which the participants can be connected and from which only
some are selected as sentence constituents. This is shown in Figure 4.23.
While diagram (a) is a schematic version of Figure 4.22, diagram (b) shows

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
1 9 9
olive
tomato
sheep’s
milk
cheese
onion
Susan
bowl
setting: kitchen
spoon
Greek
salad
oil
vinegar
«into»
«cut»
«into»
«into»
«pour»
«hold» «pre-
pare»
«pour»
«into»
«into»
«into»
«turn»
«in»
«in»
«slice»
«slice»
«contain»
«contain»
«contain»
«contain»
«contain»
«contain»
«pick
up»
Figure 4.22
Cognitive interactive network for the Greek salad situation
setting
(a)
(b)
setting
Figure 4.23
Interactive network and the selection of action chains/sentence
constituents
(schematic representation after Langacker 1990: 219)
how a certain combination of interrelated participants are chosen as the basis
of the clause pattern. As we know from Section 4.2, this process of selection
is governed by role archetypes, action chains and mental interactions
between participants, with the additional provision that the setting can be

 
2 0 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
included as container for a participant. The result is a syntactic structure in
which the subject functions as figure, while the object may be, but need
not be, added; if it is, it functions as ground. To return to Figure 4.22 and
the Greek salad situation, we would expect that the speaker will select either
the general action chain comprising an agent–subject as syntactic figure and
a patient–object as syntactic ground (example (a) below), or that he will
choose a sequence of more specific action chains in which agent/patient
chains and agent/patient/locative chains are combined (example (b)); a third
possibility is the combination of a setting-subject as syntactic figure (the
Greek salad) which is linked to one or several patient roles acting as syn-
tactic ground in a ‘container–contained’ relation (example (c)):
a. Susan is preparing the Greek salad.
b. Susan puts the oil and the vinegar into the bowl, stirs them, adds
onions, tomatoes and olives and puts a large slice of sheep’s milk cheese
on top.
c. The Greek salad contains onions, tomatoes, olives and sheep’s milk
cheese.
Now that we have produced some actual sentences related to the Greek salad
situation we may leave this subject with the feeling that the principle of
prominence has proved helpful in answering our three initial questions. The
concluding sections of the chapter will show that the figure/ground con-
trast can also be applied to pragmatic aspects.
Viewing arrangement
According to Langacker (1995: 9ff) prominence is one of the three prin-
ciples guiding cognitive processing; the other two, which in a way are dove-
tailed with it, are specificity and perspective. The principle of specificity
determines the level at which we interact with the world around us (at the
basic, subordinate or superordinate level; see Chapter 2).19 The second addi-
tional principle, perspective, is more often called viewing arrangement
by Langacker.20 This notion is best approached via the +STAGE+ metaphor,
which has already been mentioned several times, mostly to describe what
happens ‘onstage’, e.g. that participants in the action must be distin-
guished from the setting (see Section 4.2). However, the +STAGE+ metaphor
also takes into account that there is an audience, and it is in this aspect,
the relationship between offstage observer and onstage event, that the view-
ing arrangement manifests itself.

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
2 0 1
The normal or ‘canonical’ arrangement is that the relationship between
audience (speaker/hearer) and onstage event is not expressed directly. What
is expressed in an utterance is the onstage event, and this is why the ‘third’
person perspective is the norm. An alternative view, which is nevertheless
also very frequent, is the egocentric viewing arrangement. Here the rela-
tionship between speaker/hearer and event is made explicit and expressed
by the use of the deictic first person pronouns to refer to the speaker and
second person pronouns for reference to the hearer. Other deictic (or
indexical) items, such as here and now, this and other determiners are also
understood as expressing reference to the ‘viewing position’ of the speaker.
Compare the following examples where the canonical viewing arrangement
is represented by (a), the egocentric variants (b) and (c):
a. (Where is the vinegar?) It is on the table. (relation to speaker/hearer not
expressed)
b. I can see the vinegar. (relation to speaker expressed)
c. Have you seen the vinegar? (relation to hearer expressed)
According to Langacker, the viewing arrangement also provides a cog-
nitive explanation of a number of other pragmatic phenomena. Among them
are the major speech acts such as assertions (a typical onstage utterance such
as It is on the table in (a)) and ordering (prototypically a speaker’s directive
act addressed to the hearer in an egocentric viewing arrangement, as in Please
pass the vinegar). In addition the viewing arrangement is also assumed to
cover what Langacker calls the psychological aspects of speech acts, which
encompass the basics of pragmatic description such as Grice’s Cooperative
Principle and Searle’s felicity conditions for successful speech acts.
But how can this diversity of aspects be subsumed under viewing arrange-
ment and more or less be attributed to the speaker’s position? Reviewing
the argument of the last three chapters the solution will perhaps not come
as a surprise. The relationship between onstage event and offstage viewer
(i.e. speaker/hearer) is interpreted as an instance of figure and ground. In
fact, as Langacker (1991: 498) puts it,
the ground should be thought of, almost literally as the vantage point from
which the speaker and hearer conceptualize the content evoked by a nominal
or a finite clause.
In other words, the ground is where the speaker is rooted with not only
his geographical, temporal, social, age and gender background, but also his
psychological considerations about how to ensure that a speech act will be
successful in communication.

 
2 0 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
COGNITIVE FUNCTION
FIGURE
GROUND
(PROFILE, TRAJECTOR)
(BASE, LANDMARK)
ORGANIZING
cognitive unit
cognitive domain
PERCEPTUAL STIMULI
SELECTION OF
nominal profile (nouns,
cognitive unit
WORD CLASS
pronouns) relational
profile (verbs, preposi-
tions, adverbs)
PROFILING IN
trajector
landmark
PREPOSITIONAL
(e.g. ‘fly’ in: fly in the
RELATIONS
soup); see Section 4.1
PROFILING PARTICIPANTS
participants (agent,
setting
IN INTERACTIONS
patient, experiencer);
(location, etc.)
see Section 4.2
SELECTION OF SUBJECT
syntactic figure 
syntactic ground 
AND OBJECT
(subject); see  
(object, major
Section 4.2
complement)
PROFILING IN THE
e.g. onstage position
e.g. offstage position
SPEECH EVENT
of profiled event
of speaker/hearer
Figure 4.24
An overview of major applications of the figure/ground segregation
in Langacker’s Cognitive Grammar
As an attempt to integrate pragmatic considerations into his framework,
the link between speaker/hearer and ground is ingenious. It permits
Langacker to develop an elaborate conception of ‘grounding’, i.e. how the
relationship between onstage event and ground is established by tense, mood,
nominal determiners and indefinite pronouns.21 Whether it also yields
much explanatory detail about speech acts and conversational implicature
over and above the well-known pragmatic descriptions is another question.
To conclude this chapter, Figure 4.24 provides an overview which should
bring home the pervasiveness of the principle of prominence in Langacker’s
framework. By extending and refining the notions of figure and ground, he
has developed the most comprehensive cognitive conception available so far.
Yet in order to give a fair evaluation of where cognitive linguistics stands
today we also need to look at other approaches, especially those that stress
a notion which is less explicit in Langacker’s work, the notion of attention.
Exercises
1. Explain which of the elementary domains (space, temperature, taste,
pressure, pain, colour) are called up, when the following cognitive units

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
2 0 3
are profiled: DOG, CHAIR, BALL, APPLE, ICE CREAM, SOUP, KISS. Which of them are
particularly important in each case?
2. Profiling cognitive units normally goes through many stages involving
elementary and more specific domains. Which domains contribute to
profiling TOE NAIL, KEY HOLE (FRONT DOOR) and WINDSCREEN WIPER?
3. The area between the upper and lower arm can be profiled as the nom-
inal category ELBOW or the verbal concept BEND. Show how, under cer-
tain conditions, the parts of the head marked with arrows can be profiled
as nominal and verbal categories.
4. Draw an interactive network modelled on Figure 4.22 for one of the
following situations: BEACH LIFE (see also Figure 1.14), ROAD ACCIDENT or WEDDING
and identify suitable action chains.
5. How can the following sentences be interpreted in terms of viewing
arrangement, i.e. onstage/offstage contrast:
Peter married that beautiful Chinese girl.
Did you attend the wedding?
Then you must have seen her wonderful dress.
It must have cost a fortune.
Like all the other guests, I was fascinated.
Suggestions for further reading
Section 4.1
The study of prepositions was the preoccupation of many first-generation
cognitive linguists. In addition to the publications referred to in the
notes below we would like to mention Cuyckens (1991), Schulze (1988)
and the special issue of Cognitive Linguistics edited by Sinha (1995). For
an example of a more recent analysis see Taylor (2002, ch. 11).

 
2 0 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
1. Basic introductions to the main aspects of figure/ground segregation
can be found in most textbooks on visual perception, e.g. Yantis
(2001) and Gordon (2004).
2. See Talmy (2000/I: 315f) and Schmid (forthcoming) for summaries of
typical characteristics of figures and grounds.
3. For literature on image schemas see Chapter 2, reading note 11.
4. Lakoff’s summary (1987: 416ff) is more easily accessible than
Brugman’s MA thesis published in 1988. See also Taylor’s (1988)
discussion of over and other English and Italian prepositions and the
discussion in Taylor (2002: 474–9).
5. See Vandeloise (1994) for a very useful survey of research into the
preposition in and some basic theoretical issues that are at stake in
the analysis of locative relations and their extensions.
6. The text in the chapter is based on Lakoff (1987: 435ff), but deviates
from his treatment by excluding (bare) image schemas as source
concepts of metaphors and establishing them as constituents of the
mapping scope. See Section 3.1.
Section 4.2
The most comprehensive view of the issues discussed in this section is
provided by Langacker (1991, chs. 7, 8); for a shorter account see
Langacker (1990). See also Taylor (2002, ch. 21).
7. For introductions to the notion of valency see the first two chapters
of Allerton (1982) and the introduction to Herbst et al. (2004:
XXIII–XXXIII). For the function of theta-roles in Transformational
Grammar see Radford (1988: 372ff, repr. 2004), for an applied view
of semantic roles see Quirk et al. (1985: 740ff).
8. Talmy’s notion of force dynamics can be approached through Talmy
(2000/I: 409ff).
9. At this point it might be interesting to draw a comparison with
Halliday’s approach to transitivity, which also distinguishes between
different types of processes with suitable participants: see Halliday
(2004: 106ff).
10. Compare also Newman’s (1996) book-sized cognitive-linguistic study
of the verb give.
11. The differing status of locative adverbials is also treated in traditional
descriptions (e.g. Quirk et al. 1985: 730ff) and has been dealt with in

 
F I G U R E  A N D  G R O U N D
2 0 5
case and valency grammar; see Fillmore (1968) and Halliday (2004:
149ff) on circumstantial elements.
12. For readers with a knowledge of German or Dutch it may be interesting
to study how this explanation can be extended to non-referential
German es, and Dutch er respectively; see Langacker (1991: 351ff). See
also Lakoff’s cognitive explanation of there-constructions (1987: 462ff).
13. The application of the prototype notion to syntactic and other
linguistic phenomena is most extensively discussed by Taylor and
MacLaury (1995, chs 8–12) and Taylor (2002, ch. 8).
14. To integrate passive sentences into his schematic definition of
subjects and clause structure, Langacker postulates that the -ed
morpheme used to form the passive past participle reverses the
figure/ground structure of the active clause, turning the syntactic
ground (the direct object) into the syntactic figure (subject) of the
passive clause. See Langacker (1991: 200f).
Section 4.3
The most comprehensive account of Langacker’s conception is contained
in the two volumes of his Foundations of Cognitive Grammar (1987a/1991).
Two of his articles, (1987b) and (1990), summarize part of the argument
of this section, while three more recent papers (1992, 1993, 1995) pro-
vide concise surveys of his theory together with applications to specific
problems. Further useful sources are Langacker (2000) and (2002), each
containing revised versions of 12 articles that had appeared before.
Langacker’s approach to discourse is developed in Langacker (2001).
In contrast with the reading suggestions for Sections 4.1 and 4.2, the aim
of the following notes is to point out passages in Langacker’s publica-
tions which, in our opinion, might facilitate access to the aspects selected
for discussion.
15. Key passages for understanding the notion of domain and the notion
of profiling things in relation to domains are Langacker (1987a:
147–50 and 183–6), the notion of scope should be approached
through Langacker (1987a: 117–20). See also Taylor (2002: 192–201)
and Croft and Cruse (2004: 15–21).
16. For essentials of nominal and relational profiles see Langacker
(1987a: 198, 214–22, 244–9). See also Langacker (1987b: 58–63, 68–9)
and Taylor (2002, ch.11).

 
2 0 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
17. The central notions of summary and sequential scanning are
introduced in Langacker (1987a: 144–6). The implications of
scanning for verbal processes and ‘atemporal’ relations are
summarized in 1987b (70–5). For the respective passages in 1987a,
see reading note 16. Interesting technical aspects of the scanning
process are discussed in 1987a (101–9, 209–13).
18. Scanning is also thought to be responsible for the distinction between
finite verb forms (as discussed above) and non-finite forms. Their
status and their interaction with auxiliaries in complex verb forms are
investigated in Langacker (1987b: 75–89) and (1991, ch. 5.2).
19. Possible degrees of specificity are illustrated by Langacker for the
‘glass-breaking situation’ (Floyd breaks the glass, etc.). See Langacker
(1991: 296ff).
20. The major aspects of the viewing arrangement are presented in
Langacker (1987a: 122–32). The topic is taken up in Langacker (1991:
494–506), where he contrasts his position with acknowledged
pragmatic thinking.
21. Langacker (1991: 89–91 and 193–7) are suitable as an introduction to
the grounding phenomenon, while (1991: 96–125) provides a survey
of grounding by means of determiners and (1991, ch. 6) is devoted
to the grounding function of auxiliaries. For an interesting parallel
see Halliday’s interpretation of tense, mood and sentence types as
grammatical realizations of the interpersonal language function
(Halliday 2004, ch. 4).

 
C H A P T E R  5
Frames and constructions
5.1 Frames and scripts
The necessity of looking at individual linguistic phenomena within their larger
cognitive context has emerged in many sections of this book; categories were
assembled into cognitive models, emotion concepts were developed into scenarios, and
clause patterns were seen in relation to interactive networks. Still another cognitive
attempt to widen the scope of lexical and grammatical analysis is provided by the
notion of ‘frame’.
Frame and perspective
The notion of frame was introduced into linguistics by Charles Fillmore in
the middle of the 1970s based on his by now classic example, the so-called
‘commercial event’ frame.1 To approach this frame, consider the aspects of
a situation which would be described by using the English verb buy. In the
initial state, a person A owns money and another person or institution D
owns some goods that A wants to have. Taking for granted that the two
participants come to an agreement on the price of the goods, person A gives
a certain sum of money to D, and D surrenders the goods. The final state
is that A owns the goods and D owns the money. Leaving the agreement
aside as some sort of prerequisite, one could then say that the action cat-
egory BUY includes a reference to at least four other categories, namely to a
BUYER, a SELLER, GOODS and MONEY.
This configuration of interacting categories – the frame of BUY – is sum-
marized in Figure 5.1. (Frames will be indicated typographically by small
capitals in square brackets.) Postulating a frame for buy seems to offer at
least two advantages: a single frame can account for various clause patterns,
and it can be applied to different (though related) verbs like sell, cost, pay

 
or charge. First, consider the following sentence which exemplifies a syn-
tactic pattern in which buy may occur:
1. David bought an old shirt from John for ten pounds.
It is easy to see that in this sentence all four components of the [BUY] frame
are rendered linguistically, each in a different syntactic slot: the BUYER
(David) as subject, the GOODS (an old shirt) as direct object, the SELLER (John)
as the first adverbial and the MONEY (ten pounds) as second adverbial. Let us
call this assignment of syntactic roles, which is of course to a large extent
governed by the choice of the verb buy, the syntactic perspective of the
sentence. (Quite obviously, the notion of perspective relies on the principle
of prominence, i.e. on figure/ground segregation, but, as we will see presently,
it includes more than that.)
The perspective of example (1) largely hinges upon the syntax of the
verb buy. It is of course perfectly possible to put a different syntactic per-
spective on the same frame, and this takes us back to the other verbs men-
tioned above, namely sell, cost, pay and charge. For example, choosing the
verb sell would allow us to put the categories SELLER and GOODS into perspective
as subject and object, with the possibility of referring to the BUYER as an in-
direct object, as in example (2). The verb charge perspectivizes the SELLER and
BUYER as subject and object (cf. (3)), and the verb pay the BUYER and MONEY,
with an option to introduce the SELLER as indirect object (cf. (4)).
2. John sold an old shirt to David for ten pounds.
3. John charged David ten pounds for an old shirt.
4. David paid ten pounds to John for an old shirt.
In short, we see that the [BUY] frame is not just a useful tool for the syn-
tactic description of the verb buy, but it can also be applied to the verbs
sell, charge and pay. In terms of the frame notion, the difference between
the four verbs is simply a change of perspective within the same frame. Using
Figure 5.1 as a basis for a more general [COMMERCIAL EVENT] frame, this difference
B
(goods)
A
D
(buyer)
(seller)
C
(money)
buy
Figure 5.1
The [BUY] frame
(after Fillmore 1977a: 104)
2 0 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 0 9
buy
sell
charge
pay
B
Obj
A
Obj
B
Obj
C
Obj
D
from
D
to
C
for
C
for
C
sum
B
for
B
for
A
Subj
A
to
D
Subj
D
Subj
A
Subj
Figure 5.2
The [COMMERCIAL EVENT] frame with the perspectives evoked by the
verbs buy, pay, sell and charge
(after Fillmore 1977a: 106ff)
can be indicated by highlighting those components of the frame that make
up the subject and object for each verb. This is illustrated in Figure 5.2.
The four diagrams show that the two verbs buy and pay describe the com-
mercial event from the BUYER’s perspective, while sell and charge perspectivize
the situation from the SELLER’s point of view. In addition to the choice of
subjects and objects, Figure 5.2 includes the prepositions that are used in
the adverbials. This is a first sign that the frame approach goes beyond the
figure and ground approach in that it pays more attention to the less promi-
nent parts of sentences like adverbials.
The frame notion: different conceptions 
and related concepts
When Fillmore first used the notion of frame he defined it (1975: 124) as
any system of linguistic choices – the easiest cases being collections of words,
but also including choices of grammatical rules or linguistic categories – that
can get associated with prototypical instances of scenes.

 
2 1 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
This means that at that time, a frame was regarded as an array of linguistic
options which were associated with so-called ‘scenes’, a notion related to
our term ‘situation’ (see Section 1.3). Starting out from this linguistic posi-
tion, the conception of the frame notion has shifted towards a cognitive inter-
pretation. This becomes clear when we look at later characterizations of the
notion of frame, also taken from Fillmore. In 1985 he says that frames are
‘specific unified frameworks of knowledge, or coherent schematizations of expe-
rience’ (1985: 223), in 1992 he views frames as ‘cognitive structures [ . . . ]
knowledge of which is presupposed for the concepts encoded by the words’
(Fillmore and Atkins 1992: 75). What this collection of definitions and expla-
nations shows is that while frames were originally conceived as linguistic con-
structs, they have by now received a cognitive reinterpretation.
Such a cognitive interpretation is even more convincing for the notion
of perspective. Thus instead of advocating an independent ‘syntactic per-
spective’, one may argue that every sentence evokes a certain cognitive per-
spective on a situation by the choice of the verb and the particular syntactic
pattern that it governs.
Accepting that perspective is a cognitive rather than a syntactic notion,
one may ask what lies behind it. The basis for perspective is mainly pro-
vided by the cognitive ability of directing one’s attention.2 Among other
things, the perspective from which we view a situation depends on what
attracts our attention. Thus we use the verb buy in order to describe a com-
mercial event when we want to direct the hearer’s attention to the BUYER
and the GOODS, and the verb sell when the focus of our attention is on the
SELLER and the GOODS.
The reader who has followed our account of Langacker’s Cognitive
Grammar in the last two sections of Chapter 4 will probably be struck by
the parallels between the figure and ground approach and the frame and
attention approach as it is presented here. Langacker’s idea of the profiling
of participants in an interactive network as syntactic figure and ground is
indeed very similar to the notion of perspectivizing two elements of a frame
as subject and object. This parallel, one may well claim, is hardly surpris-
ing, given the fact that both approaches strongly rely on Fillmore’s early
Case Grammar. In addition, both approaches share the belief that clause
patterns cannot be seen in isolation but against their cognitive background
(i.e. the interactive networks or frames respectively).
However, the two approaches are far from identical. First, researchers work-
ing in the frame paradigm are much more interested in problems related
to the meaning of the verbs that belong to a frame. Thus the frame notion
has already been used for detailed semantic analyses of a number of verbs,

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 1 1
spend
cost
B
on
A
Subj
C
Obj
B
Subj
C
Sum
A
Objind
[D]
[D]
Figure 5.3
The [COMMERCIAL EVENT] frame with the perspective evoked by the
verbs spend and cost
(after Fillmore 1977b: 107f)
and this has developed into the project of a frame-based dictionary.3
Second, the frame approach presents a unified view of syntactic patterns,
while Langacker tackles the problem on various levels of cognitive processing.
Third, and perhaps most important, on each level of his analysis Langacker
is almost exclusively interested in the two prominent entities, i.e. on the
level of clause in the syntactic figure (or subject) and the syntactic ground
(or object). Here, the frame notion has a wider scope, because indirect objects
and adverbials are also addressed. In other words, the principle of promi-
nence – as suggested by its name – applies to those elements in a sentence
that attract the main part of our attention and are therefore prominent; the
frame notion, however, also has something to say about linguistic items that
attract only a small portion of our attention potential. This will become
particularly evident when we turn to Talmy’s notion of the ‘windowing of
attention’ in ‘event-frames’ in Section 5.2.4
The wider scope of the frame approach also shows up in the fact that the
[COMMERCIAL EVENT] frame even captures cognitive categories whose prominence
is so low that they are not expressed on the linguistic surface at all. Two verbs
where this is the case are spend and cost, as used in examples (5) and (6).
5. David spent ten pounds on an old shirt.
6. The old shirt cost David ten pounds.
Figure 5.3 shows that both verbs imply a SELLER who cannot be rendered
linguistically (and is therefore put in brackets). Instead the perspective directs
the attention to the BUYER and the MONEY when spend is used, and to the
GOODS when the verb cost is chosen.
As it has emerged, frames can be conceived as a way of describing the
cognitive context which provides the background for and is associated with

 
2 1 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
cognitive categories. There is thus an obvious similarity with the ‘cognitive
models’ introduced in Section 1.3. The difference is that in our conception
cognitive models are of a more general nature than frames, so that frames are
just one of a variety of cognitive models which also include the ‘scenarios’ men-
tioned in Section 3.2, domains and interactive networks (see Sections 4.2
and 4.3) and the ‘scripts’ that will be discussed below. Using this termi-
nology, a frame is to be seen as a type of cognitive model which represents
the knowledge and beliefs pertaining to specific and frequently recurring
situations.5
From frames to scripts: flying on a plane
Linguistics is not the only discipline where the frame notion has been applied
with quite impressive results (see reading note 1 this section). A second impor-
tant field of research has been artificial intelligence, i.e. the discipline that
researches the potential of computers to copy human behaviour. Here, the
frame notion has been used in a more general, though also more technical,
way than in linguistics. In this use of the term, the relevance of frames extends
over the boundaries of single sentences to much larger linguistic and cog-
nitive units. In order to understand how this wider conception of frames
has an impact on linguistic phenomena, consider the following little story:
Sue caught a plane from London to Madrid. After she had found her seat
she checked whether the life vest was beneath it, but she could not find
it. So she asked the flight attendant to find one for her.
What should attract attention here are the two occurrences of the def-
inite article the. According to the rules of English grammar the definite arti-
cle is used when one assumes that the hearer knows which specific person
or thing one is talking about. If this is not the case the indefinite article is
used as in a plane in the first sentence. Given these rules, one may ask why
the life vest and the flight attendant are both accompanied by a definite arti-
cle, although they are neither mentioned previously in the text nor specified
later. This question is particularly interesting from the point of view of arti-
ficial intelligence, because it touches a notorious problem: even a computer
which has been equipped with all the rules of English grammar and an exten-
sive lexicon would have difficulty with our story, because it would look in
vain for earlier references that might be helpful in identifying the life vest
and the flight attendant.
Why, then, do the two uses of the definite article sound completely nat-
ural, although they cannot be explained with the rules of grammar alone?

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 1 3
The reason is that in order to understand the definite references we need to
make inferences that are based on our world knowledge, and this is where
the computer has a hard time of it. Everybody who has been on a plane
knows (among many other things) that airlines provide life vests for all pas-
sengers, which are usually stored beneath the seats, and that there are flight
attendants whose job it is to help passengers. All this knowledge is activated
when a plane is mentioned in the first sentence of the text and it is this
knowledge which allows us to make the right inferences without effort.
As an attempt to equip computers with the necessary world knowledge,
the notion of frame was introduced into artificial intelligence. Thus the com-
puter scientist Marvin Minsky defined a frame as ‘a data-structure for rep-
resenting a stereotyped situation’ (Minsky 1975: 212). The idea is that in
our plane example the cognitive category PLANE would activate a whole bun-
dle of other categories which belong to the same [FLYING ON A PLANE] frame,
for example PILOT, FLIGHT ATTENDANT, LIFE VEST, SAFETY BELT, FIRST CLASS, ECONOMY
CLASS, SAFETY INSTRUCTIONS and so on. All these categories and the specific rela-
tions that exist between them (e.g. X has a Y, X is on Y, X is a part of Y)
are part of the frame and must somehow be fed into the computer. In addi-
tion to this rather general frame there are many so-called subframes which
capture the knowledge of still more specific situations of a flight, e.g.
[EATING], [WATCHING THE MOVIE] and [GOING TO THE TOILET]. In view of the com-
plexity of many everyday situations, Minsky suggested that our knowledge
should be represented in complex ‘frame-systems’ (1975: 227ff).
Obviously cognitive categories play a major role within frames. Loosely
speaking, categories act both as anchors and as triggers for frames, because
it is in the format of categories and their interrelations that frames are
designed and it is by the same categories that they are activated. A further
function of categories is to provide so-called ‘default assignments’ (i.e. val-
ues for slots in the frame that apply under ‘normal’ conditions) by supplying
context-dependent prototypes (see Section 1.3). For example in the [EATING
ON A PLANE] subframe you will not expect to have your meal served on a
huge dinner table, set with expensive tableware and a candle. As far as food
and drinks are concerned you will presumably not reckon with a gourmet
meal accompanied by a vintage wine (unless you are used to flying first
class). All these expectations that are based on our experience and stored
in our long-term memory are part of the frame-system and influence our
ability to produce and understand the language related to it.
To keep matters simple the [FLYING ON A PLANE] frame has so far been pre-
sented as if it were a motley collection of categories. But this is of course a
somewhat superficial way of looking at it. On more detailed inspection it

 
2 1 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
1. Pre-flight stage
go to airport →look for check-in counter →check
in →go through customs (on international flights) →
look for gate →wait for flight to be called
2. The flight
Pre-take-off stage
board plane →look for seat →stow away hand
luggage → sit down and buckle up safety belt →
listen to safety instructions →take-off
Flight stage
get drinks →get meal →talk to neighbour, sleep,
read, watch movie, etc. →go to toilet →buckle up
safety belt→land
Post-landing stage
unbuckle safety belt →get up →get hand luggage
3. Post-flight stage
get off the plane →get luggage →go through
customs (on international flights) →get out of airport
Figure 5.4
A rough summary of the [FLYING ON A PLANE] script
turns out that a flight exhibits a very predictable temporal structure in which
one stage is often a prerequisite for the next stage. Viewing the flight from
such a sequential perspective, we go beyond simple frames and move into
the so-called scripts, i.e. knowledge structures that are particularly designed
for frequently recurring event sequences. Before looking at one example
of a script in more detail, we will round off our discussion of flights with
a rough script-version of their sequential structure (cf. Figure 5.4).
The restaurant script
Although Figure 5.4 may give someone who has never been on a plane a
fairly good idea of what happens on a flight, it is clearly insufficient as a
thorough instruction for behaviour on a plane. To demonstrate what a more
finely grained script would look like let us have a look at what is probably
the most famous script in the literature, the [RESTAURANT] script as developed
by the computer scientist Roger Schank and the social psychologist Robert
Abelson (Schank and Abelson 1977: 42ff).
On a general level the [RESTAURANT] script can be divided into four scenes,
namely entering, ordering, eating and exiting. In order for the first, the enter-
ing, scene to occur, a number of conditions must be fulfilled, as summa-
rized in Figure 5.5.
It is clear that the main conditions for the application of the [RESTAURANT]
script concern the people and the objects that make up the situation. Starting
out from these props and roles, we then assume that the entering scene

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 1 5
Props
Roles
Entry conditions
tables
customer (S)
S is hungry
menu
waiter (W)
S has money
food (F)
cook (C)
bill
cashier (M)
money
owner (O)
Figure 5.5
Preconditions of the
[RESTAURANT] script
(after Schank and Abelson 1977: 43)
(customer is seated at table)
(menu on table)
S TRANSFERS menu to S
W TRANSFERS W to table
W TRANSFERS menu to S
S MAKES choice of food ***
S TRANSFERS signal to W
W TRANSFERS W to table
S TRANSFERS ‘want food’ to W
W TRANSFERS W to C
W TRANSFERS (TRANSFER food) to C
C DO (prepare food script)
C TRANSFERS ‘no food’ to W
W TRANSFERS W to S
(go back to *** or forward to exiting scene)
Note: For an explanation of the abbreviations see Figure 5.5
(W brings menu)
(S asks for menu)
S TRANSFERS signal to W
W TRANSFERS W to table
S TRANSFERS ‘need menu’ to W
W TRANSFERS W to menu
Figure 5.6
Ordering scene of the [RESTAURANT] script
(adapted from Schank and Abelson 1977: 43)
can take place: the customer enters the restaurant, looks for a table, decides
where to sit, walks to the table and sits down on a chair. Each of these actions
is a prerequisite for the next to be performed, and the whole scene taken
together is necessary for the ensuing scene to take place in which the meal
is ordered. The ordering scene is represented in somewhat greater detail in
Figure 5.6. In this figure the actions that are performed by the participants

 
2 1 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
are expressed in a very basic kind of language which is similar to the com-
mands used in a computer program.
How is the ordering scene integrated into the script? Figure 5.6 shows
that when the scene begins, three states of affairs are possible: there may
be a menu on the table, the waiter may bring the menu or the customer
may ask the waiter to bring the menu. Depending on which of these three
states applies, the script runs along three different paths, which should how-
ever all end with the customer having the menu. Once the customer has
the menu in hand, the next step is the choice of food, which is commu-
nicated to the waiter, who walks into the kitchen and informs the cook of
the order. After that, again two paths are possible: the cook may prepare
the food and in so doing create the precondition for the eating scene.
Alternatively, the cook may signal the waiter that the desired food is not
available. When this happens, there are again two alternative continuations
of the script. Either the customer makes another choice of food (this means
that the script is resumed at the point indicated by *** in Figure 5.6) or the
customer decides to leave the restaurant. In the second case the script jumps
to the exiting scene or, more specifically, to the variant of the exiting scene
in which the customer leaves the restaurant without paying.
The eating and the exiting scene can also be represented in the script
format in a similar way. The reader may now feel that the contents of the
[RESTAURANT] script are fairly banal and that the whole business of writing
scripts ultimately comes down to translating things that we all know into
a special format. Although it is true that we are all familiar with the infor-
mation stored in scripts, such a view misses the point; it disregards the fact
that when we produce or listen to language we unconsciously fill in an incred-
ible amount of information taken from frames and scripts. And what is more,
without supplying this information we would certainly not be able to under-
stand even the most simple pieces of discourse. To show that this is true,
consider the two stories below, taken in slightly adapted versions from Schank
and Abelson (1977: 38f):
1. John went into a restaurant. He asked the waitress for coq au vin. He
paid the bill and left.
2. John went into a restaurant. He saw a waitress. He got up and went home.
Although the two stories roughly give the same amount of information,
the first is perfectly understandable, while the second does not seem to make
sense. The reason for this discrepancy is that the first story fits our inter-
nalized script of a meal in a restaurant, and therefore we have no difficulty
in filling in the missing parts, e.g. that John presumably looks at the menu
before he orders and that he eats his meal before he pays and leaves. Indeed

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 1 7
the script may be so powerful that when we form a mental representation
of the story we do not even notice that the important eating scene is not
expressed linguistically. The potential of scripts, and incidentally also
frames, to ensure that the right inferences are made is especially important
in face-to-face conversation. Here speakers often rely very much on the
hearer’s knowledge of a script when they leave out details or whole stages
in their description of an event.
In contrast to the first story, the second does not correspond to the script
expectations called up by the initial sentence. When they are processed, the
three sentences merely describe a collection of situations which do not com-
bine to build a coherent whole. This means that unless links are provided
by a script, the events cannot be brought into a meaningful causal chain.6
Altogether this section has discussed a number of conceptions and appli-
cations of the notions of frame and script. Frames were presented as struc-
tured patterns of knowledge related to recurring situations, which are
reflected linguistically in the lexical relations between verbs and in the syn-
tax of clauses. To account for knowledge structures that represent larger
sequences of events connected by causal chains, the notion of script was
introduced. In the next section another conception of the frame notion will
be introduced, namely Talmy’s universal ‘event-frames’.
Exercises
1. Which of the following verbs fit Fillmore’s commercial transaction frame
and which perspective do they represent?
leave (to one’s heirs), inherit, auction off, pawn, distribute, receive
Does the frame have to be changed for some of these verbs?
2. Dirven et al. (1982) use the notions of scene (i.e. our frames) and per-
spective to describe the difference between say, tell and talk. Study our
representation for the verb say and complete the diagrams for tell and talk.
hearer
message
speaker
say
He said: ‘Be careful!’
hearer
message
speaker
tell
She told the news
to everybody
hearer
message
speaker
talk
They talked to each other

 
2 1 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3. Just like other types of cognitive models, frames and especially scripts
are culture-dependent. To show this, discuss how your model of a child’s
birthday party differs from the following one, which is given by Minsky
(1975: 243):
dress
Sunday best
present
must please host
must be bought and gift-wrapped
games
hide and seek, pin tail on donkey
decor
balloons, favours, crepe-paper
party-meal
cake, ice-cream, soda, hot-dogs
cake
candles, blow-out, wish, sing birthday song
ice-cream
standard three-flavour
4. Try to write the scripts [AT THE HAIRDRESSER’S] and [IN THE CINEMA]. What
are the obligatory elements of these scripts; which optional aspects (e.g.
‘buy popcorn’) can be integrated?
5. Here are two little stories which call up the [ORAL EXAM] script. Explain why
the first seems to make sense whereas the second does not, although both
give roughly the same amount of information:
(a) Before her oral exam Jane was very nervous. Nevertheless she man-
aged to answer all questions. When the professor told her that she
had passed, she jumped in the air.
(b) Before her oral exam Jane was very nervous. Nevertheless she talked
for some time to a professor. When she went home, she was very sad.
5.2 Event-frames and the windowing 
of attention
As has been shown, frames can provide valuable tools for the linguistic and
conceptual analysis of situations like buying and selling, or having a meal in a
restaurant. This section will demonstrate how the notion of frame can be extended 
to describe more general situations, such as event chains linked by temporal
sequences or causation.
To a large extent, the explanatory power of the commercial event-frame
discussed in the last section lies in the fact that it captures only the more
general elements of situations of buying and selling. Thus the frame con-
tains no information as to the people who participate in the commercial
event, the kind of goods that are purchased and the particular sum of money

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 1 9
that changes hands. Nevertheless, the information provided by the frame
is still fairly specific. For example, the everyday practices of paying by credit
card or by cheque would require an alteration of the original frame. In cul-
tures where goods are traded for other goods rather than sold for money,
the frame would not be valid at all. In more general terms, frames as we
have got to know them are cognitive structures that are context- and culture-
dependent.
The question is whether the notion of frames is restricted to certain con-
texts and cultures, or whether it can be conceived of as being a much more
basic cognitive phenomenon that underlies a wide variety of real-world
situations and is shared by all human beings. Such a universalist–cognitive
line of research is pursued by Talmy in his investigation of event types (Talmy
2000/II: 25ff).
Motion events and motion event-frames
To understand Talmy’s notion of event, or more specifically, motion event,
it is helpful to recapitulate some aspects of situations with moving objects
that have already been mentioned in this book. In Section 4.1, the example
of a balloon flying over a house was used to illustrate the way in which the
perceptual input of a real-world situation is organized in terms of figure (or
‘trajector’) and ground (or ‘landmark’). In this example, there can be no
doubt that the moving balloon functions as ‘figure’ while the stationary
house serves as a point of reference or ‘ground’. A further component of
the situation mentioned in Section 4.1 is the ‘path’ along which the figure
(the balloon) travels. Granted that figure/ground segregation is a universally
valid principle of perception, it may well be assumed that these three com-
ponents, ‘figure’, ‘ground’ and ‘path’, are crucial for a cognitive description
of a motion event.
If one takes the conceptual analysis of motion events one step further,
it emerges that other aspects of a motion event can be isolated. To start
with, motion itself can be regarded as a fourth component of motion events.
At first sight this may seem rather trivial, because ‘motion’ is the property
that seems to define the whole event. Yet if one tries to analyze the figure
of the event in terms of motion, it becomes clear that the relationship between
‘figure’ and ‘motion’ is actually rather complex. Although the concept of
motion can hardly be conceived without a figure, the reverse is not true.
As the example of a book lying on a table in Figure 4.2 has shown, figures
that do not move are perfectly normal. Pursuing this idea a little further, one
can include static locative relations between a movable (though unmoving)

 
2 2 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
FIGURE
MOTION
PATH
GROUND
FIGURE
MOTION
PATH
GROUND
‘GENUINE’
The pencil rolled off the table.
The pencil blew off the table.
MOTION
LOCATEDNESS
The pencil lay on the table.
The pencil stuck on the table 
(after I glued it).
MANNER
CAUSE
Figure 5.7
Sentences illustrating the six components of motion events (framing
event and co-event)
(compiled from Talmy 1985: 61 and 2000/II: 26)
figure, such as a book, and its ground (e.g. the table) as a special case of
motion, i.e. zero-motion or locatedness with a zero-path. The advantages
of such an approach have already emerged in Section 4.1, where static uses
of prepositions were treated as elaborations of more fundamental dynamic
uses. The conclusion is that motion and figure are not inseparably associ-
ated with each other, and that MOTION should be added to FIGURE, GROUND
and PATH as a component of the event in its own right.
Describing the balloon situation mentioned above, one may perhaps utter
a sentence like A balloon flew over the house. In this sentence the verb fly
does not just refer to the fact that something is moving. In addition to the
conceptual component ‘moving’, fly also describes the way or MANNER of the
movement (as opposed to, e.g., running or crawling), and this may be
regarded as a fifth component to the structure of a motion event. Finally,
even if we do not always express it linguistically, we know that for a motion
event to take place something must have caused the moving object to start
moving or stay in motion; this CAUSE element can also be an important fac-
tor in the conceptualization of motion events, but like MANNER it seems to
have a less central status.7
Altogether, six cognitive components seem to play a role in the conceptual
structure of a motion event, namely FIGURE, GROUND, PATH, MOTION, MANNER and
CAUSE, and can thus be said to define the motion event-frame. Figure 5.7
provides a set of examples used by Talmy to illustrate how all six compo-
nents can be expressed in fairly simple English sentences.
As the figure suggests, the pencil functions as FIGURE and the table as
GROUND in all four sentences. The MOTION component is expressed in the
verbs: roll and blow refer to a ‘true’ motion, lie and stick to the special
case of zero-motion, i.e. locatedness. PATH is rendered by prepositions, with
off denoting a real course through space and on denoting a stable loca-
tion in space. Finally, the reference to the two components MANNER and

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 2 1
FIGURE
MOTION
PATH
GROUND
Louis Blériot
flew
across
the English Channel
Figure 5.8
Realization of major event-frame
components
CAUSE is incorporated in the verbs. Here roll and lie indicate the manner of
the movement, while blow and stick denote the cause.
Generalizing from motion events, Talmy arrives at the following defi-
nition of the notion of event-frame, which can also be transferred to other
types of events:
A set of conceptual elements and interrelationships that . . . are evoked
together or co-evoke each other can be said to lie within or constitute an
event-frame, while the elements that are conceived of as incidental – whether
evoked weakly or not at all – lie outside the event-frame.
(Talmy 2000/I: 259)
Altogether, Talmy identifies the following five types of event-frames: motion
event-frames, causation event-frames, cyclic event-frames, participant-interaction
event-frames and interrelationship event-frames. To keep matters as simple as
possible our discussion will – apart from a short discussion of causal event
frames – stick to motion event-frames, which have the most tangible struc-
ture of the five types and provide the best examples of what Talmy has called
‘windowing of attention’.8
Windowing of attention in motion event-frames
Let us start out from a somewhat more elaborate description of a flight sit-
uation than the balloon-flying-over-the-house type discussed in Section 4.1:
On 26 July 1909 Louis Blériot flew across the English Channel from Les
Baraques to Dover.
Applying Talmy’s motion-event analysis we can readily identify some parts
of this sentence as instantiations of the components of the motion event-
frame. This is shown in Figure 5.8.
However, this first application leaves important elements of the sen-
tence unaccounted for. Among them are the initial adverbial (on 26 July
1909), which provides incidental information about the time at which the
event took place, and therefore lies outside the event-frame. The other two
adverbials (from Les Baraques and to Dover) are obviously related to the PATH
component, an essential element of the motion event.

 
2 2 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Figure 5.9
Schematic representation of positional types of windowing
The crate that was in the aircraft’s cargo bay fell –
1.
Single windows:
a:
initial windowing
– out of the airplane.
b:
medial windowing
– through the air.
c:
final windowing
– into the ocean.
2.
Combined windows:
a + b:
initial and medial windowing
– out of the airplane through the air.
a + c:
initial and final windowing
– out of the airplane into the ocean.
b + c:
medial and final windowing
– through the air into the ocean.
a + b + c:
maximal windowing over 
– out of the plane through the air
the whole PATH
into the ocean.
Figure 5.10
Initial, medial and final path-windowing and combinations
(adapted from Talmy 2000/I: 266)
Their specific function becomes clearer when we consider all three spatial
adverbials contained in this sentence. While the first (across the Channel) is
seen as evoking the whole PATH component of the motion event-frame, the
second and third (from Les Baraques and to Dover) are regarded as explicit
specifications of the PATH component drawing attention to its initial and
final points.9 This cognitive process of foregrounding certain portions of an
event-frame is called windowing of attention by Talmy (2000/I:
258–309). The reverse process, in which conceptual material that makes up
part of an event-frame is backgrounded, is labelled gapping. With regard
to a motion event-frame, the two processes can be referred to as ‘path-win-
dowing’ and ‘path-gapping’ because it is along the PATH component that a
number of attentional windows can be ‘opened’ or ‘closed’.
For the purpose of analysis, Talmy distinguishes three positions along
the path that can be foregrounded: initial, medial and final windowing. These
three forms of path-windowing are schematically represented for the Louis
Blériot example in Figure 5.9. How all three positional types of windows and
their combinations can be expressed on the linguistic surface is illustrated
in Figure 5.10 with example sentences taken from Talmy.
medial
windowing
PATH
GROUND
FIGURE in MOTION
final
windowing
initial
windowing

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 2 3
I need the milk. –
1. Single windows:
a:
initial windowing
– *Go.
b:
medial windowing
– Get it out of the refrigerator.
c:
final windowing
– Bring it here.
2. Combined windows:
a + b:
initial and medial windowing
– Go get it out of the refrigerator.
a + c:
initial and final windowing
– Go bring it here.
b + c:
medial and final windowing
– Get it out of the refrigerator and
bring it here.
a + b + c:
maximal windowing over
– Go get it out of the refrigerator 
the whole PATH
and bring it here.
Figure 5.11
Illustration of closed path-windowing
(after Talmy 2000/I: 268)
The sentences in Figure 5.10 show that path-windowing is achieved by
explicitly using linguistic expressions that refer to certain portions of the
PATH. Conversely, if a conceptual element that is part of the event-frame is
not explicitly referred to, it is backgrounded by exclusion, or ‘gapped’.
On the hearer’s side one may assume that, given sufficient context, the
gapped portions of an event-frame can always be reconstructed. This means
that no matter how many portions of it are windowed for attention, the
PATH is always conceptualized in its entirety. In terms of cognitive process-
ing, the whole path is cognitively represented, but the foregrounded chunks
of conceptual content are treated with the increased processing capabilities
of the attentional system, and this leads to more elaborated and fine-grained
cognitive representations.
As has been shown, one way of looking at the path-windowing process
is concerned with the positions of the windows. Another, perhaps even more
basic, distinction concerns the types of PATHS that an object, in its function
as FIGURE, may follow. Here three types can be distinguished: open paths, closed
paths and fictive paths. Both the Louis Blériot and the crate examples belong
to the open path type, which is defined as a path whose beginning point
and ending point are at different locations in space. Schematically these paths
can be imagined as shown in Figure 5.9 as one-way arrows from one point
to another.
The paths of the second type, i.e. closed paths, are the same as open
paths, except that they should be imagined as circular arrows. In other words,
the starting and the end point of closed paths coincide at the same loca-
tion in space. A linguistic illustration of this type of path with windows in
different positions is given in Figure 5.11. In this example the figure is not

 
2 2 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
explicitly mentioned. It is represented by the person at whom the impera-
tives (Go and get, etc.) are directed. This person probably starts out from the
table, moves to the refrigerator and returns to the table, thus completing a
circular path.
With the exception of single initial windowing, all positions and com-
binations of windows are possible in this example. What Talmy does not
do is provide a reason as to why the initial position of the path cannot be
foregrounded. One possible answer is that the fact of a departure taking place
does not include enough information about the rest of the path to ensure
that the whole motion event is realized. When only the first portion of the
PATH is mentioned, as in the variant *Go in Figure 5.11, it is not even clear
whether the PATH actually comes to a full circle (and thus qualifies as a closed
PATH) or whether it is an open PATH. Thus the logic behind these unaccept-
able windowing variants seems to be this: whereas the medial and final por-
tions of paths allow for an inferential conceptualization of the entire path,
the information contained in the initial portions is not sufficient to estab-
lish the whole ensuing path.
Fictive paths
The third type of paths in motion events, fictive paths, is more clearly
set apart from the other two. The way they are envisaged by Talmy, fictive
paths remind us very much of the static uses of dynamic locative schemas
such as ‘over’, ‘up’, and ‘out’ as discussed in Section 4.1 (e.g. Hang the paint-
ing over the chimney; cf. Figures 4.10 and 4.11). The analogy is that in both
cases locative relations that are normally understood as unchanged through
time are expressed as involving an imaginary path.
As an example, consider a situation in which a friend asks you to lend
him or her your bike. Imagine further that at the time of your friend’s request
you are in a building and the bike is locked up at a certain place in the
street, so that you have to describe its precise location to your friend. One
convenient way of doing this would be to refer to some salient point in
the vicinity of your bike and specify the relation between this point and
the place where your bike can be found. Using this strategy you may per-
haps utter a sentence like My bike is across the street from the bakery (Talmy’s
example). Although the main locative relation in this sentence (be across)
has traditionally been regarded as a prime example of a static predicate, it
lends itself to an alternative interpretation in terms of a fictive path
describing the access to the object in question.10 This can best be seen when
we put ourselves in the position of the language recipient: having taken in

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 2 5
Figure 5.12
Illustration of fictive path-windowing
(based on Talmy 2000/I: 269)
the sentence, the hearer will respond by first directing his or her mind’s
eye to the reference point (the bakery) and then constructing a mental, or
fictive, path across the street. It is at the end of this path where he or she
will think the bike has been placed.
Having accepted that the sentence can actually be analyzed as an
instance of the motion event-frame, we can also investigate the way in which
the cognitive process of path-windowing is at work. With this goal in mind,
we have again integrated the example sentence in a list of possible ways of
describing the event (Figure 5.12). Comparing the sentences in Figure 5.12
to the description of the fictive PATH above, one important point must be
kept in mind: with fictive PATH windowing the order of the linguistic con-
stituents does not necessarily follow the direction of the PATH. To show this,
let us compare the maximal windowing along a fictive PATH (i.e. 2.a + b +
c in Figure 5.12) to the maximal windowing order of adverbials along an
analogous ‘real’ PATH, as exemplified by the sentence Go from the bakery across
the street to the lamppost (see Figure 5.13). While in this sentence the order
of the adverbials follows the direction of the PATH, this is not true of the
fictive PATH; as is illustrated in Figure 5.13, the final portion of the fictive
PATH is rendered by the first adverbial, i.e. against the lamppost, and the ini-
tial portion of the PATH by the last adverbial (from the bakery).
Concluding the discussion of fictive paths, attention should be drawn to
the two windowing variants in Figure 5.12, where the main reference point
(the bakery) is omitted or gapped (1.b: It is across the street, and 2.b + c: It is
Where is your bike? –
1. Single windows:
a:
initial windowing
It is across from the bakery.
b:
medial windowing
It is across the street.
c:
final windowing
*It is leaning against the lamppost 
across.
2. Combined windows:
a + b:
initial and medial windowing
It is across the street from the 
bakery.
a + c:
initial and final windowing
It is leaning against the lamppost
across from the bakery.
b + c:
medial and final windowing
It is leaning against the lamppost
across the street.
a + b + c:
maximal windowing over 
It is leaning against the lamppost
the whole PATH
across the street from the bakery.

 
2 2 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
leaning against the lamppost across the street). As Talmy points out, this element
can only be gapped when ‘its identity is generally provided by the context or
by convention’ (2000/I: 269). This means that textual and situational factors
external to the event-frame have to be taken into account for a proper anal-
ysis of such a sentence. In Section 5.3 we will pursue these supra-sentential
considerations further and discuss the role of event-frames in texts.
Causal-chain windowing
Apart from motion event-frames and the windowing and gapping options
they offer, this section deals with a second type of windowing, which
involves causal-chain event-frames. This type of event-frame is particularly
interesting because it offers an alternative approach to a familiar, and indeed
famous, linguistic example, namely the semantic analysis of the verb break
(see Section 4.2). However, before we enter this field, a word must be added
about the notion of causation and causal chains.
Traditionally, the notion of causation has been treated as a simple yes-
or-no category, i.e. a lexical item was either classified as ‘non-causative’ (e.g.
die, fall) or ‘causative’ (kill, drop). However, Talmy argued as early as 1976
that different degrees of causation exist. One type are events that are caused
by other events which do not involve animate beings (= ‘event-causation’,
e.g. the vase broke). These should be distinguished from events whose out-
come is caused, but not intended, by a person (= ‘author-causation’, e.g. he
broke the vase by mistake). A third type is events whose outcome coincides
with the agent’s intention (= ‘agent-causation’, e.g. he broke the vase to irritate
initial window
medial window
final window
lamppost
Go from the bakery
from the bakery
across the street
across the street
to the lamppost
It is leaning against the lamppost
bakery
street
‘Real’ path with maximal windowing:
Fictive path with maximal windowing:
Figure 5.13
‘Real’ path-windowing and fictive path-windowing

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 2 7
Stages of causal event-frames
Ex. John broke the window with a stone
1. Agent intends to act
1. The agent makes up his mind that
he is going to break the window.
2. Agent sets parts of his body or his
2. He bends his knees, moves his
whole body in motion and thereby
hand to the ground to grasp a
initiates the causative event
stone . . . , releases the stone from
his hand thus propelling it
forward.
3. Intermediate subevent(s) which
3. The stone sails through the air.
are causally related to each other
(optional)
4. Penultimate subevent =
4. The stone forcefully makes
immediate cause of final result
contact with the window.
5. Final resulting subevent =
5. The window breaks.
agent’s intended goal
Figure 5.14
The stages of causal event-frames
(adapted from Talmy 2000/I: 272)
his wife). In addition to postulating a gradient of causativity Talmy claimed
that many events involving causation should be treated as complex
sequences of more elementary stages and subevents.11
To illustrate the latter point, consider the sentence John broke the window
(with a stone), in its agent-causative sense, i.e. with an agent who deliber-
ately initiates the action with a certain goal in mind (example adapted from
Talmy 2000/I: 272f). A cognitive analysis of the causative event that is described
by this sentence shows that it consists of the following subevents:
1. The agent makes up his mind that he is going to break the window.
2. He bends his knees, moves his hand to the ground to grasp a stone,
straightens up and lifts the stone with his hand, swings his arm while
holding the stone in his hand, and releases the stone from his hand
thus propelling it forward.
3. The stone sails through the air.
4. The stone forcefully makes contact with the window.
5. The window breaks.
Looking at the interrelation between these five subevents one realizes that
each subevent is linked to the next by a causal relation, and this motivates
Talmy’s term ‘causal-chain event’. As in the case of motion events, it is now
possible to deduce from this example the components of the more gener-
ally valid causal-chain event-frame. Figure 5.14 gives a rough version

 
2 2 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
I broke the window –
(a) *by grasping a stone with my hand.
(b) *by lifting a stone with my hand.
(c) *by swinging a stone with my arm.
(d) *by propelling a stone through the air.
(e) *by throwing a stone towards it.
(f) ?by throwing a stone at it.
(g) by hitting it with a stone.
Figure 5.15
English by-clause reserved for penultimate
subevent
(adapted from Talmy 2000/I: 273)
of the stages of a causal-chain event-frame, which is illustrated by the anal-
ysis of the sentence John broke the window with a stone, as developed above.
Just as in the case of motion event-frames, the most interesting aspect of causal-
chain event-frames is again their potential for the windowing of attention.
Let us start out from what is probably the standard way of referring to the
above situation, from the sentence John broke the window. Putting this sen-
tence in relation to the structure of the causal-chain event-frame we realize
that stage 1 (the agent) and stage 5 (the final result) are windowed for atten-
tion, while the medial stages are gapped. That this kind of ‘discontinuous’
windowing over agent and result is the most natural way of describing a causal
event is not surprising, because it answers the two most important questions
‘What happened?’ and ‘Who initiated the event?’ In fact, the link between
the intention (stage 1) and its realization (stage 5) in an agent-initiated causal
event seems to be so strong that the two stages ‘feel seamlessly linked’, as
Talmy (2000/I: 276) puts it, and the missing parts between them hardly reach
the level of awareness. Apart from the initiating agent and the final result,
the penultimate event (stage 4) is certainly the most significant aspect in a
causal-chain event-frame, because it refers to the immediate cause of the final
result. The cognitive significance of stage 4 is reflected in the English lan-
guage by the fact that one of the main agentive–causative constructions, the
by-clause, is reserved for the penultimate subevent.
This clearly emerges from Figure 5.15 which lists by-phrases express-
ing the various stages of a causal-chain event-frame. In this collection only
the last variant, the phrase by hitting it with a stone, is fully acceptable
because only this variant represents the penultimate event. As is indicated
by the question mark, example (f) is also found acceptable by some speak-
ers who seem to infer from the sentence that the stone actually hits the
window. This means that in effect they treat the phrase as referring to
the penultimate event.

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 2 9
Although many fascinating aspects of event-frames and windowing
have not been touched yet, this is as far as we can take their discussion.
What this section should have shown is that the frame-based analysis can
be extended beyond Fillmore’s more ‘traditional’ position. In this view, the
directing of attention is more or less restricted to the choice of subject and
object as required by certain verbs. Talmy’s notions of event-frames and win-
dowing, however, widen the investigation towards the previously neglected
adverbials and other less prominent parts of the clause structure. His
approach also takes account of so-called ‘blocked complements’, i.e. those
aspects of event-frames that cannot be expressed on the linguistic surface
(e.g. The book cost ten pounds *to John/*from Sue).12 Talmy’s approach thus
provides a comprehensive cognitive view of how real-world situations are
processed in our mind and are rendered linguistically.
In this section frames were approached from a universalist–cognitive point
of view, from which event-frames seem to be shared by speakers of all lan-
guages. Section 5.3 will deal with some examples of language-specific fram-
ing, where the components of frames are expressed by different means in
different languages. The concluding section 5.4 will again be devoted to a
more general discussion of how frames can be seen as being linked with
syntactic structures in constructions.
Exercises
1. Analyze the following sentences as instances of motion event-frames:
We flew from Strasbourg to London.
Sir Edmund Hillary climbed to the top of Mount Everest in 1953.
The train goes from Brussels through the Chunnel to London.
The Northern Line will take you from Edgware via Charing Cross
to Morden.
2. Decide which of the following sentences represent closed and which
open paths and describe these paths:
We are moving to London.
Could you empty the waste paper basket, please?
I’ll go and get the newspaper from the newsagent’s.
Shall I fetch the dictionary from the study?
The bus to the City Hall goes via Regency Terrace.
They arrived from New York last night.

 
2 3 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3. Which positional windows are ‘opened’ in the following sentences?
The apple fell from the tree to the ground.
The space shuttle was launched from the space centre at Cape
Canaveral.
The parachutists glided from the aeroplane through the clouds to
the landing place on the airfield.
Amundsen went across the Antarctic to the South Pole.
4. The following examples can all be understood as being based on fic-
tive paths. In each case, give a description which follows the course of
the fictive path and contrast it with the arrangement of the elements
in the sentence.
You’ll find the matches on the cupboard in the corner behind the
kitchen door.
The book on Chinese porcelain is on the third shelf from the top
in the white bookcase.
(Are you looking for your car keys?) I think they’re among the gro-
ceries on the back seat of the car.
I think I parked the car on the third level somewhere to the right
of the entrance.
I remember the disco is on the right-hand side just after the sec-
ond traffic lights down Market Street.
5. Analyze the situation of a hunter shooting a rabbit with his gun as an
instance of causal-chain event-frame and decide which of the following
by-clauses are acceptable.
The rabbit was killed
by Peter’s taking his gun along.
by Peter’s raising his gun.
by Peter’s aiming at the rabbit.
by Peter’s pulling the trigger.
by Peter’s shot.
by the bullet.
5.3 Language-specific framing and its use 
in narrative texts
Keeping the focus on motion events, this section will widen the scope on event-frames
in two ways. First, differences in the expression of motion event-frames in various
languages will be investigated. Second, it will be shown that the language-specific

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 3 1
(a) 
Blériot
flew
across
the Channel.
FIGURE
MOTION
PATH
GROUND
MANNER
(b) 
Blériot
traversa
la manche
en avion.
‘Blériot
traversed
the Channel
by aeroplane.’
FIGURE
MOTION
GROUND
MANNER
PATH
Figure 5.16
Event-frame analysis for an English
sentence and its French translation
framing of motion events has consequences for the respective narrative style which
seems to be typical of English and Spanish stories and novels.
As shown in Section 5.2, the conceptual representation of motion events seems
to involve six components: the four central components FIGURE, GROUND,
MOTION and PATH and the two optional ones, MANNER and CAUSE. When they are
expressed in an utterance, these components typically occupy specific posi-
tions in the clause. This was illustrated by the Blériot sentence in Figure 5.8,
which is here repeated as Figure 5.16(a).
To recapitulate, the FIGURE in the English sentence is rendered as the sub-
ject (Blériot); the PATH and the GROUND are expressed as an adverbial consist-
ing of the preposition across and the noun phrase the Channel. Finally, the
MOTION and MANNER components are incorporated in the meaning of the verb
fly. Although this arrangement seems to be quite natural for English speak-
ers, it turns out to be true only of the English version of the sentence. If
we try to translate the Blériot sentence into French, we cannot imitate the
English construction, because the literal translation *Blériot vola par-dessus
la Manche is unacceptable. According to a French style manual for transla-
tors of English and French (Vinay and Darbelnet 1975), the closest equiv-
alent is the sentence Blériot traversa la Manche en avion, literally ‘Blériot
traversed the Channel by aeroplane’. Unlike the English sentence, in which
the PATH is expressed by the preposition, the French version incorporates
the PATH in the verb meaning. The MANNER is expressed in an adverbial con-
struction which is added to the clause. See the analysis in Figure 5.16(b).
It seems, then, that English and French diverge with regard to the syn-
tactic construction and the expressive potential of the two verbs. As demon-
strated by Vinay and Darbelnet (1975), such cross-linguistic differences were
noticed by translators long before cognitive linguistics came onto the scene.
Yet by viewing them from the cognitive perspective of Talmy’s event-frames,
it is possible to give a more comprehensive and unified account of what used
to be treated as unrelated phenomena.

 
2 3 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
French
Spanish
English
German
entrer
entrar
go in (enter)
hineingehen
sortir
salir
go out (exit)
hinausgehen
ascendre
subir (ascender)
go up (ascend)
hinaufgehen
descendre
bajar (descender)
go down (descend)
hinuntergehen
traverser
traspasar
go over (cross, traverse)
hinübergehen
Figure 5.17
Expression of MOTION and PATH in major verbs of
motion in French, Spanish, English and German
Verbs of motion in English, German, French 
and Spanish: some illustrations
To start with, let us have a look at the expression of the PATH component,
this time including German and Spanish in our considerations. In the fol-
lowing set of examples, the linguistic item expressing the PATH component
is shown in bold print to make the comparison of the different versions
easier. (As above, literal glosses are given below the non-English versions):
E.
The boy went out of the yard.
G.
Der Junge ging aus dem Hof hinaus.
‘The boy went from the yard out.’
Fr.
Le garçon sortit de la cour.
‘The boy exited from the yard.’
Sp.
El chico salió del patio.
‘The boy exited from the yard.’
These examples show two things. First, the English and the French version
suggest that the above contrast between fly across and traverser en avion is not
an isolated example, but seems to reflect the general tendency of English to
express the PATH by means of a particle, and of French to incorporate the PATH
in the verb meaning. Second, it is evident that German runs parallel to English
and Spanish parallel to French. In German the PATH is expressed in a verbal
particle (here separated from the complex verb hinausgehen and moved to clause-
final position), and this is similar to the English particle. In Spanish, on the
other hand, the PATH is incorporated in the verb just like in French.
To give an idea of how consistent this difference between French and
Spanish on the one hand and English and German on the other actually
is, the table in Figure 5.17 lists major verbs expressing motion in space. The
pattern in this table fully confirms our impression so far. While French and
Spanish motion verbs refer to both MOTION and PATH, the English and
German verbs express only MOTION while the PATH is rendered by a particle.

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 3 3
English
German
French
Spanish
(a) MOTION + MANNER
walk
(zu Fu) gehen
aller à pied
ir a pie
ride
reiten
aller à cheval
montar caballo (ir a cabballo)
drive
fahren
aller en voiture
ir en coche (conducir)
(b) MOTION + MANNER + PATH
walk into
hineingehen
entrer en marchant
entrar (caminando)
drive into
hineinfahren
entrer en voiture
entrar conduciendo el coche
ride into
hineinreiten
entrer à cheval
entrar a caballo
fly into
hineinfliegen
entrer en volant
entrar volando
crawl into
hineinkriechen
entrer en rampant
entrar arrastràndose
climb into
hineinklettern
entrer en grimpant
entrar escalando
Figure 5.18
Expression of MOTION, MANNER and PATH in verbs of motion in
English, German, French and Spanish
For English this is notably true of the combinations with the verb go, which
is of Germanic origin and belongs to the core vocabulary. As the verbs in
brackets show, the ‘French’ verbs are also available, but they belong to a
more formal stylistic level and are therefore less frequent.
Turning to the expression of MANNER in the description of motion
events, the four languages pair off exactly in the same way. To show this,
we will again first give an example of a whole sentence as rendered in the
four languages, where this time the linguistic elements denoting the MANNER
component are highlighted:
E. 
The boy rode out of the yard.
G.
Der Junge ritt aus dem Hof hinaus.
‘The boy rode from the yard out.’
Fr.
Le garçon sortit à cheval de la cour.
‘The boy exited on horse from the yard.’
Sp.
El chico salió a caballo del patio.
‘The boy exited on horse from the yard.’
Just as in the Blériot example, in English and German the MANNER of the move-
ment is incorporated in the verb, while in French and Spanish the MANNER is
added as a separate adverbial. Again the difference is not just restricted to
this particular case but applies to many other verbs as well. Some further exam-
ples are listed in the table in Figure 5.18. The table shows that where English
verb-particle constructions and German complex verbs express MOTION plus
MANNER and PATH, as in section (b) of Figure 5.18, the French and Spanish counter-
parts become quite elaborate if both elements are to be rendered.

 
2 3 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Description of PATH and MANNER: verb-framed 
vs satellite-framed languages
As confirmed by stylistic manuals like Vinay and Darbelnet (1975),13 it is
certainly possible to describe the cross-linguistic differences in the use of motion
verbs in traditional terminology. However, these traditional accounts tend to
neglect an important point: when we watch a moving object or person, the
path of the movement and the manner in which it is performed are not sep-
arate aspects of the situation, but clearly related to each other, at least per-
ceptually. This is why a unifying cognitive view, as is implied in Talmy’s
event-frames, promises a more convincing explanation.
Although PATH and MANNER are closely linked in the event-frame, this does
not cancel out what has been said about the unequal status of these ele-
ments. While MANNER is an optional element, a component of the co-event
in Talmy’s terminology, which can remain unexpressed (as in E. go out, Fr.
sortir, and Sp. salir), PATH is one of the central elements of the framing motion-
event (see Section 5.2). One way of expressing the framing function of PATH
is through the verb, as in Fr. entrer and Sp. entrar. In view of this, French
and Spanish can be called verb-framed languages (Talmy 2000/II: 117f,
221ff). Conversely, PATH can be rendered by a particle, as in E. go into, or
by a verbal particle, as in G. hineingehen. To capture the common function
of these last two elements, they have been subsumed in one grammatical
category by Talmy, labelled ‘satellites’. Hence, English and German can be
called satellite-framed languages.
Talmy (2000/II: 221ff) has argued that probably all languages of the world
can be categorized in terms of verb-framing and satellite-framing. The group
of verb-framed languages includes all Romance languages, Semitic languages
(e.g. Arabic and Hebrew), Japanese and many others. Satellite-framed lan-
guages besides English and German are all Indo-European languages (apart
from the Romance languages), Finno-Ugric languages and Chinese.
As the examples in the previous section suggest, the cross-linguistic dif-
ferences in the expression of PATH which gave rise to the distinction between
verb-framed and satellite-framed languages seem to coincide with the way
the MANNER element is expressed. And indeed, when Talmy (2000/II: 213ff)
investigated a range of languages, this impression was confirmed. As a
result, we may integrate the contrastive findings on the expression of PATH
and MANNER into one general picture. Figure 5.19, which provides such a uni-
fied view, is a slightly simplified version of a diagram used by Talmy to sum-
marize his results.

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 3 5
FIGURE
MOTION
PATH
MANNER
GROUND
The boy
rode
out
satellite
El chico
saliò
montando caballo
del patio.
of the courtyard.
Spanish: verb-framed
English: satellite-framed
adverbial
phrase/clause
Figure 5.19
Expression of PATH and MANNER in motion events in English
and Spanish (based on Talmy 1991)
Figure 5.19 provides us with a concise representation of the strategies
the two types of languages follow when it comes to expressing the PATH and
the MANNER of a motion event. By looking at the cross-linguistic differences
from the cognitive perspective of the event-frame in which they are embed-
ded, the difficulties faced by translators become more transparent. Thus, what
seems to be at stake is not just a random collection of ‘untranslatable’ verbs,
but completely different mapping systems of cognitive frame components
onto linguistic elements.
While the typological differences discovered by Talmy are interesting in
themselves from a syntactic point of view, they also have far-reaching con-
sequences for the narrative style typical of the two groups of languages. In
what follows we will have a look at some stylistic differences between English
and Spanish focusing on the two major aspects that have emerged, namely
that in verb-framed languages the MANNER of a motion event usually has to
be added to a clause as a separate adverbial, and that in satellite-framed
languages the PATH needs to be expressed in a particle or similar element.
Expression of MANNER and MOTION: a comparative 
study of novels
Basically, a verb-framed language like Spanish often needs more linguistic
material to express the MANNER of a motion event than a satellite-framed lan-
guage such as English. In order to supply the same quantity and specificity
of information that is contained in English motion + manner verbs, Spanish

 
2 3 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
speakers often need an elaborate paraphrase. Verbs like bolt, dart, scamper,
scurry, scuttle, scramble, slither, slide, sidle, slink (taken from LLCE: 614f) rep-
resent just the tip of the iceberg, and all of them are virtually ‘unrender-
able’ in Spanish. When it comes to translating, Spanish translators are thus
confronted with the problem of how to cope with this difference.
Working within Talmy’s framework, Slobin (1996) addressed precisely this
issue in a comparative study of translations of English-language novels into
Spanish and vice versa. Slobin took his material from five Spanish-language
and five English-language novels by such well-known Latin American, British
and North American authors as Isabel Allende, Gabriel García Màrquez and
Mario Vargas Llosa, and Daphne du Maurier, Ernest Hemingway and Doris
Lessing. All in all he collected 100 descriptions of motion events in both lan-
guages. Anticipating his main result, it can be said that
Spanish translators omit manner information about half of the time, whereas
English translators actually add manner to the Spanish original in almost a
quarter of their translations.
(Slobin 1996: 212)
Omission of manner information is often practised by Spanish transla-
tors where English motion + manner verbs have no direct Spanish
counterpart. Thus, in the following two examples from James Michener’s
Chesapeake and John Fowles’s The French Lieutenant’s Woman, the transla-
tor has simply chosen to neglect the manner component which is incor-
porated in the English verbs stomp and rustle:
He stomped from the trim house . . .
Salió de la pulcra casa . . .
‘He exited from the trim house . . .’
Mrs Tanter rustled forward, effusive and kind.
Mrs Tanter se adelantó, efusiva y amable.
‘Mrs Tantler moved forward, effusive and kind.’
As a second strategy, the translator may decide to add an adverbial clause
in order to capture the manner component. For an illustration, compare
this with another way of translating the verb rustle quoted by Slobin from
du Maurier’s Rebecca:
She rustled out of the room . . .
Salió del cuarto, acompañada del susurro siseante de sus ropas . . .
‘She exited the room, accompanied by the swishing rustle of her
clothing . . .’

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 3 7
Here the translator has made quite an effort to express the manner denoted
by the English verb rustle. However, the side-effect is that the translation
gives the manner of the movement much more prominence than in the
original, and therefore the translation can hardly be judged as being more
true to the original than the one in the preceding example which is based
on what could be called the leave-out strategy.
Reversing the perspective, the first interesting observation concerning
English translations of Spanish novels is that sometimes translators seem
to avoid English cognates of Spanish verbs. As already mentioned above,
this may be due to the fact that English words of Romance origin often
have a ring of formality about them. For an illustration consider the fol-
lowing example found by Slobin in Vargas Llosa’s La tía Julia y el escribidor
(Aunt Julia and the Script-Writer), where the first line gives the original, the
second the literal gloss and the third the translation in the English version
of the book:
Don Federico avanzó sin apresurarse . . .
‘Don Federico advanced without hurrying . . .’
Don Federico walked unhurriedly towards her . . .
Another example of the same type, this time taken from Allende’s La casa
de los espirítús (The House of Spirits), is even more interesting:
Se dirigió a la casa, abrió la puerta de un empujón, y entró.
‘He directed himself to the house, opened the door with a push, and
entered.’
He walked up to the house, gave the door a single forceful push, and went in.
The first thing we notice is that the two Spanish verbs dirigir and entrar
are not translated with their English cognates direct and enter, but by the
more colloquial verb-particle constructions walk up to and go in. Second,
it is worth having a closer look at the middle portion of the sentence. Here
the literal translation opened the door with a push is avoided by the trans-
lator, although it would certainly have been acceptable. Another transla-
tion, pushed the door open, is not used either; this would in fact have been
rather typical of English because the MANNER of the movement is incorpo-
rated in the verb and the PATH and the resultant state are expressed in the
satellite open. Instead the translator prefers the translation gave the door a
single forceful push. The reason probably lies in the translator’s intention
to emphasize the MANNER in which the movement was performed, and this
motivates the choice of a construction that permits a more vivid manner
description.

 
2 3 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Summing up at this point, the data provided by Slobin for the expres-
sion of MANNER indicate that the lexico-syntactic differences between English
and Spanish seem to have consequences on the level of the rhetorical style
of narratives. Perhaps the most spectacular result of the study is that
Spanish translators of English narrative texts often have to weigh up
descriptive detail against syntactic complexity. This should be kept in mind
when we now turn to the expression of PATH in English and Spanish stories.
Expression of PATH in English and Spanish 
stories and novels
As a second source of material for his article, and also for a book co-edited
with R. Berman (Berman and Slobin 1994),14 Slobin uses authentic stories.
Perhaps it is worth noting that material from stories circumvents a potential
methodological flaw inherent in the comparison of translations: undoubt-
edly translators are influenced by the image evoked in the original in their
descriptions of events, and this may lead to rather unnatural results. In a story,
however, the narrator is free to express his or her own perception and con-
ception of an event. The problem with freely produced stories, on the other
hand, is that different stories cannot be compared as easily as translations
of the same text. Therefore Slobin and his co-workers elicited stories from
Spanish and English speakers in Berkeley and Madrid by means of one and
the same wordless picture story called Frog, Where Are You? (Mayer 1969).
In this way, 60 stories with virtually identical content were collected for
each language from 12 narrators in each of the following age groups: 3-, 4-,
5-, 9- year-olds and adult. To give an idea of what the story is about, here
is Slobin’s own short version of the story:
The events depicted in Frog, Where Are You? invite a rich array of motion
descriptions: A pet frog escapes from its jar and a boy and his dog go looking
for the lost frog. Their search involves falling from a window, climbing and
falling from a tree, climbing a rock and getting entangled in the antlers of a
deer who throws the boy and dog over a cliff into some water, and finally
climbing out of the water and over a log to discover the runaway frog.
(Slobin 1996: 197)
To find out how the narrators expressed the PATHS in the many instances
of motion descriptions, let us start by looking at the verbs used to describe
motion events in the 60 stories in each language. While the Spanish nar-
rators could manage with as few as 27 verb types, the English narrators pro-
duced a much greater variety of verbs: counting the verb stems alone, Slobin

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 3 9
found 47 verb types; when the combinations with satellites were also taken
into account, the number increased to 123 simple and phrasal verb types.
In the following list those verbs used by the English narrators which had
the largest number of attested satellites are collected:
climb
+down, on, out, over, up, up in, up on
come
+after, down, off, on, out, over, up
fall
+down, in, off, out, over
fly
+after, away, off, out, over, up
get
+away, down, in, off, on, out, over, past, up, up on
go
+down, down out, home, in, off, out, outside, over, through, up
knock
+down, down out, in, off, out
run
+after, along, away, by, from, in, off, out, over, through
throw
+down, down in, in, off, over, over in
Although some of these verbs, e.g. come and fall, also include at least a hint
about the nature of the PATH, it is fairly clear that in the English stories descrip-
tions of PATH are mainly achieved through satellites. Extreme cases are verbs
like get or go which have virtually no meaning over and above the MOTION
component, but an enormous potential for PATH descriptions once they are
connected with a satellite. As an interim summary, then, one may very well
claim that the systematic results from Slobin’s study confirm our more or
less impressionistic observations from above.
As with MANNER, the difference in the expression of PATH leaves its mark
on the narrative style that is typical of the two languages. For one thing,
the English narrators seem to devote much more attention to the details
of PATHS than the Spanish narrators. A particularly striking aspect of these
descriptions is that even young English narrators seem to be proficient
in the strategy which was called ‘windowing of attention’ in Section 5.2.
In opening attentional windows, they exploit the resources of their satellite-
framed language for detailed descriptions of PATHS. It seems that windowing
structures of the type The deer threw the boy over a cliff into a pond,
which include a medial and final window on the PATH, abound in the
English stories.
The picture changes when one looks at the Spanish stories. Even when
the Spanish data were augmented to 216 stories with narrators from Latin
America, not more than three examples could be found where either an
initial or a medial window was combined with a final path window. This
observation is the more striking because the Spanish language clearly has
the linguistic means for path-windowing, as one of those examples shows:

 
2 4 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
He
tips
him
off
over a cliff
into the water.
AGENT
MOTION
FIGURE
PATH
medial window 
final window 
CAUSE
of attention 
of attention 
MANNER
(setting)
(setting)
Figure 5.20
Event-frame analysis of the sentence He tips
him off over a cliff into the water
Se cayó de la ventana a la calle (‘[The dog] fell from the window to the
street’.) In spite of this structural potential, however, Spanish speakers
appear to be much more reluctant to use them than speakers of English.
A look at a more extended example will demonstrate this reluctance more
clearly and show how the description of the setting of an event is related
to the description of the PATH. First, compare the following Spanish and English
descriptions of an episode in Frog, Where Are You?, where the boy is carried
off by a deer to a cliff, from which he is thrown into a pond.
Sp.
El ciervo le llevó hasta un sitio, donde debajo habiá un río.
Entonces el ciervo tiró al perro y al niño al río. Y después, cayeron.
‘The deer took him until a place, where below there was a river.
Then the deer threw the dog and the boy to the river. And then
they fell.’ [age 9]
E.
He [the deer] starts running and tips him off over a cliff into the
water. [age 9]
Both the Spanish and the English youngsters supply us with a remarkable
amount of information on the PATH that the FIGURE, i.e. the boy (and his
dog), follows, and on the setting where the event occurs. But they do it in
decidedly different ways. The Spanish child devotes a whole relative clause
to relating where the event took place (un sitio, donde debajo habià un rió ‘a
place where below was a river’). Thus the setting is rendered as one event
in its own right and described in a rather static way in an extra clause. In
the English version, however, such an isolated and static description of the
setting does not occur. Instead the setting is incorporated in the motion
event. To show how this is done, Figure 5.20 gives an event-frame analy-
sis of the second part of this sentence.
As the analysis in Figure 5.20 shows, a surprising number of cognitive
components are expressed in this innocuous-looking clause. Besides the agent
and the four components of the main motion event-frame, two additional
elements, namely CAUSE and MANNER, are incorporated in it. On top of that,
two attentional windows are opened on the medial and the final portions

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 4 1
of the PATH. In contrast to the Spanish version, these path windows allow
for an incorporation of the setting in the motion event, and this results in
a more dynamic description of the setting. The English child seems to devote
much more attention to the changing relation between the figure and the
ground or setting. The Spanish child, on the other hand, leaves some parts
of the movement to be inferred from the static description of the setting.
For example, the PATH that leads from the boy’s being thrown by the deer
to his fall into the river must be inferred from the prior information that
the river was located below.
To wrap up the discussion let us return once more to the comparison
of novels and their translations. Consider the examples below, where the
English original from Daphne du Maurier’s novel Rebecca is given first, fol-
lowed by the Spanish translation and its literal English translation.
I . . . climbed up the path over the cliffs towards the rest of the people.
Tomé el sendero que conducía al lugar donde estaba la gente.
‘I took the path that led to the place where the people were.’
Du Maurier’s original sentence contains a fairly detailed description of an
extended motion event which highlights the GROUND (the path) and includes
attentional windows on the medial (over the cliffs) and the final portion
(towards the rest of the people) of the PATH. As in the examples above, these
windows also contain the information on the setting of the event. From
the syntactic point of view, it is worth noting that all this is expressed
in a single clause. The Spanish translation, however, needs three clauses
as opposed to the one in English, and yet it omits two pieces of infor-
mation contained in the original. First, there is no reference to the verti-
cal directionality of the path, which is expressed in English by the
satellite up. Second, the medial window on over the cliffs is not retained
in the translation. Apart from these omissions, the Spanish translation also
differs from the original in that it isolates the details about the setting
from the movement by expressing it in two separate relative clauses. This
slows down the pace of the Spanish description and, compared to the
single dynamic picture drawn in the English version, gives it a more static,
step-by-step character.
According to Slobin, Spanish translators are apparently well aware of this
difference. This can be seen from translations in which locative detail seems
to be omitted deliberately for the sake of a more dynamic event-description.
In the following two examples from Rebecca and J. Fowles’s The French
Lieutenant’s Woman, attentional windows that are opened in English are not

 
2 4 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
rendered in Spanish and ‘the Spanish reader is simply not informed of the
entire journey’ (Slobin 1996: 211):
He strolled across the room to the door . . .
Se dirigió a la puerta . . .
‘He went to the door . . .’
. . . she moved out into the sun and across the stony clearing . . .
. . . la muchacha salió al claro rocoso . . .
‘. . . the girl exited to the stony clearing . . .’
In the first example the medial window of the PATH across the room is gapped
in the translation. In the second sentence the initial window into the sun
is omitted and the description of the PATH is rendered somewhat loosely as
‘to the stony clearing’.
Altogether, as it has emerged in this section, applying the notion of
event-frames to the comparison between different languages and between
different narrative texts yields some interesting findings. Apparently, a
satellite-framed language such as English is better suited for descriptions of
MANNER and elaborate PATH descriptions including dynamic descriptions of
locations along the PATH. The reasons are that in satellite-framed languages
MANNER is often incorporated in the verb meaning, and the information on
the PATH and setting can be expressed in the same clause as the motion
event by opening attentional windows. Since Spanish is a verb-framed
language, descriptions of motion events tend to be restricted to the
motion itself. Often the description of MANNER is only possible at the cost
of extended and rather awkward constructions. Similarly, if details of the
PATH and the setting are to be given, they are expressed in additional clauses.
As this will sometimes slow down the pace of narratives considerably, Spanish
speakers may opt for fewer MANNER and PATH details in favour of a more vivid
MOTION description.15
Exercises
1. Analyze the English sentences and their French counterparts (taken from
Vinay and Darbelnet 1975: 106) in terms of the motion event-frame
(cf. Figure 5.19):
She tiptoed down the stairs.
Elle descendit l’escalier sur la pointe des pieds.
‘She descended the stairs on the tip of the feet.’

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 4 3
He crawled to the other side of the road.
Il gagna en rampant l’autre côté de la route.
‘He gained crawling the other side of the road.’
2. Check the etymological origin of the following synonym pairs or near-
synonym pairs in a suitable dictionary. How do they mirror the dis-
tinction between verb-framed and satellite-framed constructions? Why
does English often have both options?
soak through
percolate
run off
escape
get there
arrive
send out
emit
come upon/across
encounter
throw up
vomit
break out
erupt
3. Look up the following English verb + satellite constructions in a bilin-
gual Spanish or French dictionary and discuss how they are rendered.
In some cases it may be helpful to counter-check the equivalents that
are given.
hop in, squeeze into, creep in, tread in, pour in, flow in, break into
4. Here is an extract from a Turkish version of the frog story (Slobin 2005:
314). Look at the length and number of clauses and the expression of
PATH and MANNER and discuss the rhetorical style in relation to the English
and Spanish examples in the text.
Geyikla uçurumum kenarina do˘gru gidiyor. Köpek de yanlarinda kos¸uyor.
Çocu˘ga as¸a˘giya atiyor, kopek de düs¸üyor as¸a˘giya. Uçurumum dibinde bir
göl varmis¸. Göle düs¸üyorlar.
’With the deer [he] goes straight to the edge of the cliff. The dog
runs by their side. [He] throws the boy down, and the dog falls down
too. At the bottom of the cliff there was a lake. [They] fell to the
lake.’
5. Look at the following English–French examples (taken from Vinay and
Darbelnet 1975: 106). Discuss how many clauses are needed for the
description of the event and how PATH and MANNER are expressed in the
two languages:
Through the wide-open window streamed the sun on to the yel-
low varnished walls and bare floor.
Par la fenêtre grande ouverte, le soleil entrait à flot et inondait les murs
vernissés en jaune et le parquet sans tapis.
‘Through the wide-open window, the sun entered floating and inun-
dated the walls varnished in yellow and the parquet without carpet.’

 
2 4 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Example
The draught
blew
the pencil
off
the table
Frame structure
CAUSE
MOTION
FIGURE
PATH
GROUND
Syntactic structure
Subject
Verb
Object
Adverbial
Figure 5.21
Conceptual and syntactic structure of the caused-motion event-frame
5.4 Construction Grammar
As it emerged in the previous chapters, frames are patterns of knowledge extracted from
the experience of recurring situations and events. What is crucial from the linguistic
point of view is that frames and the possible perspectives they open up are reflected
linguistically in the syntax of clauses or, the other way round, that syntactic patterns
may be associated with the conceptual structure of the frame. In this chapter we will
look at the theory of Construction Grammar, which claims that this is indeed the case.
From frames to constructions
In Section 5.2, the motion event-frame was introduced to explain the rela-
tionship between the conceptual structure of events and their linguistic
descriptions. As Talmy suggests, the motion event-frame comprises the cen-
tral components MOTION, FIGURE, PATH and GROUND, and, in addition, the MANNER
and CAUSE components. The more complex variant including the two latter
components was illustrated in Section 5.2 by the sentence The pencil blew
off the table, in which the CAUSE element is integrated in the verb meaning
‘moving caused by blowing’. A more explicit way of describing the same sit-
uation highlighting the CAUSE element would, for example, be The draught
blew the pencil off the table. This sentence represents a frame structure that
includes elements of both Talmy’s motion event-frame (since the pencil is
blown off the table) and his causal-chain event-frame (the motion is caused
by the draught, an example of event-causation). This combination can be called
caused-motion event-frame. Compare Figure 5.21, in which this frame is
contrasted with the respective syntactic pattern.
Even if the example may sound a little far-fetched, the caused-motion
event-frame is widely used, also with agent-subjects. Other sentences real-
izing this frame can easily be retrieved from a corpus, and this shows that
it is not an ad-hoc decision to postulate such an event-frame. Here are some
instantiations taken randomly from the International Corpus of English –
Great Britain (ICE-GB):
I [. . .] shoved them into a corner
I brought her out of hospital.

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 4 5
They kicked him to the ground.
We can always put a pillow over her head.
The fact that there is a very close correspondence between frame com-
ponents and syntactic constituents has led cognitive linguists to the idea –
which is central to a group of theories subsumed under the term Construction
Grammar – that the syntactic pattern itself may have a share in the encod-
ing of the particular type of experience. What this means is that we do not
simply map frame components onto syntactic constituents guided by the par-
ticular perspective that we have in mind, but pick a certain syntactic pattern
or construction wholesale, so to speak, from long-term memory, where it
is stored. However, not only the syntactic make-up of the construction, but
also the knowledge about the kinds of scenes and events that the construc-
tion typically encodes, is stored in long-term memory. This in turn means
that the construction itself conveys some of the conceptual content to be
expressed or, in other words, that the construction carries a meaning
of its own which is related to the corresponding conceptual frame.
But how do we know that the meaning resides in the caused-motion con-
struction and is not just part and parcel of the verb meaning (blow, shove, bring,
kick, put in the examples above), as maintained for instance in Fillmore’s earl-
ier Case Grammar? An argument put forward by Adele Goldberg (1995), one
of the protagonists of Construction Grammar, is that we readily identify the
caused-motion meaning not only in sentences with fitting verbal meanings
(kick, put, shove), but also in examples whose verbs, taken by themselves, do
not at all suggest a caused-motion meaning. Compare the following pair of
examples, where the first sentence represents the prototypical caused-motion
arrangement associated with the verb push, while the second example con-
tains the verb sneeze, which is commonly regarded as intransitive and does
not suggest a caused-motion meaning (Goldberg 1995: 152):
Frank pushed the tissue off the table.
Frank sneezed the tissue off the table.
Yet due to the force of the constructional meaning, the second example
will also be interpreted in terms of caused motion and may be paraphrased
as ‘Peter sneezed and thus caused the tissue to be swept off the table’. A
similar influence of the caused-motion construction can be observed with
other intransitive verbs coupled with an adverbial, especially adverbials used
in a figurative sense, as in the following examples:
Barnes [. . .] plays him into trouble.
The police tear-gassed the demonstrators into panic.

 
2 4 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
In both sentences the goal-orientation is not incorporated in the verbs (play,
tear-gas), but is derived from the construction as a whole. The constructional
approach also provides an interesting interpretation for the whole group of
so-called transitive–causative verbs, where the transitive use has tradition-
ally been regarded as a special sense to be distinguished from the central
intransitive meaning of verbs like sit or stand:
And then we’ll sit you on your bike.
She stood the flower-pot on the window-sill.
Summarizing what has been shown in this section so far, we will focus
on three points:
• There seems to be a close correspondence between certain conceptual
structures derived from everyday experience and syntactic structures
apparently generated on the spur of the moment.
• Evidence collected by linguists working in the framework of Construction
Grammar suggests that constructions may in fact not be generated as
we go along but stored in long-term memory just like frames and even
individual concepts are.16
• Constructions may have meanings of their own independent of the lex-
ical items inserted in particular instantiations. Just like words, con-
structions are claimed to be pairings of forms and meanings, such that
the form automatically evokes the meaning and vice versa.17
In the next section we will discuss further examples of constructions, test
the claim that constructions are experientially grounded and illustrate their
polysemy.
Argument-structure constructions
The caused-motion construction is one of the major argument-structure con-
structions (i.e. constructions in which verbs are linked with their obligatory
complements or arguments). The other two major constructions discussed
by Goldberg (1995) are the cause-receive construction (Goldberg herself sticks
to the syntactic label ‘ditransitive’) and the resultative (i.e. cause-become)
construction, which are illustrated in the following examples:
CAUSE-RECEIVE CONSTRUCTION
CAUSE-BECOME CONSTRUCTION
(resultative construction)
Joe gave Sally the ball.
Terry wiped the table clean.
Joe painted Sally a picture.
He ate himself sick.
Bob told Joe a story.
Terry pushed the door shut.

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 4 7
The conceptual make-up of these constructions is straightforward: the caused-
motion construction consists of a cause (expressed by the subject), which
initiates the motion directing the patient towards a goal. The CAUSE-RECEIVE
construction comprises an agent causing a recipient to receive a patient, and
the resultative construction an agent causing a patient to be in a resultant
state (‘become’). What these three constructions share is that they join basic
human experiences with basic syntactic clause patterns. This is shown in
Figure 5.22, which is based on Goldberg (1995: 70).
It must be emphasized that such a direct experiential basis seems only
plausible for simple and basic clause patterns of the type illustrated. The
fact that similar clause patterns can also be found in many other languages
of the world reinforces the view that they may be grounded in shared human
experience.
However, another caveat must be added here: like most constructions,
the three argument-structure constructions can occur in a range of related
meanings. This means that just like lexemes constructions are poly-
semous,18 and it is only the central and typical senses of argument-structure
constructions that may in fact be experientially grounded. As Goldberg
puts it: ‘Constructions which correspond to basic sentence types encode
as their central senses event types that are basic to human experience’
(Goldberg 1995: 39; our emphasis). To illustrate the polysemy of con-
structions, Figure 5.23 represents the major senses of the caused-motion
construction.
The nature of these semantic variants of the caused-motion construc-
tion is reminiscent of Brugman’s and Lakoff’s attempts (see Section 4.1) to
explain the range of meanings of the preposition over as interconnected elab-
orations and extensions of a central sense. Sense (b), for example, differs
from the central sense (a) in that the motion is not strictly entailed by verbs
like ask. If Sam asks someone into the room it is still possible that the person
does not comply with Sam’s request. Sense (e) is characterized by the rather
Construction
Basic experience
Basic clause structure
Caused-motion
Someone causing something
Subject–Verb–Object–Adverbial
construction
else to move
(SVOA)
Cause-receive
Someone causing someone 
Subject–Verb–Objectind–Objectdir
construction
else to receive something
(SVOO)
Resultative 
Someone causing something
Subject–Verb–Object–Object 
construction
to change state
complement (SVOCO)
Figure 5.22
The experiential and syntactic basicness of argument-structure con-
structions
(based on Goldberg 1995: 70)

 
2 4 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
(b) X causes Y to move Z (motion
not strictly entailed)
Sam asked him into the room.
(c) X enables Y to move Z
Sam allowed Bob into the
room.
(d) X helps Y to move Z
Sam helped him into the car.
(a) X causes Y to move Z (central sense)
Frank pushed it into the box.
(e) X prevents Y from moving
from Z
Harry locked Joe into the bathroom.
Figure 5.23
The polysemy of the caused-motion construction
(adapted from Goldberg 1995: 161ff.)
drastic extension that the agent does not cause the patient to move, but
prevents him or her from leaving a certain location. Senses (c) and (d) involve
weaker variants of the idea of causing, paraphrased by the notions of ‘help-
ing’ and ‘enabling’.
Complex sentence constructions: an example
Although clause patterns probably provide the most convincing examples
of constructions, the notion can be extended to complex sentences as well.
To illustrate this potential we will focus on what can be labelled ‘shell-
content construction’ (Schmid 2000) and is linguistically represented by
a combination of abstract noun and dependent clause or infinitive; the depen-
dent clause is either directly attached to the nominal (first two examples
below) or linked to it by the copula BE (last two examples).
The fact that a conference is taking place is encouraging.
The chance to find a cheap hotel room is small.
The problem is that hotels don’t offer cheap rates.
The aim is to open student hostels for guests.
What these structures have in common is their cognitive-pragmatic func-
tion: their main job is to make a whole proposition (expressed in the depen-
dent clause) available as a noun-like concept, a process called ‘reification’
(‘turning something into a thing’),19 and to present it under a certain per-
spective (i.e. as a fact, aim, goal, etc.). In this process the abstract noun serves
as a kind of container or ‘shell’ for the information contained in the depen-
dent clause and is therefore called ‘shell noun’. Figure 5.24 provides a

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 4 9
Semantic 
Shell  
Link
Content
structure
reification &
perspectivization
Syntactic 
Noun
Ø/BE
that-clause/infinitive
structure
Examples
(The) fact
that a conference is taking place . . .
(The) aim
is
to open student hostels for guests
Figure 5.24
The structure of the shell-content construction
representation of the shell-content construction modelled on Goldberg’s nota-
tion of argument-structure constructions.
The claim that the shell-content structure qualifies as a meaningful con-
struction is open to similar doubts as the cognitive status of the argument-
structure constructions. While with the latter it had to be proved that the
meaning does not reside in the verb alone, the shell-content construction
has to be defended against the view that its cognitive function exclusively
depends on the meaning of the shell noun (fact, aim, chance, problem, etc.).
As in the case of argument structures, this objection can be overcome when
we look at nouns like idea, which acquire different meanings depending on
whether they are complemented by an infinitive or a that-clause – compare
Figure 5.25, where idea + infinitive is paraphrased as expressing a plan, idea +
that-clause as expressing a thought.
However, this finding does not settle the issue completely because it could
still be maintained that the respective meaning is contributed by the com-
plement: the future-oriented, volitional meaning by the infinitive, and the
factual, thought-related meaning by the that-clause.20 Yet such a simple effect
of the clause-types can be ruled out by showing that one clause type can
have different effects on different nouns – compare Figure 5.26. Thus the
infinitive structure does not always imply ‘aim’ or ‘plan’ (as with idea, see
example above). In the case of task it tolerates the perspective of ‘obligation’,
Construction
idea + infinitive structure
idea + that-clause
Example
The idea is to open student hostels
The idea that we will open student
for guests.
hostels for guests . . .
Paraphrase
‘What we plan to do is to open 
‘The thought that we will open 
student hostels for guests.’
student hostels for guests . . .’
Gloss
‘aim’, ‘plan’
‘thought’, ‘notion’
Figure 5.25
Constructions with idea complemented by infinitive and that-clause

 
2 5 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Construction
task + infinitive structure
solution + infinitive structure
Example
The task is to open student hostels
The solution is to open student 
for guests.
hostels for guests.
Paraphrase
‘What we have to do is to open 
‘The way we are going to do it is 
student hostels for guests.’
to open student hostels for guests’
Gloss
‘obligation’
‘manner’
Figure 5.26
Constructions with task and solution + infinitive structure
in the case of solution the perspective of ‘manner’. In particular, the last
example makes it clear that the manner meaning (‘The way we are going
to do it . . .’) can be derived neither from the meaning of the infinitive
structure nor from the lexical meaning of the shell noun.
In other words, one has to posit a special meaning of the construction
that cannot be derived from its constituents. This property of non-derivability
or non-compositionality seems to be an essential, in fact even defining,
attribute of constructions. It is also something that moves constructions in
the direction of linguistic phenomena that have traditionally been regarded
as idioms.
Idioms as constructions – constructions as idioms21
The notion of idiom has been approached in linguistics mainly from two
angles, a lexicological and a syntactic one. Lexicologists have used the term
for multi-word items like bite the dust (‘to die’), whose meanings cannot be
predicted from the meanings of their parts, thus stressing their semantic non-
compositionality. Syntacticians, on the other hand, have been inclined to regard
‘formal’ idioms like The bigger they come the higher the fall or Why not fix it
yourself? as structural exceptions that are not covered by the system of rules
governing ‘regular’ syntactic structures and may be subject to special prag-
matic constraints. For example, syntactically irregular expressions of the type
Him be a doctor? or Your brother help me? (Fillmore, Kay and O’Connor 1988:
511) are only acceptable as markers of strong incredulity in responses to
statements made by previous speakers.
Yet far from downgrading these structural idioms as exceptions, Fillmore,
Kay and O’Connor focused their attention on them, regarding them as ‘syn-
tactic patterns dedicated to semantic and pragmatic purposes not know-
able from their form alone’ (1988: 505). The object of their seminal study

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 5 1
was pairs of sentence elements linked by the conjunction let alone.
Although superficially comparable to the coordinate conjunctions and and
or in pairing two syntactic elements or clauses of the same type, the let-alone
structure is characterized by a number of specific syntactic, semantic and prag-
matic features. This is illustrated by the following examples adapted from
authentic occurrences of let alone:
There are hardly two houses side by side in Shipley, let alone five.
The president dropped the pretence that the republics would enjoy greater
equality – let alone sovereignty.
We have not been able to agree on a negotiating position let alone
start to negotiate with all the other groups.
Still very much in the syntactic domain, the let-alone structure allows for frag-
ments like let alone five in the first example, which would be unacceptable if
the conjunction and were used in the sentence: *There are hardly two houses
side by side in Shipley, and five. What is more significant is the qualification
that the two juxtaposed elements must represent ‘points on a scale’
(Fillmore, Kay and O’Connor 1988: 513). This is obvious in the example since
the two numbers (two paired with five) are clearly arranged on a semantic
scale of quantity. In the second sentence the scale invoked for the evalua-
tion of equality and sovereignty is something like ‘degree of self-determination’
and in the last example ‘degree of progress in negotiations’. The speakers
of sentences based on the let-alone structure apparently assume that these
scales are feasible, and the hearers must follow the speakers to understand
the utterances.
What are the implications of these examples? While formal idioms like
let alone are both syntactically and semantically idiosyncratic or ‘irregular’,
they still seem to be syntactically productive, in the sense that they serve
as syntactic models for new sentences. Like constructions, formal idioms
seem to be readily stored syntactic moulds for the expression of highly spe-
cific semantic complexes often serving specific pragmatic functions.22 This
is also true of the other formal idioms mentioned above. For example, expres-
sions of the type Him be a doctor? are syntactically productive in spite of
their idiosyncratic structure, which includes a subject in the object case and
a verb in the uninflected stem form – compare expressions like Your brother
help me? or Her write a novel about the Spanish Inquisition? cited by Fillmore,
Kay and O’Connor (1988: 511). As a consequence of the irregular syntax,
it is impossible to determine the meaning of such expressions solely on the

 
2 5 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
basis of the meanings of the lexical items used. In addition, all occurrences
of the formal idiom share the pragmatic force of challenging or question-
ing an utterance just made by another discourse participant (Fillmore, Kay
and O’Connor 1988: 511). Thus Him be a doctor? would only be acceptable
in response to a proposition like X is going to/wants to be a doctor – but in
this situation it would be a highly natural reaction produced rapidly and
fairly automatically. Therefore, a good case can be made for regarding these
idioms as fairly representative examples of constructions.
However, it is also illuminating to reverse the perspective and view con-
structions as idioms. This has quite a revolutionary effect on how we model
the syntactic component of language. Traditionally syntax has been
regarded as the regular, rule-governed part of the grammar, while the lex-
icon and all idioms contained the idiosyncratic pieces of information that
have to be stored separately. Now if constructions are indeed responsible
for the generation of sentences, and if constructions are stored in long-term
memory like words and idioms, then we can do away with the syntactic
rules so cherished by transformational and other approaches. In Croft’s words:
‘The constructional tail has come to wag the syntactic dog’ (2001: 17).
Constructions can then be imagined as specialized variants or even parts
of frames that store all three major types of knowledge together: conceptual-
semantic, syntactic and pragmatic knowledge.
In summary, this chapter has introduced some important cognitive-
linguistic aspects of grammatical constructions:
• Constructions are pairings of meanings and forms that are stored in
long-term memory and specified with regard to their semantic and syn-
tactic structure as well as their pragmatic applicability.
• Verb-based argument-structure constructions provide syntactic moulds
for the production of basic clause patterns. Their prototypical mean-
ings are likely to be grounded in frames representing fundamental expe-
riences of recurring types of events.
• Other constructions may not be experientially grounded in the same
way, but nevertheless serve as syntactic blueprints for the encoding of
specific cognitive functions (like the shell-content construction) and/or
specific meanings and contexts (like many formal idioms).
• While formal idioms appear to stand out from the grammar because
of their irregularity, they may in fact be just the prominent tip of the
hidden iceberg of ‘regular’ constructions (including the argument-
structure constructions) which motivate and sanction all acceptable 
utterances.

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 5 3
Exercises
1. Assign the following sentences to their underlying construction (caused-
motion, cause-receive or resultative construction). Which sentences
would you regard as prototypical examples of the construction in ques-
tion, which as more marginal examples?
Shall I put your things into your rucksack?
David has to sleep himself sober.
I have sent Clarissa to the chemist’s.
Bill cooked his mother a special meal for her birthday.
Joanna helped her grandmother into the gondola.
They’ve painted their garage yellow.
2. Find glosses for the modal meanings in the following examples of shell-
content constructions (adapted from Schmid 2000) and discuss the rel-
ative contributions of the nouns and the constructions to the overall
semantic impact:
Their mission is to put a military spy satellite into orbit.
The risk is that the economy goes from bad to worse.
This is the time to make the right contacts.
It’s a wonderful place to work.
The fact is that people don’t trust politicians.
The problem is to safeguard the national heritage from decay.
The danger is that the damage is irreversible.
3. Collect evidence on the polysemy of the cause-receive construction and
the resultative construction from Goldberg (1995) and decide which of
the three argument-structure constructions discussed in this section is the
most polysemous.
4. Go through the following idioms and fixed expressions and decide to
what extent they might qualify as meaningful productive constructions
especially if you consider their pragmatic function.
kick the bucket
null and void, bread and butter
an apple a day . . .
boys will be boys
good morning
how do you do?
pay one, take two
black is beautiful

 
2 5 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Suggestions for further reading
Section 5.1
1. References to the origin of the notion of ‘frame’ in various disci-
plines can be found in Fillmore (1975: 130; 1976: 9f; 1985: 223).
2. For information on the psychological background of attention see
introductions to cognitive psychology, e.g. Eysenck and Keane (2002)
or Medin, Ross and Markman (2001, ch. 4).
3. Dirven et al. (1982) on speak, talk, say and tell and Fillmore and Atkins
(1992) on risk are interesting applications of the frame notion in syn-
tactic and semantic analysis. The latter article also includes some infor-
mation on the frame-based dictionary which is currently in preparation
(see the contributions to the special issue of the International Journal of
Lexicography edited by Thierry Fontanelle (2003)).
4. Langacker (1987a: 114f) offers a somewhat speculative discussion 
of the relations between the notions of attention, prominence and
perspective.
5. For some useful references to notions related to frames such as
‘schemas’, ‘global patterns’ or ‘scenes’ see Fillmore (1985: 223, fn. 4).
6. The notion of script makes up only a part of the whole system in Schank
and Abelson (1977). The other parts of the book deal for example with
interferences and distractions of scripts, and with notions like ‘plans’,
‘goals’ and ‘themes’ which are designed for capturing novel situations.
Section 5.2
Most of the following notes have the function of pointing out the many
aspects of Talmy’s framework that could not be mentioned in the text,
and of providing references to the relevant passages in the two volumes
of Toward a Cognitive Semantics (Talmy 2000), in which almost all his pre-
vious publications are assembled in more or less thoroughly revised form.
7. This is why Talmy assigns CAUSE and MANNER to the external ‘co-event’
(2000/II: 27ff; 220), while the central elements of FIGURE, GROUND, PATH
and MOTION constitute the ‘framing event’ (2000/II: 217).
8. For the remaining types of event-frames see Talmy (2000/I: 271–88).
9. The distinction between the beginning and the end point of a path
is similar to the distinction between ‘source’ and ‘goal adjuncts’ in

 
F R A M E S  A N D  C O N S T R U C T I O N S
2 5 5
descriptive grammar (see, e.g., Quirk et al. 1985: 479, 648). See also
Anderson’s (1971) detailed and committed localist analysis of clause
patterns.
10. Our analysis of the example My bike is across the street from the bakery
and the windowing options that it offers differs somewhat from
Talmy’s account. See Talmy (2000/I: 269f) for his own analysis. To
get an idea of how extensive and differentiated Talmy’s notion of fic-
tive paths is, see Talmy (2000/I: 99–139).
11. For Talmy’s view of causation see Talmy (2000/II: 69f).
12. For his idea of ‘blocked complements’ see Talmy (2000/I: 262–3).
Section 5.3
The theoretical framework of this chapter is based on the notion of
event-frame developed in the previous section and used by Talmy
(2000/I: 257ff), which means that not all differentiations introduced in
Talmy (2000/II) have been considered.
13. See Vinay and Darbelnet (1975: 105ff) and Malblanc (1977: 66ff) on
practically oriented accounts of stylistic differences between French
and English, and French and German expressions of motion
respectively.
14. In Berman and Slobin (1994), frog stories in five languages (English,
Spanish, German, Turkish and Hebrew) are analyzed in great detail
with regard to comparative and developmental aspects of narrative
texts. See also Slobin (1996) and many of his subsequent publications
in this field, e.g. Slobin (2004) and Slobin (2005).
15. We have restricted our explanation for the differences in narrative
style to the reference to verb-framed and satellite-framed languages.
A second explanation for the lack of windowing constructions,
especially of final windows, in Spanish is discussed in Slobin (1996)
and Aske (1989).
Section 5.4
Construction Grammar is today used as a cover term for a variety of
approaches ranging from genuinely cognitive variants such as Goldberg
(1995) to somewhat more formalist approaches, as pursued by Fillmore
and Kay (e.g. in Fillmore 1999, Kay and Fillmore 1999, Kay 2003) and on
to typologically oriented strands, as represented by Croft’s Radical

 
2 5 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Construction Grammar (2001, 2005). Given our cognitive stance and the
limitations of an introductory book we will focus on selected aspects of
Goldberg’s and Fillmore’s work. A recent summary of the Fillmorean tra-
dition can be found in Fried and Östman (2004a), a summary of cogni-
tive aspects of Construction Grammar in Östman and Fried (2005a). See
also the contributions to Foolen and van der Leek (2000), Fried and Öst-
man (2004b) and Östman and Fried (2005b) as well as the concise
overview (in German) by Fischer and Stefanowitsch (2006).
16. The idea that constructions are psychologically real – rather than just
theoretical constructs – is pursued in Bencini and Goldberg (2000).
17. Interpreting constructions as pairings of form and meaning is
something that Construction Grammar shares with Langacker’s
Cognitive Grammar (see Chapter 4). Croft and Cruse (2004: 278–83)
use these and similar parallels to justify the inclusion of Langacker’s
approach into their rather wide conception of Construction
Grammar.
18. On the polysemy of constructions see Goldberg (1995: 31ff) and
Croft (2001: 116ff), who, like Croft and Cruse (2004: 273ff), brings in
the notion of prototype (see Chapter 1).
19. Langacker (1991: 34f) uses the notion of reification to explain
nominalizations like Sam’s washing of the window. See also Heyvaert
(2003).
20. The most extensive account of constructional meanings of
infinitives, ing-forms and that-clauses used as complementizers has
been proposed by Wierzbicka (1988, ch. 1). See also Givón (1990:
515ff), Frajzyngier and Jasperson (1991) and Frajzyngier (1995).
21. Our account of idioms as constructions has mainly exemplary status.
The classic, though not the first, paper on the topic is Fillmore, Kay
and O’Connor (1988). For a wide-ranging account of idioms in
Construction Grammar, including a typology of idioms, see Croft
and Cruse (2004, ch. 9).
22. On pragmatic aspects of constructions see Fillmore, Kay and
O’Connor (1988: 532f), Goldberg (1995: 92f) and especially Kay
(2003), on discourse-related aspects see Lambrecht (2004) and
Östman (2005).

 
C H A P T E R  6
Blending and relevance
6.1 Metaphor, metonymy and conceptual
blending
In previous chapters we have dealt with linguistic and conceptual structures that
have been tacitly assumed to be stored in long-term memory, among them
conceptual categories, metaphors and metonymies, image schemas, frames and
constructions. To replace this fairly static picture of conceptualization with a more
dynamic approach, the cognitive-linguistic view has been extended to include
aspects of ongoing language processing, which have traditionally been studied by
psycholinguists using experimental methods. The most prominent framework
proposed so far is the theory of how mental spaces are constructed and blended
during online language processing.
From metaphor and metonymy to conceptual blending
A good way to explain the notion of conceptual blending, which was orig-
inally proposed by Gilles Fauconnier and Mark Turner,1 is to contrast it with
the theory of conceptual metaphors discussed in Chapter 3. Consider the
following excerpt from an article in Newsweek, providing the context lead-
ing up to the metaphorical expression a shot in the arm, which could be
paraphrased as ‘something that gives sb/sth the help or encouragement they
need’ (OALD):2
VW’s pickup man
Wolfgang Bernhard: Taking on a troubled brand.
He won’t start his job until February – and Wolfgang Bernhard has already
earned his future employer, German auto giant Volkswagen, many times his
salary. When, in October, VW announced the 44-year-old turnaround specialist
would become the No. 2 under CEO Bernd Pischetsrieder, investors celebrated
by raising VW’s market cap by h 1 billion in a single day.
Volkswagen obviously needs a shot in the arm. . . .
Newsweek, December 27/January 3, 2005: 58

 
Analyzed in terms of conceptual metaphor and metonymy (see Section 3.1)
the expression a shot in the arm suggests the (specific) metaphor +ECONOMIC
WELL-BEING IS HEALTH+, which is supported by the metonymy +SHOT (= INJECTION)
STANDS FOR HEALTH+, a cause–effect metonymy. In order to be applicable to
Volkswagen, the generic metaphor +A COMPANY IS A PERSON+ has to be called up
as well, whose source concept PERSON comes with the notion of a body that
may receive the shot in the arm. The metaphor +ECONOMIC WELL-BEING IS HEALTH+
is interpreted within the mapping scope rooted in the basic experience of
what is good (i.e. feeling healthy) or bad (i.e. feeling ill).
As it stands, this combination of metaphors and metonymy seems to pro-
vide a fairly straightforward if complex interpretation of the phrase a shot in
the arm. Yet it does not agree with our intuitions on how we comprehend the
expression on three counts: the interpretation does not consider the specific
context in which a shot in the arm is used in this text; the analysis only offers
a one-way explanation by focusing on what the source concepts contribute
to the target concept; finally it suggests that the metaphorical mapping is fully
processed to the point where it could be lexicalized as ‘[giving] the help or
encouragement they need’ (as suggested by the OALD paraphrase quoted above).
Turning to conceptual blending one finds that it seems to offer a rem-
edy for all three deficiencies. To begin with the first, the preceding context
does play an important role in the cognitive processing of the expression
a shot in the arm. The assumption is that reading the headline, the lead and
the first paragraph of the sample text, the reader constructs a mental space
containing, among other things, the information that Volkswagen has
hired a new director. Let us call this mental space a ‘hiring space’. This men-
tal space is an online conceptual representation, constructed under the influ-
ence of the incoming information but tapping stored cognitive models like
VW, PROFIT-MAKING COMPANY, BOARD OF DIRECTORS and HIRING EMPLOYEES. In the words
of Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 40, 102):
Mental spaces are small conceptual packets constructed as we think and talk,
for purposes of local understanding and action. . . . [They] operate in working
memory but are built up partly by activating structures available from long-
term memory.
Along with the hiring space, the incoming metaphorical expression triggers
a second mental space, which will be called the ‘injection space’. This space
taps conceptual structure of a well-known cognitive model, which proto-
typically features a doctor or a nurse administering a syringe containing
medicine intravenously in the arm of the patient. Also included is activated
knowledge about the purpose of such an event, the improvement of the
patient’s health.
2 5 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 5 9
According to the conceptual-blending theory, these two mental spaces
(the hiring and the injection space, which are called input spaces) are
brought together and integrated, or ‘blended’. The result of this cognitive
operation is a new blended space containing information projected from
both input spaces. However, the blended space does not only draw on the
input spaces, but is characterized by a new, emergent conceptual structure
in its own right, whose set-up differs from those of the two input spaces.
Compare Figure 6.1 for a visual representation in a network model, which
makes use of the terminology of participant roles introduced in Section 4.2.
(Note that like Mandelblit (2000) and Coulson and Oakley (2003) we have
neglected the fourth, so-called ‘generic space’ proposed by Fauconnier and
Turner in this and the later diagrams, because it does not add anything that
we regard as essential for understanding the network model.)3
According to Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 48f) the projection from the
input spaces into the blended space involves three processes: composition,
completion and elaboration. Composition is always involved when con-
ceptual content from two or more mental spaces is fused in the blended
space, e.g. when hiring a director is seen as administering an injection, or
raising profits as improving health. The process of completion is also
required to understand the blend in our example because the sentence
CROSS-SPACE MAPPINGS
identity
Compression
Input space 1
‘hiring space’
Input space 2
‘injection space’
Blended space 
AGENT: VW
ACTION: hiring
new staff
PATIENT (implicit):
new director
AGENT: doctor/nurse
ACTION:
administering injection
PATIENT: patient
AGENT or
INSTRUMENT:
new director
ACTION: hiring as 
administering
injection
PATIENT: VW
Figure 6.1
Network diagram of the shot in the arm blend (the square box
indicates the emergent structure of the blend)

 
2 6 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Volkswagen obviously needs a shot in the arm underspecifies the situation
described: neither the person giving the injection (i.e. the agent) nor the
instrument needed for the injection space are mentioned in this sentence.
Since these elements are indispensable parts of the injection situation and
therefore included in the corresponding frame, they are so to speak ‘rec-
ommended’ for completion by the underspecified sentence. Finally,
elaboration is envisaged in a highly dynamic fashion, i.e. in terms of ‘sim-
ulating’ or ‘running’ the blend. The idea behind these explanatory metaphors
is that the event construed in the blend is mentally unfolded and taken
through its stages like a computer program being tested for correctness and
consistency. During this process the blend can be enriched by information
deemed necessary, pertinent or even just interesting. What is important is
that the depth (and presumably also the duration) of this process of elab-
oration is in principle open-ended and will vary among readers. Returning
to our example, some readers may be satisfied having constructed a
blended space that contains the rather general information that the new
director will somehow improve the company’s economic prospects. Others
may actually call up an image of the director giving the injection to the
(personified) company.
As illustrated by Figure 6.1, the input spaces not only feed the blended
space (by supplying the necessary projections), but are also linked to each other
by cross-space mappings, which are based on what Fauconnier and
Turner (2002: 89–111) call vital relations. In the case of metaphor the
prominent vital relation is identity, in our example the identity relation
between the actions of hiring a new director (input space 1) and of admin-
istering an injection (input space 2). In order to establish the blend the actions
of the two input spaces are projected onto the blended space, largely by
means of composition and completion. As a result the actions in the two
spaces undergo what Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 92f, 312–25) call
compression. As will be shown in more detail in the next section, com-
pression is in fact the ultimate goal of the whole blending process. The cru-
cial effect of compression is that the conceptual complexity of the inputs
from several sources is reduced considerably. A newly integrated and uni-
fied conceptual structure emerges that is cognitively manageable and thus
has, as Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 312) put it, ‘human scale’. In our exam-
ple, the result of compression on the identity relation is a new combina-
tion of actions, the emergent structure described as the ACTION of ‘hiring as
injection-administering’ in the blended space. Similarly, as we have seen,
the goals of the two actions are fused into ‘raising profits as improving health’.
This shows that both input spaces contribute to the emergent structure of

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 6 1
the blend, which is different from the structure of either input space and
less complex than their simple addition.
As for the participants of the actions, Volkswagen, the AGENT of the hir-
ing action in input space 1, turns out to be the PATIENT in need of medical
treatment in the blended space. Yet what is more interesting is the role of
the new director. Although he is not explicitly mentioned in the sentence
Volkswagen obviously needs a shot in the arm, his role is necessary for its under-
standing and will be added to the blend by means of completion. His par-
ticipant role is ambiguous, however. What is clear is that he does not represent
the element affected by the action any more, as is the case in the hiring
space (input space 1). One possible interpretation is that in the blended space
he takes on the AGENT role of the doctor, who is going to administer the
syringe to the ailing company. In an alternative understanding, he himself
could function as the INSTRUMENT, because even the announcement of his
hiring has been a means sufficient to administer the much-needed
medicine to VW. Such ambiguities need not be resolved for the blend to
‘make sense’, they are open to further elaboration. Indeed, they are proof
that the blending theory is well suited to capture the kind of conceptual
indeterminacy and open-endedness typical of online cognitive processing,
and this seems to be much more important for comprehension than more
traditional approaches would make us believe.
Summing up at this point, the conceptual blending analysis differs from
the metaphor and metonymy analysis in the following ways:
• The conceptual-metaphor approach operates with cognitive models
stored in long-term memory, the blending approach with mental
spaces constructed during online processing, though often based on cog-
nitive models.
• Unlike cognitive models, mental spaces are context-dependent and
include information about specific situations.
• While metaphor is seen as a one-directional mapping from a source to
a target model, conceptual blending prototypically involves mappings from
two input spaces to a third, blended space, which is characterized by a
compressed emergent conceptual structure. This operation involves the
cognitive processes of composition, completion and elaboration and can
be described in terms of conceptual integration networks.
• The mapping scope, which restrains metaphorical mappings, is to a large
extent represented by the vital relations (such as identity), which
underlie cross-mappings between input spaces and undergo compres-
sion in the blended space.

 
2 6 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Further dimensions of compression: space, time,
cause–effect and part–whole
Identity may be the most important and most frequent vital relation com-
pressed in blends, but there are other relations that are also affected by this
process.4 One of them is space, which gives rise to spatial compression,
as can be assumed for the processing of the expression American-type tor-
nado in the following sentence:
Without any warning an American-type tornado hit the sleepy French
village of Châtel-les-Bains leaving a trail of destruction behind.
Applying the conceptual blending approach, the reader will call up two men-
tal input spaces. One space will assemble the reader’s knowledge of the effects
of tornados in the Caribbean or the United States, with huge waves running
up beaches, cars being overturned and wooden houses and garages being lit-
erally flattened or blown away; a second input space will focus on what 
normally happens in a thunderstorm in a well-protected European village (tor-
rential rain, perhaps a tree or two uprooted, tiles flying around, a debris of
leaves and branches in the streets lined by terraced stone houses). It is obvi-
ous that the two input spaces are situated in different locations and it is equally
clear that their spatial separation must be overcome for the message to make
sense. This is why the two input spaces are compressed to overcome their
spatial separation. The result is probably a blended space in which our pic-
ture of the French village and the kind of damage normally caused by
European thunderstorms is tied up with the devastating effects that are typ-
ical of American tornados. But as with the shot-in-the-arm example the exact
nature and the details of the damage will not and cannot really be sorted
out. What is achieved in this online process and what is obviously quite suf-
ficient for our comprehension is an emergent structure which establishes cer-
tain links between the two settings, but leaves the details unresolved.
Closely linked to spatial compression is compression along the time
dimension. Here is one of Fauconnier and Turner’s own examples (2002:
63), the ‘regatta blend’:
The clipper ship Northern Light sailed in 1853 from San Francisco to Boston in
76 days, 8 hours. That time was still the fastest on record in 1993, when a
modern catamaran, Great American II, set out on the same course. A few days
before the catamaran reached Boston, observers were able to say: at this point
Great American II is 4.5 days ahead of Northern Light.
(Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 63)

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 6 3
Summarizing the gist of Fauconnier and Turner’s argument one can pos-
tulate two input spaces, one containing the voyage undertaken by Northern
Light in 1853 (with as much detail of the trip as we can muster), the other
one devoted to the 1993 voyage of the Great American II (also equipped with
the respective details). Though there are strong identity links between the
two input spaces (the two boats involved, their starting point and destina-
tion, the course and their positions on the course), which are all projected
into the blended space and fused by means of composition, the emergent
structure of the blend crucially depends on the compression of the two time
periods. This temporal compression is the condition for ‘running the blend
by imagining the two boats in competition’ (Fauconnier and Turner 2002:
63); it provides an immediate grasp of the situation as opposed to mathe-
matical calculations which would have to relate the position of the boats
either to the starting point or the end point of the journeys.
Moving on to cause–effect, good examples of compression along this
vital relation are causation events expressed by verbs like kill and break, which
were traditionally described as conflations of the semantic components ‘cause’
and ‘become’. One cognitive-linguistic approach already discussed in this
book (see Section 5.2) was Talmy’s notion of the windowing of attention
in causal-chain events. Our example in Section 5.2 was John broke the win-
dow. Analyzed in terms of Talmy’s approach, this example opens up an ini-
tial and a final window of attention selected from a much larger causal chain
of sequential events. The sentence focuses on the agent John and the final
result (the fact that the window has been broken), while other events like
John’s bending down and grasping a stone as well as the actual contact of
the stone with the window are backgrounded.
In conceptual-blending theory this ‘hiding’ of sub events can be explained
as a case of compression on the vital relation of cause–effect. The compres-
sion mainly concerns the first of two input spaces that must be posited, the
space containing John’s sequence of actions. The second space contains the
result of the action, the broken window. While there is of course a cross-space
relation of cause–effect from the first input space to the second, the actual
utterance John broke the window projects the agent into the blended space, com-
pressing all intermediate stages (bending knees, putting out hand, grasping
stone, pulling stone towards the body, and so on) in the single verb break.
The compression thus substantially reduces the causal complexity of the
event, yielding a cognitively manageable conceptual unit.
With the vital relation of part–whole we enter the domain of image
schemas grounded in our bodily experiences (see Sections 2.5 and 3.1).
Normally, the part–whole link between body parts and body (or person) as

 
2 6 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
a whole is as natural as it is unobtrusive. Yet if we react to a portrait with
That’s Jane Doe (Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 97) or – to add another vari-
ant – if we say That’s Jim when hearing someone’s voice at the door, it is
not all that certain that we automatically call up the person as a whole,
although nobody would earnestly claim that we are only conceptualizing
the face or the voice of the person in question. Again a blending approach
may be helpful in providing a more adequate analysis than either the (improb-
able) non-metonymic or a fully metonymic interpretation. Assuming the
person’s face (or the voice backed up by a conversation) as one input space
and the person as a whole conceptualized in the other input space, the
part–whole relationship between the two input spaces can again be under-
stood as being compressed into a blend with an emergent structure oscil-
lating between face/voice and an image of the whole person.
If one tries to describe the goal achieved by the compression of vital rela-
tions in the blended space, it can invariably be understood as a state of uni-
fication. This is not only true of the identity relations between hiring a new
director and a doctor giving a shot in the arm, from which we started out. It
also applies to the compression of spatially and temporally distant elements
(the American-type tornado and the regatta boats) or to the compression of
the numerous stages of a cause–effect chain (the window-breaking blend) or
of parts and wholes (face/person blend).
The unified concept can be conceptualized in the blended space as a
person concept (e.g. the new director as doctor), an object concept (the
blended regatta boat) or an action concept (window breaking). However,
the unified element can also be attached as a property to another concept
in the blended space (just as the modifiers small or big are attached to their
heads in phrases like small boy or big house); this function will be referred
to as blended property.5
Taking the expression mid-Atlantic English as a first example, the modifier
mid-Atlantic can be understood as the compression of a spatial relation involv-
ing US and Britain to denote the unification of being an American–British mix-
ture; attached to the concept ENGLISH (as a language) it functions as a blended
property to denote a special kind of English found in some British magazines.
In the noun phrase old friend – the friend may of course be quite young – the
property ‘old’ can be said to result from a compression of the various stages
of an acquaintance spread over a long period of time; this is why it qualifies
as a blended property while ‘old’ in old man would not. Finally, and this is
Fauconnier and Turner’s (2002: 100) own example, the modifier warm in the
noun phrase warm coat does not express that the coat has the inherent qual-
ity of warmth, but that the coat is something that causes people to be warm

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 6 5
if they wear it. ‘Warmth’ is therefore due to the compression of a cause–effect
relation between ‘coat’ and ‘warmth’ into a blended property (while the prop-
erty ‘thick’ in thick coat would not involve a blend).
In surveying this range of conceptual compression and its applications one
should take into account that the examples have here been presented in iso-
lation for the sake of clarity. What has been neglected is the fact that com-
pression regularly affects several vital relations, which can be interrelated in
various ways. Apart from the well-known symbiosis of spatial and temporal
relations, which are often combined in compression, it can be safely assumed
that there is always some sort of identity compression involved in blending.
Governing rules of blending and entrenchment
Conceptual blending is, as we have seen, a potentially open-ended cognitive
process. This raises the question whether compression based on a few vital
relations is sufficient to delimit the emergent structure in the blended space.
The wide range of examples considered for conceptual blending (‘sexual fan-
tasies, grammar, complex numbers, personal identity, redemption and lot-
tery depression’; Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 309) invites criticism of the
type that ‘anything goes’ (see Gibbs 2000: 349f, Broccias 2004). Reacting to
such objections, Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 325–34) have proposed nine
governing (or optimality) principles, which determine the degree of compression
and unification achieved by a given blend. They have been condensed here
into a set of five for the purpose of simplification.6
The first principle to be observed in optimizing blending is the topology
principle – the term takes up the geographical metaphor favoured by cog-
nitive linguists to denote conceptual structure. The topology principle
requires the blend to take over and preserve important aspects of the conceptual
structure of the input spaces, e.g. the space-internal relations of part–whole
when conceptualizing a body and its parts, or the agent–action–patient pat-
tern of events (like a boss hiring a new employee). Considering the impor-
tance of vital relations in the blending process, it is not surprising that their
strength and intensity both in cross-space mappings between input spaces and
in the emergent structure of the blended space should be increased rather than
reduced (‘principle of promoting vital relations’); as has been shown, the win-
dow-breaking blend intensifies the link between the initial stage and the result
of the process by compressing all the intermediate stages of the window-
breaking action in the single verb break.
Moving on to the principle of integration (a more pointed term would
be ‘gestalt principle’), this is what one would expect compression to conform

 
2 6 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
with: the establishment of an emergent structure that has as far as possible
the qualities of a conceptual ‘gestalt’, i.e. holistic conceptualization and easy
handling as a unit, qualities that facilitate entrenchment and memorability.
In contrast, the principle of unpacking ensures that the blend can still
prompt the reconstruction of the entire network (Fauconnier and Turner 2002:
332). An extreme case is a blend in which the normal processing direction of
the blend is as it were reversed and the input spaces are in fact approached
from the angle of the blended space. For instance, in a philosophy lecture the
professor may set up a fictive argument between a famous philosopher and
himself on the pattern of ‘Kant says that X, but I object that Y’. Such a dis-
cussion between people living at different times is motivated by a debate
frame which defines the structure of the blended space; yet this debate frame
unpacks into input frames featuring the philosophers living and teaching at
different times (‘the debate with Kant’, Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 59).
What is probably more frequent is a partial unpacking, a return to the input
frames and their cross-mappings to reconceptualize parts of the emergent
structure that have been temporarily lost. In either case the unpacking prin-
ciple works for keeping the blend ‘open’ as an online process and in this
way competes with the principle of integration.
Compared with these principles, all of them concerned with regulating the
relationship between the spaces in the blend, the principle of relevance
has a more basic function: by distributing significance to the elements of the
blend this principle decides in which direction the blend is developing.
Applied to our first example, the shot-in-the-arm blend, this means that rele-
vance is responsible for projecting the new director into the role of doctor 
(and VW as patient). In other words, relevance is the major motivating force
behind blends in their actual contexts. As such it is equally encompassing and
omnipresent as the principle of human scale mentioned earlier on, which
is regarded as the ‘overarching goal’ by Fauconnier and Turner. While human
scale is safely embedded in cognitive thinking – in the notions of prototype,
basic level, part–whole hierarchies, the metaphorical derivation of abstract con-
cepts from concrete source concepts – the reason why the principle of rele-
vance should be so important for conceptual blending remains more or less
unexplained; this asks for an explanation from a different angle, as it has been
proposed by Relevance Theory, which is rooted in pragmatics (see Section 6.4).
Summing up, this is what the last two sections should have added to the
preliminary sketch of conceptual blending at the end of the first section:
• The vital relations underlying blends include image schemas (part–
whole), basic correlations (cause–effect), place and time and a number

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 6 7
of other relations, whose status still awaits critical assessment (Fauconnier
and Turner 2002: 98, 100).
• Compression, which is the core of the blending process, normally
involves several vital relations.
• The blending process is constrained – and optimized – by a set of gov-
erning principles, among them the topology, the integration and the
unpacking principles.
• Ideally, the interplay of the governing principles maintains the online
quality of indeterminacy and open-endedness and ensures the human
scale of the emergent structure.
• Blending is also strongly motivated by the relevance principle, which
assigns significance to certain elements of the blend and links the blend
with the needs of communicative interaction (see Section 6.3).
Exercises
1. In order to provide a blending representation, which input spaces
would you posit for the following metaphors and which emergent struc-
ture would you expect in the blended space to occur? Contrast this dia-
gram with a metaphor analysis based on the suggestions made in
Section 3.1.
She lives at the foot of the mountain.
Their love is a bumpy journey.
Prices are still spiralling.
2. The emergent structure may remain vague (for instance by permitting
the new director to be seen as a doctor or an instrument in the shot-
in-the arm blend). Go back to Chapter 2 and find other examples where
we tolerate conceptual alternatives and inconsistencies.
3. Look out for parallel examples of the American-type tornado, John broke
the window, warm coat, that’s Jim and interpret them in terms of spa-
tial, cause–effect, property and part–whole compression respectively.
4. Construct another context in which past and present achievements in
sports, science or technology are compared in a similar way as in the
regatta blend and provide a blending analysis for your example.
5. Show how the examples you have provided for exercises 3 and 4 con-
tribute to reducing complex conceptualizations to easily handled ‘con-
ceptual packages’ of ‘human scale’ (Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 40,
312, 346).

 
2 6 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
6.2 Conceptual blending in linguistic analysis
and description
Applications of the theory of conceptual blending are numerous and wide-ranging.
Outside linguistics, they span the gamut from cognitive psychology to mathematics
and computing to musicology and archeology.7 Sticking to our own field we will
present in this section some case studies of lexical, grammatical and pragmatic
phenomena suitable for analysis in the blending framework.
Conceptual blending and morphological blends
Superficially, the most obvious candidate for an analysis in terms of conceptual
blending is its namesake in the area of word-formation, the morphological
blend, as represented by items like smog, brunch, motel, infotainment. Of
course, the fact that all these blends are the result of telescoping two words
into a new one suggests that they have all undergone a process of concep-
tual projection and composition of material from input spaces into a
blended space. However, with most accepted morphological blends this pro-
cess is seen as a stage in the word’s history rather than an ongoing or even
open-ended conceptual process. When choosing the word smog, many lan-
guage users will not even realize the blending background any longer, so
deeply entrenched and lexicalized is the word today. In the case of brunch
or motel the input spaces ‘breakfast’ and ‘lunch’, ‘motorist’ and ‘hotel’ respec-
tively may be available for processing, but brunch and motel can also be con-
ceptualized from the emergent structure without ‘unpacking’ the whole blend.
It is only with the last example, infotainment, that the blending analysis
unfolds some of its explanatory potential. Although the input spaces show
considerable similarities – information and entertainment are related
abstract principles denoting ways of satisfying an audience – the emergent
structure of the blended space is open-ended; it is difficult, and probably
not even necessary, to define the mixture represented by infotainment in a
conclusive way.8
The real testing ground for a conceptual blending analysis is two types of
morphological blends: those that fail to survive and to be conventionalized
and those that are intentionally conceived as a temporary and open-ended
phenomenon. Take two candidates that have not really made it as mor-
phological blends, swimsation (the name of a New Zealand chain of swim
schools) and sportianity (Lehrer 1996: 379). Why is it that many people may
find it easy to recognize the notion of ‘swimming’, but difficult to identify

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 6 9
‡ This example was pointed out to us by Markus Riedel, Rostock.
the second input space ‘sensation’ – and the same applies to sportianity
with regard to ‘sports’ and ‘Christianity’. In either case the cross-space map-
pings connecting the first space (‘swimming’, ‘sports’) with the second
space (‘sensation’, ‘Christianity’) do not appear to be very ‘vital’; they can-
not be grasped as identity, space, time, cause–effect or part–whole rela-
tionships. This is why the basic processes of composition and completion
do not seem to be applicable. As a result, compression does not lead to
an emergent structure that goes beyond the unsatisfactory impression that
the blend must have something to do with the content of the first input
space, ‘swimming’ or ‘sports’.
A still more interesting application of the blending approach is con-
cerned with ad-hoc blends, as they are for instance used in the headlines
of popular newspapers to attract attention and entertain the readership (but
not really in order to enlarge the vocabulary of the language). Most of these
blends presuppose a certain insider knowledge. In the case of Ballacktisch ‡
(‘Ballacktic’), a front headline of the German popular paper Bildzeitung (6
June 2005), the background is that Ballack was the name of a well-known
German soccer player of the Bayern Munich team at the time of publica-
tion, that he was said to be negotiating a transfer to Real Madrid, another
famous soccer team, in fact one that was so highly praised at the time that
it had acquired the nickname galacticos (‘the galactic ones’). Assuming this
background knowledge, which the newspaper obviously expected from its
readership, one can set up the blend as documented in the simplified net-
work representation of Figure 6.2
In the first input space, Ballack is primarily characterized in his role as
the soccer player (an ‘inner-space’ relation in Fauconnier and Turner’s ter-
minology); he is also tied to the location of Munich as a member of the Bayern
Munich team. Input space 2 conceptualizes the Real team, also characterized
by its role as soccer team and linked to the location of Madrid. In addition,
Real is equipped with the blended property ‘galactic/outstanding’ – a
blended property because it can be understood as the result of a preceding
blending process based on the mental space ‘stars on the firmament/show-
business stars’ and another input space devoted to the outstanding qualities
of the Real team.
Returning to Figure 6.2, we find that the Ballack space and the Real
space are linked by the cross-space mapping of the vital relations of ‘iden-
tity’ with regard to the people involved and their roles as soccer players,
while the locations are connected by the relation of ‘space’ (distance).

 
2 7 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Now in the blended space the property of ‘Real being galactic/outstand-
ing’ is projected from input space 2 onto the concept Ballack: the iden-
tity relation is compressed into the ‘unified’ message that Ballack can also
be regarded as galactic and therefore as eligible for Real. This message is
supported by the spatial compression which results in the unification of
Ballack’s and Real’s location. The effect is an emergent structure that sug-
gests, although this is not stated as a fact, that Ballack is going to Madrid
to join the Real team. This condensation of a speculative rumour into
the single word Ballacktisch is exactly what the headlines of popular news-
papers are aiming at.
In their quest for immediate and short-lived effects the editors of the
Bildzeitung did not care whether the handy label they invented as a headline
was highly context-dependent or not; Ballacktisch is surely a poor candidate
for conceptual entrenchment or lexicalization as an independently available
meaning. In fact there is a simple test to assess the online quality of this
blend. You only have to ask yourself if you would have understood it (as
millions of Bild readers apparently did at the time of printing) without the
information furnished above.
CROSS-SPACE MAPPINGS
identity, space
Compression
 Input space 1
‘Ballack space’
Input space 2
‘Real space’
Blended space
Ballack,
soccer player
galactic/outstanding;
probably joining
Real Madrid
Ballack
soccer player
Bayern Munich
Real
soccer team
Madrid
Blended property:
‘galactic/outstanding’
Figure 6.2
Network representation of the morphological blend
Ballacktisch (‘Ballacktic’)

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 7 1
Compounds and acronyms as conceptual blends
Discussing morphological blends in terms of conceptual blending or inte-
gration has led us away from their salient features of telescoped form. In
fact, from the conceptual perspective, morphological blends can be under-
stood as a special kind of compound. It is therefore not surprising that they
provide a model case of the cognitive processing of compounds at large, in
particular nominal compounds based on adjective–noun and noun–noun
combinations. Like morphological blends these compounds can all be sub-
jected to a conceptual blending analysis, but this procedure will yield vary-
ing degrees of insight over and above what has already been achieved in
the concept-based attribute analysis in Section 3.2. Compositional compounds
such as apple juice can be explained as a set-up of two input spaces (‘apple
space’ and ‘juice space’); here the emergent structure in the blended space
is characterized by the integration of the core information of the first input
space into the second.
More sophisticated types of blending processes can be posited for less
compositional compounds like wheelchair in order to account for the extra
attributes that go beyond the meanings inherent in the constituents wheel
and chair. One way of doing this would be to assume an additional input
space ‘hospital’ or ‘invalid’ or both; in another interpretation the extra mean-
ing would arise from the blending process as newly emergent conceptual
structure. Yet no matter how a more detailed blending analysis will explain
these compounds, the compression in these blends has long led to deeply
entrenched structures in the blended space – or firmly lexicalized items in
more traditional terminology – so the blending process will not be repeated
every time these items are used. As observed by Coulson (2001: 142–4) the
online quality of the blend only comes to the fore when the entrenched
interpretation does not fit a specific context; her rather exotic example is
the compound pet fish, which normally calls up the context of a fish tank,
but might be used by a biologist investigating shark behaviour for her
favourite specimen of shark.9
A discrepancy between an entrenched meaning and an ad hoc concep-
tualization is particularly frequent with compounds created in family dis-
course or in conversation with close friends. Take the example of cherry jeans,
for which a relatively conventionalized meaning is probably ‘jeans of a cherry-
like colour’. Yet in specific contexts the conceptual blending of the two input
spaces ‘jeans’ and ‘cherry’ may produce quite different emergent structures in
the blended space. Compare Figure 6.3, where it is clear that the colour inter-
pretation of the blend is the most likely one. It can rely on the cross-space

 
2 7 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
mapping involving the vital relation of identity between the colour prop-
erty of the cherry space and the colour property of the jeans space; both
colour properties are projected into the blended space and compressed into
the blended property of ‘cherry red’ assigned to cherry jeans. A similar (but
more unusual) mapping can be assumed between the (plain) cloth pattern
of jeans and the shape property of cherries to describe a pair of white designer
jeans printed with a cherry pattern; it goes without saying that this con-
ceptualization of the compound cherry jeans, which is based on the blended
property ‘printed with a cherry pattern’, will not be able to compete suc-
cessfully for entrenchment and lexicalization with ‘cherry-coloured jeans’.
For the last two emergent structures documented for cherry jeans in the
blended space of Figure 6.3 entrenchment is not really feasible. Conceptua-
lizing cherry jeans as ‘garment soiled by stains of cherry juice’ presupposes
the knowledge that such an accident has in fact happened. Only then will
the cross-space mapping of cause (cherry juice) and effect (colour stain on
jeans) be activated and compressed into the blended property of the jeans
(‘cherry juice stains on jeans’). More likely than not the blend will be an
CROSS-SPACE MAPPINGS
identity, cause–effect
Compression
Input space 1
‘cherry space’
Input space 2
‘jeans space’
Blended space 
SUBSTANCE: flesh & stone
COLOUR PROPERTY: red
SHAPE PROPERTY: round
PRODUCE: jam, juice
(produces bad stains if spilt)
ORIGIN: grows on and is 
harvested from cherry tree
often blue
jeans cut 
SUBSTANCE: garment
made of denim
COLOUR PROPERTY:
SHAPE PROPERTY:
CLOTH PATTERN: none
FUNCTION: (dungaree) jeans
worn for gardening and
other rough work
SUBSTANCE: garment
BLENDED PROPERTY:
most likely: cherry red/
also: printed with cherry
pattern/
or: soiled by cherry juice
stains/
or: worn for cherry
picking
Figure 6.3
Network representation of the cherry-jeans blend

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 7 3
ad hoc coinage used for a pair of jeans picked out from the laundry bag for
washing and will be discarded when the item has vanished in the washing
machine. It is in the improbable case that the stain should persist that the
blend ‘jeans soiled by cherry juice’ might achieve acceptance in the family
circle. Just like this version of the blend, the last variant (‘jeans used for
cherry picking’) relies on a cause–effect relation between one traditional
FUNCTION of (dungaree) jeans (gardening work, including picking cherries)
and the effect of the cherries being harvested (the ORIGIN element of the cherry
input space), which is to be compressed into a blended property of the jeans
in the blended space. Yet the activation of this link presupposes the con-
text that picking cherries involves climbing cherry trees or dirty ladders requir-
ing special clothing, plus the knowledge that the person in question has
worn or intends to wear a certain pair of dungaree jeans for cherry pick-
ing. An emergent structure dependent on such a constellation has little or
no chance of achieving wider currency, let alone permanence: it is a typi-
cal product of context-dependent online conceptualization.
Apart from the prototypical case of the two-element compound there
are three-element combinations (car boot sale, home help service, health care
costs, state school heads, etc.; see Schmid 2005: 212f), which call for a spe-
cial blending analysis, and this also applies to acronyms (or initialisms) com-
prising more than two elements.10 Exploring their blending behaviour
would go beyond the range of this introduction, yet there is one aspect of
acronym building that will be picked out for discussion because it vividly
illustrates our urge for conceptual blending as well as the descriptive poten-
tial inherent in blending analysis. Acronyms pronounced like natural
words (as opposed to spelling pronunciation) have always shown a tendency
to be modelled phonologically and graphically on existing words. If this
just means compliance with English syllable structure as in TAM (<
Television Audience Measurement) or laser (< Light Amplification by Stimulated
Emission of Radiation), it is a phonological issue that does not directly affect
conceptual blending. However, as soon as existing English words come into
play and are used as ‘prop words’, the governing principle of relevance will
motivate us to look for conceptual links between the meaning of the prop
word and the acronym, which can be understood as the two input spaces
as a conceptual blend. The link can be very obvious, as in the case of the
time-hallowed acronym CARE (< Cooperative American Relief to Europe), where
a cause–effect relation can be established between a caring attitude and the
execution of this intention; but often it is much less straightforward, as in
the well-known example WASP (< White Anglo-Saxon Protestant) or in the more
recent acronym PISA (< Programme for International Student Assessment). What

 
2 7 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
is typical of acronyms with prop words is that the emergent structure does
not boil down to a discrete cognitive meaning, but will retain or even con-
sist of more or less vague and subjective associations quite in line with the
indeterminate and open-ended nature of online processing. This is even more
noticeable when the ‘prop word space’ is supported by a pictorial represen-
tation. An example is a statistics of the PISA results, which was illustrated
with a picture of the leaning tower (Süddeutsche Zeitung, 15 July 2005).
This constellation is represented in the network diagram of Figure 6.4,
where input space 1 supplies a condensed conceptualization of the
acronym meaning (which could be seen as the structure emerging from a
separate blending process). Input space 2 provides the conceptualization of
the leaning tower of Pisa, a highlight of European culture, which has never-
theless achieved its fame as an architect’s nightmare. Yet what is the con-
ceptual link between the two input spaces? If one does not simply deny
the existence of any relation, what can be assumed as tentative cross-space
mapping is a relation of cause–effect between the educational achievement
of the results of input space 1 (cause) and the cultural reputation of the
architectural heritage (effect), as suggested both verbally and visually by input
CROSS-SPACE MAPPINGS
cause–effect
Compression
Input space 1
‘PISA test space’
Input space 2
‘Pisa tower space’
Blended space
Good PISA test
results
maintain cultural
heritage
yet off course like
the leaning tower
Leaning tower of Pisa:
hallmark of
European culture, 
architect’s nightmare
Testing educational
achievement across
countries:
text comprehension,
mathematical problem
solving
Figure 6.4
Network representation of the PISA blend (PISA test space may
also be seen as the result of a preceding blending process)

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 7 5
space 2. This cause–effect relation is compressed in the blended space into
an emergent structure that – perhaps rather hazily – indicates that good
Pisa results maintain our cultural heritage, but at the same time suggests
that education may be off course, just like the leaning tower.
Seen against the background of English word-formation, these
acronyms (and especially the combination with pictorial elements like the
leaning tower) may appear to be a rather marginal phenomenon. However,
the blending processes they give rise to and the type of emergent struc-
ture produced for instance in the Pisa blend foreshadow the type of blends
that seems to be omnipresent in advertising today (and will be discussed
in Section 6.3 below).
Conceptual blending, event structure and constructions
Surveying the mental spaces involved in the creation of morphological blends,
compounds and acronyms, we note that most of them will be conceptual-
ized as states or situations. Yet there are also mental spaces qualifying as
events (e.g. brunch, swimming, testing students, etc.) that can be described
in terms of actions and participant roles, just as our first example in this
chapter, the shot-in-the-arm blend (see Figure 6.1). While this blend relies
on a single event structure (AGENT/INSTRUMENT – ACTION – PATIENT), which is shared
by both input spaces, the more interesting cases are those in which differ-
ent event structures are involved.
Taking up an example already discussed in Section 5.4 in the context
of Construction Grammar, the sentence Frank sneezed the tissue off the table
can also be explained as an online blend involving three different event
schemas – compare Figure 6.5. Two of these event schemas, the causing event
(paraphrasable as Frank sneezed) and the effected event (paraphrasable as the
tissue fell off the table), are conceptualized in input space 1 (we mention only
in passing that this bipartite input space can be understood as the result of
a blending process including compression along the vital relation of
cause–effect). The third event schema, the caused-motion event (prototyp-
ically paraphrased as Frank pushed the tissue off the table) is contained in input
space 2. Assuming the participants of the events in the two input spaces
are linked by cross-space mappings of identity, which undergo compression,
the result is an emergent structure in the blended space combining AGENT,
ACTION, PATIENT and (DIRECTIONAL) LOCATIVE.11 In other words, the two-event pat-
tern of the first input space amalgamates with the construction activated
in the second space and the topology of the first space is overruled by the
principle of integration.

 
2 7 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
CROSS-SPACE MAPPINGS
identity, cause/effect
Compression
Input space 1
‘sneeze & fall space’
Input space 2
 ‘push space‘
Blended space
AGENT: Frank
ACTION: sneezed
PATIENT: tissue
(DIRECTIONAL)
LOCATION: 
off the table
AGENT: Frank
ACTION: pushed
PATIENT: tissue 
(DIRECTIONAL)
LOCATION: 
off the table
Causing event
AGENT: Frank
ACTION: sneezed
Effected event
PATIENT: tissue
ACTION: fell
(DIRECTIONAL)
LOCATION: off the
table
Figure 6.5
Network representation of the blend underlying Frank
sneezed the tissue off the table
Since the blending analysis provides for the representation of online pro-
cesses, it can also be used to describe what may happen in the mind of a
language user when confronted with the deviant use of a construction by
a foreign language learner. Take the utterance *Susan remembered Tom of
Grandma’s birthday. As shown in Figure 6.6 (input space 1), the verb
remember functions in a construction comprising the elements EXPERIENCER –
MENTAL PROCESS – EXPERIENCED OBJECT (a monotransitive pattern in traditional
terminology), but this leaves the noun Tom unaccounted for.
In order to accommodate the meaning of the verb remember as well as
the ‘loose’ element Tom, the language user is likely to establish a second
input space which takes up the lexical concept REMEMBER and provides for a
construction in which the element Tom can be placed. These conditions
are met by the cause-experience construction (a variant of the cause-receive
construction; see Section 5.4). As documented in input space 2 and
expressed by the verb remind, this construction comprises the elements AGENT
– MENTAL ACTION – EXPERIENCER – EXPERIENCED OBJECT. (Since the EXPERIENCED OBJECT

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 7 7
CROSS-SPACE MAPPINGS
identity
Compression
Input space 1
‘remember space’
Input space 2
‘remind space’
Blended space 
AGENT: Susan
ACTION: caused sb. to
remember sth.
EXPERIENCER: Tom
EXPERIENCED
OBJECT: Grandma’s
birthday
AGENT: Susan
ACTION: caused sb.
includes MENTAL PROCESS:
to remember sth.
EXPERIENCED OBJECT:
Grandma’s birthday
EXPERIENCER: person
EXPERIENCER: Susan
(MENTAL) ACTION:
remembered
EXPERIENCED OBJECT:
Grandma’s birthday
‘LOOSE’ ELEMENT: Tom
Figure 6.6
Network representation of the blend stimulated by the foreign
learner error *Susan remembered Tom of Grandma’s birthday.
is introduced by the prepositions of or about, this yields a ditransitive pat-
tern with a prepositional object in traditional terms.)
Assuming that the MENTAL PROCESS (‘remembering’) and the EXPERIENCED OBJECT
(‘Grandma’s birthday’) contained in both input spaces 1 and 2 are linked
by the cross-space relation of identity, it is not difficult to imagine that  the
AGENT role (‘Susan’) of input space 2 is projected onto the mistaken
EXPERIENCER role inherited from input space 1 (also ‘Susan’); more importantly,
the EXPERIENCER role of space 2 is projected onto the ‘loose’ element Tom derived
from input space 1. The result is, however, not an immediate replacement
of the verb remember by remind, but rather an emergent structure best char-
acterized by the paraphrase ‘Susan caused Tom to remember Grandma’s birth-
day’. Only when the fact that the blend is due to a learner’s error has been
realized by the language user will the replacement of remember by remind
take place, perhaps accompanied by an utterance like Oh, you mean ‘remind
Tom’, not ‘remember Tom’. This is the point when the preposition of will
find its place in the expression Susan reminded Tom of Grandma’s birthday.
The blend has now fulfilled its function and will be discarded.

 
2 7 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Blending, counterfactuals and space builders
That counterfactual sentences like If I were you, I’d apply for the York posi-
tion just for the experience (ICE-GB) involve two different ‘worlds’, a factual
and a counterfactual world, is general linguistic knowledge;12 within the blend-
ing approach, sentences of this type take us from the discussion of clause
patterns to the pragmatic level of speech events and suggested or imagined
actions. Compare Figure 6.7, where input space 1 focuses on the current
speech situation, with I referring to the speaker and you to the hearer. The
speaker brings along certain beliefs and dispositions on which his or her
advice to the hearer is based, among them the belief expressed in the adver-
bial just for the experience, i.e. that job applications create indispensable expe-
rience. Input space 2 represents the suggested (‘counterfactual’) action of
decision-making. The two input spaces are linked by an identity relation
between the AGENT roles in the two spaces; its effect is that the speaker is
mapped from the first input space onto the hearer slot in the hearer’s space
so that the blend looks at the hearer’s dilemma with the speaker being
CROSS-SPACE MAPPINGS
identity
Compression
Input space 1
‘speech event space’
Input space 2
‘decision-making space’
Blended space 
AGENT: speaker as
              hearer
ACTION: makes decision
PATIENT: job
                application
PURPOSE: gain
                  experience
AGENT: hearer
ACTION: deciding on sth.
PATIENT: job application
PURPOSE: take the
                 right decision
ACTION: talk
AGENT: speaker
PATIENT: hearer
PURPOSE: speaker giving
                  advice to hearer
SPEAKER’S BELIEF:
job applications create
experience
Figure 6.7
Network representation of the York application blend (If I were
you, I’d apply for the York position just for the experience)

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 7 9
presented as having to make the decision. This shows that despite the
explicit assurance by the speaker to construe the basic cross-space relation
of ‘identity’ between his or her own person and the hearer’s, the problem
of decision-making is still looked at very much from the speaker’s point of
view. It is perhaps this particular mixture of verbally highlighting the relation
of identity while at the same time refusing to go all the way that creates the
somewhat patronising tone of expressions of this type.
Hypothetical if-clauses may be the prototypical way of establishing
counterfactual mental spaces and may thus act as ‘space builders’, yet there
are many other linguistic elements that fulfil this function. As defined by
Fauconnier a space builder is ‘a grammatical expression that either opens
up a new space or shifts focus to an existing space’ (1997: 40). Typical exam-
ples are once upon a time, in that story, in the movie, my daughter thinks that,
or last night I dreamt that, and many others. Since the expression once upon
a time immediately evokes a fairytale space, nobody will be surprised to
encounter speaking animals, ghosts, witches and wizards and hear of all kinds
of miraculous events. Similarly, by saying in the movie or in the novel the
speaker tells the hearer to build a fictitious space where, just like in the fairy-
tale, the laws of dire reality are temporarily suspended. It is obvious that
this view of space builders opens up a huge range of pragmatic and dis-
course phenomena for a blending analysis.
To sum up, this section has discussed a variety of linguistic examples rang-
ing from lexical blends to compounds, acronyms, argument-structure con-
structions and counterfactuals. What has emerged is that while fully capable
of describing stock examples of lexicalized word-formations or entrenched
constructions, the blending analysis can also cope with more marginal but
also more interesting examples than the more traditional methods and is
therefore well suited to extend the field of linguistic research.
Exercises
1. Discuss the following examples of more or less novel morphological
blends (taken from the Oxford Dictionary of New Words, Knowles 1997)
in terms of conceptual blending and emergent structure:
edutainment
< education + entertainment: ‘entertainment with an educational
aspect’
vegelate
< vegetable + chocolate: ‘chocolate which contains a certain proportion
of vegetable fat other than cacao butter’

 
2 8 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
feminazi
< feminist + nazi: ‘a contemptuous term for a radical feminist’
2. Analyze the following compounds as conceptual blends:
Aga saga
‘a form of popular novel typically set in rural location and concerning
the domestic and emotional lives of the middle class’; Aga stoves are
stereotypical of middle-class life and represent a sustained cosiness.
Riot girl
‘a young militant feminist’
Discuss how the onomatopoeic impact of the alternative spelling riot
grrl can be integrated in the analysis.
3. Provide a conceptual-blending analysis for the following acronyms
with prop words and discuss the omission of initial letters from the source
expression:
FIST < Federation of Interstate Truckers
PEN < International Association of Poets, Playwrights, Editors, Essayists,
and Novelists
WAR < Women Against Rape
4. Transfer the blending analyses of Frank sneezed the tissue off the table, etc.
to the following examples of the resultative construction (cf. Section 5.4):
Terry wiped the table clean.
The pupils chatted the teacher furious.
The crowd shouted the speaker silent.
5.
*I would never borrow Tom a book.
Provide a blending analysis of this sentence produced by a foreign learner
of English modelled on Figure 6.6 and explain the blending process.
6. ‘Once upon a time . . .’. Select scenes from fairytales like Little Red Riding
Hood, or Puss in Boots, where animals behave like human beings and
discuss how a blending analysis could explain the constantly changing mix
of animal and human behaviour in these ‘anthropomorphic metaphors’.
6.3 Conceptual blending in advertising texts,
riddles and jokes
Conceptual blending can probably be observed in most text types, but there are some
where it takes on a special form and achieves a special effect. This seems to be true of
advertisements, riddles and jokes, which have been selected for discussion in this section.

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 8 1
Advertising texts as ‘forced’ blends
Our discussion of advertising texts will be restricted to print ads combin-
ing text and pictorial elements. The text/picture constellation has been widely
discussed in the literature, particularly in semiotics, where it has led Roland
Barthes (1977: 38–41) to postulate a basic distinction between ‘anchorage’
(text providing disambiguation and deictic support for the picture) and ‘relay’
(text and image standing in a complementary relationship).13 Since the sec-
ond type promises more interesting results, the treatment will focus on it.
The example chosen is a fairly conventional ad taken from the January
2000 UK edition of the magazine Marie Claire (Figure 6.8); the blending anal-
ysis of this ad is represented in network format in Figure 6.9. To keep the
analysis simple, the ad has been documented in two input spaces, a lovers
space (picture-based) and a Pantene space (based on both pictures and text,
including the headline, which in fact straddles both sections of the ad).
In its pictures as well as in its wording, the ad builds on a rather bla-
tant use of cross-space identity between participants and the spatial rela-
tions in which they are involved. There are two lovers and two products
(metonymically represented by their bottles) and both pairs are pictured not
only close to each other, but, even in the case of the bottles, facing each
other. This pictorial effect is supported the verbal messages such as Don’t
go it alone and used in harmony. The obvious intention is to create an emer-
gent structure in which the prototypical interaction of the lovers is pro-
jected onto the relationship of the hair-care products. What the text
stresses in addition is the agenthood of the lifeless products (the shampoo
delivering vitamins, the conditioner moisturizing the hair), a tendency cul-
minating in the headline of the ad Some things just work better together.
But how do the other elements of the input spaces find their way into
the blended space? The SETTING in which the lovers are presented, the sleep-
ing bag and the clear morning light, suggesting that they have spent the
night together out in the cornfield, call up associations of nature, fresh-
ness, purity and youth (plus all the memories of a romantic meeting,
including the ‘innocent’ whiteness of the underwear). These associations
may be even more important for the effectiveness of the ad than the sur-
face relationship between lovers and products. The key question is how the
SETTING of the lovers space can be related to the PURPOSE element of the Pantene
space (motivating customers to use both the shampoo and the condi-
tioner). While no explicit cross-space mapping offers itself, the ad tries to
suggest a loose link, preferably something resembling an identity or a
cause–effect relation (indicated in Figure 6.9 in brackets). What is crucial

 
2 8 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Figure 6.8
www.pantene.com
Ad for Pantene shampoo and conditioner (from Marie Claire, Jan. 2000)
is that the relevance of this cross-space mapping is as it were ‘forced upon’
the reader (by the size and attractive colours of the picture, the lovers’ appeal,
etc.). Guided by the relevance principle, the reader will then attempt the
compression of the SETTING and the PURPOSE elements of the input spaces, thus
creating a new element of PURPOSE in the blended space – based on the notion
that the shampoo and the conditioner somehow produce nature, freshness,

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 8 3
CROSS-SPACE MAPPINGS
identity, (cause–effect)
Compression
Input space 1
‘lovers space’
Input space 2
‘Pantene space’
Blended space 
PATIENT: two products
SPATIAL RELATION:
close & facing each other
ACTION: working together
(delivering vitamins,
moisturizing hair)
PURPOSE: using both
       products together
AGENT: two lovers
SPATIAL RELATION: 
close & facing each other
ACTION: kissing each other
SETTING: in sleeping bag,
cornfield, early morning
AGENT: two products
SPATIAL RELATION: 
close & facing each other
ACTION: working
together
PURPOSE: conveying
nature, freshness, purity
Figure 6.9
Network representation of the Pantene ad blend
purity and youth. Far from trying to spell out the relationship between these
hair-care products and the associations of the lovers’ kiss, the advertisers
will be quite happy to exhaust the indeterminacy of online processing offered
by conceptual blending (which was already encountered in the analysis of
the PISA acronym above). Even if these positive associations are entrenched
as part of the brand image of Pantene, it will remain rather vague because
the systematic analysis of the emergent structure is neither attempted nor
even desired. In this the Pantene ad joins the range of forced blends prop-
agating such powerful, but ultimately undifferentiated images as the
Marlboro country of cigarette smokers or the tropical beach life of the happy
people drinking Bacardi rum.
Blending in riddles and jokes: using conceptual blending
as a problem-solving tool
Compared with advertisements, both riddles and jokes may be more marginal
text types, but they are also very interesting from the angle of comprehen-
sion and cognitive processing. It is therefore not surprising that Fauconnier

 
2 8 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
and Turner selected a riddle as one of the prime examples of the conceptual-
blending analysis, the ‘Buddhist monk riddle’, which they summarize from
Arthur Koestler’s The Act of Creation (1964: 183f) as follows:
A Buddhist monk begins at dawn one day walking up a mountain, reaches the
top at sunset, meditates at the top for several days until one dawn when he
begins to walk back to the foot of the mountain, which he reaches at sunset.
Make no assumptions about his starting or stopping or about his pace during
the trips. Riddle: Is there a place on the path that the monk occupies at the
same hour of the day on the two separate journeys?
(Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 39)
To solve the riddle, Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 39) suggest that one should
imagine that the monk is walking up and down the mountain on the same
day along the same path. Assuming this, there must be a place where he
‘meets himself’, i.e. where he passes by on both his journeys even if the
exact position of the imaginary meeting point is not clear.
After what has been said about blends, this explanation reads like a
paraphrase of the blending process (and is therefore used as an introductory
example of the theory by Fauconnier and Turner). By conflating the two
journeys we acknowledge that there must be a cross-space identity rela-
tion between the two journeys, a link embodied by the monk; in addi-
tion, there must be a spatial relation between the paths he follows on
both his journeys, and finally and most importantly, there must be a time
relation.
All these relations undergo compression in the blend. The person of the
monk and the path followed are unified in the blended space without prob-
lems, while the compression of time is only carried out to a point: we can
compress the days of the two journeys, but not the hour of the imaginary
meeting; in this the emergent structure remains vague. Compare Figure 6.10,
where the path and direction are represented by lines and arrows, the posi-
tion of the monk by a bold circle and the person of the monk by the let-
ters a1 and a2. Compression in the blended space is indicated by the
conflation of the path and the day symbol, while the actual position of the
imaginary meeting point is a1 and a2 is narrowed down to a stretch
between a1
’ and a2
’, but not really fixed.
While this is the point where the open-endedness and indeterminacy
of the emergent structure are made explicit, it is only by means of blend-
ing the two journeys into one that the riddle can be solved. This shows
that conceptual blending is not only a more or less unconscious process

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 8 5
CROSS-SPACE MAPPINGS
identity, place, time
Compression
Input space 1
‘ascent space’
Input space 2
‘descent space’
Blended space
Explanations: a1 monk ascending, a2 monk descending
day’
a1’
a2’
day2
day1
a1
a2
Figure 6.10
Network representation of Buddhist Monk blend
(adapted from Fauconnier and Turner 2002: 45)
involved in interpreting linguistic utterances (and, to some extent, other
phenomena), but can also be a deliberately chosen problem-solving
strategy. Similar types of hypothetical scenarios also need to be blended
in weighing the pros and cons of future strategies, say, in business, politics
and of course also the private domain. Here several possible future actions
are blended and evaluated with respect to their hypothetical outcomes.
The blending approach can also build on earlier explanations, in par-
ticular on Arthur Koestler’s claim that the principle underlying jokes is
the perceiving of a situation or idea, L, in two self-consistent but habitually
incompatible frames of reference, M.1 and M.2 [. . .]. The event L, in which
the two intersect, is made to vibrate simultaneously on two different
wavelengths, as it were.
(Koestler 1964: 35)
The idea of linking the joke to two different frames of reference (or to two
different scripts, as suggested by Raskin 1985) directly leads to the postu-
lation of two input spaces while the ‘simultaneous vibrating on two dif-
ferent wavelengths’ is aptly captured by the notion of blended space.14

 
2 8 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
To illustrate the potential of the blending approach for the under-
standing of jokes, here is an example of a type popular with children, where
misdemeanour in school takes an unexpected turn:
Mother:
Why were you sent home early, Mary?
Mary:
Well, Mum, the boy next to me was smoking.
Mother:
But if he was smoking, why were you sent home?
Mary:
I set him on fire.
As shown in Figure 6.11, the two reference frames or scripts can be repre-
sented in terms of participant roles in the two input spaces. Input space 1
documents Mary’s first utterance, assigning the role of AGENT to the boy,
who is performing the action of smoking. Since XY is smoking a
cigarette/pipe is a well-entrenched construction, the PATIENT role of cigarette
is automatically implied. The figure of Mary is backgrounded and reduced
to the status of BYSTANDER. In addition, this mental space will include the
encyclopaedic knowledge that smoking is a common transgression of
school rules.
CROSS-SPACE MAPPINGS
identity, cause−effect,
scale of offence
Compression
Input space 1
‘cigarette-smoking space’
Input space 2
‘setting-on-fire space’
Blended space
AGENT: Mary
ACTION: setting sth.
on fire
PATIENT: boy
ENCYCLOPAEDIC
KNOWLEDGE: burning
objects smoke
AGENT: boy
ACTION: smoking
OBJECT: cigarette (implied)
BYSTANDER: Mary (implied)
ENCYCLOPAEDIC
KNOWLEDGE: smoking is
  a common violation of
  school rules
AGENT: Mary
ACTION: producing
smoke by setting on fire
is not smoking cigarettes
PATIENT: boy
Figure 6.11
Setting-on-fire joke: network representation of the blend

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 8 7
Input space 2 is used to render the contents of the punchline. Here Mary
functions as the AGENT engaged in the action of setting fire to the PATIENT,
embodied by the boy. So the second input space is a setting-on-fire space
including encyclopaedic knowledge that burning objects smoke.
To satisfy the audience’s demands for relevance at least three cross-space
relations will be established: first an identity relation between the AGENT of input
space 1 and the PATIENT of input space 2, both representing the boy, secondly
a cause–effect link between the actions of setting on fire and of smoking, and
finally a scalar link denoting the seriousness of the offence incurred. In the
process of blending, all three cross-space relations undergo compression: in the
emergent structure of the blended space the AGENT role is superseded by the
PATIENT role while the BYSTANDER role is elevated to the status of AGENT. With regard
to the actions involved, the compression of ‘producing smoke by setting on
fire’ and ‘smoking cigarettes’ proves futile because the two actions are shown
to be incompatible and this is also underlined by a compression of the wildly
diverging evaluations of the two actions in terms of offensiveness. It is this
obvious incompatibility emerging in the structure of the blended space that
pinpoints the locus of the joke and the source of its humorous effect. And
since the blend also complies with the unpacking principle, it permits the unrav-
elling of the development of the joke and invites the audience to take delight
in Mary’s verbal skills demonstrated by backgrounding herself as BYSTANDER and
highlighting the boy’s AGENT role before the genuine relationship is revealed.
To sum up, what all the text types discussed in this section share is a
rather blatant exploitation of the online quality of the emergent structure
of the blend.
• Advertising texts encourage and even force upon the reader an online
compression of the positive effects suggested (often by way of pictures)
and the advertised goods. To enhance the effect, they tend to hide the
indeterminacy of the blend rather than lay it open to the reader.
• Problem-based riddles (and plans for future actions) are solved by strate-
gically and deliberately blending different event scenarios and assessing
their possible outcomes.
• Jokes produce an emergent structure containing at least some elements
for which blending is not successful because they are incompatible and
this is the source of their humorous effect.
Exercises
1. Many ads try to project associations of luxury, wealth, beauty or fame
onto utterly mundane products like chocolates, beer or cosmetics, thus

 
2 8 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
creating a certain ‘image’ for a company or brand. Find examples of
this type of ad, sketch the mental spaces involved and show to what
extent the blend between them is not a ‘natural’ result of compression
but is forced upon the audience.
2. Analyze the following riddles with regard to the mental spaces activated
and discuss how the spaces are brought together in the blend. What
makes these riddles funny?
Why do cows wear bells?
(Because their horns don’t work.)
Why are mosquitoes so 
(Because they get under our skin.)
annoying?
What did the beach say 
(Long time no sea.)
when the tide came in?
3. Discuss the following jokes in terms of conceptual blending, trying to
locate the incompatibility in the blend:
After swallowing a (wind) surfer, the shark pensively looks at the
empty board and sail. ‘Nicely served, with breakfast tray and napkin.’
Everyone had so much fun diving from the tree into the swimming
pool, we decided to put in a little water. (Coulson 2001: 3)
A:
Do you know the way to the station?
B:
No, I don’t!
A:
Listen, you take a right turn at the next corner, then straight
ahead . . . 
Everybody likes the torero. I don’t. I’m the bull.
6.4 Relevance: a cognitive-pragmatic phenomenon
As we have seen, relevance has been proposed as one of the governing principles of
conceptual blending by Fauconnier and Turner. Originally conceived as a pragmatic
principle of interaction, the notion of relevance has been given a cognitive turn by
Sperber and Wilson (1995). This section looks at their approach, selecting (and
simplifying) some aspects that seem to be akin to cognitive-linguistic thinking and
from which cognitive linguistics might benefit.
The search for relevance and the notion 
of cognitive environment
Human understanding of verbal and non-verbal communicative events seems
to be controlled and dominated by the search for relevance. Confronted with

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 8 9
an apparently incoherent contribution to an ongoing piece of discourse, we
still cannot help but pursue the question Why was this said to me here and
now? For example, as suggested in the previous section, if two pieces of infor-
mation, such as the text and the picture of an advertisement, are presented
to us on one page, we automatically assume that there must be some reason
why they occur together and look for some plausible relation between them.
Similarly, participants in discourse will generally look for the relevance of an
utterance in the context of previous ones; and even if they do not immedi-
ately recognize how a contribution could tie in, they often go to great lengths
to construct a satisfying link.
Picking up one of Sperber and Wilson’s examples (1995: 34), here is a
short dialogue which might have been uttered at the end of a dinner and
in which Peter’s question obviously does not receive a straightforward
answer from Mary:
Peter:
Do you want some coffee?
Mary:
Coffee would keep me awake.
Yet although no direct answer is provided, Peter will try to make sense of
this answer, probably concluding that Mary does not want coffee in order
to ensure a good night’s rest. To a large extent Mary’s utterance will be under-
stood by Peter because they share the situational information that it is late
in the evening and the encyclopaedic knowledge about the effects of caf-
feine on sleep. Both pieces of knowledge are, in Sperber and Wilson’s words,
part of Peter’s and Mary’s ‘cognitive environment’. This is defined as
the set of all assumptions that are manifest to Peter and Mary because they
can perceive them in their physical environment or infer them using such
cognitive abilities as memory and reasoning (1995: 39). In short, the cog-
nitive environment is made up of assumptions that are either stored in
memory, currently perceived or currently inferred.
The stored knowledge acquired by a person is obviously equivalent to
the sum of all the cognitive models (frames, scripts, scenarios) he or she
has internalized. However, while many cognitive linguists tend to focus on
‘idealized’ cognitive models shared by groups of people, Sperber and
Wilson – working as they are in a largely pragmatic framework – empha-
size that the cognitive environments differ from one person to another and
from one situation to another. In particular, like the conceptual-blending
approach presented in the previous sections, Sperber and Wilson are inter-
ested in the ongoing meaning construction and therefore stress that cog-
nitive abilities also include the ability to become aware of further facts and
thus to generate new assumptions and inferences.

 
2 9 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
To pick up the coffee-offering example quoted above (and using it for
our own interpretation), Mary’s cryptic answer Coffee would keep me awake
could also stimulate Peter to develop new inferences, which might gener-
ate different assumptions. One of them might be that Mary perhaps wants
to stay awake to take an active share in the conversation with the other
party guests, another one that she is afraid that without the coffee she might
fall asleep on her drive back home. But how should Peter know that one
of these additional inferences is also part of Mary’s cognitive environment,
is shared by her and can therefore be assumed to be part of the intended
message?
Ostensive–inferential behaviour, figure/ground
segregation and communicative relevance
The key to Peter’s understanding of what Mary means is of course what she
actually said. What she did say, together with her gestures, facial expression
and other non-verbal cues, is called her ‘ostensive–inferential behaviour’
in Relevance Theory. From a cognitive-linguistic point of view this can be under-
stood in terms of figure/ground segregation: the ostensive–inferential
stimulus (as it is called) stands out as figure from the conceptual (back)ground
of all the potential assumptions that are not explicitly encoded, be it ver-
bally or non-verbally. The most explicit realization of ostensive–inferential
behaviour in our case would be a clarifying linguistic utterance: compare
the following pair, where the first version unequivocally supports the sleep-
robbing assumption while the second version would fit the car-driving
assumption:
No, thank you, coffee would keep me awake.
Yes, please, coffee would keep me awake.
Less unambiguous but still helpful would be the employment of different
intonation patterns, a falling intonation to indicate the rejection of the offer
and a rise to signal its acceptance.
Ostensive behaviour can also be expressed by body posture, body move-
ment and eye contact. Sperber and Wilson’s own example is the park bench
situation (Sperber and Wilson 1995: 48–9): Peter, who is sitting on the bench
together with Mary, indicates by a rigid act of leaning back that he does
not just want to take up a more comfortable position: rather he wants to
draw Mary’s attention to a phenomenon that had been hidden from her
view before his movement. Mary realizes how this ostensive–inferential act
changes their shared cognitive environment, gives prominence to different

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 9 1
assumptions and this may well spark off a new set of assumptions on her
part (which will be sketched out in the next subsection). While the cogni-
tive operation of providing prominence to certain assumptions can be eas-
ily captured in terms of profiling (see Chapter 4), the notion that change
is initiated by an intentional act of the conversational partner brings the
interactional component to the fore, which is rather neglected in cognitive-
linguistic thinking. As stressed by Wilson and Sperber (2003: 611f),15
Peter’s ostensive act conveys not just one, but two intentions: the inten-
tion to inform Mary of something and, more importantly, the intention
to inform her of his informative intention; this second ‘communicative
intention’ is a clear sign of the communicative relevance attributed
to ostensive–inferential acts.
Relevance: cognitive effectiveness, cognitive efficiency
and cognitive economy
Assuming that Peter’s ostensive behaviour has achieved the intended effect,
this is what Sperber and Wilson think might happen to Mary’s cognitive
environment:
Imagine, for instance, that as a result of Peter’s leaning back she can see,
among other things, three people: an ice-cream vendor who she had noticed
before when she sat down on the bench, an ordinary stroller who she has
never seen before, and her acquaintance William, who is coming towards them
and is a dreadful bore. Many assumptions about each of these characters are
more or less manifest to her. She may already have considered the
implications of the presence of the ice-cream vendor when she first noticed
him; if so, it would be a waste of processing resources to pay further attention
to him now. The presence of the unknown stroller is new information to her,
but little or nothing follows from it; so there again, what she can perceive and
infer about him is not likely to be of much relevance to her. By contrast, from
the fact that William is coming her way, she can draw many conclusions from
which many more conclusions will follow. This, then, is the only true relevant
change in her cognitive environment; this is the particular phenomenon she
should pay attention to.
(Sperber and Wilson 1995: 48f)
Reading the account it becomes clear that relevance is to be understood in
terms of effects on a person’s cognitive environment and efficiency of
short-term information processing. From this angle, assumptions about the
ice-cream vendor are a waste of processing resources, and the same applies

 
2 9 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
to the second person involved, the stroller. Instead, considering how large
the memories of terribly boring meetings loom in Mary’s cognitive envi-
ronment, William is the only individual triggering significant contextual
effects and worth the cognitive effort (even if it is only to develop strate-
gies of how to get rid of him again). And since so much has already been
stored about him in the cognitive environment, the effort needed to
develop these strategies should not be too great. In short, the sight of William
has a positive cognitive effect on Mary’s cognitive environment without
costing her too much effort.
Abstracting from this description one could say that the assumptions
concerning William meet the two extent conditions of relevance to indi-
viduals postulated by Sperber and Wilson:
CONDITION 1:
An assumption is relevant to an individual to the extent that the positive
cognitive effects achieved when it is optimally processed are large.
CONDITION 2:
An assumption is relevant to an individual to the extent that the effort
required to achieve these positive cognitive effects is small.
(Sperber and Wilson 1995: 265f)
Relevance is thus tied to two complementary claims: on the one hand rele-
vance depends on the positive cognitive effects that an optimally processed
assumption will exert on a participant of an interaction. On the other hand
relevance is linked to cognitive efficiency which demands an economic use
of processing resources. For cognitive linguists the term cognitive efficiency
is strongly reminiscent of the notion of cognitive economy developed by Rosch
(1978) to justify the dominance of the basic level categories in the concep-
tualization of the world – her definition of cognitive economy was that the
largest amount of information about an item can be obtained with the least
cognitive effort (see Section 2.1). Undoubtedly, Sperber and Wilson’s conception
of cognitive efficiency is much more comprehensive than Rosch’s character-
ization of basic level conceptualization, and this is exactly where cognitive-
linguistic thinking might again be stimulated by Relevance Theory. It could
well be worth examining how cognitive efficiency is involved with other ele-
ments and operations investigated by cognitive linguists apart from basic level
categories. An interesting candidate might be holistic or gestalt perception,
which was explained as a short-cut approach that precedes and often replaces
the detailed conceptualization in terms of attributes (see Section 1.2). As for
metonymies, there are also many examples promising economic processing

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 9 3
by way of easily accessible source concepts – think of a glass (of beer), drive a
Ford, wait for a White House decision (see Section 3.1). Even the use of mean-
ingful syntactic constructions (see Section 5.4) could be investigated from this
angle. Finally, as already mentioned, conceptual blending explicitly integrates
relevance – and thus by definition includes cognitive efficiency – as one of
its governing principles.
Assumptions, vital relations and compression
Both Relevance Theory and Conceptual-Blending Theory address online
aspects of cognitive processing, but they approach the problem in different
ways. In Relevance Theory the change in the cognitive environment is
thought to be initiated by an act of ostensive–inferential behaviour that sparks
off various types of assumptions – assumptions based on the fact that a series
of sounds has been uttered as well as assumptions based on the semantic
content of this sound chain. Following the philosophical tradition of prag-
matic reasoning, Sperber and Wilson cast these assumptions in the shape
of statements, as shown in Figure 6.12 for the ‘dinner is ready’ example.
The utterance of the sound sequence [tlgetkəυld] by Mary changes Peter’s
cognitive environment even if the semantic content of the utterance is dis-
regarded. This is reflected in the assumptions of set {A}. If Peter regards some
of these assumptions as relevant and selects them for processing, e.g.
assumptions (3) – (5), the ostensive act of producing It will get cold achieves
about the same effect as if Mary had cleared her throat. Only if he decides
ACT OF OSTENSIVE BEHAVIOUR:
Sound sequence [tlgetkəυld] (It will get cold)
produced by Mary in the presence of Peter:
ASSUMPTIONS MADE MANIFEST TO PETER BY MARY’S OSTENSIVE BEHAVIOUR:
Set {A}
Set {I}
(1) Someone has made a sound.
(8) Mary’s utterance is optimally relevant 
(2) There is someone in the house.
to Peter.
(3) Mary is at home.
(9) Mary has said that the dinner will get 
(4) Mary has spoken.
cold.
(5) Mary has a sore throat.
(10) The dinner will get cold very soon.
(6) Mary has said to Peter: ‘It will get 
(11) Mary wants Peter to come and eat
cold.’ 
dinner at once.
(7) There is a set of assumptions {I} which
Mary intends to make manifest to Peter
by saying to him ‘It will get cold.’
Figure 6.12
Assumptions generated for the ‘dinner is ready’ example
(selected from Sperber and Wilson 1995: 176–82)

 
2 9 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
to process assumptions (6) – (7), because they promise the largest cognitive
gains without requiring too much processing effort, will this lead on to the
assumptions assembled in set {I}.
This second set of assumptions first states the general principle of com-
municative relevance (8) and then opens up a choice between a reported
statement (9), a plain assertion (10) and the more complex evaluation Mary
wants Peter to come and eat dinner at once (11). This last variant is definitely
more than a mere logical deduction from the previous assumptions because
it also draws on Peter’s memorized experience of the whole scenario ‘din-
ner at home’ and Mary’s part in it. It is indeed highly relevant for Peter
and well worth the processing effort if only for the sake of domestic peace.
On a more technical level, an ostensive act like the sound sequence
[tlgetkəυld] is, of course, a stimulus of a very indirect kind; it is clear that
all assumptions it sparks off can only be inferred, including the final vari-
ant Mary wants Peter to come and eat dinner at once, and can therefore be
regarded as implicatures.16 However, even if Mary had chosen the explicit
utterance Peter, you must come at once to eat dinner because it’s getting cold,
this simple example of an explicature (Sperber and Wilson 1995:180–3)
could not be safely processed by just considering the word meaning of the
utterance and neglecting the inferences to be drawn from the cognitive envi-
ronment in which the utterance is placed. Just to call up the ‘dinner at home’
scenario once more, its knowledge is definitely necessary to evaluate the
urgency of Mary’s request and the consequences of a delayed reaction on
Peter’s part.
How does this system of inferential assumptions and its realization as
implicatures and explicatures compare with the toolkit proposed by
Conceptual-Blending Theory for online processing?17 Rooted in the tradi-
tion of pragmatic reasoning, the format of assumptions seems to provide a
fairly systematic and logical approach to the treatment of cognitive input.
Compare again Figure 6.12, where a first set of ‘preparative’ assumptions
(set {A} concerning Mary’s physical presence, the state of her voice and the
realization of the utterance) paves the way for the second set of more cen-
tral assumptions (set {I}), from which – after the consideration of memo-
rized experience – the most relevant is selected. No matter what is said about
the consideration of non-verbal ostensive acts, the system works best when
these acts contain a linguistic element and when the cognitive environment
as a whole lends itself to the establishment of ‘chains’ of assumptions.
By contrast, the treatment of cognitive material in Conceptual-Blending
Theory seems to be much more liberal, but also much vaguer. Cognitive input,
whose sources are often not really explored, but which include linguistic,

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 9 5
visual and aural stimuli, is assembled in mental input spaces and is sup-
ported by material drawn from long-term memory in the form of cognitive
models, and also by additional contextual material. As discussed in Section
6.1, the structuring of the material in the input spaces as well as the cross-
space mappings between them rely on vital relations, in particular on the
relations of identity, space and time, property, cause–effect and part–whole.
The crucial point is that these relations do not form a coherent system and
the same applies to compression, on which the emergent structure in the
blended space is based. This lack of hierarchy and systematic sequence has
given rise to the criticism that ‘anything goes’ in conceptual blending and
has led to the postulation of governing principles by Fauconnier and Turner,
among them the principle of relevance (other governing principles are topog-
raphy, integration, unpacking; see Section 6.1). Yet like the vital relations
(and perhaps for the same reasons) these principles have not been organized
in a systematic hierarchy, but actually counteract and cancel out each other
in certain blends.
In short, Relevance Theory is clearly positioned more on the logical–
deductive side typical of pragmatic work inspired by the philosophical tra-
dition, while Conceptual-Blending Theory has a much richer and multi-faceted
view of cognition, which is, however, also more hazy and intuitive. In addi-
tion, like other cognitive-linguistic theories discussed in this book concep-
tual blending favours a holistic view of cognition which sees language
structure and use as intertwined with general cognitive abilities like per-
ception, attention and problem-solving. Relevance Theory, on the other
hand, postulates a separate inferential module which is only loosely related
to general cognition.18
The question that can only be asked here but not answered is if the
two theories could profit from a closer cooperation with each other –
assuming that the rather fundamental ideological differences could be rec-
onciled. For instance, could vital relations and the process of compres-
sion benefit from the more systematic organization underlying the
response to the cognitive environment and to ostensive acts in
Relevance Theory? Or could the disregard of the interactional component,
which is widespread in cognitive linguistics, but particularly regrettable
in a theory of online processing, be overcome by relevance-theoretic sug-
gestions? Or, from the complementary perspective, could Relevance
Theory enrich the cognitive complexity of its explanations by letting in
more ‘soft’ cognition?
Since our concern is the development of cognitive linguistics, we will
conclude this short and introductory sketch of Relevance Theory by 

 
2 9 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
recapitulating the other suggestions for the development of cognitive lin-
guistics the discussion has yielded:19
• The notion of idealized cognitive models (frames, scripts, scenarios)
should be extended to individualized cognitive environments.
• The notion of figure and ground should be given a speaker- and hearer-
oriented interpretation to cope with the cognitive aspects of relevance.
• The related notions of cognitive economy and cognitive efficiency should
gain wider currency in cognitive linguistics (e.g. in the analysis of gestalt,
metonymies, etc.).
Exercises
1. Imagine driving down a busy one-way street in a car with your partner
in the passenger seat.
The street is lined by trees and shops with sales announced in the
shop windows, young mothers with toddlers in buggies, important-
looking executives passing by on the pavement, a group of little chil-
dren playing ball close to the kerb, cars parked along the other kerb
and reversing into empty lots.
Suddenly your partner shouts Watch out! in an agitated voice. Describe
your and your partner’s cognitive environments and your partner’s osten-
sive behaviour and discuss what types of assumptions you could infer
from it. What could a description in terms of figure and ground con-
tribute to this analysis?
2. Look at the following sentence pairs and decide which member of each
pair promises greater efficiency of cognitive processing. Which mem-
ber involves a metonymy, and if this applies, which metonymy?
I’d like to have another half pint of White Label, please.
I’d like to have another glass, please.
Nine-eleven changed our view of the world.
The terrorist attack against the World Trade Center in September
2001 changed our view of the world.
If we take the car, we’ll need a tankful of petrol for the journey.
If we take the car, we’d better fill her up for the trip.
You see the whole medical staff, doctors and nurses and all, are
working to rule.
You see the whole hospital is on strike.

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 9 7
3. Imagine Susan reading the entertainment guide in the local newspaper
in the presence of Tom, pointing at a picture of the Rooftop Band, drum-
ming a rhythm on the table and uttering the sound sequence [ðəυd'b
'səυd aυt banaυ].
Show how this utterance can spark off a sequence of assumptions in
Tom along the lines of the example illustrated in Figure 6.12.
Suggestions for further reading
Section 6.1
This section and the following sections are based on Fauconnier and
Turner’s work (esp. Fauconnier and Turner 2002). In trying to provide a
first impression, the complexity of their approach has been reduced to
arrive at an easily manageable set of analytic tools.
1. See Turner and Fauconnier (1995), Fauconnier and Turner (1996),
Fauconnier (1997, ch. 6).
2. Grady, Oakley and Coulson (1999) discuss the relationship between
metaphor and blending. See Givón (2005) for a critical account of the
conceptual metaphor theory from the point of view of online
activation of metaphors and Grady (2005) on basic ‘primary’
metaphors as inputs to, rather than results of, blending processes.
Coulson and Oakley (2005) look at the traditional distinction between
literal and figurative meaning from a conceptual-blending perspective.
3. The network model is summarized and illustrated e.g. in Fauconnier
and Turner (1998: 142ff), Coulson and Oakley (2000: 178ff) and
(2003: 54ff).
4. A more detailed discussion of vital relations than we are able to
present can be found in Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 89–111 and
312–27).
5. This interpretation is in line with Fauconnier and Turner’s (2002: 99f)
idea of ‘property’ as an ‘inner space relation’, i.e. a vital relation
structuring mental spaces. Note that there is a parallel between simple
(inner-space) properties vs blended properties, on the one hand, and
so-called inherent vs non-inherent adjectives in descriptive grammar
on the other (see e.g. Quirk et al. 1985: 428f, 435f).
6. Optimality principles (whose name is inspired by phonological
‘Optimality Theory’, see e.g. Kager (1999) for an introduction) were

 
2 9 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
first sketched very briefly in Fauconnier (1997: 185f), expounded by
Fauconnier and Turner (1998) and later revised and partly renamed
in Fauconnier and Turner (2002), where they are referred to as
‘governing principles’.
Section 6.2
7. The easiest way of getting an idea of the broad range of issues
addressed by blending theorists is to look at the conceptual blending
website at http://markturner.org/blending.html.
8. For other cognitive-linguistic approaches to lexical blends see Lehrer
(1996) and Kemmer (2003), and in terms of isomorphism between
word form and concept Ungerer (1999).
9. Coulson (2001: 128–33) has further analyses of interesting nominal
compounds, among them rather exotic ones, but does not
sufficiently emphasize their online quality. See Sweetser (1999) for an
application of blending theory to adjective–noun combinations and a
discussion of their compositionality.
10. Depending on the match between input spaces and the relative
dominance of them in the blended space, different types of networks
such as ‘mirror networks’, ‘simplex’, ‘single-scope’ and ‘double-scope
networks’ can be distinguished. See Fauconnier and Turner (2002:
119ff) for a survey of these types.
11. See Mandelblit (2000: 199–203), who postulates a blending process
between an input space containing the causing and effected events
(providing the lexical information) and a second input space, which
contains the caused-motion construction (providing the structural
information), and also analyzes other motion-event constructions
mentioned in Section 5.4 in this way.
12. For studies on conditionals and counterfactual blends see Fauconnier
(1996) and (1997: 99ff), Sweetser (1996), Dancygier and Sweetser
(1997), and Fauconnier and Turner (2002: 217ff). See Lakoff (1996:
94–8) for a discussion of the if-I-were-you construction.
Section 6.3
13. For a study of pictorial metaphors see Forceville (1998), and for an
alternative interpretation of the relation between text and picture in
terms of metaphors and metonymies see Ungerer (2000a).
14. Koestler’s (1964) classic model is known as the ‘bisociation theory’ of

 
B L E N D I N G  A N D  R E L E V A N C E
2 9 9
joking. Raskin and Attardo now call their approach the ‘general theory
of verbal humour’ (see Attardo 2001: 1–29 for a historical survey). See
also the papers in Attardo (2003) on pragmatic and cognitive theories
of humour. Coulson (2001) investigates online jokes and Coulson (in
press) cartoons from a conceptual-blending perspective.
Section 6.4
This introductory account of Relevance Theory from an experientialist
cognitive angle is based on Sperber and Wilson’s own account, integrat-
ing the modifications suggested by the authors in the postface of the 2nd
edition of Relevance (Sperber and Wilson 1995; 1st edn 1986) and in their
more recent paper (Wilson and Sperber 2003). Relevance Theory is now
accessible through a large number of introductory books, among them
Blakemore (1992). For a first overview of the overwhelming literature that
has been published on Relevance Theory in pragmatics see Sperber and
Wilson (1995: 255–60) and Wilson and Sperber (2003).
15. For a concise account of the current version of the communicative
principle of relevance and its role in understanding and cognition,
see Wilson and Sperber (2003).
16. The notion of implicatures was of course first introduced into the
philosophy of language and pragmatics by Grice (1975) in the context
of his Cooperative Principle, from one of whose maxims (the maxim
of relation) Sperber and Wilson have derived Relevance Theory.
17. See Fauconnier (2003) for a discussion of pragmatic aspects of
conceptual-blending theory.
18. See Wilson and Sperber (2003: 623–5) for arguments in favour of a
modular architecture of cognition including a specialized inferential
device – a view largely incompatible with the experientialist
cognitive-linguistic approach. Earlier in their paper, Wilson and
Sperber (2003: 618) express their scepticism towards the prototype
theory of categorization.
19. Another source of inspiration on how to include the interactional
component might be Givón’s ‘context as other minds’, which means
that successful online processing of cognitive input always includes the
systematic online construction of mental models of the interlocutor’s
belief and intention states (Givón 2005: xiv; see also chs 1.1 and 4).

 
C H A P T E R  7
Other issues in cognitive
linguistics
7.1 Iconicity
The study of iconicity, or more tangibly, of language miming the world, ranks
prominently among those lines of research that have not been initiated by cognitive
linguists, but have much earlier beginnings. Originally a topic of philosophical
discussion and later claimed by semiotics as an important parameter for the
description of signs, iconicity has benefited a great deal from being put on a
cognitive basis.
Iconic and arbitrary linguistic signs
The question why words have the sound shape they have and whether they
may be regarded as ‘icons’ (or imitations) of real objects and organisms has
occupied philosophers throughout the ages. Plato, in his Cratylos dia-
logue,1 distinguished between items for which form and content are deter-
mined by nature, as in bow-wow, cuckoo or splash, and those items where
the relationship between form and content is based on agreement in a speech
community, as in bread or chair. This distinction was taken up at the begin-
ning of the twentieth century by the founder of modern linguistics,
Ferdinand de Saussure, who maintained that the form of most words (or
linguistic signs) is linked to what they signify only by convention, that
the relationship between form and meaning is in fact arbitrary. In his
conception, sound-symbolic expressions like bow-wow are at best regarded
as exceptions.2
More recently, however, this rigid view of the linguistic sign has come
under increasing criticism. In this context the ideas of C.S. Peirce, a nineteenth-
century American philosopher, have been revived and have become the
backbone of modern semiotics.3 According to Peirce, only one type of sign,
which he calls ‘symbol’, represents a conventionalized relationship with an

 
object, and therefore comes close to Saussure’s standard interpretation of the
arbitrary sign. The other two major sign categories postulated by Peirce, the
‘index’ and the ‘icon’, are characterized by their ‘natural’ grounding, as already
discussed by Plato. The index basically has a pointing function, which is
often realized by expressing the positioning of an object in space and time.
This indexical function is fulfilled by personal and demonstrative pronouns
as well as deictic adverbs of place and time, such as here, there, now and then.
However, the notion of index also transcends the level of linguistic expres-
sion and is often rendered non-verbally, for instance when the direction of
the wind is indicated by a weather vane or when a fire is signalled by smoke.
Yet it is the third type of sign proposed by Peirce (the icon) that is
most relevant for the issue of iconicity and its cognitive interpretation. Peirce
uses the term for those signs that convey a certain similarity with an object.
The important thing is that he does not restrict the use of icon to the more
or less realistic non-verbal imitation of an object (e.g. the signs used on a
computer screen for files and documents) or – on the linguistic level – to
sound-symbolic expressions. Apart from this type of icon (which he calls
‘image’), he also includes similarities between the structure of language and
the structure of events (and other phenomena) encountered in reality; his
term for this type of icon is ‘diagram’.
Talking about structural similarities takes us into the domain of grammar
and raises the question of the arrangement of linguistic elements. The iconic
principles that have been proposed for this area are iconic sequencing,
iconic proximity and the iconic quantity of linguistic material.4 To start
with iconic sequencing, consider the following two pairs of sentences:
He opened the bottle and poured himself a glass of wine.
*He poured himself a glass of wine and opened the bottle.
He jumped onto his horse and rode out into the sunset.
*He rode out into the sunset and jumped onto his horse.
It is evident that in the first version of both sentence pairs, the sequence
of the two clauses corresponds to the natural temporal order of events. In
contrast, the second versions are odd to say the least, because they do not
comply with this natural sequence. As far as the rules of syntax proper are
concerned, nothing is wrong with the second versions. Nevertheless, the
sentences are unacceptable because the order in which the clauses are arranged
violates the principle of iconic sequencing.
The second type of iconicity, iconic proximity, is perhaps less obvious
because the similarity relation between language and the extra-linguistic
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 0 1

 
3 0 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
world is less obtrusive. Compare the following examples (based on Radden
1992: 515f):
the famous delicious Italian pepperoni pizza
*the Italian delicious famous pepperoni pizza
*the famous pepperoni delicious Italian pizza
*the pepperoni delicious famous Italian pizza
As the example shows, only the first version is acceptable while the other
three (and all other possible combinations) are not. The reason is that only
the first sentence follows the principle of iconic proximity, which states that
elements that have a close relationship must be placed close together. Since
pepperoni is an inherent component of this kind of pizza, this word must
precede the noun directly; Italian, which denotes the place of origin,
deserves the second closest position, while the characterization of the pizza
as delicious and its evaluation as famous take the positions which are more
distant from the noun. The problem is that while the linguistic description
consists of a linear sequence of elements, in the real world all the charac-
teristics of the pizza are integrated in one single object.
Before pursuing this problem further, let us take a look at the third type
of iconicity, iconic quantity or quantitative iconicity (Givón 1990: 966ff).
Consider the following example:
This guy is getting on my nerves.
This aggressively impertinent egghead is getting on my nerves.
Obviously, there is a marked difference in the length of the subject noun phrase
between the two sentences. This difference corresponds to the amount of infor-
mation provided for the description of the person referred to, and this has
been regarded as a manifestation of iconic quantity. However, this view brings
with it a serious problem: no matter how much information is supplied, the
person in the real world that is referred to stays the same. In other words, the
view that iconic quantity establishes a relation between linguistic expressions
and the person (or object) in the real world cannot be upheld in such a sim-
ple form, and this is the point where cognitive linguistics comes into play.
Putting iconicity on a cognitive footing: 
examples of diagrammatic iconicity
If one recalls that cognitive linguists do not claim to make statements about
the real world of objects and organisms, but deal with the categories and cog-
nitive models we have about the real world, this provides a new reference

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 0 3
point for the iconicity relation. Instead of comparing words and grammat-
ical structures with real objects and events, we may now compare them with
our categories and cognitive models of the real world, and this makes the
diagrammatic comparison much easier and much more plausible. This
means that in our example, iconic quantity is a relationship between the
length of the linguistic expression and the complexity of the cognitive model
evoked for the description of the impertinent egghead. Returning to our
pizza example, we find that iconic proximity is now a matter of the men-
tal proximity of associated object categories (PIZZA, PEPPERONI, ITALY) and the
adjectival category GOOD (which underlies both delicious and famous). And
of course, the iconic sequence in the first examples (pouring a glass of wine,
riding out into the sunset) can also be understood as a similarity relation
between the sequence of linguistic elements and the sequence of the
respective event categories.
There can be no doubt that the cognitive reinterpretation of iconicity has
boosted research in this field. One fascinating aspect of this work is that lin-
guistic facts which used to be taken for granted but were in fact unexplained
can now be interpreted as manifestations of the principle of iconicity.
Investigations of verb morphology5 have shown that in many languages, aspect
markers are closer to the verb stem than tense markers, and tense markers
in turn are closer to the verb stem than modality markers. To a certain extent
this is also reflected in the English verb phrase, as illustrated by the following
set of examples:
She was working at that time.
She worked a lot at that time.
She could swim when she was three.
*She swim-could when she was three.
In the first sentence the aspect marker -ing is closest to the lexical verb stem
because it is used as a suffix, while the tense marker is part of the preced-
ing auxiliary and therefore less closely linked with the verb stem. However,
the tense marker can be attached to the verb stem when aspect is not
expressed, as in the second example, which proves that the link is still very
strong. This is not the case with the modality marker ‘can’ contained in
the could form of the third sentence (the other grammatical component of
could is the tense marker). As shown by the ungrammatical fourth sentence,
the modality marker cannot be moved into a closer position to the verb
stem, for instance by being turned into a suffix.
For the cognitive linguist, the proximity between the aspect marker and
the verb stem reflects the close relationship between the grammatically

 
3 0 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
specified notions of DURATION and PROGRESSION and the ‘verbal’ action cate-
gory WORK. In contrast, the relationship between the notion of TEMPORAL LOCA-
TION (underlying tense markers) and the category WORK seems to be less
intimate. Yet the link is still stronger than the affinity between the modal-
ity notion ABILITY and the lexical category SWIM.
Turning to noun morphology, we find that the relative positions of
plural markers and case markers (e.g. dative and genitive markers) can be
explained in a similar way. Most concrete objects and persons are con-
ceived as entities that can be easily counted, so the concepts expressing
them combine well with the notion of QUANTITY, which underlies plural mark-
ers, and this is why plural markers are directly attached to the noun stem.
Case markers (which are, for instance, expressed as prepositions and suffixes)
also have their conceptual background. Dative markers (as in give something
to the girl) are probably based on orientational image schemas (see Section
2.4) while genitive markers (as in Peter’s pen) can be related to the
‘part–whole’ schema. These schemas are also very elementary parts of our
experience, but seem to be less closely related to object and person cate-
gories than the plural category QUANTITY. This difference is duly mirrored in
noun morphology, where case markers are normally placed in the second
closest position if a plural marker is present.
Since English has lost most of its noun morphology, it is not a good
testing ground. One of the few examples it provides is the genitive plural
form children’s (as in children’s books). Here the ‘irregular’ plural marker -ren
is closer to the noun stem than the genitive marker -s, and this sequence
cannot be reversed.
Like iconic proximity, quantitative iconicity has also been given a wider
interpretation in cognitive studies. Starting from the principle that longer
linguistic expressions reflect a larger amount of conceptual information, Givón
(1990) suggests that the amount of linguistic material corresponds to the
importance and the degree of predictability of the information processed.
This applies to the egghead sentence discussed above, but it is perhaps more
obvious in the following examples:
On the Brighton train from Victoria I met her.
On the Brighton train from Victoria I met the girl from next door.
Just imagine! Last night on the Brighton train from Victoria I met this
fair-haired, fragile, just unbelievably beautiful creature.
It is evident that the pronoun her (first sentence) is normally only justified
if the person referred to is neither particularly important nor unknown and
the reference is not unexpected. The girl from next door (second sentence)

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 0 5
indicates a larger degree of conceptual importance and unexpectedness, but
this sentence is easily beaten by the last version, where the singular con-
ceptual importance of the information and its unexpectedness are matched
by an exploding linguistic expression. On a more general level, the prin-
ciple of quantitative iconicity explains why personal pronouns are usually
shorter than full noun phrases and why the standard forms of pronouns
tend to be shorter than contrastive forms (which are stressed to signal impor-
tance). Compare the unstressed French first person pronoun je (in je sais
and j’aime) with the contrastive form moi.
A cognitive view of onomatopoeia (sound symbolism)
The claim of cognitive linguists that the iconic relationship is established
between a linguistic item and the conceptualization of the object in ques-
tion (and not the object itself) is also helpful for a better understanding of
sound-symbolic or onomatopoeic words (Peirce’s images).6 To start with what
is conventionally regarded as prototypical sound symbolism (‘imagic
iconicity’ in Peirce’s terminology), the imitation of movements or of ‘nat-
ural’ animal noises, it is not surprising that onomatopoeic words differ from
language to language, as illustrated in Figure 7.1. This is not just a matter
of the divergent phonological development languages have undergone
since a sound-symbolic word was accepted in the vocabulary – an example
of this would be the different pronunciations (and spellings) of the initial
labial sounds in English bow-wow and German wauwau. As our perception
of the world is determined by cultural models, speakers of different languages
will tend to highlight different aspects of animal sounds in the process of
conceptualization – compare this to Arabic haphap, which is much closer
to English woof-woof and French oauf ouaf than to bow-wow. Similarly, sound
English bow-wow 
French  ouah ouah 
Bulgarian bau-bau
woof-woof
ouaf ouaf
German wauwau
Spanish guau
Yoruba    waw-waw
English miaow
French  miaou
Bulgarian miau
German miau
Spanish (moullar)
Yoruba    miu
English cock-a-doodle-do
French  cocorico
Bulgarian kukuriguu
German kikeriki
Spanish quiquiriquí
Yoruba      kokorookoo
English moo
French  meuh
Bulgarian muu
German muh
Spanish (mugir)
Yoruba    broo
Figure 7.1
Onomatopoeic rendering of animal sounds in selected languages

 
3 0 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
clusters like /kr/ in crash, creak, crush, Crunchies can either convey harsh unpleas-
ant conceptualization of a creaking sound or the pleasant impression of crunch-
iness experienced when eating a breakfast cereal.
The cognitive approach also explains the effectiveness of ‘secondary’
sound-symbolic clusters, which develop from an accumulation of words con-
taining a certain sound cluster and expressing related meanings. A case in
point are English words introduced by the cluster /sw/, such as swing, sway,
sweep, swirl, swagger. Since all of them express the notion of swinging, they
have created the impression that /sw/ iconically reflects the motion and sound
of swinging.
Finally, a cognitive interpretation may also throw some light on the
most puzzling type of onomatopoeia, evocative or associative sound sym-
bolism, which claims, among other things, that the front vowel /i/ stands
for smallness, brightness and pleasant feelings and the back vowels /u/ and
/o/ suggest large size, strength and unpleasant feelings. A similar but less
pronounced tendency of positive and negative associations has been
observed for the distinction between voiceless and voiced consonants
(Masuda 2002). These associations have been repeatedly confirmed in
experiments, starting with Sapir’s study in 1929, in which informants were
asked to assign minimal nonsense utterances like [mil] and [mal] to large
and small objects.
The good/bad association has also been used by authors in choosing
names for fictional characters and creating artificial languages for them.
In these cases, the cognitive view of iconicity is particularly convincing
since the referents of these names do not ‘live’ in reality, but only in the
readers’ imaginations. A good example is Tolkien’s classic Lord of the Rings,
from which the following names of characters are taken (Podhorodecka,
forthcoming):7
Aegnor, Carcharoth, Draugluin, Earendil, Gorthaur, Idril, Celebrindal,
Lúthien Tinúviel, Míriel Serinde, Morgoth, Túrin Turambar
When informants (most of them unfamiliar with Tolkien’s work) were asked
which of these names they thought suitable for a positive and which for a
negative character, the majority agreed with Tolkien’s assignment, based on
the dominance of front vowels for positive and of back vowels for negative
characters:
Positive characters:
Aegnor, Earendil, Idril, Celebrindal,
Lúthien Tinúviel, Míriel Serinde
Negative characters:
Carcharoth, Draugluin, Gorthaur, Morgoth
Intermediate:
Túrin Turambar

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 0 7
Language
/i:/
/e/
/u/
other vowels
C per V
Sindarin
22.5 %
35.5 %
2 %
40 %
1.22
Quenya
28 %
23 %
10 %
39 %
1.08
Black Speech
14 %
0 %
40 %
46 %
1.7
Figure 7.2
Distribution of vowels, ration of consonants and vowels in Tolkien’s
artificial languages (selected from Podhorodecka, forthcoming)
A similar relationship was observed for the distribution of the front
vowels /i/ and /e/ and the back vowel /u/ in the three artificial languages
invented by Tolkien: the two ‘positive’ Elves’ languages, Sindarin and
Quenya, and the ‘negative’ Black Speech of the Orks: this distribution was
also accompanied by a significant difference in the rate of consonant per
vowel, as shown in Figure 7.2.
Tolkien’s use of evocative sound symbolism is just an extreme case of
what can be observed in many literary texts, especially in lyrical poems, as
shown by Leech (1969) for Tennyson’s ‘Oenone’ – see Figure 7.3. Reading
the poem one cannot deny that the many front vowels (contained in ll.
1–4) contribute to creating a pleasant atmosphere, while the back vowels
(in ll. 7–8) are likely to evoke its sombre counterpart.8
What is different is that unlike the Tolkien examples the words of these
poems are not invented, but part of a natural language and carry a lexical
meaning which is supported by the sound-symbolic effects.
Problems arise when one tries to transfer the evocative sound symbol-
ism observed in poems to language as a whole. What is skillfully merged
in the poem into a symbiosis of lexical and sound symbolic ‘meaning’ by
the artist falls apart when it is tested in ordinary language use. However
much we would have it, there is no sound-symbolic principle underlying
Oenone
[1] There lies a vale in Ida, lovelier
[2] Than all the valleys of Ionian hills.
[3] The swimming vapour slopes athwart the glen,
[4] Puts forth an arm, and creeps from pine to pine,
[5] And loiters, slowly drawn. On either hand
[6] The lawns and meadow-ledges midway down
[7] Hang rich in flowers, and far below them roars
[8] The long brook falling thro’ the clov’n ravine
[9] In cataract after cataract to the sea.
Alfred Tennyson
Figure 7.3
Tennyson’s poem ‘Oenone’

 
3 0 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
the phonological form of lexical words. Somewhat ironically, the small/big
and the good/bad associations of front and back vowels respectively are can-
celled out by the sound shapes of the two adjective pairs expressing these
notions in English, and the same is true for many other languages.
It is not surprising that, faced with this contradiction between lexical
and sound-symbolic meaning, traditional linguists have had difficulties
accepting the existence and relevance of evocative sound symbolism.
Semioticians working in the tradition of Peirce have found it easier because
they will attribute lexical signs like big and small to the category of ‘sym-
bol’, while the contradictory sound-symbolic effects will be regarded as iconic
images. Yet it is only a cognitive-linguistic explanation that really comes
to terms with the problem. First, the most central of the associations, the
small/big contrast, can be related to bodily experiences of the small and
large resonance room created in the oral cavity for the articulation of the
/i/ and /u/ sound respectively (Masuda 2002). Secondly and more impor-
tantly, empirical research has shown that human conceptualization toler-
ates differing and even contradictory concepts and can deal easily with
competing linguistic expressions. Considering for instance how effortlessly
we alternate between onomatopoeic bow-wow or miaow and the lexical forms
dog or cat using each in its appropriate context, it is understandable that
we have no problem in tolerating the coexistence of non-iconic lexical sym-
bols such as small and big with the iconic use of the /i/ sound denoting
smallness, etc.
Iconic explanation of text strategies
On the linguistic level, imagic iconicity tends to affect individual words,
while diagrammatic iconicity, as discussed before, seems to be concerned
with the quantity of the linguistic output and the arrangements of linguistic
elements in phrases and sentences. Yet there is no reason to keep us from
extending the iconic interpretation to more comprehensive text structures
and to relate them to the complex action patterns used in the conceptual-
ization of the world.9
The most obvious example is the path strategy, which can be observed
in many text-types and is at the same time firmly rooted in our conceptu-
alization. As discussed in previous chapters, the notion of path is not only
regarded as one of the basic image schemas that reflect our bodily experi-
ences (Section 2.3), it is also an integral part of the figure/ground contrast,
supplying as it does the notion of trajectory on which the dynamic inter-
pretation of figure is based (Section 4.1). Path is also at the core of the motion

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 0 9
event schema (Section 5.1), with its different options of windowing
(Section 5.2), and as part of the motion event it is reflected in different ways
in different languages (Section 5.3), not to mention that it supports impor-
tant syntactic constructions (Section 5.4).
In transferring the notion of path to the understanding of texts, we must
take into consideration that – at least in readable and user-friendly texts –
readers are not left to their own devices and forced to ‘find their own way’
through the text but are gently guided by the writer. So a more appropriate
and tangible way of imagining the path strategy is a situation where some-
one guides another person along a path, for example a local guiding foreign
visitors to a new destination or a tourist guide taking groups round a castle,
garden or park. From this perspective the path strategy comprises much more
than a simple A-leads-to-B relationship. It includes the action of walking along
a certain path, in itself a complex action. Other elements of the action pat-
tern are opening rituals that climax in inviting someone to follow, deciding
between alternative routes, pointing out objects of interest encountered dur-
ing the tour, explaining them, and finally the appropriate closing rituals. All
this is something authors of prototypical travel guidebooks and brochures
describing a guided tour through a building, town, etc. will incorporate in
their work, something that readers will expect to find in these texts because
they automatically transfer their notion of path and guiding from their own
cognitive experiences to their text comprehension. Yet this does not mean
that the iconic relationship supporting the travel book will rely on a detailed
transfer of individual attributes of the path strategy, a kind of checklist
approach. What is much more likely is a holistic transfer of the compre-
hensive action pattern developed within a certain cultural model, a cogni-
tive process that may be compared with the holistic or gestalt perception of
concrete objects (Section 1.2). Read the short extract from a tourist brochure
for a Welsh manor house, which shows how general motion verbs like step
over and enter and the ‘path verb’ guide combine with the imperative form of
address, greeting rituals and descriptive detail (dressed in period costume, etc.)
to create a rich and vivid impression of being shown around the building.
Step over the threshold of Llancaiach (pronounced glan kayack) Fawr and
travel back over 350 years to a time of great unrest and Civil War in Wales. As
you enter the manor house you are greeted by the servants of ‘Colonel’
Edward Prichard, dressed in period costume and speaking in the style of the
17th century, who guide you around the manor’s many beautiful rooms with
fascinating tales of life in a Civil War gentry household.
(From: Llancaiach Fawr Manor. Where History Comes Alive!; tourist brochure)

 
3 1 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Admittedly, the textual path strategy would not merit so much atten-
tion if it were restricted to travel guidebooks. The important thing is that
the prototypical strategy serves as a reference point for a huge variety of
text structures ranging from instructions and procedural texts (cookery books,
do-it-yourself manuals, etc.) to chronological accounts (non-fictional doc-
umentations, historical novels, biographies, etc.). Another advantage of assum-
ing a holistically transferred conception of path and guiding is that it is
effective beyond the linguistic medium, i.e. it invites a combined dynamic
interpretation of linguistic, visual and auditory elements and their inter-
play, and this is essential for the understanding of advertising spots and
other television genres.
Faced with this situation one might ask whether there are any alterna-
tives to the path strategy or whether it is the only iconically supported text
strategy available. Surveying text-types as far apart as phone books (or dic-
tionaries) and news stories, it is difficult to understand them as being based
on a strategy of leading the reader from one item to the next. There is no
real guiding quality in an alphabetical arrangement of items, and if one looks
at prototypical news stories, they follow the top–down principle of placing
items in the order of decreasing importance, which is often at odds with
the notions of spatial path or chronological sequence. Yet, looking for a
reason why we accept these textual arrangements so effortlessly, it emerges
that these text-types can also rely on iconic support.
A starting point could be the observation that one of the abilities
already exhibited by small children and available for us all through our lives
is the aptitude (and even urge) to arrange objects in certain patterns.
Though perhaps not obvious at first sight, this sorting strategy is also a
rich strategy, which includes the assembly of the material as well as explor-
ing sorting parameters (size, shape, colour and value), selecting the most
suitable sorting principles (sorting into pairs, triads, quartets, dozens),
dividing the sorting process up into suitable stages and finally deciding on
the display of the sorting result (linear, circular presentation, etc.). More
often than not, the sorting strategy is combined with a weighting strat-
egy that suggests an upward or downward arrangement of items along the
sorting parameters and this supplies either an initial or an end focus for
the weighting process. One linguistic application is that the sorting-and-
weighting strategy can provide the conceptual underpinning for the role
assigned to thematic prominence (or initial focus) and to end focus in the
analysis of linguistic information units. More importantly, assuming
again the holistic iconic transfer of a comprehensive cognitive strategy, the

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 1 1
sorting-and-weighting strategy can be used to explain the universal accep-
tance of alphabetical sorting in directories, but also the success of the
top–down structure of news stories or the end-focus strategies, as employed
for instance in rhetorical speeches, anecdotes or jokes.
Summing up at this point, it appears that the cognitive-linguistic
approach of understanding iconicity as a relationship between the linguis-
tic (and also visual, auditory) level10 and the level of conceptualization offers
a number of advantages:
• Onomatopoeic words (iconic images) denoting natural noises (wind,
waves) and animal calls (bow-wow, miaow) need not be objectively com-
pared with their models in reality. Like secondary sound-symbolic
effects (/sw/ expressing a swinging motion) they convey our culture-
dependent conceptualizations. This is also true of evocative sound
symbolism (/i/ sound for smallness), which is tolerated side by side with
phonologically conflicting lexical items.
• Diagrammatic iconicity should be conceived as a relationship between
the linguistic level and its underlying conceptualization rather than
as a link connecting linguistic expressions and objects in reality. The
comparison is possible in terms of quantity of information, of prox-
imity and sequence, and this permits the iconic explanation of a range
of morphological phenomena and syntactic structures.
• Holistically experienced iconic text structures take the notion of
iconicity on yet a higher level by providing a conceptualist background
for many of the major text strategies and their combinations.
Exercises
1. The following examples might be said to violate the principles of
iconic sequencing. Why are they nevertheless acceptable?
Before he found a new position he gave up his job at the local super-
market.
We moved to Canada as soon as we sold our house in England.
Last night we had dinner with Sue and Jack. We met them on holi-
day a couple of years ago.
The photographs in this book remind me of what life was like when
I was a child.

 
3 1 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
2. Why are the following sentences odd? How should the modifiers be
rearranged to make them more acceptable? What kind of iconicity is
involved?
*He bought a blue-and-yellow cotton striped oversize shirt.
*I was led into a poorly furnished, crowded, dirty, run-down, repul-
sive basement two-room flat.
3. In the text, certain claims are made about the proximity of noun stem,
plural and case markers and of verb stem, aspect, tense and mood mark-
ers. Show how these claims are supported by the following examples
taken from Turkish:
ev
‘house’, singular (nominative case unmarked)
ev + ler
‘house’ + plural (nominative case unmarked)
ev + ler + im
‘house’ + plural + dative
ev + e
git + mek
isti + 
yor + um
‘house’/dative 
‘go’ + infinitive ‘want’ + present + 1st person
‘home’
prog.
singular
‘I am wanting (= I want) to go home.’
4. Select names chosen for the characters of another bestseller, Harry Potter
(Hermione, Dumbledore, Voldemort, Sirius Black, Hagrid, Malfoy,
Severus Snape, Sybill Trelawney, Quirrell, etc.) and find out to what extent
their positive or negative connotations rely on evocative sound-
symbolic associations described in this section. What other aspects seem
to have been relevant for the choice of these names?
5. Find more lyrical poems from English literature or the literature of your
own country in which evocative sound symbolism is important and dis-
cuss its effect.
6. Choose a short technical instruction and show to what extent it follows
a path strategy (sequential arrangements of individual steps, additional
elements of guidance). Apply the top–down sorting-and-weighting
strategy to a short news story, e.g. the report of an accident.
7.2 Lexical change and prototypicality
While iconicity is rooted in language philosophy and has only recently attracted
the attention of linguists on a larger scale, the study of language change has 
been a focal concern of linguistics since its very beginnings around 1800. Yet in
spite of its long research tradition and the infinite effort that has gone into

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 1 3
Figure 7.4
Traditional view of major processes of lexical change
exploring, for instance, the history of the English vocabulary, it seems that the
cognitive approach is capable of throwing new light on some crucial aspects of
lexical change.
Traditionally, changes in word meaning have been described in terms of
generalization, specialization, figurative use, and to mention the most rad-
ical change last, in terms of substitution or semantic shift. Some stock exam-
ples of these processes are assembled in Figure 7.4.
As these examples show, the impact of lexical change on the meaning
of words can be quite strong. But somehow the vocabulary of English (and
of other languages) has never been in danger of being overwhelmed by these
changes. Languages seem to have a kind of inbuilt stability, a core of mean-
ings the speakers can rely on. At the same time languages seem to be flex-
ible enough to permit substantial lexical change.
The development of the lexical category BIRD
According to Geeraerts (1992, 1997),11 the coexistence of stability and flex-
ibility in lexical development can best be explained if we take a cognitive
stance and understand lexical meaning in terms of prototype categories. This
means that what was said about prototype categories in Chapter 1 is also
relevant for the historical perspective of lexical change. Since we cannot
attempt to present Geeraerts’s comprehensive system in full, we will select
a few key aspects and illustrate them with the examples that have accom-
panied us through the book, starting with the category BIRD.
Figure 7.5 documents the first three types of lexical change listed in
Figure 7.4, specialization, generalization and metaphor, and shows how they
affect the category structure of BIRD. The central portion of the diagram is
SPECIALIZATION
Old Engl.: 
fugol
→
Mod. E.: fowl
[‘any bird’]
[‘cocks, hens, chickens’]
GENERALIZATION
Old Engl.: 
bryd
→
Mod. E.: bird
[‘young bird’]
[‘any bird’]
FIGURATIVE USE
Middle E. 
bird
→
17th cent.: bird
(METAPHOR)
and Mod. E.:
[‘prisoner’, additional meaning]
SUBSTITUTION
17th cent.:
coach
→
20th cent.: coach
(SEMANTIC SHIFT)
[‘horse drawn -
[‘motor coach’]
carriage’]

 
a simplified version of Figure 1.8 in Chapter 1, which assembled category
members, or rather subcategories, of BIRD and the attributes linking them.
Since the attributes are not shown in the present figure, we should perhaps
recapitulate that typical attributes of BIRD are most numerous for the central
members of the category (e.g. >ROBIN<, >SPARROW<, >BLACKBIRD<), while more
peripheral members (e.g. >OSTRICH<, >FLAMINGO<) have fewer typical attributes
and rely on family resemblances with other less central members (for
instance, ostriches and flamingoes share their long necks with swans and
storks). Considering the fact that lexical change has traditionally been seen
as involving the meaning of a word as a whole, one might assume that it
also affects the underlying category as a whole including the category centre.
Looking at Figure 7.5 one finds that this is not the case.
To start with metaphorical change, there are of course examples where
the mapping is based on the attributes of the prototype BIRD, such as ‘chirps
or sings’, ‘small and lightweight’, ‘can fly’ and ‘has wings’. Thus the ‘little
bird supplying secret information’ (example (a)) focuses on the first three
of these attributes (chirps/lightweight/can fly), while the metaphorical use
‘aeroplane’ (b) relies predominantly on the last two (can fly/has wings).
3 1 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
little bird
ësec ret source
of information’
1546–
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(A): 
specialization
(B): 
generalization
The years given refer to the date
of the first quotation in the Oxford
English Dictionary
bird
‘aeroplane, missile
spacecraft’
1938–
(jail) bird
‘prisoner’
1608–
rare bird
‘strange person’
1799–
category
YOUNG BIRD
(Old. Engl.)
(B)
to get the (big) bird
‘be booed’, ‘be
dismissed’
1845–
Legend:
(a)–(f): lexical change based
            on metaphor
>DOVE<
>SWALLOW<
>SPARROW<
>ROBIN<
>BUDGERIGAR<
>PARROT<
>STORK<
>DUCK<
>SWAN<
>GOOSE<
>TURKEY<
>COCK<
>HEN<
>PEACOCK<
>FLAMINGO<
>OSTRICH<
(f)
(A)
(e)
category
FOWL
(Mod. Engl.)
strictly for the birds
‘worthless’
1942–
Figure 7.5
Examples of lexical change involving the category BIRD

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 1 5
The majority of the metaphorical uses, however, seem to spring from
family resemblances uniting the periphery of the BIRD category rather than
from its centre. Take the use of bird for prisoner (c), which is dominated
by the attribute ‘locked in a cage’. Though this metaphor also calls up var-
ious other aspects of birds, among them the central attributes ‘can fly’ and
‘has wings’, the idea of being locked up is typical of parrots, budgerigars
and other cage birds, but not of birds in general. The use of bird to denote
‘strange or queer persons’ (d) seems to focus on the peripheral attribute ‘exotic
appearance’, which applies to ostriches, flamingoes, peacocks and again to
parrots and budgerigars rather than to central category members. The
examples listed on the right-hand side of the figure are even more extreme.
According to a quotation from American Speech given in the OED, the use
of strictly for the birds (e), meaning ‘completely worthless’, is related to ‘birds
eating droppings from horses and cattle’. Although apparently many types
of birds look for grain and insect larvae in droppings and dunghills, this is
certainly not among the most salient attributes connected with the cate-
gory BIRD. Finally, the use of get the big bird in the sense of ‘booing an actor’
or ‘dismissing a person from a job’ (f) is derived from the hissing sound
produced by geese (but not by birds in general).
Reviewing these examples of metaphorical mappings, it is easy to see
that they do not really affect the category structure of BIRD, let alone change
it. But what is the outcome when a whole section is, as it were, carved out
of a category? This process occurred in the case of the BIRD category when
hens and other birds raised for their meat, eggs and feathers were collected
in a separate category. To complicate matters, the orginal name of the cat-
egory BIRD, Old English fugol (Mod. Engl. fowl), was used for this new cate-
gory (see (A) in Figure 7.5).
In Old English the word fugol referred to all kinds of birds. Now we do
not really know what the BIRD category was like in Anglo-Saxon times because
the major descriptive tools of category structure, i.e. goodness-of-example
ratings and attribute listing by informants, are obviously not available. Yet
apart from exotic birds like ostriches and flamingoes, most birds are men-
tioned in extant Old English texts, and therefore we may assume that the
category structure was not totally different from what it is today. Even if
we cannot safely pinpoint the Anglo-Saxon prototype, the major attributes
of good examples of the BIRD category were probably similar to what they
are today.
How, then, did this category structure survive the transfer of the cate-
gory name to the peripheral members of the BIRD category denoted by Modern
English fowl? The traditional explanation would point out that fugol was

 
3 1 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
replaced by the word bird, whose meaning underwent the process of gen-
eralization (Figure 7.4). The background is that its Old English version bryd
was already used for the closely related category YOUNG BIRD (see (B) in Figure
7.5). This means that even in Anglo-Saxon times the category structure under-
lying bryd included all the major attributes of the BIRD category (as
expressed by Old Engl. fugol). As a result, the focal area of the category
remained intact. Its stability ensured that the transition from fugol to bird,
which extended over several centuries, was smooth. It was made even
smoother by the fact that for some time there was a tendency to use bird
for smaller birds while fugol (or Middle Engl. foule) was increasingly
reserved for larger birds. In cognitive terms, this can be seen as a way of
using an important attribute of young birds, their smallness, as a crutch to
facilitate the switch of the word bird from the category YOUNG BIRD to the
category BIRD.
Summing up our diachronic discussion of the category BIRD, the stabil-
ity shown by the category structure across centuries is indeed impressive.
The main reason seems to be that the focal area of the category and the
prototype in particular remain largely unaffected by metaphorical change
and even by the processes of specialization and generalization in which the
category BIRD has been involved.
Prototype shift and prototype split: the categories COACH
and IDEA
Even if this does not apply to BIRD, there are cases where central attributes
of a category are replaced, normally as a result of extra-linguistic changes.
Traditionally called substitution or semantic shift (Figure 7.4), the appro-
priate cognitive term is prototype shift. A fairly straightforward illustra-
tion of this process is provided by the history of the category COACH, as
documented in Figure 7.6.12
The word coach was introduced into English in the sixteenth century to
denote a large closed carriage with four wheels and seats inside and out-
side, which was drawn by horses. In the sixteenth and seventeenth cen-
turies such carriages were mainly used by the Royal Family and other officials.
This situation is illustrated in Figure 7.6(a), where the category prototype
>STATE CARRIAGE< is circled by a bold line. Yet as indicated by the circle round
>STAGE COACH<, this second use was gaining ground as coaches were increas-
ingly used for regular cross-country services for ordinary citizens. In dia-
gram (b) of the figure, which sketches the situation in the nineteenth century,
>STAGE COACH< has superseded >STATE CARRIAGE< as prototypical subcategory,

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 1 7
(a) 17th century
>MOURNING
COACH<
>GLASS
COACH<
>STATE CARRIAGE<
>HACKNEY
COACH<
(for hire)
>STAGE
COACH<
(b) 19th century
>STATE
CARRIAGE<
>HACKNEY
COACH<
>MOURNING
COACH<
>STAGE COACH<
>SLOW
COACH<
>LONG COACH<
(long-distance)
>RAILWAY
CARRIAGE<
(c) 20th century
>STATE
COACH<
>MOTOR COACH<
(for touring)
>SINGLE
DECKER
BUS<
>SCHEDULED LONG-
DISTANCE COACH<
>STAGE
COACH<
(Lord Mayor’s
coach)
>RAILWAY
CARRIAGE<
Figure 7.6
Prototype shift: the development of the category COACH
but new competition has arisen through the use of coach for the techno-
logical innovation of railway carriages. Finally, in diagram (c) >STAGE COACH<
has been pushed towards the category periphery in favour of >MOTOR COACH<
as a new prototype, and this again reflects technological developments.
Faced with these massive changes in the conceptual content of the pro-
totype, especially the change from >STAGE COACH< to >MOTOR COACH<, it is sur-
prising how little language users are disturbed by them. It seems as if the
category structure remained intact in spite of the shift of the prototype. How
can this remarkable stability be explained?
From a cognitive point of view, the main reason is that most of the impor-
tant attributes are carried over from the old into the new category proto-
type, for example ‘is used for transporting people’, ‘large closed carriage’,
‘has four wheels’ and ‘has seats inside’. Among these attributes the crucial
one is the functional attribute ‘used for transporting people’. This attribute
seems to have held the category members together even though attributes

 
3 1 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
on other dimensions changed dramatically. An example of such a change
is the development on the dimension ‘power source’ where the attributes
changed from ‘horse drawn’ for >STAGE
COACH<, through ‘drawn by an
engine’ for >RAILWAY CARRIAGE<, to ‘self-powered’ for >MOTOR COACH<. The devel-
opment of the attributes on this dimension is indeed striking. But it has
not led to a dissolution of the category integrity because the uniting power
of the functional attribute ‘used for transporting people’, and of the other
attributes mentioned above, has prevailed.
Yet there is one exception. Although, as we have seen, the use of coach
for railway carriages may have fulfilled a transitional function between >STAGE
COACH< and >MOTOR COACH<, it represents a new departure in another respect.
Unlike all other types of coaches, a railway carriage cannot be used as a sin-
gle unit, and it does not run on roads but on rails. In spite of their shared
function, then, today the distinction between motor coaches and railway
carriages is so clear-cut that the use of coach for >RAILWAY CARRIAGE< could be
regarded as involving the splitting off of a second prototype.
Such prototype splits are not very common in the domain of con-
crete objects, but are much more frequent among abstract categories. This
can be demonstrated by looking at the development of the category IDEA,
which was already discussed in the context of metaphors in Chapter 3.1.
There we tried to show how certain metaphors (the +CONTAINER+ metaphor,
the +OBJECT+ metaphor, etc.) contribute to an overall conceptualization of
the category IDEA, which could be roughly glossed as ‘thought’. To arrive at
the finer conceptual distinctions that are also historically relevant we should
first look at the sample sentences in Figure 7.7.
A short glimpse at the examples and the semantic labels attached to
them makes it clear that version (a) has received the most general label,
while versions (b) to (d) have been given more specific paraphrases. In a
cognitive context the labels could be regarded as a rough indication of pro-
totypes, and we would expect each of them to be representative of less clearly
defined instances (or lesser category members; Schmid 1993: 188ff). To intro-
duce the historical perspective it must be pointed out that, though the sen-
tences are all taken from present-day English for convenience, they do in
(a) The idea of truth is hard to grasp.
IDEA = CONCEPT, MENTAL PICTURE
(b) The idea that the earth is a disc has been refuted.
IDEA = BELIEF
(c) The idea is to put all cards on the table.
IDEA = AIM, PLAN
(d) And then he had a brilliant idea.
IDEA = SUDDEN INSPIRATION
Figure 7.7
The category IDEA: sample sentences and semantic labels

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 1 9
(a) 1430–1770
>CONCEPT<
>CONCEPT<
>INSPIRATION<
>CONCEPT<
>BELIEF<
>AIM<
>BELIEF<
(b) 1770–1830
(c) 1830 and later
Figure 7.8
Prototype split: the development of the category IDEA (Schmid 1996b)
fact reflect the sequence of stages in which the category IDEA has unfolded since
the word idea entered the English language in the fifteenth century. If we con-
sider that this implies a change from one global prototype to more specific
‘local’ ones, we can understand this development as an example of prototype
split. Compare the diagrams in Figure 7.8, which is based on an analysis of
the examples contained in the Oxford English Dictionary (Schmid 1996b).
If one contrasts Figure 7.8 with Figures 7.5 and 7.6 (dealing with the cat-
egories BIRD and COACH respectively), it is evident that any statement about
the structure of abstract categories will be much more general than descrip-
tions of concrete object categories. Faced with the absence of tangible
attributes and the vagueness of most conceptual metaphors, there are no
reliable semantic criteria that a historical description of the category IDEA might
be based on, let alone an evaluation of its stability.
The only available parameter seems to be the syntactic environment in
which abstract terms like idea occur. The oldest prototype in the history of
the category IDEA, the prototype >CONCEPT<, is closely linked to the syntac-
tic structure the idea of. The prototype >BELIEF< is connected with the con-
struction the idea that, the prototype >AIM< with the idea is to, and finally
the prototype >SUDDEN INSPIRATION< is coupled with the structure have/get an
idea. (See also Figure 7.7 where these structures are shown in bold print.)
As the analysis of the examples for IDEA in the Oxford English Dictionary has
shown, such a ‘contextual approach’ to abstract categories is feasible and
helpful in describing lexical change and can also explain the emergence of
certain constructions (see Section 5.4 on the shell-content construction).
If at the end of this section, one looks back at the traditional classifi-
cation from which the discussion started out, it should have become clear
that, on the whole, cognitive linguistics offers a richer description of lexi-
cal change and opens up a line of research which could profitably be fur-
ther pursued.13

 
3 2 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Exercises
1. As Geeraerts (1997: 33–41) has shown, the stability of lexical development
can also be illustrated in ‘quick motion’ for recent additions to the lexi-
con. His example is the Dutch concept LEGGING, which since its introduction
in 1988 has kept the prototype relatively fixed while adding additional
non-prototypical category members representing for instance different types
of material. Transfer this method to the concept MOBILE PHONE and find
out if the core meaning also remains stable while additional meanings
are added due to changes in size, shape and colour, additional electronic
functions and equipment, battery support, etc.
2. In Old English the word man referred to human beings while ‘male
human being’ was normally expressed by another word (Old Engl. wer).
Compare the present usage of man and discuss the semantic change
involved in terms of prototype categories. A comparison with the devel-
opment of fugol/fowl might be helpful.
Discuss whether the sexist use of man, which is much criticized today,
has been in the language since Anglo-Saxon times or whether it is a
more modern development.
3. Here is an extract from the entry for car in the Oxford English Dictionary:
1. A wheeled vehicle or conveyance
a. generally – a carriage, chariot, cart, wagon, truck, etc.
(quotations from the fourteenth to the eighteenth century)
b. From sixteenth to nineteenth century, chiefly poetic with
associations of dignity, solemnity and splendour. Applied also to
the fabled chariot of Phaeton or the sun . . .
d. transf. a miniature carriage or truck used in experiments, etc.
(quotation from the nineteenth century)
e. = motor car
(quotations from the late nineteenth and the twentieth century)
4. a. The part of a balloon in which aeronauts sit
(quotations from the eighteenth and the nineteenth century)
b. The cage of a lift. Chiefly US
(quotations from the nineteenth and the twentieth century)
Try to sketch the development of the category structure on the basis
of this information.
4. Sketch the development of the concept underlying the nouns liquor and
sensation by analyzing the entries in the OED. Can you see evidence of
a prototype shift (in the case of liquor) or of a prototype split (in the case
of sensation)?

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 2 1
7.3 Cognitive aspects of grammaticalization
Apart from lexical change, the origin and development of grammatical forms (tense
markers, plural and case markers, etc.) has been a long-standing concern of
linguistics. Here a cognitive approach has proved helpful in explaining the
development of individual grammatical forms, but it also seems capable of providing
a framework for a whole range of grammaticalization processes.
In the nineteenth century the study of the development of grammatical forms
was motivated by the general interest in the etymological roots of languages.
The term ‘grammaticalization’ was probably first used by the French lin-
guist Meillet. According to Meillet (1912), the aim of studying grammati-
calization is to investigate ‘the transition of autonomous words into the role
of grammatical elements’ (1912: 133), or to add a more recent definition, to
show ‘where a lexical unit . . . assumes a grammatical function, or where a gram-
matical unit assumes a more grammatical function’ (Heine et al. 1991: 2).14 It
is the first of these two stages, the transition from a lexical unit to a gram-
matical form, for which an explanation from the perspective of cognitive
linguistics seems to be most rewarding.
Motion events, metaphor and metonymy 
in grammaticalization
Our test case is one of the best-known instances of grammaticalization in
English, the development of the lexical verb go into an auxiliary used to
express the future tense.15 The suitable starting point of a cognitive analy-
sis is the notion of motion event developed by Talmy (2000). As shown in
Sections 4.1 and 5.2, a motion event can be basically conceived as the path
of a figure in motion over a ground. Assuming an open path leading from
A to B, the motion of the figure (or trajector) is always directed towards the
destination B, in other words it is characterized by goal orientation. At the
same time the destination or goal can only be reached if the position of
the trajector along the path keeps changing, an observation that supports
the basic correlation ‘action/change<>motion’ (see Section 3.1). The figure
and its path are contrasted with the ground, which functions as a reference
point or ‘landmark’ for orientation and is normally tied to what the
speaker regards as the present state of the world; this can be captured in
the correlation ‘(present) viewpoint<>landmark’.
Analyzing the motion event in this way, we have already assembled the
three aspects, goal orientation, change and viewpoint, which will play an
important role in the grammaticalization of the so-called going-to future. To

 
3 2 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
complete the picture we should consider that the path of the trajector can
be accessed conceptually through different windows of attention. Talmy’s
own example of path-windowing is:
The crate that was in the aircraft’s cargo bay fell out of the plane
through the air into the ocean (see Figure 5.10).
In this example all three possibilities of path-windowing are assembled:
initial windowing (out of the cargo bay), medial windowing (through the air),
final windowing (into the ocean), but it is fairly clear that the last possi-
bility is normally preferred. This is even more so for the motion verb go,
which is most likely combined with an adverbial of direction denoting a
concrete destination while the initial and medial windows are gapped, as
in example (1).
Susan’s going to London next month.
She’s going to hospital/college/prison.
She’s going to London to work at our office.
She’s going to work at our office.
You’re going to like her.
You’re going to be friends.
You’re gonna like her.
You gonna like her. (non-standard)
In terms of grammaticalization, example (1) represents stage 1 of the process-
compare Figure 7.9, where ‘final windowing’ is selected and ‘destination’ of
the path is singled out as foregrounded. Examples (2) and (3) show how
this foregrounded aspect of the motion event invites a conceptual exten-
sion: the concrete destination can be ‘specified for the purpose associated
with it’ (OALD) (as in the ‘destinations’ hospital, college or prison in (2)); the
second type of extension occurs if an adverbial of purpose (such as to work
at our office in (3)) is added that is more or less closely linked to the direc-
tion adverbial. Both examples stress the goal orientation of the motion event
and thus indicate in which direction the notion of destination can be
extended in stage 2 of the grammaticalization process. As shown in Figure
7.9, stage 2 can be understood as a metonymic transfer based on the rela-
tionship +GOAL-ORIENTED MOVEMENT STANDS FOR INTENDED ACTION+, for which the
‘part–whole’ image schema and the basic experiential relation of ‘pur-
pose<>goal’ (see Section 3.1) determine the mapping scope. Monitored by
this mapping scope the source concept 
GOAL-ORIENTED
MOVEMENT
is
metonymically related to the wider target concept PURPOSEFUL OR INTENDED

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 2 3
Figure in motion
Initial
window
gapped
source
Medial
window
gapped
passage
Final path
windowing
destination/
goal
Stage 1 Motion event
Final path windowing
(destination/goal
foregrounded)
Ex. (1) – (3) 
Stage 2 Metonymy
+GOAL-ORIENTED MOVEMENT
STANDS FOR INTENDED ACTION+
Ex. (4)
Goal-
oriented
movement
Intended
action
MAPPING SCOPE
part–whole 
purpose<>goal
Stage 3 Metaphor
+PREDICTED STATE IS
INTENDED ACTION+
Ex. (5), (6)
MAPPING SCOPE
viewpoint<>landmark
change<>motion
Intended
action
Predicted
state
Figure 7.9
Cognitive view of the grammaticalization of the going-to future:
stages 1–3
ACTION (e.g. going to work at our office in example (4)). Since the notion of
purposeful or intended action comes with the expectation of future enact-
ment, the verb form is going acquires an aspect of futurity in this construction.
Futurity in turn is, like other tenses, normally expressed by auxiliaries in
English and so it is not surprising that the reduction of the going-to future
to the status of an auxiliary is initiated.
Building on this level of grammaticalization, a metaphorical extension
develops (stage 3 in Figure 7.9), in which the source concept INTENDED FUTURE
ACTION is carried over to the target concept PREDICTED FUTURE STATE – or in the
usual format of metaphor labelling +PREDICTED
STATE
IS
INTENDED
ACTION+.
Compare examples (5) and (6), where the attitude of affection or the state
of friendship are predictions based on the speaker’s evaluation. This
metaphorical mapping is again monitored by a mapping scope based on
the underlying motion event (a topic addressed in more detail below).
Compared with stage 2 and 3, the final stage (stage 4, represented in
examples (7) and (8), but not in Figure 7.9) does not change the meaning
any more, but documents the phonological and graphic changes that
accompany the final reduction to auxiliary status.
What is the advantage of this cognitive explanation compared with the
traditional description, which characterizes stage 2 as syntactic reanalysis
(instead of metonymy) and stage 3 as analogy (rather than metaphor)? As

 
3 2 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
it appears, the cognitive explanation not only throws light on the seman-
tic changes involved in the grammaticalization of going to, it is particularly
helpful in describing the limitations of the process.
Looking at the representation of the motion event in Figure 7.9 again,
it is evident why the motion verb go is selected for this grammaticalization
process and not other verbs of motion such as leave (which focuses on the
initial windowing or source of the motion), pass (stressing the medial win-
dow or passage) or stagger, ride and fly (with their strong emphasis on the
manner-of-motion component). It is only a verb focused on the final path
window like go that has the goal orientation that permits the infinitive,
with its inherent intentional potential, to be added (but not participles or
gerunds). Finally and perhaps more interestingly, the motion event is also
responsible for the way in which the mapping scope of the metaphor
+PREDICTED STATE IS INTENDED ACTION+ captures the limitations that competent
speakers of English still feel when using the going-to future. As shown at the
beginning of this section, the basic correlation ‘(present) viewpoint<>land-
mark (of the motion event)’ suggests that there must be some reference point
in present time for establishing a prediction, either some present evaluation
(as in examples (5) and (6)) or some present observations or evidence, such
as the ominous clouds supporting It’s going to rain. Secondly, the correla-
tion ‘change<> motion’, which is based on our conceptualization of a tra-
jector moving along the path, limits the predictive use of the going-to future
to human attitudes such as likes or dislikes (inherently non-permanent and
liable to change; see (5)) and to states that do not exclude the notion of
change. This mapping constraint explains for instance why You are going to
be friends (6) is fully acceptable while The earth is going to be round for ever
is not.
Although the emergence of the going-to future is probably the best
example, other grammaticalization processes like the development of the
verbal participles given, provided and granted and of the imperative suppose
into conditional conjunctions could also benefit from a cognitive analysis
(see also Exercise 1 below). Yet, as has been claimed, the real explanatory
power of the cognitive view only becomes apparent when it is used as a
unifying framework for a whole range of grammaticalization processes. This
is what Heine attempts in his description of the development of tense, aspect
and mood markers (Heine 1993).
A cognitive framework for grammaticalization
Heine’s starting point is a system of so-called propositional schemas,16
which represent processes and events and consist of three elements, a set-up

 
well known from traditional clause patterns and Construction Grammar (see
Section 5.4). While many processes and their propositional schemas are fairly
specific (e.g. X EAT Y or X WRITE Y), some of them, for instance X GO Y, X
COME Y, X BE AT Y, are much more general, and it is from these general propo-
sitional schemas that grammatical categories have developed.
Figure 7.10 assembles the major propositional schemas underlying
aspect and tense in many languages. As the figure shows, the schemas can
be divided into two groups: three basic schemas (Location, Motion, Action)
and a number of schemas that have been derived from these basic schemas
(Equation, Accompaniment, Possession, Manner, Change of state, Volition).
What is particularly striking is the role attributed to the location schema
as the main source of derived schemas; this judgement is supported by a
long-standing non-cognitivist tradition of localist thought and it is also in
agreement with the everyday observation that space is our primary sphere
of experience.
Turning to the kind of grammaticalization process sparked off by the indi-
vidual propositional schemas (cf. Figure 7.11), we find that some of them are
quite obvious: volition generates future tense (the will-future in English) and
so does change of state (werden (=‘become’)-future in German); accompani-
ment develops into a progressive marker documented for many African lan-
guages. With other propositional schemas, especially the basic schemas, the
grammaticalization potential is more ambiguous. Thus the motion schema
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 2 5
BASIC SCHEMAS
DERIVED SCHEMAS
Equation
‘X is like (a) Y’
Location
‘X is at Y’
Action
‘X does Y’
Motion
‘X moves to/from Y’
Accompaniment
‘X is with Y’
Possession
‘X has Y’
Change of state
‘X becomes Y’
Volition
‘X wants Y’
Manager
‘X stays in a Y manner’
Figure 7.10
Major propositional schemas underlying the grammatical categories
of aspect and tense
(adapted from Heine’s event schemas, Heine 1993: Table 2.1)

 
3 2 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Figure 7.11
Propositional schemas and possible grammaticalizations
(adapted from Heine 1993: 47)
can be used for looking both forwards and backwards, resulting in future or
perfect and past tenses, while the action schema may be used to express ingres-
siveness (the beginning of an action) as well as its completion. Considering
these conflicting types of grammaticalizations it is not surprising that lan-
guages have developed quite different tense/aspect systems from a common
conceptual basis.17
To conclude this section, we will add a note on an issue that has been
hotly debated in recent years: the question of whether or not grammati-
calization should be seen as a unidirectional process from lexical units to
units with grammatical functions and from grammatical functions to still
more grammatical functions. As far as we can see, for the first stage, on
which we have concentrated in this section, a cognitive analysis seems to
provide evidence for the unidirectional evolution from lexical to gram-
matical units. Whether the switch from one type of grammatical function
to another one (e.g. from adverbs linking main clauses to subordinators)
is not reversible in some cases is another matter. Yet what can be said from
our point of view is that even if examples of the reverse development of
‘de-grammaticalization’ from grammatical into lexical items should be
PROPOSITIONAL
GRAMMATICALIZATION
EXAMPLE
SCHEMA
Location
progressive, ingressive
Dutch: Hij is een boek aan het lezen.
‘He is a book at the reading.’
continuous
Germ.: Er ist beim Lesen.
‘He is at the reading.’
Motion
ingressive, future,
Engl.: going-to future
perfect, past
Fr.: 
venir-de past
Action
progressive, continuous,
African languages
ingressive, completive,
perfect
Equation
resultative, progressive,
Fr.: 
être perfect
perfect, future
Accompaniment
progressive
African languages
Possession
resultant, perfect, future
Engl.: have perfect
Manner
progressive
Ital.: 
sto mangiando
‘I stay eating’ (I’m eating)
Change of state
ingressive, future
Germ.: werden future
Volition
ingressive, future
Engl.: will future

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 2 7
uncovered, cognitive linguists should be well equipped to tackle these lin-
guistic phenomena as well.
Exercises
1. How do the conceptual meanings of GIVE and GRANT differ in the fol-
lowing examples? Try to interpret these conceptual and functional
changes in terms of grammaticalization.
Aunt Mable gave me a piece of cake.
We waited for him at the given place and time, but he didn’t come.
Given her youth, she is quite experienced in the field.
Given that he has lost all his money gambling, he is still surpris-
ingly optimistic.
Regrettably, the bank didn’t grant me the loan.
It’s an ingenious project, I grant you, but will it work?
Granted, it’s not a perfect cake, but it should be edible.
Granted (that) your grandfather was rich, why didn’t he pay for
your education?
2. Both the English suffixes -ly and -like are based on a common Germanic
root word meaning ‘appearance’, ‘form’, ‘body’. Compare pairs like
fishlike/fishy, foxlike/foxy and roomlike/roomy and decide where the
original category is still more vivid and what this means in terms of
grammaticalization.
3. Pidgin English, a kind of elementary language spoken in contact situ-
ations in various parts of the world, is said to represent an early stage
of grammaticalization, in which the source categories of grammatical
markers are still easily recognizable. Try to find out which English words
(and underlying categories) the following grammatical markers in
Cameroon Pidgin are based on:
go
(future marker)
don
(positive perfect marker)
neva
(negative perfect marker)
sei
(element introducing indirect speech)
fit
(modal auxiliary ‘can’)
mek
(element introducing polite imperatives)

 
3 2 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
4. If your native language is not English, find out which tense forms, modal
forms and ways of expressing possession are based on motion and action
schemas in your own language (see also Figure 7.11.).
7.4 Effects on foreign language teaching
Since many more people are engaged in teaching English than in linguistic analysis,
it is only natural that each new linguistic approach is soon examined for practical
applications, especially for foreign language teaching. This chapter tries to show how
some of the major aspects of cognitive linguistics discussed in this book either give
support to existing teaching methods or provide new ideas in the field of language
learning.
Surveying the cognitive-linguistic literature addressing aspects of foreign
language teaching, one gets the impression that cognitive linguistics
makes a twofold contribution to the field: it suggests new forms of
cognitive-experiential access to a foreign language through basic
level, metonymy and metaphor, figure and ground as well as gestalt, and
it provides insights into cognitive networks
based on these
approaches. This section draws together examples from various fields of
language teaching to support this claim. The first example is vocabulary
acquisition, where cognitive linguistics lends theoretical support to long-
standing, empirically developed teaching approaches.
Prototypes, basic level, conceptual hierarchies, metaphor
and the structure of lexical fields
It has always been a golden rule for teachers and textbook writers that the
vocabulary of a foreign language must be introduced gradually and with an
eye to the usefulness of the individual item. This has led to the establish-
ment of ‘frequency lists’ or ‘pedagogical vocabularies’, which are widely
taken into account by the authors of textbooks, readers and dictionaries
for foreign learners and are now even indicated in general dictionaries, as
the ‘Oxford 3000’ are in the OALD (2005). The systematic work on these
frequency lists goes back to the Interim Report on Vocabulary Selection, pub-
lished in 1936, but is more easily accessible in Michael West’s revised ver-
sion A General Service List of English Words (1953). Though the list was
based on a frequency count of word meanings in a collection of written
texts, West was fully aware of the fact that frequency alone was an insuf-
ficient yardstick for the vocabulary he had in mind. This judgement is fully

 
supported by the frequency lists culled from present-day computer corpora,
which are invariably headed by function words like the, of or and as well as
general lexical items used in high-frequency grammatical constructions (e.g.
time, place and way). To forestall these distortions, West used a number of
other criteria which, together with later additions from other sources, are
assembled in the following list:
• cover
• value for definitions and word-formation
• degree of stylistic neutrality
• availability (what first comes to mind)
• ease or difficulty of learning
For the cognitive linguist, most of these criteria are familiar; indeed, the
list reads like a description of the basic level categories discussed in Chapter 2.
Though West’s definition of our term ‘cover’ (‘covers a certain range of nec-
essary ideas’; West 1953: ix) still shows a certain weakness for superordinate
terms, the notion has since been overwhelmingly interpreted as referring to
basic level categories. The second criterion mirrors what we have found out
about the word-formation potential of basic level categories (cf. Schmid
1996a). Stylistic neutrality, the third principle, often goes hand in hand with
morphological simplicity, while availability is the major psychological crite-
rion of basic level categories, and ease of learning is related to the observation
that words for basic level categories are first acquired by children. All in all,
one may claim that what the compilers of frequency lists are after are, on the
whole, words for basic level items, or to put it the other way round, basic level
categories seem to provide the preferred access to a frequency vocabulary.
While the basic level of categorization may guide teachers and textbook
writers to choose the right kind of vocabulary, the prototype idea may be
helpful for decisions on how to introduce lexical items and their meanings.
The long-standing intuition that word meanings are easier to grasp if they
are illustrated with typical rather than exotic examples is confirmed by the
prototype theory of categorization. Undoubtedly, children learning English
will grasp the meaning of a lexeme like bird more quickly when they can
connect it to the corresponding prototype in their own language and cul-
ture. On the other hand, differences between the prototypes underlying super-
ficially corresponding words such as English bread, French pain and German
Brot, provide a good opportunity for raising the level of intercultural aware-
ness. The salience of prototypes is also reflected in the long-standing prac-
tice in textbooks to prefer prototypical examples of categories for illustrations
with pictures or simple line-drawings.18
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 2 9

 
3 3 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
A third aspect which is also fully accepted in language teaching is that
words should not be learned in isolation, but embedded in context as they
are used in natural communication. Yet introducing and practising every
word in a natural context is a very time-consuming procedure. This is why
there has been a long tradition of assembling words in lexical fields of related
meanings, based on the practical experience that this is a good base for
memorizing vocabulary items. After what has been said about cognitive net-
works in this book it is quite obvious that lexical fields are successfully
employed because they reflect the way our mental lexicon is structured. A
condition is that word fields are not restricted to specific word classes (nouns,
verbs, adjectives), as it was advocated by many structuralist linguists, but
cut across word classes drawing together all items that are semantically
related.
However, cognitive linguistics does not only provide justification for
the use of lexical fields, but it can also explain how they should be struc-
tured. Scrutinizing the vocabulary in a current textbook of English for
foreign learners and trying to arrange it in lexical fields, it is helpful to
think in terms of part–whole organization rather than taxonomic type-
of hierarchies (see Section 2.4). Compare Figure 7.12, which assembles
the frequency-filtered vocabulary items found in the first volume of Green
Line (so-called ‘classroom vocabulary’ like desk and blackboard has been
excluded).19 At a first glance, there seems to be a near-balance of lexical
fields based on the type-of and part–whole relationship, but this impres-
sion is deceptive. The reason is that the taxonomic models ANIMAL, CLOTHES,
FURNITURE and SPORTS (marked by an asterisk in Figure 7.12) could also qual-
ify as candidates of partonymic models. Most of the animals introduced
belong to a farmyard, clothes consist of various individual clothing items,
Taxonomic models 
Partonymic models 
(type-of relation)
(part–whole relation)
ANIMAL
12*
BODY
11
FOOD
17
HOUSE
8
CLOTHES
4*
NEIGHBOURHOOD
9
MEALS
2
PARTY
5
FURNITURE
6*
HOLIDAY
17
UTENSILS
3
TRANSPORT
15
SPORTS
10*
SHOPPING & SERVICES
12
PROFESSION
?
AUDIO & VISUAL MEDIA
15
Figure 7.12
Taxonomic and partonymic lexical fields on a textbook vocabulary
(Function words and ‘classroom vocabulary’ are not considered)

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 3 1
furniture can be seen as an assembly of tables, chairs, beds, etc., sports as a
realization of physical exercise with individual sporting activities as its parts.
In fact, this is why experienced textbook authors introduce the vocabulary
by exhausting the possibilities of part–whole links (as described in Section
2.4) before moving on to type-of relations. From a cognitive-linguistic angle
this preference for part–whole links is not surprising; it only reflects the sta-
tus of image schema assigned to the part–whole relationship (which also
plays a key role as metonymy and one of the vital relations of the blend-
ing theory; see Sections 3.4 and 6.1). What is also striking is that the words
for the superordinate concepts used as category labels (animal, body, house)
are already available for the partonymic models (apart from transport) in
the first year of teaching, while only a few type-of superordinates are intro-
duced that early, e.g. fruit, vegetable and toy. Other superordinates, espe-
cially abstract concepts, only crop up when the possibilities of basic level
vocabulary have been exhausted. Concepts like IDEA, FACT, ASPECT, ISSUE or
PROBLEM will be introduced at a later stage together with the discourse strate-
gies in which they are used.
Subordinate categories may be regarded as supplementary for the ordinary
learner, but they will be crucial in teaching English for Special Purposes.
The important thing is to find out whether specialists still start out from
what is usually regarded as basic level, or whether they have already estab-
lished a certain subordinate level as a new basic level to which the teacher
has to adapt his or her teaching. Quite obviously, a vocabulary training course
for foreign botanists or zoologists, for example, should not be concerned
with basic level terms like tree, flower, horse or bug, but employ a much finer
grid of terminological distinctions.
When it comes to facilitating access to abstract lexical items denoting,
for example, emotion concepts, the cognitive-linguistic insight that many
of them are rooted in conceptual metaphors can be exploited for language
teaching purposes. As claimed by Kövecses (2001: 93ff), pointing out the under-
lying metaphors to students can facilitate access to idioms; the assembly of
idioms expressing a related metaphor can help us to imagine the structure
of our conceptual system. The ‘networks’ constructed in this way also
include metaphorical expressions consisting of one word, which help to sup-
port the conceptualization of the target concept. Compare the list of +FIRE+
metaphors in Figure 7.13, which conceptualize a wide range of target con-
cepts including ANGER, LOVE, IMAGINATION, CONFLICT and ENTHUSIASM. Although
this is an interesting approach, it is yet somewhat difficult to assess the learn-
ing effects of this form of presentation.20

 
3 3 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
+ANGER IS FIRE+
After the row he was spitting fire.
He was doing a slow burn.
He’s smoldering with anger.
+LOVE IS FIRE+
She carries a torch for him.
The flames are gone from their 
relationship.
I’m burning with love.
+IMAGINATION IS FIRE+
The painting set fire to the composer’s 
imagination.
His imagination caught fire.
The story kindled the boy’s imagination.
+CONFLICT IS FIRE+
The killings sparked off the riot.
The flames of war spread quickly.
The country was consumed by the
inferno of war.
They extinguished the last sparks of the 
uprising.
+ENTHUSIASM IS FIRE+
The speaker fanned the flames of the
crowd’s enthusiasm.
Don’t be a wet blanket.
Her enthusiasm was ignited by the new
teacher.
Figure 7.13
A ‘network’ of idiomatic expressions and one-word items (in italics)
based on the +FIRE+ metaphor (after Kövecses 2001: 93ff)
Figure, ground and the teaching of prepositions 
and phrasal verbs
Just like prototypes, basic level, metonymy and metaphor, the notions of
figure and ground have always been essential components of cognitive-
linguistic thinking, and from the very beginning they have been linked to
the study of prepositions, in particular of prepositions expressing direction
such as in, out, up and down or across, over and under (compare Section 4.1).
From a teaching perspective the cognitive description of prepositions (and
their use as particles in phrasal verbs and idioms) can be instrumental for
facilitating both access to the wide variety of seemingly unrelated mean-
ings and the construction of corresponding networks. The juxtaposition of
figure and ground, or in Langacker’s terminology of trajector and landmark,
provides a tangible access to the topic, which can be supported by a wealth
of visualizations (see Figures 4.5 to 4.11 in Section 4.1); the network rep-
resentation of prepositional senses should have a beneficial effect in an area
of language use regarded as notoriously unordered.
Based on earlier cognitive research on prepositions, this network idea
was the background of a first cognitive-linguistic workbook on phrasal verbs
compiled in the 1990s by Rudzka-Ostyn;21 compare Figure 7.14, which illus-
trates her approach by way of an exemplary diagram covering the major
uses of across. A quick glimpse at the diagram already shows that it is prob-
ably not always easy to transfer this array of prepositional senses into a com-
municatively oriented teaching unit. The network of senses (and other more

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 3 3
        basic sense
(from A to B)
 running across the road
       
          ‘at the other side’
(sitting across the table from me)
                 ‘transfer’
(Teachers always see their 
pupils across the busy street)
       ‘make sb. identify sth.’
(Marketing is about putting across
      the qualities of a product)
‘make sb. accept and understand’
    (get ideas across to audience)
‘form impressions about 
    oncoming phenomena’
      (coming across as an
        intelligent person)
      ‘find or meet by chance’
(coming across an interesting book)
Figure 7.14
A network for (walk/get/put/come) across
based on Dirven (2001:19f)
specific networks proposed by cognitive linguists)22 may be helpful for the
design of pedagogical grammars (Dirven 2001: 20) and may provide insights
into the conceptual model underlying the diverse uses of prepositions and
particles. Yet in order to increase the practical value for language learners
on an intermediate level, the short-hand labels used in Figure 7.14 like ‘trans-
fer’ and ‘at the other side’ will have to be extended to the other senses, as
proposed by Tyler and Evans (2004). In addition, the descriptive labels should
be supported by specific visual representations of the trajector/landmark
contrast and equipped with iconic images like the oversize dot (compare
Figure 7.15) to indicate completion.
As Tyler and Evans (2004: 273) rightly claim, these representations
reflect ‘the gestalt-like conceptualizations of situations or scenes’. Holistic
conceptualization is further strengthened by a series of exercises, which they
suggest for the ‘normal interpretation’ and the completion sense of over. In
order to familiarize the learner with the A–B–C trajectory (see Figure 7.15,
box (a)) of the default sense, they propose to use a flip book or clips of
movies or cartoons depicting a cat jumping over a wall and to arrest the
sequence of pictures at various points to convey the different stages of the
movement expressed by over. By highlighting the final stage C of the jump
or of any other action, the completion sense of over can be introduced in
a natural way.

 
3 3 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
(a)
B
A
C
(
)
<(
)>
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.15
Diagrams of major senses of the preposition over
(Tyler and Evans 2004: 267ff) (a) normal interpretation, (b) transfer sense (with empty
source element), (c) completion sense (with inflated target element), (d) on-the-other-side sense (with
left-hand symbol of eye)
Although it may be difficult to agree with Tyler and Evans’s judgement
that this method is suitable for intermediate-level learners of English, who
might well find it a little primitive, this highly iconic visualization could be
profitably used in teaching Modern Languages at Primary Schools (MLPS).
The gestalt approach to grammatical issues 
and pre-grammatical learning
If the conceptualization of prepositions suggests a gestalt approach, there
are other areas of grammar where this holistic view could also be helpful.
One is the area of noun classes. Although it is common in English gram-
mars to distinguish between count and mass nouns, and assign nouns to
these rather abstract categories,23 the question is whether it is not much
more natural to approach nouns in terms of person and object concepts,
which can be experienced holistically as gestalts. Figure 7.16 provides a sketch
of this gestalt approach to noun grammar, indicating the types of concepts
to be distinguished and the grammatical features involved.
Like many other conceptual phenomena discussed in this book, the access
to noun grammar through person and object concepts is perhaps less sat-
isfactory intellectually than a clear-cut binary contrast, but it seems to reflect
the conceptual priorities guiding the native language user. This means that
the distinction between countable and uncountable items is only relevant

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 3 5
Figure 7.16
An approach to noun classification based on the distinction
between person and object categories
(Ungerer 2000b: 9ff, Ungerer et al. 2004: 7ff)
for object concepts (and there are borderline cases such as ‘collections of
things’), while person concepts are primarily subcategorized in terms of gen-
der. Another advantage is that the person/object approach has no problems
in accommodating group concepts (FAMILY, GOVERNMENT), where the two
grammatical criteria of countability and gender overlap. What remains a lit-
tle hazy, however, is how these subordinate concepts are related to each other
(e.g. both-sex concepts and groups, ‘pair’ objects and collections of things’),
but this indeterminacy of relationship is again a problem for linguists rather
than for the ordinary language user.
Turning to verb grammar, gestalt access might be claimed for a number
of grammatical phenomena often collected under the label of ‘signal gram-
mar’ in foreign language teaching. One of the best-known examples is the
British Standard use of past tense and present perfect, where the past tense
is said to be signalled by temporal concepts, as expressed in yesterday or
‘noun phrase + ago’. Similarly, the use of the simple form is said to be sparked
off by habitual concepts (always, often), whereas the progressive form is fre-
quently supported by the concept of simultaneity (at this moment, at pre-
sent). Admittedly, grammarians will quickly point at counterexamples for
each of these uses, but this does not cancel out the function fulfilled by
these signals as marking prototypes and therefore reference points for the
use of the respective tense and aspectual forms.
The question is whether the gestalt access can be transferred from these
rather simple phenomena to the more intractable areas of English gram-
mar. A good test case is the use of non-finite forms, which is dominated
Person concept
Object concept
MALE
FEMALE
INDIVIDUAL
SUBSTANCES
‘ABSTRACT
PERSON
PERSON
OBJECTS
SUBSTANCES’
uncle, waiter
aunt, waitress 
car, house 
milk, bread 
anger, advice
(male, sg. & pl.)
(female, sg. & pl.)
(sg. & pl.)
(only sg.)
information
(only sg.)
BOTH SEXES
GROUPS
‘PAIR’ OBJECTS
COLLECTIONS OF THINGS
friend, doctor,
family, police
shorts, scissors
furniture,
coach
(sg. + neuter &
(only plural)
luggage, clothes
(male & female,
pl. + male/female;
(only sg./only pl.)
sg. & pl.)
or: only pl. +
male/female) 

 
by isolated attempts to provide semantic explanations in traditional gram-
mar. Compare the following examples:
He wants to write a book about college 
‘intention’
dropouts.
I would like to take the weekend off.
‘concrete event’
I like to spend Sunday mornings in bed.
‘habit’
He is engaged in writing a book about 
‘ongoing activity’
college dropouts.
He remembers with some horror losing
‘past activity’
half his manuscript in a computer 
breakdown.
I like spending Sunday mornings in bed.
‘general statement’
Looking at the examples and the labels, one may indeed accept some of
them as signals for individual uses, yet this leaves the links between the
individual uses unexplained. What, one might ask, is the relationship
between ‘intention’ and ‘concrete event’, which are both offered for the infini-
tive, or between ‘past’ and ‘ongoing activity’ and ‘general statement’, all of
them used for the gerund? And to take the argument one step further, how
is ‘habit’ (infinitive) to be distinguished from ‘general statement’ (gerund)?
It is against this background that Dirven (1989) developed a unified sys-
tem based on what he regarded as two closely related cognitive ‘schemas’
(see Section 4.2 for the notion of schema); a simplified version, on which
our account partly relies, is provided by Taylor (1993: 210).24 As shown in
Figure 7.17, the various uses of the infinitive are subsumed under the mean-
ing that a situation is perceived in terms of individual instances. According
to Dirven and Taylor, this definition includes specific events as well as an
‘indefinite number of instances’, which is equivalent to the label ‘habit’ in
the introductory examples, while ‘intention’ is represented in Dirven and
Taylor’s account as ‘bringing about a new situation’. By extending this inter-
pretation the authors are able to include certain causative verbs (ask, tell,
persuade) and verbs of accomplishment (manage, try), which are not very
well covered by traditional explanations. The schema for the gerund (= ‘sit-
uation as such detached from single events’) may appear somewhat vague
at first sight, but it permits the inclusion of such diverse traditional notions
as ‘general’ and ‘ongoing activity’ (‘psychological experience of a situation’).
Yet how can this system be distinguished from the many attempts to
find umbrella terms for the disparate uses of infinitive and gerund con-
structions? This becomes more obvious when Dirven and Taylor’s schemas
are approached with the cognitive notion of gestalt in mind. Starting with
the definition of the gerund meaning (‘situation as such detached from single
3 3 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 3 7
to-infinitive complement
gerundial complement
SCHEMATIC MEANING
SCHEMATIC MEANING
to denote instances, or series of instances, 
to denote a situation as such detached from 
of a situation
single events
THIS INCLUDES
THIS INCLUDES
– specific particular event 
– a situation in general 
propose/be keen to jump from Tower Bridge
propose/be keen on swimming
– indefinite number of events 
– a situation that is considered a fact 
like to eat hamburgers
like eating hamburgers
FURTHER APPLICATIONS
FURTHER APPLICATIONS
– bringing about a new situation
–‘near reality’, i.e. an activity is due but 
not realized
want/intend to buy a dishwasher
avoid/postpone doing the dishes
– effort leading to an accomplishment 
– object of a mental activity 
manage/try to find a flat
consider/imagine being homeless
– influence and indirect causation 
– psychological experience of a situation 
advise/invite/permit someone to play 
enjoy/hate singing
a piece on the piano 
Figure 7.17
To-infinitive and gerund: schematic meaning and selected applica-
tions (based on Dirven (1989) and Taylor (1993: 210); examples added)
events’), the ‘detachment’ need not be seen as an abstraction from the con-
stituent events of the situation, but can be understood as a claim that the ‘sit-
uation’ is grasped holistically as a gestalt, as an intermediate stage between
what is expressed by a verb and a noun. Compared with this prototypical embod-
iment of gestalt, the infinitive meaning (‘instances or a series of instances of
a situation’) seems more specific, but does not really require an analytic decom-
position of a situation. In fact, the distinction between a situation as a whole
and the instance of a situation can still be experienced holistically, and this
is probably what happens in a native speaker’s mind when confronted with
the decision to choose a gerund or an infinitive construction.
Yet how can this conceptual distinction between a situation as a whole
and the instance of a situation be acquired by a foreign learner, in whose
native language this conceptual contrast is perhaps not grammatically rel-
evant (as is for instance the case in German)? What the foreign learner
would have to develop is this specifically ‘English’ holistic sensitivity for
the situation/instance contrast as part of their learning strategies; to design
suitable teaching material would obviously be a challenge for textbook writ-
ers and teachers, but one that might be worth the effort.
Summing up, there seem to be quite a number of grammatical decisions
that are facilitated by assuming a gestalt conceptualization. This is true
for grammatically relevant noun classes, and also for certain temporal and
aspectual concepts governing the use of verb forms. Whether this gestalt

 
3 3 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
approach works largely depends on how well the holistic conceptualization
underlying the foreign language use is already entrenched in the learner’s
‘native’ conceptualization. While a good ‘native’ grounding in many cul-
tures may be assumed for PERSON and OBJECT concepts, this is more doubtful
with regard to the SITUATION/INSTANCE contrast underlying the use of non-finite
verb forms, for which a conceptual sensitivity would have to be developed
in foreign language teaching.
However, gestalt conceptualization does not only apply to the way in which
grammatically relevant concepts are experienced. In fact, gestalt perception
can be seen as a condition for any non-analytical processing of linguistic input.
This is not just a matter of conceptualizing the meaning of non-transparent
phraseologisms (kick the bucket, white elephant, etc.), which are experienced as
single conceptual units. Quite ordinary sentences that could easily be analyzed
in terms of lexical constituents and grammatical functions seem to be con-
ceptualized holistically as ‘chunks’, i.e. in a pre-grammatical mode. This type
of conceptualization is typical in young children, who are better used to gestalts
than to analytical segmentation and composition. The extending of foreign
language teaching into these age groups means that gestalt perception has to
be considered as the major access route to the foreign language.
One consequence is that gestalt conceptualization can and should be used
as a yardstick to evaluate the extensive range of text-types proposed for teach-
ing primary-school English (simple role-plays and slapstick sketches, ABC
rhymes, counting-out rhymes, lullabies, riddles, proverbs, jokes, fairytales and
fables, etc.).25 In addition, the other cognitive criteria discussed, in particu-
lar the preference for basic level vocabulary and simple cognitive models based
on part–whole relationships, should be taken into account, and the same
goes for the easy approach offered to children by identifiable figures (in the
cognitive sense of the word), i.e. situations with prominent persons, animals
and objects.
Access, method and goal in foreign language learning
Returning to the two aspects of cognitive-experiential access and cognitive
network representation mentioned at the beginning of this section, it
should have become clear in the course of the discussion that cognitive
network representations, especially those connecting prepositional
senses and senses of non-finite structures, are more helpful for the curriculum
designer, the textbook author, or the teacher planning his teaching units than
for the learner involved in one of those units. By contrast, conceptual access
to the foreign language, for instance through basic level vocabulary, through

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 3 9
the figure and ground view of prepositional senses and through gestalt con-
ceptualization of temporal and aspectual concepts, seems to be geared to cer-
tain kinds of learning processes and also certain kinds of learning ages. How
does this fit into current theories of foreign language learning?
It is widely accepted that language teaching should focus on learning goals
(preferably the goals of communicative and intercultural competence) and
on learning strategies and teaching methods (with a clear bias for action-
oriented and learner-centred methods). What seems to be somewhat neglected
in this conception is that learning strategies promise to be more successful
if they are backed up by suitable cognitive access routes, as they can be inves-
tigated and described with the tools of cognitive linguistics. Considering this,
a modern theory of foreign language teaching that takes into account the
findings of cognitive linguistics could be constructed along the following lines:
• Goal: communicative, and ultimately, intercultural competence
• Method/strategy: action-oriented, learner-centred
• Access: cognitive-experiential access routes to the foreign language
through prototype, basic level, figure and ground, and gestalt.
Combining these three elements in the learning paradigm might prove fruit-
ful for foreign language teaching in general, but, as it has been suggested
in this chapter, it may well yield the most interesting results in the field of
primary-school English.
Exercises
1. Study the vocabulary list of an introductory textbook for English as a
foreign language (or part of it), arrange the items in part–whole lexical
fields and type-of fields and compare the results with Figure 7.12. If
there are differences, try to explain them.
2. Assemble idioms based on specific body parts and try to find situations
in which several of them can be used in natural communication. Ask
learners if they feel that this method reduced the learning effort.
3. Go through the illustrations of the prepositional meanings in Figures
4.5–4.12 (Section 4.1) and decide which of them might be helpful for
teaching purposes, which less so.
4. Some pedagogical grammars are organized in terms of syntactic patterns
(clauses consisting of subject, predicate and object expressed by nouns
and verbs, of main clauses and subordinate clauses, sentence types). Other
grammars are based on a grid of word classes, their meanings and their

 
3 4 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
functions (nouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, conjunc-
tions). Which structure is more convincing from a cognitive-linguistic
perspective?
5. Compare the following classification (based on Ungerer 2000b: 216ff)
with Dirven and Taylor’s proposal illustrated in Figure 7.17.
Major verb + infinitive constructions
1. Verb expressing intention/willingness/wish/request/order/permission
+ infinitive with future-oriented meaning
2. Verb expressing opinion/supposition/probability + infinitive expressing
probability
Major verb + gerund constructions
1. Verb expressing general/mental occupation + gerund expressing that
an action is taking place/has taken place
2. Verb expressing prevention/reaction/relation + gerund expressing that
something is regarded as a fact
Do you find the two approaches helpful for teaching and learning pur-
poses and which approach do you prefer?
6. Consider typical counting-out rhymes, lullabies, riddles, proverbs, jokes,
limericks, fairytales, fables, comics and examine them in terms of basic
level vocabulary items, ‘part–whole’ links between these items, simple
utterances that can be taken in as gestalts, a plot with clearly identifi-
able (conceptual) figures. Decide which text types are most suitable for
teaching English at primary-school level.
Suggestions for further reading
Section 7.1
1. The issue is discussed in Plato’s Cratylos dialogue (1998), which still
makes very good reading today, also for the non-philosopher.
2. See also Saussure (1985 [1913]) and Holdcroft’s (1991) discussion of
Saussure’s conception.
3. For a short overview of Peirce’s system see Nänny and Fischer (1999:
xxiff), for a more thorough account see Nöth (2000: 59–70). For the
basic distinction of icon, index and symbol see also Dirven and
Verspoor (2004, ch. 1).
4. For a discussion of diagrammatic iconicity and its subcategories see
Givón (1990: 968ff), who offers some very imaginative suggestions for a

 
O T H E R  I S S U E S  I N  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
3 4 1
wide range of applications of the iconicity principle. He also proposes
psychological and biological explanations of the major types of iconicity.
5. For the iconic interpretation of inflections see Bybee (1985) and Bybee
et al. (1994). For an overview of current research issues in the domain
of iconicity, see Nänny and Fischer (1999), Fischer and Nänny (2001),
Müller and Fischer (2003) and Maeder et al. (2005).
6. For an overview of sound symbolism, see Masuda (2002).
7. See Podhorodecka (forthcoming) for a discussion of sound symbolism
in children’s books.
8. For a more thorough analysis of Tennyson’s poem see Leech (1969: 98).
9. For more details on the path and the sorting-and-weighting strategy
discussed in the following, see Ungerer (forthcoming (b)), who also
proposes a third text strategy dubbed ‘kaleidoscope’ strategy.
10. Good examples of this ‘multimodal iconicity’ are performances,
combining, i.e. computer-animated motion sequences, dance
performances and rhythmically spoken text. See Moser
(forthcoming).
Section 7.2
11. Geeraerts (1992) provides a concise view of what is discussed in more
detail in Geeraerts and Grondelaers (1995). In particular Geeraerts dis-
tinguishes between the intensional level of analysis focusing on the
senses of the lexical item (which are related to our use of attribute) and
the extensional level focusing on what we describe as internal category
structure. See Geeraerts (1997: 17–26) for an introduction to his concep-
tion.
12. For other examples of this type of analysis see Schneider (1998:
29–48) on the development of HARVEST, GRASP and GLAD.
13. For the much rarer case of prototype merger see Geeraerts (1992).
Another cognitive issue that cannot be treated adequately is the
interpretation of a set of etymological roots in terms of metaphors.
Sweetser’s (1990, ch. 2) study of Indo-European verbs of perception is
a good example of this approach.
Section 7.3
14. See similar definitions of grammaticalization in Hopper and Traugott
(2003: xv). Generally this textbook provides an excellent overview of
the important aspects of the subject.

 
3 4 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
15. To choose just two of the many discussions of the topic, see Fischer
and Rosenbach (2000: 3f) and also Hopper and Traugott (2003: 1ff),
who advocate an analysis of the going-to grammaticalization in terms
of metonymy and metaphor, but also offer alternative explanations
(reanalysis and analogy, problem-solving explanation).
16. Heine’s earlier term was ‘proposition’, which was replaced in Heine
(1993) by ‘event schema’. However, following Talmy (see Sections 5.2
and 5.3) the same term is used in a different (and more cognitive)
way, and we have therefore opted for ‘propositional schema’. See
Heine (1993: 30f) for further details.
17. Heine’s conception also covers modal auxiliaries, which he derives
from more complex schemas. See Heine (1993: 27ff).
Section 7.4
For an overview of recent research in the field see the two collections
edited by Pütz et al. (2001) and Achard and Niemeier (2004).
18. On the use of visual elements in language teaching see for instance
Wright (2001) and Wright and Haleem (1995).
19. See Ungerer (2001) for methodological aspects and more details of the study.
20. The experiment summarized by Kövecses to test the success of his
method is devoted to phrasal verbs with the particles up and down
and is based on ‘up–down’ metaphors (which we would regard as
image schemas). See Kövecses (2001: 102ff).
21. Rudzka-Ostyn died before the workbook was completed for
publication. For a detailed account of its contents see Kurtyka (2001),
for a cognitive-linguistic evaluation see Dirven (2001: 17ff).
22. See Tyler and Evans (2004) on over, as well as Queller (2001) for the
uses of all over, and Chapter 4, reading note 4.
23. This distinction is also taken up by Langacker (1987a: 203f), who
regards the count/ mass contrast as a schema. Taylor (1993) also
sticks to this distinction, but introduces a more holistic view by
assuming the gestalt-like prototypes ‘thing’ and ‘substance’ for count
and mass nouns respectively.
24. The text provides only a selective account of Dirven’s (1989)
comprehensive description of verb complementation, which also
covers other non-finite constructions and finite clauses.
25. See the extensive list of text types in Schmid-Schönbein (2001: 86).

 
Conclusion
As it should have emerged in the course of this book, cognitive linguistics is not a
unified and monolithic theory, but rather a cluster of linguistic approaches sharing
underlying assumptions about the essence of language. Given the interdisciplinary
nature of most strands within cognitive linguistics it is not surprising that there are
ongoing endeavours to put linguistic theorizing on a safer psychological and
neurological footing. This final section summarizes some of these developments,
which cut across the chapters of this book, and relates them to current trends.
Originating in experimental work in cognitive psychology, as pursued by
Eleanor Rosch and others, prototype theory (including basic level theory)
has always had a psychological basis. Fundamental cognitive abilities like
perception and memory are undoubtedly involved in the selection of
prototypes, the gradation from good to bad category members (e.g. from
>ROBIN<, >SWALLOW< to >OSTRICH< and >PENGUIN< in the category BIRD) and the
fuzziness of category boundaries (e.g. between CUP and BOWL). While the the-
oretical status of prototypes is still somewhat contentious, hovering as it
does between the status of best example and cognitive reference point (see
Section 1.2), there seems to be little controversy about the psychological
salience and importance of the basic level, as long as its dependence on
context and cultural models is acknowledged. What must be questioned,
however, is the strong traditional focus on type-of (or taxonomic) concep-
tual hierarchies (e.g. JEEP – CAR – VEHICLE – MOVABLE OBJECT). As we have shown
in Section 2.3, part–whole relations, such as TYRE – WHEEL – BODY – CAR – TRAFFIC,
are probably equally important; they are often more tangible than taxonomic
relationships and seem to play a more decisive role in structuring cognitive
models in our memory. The primacy of part–whole relations is also notice-
able in the formation of perceptual and conceptual gestalts and in language

 
3 4 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
acquisition and should also be reflected in foreign language learning (see
Section 7.4).
While gestalt psychology is of course not a particularly recent inven-
tion, its central claims concerning gestalt perception and figure/ground dis-
tribution are still widely accepted in cognitive psychology. The notion of
gestalt has been successfully applied in a variety of areas ranging from pro-
totype formation, where for instance a prototype chair is characterized by
the presence of its part in optimally functional proportions (see Section 1.3),
to image schemas and to prepositional meanings, which have been shown
to reflect diverse constellations of figure and ground (see Section 4.1). The
basic principle behind these phenomena seems to be the urge to produce
holistic, rather than decomposed, analytical, experiences that reduce the cog-
nitive effort and thus contribute to cognitive economy and efficiency of
conceptual processing, including conceptual blending. Gestalt properties can
also be attributed to the units posited by Construction Grammar, which
range in size from short idioms (let alone, him be a doctor?) to whole clause
patterns, such as the caused-motion and cause-receive constructions (see
Section 5.4). Fundamental clause patterns like these have been claimed to
be based on experiential event-frames and to be stored as ready-made
chunks in long-term memory alongside the latter. In this context it is inter-
esting to note that there is a growing body of work indicating that con-
structions also play a crucial role in language acquisition (Tomasello 2003).
Figure/ground effects and the distribution of attention in perception and
language are also the key to the notion of perspective, which lies at the
heart of the prominence approach and the frame-and-attention approach
(outlined in Chapters 4 and 5 respectively) and is involved in the catego-
rization of organisms, objects and events in the world around us. It is a
long-standing truism that for any ‘objectively’ given situation, speakers have
a basically unlimited choice of options both on the lexical and the gram-
matical level – compare, for example, the sentences The dog chased a rabbit
and The rabbit tried to escape our terrier through a small hole in the fence describ-
ing the same event. What cognitive-linguistic work has brought to the fore,
however, is that decisions concerning the specificity of categories (e.g. DOG
vs TERRIER), the allocation of syntactic figure and ground (the dog vs the rab-
bit as subject) or the opening of ‘windows’ of attention (through a small hole
in the fence) may result in dissimilar conceptions of the scene described.
Event-frames and image schemas are not only based on figure/ground seg-
regation and other principles of perception and attention, but are assumed
to have a grounding in our bodily experience. In fact the embodiment-of-
language thesis pervades a number of approaches in cognitive linguistics,

 
C O N C L U S I O N
3 4 5
most prominently in the area of conceptual metaphor theory. The starting
point was the relatively modest claims of early cognitive metaphor research
(Lakoff 1987: 380ff, esp. 406–8) that emotion concepts are tied to certain
physiological symptoms by way of metonymy (+BODY HEAT STANDS FOR ANGER+)
and that meaning in general may be rooted in bodily experienced image
schemas like ‘up’ and ‘down’ or ‘in and ’out’ (Johnson 1987; see Section 3.2).
This explains, among other things, the striking similarity of figurative expres-
sion in this domain in totally unrelated languages and cultures.
In Lakoff and Johnson’s Philosophy in the Flesh (1999), and in many more
recent publications and statements, bodily roots have been claimed for large
parts of our conceptual system and abstract thinking. In line with the slo-
gan in neuroscience ‘neurons that fire together wire together’ (Lakoff and
Johnson 2003: 256) the ‘neural theory of metaphor’ claims that when an
abstract concept is understood metaphorically, two sets of neurons are acti-
vated in the brain (Gallese and Lakoff 2005, Kövecses 2005: 23–6). What is
more, when two neural structures are repeatedly activated together, the
connections tend to grow stronger – which gives us an assumed neurolog-
ical correlate of the entrenchment of conceptual metaphors.
Not only metaphors but also conceptual blends (see Sections 6.1 to
6.3) are said to have a neurological foundation. Indeed, Fauconnier and Turner
(2002: V) argue that it was the emerging ability for blending different men-
tal spaces that allowed humans to gain the upper hand over competing species
from the Upper Paleolithic onwards, since this ability gave them the imag-
ination required to invent new concepts, tools and means of communication
(among them language). Undoubtedly, hypothetical reasoning, as expressed
in if-clauses, presupposes the capacity to compare imagined possible future
events to previously experienced ones and arrive at possible outcomes by blend-
ing aspects like cause and effect. Conceptual blending has a close counterpart
in neurological theory in the notion of binding, which refers to a basic neu-
rological process necessary even for the most mundane perceptual tasks. While
there are different types and groups of receptors and brain areas involved
in the perception of, for example, lines, corners, colours, shades of bright-
ness or texture, it is in the process of binding that these diverse inputs are
integrated to form a holistic perceptual experience of, say, a baseball cap
(see Kolb and Wishaw 2003: 239ff).
Essentially, ‘traditional’ cognitive-linguistic work is concerned with cog-
nitive aspects of the system of a language and its speakers’ competence.
However, since the increasing recognition of conceptual-blending theory in
the late 1990s, more attention has been devoted to the procedural and con-
textual aspects of language use (see the interpretation of Ballacktic, cherry

 
3 4 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
jeans, Pisa and also of ads, riddles and jokes in Sections 6.2 and 6.3). This
focus on on-going language processing and its open-ended nature in
actual language use has brought cognitive linguistics closer to pragmatic
approaches which stress the context-dependence and indeterminacy of
understanding. As was made clear in our short survey of Relevance Theory
in Section 6.4, we believe that there could be a fruitful exchange of ideas
between cognitively minded pragmatics and cognitive thinking.
Like all interdisciplinary undertakings, the cognitive-linguistic enterprise
is undoubtedly enriched and strengthened by constantly widening its scope
and joining forces with neighbouring fields within the cognitive sciences –
and even with evolutionary biology (Givón 2005). But it also faces the pit-
falls of most interdisciplinary work, among them, for example, the danger
that the full complexity of psychological, neurological and biological issues
and debates gets lost in the unavoidably selective borrowing of insights from
these fields. No matter how cognitive linguists will manage to deal with
this dilemma in the future, what seems uncontroversial at this stage is that
the cognitive approach to language is definitely here to stay and will have
a lasting impact on how linguists theorize about language.

 
References
Achard, Michel and Susanne Niemeier, eds (2004), Cognitive Linguistics, Second
Language Acquisition, and Foreign Language Teaching, Berlin; New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Aitchison, Jean (2003), Words in the Mind: An Introduction to the Mental Lexicon,
3rd edn, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Akman, Varol, Paolo Bouquet, Richmond Thomason, Roger A. Young, eds (2001),
Modeling and Using Context. Third International and Interdisciplinary
Conference, CONTEXT 2001, Dundee, UK, July 2001: Proceedings,
Berlin: Springer.
Allerton, David (1982), Valency and the English Verb, London: Academic Press.
Anderson, John (1971), The Grammar of Case: Towards a Localist Theory,
London.
Armstrong, Sharon L., Lila R. Gleitman and Henry Gleitman (1983), ‘What
some concepts might not be’, Cognition 13, 263–308.
Aske, Jon (1989), ‘Path predicates in English and Spanish: a closer look’,
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics
Society, Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Linguistics Society, 1–14.
Attardo, Salvatore, ed. (2003), ‘The Pragmatics of Humor’. Special issue of
Journal of Pragmatics, 35.
Attardo, Salvatore (2001), Humorous Texts: A Semantic and Pragmatic Analysis,
Berlin; New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Barcelona, Antonio (2003), ‘Metonymy in cognitive linguistics: an analysis
and a few modest proposals’ in Cuyckens et al. (2003), 223–55.

 
Barcelona, Antonio, ed. (2000), Metaphor and Metonymy at the Crossroads. A
Cognitive Perspective, Berlin; New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Barsalou, Lawrence W. (1982), ‘Context-independent and context-dependent
information in concepts’, Memory and Cognition 10, 82–93.
Barsalou, Lawrence W. (1987), ‘The instability of graded structure: implica-
tions for the nature of concepts’ in Ulric Neisser, ed., Concepts and
Conceptual Development: Ecological and Intellectual Factors in Categorization,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 101–40.
Barthes, Roland (1977), Image Music Text, London: Fontana Press.
Bauer, Laurie (1983), English Word-Formation,
Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bechtel, William and Adele Abrahamsen (2002), Connectionism and the
Mind: An Introduction to Parallel Processing in Networks, 2nd edn,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Bencini, Giulia and Adele E. Goldberg (2000), ‘The contribution of argu-
ment structure constructions to sentence meaning’, Journal of Memory
and Language 43, 640–51.
Berlin, Brent and Paul Kay (1969), Basic Color Terms: Their universality and
evolution, Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Berlin, Brent, Dennis Breedlove and Peter Raven (1973), ‘General principles
of classification and nomenclature in folk biology’, American
Anthropologist 75, 214–42.
Berlin, Brent, Dennis Breedlove and Peter Raven (1974), Principles of Tzeltal
Plant Classification, New York: Academic Press.
Berman, Ruth and Dan I. Slobin (1994), Relating Events in Narrative: A
Crosslinguistic Developmental Study, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Black, Max (1949), Language and Philosophy, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Black, Max (1962), Models and Metaphors, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Black, Max (1993), ‘More about metaphor’ in Ortony (1993), 19–41.
Blakemore, Diane (1992), Understanding Utterances, Oxford: Blackwell.
Bouquet, Paolo, Luciano Serafini, Patrick Brézillon, Massimo Benerecetti and
Francesca Castellani, eds (1999), Modeling and Using Context. Second
International and Interdisciplinary Conference, CONTEXT ’99, Trento,
Italy, September 1999: Proceedings, Berlin: Springer.
3 4 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S

 
R E F E R E N C E S
3 4 9
Boyd, Richard (1993), ‘Metaphor and theory change: What is “metaphor”
a metaphor for?’ in Ortony (1993), 481–532.
Broccias, Cristiano (2004), Review of Fauconnier and Turner (2002), Cognitive
Linguistics 15, 575–88.
Brown, Cecil H. (1990), ‘A survey of category types in natural language’ in
Tsohatzidis (1990), 17–47.
Brown, Roger (1958), ‘How shall a thing be called?’, Psychological Review 65,
14–21.
Brown, Roger (1965), Social Psychology, New York: Free Press.
Brown, Roger and Eric H. Lenneberg (1954), ‘A study in language and cog-
nition’, Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 49, 454–62.
Brugman, Claudia M. (1981), The story of Over, Trier: LAUT.
Brugman, Claudia M. (1988), The story of Over: Polysemy, Semantics, and the
Structure of the Lexicon, New York; London: Garland.
Brugman, Claudia M. (1990), ‘What is the invariance hypothesis?’,
Cognitive Linguistics 1, 257–66.
Bybee, Joan (1985), ‘Diagrammatic iconicity in stem-inflection relations’ in
Hàiman (1985), 11–48.
Bybee, Joan, Evere Perkins and William Pagliuca (1994), The Evolution of
Grammar: Tense, Aspect, and Modality in the Languages of the World,
Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Cain, A.J. (1958), ‘Logic and memory in Linnaeus’s system of taxonomy’,
Proceedings of the Linnaen Society of London 169, 144–63.
Clark, Herbert H. and Eve H. Clark (1977), Psychology and Language: An
Introduction to Psycholinguistics, New York: Harcourt Brace.
COBUILD Sinclair, John M. et al. (1987), Collins COBUILD English Language
Dictionary, Landen: Collins.
COD Pearsall, Judy, ed. (1999), The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Current English,
10th edn, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Coleman, Linda and Paul Kay (1981), ‘Prototype semantics: the English word
LIE’, Language 57, 26–44.
Coulson, Seana (2001), Semantic Leaps: Frame Shifting and Conceptual Blending
in Meaning Construction, Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.
Coulson, Seana (in press), ‘What’s so funny?: conceptual blending in
humorous examples’ in Vimala Herman, ed., The Poetics of Cognition: Studies

 
3 5 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
of Cognitive Linguistics and the Verbal Arts, Cambridge; New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Coulson, Seana and Todd Oakley (2000), ‘Blending basics’, Cognitive
Linguistics 11, 175–96.
Coulson, Seana and Todd Oakley (2003), ‘Metonymy and conceptual
blending’ in Panther and Thornburg (2003), 51–79.
Coulson, Seana and Todd Oakley (2005), ‘Blended and coded meaning: lit-
eral and figurative meaning in cognitive semantics’, Journal of Pragmatics
37, 1510–36.
Craig, Collette, ed. (1986), Noun Classes and Categorization, Amsterdam;
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Croft, William (1993), ‘The role of domains in the interpretation of
metaphors and metonymies’, Cognitive Linguistics 4, 335–70.
Croft, William (2001), Radical Construction Grammar: Syntactic Theory in
Typological Perspective, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Croft, William (2005), ‘Logical and typological arguments for radical con-
struction grammar’ in Östman and Fried (2005b), 273–314.
Croft, William and D. Allan Cruse (2004), Cognitive Linguistics, Cambridge;
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cruse, D. Allan (1986), Lexical Semantics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cruse, D. Allan (2000), Meaning in Language, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cuyckens, Hubert (1991), The Semantics of Spatial Prepositions in Dutch: A
Cognitive-Linguistic Exercise, Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Antwerp.
Cuyckens, Hubert, Thomas Berg, René Dirven and Klaus-Uwe Panther, eds
(2003), Motivation in Language: Studies in Honor of Günter Radden,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Dancygier, Barbara and Eve Sweetser (1997), ‘Then in conditional con-
structions’, Cognitive Linguistics 8, 109–36.
Davitz, Joel (1969), The Language of Emotion, New York: Academic Press.
Dirven, René (1989), ‘A cognitive perspective on complementation’ in
Dany Jaspers, Wim Klooster, Yvan Putseys and Peter Seuren, eds,
Sentential Complementation and the Lexicon: Studies in honour of Wim de
Geest, Dordrecht: Foris, 113–39.
Dirven, René (1999), ‘Conversion as a conceptual metonymy of event
schemata’ in Panther and Radden (1999), 275–87.

 
R E F E R E N C E S
3 5 1
Dirven, René (2001), ‘English phrasal verbs; theory and didactic applications’
in Pütz et al. (2001), 3–27.
Dirven, René and John Taylor (1988), ‘The conceptualization of vertical space
in English: the case of Tall’ in Rudzka-Ostyn (1988), 379–407.
Dirven, René, Louis Goossens, Yvan Putseys and Emma Vorlat (1982), The
Scene of Linguistic Action and its Perspective by SPEAK, TALK, SAY and TELL,
Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Dirven, René, Roslyn Frank and Martin Pütz, eds (2003), Cognitive Models
in Language and Thought: Ideology, Metaphors and Meanings, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Dirven, René and Ralf Pörings, eds (2002), Metaphor and Metonymy in
Comparison and Contrast, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Dirven, René and Johan Vanparys, eds (1995), Current Approaches to the
Lexicon. A Selection of Papers presented at the 18th LAUD Symposium,
Duisburg, March 1993, Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
Dirven, René and Marjolijn Verspoor, eds (2004), Cognitive Explorations in
Language and Linguistics, 2nd edn, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Dixon, Robert M.W. (1977), ‘Where have all the adjectives gone?’, Studies
in Language 1, 19–80.
Elbers, Loekie (1988), ‘New names from old words: related aspects of children’s
metaphors and word compounds’, Journal of Child Language 15, 591–617.
Eysenck, Michael W. and Mark Keane (2002), Cognitive Psychology: A
Student’s Handbook, 4th edn, Hove: Psychology Press.
Fauconnier, Gilles (1996), ‘Analogical counterfactuals’ in Fauconnier and
Sweetser (1996), 57–90.
Fauconnier, Gilles (1997), Mappings in Thought and Language, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Fauconnier, Gilles (2003), ‘Pragmatics and cognitive linguistics’ in Horn and
Ward (2003), 657–74.
Fauconnier, Gilles and Mark Turner (1996), ‘Blending as a central process
of grammar’ in Adele Goldberg, ed. Conceptual Structure, Discourse, and
Language, Stanford: Center for the Study of Language and Information,
113–29.
Fauconnier, Gilles and Mark Turner (1998), ‘Conceptual integration networks’,
Cognitive Science 22 (2), 133–87.

 
3 5 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Fauconnier, Gilles and Mark Turner (2002), The Way We Think: Conceptual
Blending and the Mind’s Hidden Complexities, New York: Basic Books.
Fauconnier, Gilles and Eve Sweetser, eds (1996), Spaces, Worlds and Grammars,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Fehr, Beverley and James A. Russell (1984), ‘Concept of emotion viewed from
a prototype perspective’, Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
113, 464–86.
Fillmore, Charles C. (1968), ‘The case for case’ in E. Bach and R.T. Harms,
eds, Universals in Linguistic Theory, London: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1–88.
Fillmore, Charles C. (1975), ‘An alternative to checklist theories of meaning’
in C. Cogen, H. Thompson, G. Thurgood and K. Whistler, eds,
Proceedings of the Berkeley Linguistic Society, Berkeley: Berkeley Linguistics
Society, 123–31.
Fillmore, Charles C. (1976), ‘The need for a frame semantics within linguistics’,
Statistical Methods in Linguistics, 5–29.
Fillmore, Charles C. (1977a), ‘Topics in lexical semantics’ in R.W. Cole, ed.,
Current Issues in Linguistic Theory, Bloomington; London: Indiana
University Press, 76–138.
Fillmore, Charles C. (1977b), ‘The case for case reopened’ in P. Cole and
J.M. Sadock, eds, Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 8: Grammatical Relations,
New York; San Francisco; London: Academic Press, 59–81.
Fillmore, Charles C. (1982), ‘Towards a descriptive framework for spatial deixis’
in R.J. Jarvella and W. Klein, eds, Speech, Place and Action, Chichester:
John Wiley and Sons, 31–59.
Fillmore, Charles C. (1985), ‘Frames and the semantics of understanding’,
Quaderni di Semantica VI, 222–54.
Fillmore, Charles C. (1999), ‘Inversion and constructional inheritance’ in
Gert Webelhuth, Jean-Pierre Koenig and Andreas Kathol, eds, Lexical
and Constructional Aspects of Linguistic Explanations, Stanford, CA:
Stanford University, 113–28.
Fillmore, Charles C. and Beryl T. Atkins (1992), ‘Toward a frame-based lex-
icon: the semantics of RISK and its neighbors’ in Adrienne Lehrer and
Eva Kittay, eds, Frames, Fields, and Contrasts, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Assoc., 75–102.
Fillmore, Charles J., Paul Kay and Mary Catherine O’Connor (1988),

 
R E F E R E N C E S
3 5 3
‘Regularity and idiomaticity in grammatical constructions: the case of
let alone’, Language 64, 501–38.
Fischer, Kerstin and Anatol Stefanowitsch (2006), ‘Konstruktionsgrammatik:
Ein überblick’ in Kerstin Fischer and Anatol Stefanowitsch, eds,
Konstruktionsgrammatik. Van der Anwendung zur Theorie, Tübingen: 
Stauffenberg.
Fischer, Olga and Anette Rosenbach (2000), ‘Introduction’ in Olga Fischer,
Anette Rosenbach and Dieter Stein, eds, Pathways of Change:
Grammaticalization in English, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 1–37.
Fischer, Olga and Max Nänny, eds (2001), The Motivated Sign. Iconicity in
Language and Literature, Vol. 2, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Fontanelle, Thierry, ed. (2003), ‘FrameNet and frame semantics’, International
Journal of Lexicography 16 (3).
Foolen, Ad and Frederike van der Leek, eds (2000), Constructions in Cognitive
Linguistics. Selected Papers from the Fifth International Cognitive
Linguistic Conference, Amsterdam 1997, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Forceville, Charles (1998), Pictorial Metaphor in Advertising, London: Routledge.
Frajzyngier, Zygmunt (1995), ‘A functional theory of complementizers’ in
Joan Bybee, and Suzanne Fleischman, eds, Modality in Grammar and
Discourse, Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 473–502.
Frajzyngier, Zygmunt and Robert Jasperson (1991), ‘That-clauses and other
complements’, Lingua 83, 133–53.
Fried, Mirjiam and Jan-Ola Östman, (2004a), ‘Construction grammar: a
thumbnail sketch’ in Fried and Östman (2004b), 11–86.
Fried, Mirjiam and Jan-Ola Östman, eds (2004b), Construction Grammar in a
Cross-Linguistic Perspective, Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Gallese, Vittorio and George Lakoff (2005), ‘The brain’s concepts: the role
of the sensory-motor system in conceptual knowledge’, Cognitive
Neuropsychology 2,455–79.
Geeraerts, Dirk (1988a), ‘Prototypicality as a prototypical notion’,
Communication and Cognition 21, 343–55.
Geeraerts, Dirk (1988b), ‘Where does prototypicality come from?’ in
Rudzka-Ostyn (1988), 207–29.
Geeraerts, Dirk (1990), ‘The lexicographical treatment of prototypical poly-
semy’ in Tsohatzidis (1990), 195–210.

 
3 5 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Geeraerts, Dirk (1992), ‘Prototypicality effects in diachronic semantics: a
round-up’ in Günter Kellermann and Michael D. Morrissey, eds
(1992), Diachrony within Synchrony: Language History and Cognition. Papers
from the International Symposium at the University of Duisburg,
26–28 March 1990, Frankfurt, Main: Peter Lang, 183–205.
Geeraerts, Dirk (1993), ‘Vagueness’s puzzles, polysemy’s vagaries’, Cognitive
Linguistics 4, 223–72.
Geeraerts, Dirk (1997), Diachronic Prototype Semantics: A Contribution to
Historical Lexicology, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Geeraerts, Dirk and Stefan Grondelaers (1995), ‘Looking back in anger: cul-
tural traditions and metaphorical patterns’ in Taylor and MacLaury
(1995), 153–79.
Geeraerts, Dirk, Stefan Grondelaers and Peter Bakema (1994), The Structure
of Lexical Variation: A Descriptive Framework for Cognitive Lexicology, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Geiger, Richard A. and Barbara Rudzka-Ostyn, eds (1993), Conceptualization
and Mental Processing in Language, Berlin; New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Gentner, Dedre (1982), ‘Are scientific analogies metaphors?’ in David S. Miall,
ed., Metaphor: Problems and Perspectives, Sussex: The Harvester Press.
Gentner, Dedre and Michael Jeziorski (1993), ‘The shift from metaphor to
analogy in Western science’ in Ortony (1993), 447–80.
Gentner, Dedre and Albert. L. Stevens, eds (1983), Mental Models, Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc.
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr. (1994), The Poetics of Mind: Figurative Thought,
Language, and Understanding, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr (1999), ‘Speaking and thinking with metonymy’ in
Panther and Radden (1999), 61–76.
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr (2000), ‘Making good psychology out of blending
theory’, Cognitive Linguistics 11, 347–58.
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr and Herbert L. Colston (1995), ‘The cognitive psy-
chological reality of image schemas and their transformations’,
Cognitive Linguistics 6, 347–78.
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr and Gerald Steen, eds (1999), Metaphor in Cognitive
Linguistics.
Selected Papers from the 5th International Cognitive
Linguistics Conference. Amsterdam, July 1997. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.

 
R E F E R E N C E S
3 5 5
Givón, Talmy (1990), Syntax: A Functional-Typological Introduction, Vol. 2,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Givón, Talmy (2005), Context as Other Minds, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Goddard, Cliff and Anna Wierzbicka, (2004), ‘Cultural scripts: what are they
and what are they good for?’, Intercultural Pragmatics 1–2, 153–66.
Goldberg, Adele E. (1995), Constructions: A Construction Grammar Approach
to Argument Structure, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goossens, L. (1990), ‘Metaphthonymy: the interaction of metaphor and
metonymy in expressions for linguistic action’, Cognitive Linguistics 1,
322–40.
Gordon, Ian E. (2004), Theories of Visual Perception, 3rd edn, Hove: Psychology
Press.
Grady, Joseph E. (1997), ‘THEORIES ARE BUILDINGS Revisited’, Cognitive
Linguistics 8, 267–90.
Grady, Joseph E. (1999) ‘Typology and motivation for conceptual metaphor:
correlations vs. resemblance’ in Gibbs and Steen (1999), 79–100.
Grady, Joseph E. (2005), ‘Primary metaphors as inputs to conceptual inte-
gration’, Journal of Pragmatics 37, 1595–614.
Grady, Joseph E. and Ch. Johnson (2002), ‘Converging evidence for the
notions of subscene and primary scene’ in Dirven and Pörings (2002),
533–54.
Grady, Joseph E., Todd Oakley and Seana Coulson (1999), ‘Blending and
metaphor’ in Gibbs and Steen (1999), 101–24.
Greenbaum, Sidney and Randolph Quirk (1992), A Student’s Grammar of the
English Language, London: Longman.
Grice, H. P. (1975), ‘Logic and conversation’ in Peter Cole and Jerry L. Morgan,
eds, Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 3: Speech Acts, New York: Academic Press,
41–58.
Haiman, John, ed. (1985), Iconicity in Syntax, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Halliday, Michael A.K. (2004), An Introduction to Functional Grammar, 3rd
edn, London: Edward Arnold.
Halliday, Michael A.K. and Ruqaiya Hasan (1989), Language, Context, and
Text: Aspects of Language in a Social-Semiotic Perspective, 2nd edn,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hampe, Beate (2005), ‘On the role of iconic motivation in conceptual

 
3 5 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
metaphor: has metaphor theory come full circle?’ in Maeder et al. (2005),
39–66.
Hampton, James A. (1979), ‘Polymorphous concepts in semantic memory’,
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 18, 441–61.
Heider, Eleanor R. (1971), ‘ “Focal” color areas and the development of color
names’, Developmental Psychology 4, 447–55.
Heider, Eleanor R. (1972), ‘Universals in color naming and memory’,
Journal of Experimental Psychology 93, 10–20.
Heider, Eleanor R. and D.C. Oliver (1972), ‘The structure of the color space
in naming and memory for two languages’, Cognitive Psychology 3,
337–45.
Heine, Bernd (1993), Auxiliaries. Cognitive Forces and Grammaticalization, New
York; Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heine, Bernd, Ulrike Claudi and Friederike Hünnemeyer (1991),
Grammaticalization: A Conceptual Framework,
Chicago; London:
University of Chicago Press.
Herbst, Thomas, David Heath, Ian F. Roe and Dieter Götz (2004), A Valency
Dictionary of English: A Corpus-based Analysis of the Complementation
Patterns of English Verbs, Nouns and Adjectives, Berlin; New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Heyvaert, Liesbet (2003), A Cognitive–Functional Approach to Nominalization
in English, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Holdcroft, David (1991), Saussure. Signs, System, and Arbitrariness,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Holland, Dorothy and Naomi Quinn, eds (1987), Cultural Models in
Language and Thought, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hopper, Paul J. and Elizabeth C. Traugott (2003), Grammaticalization, 2nd
edn, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Horn, Laurence R. and Gregory Ward, eds (2003), Handbook of Pragmatics,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Hüllen, Werner and Rainer Schulze, eds (1988), Understanding the Lexicon:
Meaning, Sense and World Knowledge in Lexical Semantics, Tübingen:
Niemeyer.
Hunn, Eugene S. (1975), ‘A measure of degree of correspondence of folk to
scientific biological classification’, American Ethnologist 2, 309–27.

 
R E F E R E N C E S
3 5 7
Hunn, Eugene S. (1977), Tzeltal Folk Zoology: The Classification of
Discontinuities in Nature, New York: Academic Press.
Johnson, Mark (1987), The Body in the Mind: The Bodily Basis of Meaning,
Imagination, and Reason, Chicago; London: University of Chicago
Press.
Johnson-Laird, Philip N. (1983), Mental Models, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Johnson-Laird, Philip N. and Keith Oatley (1989), ‘The language of emo-
tions: an analysis of a semantic field’, Cognition and Emotion 3, 81–123.
Johnson-Laird, Philip N. and Keith Oatley (1992), ‘Basic emotions, rationality
and folk theory’, Cognition and Emotion 6, 201–23.
Kager, René (1999), Optimality Theory, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Katz, Jerrold and Paul Postal (1964), An Integrated Theory of Linguistic
Descriptions, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kay, Paul (1971), ‘Taxonomy and semantic contrast’, Language 47, 866–87.
Kay, Paul (1999), ‘Color appearance and the emergence and evolution of
basic color lexicons’, American Anthropologist 101, 743–60.
Kay, Paul (2003), ‘Pragmatic aspects of grammatical constructions’ in Horn
and Ward (2003), 675–700.
Kay, Paul and Charles J. Fillmore (1999), ‘Grammatical constructions and
linguistic generalizations: the What’s X doing Y?
construction’,
Language 75, 1–33.
Kay, Paul and Chad K. McDaniel (1978), ‘The linguistic significance of the
meanings of basic color terms’, Language 54, 610–46.
Kemmer, Suzanne (2003), ‘Schemas and lexical blends’ in Cuyckens et al.
(2003), 69–97.
Kempton, Willett (1987), ‘Two theories of home control’ in Holland and
Quinn (1987), 222–42.
Kerrigan, John (1986), The Sonnets and a Lover’s Complaint, London: The New
Penguin Shakespeare.
King, D. Brett and Michael Wertheimer (2005), Max Wertheimer and Gestalt
Theory, New Brunswick: Transaction Publisher.
Kirkpatrick, Betty (1852; 1987), Roget’s Thesaurus of English Words and
Phrases, London: Longman.

 
3 5 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Kleiber, Georges (1998), La sémantique du prototype: Catégories et sens lexical,
2ème ed., Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.
Knowles, Elizabeth, ed. (1997), The Oxford Dictionary of New Words, Oxford;
New York: Oxford University Press.
Koestler, Arthur (1964), The Act of Creation, New York: Macmillan.
Koffka, Kurt (2002 [1935]), Principles of Gestalt Psychology, reprint, London:
Routledge.
Köhler, Wolfgang (1992), Gestalt Psychology: An Introduction to New Concepts
in Modern Psychology, reissued, New York: Liveright.
Kolb, Brian and Ian Q. Wishaw (2003), Fundamentals of Human
Neuropsychology, 5th edn, New York: Worth Publishers.
Kövecses, Zoltán (1990), Emotion Concepts, New York: Springer.
Kövecses, Zoltán (1991), ‘Happiness: a definitional effort’, Metaphor and
Symbolic Activity 6: 29–46.
Kövecses, Zoltán (1995), ‘Anger: its language, conceptualization, and phys-
iology in the light of cross-cultural evidence’ in Taylor and MacLaury
(1995), 181–96.
Kövecses, Zoltán (2000), Metaphor and Emotion: Language, Culture, and Body
in Human Feeling, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán (2001), ‘A cognitive linguistic view of learning idioms in
an FLT context’ in Pütz et al. (2001), 87–115.
Kövecses, Zoltán (2002), Metaphor. A Practical Introduction, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán (2005), Metaphor in Culture: Universality and Variation,
Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kövecses, Zoltán and Günter Radden (1998), ‘Metonymy: developing a cog-
nitive linguistic view’, Cognitive Linguistics 9, 37–77.
Kuhn, Thomas S. (1993), ‘Metaphor in science’ in Ortony (1993), 533–42.
Kurtyka, Andrzej, (2001), ‘Teaching English phrasal verbs: a cognitive
approach’ in Pütz et al. (2001), 29–54.
Labov, William (1973), ‘The boundaries of words and their meaning’ in
Charles-James N. Bailey and Roger W. Shuy, eds, New ways of Analyzing
Variation in English, Washington DC: Georgetown University Press,
340–73.
Labov, William (1978), ‘Denotational structure’ in Donka Farkas, Wesley M.

 
R E F E R E N C E S
3 5 9
Jacobsen and Karol W. Todrys, eds, Papers from the Parasession on the
Lexicon, Chicago: Chicago Linguistics Society, 220–60.
Lakoff, George (1986), ‘Classifiers as a reflection of mind’ in Craig (1986),
13–51.
Lakoff, George (1987), Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things. What Categories
Reveal About the Mind, Chicago; London: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, George (1990), ‘The Invariance Hypothesis: is abstract reason based
on image-schemas?’, Cognitive Linguistics 1, 39–74.
Lakoff, George (1992) ‘Metaphor and war: the metaphor system used to jus-
tify war in the gulf’ in Pütz (1992), 463–81.
Lakoff, George (1993), ‘The contemporary theory of metaphor’ in Ortony
(1993), 202–51.
Lakoff, George (1996), ‘Sorry, I’m not myself today: the metaphor system for
conceptualizing the self’ in Fauconnier and Sweetser (1996), 91–123.
Lakoff, George (2002), Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think,
2nd edn, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, George (2003), ‘Metaphor and war, again’. Alter Net. Available at
http://www.alternet.org/story/15414/, posted 18 March, 2003.
Lakoff, George (2004), Don’t Think of a White Elephant: Know Your Values
and Frame the Debate, White River Junction, Vermont: Chelsea Green
Publishing.
Lakoff, George and Mark Johnson (1980/2003), Metaphors We Live By, 2nd
edn with a new afterword, Chicago; London: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, George and Mark Johnson (1999), Philosophy in the Flesh: The
Embodied Mind and its Challenge to Western Thought, New York: Basic Books.
Lakoff, George and Mark Turner (1989), More Than Cool Reason: A Field Guide
to Poetic Metaphor, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Lambrecht, Knud (2004), ‘On the interaction of information structure and
formal structure in constructions: the case of French right-detached
comme-N’ in Fried and Östman (2004b), 157–99.
Langacker, Ronald W. (1987a), Foundations of Cognitive Grammar, Vol. I:
Theoretical Prerequisites, Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.
Langacker, Ronald W. (1987b), ‘Nouns and verbs’, Language 63, 53–94.
Langacker, Ronald W. (1990), ‘Settings, participants, and grammatical rela-
tions’ in Tsohatzidis (1990), 213–38.

 
3 6 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Langacker, Ronald W. (1991), Foundations of Cognitive Grammar, Vol. II:
Descriptive Application, Stanford, California: Stanford University Press.
Langacker, Ronald W. (1992), ‘The symbolic nature of cognitive grammar:
the meaning of of and of of-periphrasis’ in Pütz (1992), 483–502.
Langacker, Ronald W. (1993), ‘Reference-point constructions’, Cognitive
Linguistics 4, 1–38.
Langacker, Ronald W. (1995), ‘Raising and transparency’, Language 71, 1–62.
Langacker, Ronald W. (2000), Grammar and Conceptualization, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Langacker, Ronald W. (2001), ‘Discourse in cognitive grammar’, Cognitive
Linguistics 12, 143–88.
Langacker, Ronald W. (2002), Concept, Image, and Symbol: The Cognitive Basis
of Grammar, 2nd edn, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
LDOCE2 Summers, Della et al. (1987), Longman Dictionary of Contemporary
English, 2nd edn, London: Longman.
LDOCE4 Summers, Della et al. (2005), Longman Dictionary of Contemporary
English, 4th edn, London: Longman.
Leech, Geoffrey N. (1969), A Linguistic Guide to English Poetry, London:
Longman.
Leech, Geoffrey N. (1981), Semantics: The study of Meaning, 2nd edn,
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Lehrer, Adrienne (1996), ‘Identifying and interpreting blends: an experimental
approach’, Cognitive Linguistics 7, 359–90.
Leisi, Ernst (1985), Praxis der englischen Semantik, 2. Aufl., Heidelberg: Winter.
Lenneberg, Eric H. (1967), Biological Foundations of Language, New York: Wiley.
Lindner, Susan J. (1982), ‘A lexico-semantic analysis of English verb par-
ticle constructions with out and up’, PhD Dissertation, San Diego,
University of California.
Lipka, Leonhard (1987), ‘Prototype semantics or feature semantics: an alter-
native?’ in W. Lörscher and R. Schulze, eds, Perspectives on Language in
Performance: Studies in Linguistics, Literary Criticism, and Language
Teaching and Learning, Tübingen: Narr, 282–98.
Lipka, Leonhard (1988), ‘A rose is a rose is a rose: on simple and dual cate-
gorization in natural languages’ in Hüllen and Schulze (1988), 355–66.
Lipka, Leonhard (1995), ‘Lexicology and lexicography: poor relations, com-
petition, or co-operation?’ in Dirven and Vanparys (1995), 381–403.

 
R E F E R E N C E S
3 6 1
Lipka, Leonhard (2002), English Lexicology: Lexical Structure, Word Semantics
and Word-Formation, Tübingen: Narr.
LLCE McArthur, Tom, (1981), Longman Lexicon of Contemporary English,
Harlow: Longman.
Lyons, John (1977), Semantics, 2 vols, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Lyons, John (1981), Language, Meaning and Context, Bungay, Suffolk: Fontana.
Maeder, Costantino, Olga Fischer and William J. Herlofsky, eds (2005), Outside-
in – inside-out. Iconicity in Language and Literature, Vol. 4, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Malblanc, Alfred (1977), Stylistique comparée du français et de l’allemand, 5ème
edn, Paris: Didier.
Mandelblit, Nili (2000), ‘The grammatical marking of conceptual integra-
tion: from syntax to morphology’, Cognitive Linguistics 11, 197–251.
Masuda, Keiko (2002), ‘A phonetic study of sound symbolism’. Unpublished
PhD dissertation, Cambridge University.
Mayer, Mercer (1969), Frog, Where Are You?, New York: Dial Press.
Mayer, Richard E. (1993), ‘The instructive metaphor: metaphoric aids to stu-
dents’ understanding of science’ in Ortony (1993), 561–78.
McArthur, Tom (1981), Longman Lexicon of Contemporary English, London:
Longman (= LLCE).
McArthur, Tom (1986), Worlds of Reference, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
McCloskey, Michael (1983), ‘Naive theories of motion’ in Gentner and Stevens
(1983), 299–324.
Medin, Douglas L. Brian H. Ross and Arthur B. Markman (2001), Cognitive
Psychology, 3rd edn, Hoboken: Wiley.
Meillet, Antoine (1912; 1921), Linguistique historique et linguistique générale,
Paris: Champion.
Mervis, Caroline B. and Eleanor Rosch (1981), ‘Categorization of natural
objects’, Annual Review of Psychology 32, 89–115.
Minsky, Marvin (1975), ‘A framework for representing knowledge’ in P. H.
Winston, ed., The Psychology of Computer Vision, New York: McGraw-
Hill, 211–7.
Moser, Sibylle (forthcoming), ‘Iconicity in multimedia performance’ to

 
3 6 2
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
appear in: Elsbieta Tabakowska and Christina Ljungberg, eds, Iconicity
in Language and Literature, Vol. 5, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Müller, Wolfgang G. and Olga Fischer, eds (2003), From Sign to Signing. Iconicity
in Language and Literature, Vol. 3, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Murphy, Gregory L. (1988), ‘Comprehending complex concepts’, Cognitive
Science 12, 529–62.
Musolff, Andreas (2001), ‘The metaphorization of European politics: move-
ment on the road to Europe’ in Musolff, Andreas, Colin Good, Petra
Points and Ruth Wittlinger, eds, Attitudes towards Europe: Language in
the Unification Process, Aldershot: Ashgate, 179–200.
Nänny, Max and Olga Fischer, eds (1999), Form Miming Meaning. Iconicity
in Language and Literature, Vol. 1, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Nerlich, Brigitte, David D. Clarke and Zazie Todd (2002), ‘ “Mummy, I like
being a sandwich”. Metonymy in language acquisition’ in Dirven and
Pörings (2002), 361–83.
Newman, John (1996), Give: A Cognitive-Linguistic Study, Berlin; New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Niemeier, Susanne (1998), ‘Colourless green ideas metonymise furiously’.
Rostocker Beiträge zu Sprachwissenschaft 5, 119–46.
Niemeier, Susanne und René Dirven, eds (2000), Evidence for Linguistic
Relativity, Vol. I, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Nöth, Winfried (2000), Handbuch der Semiotik, 2nd edn, Stuttgart: Metzler.
OALD Wehmeier, Sally, ed. (2005), The Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary
of Current English, 7th edn, Oxford University Press.
OED Simpson, J.A. and E.S.C. Weiner, eds (1991), The Oxford English
Dictionary, 2nd edn, Oxford: clarendon Press.
Ortony, Andrew, ed. (1993), Metaphor and Thought, 2nd edn, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ortony, Andrew, Gerald L. Clore and Allan Collins (1988), The Cognitive
Structure of Emotions, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Östman, Jan-Ola (2005), ‘Construction discourse: a prolegomenon’ in Öst-
man and Fried (2005b), 121–44.
Östman, Jan-Ola and Mirjam Fried (2005a), ‘The cognitive grounding of con-
struction grammar’ in Östman and Fried (2005b), 1–13.

 
R E F E R E N C E S
3 6 3
Östman, Jan-Ola and Mirjam Fried, eds (2005b), Construction Grammars:
Cognitive Grounding and Theoretical Extensions, Amsterdam; Philadelphia:
John Benjamins.
Panther, Klaus-Uwe and Günter Radden, eds (1999), Metonymy in Language
and Thought, Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Panther, Klaus-Uwe and Linda Thornburg (1999), ‘The potentiality for
actuality metonymy in English and Hungarian’ in Panther and Radden
(1999), 333–57.
Panther, Klaus-Uwe and Linda Thornburg, eds (2003), Metonymy and
Pragmatic Inferencing, Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Plato (1998) Cratylus, transl. by C.D.C. Reeves, Indianapolis: Hackett.
Podhorodecka, Joanna (forthcoming), ‘Is lámatyáve a lingustic heresy?
Iconicity in J.R.R. Tolkien’s invented languages’ to appear in Elsbieta
Tabakowska and Christina Ljungberg, eds, Iconicity in Language and
Literature, Vol. 5, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Putnam, Hilary (1981), Reason, Truth and History, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Pütz, Martin, ed. (1992), Thirty Years of Linguistic Evolution, Amsterdam;
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Pütz, Martin ed. (2000), Evidence for Linguistic Relativity, Vol. II, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Pütz, Martin, Susanne Niemeier, and René Dirven, eds (2001), Applied
Cognitive Lingustics II: Language Pedagogy, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Queller, Kurt (2001) ‘A usage-based approach to modeling and teaching the
phrasal lexicon’ in Pütz et al. (2001), 55–83.
Quine, Willard V.O. (1960), Word and Object, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Quinn, Naomi (1987), ‘Convergent models for a cultural model of
American marriage’ in Holland and Quinn (1987), 173–92.
Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech and Jan Svartvik
(1985), A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language, London;
New York: Longman.
Radden, Günter (1989), ‘Figurative use of prepositions’ in René, Dirven,
Wolfgang Zydatiss and Willis J. Edmondson., eds (1989), A User’s
Grammar of English, Frankfurt: Lang, 551–76.

 
3 6 4
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Radden, Günter (1992), ‘The cognitive approach to natural language’ in Pütz
(1992), 513–41.
Radden, Günter and Zoltán Kövecses (1999), ‘Towards a theory of metonymy’
in Panther and Radden (1999), 17–59.
Radford, A. (1988), Transformational Grammar, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Raskin, Victor (1985), Semantic Mechanisms of Humor, Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Richards, Ivor A. (1936), The Philosophy of Rhetoric, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Rifkin, Anthony (1985), ‘Evidence for a basic level in event taxonomies’,
Memory and Cognition 13, 538–56.
Rosch, Eleanor (1973), ‘On the internal structure of perceptual and seman-
tic categories’ in Timothy E. Moore, ed., Cognitive Development and the
Acquisition of Language, New York; San Francisco; London: Academic
Press, 111–44.
Rosch, Eleanor (1975), ‘Cognitive representations of semantic categories’,
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 104, 193–233.
Rosch, Eleanor (1977), ‘Human categorization’ in Neil Warren, ed., Studies
in Cross-Cultural Psychology, Vol. I, London: Academic Press, 1–49.
Rosch, Eleanor (1978), ‘Principles of categorization’ in Eleanor Rosch and
Barbara B. Lloyd, eds, Cognition and Categorization, Hillsdale, NJ; NY:
Lawrence Erlbaum, 27–48.
Rosch, Eleanor (1988), ‘Coherence and categorization: a historical view’ in
F.S. Kessel, ed., The Development of Language and Language Researchers.
Essays in Honor of Roger Brown, Hillsdale, NJ; NY: Lawrence Erlbaum,
373–92.
Rosch, Eleanor and Caroline B. Mervis (1975), ‘Family resemblances: studies
in the internal structure of categories’, Cognitive Psychology 7, 573–605.
Rosch, Eleanor, Caroline B. Mervis, Wayne D. Gray, David M. Johnson and
Penny Boyes-Braem (1976), ‘Basic objects in natural categories’,
Cognitive Psychology 8, 382–439.
Roth, Emilie M. and Edward J. Shoben (1983), ‘The effect of context on the
structure of categories’, Cognitive Psychology 15, 346–78.
Rudzka-Ostyn, Brygida, ed. (1988), Topics in Cognitive Linguistics, Amsterdam;
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

 
R E F E R E N C E S
3 6 5
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibañez, Francisco José (2000), ‘The role of mappings and
domains in understanding metonymy’ in Barcelona (2000), 109–32.
Sandikcioglu, Esra (2000), ‘More metaphorical warfare in the gulf: orientalist
frames in news coverage’ in Barcelona (2000), 299–320.
Saussure, Ferdinand de (1985 [1913]), Cours de linguistique générale. Paris:
Edition Payot.
Schank, Roger C. and Roger P. Abelson (1977), Scripts, Plans, Goals and
Understanding, Hillsdale, NJ; NY: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Schmid, Hans-Jörg (1993), Cottage and Co., Idea, Start vs. Begin: Die
Kategorisierung als Grundprinzip einer differenzierten Bedeutungsbeschreibung,
Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Schmid, Hans-Jörg (1996a), ‘Basic level categories as basic cognitive and lin-
guistic building blocks’ in Edda Weigand and Franz Hundsnurscher, eds,
Lexical Structure and Language Use. Proceedings of the International
Conference on ‘Lexicology and Lexical Semantics’, Münster 1994,
Tübingen: Niemeyer, 285–95.
Schmid, Hans-Jörg (1996b), ‘The historical development and present-day use
of the noun idea as documented in the OED and other corpora’,
Poetica 47, 87–128.
Schmid, Hans-Jörg (1996c), Review of Geeraerts et al. (1994), Lexicology 2,
78–84.
Schmid, Hans-Jörg (2000), English Abstract Nouns as Conceptual Shells: From
Corpus to Cognition, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Schmid, Hans-Jörg (2003), ‘Introduction: context and cognition – a concern
shared by the cognitive sciences’ in Ewald Mengel, Hans-Jörg Schmid
and Michael Steppat, eds, Anglistentag 2002 Bayreuth: Proceedings, Trier:
Wissenschaftlicher Verlag Trier, 363–7.
Schmid, Hans-Jörg (2005), Englische Morphologie und Wortbildung: Eine
Einführung, Berlin: Erich Schmidt.
Schmid, Hans-Jörg (forthcoming), ‘Entrenchment, salience and basic levels’
in Dirk Geeraerts and Hubert Cuyckens, eds, Handbook of Cognitive
Linguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schmid, Hans-Jörg and Karina Kopatsch (forthcoming), ‘Alienation or
adaptation? A cognitive-semantic study of Nigerian English words in
comparison with American English, Hausa and Fulfulde’. 

 
3 6 6
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Schmid-Schönbein, Gisela (2001), Didaktik: Grundschulenglisch.
Berlin:
Cornelsen.
Schneider, Kristina (1998), ‘Prototypentheorie und Bedeutungswandel: die
Entwicklung von HARVEST, GRASP
und GLAD’, Rostocker Beiträge zur
Sprachwissenschaft 5, 29–48.
Schön, Donald (1993), ‘Generative metaphor: a perspective on problem solv-
ing social policy’ in Ortony (1993), 137–63.
Schulze, Rainer (1988), ‘A short story of down’ in Hüllen and Schulze
(1988), 395–414.
Searle, John R. (1979), Expression and Meaning, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Searle, John R. (1975), ‘Indirect speech acts’ in Peter Cole and Jerry L. Morgan,
eds, Syntax and Semantics. Volume 3, 59–82.
Seto, Ken-ichi (1999), ‘Distinguishing metonymy from synecdoche’ in
Panther and Radden (1999), 91–120.
Shaver, Phillip, Judith Schwartz, Donald Kirson and Cary O’Connor (1987),
‘Emotion knowledge: further exploration of a prototype approach’, Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 52, 1061–86.
Sinha, Chris, ed. (1995), ‘Special issues on spatial language and cognition’,
Cognitive Linguistics 6, 1–3.
Slobin, Dan I. (1996), ‘Typology and rhetoric: verbs of motion in English
and Spanish’ in Masayoshi Shibatani and Sandra A. Thompson, eds,
Grammatical Constructions: Their Form and Meaning, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Slobin, Dan I. (2004), ‘The many ways to search for a frog: linguistic typology
and the expression of motion events’ in Strömquist, S and I. Verhoeven,
eds, Relating Events in Narrative: Typological and Contextual Perspectives.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 219–57.
Slobin, Dan I. (2005), ‘Linguistic representation of motion events: what is
signifier and what is signified?’ in Maeder et al. (2005), 307–22.
Smith, Edward E. (1978), ‘Theories of semantic memory’ in W.K. Esters, ed.,
Handbook of Learning and Cognitive Processes, Vol. 6, Potomac, MD.
Smith, Edward E. and Douglas L. Medin (1981), Categories and Concepts,
Cambridge, MA; London: Harvard University Press.
Smith, Edward E., Daniel N. Osherson, Lance J. Rips and Margaret Keane

 
R E F E R E N C E S
3 6 7
(1988), ‘Combining prototypes: a selective modification model’,
Cognitive Science 12, 485–527.
Sperber, Dan and Deirdre Wilson (1995), Relevance. Communication and
Cognition, 2nd edn, Oxford: Blackwell.
Springer, Ken and Gregory Murphy (1992), ‘Feature availability in concep-
tual combinations’, Psychological Science 3, 111–17.
Steen Gerard, (1994), Understanding Metaphor in Literature: An Empirical
Approach, London: Longman.
Stein, Gabriele (1991), ‘Illustrations in dictionaries’, International Journal of
Lexicography 4, 99–127.
Stern, Joseph (1999), Metaphor in Context, Cambridge, MA; London: MIT Press.
Stuessy, Tod F. (1990), Plant Taxonomy: The Systematic Evaluation of
Comparative Data, New York: Columbia University Press.
Sweetser, Eve E. (1990), From Etymology to Pragmatics: Metaphorical and Cultural
Aspects of Semantic Structure, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sweetser, Eve E. (1996), ‘Mental spaces and the grammar of conditional con-
structions’ in Fauconnier and Sweetser (1996), 318–33.
Sweetser, Eve E. (1999), ‘Compositionality and blending: semantic composi-
tion in a cognitively realistic framework’ in Theo Janssen and Gisela
Redeker, eds (1999), Cognitive Linguistics: Foundations, Scope and
Methodology, Berlin; New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 129–62.
Talmy, Leonard (1985), ‘Lexicalization patterns: Semantic structure in lex-
ical forms’ in Timothy Shoper, ed., Language typology and syntactic descrip-
tion, vol. 3, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 36–149.
Talmy, Leonard (1991), ‘Path to realization: a typology of event conflation’,
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley
Linguistics Society, Berkeley: Berkeley Linguistic Society, 480–519.
Talmy, Leonard (2000), Toward a Cognitive Semantics, 2 vols., Cambridge,
MA; London: MIT Press.
Taylor, John R. (1988), ‘Contrasting prepositional categories: English and
Italian’ in Rudzka-Ostyn (1988), 299–326.
Taylor, John R. (1993), ‘Some pedagogical implications of cognitive gram-
mar’ in Geiger and Rudzka-Ostyn (1993), 201–26.
Taylor, John R. (2002), Cognitive Grammar, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, John R. (2003), Linguistic Categorization, 3rd edn, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

 
3 6 8
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Taylor, John R. and Robert E. MacLaury, eds (1995), Language and the
Cognitive Construal of the World, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Tesnière, Lucien (1959), Eléments de syntaxe structurale, Paris: Librairie C
Klincksieck.
Thornburg, Linda and Klaus-Uwe Panther (1997), ‘Speech act metonymies’
in Wolf Andreas Liebert, Gisela Redeker and Linda Waugh, eds, Discourse
and Perspectives in Cognitive Linguistics, Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
205–19.
Tomasello, Michael (2003), Constructing a Language: A Usage-Based Theory of
Language Acquisition, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tsohatzidis, Savas L., ed. (1990), Meanings and Prototypes: Studies on Linguistic
Categorization, Oxford: Routledge.
Tuggy, David (1993), ‘Ambiguity, polysemy, and vagueness’, Cognitive
Linguistics 4, 273–90.
Turner, Mark (1993), ‘An image-schematic constraint on metaphor’ in
Geiger and Rudzka-Ostyn (1993), 291–306.
Turner, Mark and Gilles Fauconnier (1995), ‘Conceptual integration and for-
mal expression’, Journal of Metaphor and Symbolic Activity 10 (3), 183–204.
Tversky, Barbara (1990), ‘Where partonomies and taxonomies meet’ in
Tsohatzidis (1990), 334–44.
Tversky, Barbara and Kathleen Hemenway (1984), ‘Objects, parts, and cat-
egories’, Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 113, 169–93.
Tyler, Andrea and Vyvyan Evans (2004), ‘Applying cognitive linguistics to
pedagogical grammar: the case of over’ in Achard and Niemeier (2004),
257–80.
Ullmann, Stephen (1957), The Principles of Semantics, 2nd edn, Oxford;
Glasgow: Basil Blackwell.
Ullmann, Stephen (1962), Semantics: An Introduction to the Science of
Meaning, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Ungerer, Friedrich (1994), ‘Basic level concepts and parasitic categorization:
an alternative to conventional semantic hierarchies’, Zeitschrift für
Anglistik und Amerikanistik 42, 148–62.
Ungerer, Friedrich (1995), ‘The linguistic and cognitive relevance of basic
emotions’ in René Dirven and Johan Vanparys, eds, Current Approaches
to the Lexicon, Frankfurt Main: Peter Lang, 185–209.

 
R E F E R E N C E S
3 6 9
Ungerer, Friedrich (1999), ‘Iconicity in word-formation’ in Nänny and
Fischer (1999), 307–24.
Ungerer, Friedrich (2000a), ‘Muted metaphors and the activation of
metonymies in advertising’ in Barcelona (2000), 321–40.
Ungerer, Friedrich (2000b), Englische Grammatik heute, Stuttgart: Klett.
Ungerer, Friedrich (2001), ‘Basicness and conceptual hierarchies in foreign
language learning’ in Pütz et al. (2001), 201–21.
Ungerer, Friedrich (2002), ‘The conceptual function of derivational word-
formation in English’, Anglia 120, 534–67
Ungerer, Friedrich (forthcoming (a)),‘Derivational morphology and word-
formation’ in Dirk Geeraerts and Hubert Cuyckens, eds, Handbook of
Cognitive Linguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ungerer, Friedrich (forthcoming (b)), ‘Iconic text strategies: path, sorting &
weighting, kaleidoscope’ to appear in Elsbieta Tabakowska and
Christina Ljungberg, eds, Iconicity in Language and Literature, Vol. 5.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ungerer, Friedrich and Hans-Jörg Schmid (1998), ‘Englische Komposita und
Kategorisierung’, Rostocker Beiträge zur Sprachwissenschaft 5, 77–98.
Ungerer, Friedrich, Peter Pasch, Peter Lampater and Rosemary Hellyer-Jones
(2004), A Guide to Grammar, new edn, Stuttgart: Klett.
van Dijk, Teun (1981), Studies in the Pragmatics of Discourse, The Hague:
Mouton.
van Dijk, Teun (1999), ‘Context models in discourse processing’ in Herre
van Oostendorp and Susan R. Goldman, eds, The Construction of Mental
Representations during Reading,
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 123–48.
Vandeloise, Claude (1994), ‘Methodology and analyses of the preposition
in’, Cognitive Linguistics 5, 157–84.
Verschueren, Jef (1985), What People Say They Do with Words: Prolegomena to
an Empirical–Conceptual Approach to Linguistic Action, Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Vinay, J.-P. and J. Darbelnet (1975), Stylistique comparée du français et de
l’anglais, nouvelle édition, Paris: Didier.
West, Michael (1953), A General Service List of English Words, London:
Longman.
Wierzbicka, Anna (1985), Lexicography and Conceptual Analysis, Ann Arbor:
Karoma.

 
3 7 0
A N  I N T R O D U C T I O N  T O  C O G N I T I V E  L I N G U I S T I C S
Wierzbicka, Anna (1986), ‘Human emotions: universal or culture specific?’,
American Anthropologist 88, 584–94.
Wierzbicka, Anna (1988), ‘The semantics of emotions: fear and its relatives
in English,’ Australian Journal of Linguistics 10, 359–75.
Wilkinson, Peter R. (1993), Thesaurus of Traditional English Metaphors,
London; New York: Routledge.
Wilson, Deirdre and Dan Sperber (2003), ‘Relevance theory’ in Horn and
Ward (2003), 607–32.
Wilson, John (1990), Politically Speaking: The Pragmatic Analysis of Political
Language, Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1958), Philosophical Investigations, transl. by G.E.M.
Anscobe, 2nd edn, Oxford: Blackwell.
Wright Andrew (2001), Pictures for Language Learning.
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Wright Andrew and Safia Haleem (1995), Visuals for the Language
Classroom, London: Longman.
Yantis, Steven, ed. (2001), Visual Perception: Essential Readings, Philadelphia:
Psychology Press.

 
Abelson, R.P. 214–16, 254
Abrahamsen, A. 63
Achard, M. 342
Aitchison, J. 45, 60, 62, 90, 113, 132
Akman, V. 62
Allerton, D.J. 204
Anderson, J. 255
Armstrong, S.L. 42, 44
Aske, J. 255
Atkins, B.T. 210, 254
Attardo, S. 299
Barcelona, A. 130, 159–61
Barsalou, L.W. 11, 63
Barthes, R. 281
Bauer, L. 112
Bechtel, W. 63
Bencini, G. 256
Berlin, B. 8–10, 12f, 60, 67, 69f, 73,
102, 111
Berman, R, 238, 255
Black, M. 19–21, 116, 118, 253, 
307, 312
Blakemore, D. 299
Bouquet, P. 62
Boyd, R. 147f, 150, 161
Breedlove, D. 67
Broccias, C. 265
Brown, C. 41, 80, 110f
Brown, R. 8, 67, 70, 72
Brugman, C.M. 160, 168, 204, 247
Bybee, J. 341
Cain, A.J. 110
Clark, E.H. 60
Clark, H.H. 60
Coleman, L. 42, 101f
Colston, H.L. 112
Coulson, S. 112, 259, 271, 288, 
297–9
Croft, W. 59–62, 89, 111f, 159–61, 205,
252, 255f
Cruse, D.A. 59–62, 88f, 111–13, 159–61,
205, 256
Cuyckens, H. 203
Dancygier, B. 298
Darbelnet, J. 231, 234, 242f, 255
Davitz, J. 134
Dirven, R. 60, 63, 107, 155, 161f, 217,
254, 333, 336f, 340, 342
Dixon, R.M.W. 113
Elbers, L. 159
Evans, V. 333f, 342
Eysenck, M.W. 254
Fauconnier, G. 5, 160, 257–60, 262–7,
269, 279, 283–5, 288, 295, 
297–9, 345
Fehr, B. 42, 140, 161
Fillmore, C.C. 5, 113, 181, 204, 207–11,
217, 229, 245, 250–2, 254–6
Fischer, O. 340, 342
Fontanelle, T. 254
Foolen, A. 256
Forceville, C. 298
Frajzyngier, Z. 256
Frank, R. 63, 245, 275f, 280
Fried, M. 256
Gallese, V. 345
Geeraerts, D. 59–62, 111, 113, 138, 
313, 320, 341
Gentner, D. 63, 161f
Gibbs, R.W. Jr. 112, 159, 162, 265
Index of persons

 
Kuhn, T.S. 148f, 161
Kurtyka, A. 342
Labov, W. 20–2, 33–6, 60, 101f
Lakoff , G. 4, 41f, 59–63, 104, 109f,
112f, 117–19, 121–4, 128, 133,
135f, 142f, 150–2, 159–62, 168,
171, 173, 189, 204f, 247, 298, 345
Lambrecht, K. 256
Langacker, R.W. 5, 48, 61–3, 98, 112f,
118, 139, 145f, 176–84, 186,
188–202, 204–6, 210f, 254, 256,
332, 342
Leech, G.N. 61, 112, 115f, 159f, 307, 341
Lehrer, A. 268, 298
Leisi, E. 63
Lenneberg, E.H. 8, 10
Lindner, S.J. 168, 171
Lipka, L. 53, 61f, 111–13, 159f
Lyons, J. 58, 60f, 111
Malblanc, A. 255
Mandelblit, N. 259, 298
Markman, A.B. 60, 62, 254
Masuda, K. 306, 308, 341
Mayer, M. 238
Mayer, R. 162
McArthur, T. 110f
McCloskey, M. 56
McDaniel, C.K. 14, 60
Medin, D.L. 60–2, 254
Meillet, A. 321
Mervis, C.B. 29, 31, 33f, 42, 61, 
111, 146
Minsky, M. 213, 218
Moser, S. 341
Murphy, G.L. 112
Musolff , A. 162
Nänny, M. 340
Nerlich, B. 159
Newman, J. 204
Niemeier, S. 60, 132, 342
Nöth, W. 340
Oakley, T. 259, 297
Oliver, D.C. 60
Ortony, A. 161
Östman, J.-O. 256
Givón, T. 256, 299, 302, 304, 346
Goddard, C. 161
Goldberg, A.E. 5, 245–9, 253, 255f
Goossens, L. 161
Gordon, I.E. 61, 204
Grady, J.E. 160, 297
Greenbaum, S. 191
Grice, H.P. 201, 299
Grondelaers, S. 138
Haleem, S. 342
Halliday, M.A.K. 47, 204, 206
Hampe, B. 160
Hampton, J.A. 26
Hasan, R. 47
Heider, E.R. 12f, 60
Heine, B. 321, 324–6, 342
Hemenway, K. 112
Herbst, T. 204
Heyvaert, L. 256
Holdcroft, D. 340
Holland, D. 63
Hopper, P.J. 341f
Hunn, E.S. 111
Jakobson, R. 161
Jasperson, R. 256
Jeziorski, M. 162
Johnson, M. 4, 60, 63, 104, 112, 118,
121–4, 138f, 150, 159–62, 345
Johnson–Laird, P.N. 63, 138f, 161
Kager, R. 297
Katz, J. 61
Kay, P. 8–10, 12–14, 42, 60, 70, 101f,
250–2, 255f
Keane, M. 254
Kemmer, S. 298
Kempton, W. 57
King, D.B. 61
Kirkpatrick, B. 66
Kleiber, G. 59, 62, 110f
Koestler, A. 284f, 298
Koffka, K. 61
Köhler, W. 61
Kolb, B. 345
Kopatsch, K. 54f, 59
Kövecses, Z. 133–6, 141–3, 156, 159–62,
331f, 342, 345
3 7 2
I N D E X  O F  P E R S O N S

 
I N D E X  O F  P E R S O N S
3 7 3
Panther, K.-U. 157, 161f
Plato 300f, 340
Podhorodecka, J. 306f, 341
Pörings, R. 161
Postal, P. 61
Putnam, H. 60
Pütz, M. 60, 63, 342
Queller, K. 342
Quine, W.V.O. 20, 59
Quinn, N. 63, 131
Quirk, R. 191, 204, 255, 297
Radden, G. 156, 160–2, 302
Radford, A. 204
Raskin, V. 285, 299
Raven, P. 67
Richards, I.A. 116
Rifkin, A. 106, 113
Rosch, E. 4, 11–18, 26, 29, 31, 33f, 41f,
54, 59–62, 72, 74–7, 80, 84, 102,
107, 111f, 146, 292, 343
Rosenbach, A. 342
Ross, B.H. 60, 62, 254
Roth, E.M. 62
Rudzka–Ostyn, B. 332, 342
Ruiz de Mendoza Ibañez, F.J. 126, 
131, 160
Sandikcioglu, E. 162
Saussure, F. de 300f, 340
Schank, R.C. 214–16, 254
Schmid, H.-J. 35, 54f, 59, 62, 93, 110,
112f, 124, 156, 162, 204, 248,
253, 273, 318f, 329, 342
Schmid-Schönbein, G. 342
Schneider, K. 341
Schön, D. 161
Schulze, R. 203
Searle, J. 47, 158, 201
Seto, K. 112
Shaver, P. 134, 161
Shoben, E.J. 62
Sinha, C. 203
Slobin, D.I. 5, 236–9, 241–3, 255
Smith, E.E. 44, 60–2, 112
Sperber, D. 5, 288–94, 299
Springer, K. 112
Steen, G. 160
Stein, G. 62
Stern, J. 160
Stevens, A.L. 63
Stuessy, T.F. 110
Sweetser, E.E. 112, 298, 341
Talmy, L. 5, 161, 179, 204, 211, 217,
219–29, 231, 234–6, 244, 254f,
263, 321f, 342
Taylor, J.R. 59f, 107, 110f, 113, 203–5,
336f, 340, 342
Tesnière, L. 186
Thornburg, L. 157, 162
Traugott, E.C. 341f
Tuggy, D. 60
Turner, M. 5, 112, 117–19, 121, 128,
159f, 257–60, 262–7, 269, 284f,
288, 295, 297f, 345
Tversky, B. 41, 112
Tyler, Andrea 333f, 342
Ullmann, S. 59, 159f
Ungerer, F. 93, 98, 110–13, 139, 158,
298, 335, 340–2
van der Leek, F. 256
van Dijk, T. 62
Vandeloise, C. 204
Verschueren, J. 102
Verspoor, M. 340
Vinay, J.-P. 231, 234, 242f, 255
Wertheimer, M. 61
West, M. 328f
Wierzbicka, A. 44, 61, 111, 138, 161, 256
Wilkinson, P.R. 117
Wilson, D. 5, 288–94, 299
Wilson, J. 151
Wishaw, I.Q. 345
Wittgenstein, L. 28f, 79, 146
Wright, A. 342
Yantis, S. 204

 
References to the main passages are
indicated by bold page numbers.
abstract categories 2, 4, 40, 318f, 334
abstract noun 248
acronym 271, 273–5, 279f
actants 177
action categories 101–10, 122, 125
action chain 179–91, 199f, 203
ad-hoc blends 269
adjective 68, 106–8, 113, 140, 194–8,
297, 308
advertisement 289
advertising 3, 275, 280f, 310
agent (as a semantic role) 58, 155f, 159,
162, 177–90, 200, 202, 226–8,
240, 244, 247f, 260f, 263, 265,
275–8, 286f
Alsatian 45f
American English 18, 54f
analogy 122, 323, 342
anchorage 281
anger 2, 121, 126, 132–44, 161, 331f, 345
animal 4, 64, 66, 70, 86f, 100, 111, 330f
anthropological linguistics 52
apple juice 92f, 95, 97–9, 104, 145, 271
Arabic 58, 234, 305
archetype see role archtetype
argument 121–8
argument structure 249, 279
aspect 312, 324–6, 335, 337, 339
associations 1–3, 43, 58, 79, 86, 90,
120, 274, 281, 283, 287, 306,
308, 312, 320
assumptions 289–97
atom (as a solar system) 148f
attention 3, 5f, 11f, 14, 66, 172, 202,
210f, 218, 221–5, 228f, 239, 241,
254, 263, 269, 295, 322, 344f
attentional view (in cognitive
linguistics) 3, 5
attribute listing 31–3, 55, 77, 93, 95, 315
attribute-based typicality ratings 31, 34,
40, 47, 61
attributes 1, 4, 24–8
and action categories 104f
and basic-level categories 70
and cognitive economy 71
and dimensions 33f
and essential features 25f
and family resemblances 28–31, 42f
and gestalt perception 34–6
and lexical change 314–19
and types of metaphorical mapping
124f
and subordinate categories (salient
specific attribute) 81
and superordinate categories (salient
general attribute) 82–4, 123
category-wide attributes 29, 43f, 77,
79, 146
cognitive status of 42f
distinctive attributes 25, 32
evaluative attributes 120
functional attributes 37f
non-derived attributes 95, 97, 112
salient attributes 91, 125, 140, 315
weight of 27, 33, 47, 58, 94
see also essential features
bad examples of categories 16–18,
23–7, 29, 32f, 40, 42, 92, 105
ballacktisch 69f
base (of comparison) 116, 119
base (in profiling) 192–4, 198, 202
basic colour terms 10–13, 23, 101f, 108,
132
Index of subject

 
I N D E X  O F  S U B J E C T
3 7 5
basic correlation 120, 126, 131, 160,
321, 324
basic domain 113, 193, 198
basic emotion categories 138–41, 144
basic emotions 138–41, 161
basic level categories 4, 6, 64, 70–5,
266, 292
and cognitive economy 71, 76, 292
and domains 192f
and image schemas 167
and prototypes 75f
in foreign language teaching 328–32,
338, 343
sources for conceptual metaphors
123, 125, 135, 137, 139f, 143f,
sources for subordinate categories
79–81
sources for superordinate categories
77–9
emergence of new basic level
categories 95–8
see also cognitive efficiency
battle 122f, 125, 129
beach 49, 50, 57, 129, 193, 203, 283,
288
bean 68f, 76, 85, 92
beneficiary 184 see also role archetype
best examples 10f
billiard-ball metaphor 178
birds 7, 18, 24–8, 30, 38, 64, 75, 78,
122, 315f
bisociation 298
black bean 92, 99
blackbird 92, 100, 314
blended property 264, 269, 272f
blended space 259–282, 284f, 287, 295,
298
blending see conceptual blending
bodily interaction 167
boundaries see categories, boundaries of
bowl 21–4, 34f, 42, 44, 77, 198, 343
break 2, 181, 226f, 243, 263, 265
breakfast 52f, 57, 106, 268, 288, 306
Buddhist monk (riddle of the) 284
building 36, 39, 48f, 85, 100, 105, 112,
121–6, 145f, 224, 273, 309
building-block metaphor 112
Bulgarian 305
bungalow 39
bus 32, 44, 55, 73, 77, 82f, 103, 191, 229
buy 207–10, 218
by-clause 228, 230
car 1–4, 29–32, 44, 58, 64, 67, 73f, 77,
83, 88, 90, 97f, 127, 230, 273,
290, 296, 320, 343
Case Grammar 210, 245
castle 43, 123, 125, 309
categorical view of categorization 25 see
also classical view of
categorization
categories (cognitive) 7f, 22f.
and family resemblances 28–31
and foreign language teaching
328–32
and lexical change 316–19
boundaries of 7f, 11, 18–23, 26, 33,
41, 45, 57, 77, 99, 169, 187, 212,
343 see also fuzziness
cognitive status of 40–3
internal structure of 24–8
see also abstract categories; action
categories; basic-level categories;
category member; cognitive
categories; colour categories;
lexical categories; object
categories; organism categories;
prototype categories; shape
categories; subordinate categories;
superordinate categories
categorization 4, 8f
and attributes 24–26
everyday 76, 80, 86, 91
levels of 64ff, 70, 72, 89, 101
of colours 12–14
of concrete objects 19, 23f, 35, 38–43,
64, 76, 140, 304, 309, 318
of shapes 14–16
of organisms and objects 16–18
of plants (in Tzeltal) 67–9
prototype view of 7–45
scientific 65–7, 85–7
see also categories; children; parasitic
categorisation
categorization task 35
category member 16, 18, 26, 29–33,
41–43, 46, 49, 62, 72f, 77–80, 146,
155, 269, 296, 314–18, 320, 343

 
coat collar 94, 97
COBUILD 25
cognitive categories 4, 8, 11, 19, 22–6,
32, 45, 48, 52, 58, 62–66, 71,
76–9, 83, 96–101, 108, 110, 141,
178, 194, 211–13 see also
categories; categorization
cognitive economy 71, 76, 111, 291f,
296, 344
cognitive effect 291f
cognitive effectiveness 291
cognitive efficiency 291–3, 296
cognitive environment 288–96
Cognitive Grammar 118, 176, 191, 202,
205, 210, 256
cognitive intake 185, 191, 192
cognitive model 47–58, 63, 95–101, 106,
118, 129f, 142, 302f, 338, 343
and conceptual hierarchies 90–2
and emotion metaphors 144f, 152f–8,
162
and frames/scripts 207, 212, 218
and mental spaces 258, 261, 289,
295f.
naive model 56, 59
cognitive network 328, 330
cognitive network representation 338
cognitive processing 5, 11, 191, 194,
196, 198, 200, 211, 223, 258,
261, 271, 283, 293, 296
cognitive region 195–8
cognitive unit 99, 191–8, 202f, 212
cognitive-experiential access 328, 338f
collecting function 83–5
colour 8–16, 19, 23, 25, 37, 41f, 60,
80–4, 92f, 99, 106–108, 132, 165,
192f, 202, 271f, 310, 320
colour categories 8, 10–14, 41f
commercial event 207–11, 218
communicative relevance 290–4
completion (as a blending process)
259–261, 269
composite term 86, 99, 104
composition
as a blending process 259–63, 268f
as a word-formation process 94–107,
112, 145, 271, 328
compound 19, 94–107, 145f, 175,
271–273
category membership 18, 31, 41f, 62,
78, 146
category structure 24, 34, 42–7, 57, 62,
76, 79, 92, 106f, 124, 168,
313–17, 320, 341
causal-chain 226–230, 244, 263
causal-chain windowing 226–9
causation 104, 139, 160, 218, 221, 226f,
244, 255, 263
causation event-frame 221
cause
as component of an event-frame
220f, 228, 231, 240, 244–8, 253f,
258,
as semantic primitive 103f
in metonymies 133f, 142f.
see also cause-effect
cause-effect 120, 129, 131, 133, 154,
258, 262–75, 281, 286f, 295, 344f
central schema 168–75
cereal 85, 306
chair 2, 19–23, 29–31, 37f, 42, 53, 70f,
74–81, 84, 88, 95f, 106, 112, 138,
145f, 203, 215, 271, 300, 344
chair museum 19–21
charge 208f
cherry jeans 271–3
children
and metaphor 114, 140, 159
as test persons 12–14
and language/category acquisition 79,
89f, 103f, 140, 159, 328ff
church 44, 110, 191
class inclusion 64f, 69, 91
classical model of categorization 41
classical view of categories 25, 27, 29f,
42, 61
classification 8, 11f, 19f, 87, 110
plant classification 67–9
of semantic roles 78
scientific classification 42, 62, 65–7,
76, 86, 91, 111
clause patterns 2, 176, 178, 181, 183,
185, 198, 207, 210, 247f, 252,
255, 278, 325, 344
clothing 17, 23, 31, 73f, 85, 111, 113,
236, 273, 330
coach 159, 316–19
coat 94–97, 264, 267
3 7 6
I N D E X  O F  S U B J E C T

 
I N D E X  O F  S U B J E C T
3 7 7
compression 260–71, 275–7, 282–4,
287f, 293, 295 see also conceptual
blending
concept 4, 8, 48
as source in metaphors 115-60
conceptual blending 5, 112, 257–99
and acronyms 273–5
and advertising 281–3
and metaphor 257–61
and compounds 271–3
and constructions 275–7
and morphological blends 268–71
governing rules of 265–7
see also compression; forced blend;
governing principles
conceptual metaphor 4, 114–60, 257f,
297, 319, 331, 345
conceptual metonymy 115, 127–44,
154–9
consistency profile 21, 34
constitutive metaphor 150, 153, 161
construction 5, 245–50
and conceptual blending 275–7
argument-structure construction
246–8
caused-motion construction 244–8
cause-receive construction 246f, 253,
276, 344
idioms as constructions 250–2
resultative construction 246f, 253,
280
shell-content construction 248–50
Construction Grammar 244ff, 255f,
275, 344
container schema 119, 121–4, 127, 135,
137, 141–3, 154, 161, 187–91,
200, 248
context 4, 21f, 335, 42–52, 57f,
and metaphors 115–18
and metonymies 128f
and word-formation 156f
in conceptual blending 257–61, 267,
270–5
of culture 47, 52
context-dependence 22, 45, 58, 62, 99,
346
contiguity 88, 115, 128f, 154, 159
conventionalization 121, 130f
conventionalized metaphor 131
conversion 155–9
copulative compounds 100
corn 69, 76, 85
corpora 124, 138, 244, 278, 329
correlation see basic correlation
cost 207f, 211, 229
cottage 36, 39, 43
colour see focal colours
countability 335
counterfactuals 278f
creature 86, 111
cross-space mapping 260, 265, 269–75,
281f, 295
cross-space relation 263, 277–81, 284,
287
cultural model 4, 45, 51–9, 63, 73, 76,
85, 99, 106, 118, 305, 309, 343
culture 12, 47, 51, 54, 67f, 120, 144,
218f, 274, 311, 329
culture-dependent evaluation 120
cup 20–2, 33–5, 42, 44f, 77, 99, 106, 343
cutlery 4, 52, 84
daisy 80f, 98–101
dandelion 80–2, 98–100, 104
Dani 12–16
desk 53f, 90, 330
diachronic 59, 316
dictionary 24–6, 28, 32, 39, 132, 211,
229, 243, 254, 279
derived metaphor 135
dime 80, 98f
dimension 22, 33f, 43, 84, 101, 108, 110
of compression in conceptual
blending 262–5
direct object 184, 205, 208
discourse 47, 205
discourse context 157
discourse participant 252, 289
discourse situation 158
literary discourse 160
scientific discourse 86
discourse space 62
ditransitive 246, 277
domain 3f, 48f, 51, 63, 113, 160, 186,
191–3, 202, 205
basic 198
elementary 192f, 198, 202
double-scope network 298

 
3 7 8
I N D E X  O F  S U B J E C T
eat 11, 52, 103, 105f, 110, 120, 293f,
325
efficiency 75, 291f, 296, 344
elaboration
as blending process 259–61
of image schemas 158, 174
elevator 31
embodiment 337, 344 see also bodily
experience; bodily interaction
emotion concepts 4, 132, 138–44
emotion scenarios 141–3
emotion words 133, 138f
English 5, 8–13, 23, 39, 52–5, 65, 68,
76, 84, 86f, 103, 105, 110f, 118,
131, 133, 138f, 144, 160f, 204,
207, 212, 220f, 228, 231–44, 255,
264, 273, 275, 280, 303–8,
312–40
enter 196f, 237, 309
entrenched 117, 120f, 268, 271, 279,
283, 286, 338
entrenchment 110, 121, 130, 265f, 270,
272, 345
essential features 25f, 30, 41, 61
estate car 32, 67, 73, 74
evaluation see culture-dependent
evaluation
event
and viewing arrangement 200–2
commercial event 211f
social event 129
event categories/concepts 105f, 110,
113, 125, 135, 150, 154, 303
event schema 275, 309, 325, 342
event sequence 214
event-frame 211, 218–43, 254, 344
causal-chain 227–9
closed-path 223f
cyclic 221
interrelationship 221
motion 5, 219–30, 240–4
participant-interaction 221
experience
basic 76, 88, 90, 101, 106, 108–10,
139, 150, 154, 258
bodily experience 4, 91, 108f, 119f,
263, 308, 344f
collective 51, 55f, 58
in emotion metaphors 133, 137, 139
everyday 51, 57
see also embodiment; experiential
view of language; image schema
experienced (as semantic role) 182–5,
276f
experiencer (as semantic role) 177f,
182–5, 202, 276f
experiential
access to foreign language learning
328, 338f
attribute 95, 97
correlations 160
grounding of constructions 246f, 252
prototype 26, 41
view of language 2, 4, 299
experimental evidence 40
expert model 55f, 59
explanatory metaphor 146, 151, 153,
260
explicature 294
extension
metaphorical 172f
of senses 247f, 322f
eye 101, 114–6
family resemblances 4, 24, 28–30,
40–5, 77–9, 314f
fear 132–44
figure 163–6, 174, 176, 191–210
syntactic 177–90, 200, 202, 205,
210f, 344
figure/ground 5, 163–7, 174–7, 181–5,
191–5, 200–5, 208, 219, 290, 308,
344
figure/ground segregation 5, 163f, 177,
185, 193, 202, 204, 208, 219,
290, 344
flower 24, 80f, 98–101, 246, 331
focal colours 9, 11–15, 41, 67
folk taxonomies 64, 67–70, 76, 84f, 87,
91, 99f
food 54, 63, 85, 91f, 120, 137, 330
forced blend 283 see also conceptual
blending
foreign language teaching 328–42
frame 5, 49, 63, 106, 142, 176, 207–18
see also event-frame
framing function (of event-frame
components) 234

 
I N D E X  O F  S U B J E C T
3 7 9
French 5, 52f, 98, 186, 231–6, 241–3,
255, 262, 305, 321, 329
frog story 243
fruit 17f, 29, 31f, 59, 73, 77, 85, 331
function
assembling 88
collecting 84–6
explanatory function (of metaphors)
148–50, 153
highlighting 81–5, 104, 131, 140,
160, 209, 244, 279, 287, 333
of types of metaphors 127f
referential function (of metonymies)
131
functionally relevant parts 37–40, 43
furniture 17, 29–31, 73–81, 84, 198, 330f
fuzziness 19–24, 60, 77, 343
game 12, 28f, 44, 51, 79, 152
gapping 222, 226 see also windowing
gender 193, 201, 335
generalization 313, 316
generic level 67–70, 76, 125
generic metaphor 125f, 135, 258
generic space 259 see also conceptual
blending
German 5, 9, 16, 51, 63, 205, 232–4,
255, 257, 269, 305, 325, 329, 337
gerund 336f, 340
gestalt 5f, 15, 24, 34–44, 61, 72–7, 80,
88, 90, 99, 102–5, 110, 113, 139,
145, 160, 163, 165, 192, 196,
265f, 292, 296, 309, 328, 333–9,
342, 344
gestalt principles 36f, 43, 61, 165
gestalt psychology 15, 37, 40, 44, 61
give 18, 24, 183–5, 204, 304
going-to future 321–324
goodness-of-example 17f, 24, 31–6,
45–7, 51, 54f, 58, 62, 70, 140, 315
governing principles 267, 288, 295,
298
grammaticalization 5, 321–42
ground see figure; figure/ground;
figure/ground-segregation
in traditional metaphor theory 115f,
119
syntactic ground 177, 180, 184–9,
200, 202, 205, 211
grounding
in basic experiences 90, 160, 344
in cognitive grammar 202, 206
Gulf War 151, 162
height 8, 33–36
hierarchy 9, 64–9, 85–91, 99f, 105,
109–12, 181, 266, 295, 328, 330,
343
multi-level hierarchy 86
highlighting see function, highlighting
holistic
conceptualisation 266, 292, 295,
309f, 334, 337f, 342, 344f
perception 36, 43, 75, 80, 292
transfer 309f.
house 4, 36, 39, 44, 57, 77, 81, 88–92,
100, 123, 125, 129, 132, 145,
154, 165–8, 174, 219–21, 236f,
264, 293, 309, 311f, 330f
house in the country 36
human scale 260, 266f see also
conceptual blending
humour 299
ICE-GB 244, 278
icon 301, 340
iconic proximity 301–4
iconic quantity 301–3
iconic sequencing 301, 311
iconicity 5, 300–12, 340f
imagic 305, 308
idea 124, 127, 249, 319
identification 11f, 74, 99, 196
identity (as a vital relation) 260–5,
269–72, 275–81, 284, 287, 295
idiom 5, 250–3, 256, 331, 339, 344
if-clause 279, 345
image-schema 4, 109, 112, 119, 122,
124, 130, 134f, 154, 169–75, 187,
191, 204, 233, 266, 304, 308,
322, 331, 342, 344
implicature 202
indirect speech act 157
inference 213, 217, 289f, 294
infinitive 248–50, 312, 324, 336f, 340
infotainment 268
input space 259–78, 281–7, 295, 298 
see also conceptual blending

 
3 8 0
I N D E X  O F  S U B J E C T
insect 72, 86, 315
instrument (as semantic role) 155–9,
178, 180–5, 189f, 260f, 267, 275
interaction theory of metaphor 116, 159
interactive network 198f, 203, 207, 210,
212
intercultural awareness 329
joke 285–7
journey 118–22, 126, 129, 131, 174, 267,
296
joy 133–44
kill 47, 103, 104, 113, 226, 263
knowledge of the world 65, 67, 95
lamp 29, 84
landmark 122, 163, 167–71, 174, 177,
195–7, 202, 219, 321, 324, 332f
language acquisition 344
language processing 257, 346
language-specific framing 229
LDOCE 25, 39, 117, 175
lean mapping 125f
let alone 251, 344
lexical change 5, 100, 313f, 319, 321,
341
lexical field 328, 330, 339
lexicalization 86, 98, 112, 117, 258,
268–72, 279
lie 102, 220f
living being 86f
location 169, 178, 182, 186, 202,
220–4, 248, 269f, 280, 304, 325
locative relation 5, 108f, 163–7, 172,
175, 204, 219, 224
logical hierarchies 87
logical view of language 25f, 34, 44, 97
see also experiential view
long-term memory 13f, 49, 158, 213,
245f, 252, 257–61, 295, 344
love 121, 133–44, 267, 331f
lower animal 86f
mammal 64, 66, 72, 86–9
manner (as a component of 
event-frames) 220f, 231–44, 250,
254, 324
mapping
metaphorical 4, 118–32, 154–60,
173f, 204
of event-frame components 235
cross-space 258, 261, 269, 272, 274,
281f
mapping scope 4, 119–32, 154–60,
173f, 204, 258, 261, 322–4
mass noun 334, 342
meal 53, 92, 106, 330
measure of family resemblances 31, 146
member see category member
memory 11–14, 245, 258, 289, 343 see
also long-term memory
mental interactions 182–7, 190f, 199
mental lexicon 4, 40, 42, 60, 62, 330
mental operation 182–5
mental processing 3, 178
mental space 3, 5, 257–61, 269, 275,
279, 286, 288, 297, 345 see also
conceptual blending
metaphor 6, 98, 101, 114–25, 159–62,
345
and conceptual blending 257–61
and emotion concepts 132–44
and foreign language teaching 331f
and image schemas 172–4
and grammaticalization 321–3
and lexical change 314–16, 318
and metonymy 114–16, 127f, 135–8
and the description of linguistic
phenomena 145–7
as a figure of speech 114–16
as a way of thinking 118, 144
as cognitive instruments 117–21, 154
in politics 150–3
in science 145–50
structuring power of 121–5
traditional view of 116f
see also conceptual metaphor;
conventionalized metaphor;
constitutive metaphor; derived
metaphor; explanatory metaphor;
mapping scope; primary
metaphor; source concept;
specific metaphor; target concept
metaphorical extensions 116, 172f
metonymy 6, 99, 101, 114-16, 127f,
158–62, 342, 345
and cognitive economy 296

 
I N D E X  O F  S U B J E C T
3 8 1
and compounding 155
and conceptual blending 257–61
and conversion 155–7
and emotion concepts 132–44
and foreign language teaching 331f
and grammaticalization 321–3
and indirect speech acts 157f
and metaphor 114–16, 127f, 135–8
and part-whole relations 88, 91
and word-formation 155–7
as cognitive instrument 127f, 154
as a figure of speech 114–16
as a way of thinking 154–9
see also mapping scope
mirror network 298 see also conceptual
blending
Modern Languages at Primary Schools
334
modifier-head compounds 100
morphological blend 268–71, 275, 279
morphology 304
mosquito 86
mother 42, 86, 193, 253
motion
and iconicity 306–11
as a component of caused-motion
constructions 275, 298
as a component of event-frames
219–48, 253–5
in action chains 184,
in image schemas 165, 170, 178
verbs of 195–7
motion event 5, 219–44
and caused-motion construction 275,
298
and iconicity 309
and grammaticalization 321–4
motion event-frame see event-frame
motor movements 72, 74
motorcycle 32, 73f
mug 21, 34, 42, 44
Munsell colour chips 9f
naming 1, 8, 14, 21, 24, 35, 67, 69
narrative 230f, 235, 238f, 242, 255
narrative texts 230, 238, 242, 255
network 29, 50, 89, 92, 199, 259, 
266, 269, 274, 281, 286, 297,
332f, 338
network model 259, 297
neural agitation 138
neural theory of metaphor 345
newspaper 84, 97, 146,
newspaper texts 154, 229, 269, 297
Nigerian English 55
noun 2, 92, 107f, 147, 155, 158f, 162,
188, 194f, 231, 248, 264, 271,
276, 298, 302–5, 312, 334–337
nurturant parent model 152
OALD 24, 257f, 322, 328
object (in a clause) 176f, 180–4, 186–8
object categories 20–4, 74, 96, 103–6,
109, 135, 138, 303, 319, 335
objects
and word class 191, 194f, 338f,
concrete objects 19, 23, 35, 38f, 41,
43, 64, 76, 140, 304, 309, 318
moving objects 219
odd number 42
Old English 315f, 320
olive 31f, 107, 132
online processing 3, 5, 6, 257f, 261f,
266f, 270–6, 283, 287, 293–9
onomatopoeia 305 see also sound
symbolism
open path 223f, 229, 321
optimality 265
ostensive-inferential behaviour 290–6
ostrich 25–31, 33, 343
parasitic categorization 77–80, 84f, 96,
104, 111, 139, 141
parrot 17, 25, 27
participants
discourse 58, 122
in metonymies 155
in Cognitive Grammar 177, 182, 186,
188, 198–204, 207, 210, 215,
261, 275, 281, 289
particle 168, 232–5, 237
partonomy 88–91, 106, 108, 112
part-whole
compound 94, 97
in conceptual blending 262–9
relation 4, 61, 85, 88–92, 94–100,
103, 111f, 119, 128f, 154f, 190,
304, 322, 330f, 338, 340, 343

 
3 8 2
I N D E X  O F  S U B J E C T
path
as component of image schema
167–74
as component of motion-event
219–44, 254
fictive path 223–6, 230, 255
see also windowing, path
path schema 119, 122, 162, 174, 187,
197
path strategy 308–12
patient (as semantic role) 177–90, 200,
202, 247f, 258, 261, 265f, 275,
286f
pay 207–9, 291, 327
perception 5, 9, 14, 36f, 40–4, 62, 72,
75, 80, 88, 90, 102, 105, 108,
139, 163, 186, 191, 204, 219,
238, 292, 295, 305, 309, 338,
341–5
perceptual prominence 164
perspective 344
frame and perspective 207–11, 214,
217
in Cognitive Grammar 200f
pet 100, 238, 271
phrasal verbs 239, 332, 342
phraseologisms 338
physiological
aspects of perception 14, 40f, 108
metonymy 133–7, 143, 161, 345
pictograms 39, 85
pine 68, 76, 85, 307
PISA 273–5
politics 144, 150–3, 285
polysemy 23, 61, 246–8, 253, 256
poodle 46, 79, 98–100
pragmatic aspects
of Cognitive Grammar 200–6
of cognitive linguistics 5f, 346
of conceptual blending 268, 278f
of Construction Grammar 248–56
of context 49
of Relevance Theory 288f, 293–5, 299
pragmatics 58, 266, 299, 346
Prägnanz 37, 61, 165
preposition 108, 167–75, 187f, 195f,
204, 231, 247, 277, 334
pride 133, 144
primary domain 193
primary metaphor 160
priming 18
principle of integration 265f, 275
principle of promoting vital relations
265
principle of relevance 266f, 273, 282,
287f, 295, 299
principle of unpacking 266
principle of topology 266
problem-solving 283, 285, 295
profile 192, 202
consistency profile 21f
profiled cognitive region 195
profiled relation 194, 198
profiling 191–195, 202–5, 210, 291
prominence 2–6, 163, 174, 177,
184–191, 194, 200, 202, 208,
211, 237, 254, 290f, 310, 344
prominence view 3, 5
properties 106–9
propositional schema 324f, 342
prototype 4, 9f, 15f, 20, 23, 59–62, 92
and action categories 103–5
and attributes 26–8, 31–3, 42
and basic-level categories 72, 75f, 102
and cultural models 51–5
and event categories 105f
and family resemblances 28–31
and foreign language teaching 339,
341, 343f
and gestalt 34–40, 43
and lexical change 313–20
and properties 106–8
cognitive status of 41f
context-dependence of 45–7
prototype categories 20, 26, 32, 42f, 75,
102, 105–10, 167, 313, 320
prototype shift 46, 316, 320
prototype split 316–20
prototypical subject 189
prototypicality 17, 40, 62, 103, 111,
141, 143, 312
pub 39
raincoat 95, 97, 100
re-analysis 323
receive 183f, 217 see also construction,
cause-receive
recognition task 13

 
I N D E X  O F  S U B J E C T
3 8 3
regatta blend 262f
reification 248f, 256
relay 281
relevance 5
see also principle of relevance
relevance theory 289–96
reptile 72, 86
restaurant script 214
retriever 16, 46
rich mapping in metaphors 126f
riddle 284
robin 24–8, 30, 75, 314, 343
role archetypes 177f, 180, 182, 185, 199
rose 79–81, 99f, 105
sadness 133, 135, 140–4
saloon 32, 73
satellite 234–43, 253–5
satellite-framed language 234f, 239,
242, 255
scanning 196–8, 206
scenario 142–4, 161, 294
scotch terrier 66
script 49, 214–18, 254
sell 207–10
semantic primitive 103, 113
semantic roles 177, 204 see also role
archetype
semiotics 281, 300
sequential scanning 196f, 206
setter 46
setting 198–202, 240–2, 281f, 287
and the stage metaphor 185–90
unspecified 189
shell noun 248–50
shell-content constructions 253
short-term memory 13f
shot in the arm 257–9
signal grammar 335
similarity
and iconicity 301, 303
and metaphor 115
gestalt principle of similarity 36f
of category members 43, 70, 72, 89,
345
simplex network 298 see also
conceptual blending
single-scope network 298 see also
conceptual blending
situation 48f, 58
solar system metaphor 149, 162
sorting strategy 310
sound symbolism 305, 311f, 341
source category (of compounds) 94, 97,
100f, 105
source concept (of metaphors) 4, 118f,
121, 125–32, 135, 144–7, 152,
161, 204, 258, 261, 266, 293f,
322f, 331
source model 118
space builder 278f
Spanish 5, 231–43, 251, 255, 305
sparrow 17, 26, 59, 73, 314
spatial compression 262, 270
specialization 313, 316
specific attribute 35, 80f, 93, 98, 104, 120
specific metaphor 125
specificity 200, 206, 235, 344
speech act 154, 157f, 201f
speech event 49, 58, 191, 202, 278
sport 17, 23
sports car 73f
stability of category strcucture 313,
316–20
stage metaphor 185, 198
stationery 85
stories (used in experiments) 102, 142,
216, 218, 231, 238f, 255, 310f
strict father model 152
structuring power of metaphor 4, 121,
124, 152
style 114, 231, 235, 238f, 243, 255, 309
subject 1–3, 5, 147, 176–90, 200, 202,
205, 208–11, 229, 231, 247, 250f,
302, 339, 341, 344
prototypical vs schematic 189f
subordinate category 4, 73, 76f, 79–86,
92–4, 98–100, 104–6, 109f
subordinate clause 339
subordinate level of categorization 64,
70, 72, 74, 84, 200, 331, 335
summary scanning 196f
superordinate categories 4, 29f, 64, 67,
69–74, 77–88, 90, 92, 100, 103–6,
111, 123, 125, 140f, 329, 331
superordinate level of categorization 72,
77, 105, 200
symbol 167, 284, 300, 308, 334, 340

 
3 8 4
I N D E X  O F  S U B J E C T
syntactic figure see figure
syntactic ground see ground
take 185
tall 107–9
target concept (of metaphors) 4, 118f,
121–32, 147, 258, 322f, 331
target model 118, 261
taxonomy 65, 67, 69f, 84f, 91, 95, 112
telephone 31, 44
tenor 115f, 119
tense 1, 202, 206, 303f, 312, 321,
324–6, 328, 335
text strategies 308, 311
that-clause 249, 256
toiletries 85
tool 17, 73, 92
toy 17, 79, 82–4, 103, 145, 331
trajector 163, 167–71, 174, 177, 195–7,
202, 219, 321–4, 332f
translation 191, 194, 231, 236–8, 241f
truck 29, 32, 67, 73, 83, 320
tulip 81, 99
Turkish 243, 255, 312
type-of relationship 4, 64–5, 69, 83–5,
88–95, 97, 99f, 104, 106, 330f,
339, 343
typicality 16, 18, 23, 31, 34, 41f, 46,
54, 62, 107, 109
typicality ratings 31, 34, 54
Tzeltal 67–9, 73, 76, 84f, 111
Tzeltal plant classification 67–9, 111
uncle 42, 61, 193
vagueness 8, 19f, 24, 59f, 133, 146f, 319
varieties of English 55
vase 21, 24, 44,
vegetable 17, 31, 59, 198, 279, 331
vehicle 3, 17f, 29–31, 39, 73f, 77, 79,
82f, 88, 103, 115f, 119, 320, 343
verb 1, 102, 155f, 158f, 162, 168, 176f,
181, 183, 185, 194–6, 204,
206–11, 217, 220, 226, 231–9,
242–5, 249, 251, 255, 263, 265,
276f, 303, 309, 312, 321–4, 335,
337f, 340, 342
verb morphology 303
verb of motion 195
verb-framed language 234f, 242f, 255
viewing arrangement 200–3, 206
villa 36
vital relation 160, 260–9, 272, 275,
293, 295, 297, 331
vocabulary 9, 138f, 148, 233, 269, 305,
313, 328–31, 338–40
walk 104f, 113, 159, 215f, 237, 284,
333
war 115, 121, 123, 137, 151f, 332
weapon 17, 31, 103
weight (of attributes) 27, 33, 47, 58, 94
weighting strategy 310–12, 341
wheelchair 95f, 98, 101, 145, 146, 271
windowing 211, 218, 221–9, 239, 255,
263, 309
final 222, 322
initial 224, 322, 324
medial 322
path 223–6, 239, 322
word class 189, 191, 194–6, 202, 330,
339
word-formation 92, 97, 100, 112,
153–5, 157, 268, 275, 279, 329
Yoruba 305

