
Ancient Philosophy
This is the remarkable story of the birth of philosophy, its flourishing in
the ancient Mediterranean world, and the development of ideas which
have shaped the course of Western thought and society.
Sir Anthony Kenny’s stimulating account begins with Pythagoras and
Thales, and ends with St Augustine, who handed on the torch of
philosophy to the Christian age. At the centre of the narrative are the
two great Wgures of Plato and Aristotle, who between them set the agenda
for philosophy for the next two millenia, and whose influence is as
profound today as ever.
The fruit of a lifetime’s scholarship and insight, Ancient Philosophy sets the
philosophers and their ideas in historical context, and explains the
signiWcance and impact of each wave of new ideas. It is the first volume
in a magisterial new series, which brings the history of philosophy alive to
anyone who wants to understand the roots of Western civilization.
Sir Anthony Kenny has been President of the British Academy, and
Pro-Vice-Chancellor of the University of Oxford. He has written many
acclaimed books on the philosophy of mind, the philosophy of religion,
and the history of philosophy, including both scholarly and popular
works on Aristotle, Aquinas, Descartes, and Wittgenstein.
A New History of Western Philosophy
Anthony Kenny
Volume 1: Ancient Philosophy
Volume 3: The Rise of Modern Philosophy
Volume 2: Medieval Philosophy
Volume 4: Philosophy in the Modern World

This page intentionally left blank 

A NEW HISTORY OF WESTERN PHILOSOPHY
volume 1
Ancient Philosophy
anthony
kenny
CLARENDON PRESS  OXFORD

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford ox2 6dp
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford New York
Auckland Cape Town Dar es Salaam Hong Kong Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Nairobi
New Delhi Shanghai Taipei Toronto
With oYces in
Argentina Austria Brazil Chile Czech Republic France Greece
Guatemala Hungary Italy Japan Poland Portugal Singapore
South Korea Switzerland Thailand Turkey Ukraine Vietnam
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press
in the UK and in certain other countries
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
 Sir Anthony Kenny 2004
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published 2004
First published in paperback 2006
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press,
or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate
reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department,
Oxford University Press, at the address above
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Data available
Typeset by SPI Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
Printed in Great Britain on acid-free paper by
Biddles Ltd., King’s Lynn
ISBN 0–19–875273–3
978–0–19–875273–8
ISBN 0–19–875272–5 (Pbk.)
978–0–19–875272–1 (Pbk.)
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

SUMMARY OF CONTENTS
List of Contents
vii
Map
x
Introduction
xi
1. Beginnings: From Pythagoras to Plato
1
2. Schools of Thought: From Aristotle to Augustine
65
3. How to Argue: Logic
116
4. Knowledge and its Limits: Epistemology
145
5. How Things Happen: Physics
178
6. What There Is: Metaphysics
199
7. Soul and Mind
229
8. How to Live: Ethics
257
9. God
289
Chronology
317
List of Abbreviations and Conventions
319
Bibliography
323
List of Illustrations
331
Index
335

This page intentionally left blank 

CONTENTS
Map
x
Introduction
xi
1. Beginnings: From Pythagoras to Plato
1
The Four Causes
1
The Milesians
4
The Pythagoreans
9
Xenophanes
11
Heraclitus
12
Parmenides and the Eleatics
17
Empedocles
20
Anaxagoras
24
The Atomists
26
The Sophists
28
Socrates
32
The Socrates of Xenophon
35
The Socrates of Plato
37
Socrates’ Own Philosophy
41
From Socrates to Plato
45
The Theory of Ideas
49
Plato’s Republic
56
The Laws and the Timaeus
60
2. Schools of Thought: From Aristotle to Augustine
65
Aristotle in the Academy
65
Aristotle the Biologist
69
The Lyceum and its Curriculum
73
Aristotle on Rhetoric and Poetry
75
Aristotle’s Ethical Treatises
79
Aristotle’s Political Theory
82
Aristotle’s Cosmology
87
The Legacy of Aristotle and Plato
89
Aristotle’s School
91
Epicurus
94

Stoicism
96
Scepticism in the Academy
100
Lucretius
101
Cicero
103
Judaism and Christianity
104
The Imperial Stoa
106
Early Christian Philosophy
109
The Revival of Platonism and Aristotelianism
111
Plotinus and Augustine
112
3. How to Argue: Logic
116
Aristotle’s Syllogistic
117
The de Interpretatione and the Categories
123
Aristotle on Time and Modality
129
Stoic Logic
136
4. Knowledge and its Limits: Epistemology
145
Presocratic Epistemology
145
Socrates, Knowledge, and Ignorance
148
Knowledge in the Theaetetus
152
Knowledge and Ideas
156
Aristotle on Science and Illusion
161
Epicurean Epistemology
166
Stoic Epistemology
169
Academic Scepticism
173
Pyrrhonian Scepticism
175
5. How Things Happen: Physics
178
The Continuum
178
Aristotle on Place
182
Aristotle on Motion
184
Aristotle on Time
186
Aristotle on Causation and Change
189
The Stoics on Causality
192
Causation and Determinism
194
Determinism and Freedom
196
6. What There Is: Metaphysics
199
Parmenides’ Ontology
200
CONTENTS
viii

Plato’s Ideas and their Troubles
205
Aristotelian Forms
216
Essence and Quiddity
218
Being and Existence
223
7. Soul and Mind
229
Pythagoras’ Metempsychosis
229
Perception and Thought
232
Immortality in Plato’s Phaedo
234
The Anatomy of the Soul
237
Plato on Sense-Perception
240
Aristotle’s Philosophical Psychology
241
Hellenistic Philosophy of Mind
248
Will, Mind, and Soul in Late Antiquity
251
8. How to Live: Ethics
257
Democritus the Moralist
257
Socrates on Virtue
260
Plato on Justice and Pleasure
264
Aristotle on Eudaimonia
266
Aristotle on Moral and Intellectual Virtue
269
Pleasure and Happiness
274
The Hedonism of Epicurus
277
Stoic Ethics
280
9. God
289
Xenophanes’ Natural Theology
289
Socrates and Plato on Piety
290
Plato’s Evolving Theology
293
Aristotle’s Unmoved Movers
296
The Gods of Epicurus and the Stoics
302
On Divination and Astrology
308
The Trinity of Plotinus
311
Chronology
317
List of Abbreviations and Conventions
319
Bibliography
323
List of Illustrations
331
Index
335
CONTENTS
ix


INTRODUCTION
W
hy should one study the history of philosophy? There are many
reasons, but they fall into two groups: philosophical and historical.
We may study the great dead philosophers in order to seek illumination
upon themes of present-day philosophical inquiry. Or we may wish to
understand the people and societies of the past, and read their philosophy
to grasp the conceptual climate in which they thought and acted. We may
read the philosophers of other ages to help to resolve philosophical
problems of abiding concern, or to enter more fully into the intellectual
world of a bygone era.
In this history of philosophy, from the beginnings to the present
day, I hope to further both purposes, but in diVerent ways in diVerent
parts of the work, as I shall try to make clear in this Introduction. But
before outlining a strategy for writing the history of philosophy, one must
pause to reXect on the nature of philosophy itself. The word ‘philosophy’
means diVerent things in diVerent mouths, and correspondingly ‘the
history of philosophy’ can be interpreted in many ways. What it signiWes
depends on what the particular historian regards as being essential to
philosophy.
This was true of Aristotle, who was philosophy’s Wrst historian, and of
Hegel, who hoped he would be its last, since he was bringing philosophy to
perfection. The two of them had very diVerent views of the nature of
philosophy. Nonetheless, they had in common a view of philosophical
progress: philosophical problems in the course of history became ever
more clearly deWned, and they could be answered with ever greater
accuracy. Aristotle in the Wrst book of his Metaphysics and Hegel in his
Lectures on the History of Philosophy saw the teachings of the earlier philosophers
they recorded as halting steps in the direction of a vision they were
themselves to expound.
Only someone with supreme self-conWdence as a philosopher could
write its history in such a way. The temptation for most philosopher
historians is to see philosophy not as culminating in their own work, but
rather as a gradual progress to whatever philosophical system is currently

in fashion. But this temptation should be resisted. There is no force that
guarantees philosophical progress in any particular direction.
Indeed, it can be called into question whether philosophy makes any
progress at all. The major philosophical problems, some say, are all still
being debated after centuries of discussion, and are no nearer to any
deWnitive resolution. In the twentieth century the philosopher Ludwig
Wittgenstein wrote:
You always hear people say that philosophy makes no progress and that the same
philosophical problems which were already preoccupying the Greeks are still
troubling us today. But people who say that do not understand the reason why
it has to be so. The reason is that our language has remained the same and always
introduces us to the same questions. . . . I read ‘philosophers are no nearer to the
meaning of ‘‘reality’’ than Plato got’. What an extraordinary thing! How remark-
able that Plato could get so far! Or that we have not been able to get any further!
Was it because Plato was so clever? (MS 213/424)
The diVerence between what we might call the Aristotelian and the
Wittgensteinian attitude to progress in philosophy is linked with two
diVerent views of philosophy itself. Philosophy may be viewed as a science,
on the one hand, or as an art, on the other. Philosophy is, indeed, uniquely
diYcult to classify, and resembles both the arts and the sciences.
On the one hand, philosophy seems to be like a science in that the
philosopher is in pursuit of truth. Discoveries, it seems, are made in
philosophy, and so the philosopher, like the scientist, has the excitement
of belonging to an ongoing, cooperative, cumulative intellectual venture. If
so, the philosopher must be familiar with current writing, and keep abreast
of the state of the art. On this view, we twenty-Wrst-century philosophers
have an advantage over earlier practitioners of the discipline. We stand, no
doubt, on the shoulders of other and greater philosophers, but we do stand
above them. We have superannuated Plato and Kant.
On the other hand, in the arts, classic works do not date. If we want to
learn physics or chemistry, as opposed to their history, we don’t nowadays
read Newton or Faraday. But we read the literature of Homer and Shake-
speare not merely to learn about the quaint things that passed through
people’s minds in far-oV days of long ago. Surely, it may well be argued, the
same is true of philosophy. It is not merely in a spirit of antiquarian
curiosity that we read Aristotle today. Philosophy is essentially the work
xii
INTRODUCTION

of individual genius, and Kant does not supersede Plato any more than
Shakespeare supersedes Homer.
There is truth in each of these accounts, but neither is wholly true and
neither contains the whole truth. Philosophy is not a science, and there is
no state of the art in philosophy. Philosophy is not a matter of expanding
knowledge, of acquiring new truths about the world; the philosopher is
not in possession of information that is denied to others. Philosophy is not
a matter of knowledge, it is a matter of understanding, that is to say, of
organizing what is known. But because philosophy is all-embracing, is so
universal in its Weld, the organization of knowledge it demands is some-
thing so diYcult that only genius can do it. For all of us who are not
geniuses, the only way in which we can hope to come to grips with
philosophy is by reaching up to the mind of some great philosopher of
the past.
Though philosophy is not a science, throughout its history it has had an
intimate relation to the sciences. Many disciplines that in antiquity and in
the Middle Ages were part of philosophy have long since become inde-
pendent sciences. A discipline remains philosophical as long as its concepts
are unclariWed and its methods are controversial. Perhaps no scientiWc
concepts are ever fully clariWed, and no scientiWc methods are ever totally
uncontroversial; if so, there is always a philosophical element left in every
science. But once problems can be unproblematically stated, when con-
cepts are uncontroversially standardized, and where a consensus emerges
for the methodology of solution, then we have a science setting up home
independently, rather than a branch of philosophy.
Philosophy, once called the queen of the sciences, and once called their
handmaid, is perhaps better thought of as the womb, or the midwife, of the
sciences. But in fact sciences emerge from philosophy not so much by
parturition as by Wssion. Two examples, out of many, may serve to
illustrate this.
In the seventeenth century philosophers were much exercised by the
problem which of our ideas are innate and which are acquired. This
problem split into two problems, one psychological (‘What do we owe to
heredity and what do we owe to environment?’) and one belonging to the
theory of knowledge (‘How much of our knowledge depends on experi-
ence and how much is independent of it?’). The Wrst question was handed
over to scientiWc psychology, the second question remained philosophical.
xiii
INTRODUCTION

But the second question itself split into a number of questions, one of
which was ‘Is mathematics merely an extension of logic, or is it an
independent body of truth?’ The question whether mathematics could be
derived from pure logic was given a precise answer by the work of logicians
and mathematicians in the twentieth century. The answer was not philo-
sophical, but mathematical. So here we had an initial, confused, philosoph-
ical question which ramiWed in two directions—towards psychology and
towards mathematics. There remains in the middle a philosophical residue
to be churned over, concerning the nature of mathematical propositions.
An earlier example is more complicated. A branch of philosophy given
an honoured place by Aristotle is ‘theology’. When today we read what he
says, the discipline appears a mixture of astronomy and philosophy of
religion. Christian and Muslim Aristotelians added to it elements drawn
from the teaching of their sacred books. It was when St Thomas Aquinas,
in the thirteenth century, drew a sharp distinction between natural and
revealed theology that the Wrst important Wssion took place, removing
from the philosophical agenda the appeals to revelation. It took rather
longer for the astronomy and the natural theology to separate out from
each other. This example shows that what may be sloughed oV by philoso-
phy need not be a science but may be a humanistic discipline such as
biblical studies. It also shows that the history of philosophy contains
examples of fusion as well as of Wssion.
Philosophy resembles the arts in having a signiWcant relation to a canon.
A philosopher situates the problems to be addressed by reference to a series
of classical texts. Because it has no speciWc subject matter, but only
characteristic methods, philosophy is deWned as a discipline by the activities
of its great practitioners. The earliest people whom we recognize as
philosophers, the Presocratics, were also scientists, and several of them
were also religious leaders. They did not yet think of themselves as
belonging to a common profession, the one with which we twenty-
Wrst-century philosophers claim continuity. It was Plato who in his
writings Wrst used the word ‘philosophy’ in some approximation to our
modern sense. Those of us who call ourselves philosophers today can
genuinely lay claim to be the heirs of Plato and Aristotle. But we are
only a small subset of their heirs. What distinguishes us from the other
heirs of the great Greeks, and what entitles us to inherit their name, is that
unlike the physicists, the astronomers, the medics, the linguists, we phil-
xiv
INTRODUCTION

osophers pursue the goals of Plato and Aristotle only by the same methods
as were already available to them.
If philosophy lies somewhere between the sciences and the arts, what is
the answer to the question ‘Is there progress in philosophy?’
There are those who think that the major task of philosophy is to cure
us of intellectual confusion. On this, modest, view of the philosopher’s
role, the tasks to be addressed diVer across history, since each period needs
a diVerent form of therapy. The knots into which the undisciplined mind
ties itself diVer from age to age, and diVerent mental motions are necessary
to untie the knots. A prevalent malady of our own age, for instance, is the
temptation to think of the mind as a computer, whereas earlier ages were
tempted to think of it as a telephone exchange, a pedal organ, a homun-
culus, or a spirit. Maladies of earlier ages may be dormant, such as belief
that the stars are living beings; or they may return, such as the belief that
the stars enable one to predict human behaviour.
The therapeutic view of philosophy, however, may seem to allow only
for variation over time, not for genuine progress. But that is not necessarily
true. A confusion of thought may be so satisfactorily cleared up by a
philosopher that it no longer oVers temptation to the unwary thinker.
One such example will be considered at length in the Wrst volume of this
history. Parmenides, the founder of the discipline of ontology (the science
of being), based much of his system on a systematic confusion between
diVerent senses of the verb ‘to be’. Plato, in one of his dialogues, sorted out
the issues so successfully that there has never again been an excuse for
mixing them up: indeed, it now takes a great eVort of philosophical
imagination to work out exactly what led Parmenides into confusion in
the Wrst place.
Progress of this kind is often concealed by its very success: once a
philosophical problem is resolved, no one regards it as any more a matter
of philosophy. It is like treason in the epigram: ‘Treason doth never
prosper, what’s the reason? j For if it prosper none dare call it treason.’
The most visible form of philosophical progress is progress in philosoph-
ical analysis. Philosophy does not progress by making regular additions to a
quantum of information; as has been said, what philosophy oVers is not
information but understanding. Contemporary philosophers, of course,
know some things that the greatest philosophers of the past did not know;
but the things that they know are not philosophical matters but the truths
xv
INTRODUCTION

that have been discovered by the sciences begotten of philosophy. But there
are also some things that philosophers of the present day understand
which even the greatest philosophers of earlier generations failed to
understand. For instance, philosophers clarify language by distinguishing
between diVerent senses of words; and once a distinction has been made,
future philosophers have to take account of it in their deliberations.
Take, as an example, the issue of free will. At a certain point in the
history of philosophy a distinction was made between two kinds of human
freedom: liberty of indiVerence (ability to do otherwise) and liberty of
spontaneity (ability to do what you want). Once this distinction has been
made the question ‘Do human beings enjoy freedom of the will?’ has to be
answered in a way that takes account of the distinction. Even someone who
believes that the two kinds of liberty coincide has to provide arguments to
show this; he cannot simply ignore the distinction and hope to be taken
seriously on the topic.
It is unsurprising, given the relationship of philosophy to a canon, that
one notable form of philosophical progress consists in coming to terms
with, and interpreting, the thoughts of the great philosophers of the past.
The great works of the past do not lose their importance in philosophy—
but their intellectual contributions are not static. Each age interprets and
applies philosophical classics to its own problems and aspirations. This is, in
recent years, most visible in the Weld of ethics. The ethical works of Plato
and Aristotle are as inXuential in moral thinking today as the works of any
twentieth-century moralists—this is easily veriWed by taking any citation
index—but they are being interpreted and applied in ways quite diVerent
from the ways in which they were applied in the past. These new inter-
pretations and applications do eVect a genuine advance in our understand-
ing of Plato and Aristotle; but of course it is understanding of quite a
diVerent kind from what is given by a new study of the chronology of
Plato’s dialogues or a stylometric comparison between Aristotle’s various
ethical works. The new light we receive resembles rather the enhanced
appreciation of Shakespeare we may get by seeing a new and intelligent
production of King Lear.
The historian of philosophy, whether primarily interested in philosophy
or primarily interested in history, cannot help being both a philosopher
and a historian. A historian of painting does not have to be a painter; a
historian of medicine does not, qua historian, practise medicine. But a
xvi
INTRODUCTION

historian of philosophy cannot help doing philosophy in the very writing of
history. It is not just that someone who knows no philosophy will be a bad
historian of philosophy; it is equally true that someone who has no idea of
how to cook will be a bad historian of cookery. The link between philosophy
and its history is a far closer one. The historical task itself forces historians of
philosophy to paraphrase their subjects’ opinions, to oVer reasons why past
thinkers held the opinions they did, to speculate on the premisses left tacit
in their arguments, and to evaluate the coherence and cogency of
the inferences they drew. But the supplying of reasons for philosophical
conclusions, the detection of hidden premisses in philosophical arguments,
and the logical evaluation of philosophical inferences are themselves
full-blooded philosophical activities. Consequently, any serious history of
philosophy must itself be an exercise in philosophy as well as in history.
On the other hand, the historian of philosophy must have a knowledge
of the historical context in which past philosophers wrote their works.
When we explain historical actions, we ask for the agent’s reasons; if we Wnd
a good reason, we think we have understood his action. If we conclude he
did not have good reason, even in his own terms, we have to Wnd, diVerent,
more complicated explanations. What is true of action is true of taking a
philosophical view. If the philosophical historian Wnds a good reason for
a past philosopher’s doctrine, then his task is done. But if he concludes that
the past philosopher has no good reason, he has a further and much more
diYcult task, of explaining the doctrine in terms of the context in which it
appeared—social, perhaps, as well as intellectual.1
History and philosophy are closely linked even in the Wrst-hand quest
for original philosophical enlightenment. In modern times this has been
most brilliantly illustrated by the masterpiece of the great nineteenth-
century German philosopher Gottlob Frege, The Foundations of Arithmetic.
Almost half of Frege’s book is devoted to discussing and refuting the
view of other philosophers and mathematicians. While he is discussing
the opinions of others, he ensures that some of his own insights are artfully
insinuated, and this makes easier the eventual presentation of his own
theory. But the main purpose of his lengthy polemic is to convince readers
of the seriousness of the problems to which he will later oVer solutions.
1 The magnitude of this task is well brought out by Michael Frede in the introduction to his
Essays in Ancient Philosophy (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987).
xvii
INTRODUCTION

Without this preamble, he says, we would lack the Wrst prerequisite for
learning anything: knowledge of our own ignorance.
Most histories of philosophy, in this age of specialization, are the work
of many hands, specialists in diVerent Welds and periods. In inviting me
to write, single-handed, a history of philosophy from Thales to Derrida,
Oxford University Press gave expression to the belief that there is
something to be gained by presenting the development of philosophy
from a single viewpoint, linking ancient, medieval, early modern, and
contemporary philosophy into a single narrative concerned with con-
nected themes. The work will appear in four volumes: the Wrst will
cover the centuries from the beginning of philosophy up to the conver-
sion of St Augustine in ad 387. The second will take the story from
Augustine up to the Lateran Council of 1512. The third will end with
the death of Hegel in 1831. The fourth and Wnal volume will bring the
narrative up to the end of the second millennium.
Obviously, I cannot claim to be an expert on all the many philosophers
whom I will discuss in the volumes of this work. However, I have published
books on major Wgures within each of the periods of the four volumes: on
Aristotle (The Aristotelian Ethics and Aristotle on the Perfect Life), on Aquinas
(Aquinas on Mind and Aquinas on Being), on Descartes (Descartes: A Study of his
Philosophy and Descartes: Philosophical Letters), and on Frege and Wittgenstein
(Frege and Wittgenstein as Penguin introductions and The Legacy of Wittgenstein).
I hope that the work that went into the writing of these books gave me an
insight into the philosophical style of four diVerent eras in the history of
philosophy. It certainly gave me a sense of the perennial importance of
certain philosophical problems and insights.
I hope to write my history in a manner that takes account of the points I
have raised in this Introduction. I do not suVer from any Whiggish illusion
that the current state of philosophy represents the highest point of
philosophical endeavour yet reached. On the contrary, my primary pur-
pose in writing the book is to show that in many respects the philosophy of
the great dead philosophers has not dated, and that today one may gain
philosophical illumination by a careful reading of the great works that we
have been privileged to inherit.
The kernel of any kind of historiography of philosophy is exegesis: the
close reading and interpretation of philosophical texts. Exegesis may be of
two kinds, internal or external. In internal exegesis the interpreter tries to
xviii
INTRODUCTION

render the text coherent and consistent, making use of the principle of
charity in interpretation. In external exegesis the interpreter seeks to bring
out the signiWcance of the text by comparing it and contrasting it with
other texts.
Exegesis may form the basis of the two quite diVerent historical endeav-
ours that I described at the beginning of this Introduction. In one, which
we may call historical philosophy, the aim is to reach philosophical truth,
or philosophical understanding, about the matter or issue under discussion
in the text. Typically, historical philosophy looks for the reasons behind, or
the justiWcation for, the statements made in the text under study. In the
other endeavour, the history of ideas, the aim is not to reach the truth
about the matter in hand, but to reach the understanding of a person or an
age or a historical succession. Typically the historian of ideas looks not for
the reasons so much as the sources, or causes, or motives, for saying what is
said in the target text.
Both of these disciplines base themselves on exegesis, but of the two, the
history of ideas is the one most closely bound up with the accuracy and
sensitivity of the reading of the text. It is possible to be a good philosopher
while being a poor exegete. At the beginning of his Philosophical Investigations
Wittgenstein oVers a discussion of St Augustine’s theory of language. What
he writes is very dubious exegesis; but this does not weaken the force of his
philosophical criticism of the ‘Augustinian’ theory of language. But Witt-
genstein did not really think of himself as engaged in historical philosophy,
any more than he thought of himself as engaged in the historiography of
ideas. The invocation of the great Augustine as the author of the mistaken
theory is intended merely to indicate that the error is one that is worth
attacking.
In diVerent histories of philosophy the skills of the historian and those of
the philosopher are exercised in diVerent proportions. The due proportion
varies in accordance with the purpose of the work and the Weld of
philosophy in question. The pursuit of historical understanding and the
pursuit of philosophical enlightenment are both legitimate approaches to
the history of philosophy, but both have their dangers. Historians who
study the history of thought without being themselves involved in the
philosophical problems that exercised past philosophers are likely to sin by
superWciality. Philosophers who read ancient, medieval, or early modern
texts without a knowledge of the historical context in which they were
xix
INTRODUCTION

written are likely to sin by anachronism. Rare is the historian of philosophy
who can tread Wrmly without falling into either trap.
Each of these errors can nullify the purpose of the enterprise. The
historian who is unconcerned by the philosophical problems that troubled
past writers has not really understood how they themselves conducted
their thinking. The philosopher who ignores the historical background of
past classics will gain no fresh light on the issues that concern us today, but
merely present contemporary prejudices in fancy dress.
The two dangers threaten in diVerent proportions in diVerent areas of
the history of philosophy. In the area of metaphysics it is superWciality
which is most to be guarded against: to someone without a personal
interest in fundamental philosophical problems the systems of the great
thinkers of the past will seem only quaint lunacy. In political philosophy
the great danger is anachronism: when we read Plato’s or Aristotle’s
criticisms of democracy, we shall not make head or tail of them unless
we know something about the institutions of ancient Athens. In between
metaphysics and political philosophy stand ethics and philosophy of mind:
here both dangers threaten with roughly equal force.
I shall attempt in these volumes to be both a philosophical historian and
a historical philosopher. Multi-authored histories are sometimes struc-
tured chronologically and sometimes structured thematically. I shall try
to combine both approaches, oVering in each volume Wrst a chronological
survey, and then a thematic treatment of particular philosophical topics of
abiding importance. The reader whose primary interest is historical will
focus on the chronological survey, referring where necessary to the
thematic sections for ampliWcation. The reader who is more concerned
with the philosophical issues will concentrate rather on the thematic
sections of the volumes, referring back to the chronological surveys to
place particular issues in context.
Thus in this Wrst volume I oVer in the Wrst part a conventional chrono-
logical tour from Pythagoras to Augustine, and in the second part a
more detailed treatment of topics where I believe we have still much to
learn from our predecessors in classical Greece and imperial Rome.
The topics of these thematic sections have been chosen partly with an eye
to the development of the same themes in the volumes that are yet
to come.
xx
INTRODUCTION

The audience I have in mind is at the level of second- or third-year
undergraduate study. I realize, however, that many of those interested in
the history of philosophy may themselves be enrolled in courses that are
not primarily philosophical. Accordingly, I shall do my best not to assume
a familiarity with contemporary philosophical techniques or terminology. I
aim also to write in a manner clear and light-hearted enough for the
history to be enjoyed by those who read it not for curricular purposes but
for their own enlightenment and entertainment.
xxi
INTRODUCTION

This page intentionally left blank 

1
Beginnings:
From Pythagoras to Plato
T
he history of philosophy does not begin with Aristotle, but the
historiography of philosophy does. Aristotle was the Wrst philosopher
who systematically studied, recorded, and criticized the work of previous
philosophers. In the Wrst book of the Metaphysics he summarizes the
teachings of his predecessors, from his distant intellectual ancestors
Pythagoras and Thales up to Plato, his teacher for twenty years. To this
day he is one of the most copious, and most reliable, sources of our
information about philosophy in its infancy.
The Four Causes
Aristotle oVers a classiWcation of the earliest Greek philosophers in
accordance with the structure of his system of the four causes. ScientiWc
inquiry, he believed, was above all inquiry into the causes of things;
and there were four diVerent kinds of cause: the material cause, the
eYcient cause, the formal cause, and the Wnal cause. To give a crude
illustration of what he had in mind: when Alfredo cooks a risotto, the
material causes of the risotto are the ingredients that go into it, the eYcient
cause is the chef himself, the recipe is the formal cause, and the satisfaction
of the clients of his restaurant is the Wnal cause. Aristotle believed that a
scientiWc understanding of the universe demanded an inquiry into the
operation in the world of causes of each of these kinds (Metaph. A 3.
983a24–b17).

Early philosophers on the Greek coast of Asia Minor concentrated on
the material cause: they sought the basic ingredients of the world we live
in. Thales and his successors posed the following question: At a fundamen-
tal level is the world made out of water, or air, or Wre, or earth, or a
combination of some or all of these? (Metaph. A 3. 983b20–84a16). Even if we
have an answer to this question, Aristotle thought, that is clearly not
enough to satisfy our scientiWc curiosity. The ingredients of a dish do
not put themselves together: there needs to be an agent operating upon
them, by cutting, mixing, stirring, heating, or the like. Some of these early
philosophers, Aristotle tells us, were aware of this and oVered conjectures
about the agents of change and development in the world. Sometimes it
would be one of the ingredients themselves—Wre was perhaps the most
promising suggestion, as being the least torpid of the elements. More often
it would be some agent, or pair of agents, both more abstract and more
picturesque, such as Love or Desire or Strife, or the Good and the Bad
(Metaph. A 3–4. 984b8–31).
Meanwhile in Italy—again according to Aristotle—there were, around
Pythagoras, mathematically inclined philosophers whose inquiries took
quite a diVerent course. A recipe, besides naming ingredients, will contain
a lot of numbers: so many grams of this, so many litres of that. The
Pythagoreans were more interested in the numbers in the world’s recipe
than in the ingredients themselves. They supposed, Aristotle says, that the
elements of numbers were the elements of all things, and the whole of the
heavens was a musical scale. They were inspired in their quest by their
discovery that the relationship between the notes of the scale played on a
lyre corresponded to diVerent numerical ratios between the lengths of the
strings. They then generalized this idea that qualitative diVerences might
be the upshot of numerical diVerences. Their inquiry, in Aristotle’s terms,
was an inquiry into the formal causes of the universe. (Metaph. A 5. 985b23–
986b2)
Coming to his immediate predecessors, Aristotle says that Socrates
preferred to concentrate on ethics rather than study the world of nature,
while Plato in his philosophical theory combined the approaches of
the schools of both Thales and Pythagoras. But Plato’s Theory of Ideas,
while being the most comprehensive scientiWc system yet devised, seemed
to Aristotle—for reasons that he summarizes here and develops in a
number of his treatises—to be unsatisfactory on several grounds. There
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
2

were so many things to explain, and the Ideas just added new items calling
for explanation: they did not provide a solution, they added to the problem
(Metaph. A 5. 990b1 V.).
Most dissertations that begin with literature searches seek to show
that all work hitherto has left a gap that will now be Wlled by the
author’s original research. Aristotle’s Metaphysics is no exception. His not
too hidden agenda is to show how previous philosophers neglected
the remaining member of the quartet of causes: the Wnal cause, which
was to play a most signiWcant role in his own philosophy of nature
(Metaph. A 5. 988b6–15). The earliest philosophy, he concluded, is, on
all subjects, full of babble, since in its beginnings it is but an infant
(Metaph. A 5. 993a15–7.)
A philosopher of the present day, reading the surviving fragments of the
earliest Greek thinkers, is impressed not so much by the questions they
were asking, as by the methods they used to answer them. After all, the
book of Genesis oVers us answers to the four causal questions set by
Aristotle. If we ask for the origin of the Wrst human being, for instance,
we are told that the eYcient cause was God, that the material cause was the
dust of the earth, that the formal cause was the image and likeness of God,
and that the Wnal cause was for man to have dominion over the Wsh of the
sea, the fowl of the air, and every living thing on earth. Yet Genesis is not a
work of philosophy.
On the other hand, Pythagoras is best known not for answering any of
the Aristotelian questions, but for proving the theorem that the square on
the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle is equal in area to the sum of the
squares on the other two sides. Thales, again, was believed by later Greeks
to have been the Wrst person to make an accurate prediction of an eclipse,
in the year 585 bc. These are surely achievements in geometry and
astronomy, not philosophy.
The fact is that the distinction between religion, science, and philosophy
was not as clear as it became in later centuries. The works of Aristotle and
his master Plato provide a paradigm of philosophy for every age, and to this
day anyone using the title ‘philosopher’ is claiming to be one of their heirs.
Writers in twenty-Wrst-century philosophy journals can be seen to be using
the same techniques of conceptual analysis, and often to be repeating or
refuting the same theoretical arguments, as are to be found in the writings
of Plato and Aristotle. But in those writings there is much else that would
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
3

not nowadays be thought of as philosophical discussion. From the sixth
century bc onwards elements of religion, science, and philosophy ferment
together in a single cultural cauldron. From our distance in time philoso-
phers, scientists, and theologians can all look back to these early thinkers as
their intellectual forefathers.
The Milesians
Only two sayings are recorded of Thales of Miletus (c.625–545 bc), trad-
itionally the founding father of Greek philosophy. They illustrate the
me´lange of science and religion, for one of them was ‘All things are full
of gods’, and the other was ‘Water is the Wrst principle of everything’.
Thales was a geometer, the Wrst to discover the method of inscribing a
right-angled triangle in a circle; he celebrated this discovery by sacriWcing
an ox to the gods (D.L. 1. 24–5). He measured the height of the pyramids by
measuring their shadows at the time of day when his own shadow was as
long as he was tall. He put his geometry to practical use: having proved
that triangles with one equal side and two equal angles are congruent, he
used this result to determine the distance of ships at sea.
Thales also had a reputation as an astronomer and a meteorologist. In
addition to predicting the eclipse, he is said to have been the Wrst to show
that the year contained 365 days, and to determine the dates of the summer
and winter solstices. He studied the constellations and made estimates of
the sizes of the sun and moon. He turned his skill as a weather forecaster to
good account: foreseeing an unusually good olive crop, he took a lease on
all the oil mills and made a fortune through his monopoly. Thus, Aristotle
said, he showed that philosophers could easily be rich if they wished (Pol. 1.
11. 1259a6–18).
If half the stories current about Thales in antiquity are true, he was a
man of many parts. But tradition’s portrait of him is ambiguous. On the
one hand, he Wgures as a philosophical entrepreneur, and a political and
military pundit. On the other hand, he became a byword for unworldly
absent-mindedness. Plato, among others, tells the following tale:
Thales was studying the stars and gazing into the sky, when he fell into a well, and
a jolly and witty Thracian servant girl made fun of him, saying that he was crazy to
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
4

know about what was up in the heavens while he could not see what was in front
of him beneath his feet. (Theaetetus 174a)
An unlikely story went around that he had met his death by just such a fall
while stargazing.
Thales was reckoned as one of the Seven Sages, or wise men, of Greece,
on a par with Solon, the great legislator of Athens. He is credited with a
number of aphorisms. He said that before a certain age it was too soon for
a man to marry; and after that age it was too late. When asked why he had
no children, he said ‘Because I am fond of children.’
Thales’ remarks heralded many centuries of philosophical disdain for
marriage. Anyone who makes a list of a dozen really great philosophers
is likely to discover that the list consists almost entirely of bachelors.
One plausible list, for instance, would include Plato, Augustine, Aquinas,
Scotus, Descartes, Locke, Spinoza, Hume, Kant, Hegel, and Wittgenstein,
none of whom were married. Aristotle is the grand exception that dis-
proves the rule that marriage is incompatible with philosophy.
Even in antiquity people found it hard to understand Thales’ adoption
of water as the ultimate principle of explanation. The earth, he said, rested
on water like a log Xoating in a stream—but then, asked Aristotle, what
does the water rest on? (Cael. 2. 13. 294a28–34). He went further and said
that everything came from and was in some sense made out of water.
Again, his reasons were obscure, and Aristotle could only conjecture that it
was because all animals and plants need water to live, or because semen is
moist (Metaph. A 3. 983b17–27).
It is easier to come to grips with the cosmology of Thales’ junior
compatriot Anaximander of Miletus (d. c.547 bc). We know rather more
about his views, because he left behind a book entitled On Nature, written in
prose, a medium just beginning to come into fashion. Like Thales he was
credited with a number of original scientiWc achievements: the Wrst map
of the world, the Wrst star chart, the Wrst Greek sundial, and an indoor
clock as well. He taught that the earth was cylindrical in shape, like a
stumpy column no higher than a third of its diameter. Around the world
were gigantic tyres full of Wre; each tyre was punctured with a hole
through which the Wre could be seen from outside, and the holes were
the sun and moon and stars. Blockages in the holes accounted for eclipses
of the sun and phases of the moon. The celestial Wre which is nowadays
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
5

largely hidden was once a great ball of Xame around the infant earth;
when this ball exploded, the fragments grew tyres like bark around
themselves.
Anaximander was much impressed by the way trees grow and shed their
bark. He used the same analogy to explain the origin of human beings.
Other animals, he observed, can look after themselves soon after birth, but
humans need a long nursing. If humans had always been as they are now,
the race would not have survived. In an earlier age, he conjectured,
humans had spent their childhood encased in a prickly bark, so that they
looked like Wsh and lived in water. At puberty they shed their bark, and
Anaximander with his sundial, in a Roman mosaic
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
6

stepped out onto dry land, into an environment in which they could take
care of themselves. Because of this, Anaximander, though not otherwise a
vegetarian, recommended that we abstain from eating Wsh, as the ancestors
of the human race (KRS 133–7).
Anaximander’s cosmology is more sophisticated than Thales’ in several
ways. First of all, he does not look for something to support the earth: it
stays where it is because it is equidistant from everything else and there is
no reason why it should move in any direction rather than any other (DK
12 A11; Aristotle, Cael. 2. 13. 295b10).
Secondly, he thinks it is an error to identify the ultimate material of the
universe with any of the elements we can see around us in the contem-
porary world, such as water or Wre. The fundamental principle of things,
he said, must be boundless or undeWned (apeiron). Anaximander’s Greek
word is often rendered as ‘the InWnite’, but that makes it sound too grand.
He may or may not have thought that his principle extended for ever in
space; what we do know is that he thought it had no beginning and no end
in time and that it did not belong to any particular kind or class of things.
‘Everlasting stuV’ is probably as close a paraphrase as we can get. Aristotle
was later to reWne the notion into his concept of prime matter.1
Thirdly, Anaximander oVered an account of the origin of the present
world, and explained what forces had acted to bring it into existence,
inquiring, as Aristotle would say, into the eYcient as well as the material
cause. He saw the universe as a Weld of competing opposites: hot and cold,
wet and dry. Sometimes one of a pair of opposites is dominant, sometimes
the other: they encroach upon each other and then withdraw, and their
interchange is governed by a principle of reciprocity. As Anaximander put
it poetically in his one surviving fragment, ‘they pay penalty and render
reparation to each other for their injustice under the arbitration of time’
(DK 12 B1). Thus, one surmises, in winter the hot and the dry make
reparation to the cold and the wet for the aggression they committed in
summer. Heat and cold were the Wrst of the opposites to make their
appearance, separating oV from an original cosmic egg of the everlasting
indeterminate stuV. From them developed the Wre and earth which, we
have seen, lay at the origin of our present cosmos.
1 See Ch. 5 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
7

Anaximenes (X. 546–525 bc), a generation younger than Anaximander,
was the last of the trio of Milesian cosmologists. In several ways he is closer
to Thales than to Anaximander, but it would be wrong to think that with
him science is going backwards rather than forwards. Like Thales,
he thought that the earth must rest on something, but he proposed air,
rather than water, for its cushion. The earth itself is Xat, and so are
the heavenly bodies. These, instead of rotating above and below us in
the course of a day, circle horizontally around us like a bonnet
rotating around a head (KRS 151–6). The rising and setting of the heavenly
bodies is explained, apparently, by the tilting of the Xat earth. As for the
ultimate principle, Anaximenes found Anaximander’s boundless matter
too rareWed a concept, and opted, like Thales, for a single one of the
existing elements as fundamental, though again he opted for air rather
than water.
In its stable state air is invisible, but when it is moved and condensed it
becomes Wrst wind and then cloud and then water, and Wnally water
condensed becomes mud and stone. RareWed air became Wre, thus com-
pleting the gamut of the elements. In this way rarefaction and condensa-
tion can conjure everything out of the underlying air (KRS 140–1). In
support of this claim Anaximenes appealed to experience, and indeed to
experiment—an experiment that the reader can easily carry out for herself.
Blow on your hand, Wrst with the lips pursed, and then from an open
mouth: the Wrst time the air will feel cold, and the second time hot. This,
argued Anaximenes, shows the connection between density and tempera-
ture (KRS 143).
The use of experiment, and the insight that changes of quality are linked
to changes of quantity, mark Anaximenes as a scientist in embryo. Only
in embryo, however: he has no means of measuring the quantities he
invokes, he devises no equations to link them, and his fundamental
principle retains mythical and religious properties.2 Air is divine, and
generates deities out of itself (KRS 144–6); air is our soul, and holds our
bodies together (KRS 160).
The Milesians, then, are not yet real physicists, but neither are they
myth-makers. They have not yet left myth behind, but they are moving
away from it. They are not true philosophers either, unless by ‘philosophy’
2 See J. Barnes, The Presocratic Philosophers, rev. edn. (London: Routledge, 1982), 46–8.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
8

one simply means infant science. They make little use of conceptual
analysis and the a priori argument that has been the stock-in-trade of
philosophers from Plato to the present day. They are speculators, in whose
speculations elements of philosophy, science, and religion mingle in a rich
and heady brew.
The Pythagoreans
In antiquity Pythagoras shared with Thales the credit for introducing
philosophy into the Greek world. He was born in Samos, an island
oV the coast of Asia Minor, about 570 bc. At the age of 40 he emigrated
to Croton on the toe of Italy. There he took a leading part in the
political aVairs of the city, until he was banished in a violent revolution
about 510 bc. He moved to nearby Metapontum, where he died at the
turn of the century. During his time at Croton he founded a semi-
religious community, which outlived him until it was scattered
about 450 bc. He is credited with inventing the word ‘philosopher’:
instead of claiming to be a sage or wise man (sophos) he modestly said
that he was only a lover of wisdom (philosophos) (D.L. 8. 8). The details of
his life are swamped in legend, but it is clear that he practised
both mathematics and mysticism. In both Welds his intellectual inXuence,
acknowledged or implicit, was strong throughout antiquity, from Plato to
Porphyry.
The Pythagoreans’ discovery that there was a relationship between
musical intervals and numerical ratios led to the belief that the study of
mathematics was the key to the understanding of the structure and order
of the universe. Astronomy and harmony, they said, were sister sciences,
one for the eyes and one for the ears (Plato, Rep. 530d). However, it was not
until two millennia later that Galileo and his successors showed the sense
in which it is true that the book of the universe is written in numbers. In
the ancient world arithmetic was too entwined with number mysticism to
promote scientiWc progress, and the genuine scientiWc advances of the
period (such as Aristotle’s zoology or Galen’s medicine) were achieved
without beneWt of mathematics.
Pythagoras’ philosophical community at Croton was the prototype of
many such institutions: it was followed by Plato’s Academy, Aristotle’s
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
9

Lyceum, Epicurus’ Garden, and many others. Some such communities were
legal entities, and others less formal; some resembled a modern research
institute, others were more like monasteries. Pythagoras’ associates held
their property in common and lived under a set of ascetic and ceremonial
rules: observe silence, do not break bread, do not pick up crumbs, do not
poke the Wre with a sword, always put on the right shoe before the left, and
so on. The Pythagoreans were not, to begin with, complete vegetarians, but
they avoided certain kinds of meat, Wsh, and poultry. Most famously, they
were forbidden to eat beans (KRS 271–2, 275–6).
The dietary rules were connected with Pythagoras’ beliefs about the
soul. It did not die with the body, he believed, but migrated elsewhere,
perhaps into an animal body of a diVerent kind.3 Some Pythagoreans
extended this into belief in a three-thousand-year cosmic cycle: a human
soul after death would enter, one after the other, every kind of land, sea, or
Pythagoras commending vegetarianism, as imagined by Rubens
3 See Ch. 7 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
10

air creature, and Wnally return into a human body for history to repeat
itself (Herodotus 2. 123; KRS 285). Pythagoras himself, however, after his
death was believed by his followers to have become a god. They wrote
biographies of him full of wonders, crediting him with second sight and the
gift of bilocation; he had a golden thigh, they said, and was the son of
Apollo. More prosaically, the expression ‘Ipse dixit’ was coined in his
honour.
Xenophanes
The death of Pythagoras, and the destruction of Miletus in 494, brought to
an end the Wrst era of Presocratic thought. In the next generation we
encounter thinkers who are not only would-be scientists, but also philoso-
phers in the modern sense of the word. Xenophanes of Colophon (a town
near present-day Izmir, some hundred miles north of Miletus) straddles the
two eras in his long life (c.570–c.470 bc). He is also, like Pythagoras, a link
between the eastern and the western centres of Greek cultures. Expelled
from Colophon in his twenties, he became a wandering minstrel, and by his
own account travelled around Greece for sixty-seven years, giving recitals of
his own and others’ poems (D.L. 9. 18). He sang of wine and games and
parties, but it is his philosophical verses that are most read today.
Like the Milesians, Xenophanes propounded a cosmology. The basic
element, he maintained, was not water nor air, but earth, and the earth
reaches down below us to inWnity. ‘All things are from earth and in earth
all things end’ (D.K. 21 B27) calls to mind Christian burial services and the
Ash Wednesday exhortation ‘remember, man, thou art but dust and unto
dust thou shalt return’. But Xenophanes elsewhere links water with earth
as the original source of things, and indeed he believed that our earth must
at one time have been covered by the sea. This is connected with the most
interesting of his contributions to science: the observation of the fossil
record.
Seashells are found well inland, and on mountains too, and in the quarries in
Syracuse impressions of Wsh and seaweed have been found. An impression of a bay
leaf was found in Paros deep in a rock, and in Malta there are Xat shapes of all kinds
of sea creatures. These were produced when everything was covered with mud
long ago, and the impressions dried in the mud. (KRS 184)
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
11

Xenophanes’ speculations about the heavenly bodies are less impressive.
Since he believed that the earth stretched beneath us to inWnity, he could
not accept that the sun went below the earth when it set. On the other
hand, he found implausible Anaximenes’ idea of a horizontal rotation
around a tilting earth. He put forward a new and ingenious explanation:
the sun, he maintained, was new every day. It came into existence each
morning from a congregation of tiny sparks, and later vanished oV into
inWnity. The appearance of circular movement is due simply to the great
distance between the sun and ourselves. It follows from this theory that
there are innumerable suns, just as there are innumerable days, because the
world lasts for ever even though it passes through aqueous and terrestrial
phases (KRS 175, 179).
Though Xenophanes’ cosmology is ill-founded, it is notable for its
naturalism: it is free from the animist and semi-religious elements to be
found in other Presocratic philosophers. The rainbow, for instance, is not a
divinity (like Iris in the Greek pantheon) nor a divine sign (like the one
seen by Noah). It is simply a multicoloured cloud (KRS 178). This natural-
ism did not mean that Xenophanes was uninterested in religion: on the
contrary, he was the most theological of all the Presocratics. But he
despised popular superstition, and defended an austere and sophisticated
monotheism.4 He was not dogmatic, however, either in theology or in
physics.
God did not tell us mortals all when time began
Only through long-time search does knowledge come to man.
(KRS 188)
Heraclitus
Heraclitus was the last, and the most famous, of the early Ionian philoso-
phers. He was perhaps thirty years younger than Xenophanes, since he
is reported to have been middle-aged when the sixth century ended (D.L.
9. 1). He lived in the great metropolis of Ephesus, midway between Miletus
and Colophon. We possess more substantial portions of his work than of
any previous philosopher, but that does not mean we Wnd him easier to
4 See Ch. 9 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
12

understand. His fragments take the form of pithy, crafted prose aphorisms,
which are often obscure and sometimes deliberately ambiguous. Heraclitus
did not argue, he pronounced. His delphic style may have been an imita-
tion of the oracle of Apollo which, in his own words, ‘neither speaks, nor
conceals, but gestures’ (KRS 244). The many philosophers in later centuries
who have admired Heraclitus have been able to give their own colouring to
his paradoxical, chameleon-like dicta.
Even in antiquity Heraclitus was found diYcult. He was nicknamed
‘the Enigmatic One’ and ‘Heraclitus the Obscure’ (D.L. 9. 6). He wrote a
three-book treatise on philosophy—now lost—and deposited it in the
great temple of Artemis (St Paul’s ‘Diana of the Ephesians’). People could
not make up their minds whether it was a text of physics or a political
tract. ‘What I understand of it is excellent,’ Socrates is reported as saying.
‘What I don’t understand may well be excellent also; but only a deep sea
diver could get to the bottom of it’ (D.L. 2. 22). The nineteenth-century
German idealist Hegel, who was a great admirer of Heraclitus, used the
same marine metaphor to express an opposite judgement. When we reach
Heraclitus after the Xuctuating speculations of the earlier Presocratics,
Hegel wrote, we come at last in sight of land. He went on to add, proudly,
‘There is no proposition of Heraclitus which I have not adopted in my
own Logic.’5
Heraclitus, like Descartes and Kant in later ages, saw himself as making a
completely new start in philosophy. He thought the work of previous
thinkers was worthless: Homer should have been eliminated at an early
stage of any poetry competition, and Hesiod, Pythagoras, and Xenophanes
were merely polymaths with no real sense (D.L. 9. 1). But, again like
Descartes and Kant, Heraclitus was more inXuenced by his predecessors
than he realized. Like Xenophanes, he was highly critical of popular
religion: oVering blood sacriWce to purge oneself of blood guilt was like
trying to wash oV mud with mud. Praying to statues was like whispering in
an empty house, and phallic processions and Dionysiac rites were simply
disgusting (KRS 241, 243).
Again like Xenophanes, Heraclitus believed that the sun was new every
day (Aristotle, Mete. 2. 2355b13–14), and, like Anaximander, he thought the
5 Lectures on the History of Philosophy, ed. and trans. E. S. Haldane and F. H. Simpson (London:
Routledge, 1968), 279.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
13

sun was constrained by a cosmic principle of reparation (KRS 226). The
ephemeral theory of the sun is indeed in Heraclitus expanded into a
doctrine of universal Xux. Everything, he said, is in motion, and nothing
stays still; the world is like a Xowing stream. If we step into the same river
twice, we cannot put our feet twice into the same water, since the water is
not the same two moments together (KRS 214). That seems true enough,
but on the face of it Heraclitus went too far when he said that we cannot
even step twice into the same river (Plato, Cra. 402a). Taken literally, this
seems false, unless we take the criterion of identity for a river to be the body
of water it contains rather than the course it Xows. Taken allegorically, it is
presumably a claim that everything in the world is composed of constantly
changing constituents: if this is what is meant, Aristotle said, the changes
must be imperceptible ones (Ph. 8. 3. 253b9 V.). Perhaps this is what is hinted
at in Heraclitus’ aphorism that hidden harmony is better than manifest
harmony—the harmony being the underlying rhythm of the universe in
Xux (KRS 207). Whatever Heraclitus meant by his dictum, it had a long
history ahead of it in later Greek philosophy.
A raging Wre, even more than a Xowing stream, is a paradigm of constant
change, ever consuming, ever refuelled. Heraclitus once said that the world
was an ever-living Wre: sea and earth are the ashes of this perpetual bonWre.
Fire is like gold: you can exchange gold for all kinds of goods, and Wre can
turn into any of the elements (KRS 217–19). This Wery world is the only
world there is, not made by gods or men, but governed throughout by
Logos. It would be absurd, he argued, to think that this glorious cosmos is
just a piled-up heap of rubbish (DK 22 B124). ‘Logos’ is the everyday Greek
term for a written or spoken word, but from Heraclitus onwards almost
every Greek philosopher gave it one or more of several grander meanings.
It is often rendered by translators as ‘Reason’—whether to refer to the
reasoning powers of human individuals, or to some more exalted cosmic
principle of order and beauty. The term found its way into Christian
theology when the author of the fourth gospel proclaimed, ‘In the begin-
ning was the Logos, and the Logos was with God, and the Logos was God’
(John 1: 1).
This universal Logos, Heraclitus says, is hard to grasp and most men
never succeed in doing so. By comparison with someone who has woken
up to the Logos, they are like sleepers curled up in their own dream-world
instead of facing up to the single, universal truth (S.E., M. 7. 132). Humans
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
14

fall into three classes, at various removes from the rational Wre that governs
the universe. A philosopher like Heraclitus is closest to the Wery Logos and
receives most warmth from it; next, ordinary people when awake draw
light from it when they use their own reasoning powers; Wnally, those who
are asleep have the windows of their soul blocked up and keep contact with
nature only through their breathing (S.E., M. 7. 129–30).6 Is the Logos God?
Heraclitus gave a typically quibbling answer. ‘The one thing that alone is
truly wise is both unwilling and willing to be called by the name of Zeus.’
Presumably, he meant that the Logos was divine, but was not to be
identiWed with any of the gods of Olympus.
The human soul is itself Wre: Heraclitus sometimes lists soul, along with
earth and water, as three elements. Since water quenches Wre, the best soul
is a dry soul, and must be kept from moisture. It is hard to know exactly
what counts as moisture in this context, but alcohol certainly does: a
drunk, Heraclitus says, is a man led by a boy (KRS 229–31). But Heraclitus’
use of ‘wet’ also seems close to the modern slang sense: brave and tough
men who die in battle, for instance, have dry souls that do not suVer the
death of water but go to join the cosmic Wre (KRS 237).7
What Hegel most admired in Heraclitus was his insistence on the coinci-
dence of opposites, such as that the universe is both divisible and indivisible,
generated and ungenerated, mortal and immortal. Sometimes these iden-
tiWcations of opposites are straightforward statements of the relativity of
certain predicates. The most famous, ‘The way up and the way down are
one and the same’, sounds very deep. However, it need mean no more than
that when, skipping down a mountain, I meet you toiling upward, we are
both on the same path. DiVerent things are attractive at diVerent times:
food when you are hungry, bed when you are sleepy (KRS 201). DiVerent
things attract diVerent species: sea-water is wholesome for Wsh, but poison-
ous for humans; donkeys prefer rubbish to gold (KRS 199).
Not all Heraclitus’ pairs of coinciding opposites admit of easy resolution
by relativity, and even the most harmless-looking ones may have a more
profound signiWcance. Thus Diogenes Laertius tells us that the sequence
Wre–air–water–earth is the road downward, and the sequence earth–
water–air–Wre is the road upward (D.L. 9. 9–11). These two roads can
6 Readers of Plato are bound to be struck by the anticipation of the allegory of the Cave in the
Republic.
7 See the discussion in KRS 208.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
15

only be regarded as the same if they are seen as two stages on a continuous,
everlasting, cosmic progress. Heraclitus did indeed believe that the cosmic
Wre went through stages of kindling and quenching (KRS 217). It is
presumably also in this sense that we are to understand that the universe
is both generated and ungenerated, mortal and immortal (DK 22 B50). The
underlying process has no beginning and no end, but each cycle of kindling
and quenching is an individual world that comes into and goes out of
existence.
Though several of the Presocratics are reported to have been politically
active, Heraclitus has some claim, on the basis of the fragments, to be the
Wrst to produce a political philosophy. He was not indeed interested in
practical politics: an aristocrat with a claim to be a ruler, he waived his
claim and passed on his wealth to his brother. He is reported to have said
that he preferred playing with children to conferring with politicians. But
he was perhaps the Wrst philosopher to speak of a divine law—not a
physical law, but a prescriptive law, that trumped all human laws.
There is a famous passage in Robert Bolt’s play about Thomas More, A
Man for All Seasons. More is urged by his son-in-law Roper to arrest a spy, in
contravention of the law. More refuses to do so: ‘I know what’s legal, not
what’s right; and I’ll stick to what’s legal.’ More denies, in answer to Roper,
that he is setting man’s law above God’s. ‘I’m not God,’ he says, ‘but in the
thickets of the law, there I am a forester.’ Roper says that he would cut
down every law in England to get at the Devil. More replies, ‘And when the
last law was down, and the Devil turned round on you—where would you
hide, Roper, the laws all being Xat?’8
It is diYcult to Wnd chapter and verse in More’s own writings or
recorded sayings for this exchange. But two fragments of Heraclitus express
the sentiments of the participants. ‘The people must Wght on behalf of the
law as they would for the city wall’ (KRS 249). But though a city must rely
on its law, it must place a much greater reliance on the universal law that is
common to all. ‘All the laws of humans are nourished by a single law, the
divine law’ (KRS 250).
What survives of Heraclitus amounts to no more than 15,000 words. The
enormous inXuence he has exercised on philosophers ancient and modern
is a matter for astonishment. There is something Wtting about his position
8 Robert Bolt, A Man for All Seasons (London: Heinemann, 1960), 39.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
16

in Raphael’s fresco in the Vatican stanze, The School of Athens. In this
monumental scenario, which contains imaginary portraits of many
Greek philosophers, Plato and Aristotle, as is right and just, occupy the
centre stage. But the Wgure to which one’s eye is immediately drawn on
entering the room is a late addition to the fresco: the booted, brooding
Wgure of Heraclitus, deep in meditation on the lowest step.9
Parmenides and the Eleatics
In Roman times Heraclitus was known as ‘the weeping philosopher’.
He was contrasted with the laughing philosopher, the atomist Democritus.
A more appropriate contrast would be with Parmenides, the head of
the Italian school of philosophy in the early Wfth century. For classical
Athens, Heraclitus was the proponent of the theory that everything was in
motion, and Parmenides the proponent of the theory that nothing was
in motion. Plato and Aristotle struggled, in diVerent ways, to defend the
audacious thesis that some things were in motion and some things were
at rest.
Parmenides, according to Aristotle (Metaph. A 5. 986b21–5), was a pupil of
Xenophanes, but he was too young to have studied under him in Colo-
phon. He spent most of his life in Elea, seventy miles or so south of Naples.
There he may have encountered Xenophanes on his wanderings. Like
Xenophanes, he was a poet: he wrote a philosophical poem in clumsy
verse, of which we possess about 120 lines. He is the Wrst philosopher whose
writing has come down to us in continuous fragments that are at all
substantial.
The poem consists of a prologue and two parts, one called the path of
truth, the other the path of mortal opinion. The prologue shows us the
poet riding in a chariot with the daughters of the Sun, leaving behind the
halls of night and travelling towards the light. They reach the gates which
lead to the paths of night and day; it is not clear whether these are the same
as the paths of truth and opinion. At all events, the goddess who welcomes
him on his quest tells him that he must learn both:
9 The Wgure traditionally regarded as Heraclitus does not Wgure on cartoons for the fresco.
Michelangelo is said to have been Raphael’s model, though R. Jones and N. Penny, Raphael,
(London: Yale University Press, 1983) 77, doubt both traditions.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
17

Besides trustworthy truth’s unquaking heart
Learn the false Wctions of poor mortals’ art.
(KRS 288. 29–30)
There are only two possible routes of inquiry:
Two ways there are of seeking how to see
One that it is, and is not not to be—
That is the path of Truth’s companion Trust—
The other it is not, and not to be it must.
(KRS 291. 2–5)
(I must ask the reader to believe that Parmenides’ Greek is as clumsy and as
baZing as this English text.) Parmenides’ Way of Truth, thus riddlingly
introduced, marks an epoch in philosophy. It is the founding charter of a
new discipline: ontology or metaphysics, the science of Being.
Whatever there is, whatever can be thought of, is for Parmenides
nothing other than Being. Being is one and indivisible: it has no beginning
and no end, and it is not subject to temporal change. When a kettle of
water boils away, this may be, in Heraclitus’ words, the death of water and
the birth of air; but for Parmenides it is not the death or birth of Being.
Whatever changes may take place, they are not changes from being to non-
being; they are all changes within Being. But for Parmenides there are not,
in fact, any real changes at all. Being is everlastingly the same, and time is
unreal because past, present, and future are all one.10
The everyday world of apparent change is described in the second part of
Parmenides’ poem, the Way of Seeming, which his goddess introduces thus:
I bring to an end my trusty word and thought,
The tale of Truth. The rest’s another sort—
A pack of lies expounding men’s beliefs.
(KRS 300)
It is not clear why Parmenides feels obliged to reproduce the false notions
that are entertained by deluded mortals. If we took the second part of his
poem out of its context, we would see in it a cosmology very much in
the tradition of the Ionian thinkers. To the normal pairs of opposites
Parmenides adds light and darkness, and he is given credit by Aristotle
for introducing Love as the eYcient cause of everything (Metaph. A 3.
984b27). The Way of Seeming in fact includes two truths not hitherto
10 A detailed examination of Parmenides’ ontology will be found in Ch. 6 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
18

generally known: Wrst, that the earth is a sphere (D.L. 9. 21), and secondly,
that the Morning Star is the same as the Evening Star. Parmenides’
disowned discovery was to provide philosophers of a later generation
with a paradigm for identity statements.11
Parmenides had a pupil, Melissus, who came from Pythagoras’ island of
Samos and who was said to have studied also with Heraclitus. He was active
in politics, and rose to the rank of admiral of the Samos Xeet. In 441 bc
Samos was attacked by Athens, and though Athens was Wnally victorious in
the war Melissus is recorded as having twice inXicted defeat on the Xeet of
Pericles (Plutarch, Pericles 166c–d; D.L. 9. 4).
Melissus expounded the philosophy of Parmenides’ poem in plain prose,
arguing that the universe was unlimited, unchangeable, immovable, indivis-
ible, and homogeneous. He was remembered for drawing two consequences
from this monistic view: (1) pain was unreal, because it implied (impossibly)
a deWciency of being; (2) there was no such thing as a vacuum, since it would
have to be a piece of Unbeing. Local motion was therefore impossible, for the
bodies that occupy space have no room to move into (KRS 534).
Another pupil of Parmenides was Zeno of Elea. He produced a set of
more famous arguments against the possibility of motion. The Wrst
went like this: ‘There is no motion, for whatever moves must reach the
middle of its course before it reaches the end.’ To get to the far end of a
stadium, you have to run to the half-way point, to get to the half-way point
you must reach the point half-way to that, and so ad inWnitum. Better
known is the second argument, commonly known as Achilles and the
tortoise. ‘The slower’, Zeno said, ‘will never be overtaken by the swifter, for
the pursuer must Wrst reach the point from which the fugitive departed, so
that the slower must necessarily remain ahead.’ Let us suppose that Achilles
runs four times as fast as the tortoise, and that the tortoise is given a forty-
metre start when they run a hundred-metre race against each other.
According to Zeno’s argument, Achilles can never win. For by the time
he reaches the forty-metre mark, the tortoise is ahead by ten metres. By the
time Achilles has run those ten, the tortoise is still ahead by two and a half
metres. Each time Achilles makes up a gap, the tortoise opens up a new,
shorter, gap, so he can never overtake him (Aristotle, Ph. 5. 9. 239b11–14).
11 The 19th-century philosopher Gottlob Frege used the example to introduce his celebrated
distinction between sense and reference.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
19

These and other similar arguments of Zeno assume that distances and
motions are inWnitely divisible. His arguments have been dismissed by some
philosophers as ingenious but sophistical paradoxes. Others have admired
them greatly: Bertrand Russell, for instance, claimed that they provided the
basis of the nineteenth-century mathematical renaissance of Weierstrass
and Cantor.12 Aristotle, who preserved Zeno’s puzzles for us, claimed to
disarm them, and to re-establish the possibility of motion, by distinguishing
between two forms of inWnity: actual inWnity and potential inWnity.13 But it
was not for many centuries that the issues raised by Zeno were given
solutions that satisWed both philosophers and mathematicians.
Empedocles
The most Xamboyant of the early philosophers of Greek Italy was Empedo-
cles, who Xourished in the middle of the Wfth century. He was a native of
Acragas, the town on the south coast of Sicily which is now Agrigento. The
town’s port today bears the name Porto Empedocle, but this testiWes not to
an enduring veneration of the philosopher, but to the Risorgimento’s
passion for renaming sites in honour of Italy’s past glories.
Empedocles came of an aristocratic family which owned a stud of
prizewinning horses. In politics, however, he is reputed to have been a
democrat; he is said to have foiled a plot to turn the city into a dictatorship.
The grateful citizens, the story goes on, oVered to make him king, but
he refused the oYce, preferring his frugal life as a physician and counsellor
(D.L. 8. 63). If free of ambition, however, he was not devoid of vanity, and
in one of his poems he boasts that wherever he goes men and women
throng to him for advice and healing. He claimed to possess drugs to
ward oV old age, and to know spells to control the weather. In the same
poem he frankly professed himself to have achieved divine status (D.L. 8. 66).
DiVerent biographical traditions, not all chronologically possible, make
Empedocles a pupil of Pythagoras, of Xenophanes, and of Parmenides.
Certainly he imitated Parmenides by writing a hexameter poem On Nature;
this poem, dedicated to his friend Pausanias, contained about 2,000 lines, of
which we possess about a Wfth. He also wrote a religious poem, PuriWcations,
12 The Principles of Mathematics (London: Allen & Unwin, 1903), 347.
13 See Ch. 5 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
20

of which less has been preserved. Scholars do not agree to which poem
should be attached the many disjointed citations that survive; some,
indeed, think that the two poems belonged to a single work. Further pieces
of the textual jigsaw were recovered when forty papyrus fragments were
identiWed in the archives of the University of Strasbourg in 1994. As a poet,
Empedocles was more Xuent than Parmenides, and also more versatile.
According to Aristotle, he wrote an epic on Xerxes’ invasion of Greece,
and according to other traditions he was the author of several tragedies
(D.L. 8. 57).
Empedocles’ philosophy of nature can be regarded, from one point of
view, as a synthesis of the thought of the Ionian philosophers. As we have
seen, each of them had singled out some one substance as the basic or
dominant stuV of the universe: Thales had privileged water, Anaximenes
air, Xenophanes earth, and Heraclitus Wre. For Empedocles all four of these
substances stood on equal terms as the fundamental ingredients, or ‘roots’
as he put it, of the universe. These roots had always existed, he maintained,
but they mingle with each other in various proportions in such a way as to
produce the familiar furniture of the world and also the denizens of the
heavens.
From these four sprang what was and is and ever shall:
Trees, beasts, and human beings, males and females all,
Birds of the air, and Wshes bred by water bright;
The age-old gods as well, long worshipped in the height.
These four are all there is, each other interweaving
And, intermixed, the world’s variety achieving.
(KRS 355)
What Empedocles called ‘roots’ were called by Plato and later Greek
thinkers stoicheia, a word earlier used to indicate the syllables of a word.
The Latin translation elementum, from which our ‘element’ is derived,
compares the roots not to syllables, but to letters of the alphabet: an
elementum is an LMNtum. Empedocles’ quartet of elements was assigned a
fundamental role in physics and chemistry by philosophers and scientists
until the time of Boyle in the seventeenth century. Indeed, it can be
claimed that it is still with us, in altered form. Empedocles thought of
his elements as four diVerent kinds of matter; we think of solid, liquid, and
gas as three states of matter. Ice, water, and steam would be, for Empedo-
cles, speciWc instances of earth, water, and air; for us they are three diVerent
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
21

states of the same substance, H2O. It was not unreasonable to think of Wre,
and especially the Wre of the sun, as a fourth element of equal importance.
One might say that the twentieth-century emergence of the science of
plasma physics, which studies the properties of matter at the sun’s tem-
perature, has restored Empedocles’ fourth element to parity with the other
three.
Aristotle praised Empedocles for having realized that a cosmological
theory must not just identify the elements of the universe, but must
assign causes for the development and intermingling of the elements to
make the living and inanimate compounds of the actual world. Empedo-
cles assigns this role to Love and Strife: Love combines the elements, and
Strife forces them apart. At one time the roots grow to be one out of many,
at another time they split to be many out of one. These things, he
said, never cease their continual interchange, now through love coming
together into one, now carried apart from each other by Strife’s hatred
(KRS 348).
Love and Strife are the picturesque ancestors of the forces of attraction
and repulsion which have Wgured in physical theory throughout the
ages. For Empedocles, history is a cycle in which sometimes Love is
dominant, and sometimes Strife. Under the inXuence of Love the elements
combine into a homogeneous, harmonious, and resplendent sphere, rem-
iniscent of Parmenides’ universe. Under the inXuence of Strife the elements
separate out, but when Love begins to regain the ground it had lost, all the
diVerent species of living beings appear (KRS 360). All compound beings,
such as animals and birds and Wsh, are temporary creatures that come and
go; only the elements are everlasting, and only the cosmic cycle goes on for
ever.
To explain the origin of living species, Empedocles put forward a
remarkable theory of evolution by survival of the Wttest. First Xesh and
bone emerged as chemical mixtures of the elements, Xesh being consti-
tuted by Wre, air, and water in equal parts, and bone being two parts water
to two parts earth and four parts Wre. From these constituents unattached
limbs and organs were formed: unsocketed eyes, arms without shoulders,
and faces without necks (KRS 375–6). These roamed around until they
chanced to Wnd partners; they formed unions, which were often, at this
preliminary stage, quite unsuitable. Thus there arose various monstrosities:
human-headed oxen, ox-headed humans, androgynous creatures with
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
22

faces and breasts on front and back (KRS 379). Most of these fortuitous
organisms were fragile or sterile; only the Wttest structures survived to be
the human and animal species we know. Their Wtness to reproduce was a
matter of chance, not design (Aristotle, Ph. 2. 8. 198b29).
Aristotle paid tribute to Empedocles for being the Wrst to grasp the
important biological principle that diVerent parts of dissimilar living organ-
isms might have homologous functions: e.g. olives and eggs, leaves and
feathers (Aristotle, GA 1. 23. 731a4). But he was contemptuous of his attempt
to reduce teleology to chance, and for many centuries biologists followed
Aristotle rather than Empedocles. Empedocles had the last laugh when
Darwin saluted himfor‘shadowing forth theprinciple ofnatural selection’.14
Empedocles employed his quartet of elements in giving an account of
sense-perception, based on the principle that like is known by like. In his
poem PuriWcations he combined his physical theory with the Pythagorean
doctrine of metempsychosis.15 Sinners—divine or human—are punished
when Strife casts their souls into diVerent kinds of creatures on land and
sea. A cycle of reincarnation held out a hope of eventual deiWcation for
privileged classes of men: seers, bards, doctors, and princes (KRS 409).
Empedocles, of course, had a claim to identify himself with all these
professions.
In his writing, Empedocles moves seamlessly between an austerely
mechanistic mode and a mystically religious one. He sometimes uses divine
names for his four elements (Zeus, Hera, Aidoneus, and Nestis) and
identiWes his Love with the goddess Aphrodite, whom he celebrates in
terms anticipating Schiller’s great ‘Ode to Joy’ (KRS 349). No doubt his own
claim to divinity can be deXated in the same way as he demythologizes the
Olympian gods. But it caught the attention of posterity, especially in the
legend of his death.
A woman called Pantheia, the story goes, given up for dead by the
physicians, was miraculously restored to life by Empedocles. To celebrate,
he oVered a sacriWcial banquet to eighty guests in a rich man’s house at the
foot of Etna. When the other guests went to sleep, he heard his name called
from heaven. He hastened to the summit of the volcano, and then, in
Milton’s words,
14 Appendix to 6th edn. of The Origin of Species, quoted in A. Gottlieb, The Dream of Reason:
A History of Western Philosophy from the Greeks to the Renaissance (London: Allen Lane, 2000), 80.
15 See Ch. 7 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
23

to be deemed
A god, leaped fondly into Aetna Xames.
(Paradise Lost iii. 470)
Matthew Arnold dramatized this story in his Empedocles on Etna.
He places these verses in the mouth of the philosopher at the crater’s
rim:
This heart will glow no more; thou art
A living man no more, Empedocles!
Nothing but a devouring Xame of thought—
But a naked, eternally restless mind!
To the elements it came from
Everything will return
Our bodies to earth,
Our blood to water,
Heat to Wre,
Breath to air.
They were well born, they will be well entomb’d—
But mind?
(lines 326 –38)
Arnold gives the philosopher, before his Wnal leap, the hope that in reward
for his love of truth his intellect will never wholly perish.
Anaxagoras
If Empedocles achieved a kind of immortality as a precursor of Darwin, his
contemporary Anaxagoras is sometimes regarded as an intellectual ances-
tor of the currently popular cosmology of the big bang. Anaxagoras was
born around 500 bc in Clazomenae, near Izmir, and was possibly a pupil of
Anaximenes. After the end of the wars between Persia and Greece, he came
to Athens and was a client of the statesman Pericles. He thus stands at the
head of the distinguished series of philosophers whom Athens either bred
or welcomed. When Pericles fell from favour, Anaxagoras too became a
target of popular attack. He was prosecuted for treason and impiety, and
Xed to Lampsacus on the Hellespont, where he lived in honourable exile
until his death in 428.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
24

Here is his account of the beginning of the universe: ‘All things were
together, inWnite in number and inWnite in smallness; for the small too was
inWnite. While all things were together, nothing was recognizable because
of its smallness. Everything lay under air and ether, both inWnite’ (KRS
467). This primeval pebble began to rotate, throwing oV the surrounding
ether and air and forming out of them the stars and the sun and the moon.
The rotation caused the separation of dense from rare, of hot from cold, of
dry from wet, and bright from dark. But the separation was never com-
plete, and to this day there remains in every single thing a portion of
everything else. There is a little whiteness in what is black, a little cold in
what is hot, and so on: things are named after the item that is dominant in
it (Aristotle, Ph. 1. 4. 187a23). This is most obvious in the case of semen,
which must contain hair and Xesh, and much, much more; but it must
also be true of the food we eat (KRS 483–4, 496). In this sense, as things were
in the beginning, so now they are all together.
The expansion of the universe, Anaxagoras maintained, has continued
in the present and will continue in the future (KRS 476). Perhaps it has
already generated worlds other than our own. As a result of the presence of
everything in everything, he says,
men have been formed and the other ensouled animals. And the men possess
farms and inhabit cities just as we do, and they have a sun and a moon and the rest
just like us. The earth produces things of every sort for them to be harvested and
stored, as it does for us. I have said all this about the process of separating oV,
because it would have happened not only here with us, but elsewhere too.
(KRS 498)
Anaxagoras thus has a claim to be the originator of the idea, later proposed
by Giordano Bruno and popular again today in some quarters, that our
cosmos is just one of many which may, like ours, be inhabited by intelli-
gent creatures.
The motion that sets in train the development of the universe is,
according to Anaxagoras, the work of Mind. ‘All things were together:
then Mind came and gave them order’ (D.L. 2. 6). Mind is inWnite
and separate, and has no part in the general commingling of elements; if
it did, it would get drawn into the evolutionary process and could not
control it. This teaching, placing mind Wrmly in control of matter, so
struck his contemporaries that they nicknamed Anaxagoras himself the
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
25

Mind. It is diYcult, however, to assess exactly what his doctrine, though it
greatly impressed both Plato and Aristotle, actually meant in practice.
In Plato’s dialogue Phaedo, Socrates, in his last days in prison, is made to
express his gradual disillusionment with the mechanistic explanations of
natural science to be found in the early philosophers. He was pleased, he
said, when he heard that Anaxagoras had explained everything by nous, or
mind; but he was disappointed by the total absence of reference to value in
his work. Anaxagoras was like someone who said that all Socrates’ actions
were performed with his intelligence, and then gave the reason why he was
sitting here in prison by talking about the constitution of his body from
bones and sinews, and the nature and properties of these parts, without
mentioning that he judged it better to sit there in obedience to the
Athenian court’s sentence. Teleological explanation was more profound
than mechanistic explanation. ‘If anyone wants to Wnd out the reason why
each thing comes to be or perishes or exists, this is what he must Wnd out
about it: how is it best for that thing to exist, or to act or be acted upon in
any way?’ (Phd. 97d).
Anaxagoras speaks about his Mind in ways appropriate todivinity,and this
could have made him vulnerable to a charge, in the Athenian courts, of
introducing strange gods. But in fact the charge of impiety seems to have
been based on his scientiWc conjectures. The sun, he said, was a Wery lump of
metal, somewhat larger than the Peloponnesus. This was taken to be
incompatible with the veneration appropriate to the sun as divine. In exile
in Lampsacus, Anaxagoras made his Wnal benefaction to humanity: the
invention of the school holiday. Asked by the authorities of the city how
they should honour him, he said that children should be let oV school in the
month of his death. He had already earned the gratitude of students of
science by being the Wrst writer to include diagrams in his text.
The Atomists
The Wnal and most striking anticipation of modern science in the Presoc-
ratic era was made by Leucippus of Miletus and Democritus of Abdera.
Though they are always named together, like Tweedledum and Tweedle-
dee, and considered joint founders of atomism, nothing really is known
about Leucippus except that he was the teacher of Democritus. It is on the
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
26

surviving writings of the latter that we principally depend for our know-
ledge of the theory. Democritus was a polymath and a proliWc writer,
author of nearly eighty treatises on topics ranging from poetry and
harmony to military tactics and Babylonian theology. All these treatises
are lost, but we do possess a copious collection of fragments from Democri-
tus, more than from any previous philosopher.
Democritus was born in Abdera, on the coast of Thrace, and was thus
the Wrst signiWcant philosopher to be born on the Greek mainland. The
date of his birth is uncertain, but it was probably between 470 and 460 bc.
He is reported to have been forty years younger than Anaxagoras, from
whom he took some of his ideas. He travelled widely and visited Egypt and
Persia, but was not over-impressed by the countries he visited. He once said
that he would prefer to discover a single scientiWc explanation than to
become king of Persia (D.L. 9. 41; DK 68 B118).
Democritus’ fundamental thesis is that matter is not inWnitely divisible.
We do not know his exact argument for this conclusion, but Aristotle
conjectured that it ran as follows. If we take a chunk of any kind of stuV
and divide it up as far as we can, we will have to come to a halt at tiny bodies
whichareindivisible. Wecannotallowmatter tobedivisibletoinWnity:forlet
us suppose that the division has been carried out and then ask: what would
ensue if the division was carried out? If each of the inWnite number of parts
has any magnitude, then it must be further divisible, which contradicts our
hypothesis. If, on the other hand, the surviving parts have no magnitude,
then they can never have amounted to any quantity: for zero multiplied by
inWnity is still zero. So we have to conclude that divisibility comes to an end,
and the smallest possible fragments must be bodies with sizes and shapes.
These tiny, indivisible bodies were called by Democritus ‘atoms’ (which is
just the Greek word for ‘indivisible’) (Aristotle, GC 1. 2. 316a13–b16).16
Atoms, Democritus believed, are too small to be detected by the senses;
they are inWnite in number and come in inWnitely many varieties, and they
have existed for ever. Against the Eleatics, he maintained that there was no
contradiction in admitting a vacuum: there was a void, and in this inWnite
empty space atoms were constantly in motion, just like motes in a sunbeam.
They come in diVerent forms: they may diVer in shape (as the letter A diVers
from the letter N), in order (as AN diVers from NA), and in posture (as N
16 For Aristotle’s counter to this argument, see Ch. 5 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
27

diVers from Z). Some of them are concave and some convex, and some are
like hooks and some are like eyes. In their ceaseless motion they bang into
each other and join up with each other (KRS 583). The middle-sized objects
of everyday life are complexes of atoms thus united by random collisions,
diVering in kind on the basis of the diVerences between their constituent
atoms (Aristotle, Metaph. A 4. 985b4–20; KRS 556).
Like Anaxagoras, Democritus believed in plural worlds.
There are innumerable worlds, diVering in size. In some worlds there is no sun and
moon; in others there is a larger sun and a larger moon; in others there is more
than one of each. The distances between one world and the next are various. In
some parts of space there are more worlds, in others fewer; some worlds are
growing, others shrinking; some are rising and some falling. They get destroyed
when they collide with one another. There are some words devoid of animals or
plants or moisture. (KRS 565)
For Democritus, atoms and the void are the only two realities: what we see as
water or Wre or plants or humans are only conglomerations of atoms in the
void. The sensory qualities we see are unreal: they are due to convention.
Democritus explained in detail how perceived qualities arose from
diVerent kinds and conWgurations of atoms. Sharp Xavours, for instance,
originated from atoms that were small, Wne, angular, and jagged, while
sweet tastes were produced by larger, rounder, smoother atoms. The
knowledge given us by the senses is mere darkness compared with the
illumination that is given by the atomic theory. To justify these claims,
Democritus developed a systematic epistemology.17
Democritus wrote on ethics as well as physics. Many aphorisms have
been preserved, a number of which are, or have become, commonplace.
But it is a mistake to think of him as a sententious purveyor of conven-
tional wisdom. On the contrary, as will be shown in Chapter 8, a careful
study of his remarks shows him to have been one of the Wrst thinkers to
have developed a systematic morality.
The Sophists
In the lifetime of Democritus, a younger compatriot from Abdera, Prota-
goras, was the doyen of a new class of philosopher: the sophists. Sophists
17 See Ch. 4 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
28

were itinerant teachers who went from city to city oVering expert instruc-
tion in various subjects. Since they charged fees for imparting their skills,
they might be called the Wrst professional philosophers if it were not for the
fact that they oVered instruction and services over a much wider area than
philosophy even in the broadest sense. The most versatile, Hippias of Elis,
claimed expertise in mathematics, astronomy, music, history, literature,
and mythology, as well as practical skills as a tailor and shoemaker. Some
other sophists were prepared to teach mathematics, history, and geog-
raphy; and all sophists were skilled rhetoricians. They did brisk business in
mid-Wfth-century Athens, where young men who had to plead in law
courts, or who wished to make their way in politics, were willing to pay
substantial sums for their instruction and guidance.
The sophists made a systematic study of forensic debate and oratorical
persuasion. In this pursuit they wrote on many topics. They started with
basic grammar: Protagoras was the Wrst to distinguish the genders of nouns
and the tenses and moods of verbs (Aristotle, Rh. 3. 4. 1407b6–8). They went
on to list techniques of argument, and tricks of advocacy. As interpreters of
ambiguous texts, and assessors of rival orations, they were among the
earliest literary critics. They also gave public lectures and performances,
and set up eristic moots, partly for instruction and partly for entertain-
ment (D.L. 9. 53). Altogether, their roles encompassed those in modern
society of tutors, consultants, barristers, public relations professionals, and
media personalities.
Protagoras Wrst visited Athens as an ambassador for Abdera. He was
held in honour by the Athenians and invited back several times. He
was asked by Pericles to draw up a constitution for the new pan-Hellenic
colony at Thurii in southern Italy in 444 bc. He gave his Wrst public
performance in Athens in the house of the tragedian Euripides. He read
aloud a tract entitled On the Gods, whose opening words were long remem-
bered: ‘About the gods, I cannot be sure whether they exist or not, or what
they are like to see; for many things stand in the way of the knowledge of
them, both the opacity of the subject and the shortness of human life’
(D.L. 9. 51). His most famous saying, ‘Man is the measure of all things’,
encapsulated a relativist epistemology which will be examined in detail
later in this book.18
18 See Ch. 4 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
29

Protagoras seems to have been prepared to argue on either side of any
question, and he boasted that he could always make the worse argument
the better. This may simply have meant that he could coach a weak client
into the best presentation of his case; but by critics as diVerent as Aris-
tophanes and Aristotle he was taken to mean that he could make wrong
seem right (Aristophanes, Clouds 112 V., 656–7; Aristotle, Rh. 2. 24. 1402a25).
Protagoras’ enemies liked telling the story of the time when he sued his
pupil Eualthus for non-payment of fees. Eualthus had refused to pay up,
saying he had not yet won a single case. ‘Well,’ said Protagoras, ‘if I win this
case, you must pay up because the verdict was given for me; if you win it,
you must still pay up, because then you will have won a case’ (D.L. 9. 56).
Another sophist, Prodicus from the island of Ceos in the Aegean, came
to Athens, like Protagoras, on oYcial business of his home state. He was a
linguist, but more interested in semantics than grammar: he can perhaps
be regarded as the Wrst lexicographer. Aristophanes and Plato teased him as
a pedant, who made quibbling distinctions between words that were
virtually synonymous. In fact, however, some of the distinctions credited
to him (such as that between two Greek equivalents of ‘want’, boulesthai and
epithumein; Plato, Protagoras 340b2) were later of serious philosophical import-
ance.
Prodicus is credited with a romantic moral fable about the young
Heracles choosing between two female impersonations of Virtue and
Vice. He also had a theory of the origin of religion. ‘The men of old
regarded the sun and the moon, rivers and springs, and whatever else is
helpful for life, as gods, because we are helped by them, just as the
Egyptians worship the Nile’ (DK 84 B5). Thus, the worship of Hephaestus
is really the worship of Wre, and the worship of Demeter is really the
worship of bread.
Gorgias, from Leontini in Sicily, once a pupil of Empedocles, was
another sophist who came to Athens on an embassy, to seek help in a
war against Syracuse. He was not only a persuasive orator, but a technician
of rhetoric who categorized diVerent Wgures of speech, such as antithesis
and rhetorical questions. His style was much admired in his own day, but
was later regarded as excessively Xorid. Of his writings there have survived
two short works of philosophical interest.
The Wrst is a rhetorical exercise defending Helen of Troy against those
who slander her, arguing that she deserves no blame for running oV with
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
30

Paris and thus sparking oV the Trojan war. ‘She did what she did either
because of the whims of fortune, the decisions of the gods and the decrees of
necessity, or because she was abducted by force, or persuaded by speech, or
overwhelmed by love’ (DK 82 B11, 21–4). Gorgias goes through these
alternatives in turn, arguing in each case that Helen should be held free
from blame. No human can resist fate, and it is the abductor, not the
abductee, who merits blame. Thus far, Gorgias has an easy task: but in order
to show that Helen should not be blamed if she succumbed to persuasion,
he has to engage in an unconvincing, though no doubt congenial, enco-
mium on the powers of the spoken word: ‘it is a mighty overlord, insub-
stantial and imperceptible, but it can achieve divine eVects’. In this case, too,
it is the persuader, not the persuadee, who should be blamed. Finally, if
Helen fell in love, she is blameless: for love is either a god who cannot be
resisted or a mental illness which should excite our pity. This brief and witty
piece is the ancestor of many a philosophical discussion of freedom and
determinism, force majeure, incitement, and irresistible impulse.
Gorgias’ work entitled On What is Not contained arguments for three
sceptical conclusions: Wrst, that there is nothing; secondly, that if there is
anything it cannot be known; thirdly, that if anything can be known
it cannot be communicated by one person to another. This suite of
arguments has been handed down in two forms, once in the pseudo-
Aristotelian treatise On Melissus, and once by Sextus Empiricus.
The Wrst argument trades on the polymorphous nature of the Greek verb
‘to be’. I shall not spell out the argument here, but I shall endeavour in
Chapter 6 to sort out the crucial ambiguities involved. The second argu-
ment goes like this. Things that have being can only be objects of thought if
objects of thought are things that have being. But objects of thought are not
things that have being; otherwise everything one thinks would be the case.
But you can think of a man Xying or of a chariot driven over the sea without
there being any such things. Therefore, things that have being cannot be
objects of thought. The third argument, the most plausible of the three,
argues that each individual’s sensations are private and that all we can pass
on to our neighbours is words and not experiences.
The arguments of this famous sophist for these distressing conclusions
are indeed sophisms, and were no doubt dismissed as such by those who
Wrst encountered them. But it is easier to dismiss a sophism than to
diagnose its nature, and it is harder to still to Wnd its cure. The Wrst
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
31

sophism was disarmed essentially by Plato in his dialogue appropriately
named The Sophist.19 The second sophism involves a fallacious form of
argument that sometimes occurs in Plato himself. Aristotle’s logic, how-
ever, made clear to subsequent thinkers that ‘Not all As are B’ does not
entail ‘No B is an A’. The third argument, from the privacy of experience,
was not given its deWnitive quietus until the work of Wittgenstein in the
twentieth century.
Beside Protagoras, Hippias, Prodicus, and Gorgias there were other
sophists whose names and reputations have come down to us. There was
Callicles, for instance, the champion of the doctrine that might is right;
and Thrasymachus, the debunker of justice as the self-interest of those in
power. There were Euthydemus and Dionysidorus, a pair of logic choppers
who would oVer to prove to you that your father was a dog. These men,
however, and even the better-known sophists whom we have considered,
are known to us primarily as characters in Plato’s dialogues. Their philo-
sophical contentions are best studied in the context of those dialogues.
Searching for the historical truth about the sophists is no more rewarding
than trying to discover what King Lear or Prince Hamlet were like before
Shakespeare got hold of them.
We shall say goodbye, therefore, to these sophists and turn to consider
Socrates, who, according to one view, was the greatest of the sophists, and
according to another, was a paradigm of the true philosopher at the
opposite pole from any kind of sophistry.
Socrates
In the history of philosophy Socrates has a place without parallel. On the
one hand, he is revered as inaugurating the Wrst great era of philosophy,
and therefore, in a sense, philosophy itself. In textbooks all previous
thinkers are lumped together in textbooks as ‘Presocratics’, as if philosophy
prior to his age was somehow prehistoric. On the other hand, Socrates left
behind no writing, and there is hardly a single sentence ascribed to him
that we can be sure was his own utterance rather than a literary creation of
one of his admirers. Our Wrst-hand acquaintance with his philosophy is less
19 see Ch. 6 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
32

than with that of Xenophanes, Parmenides, Empedocles, or Democritus.
Yet his inXuence on subsequent philosophy, down to our own day, has
been incomparably greater than theirs.
In antiquity many schools of thought claimed Socrates as a founder
and many individuals revered him as a paragon philosopher. In the Middle
Ages his history was not much studied, but his name appears on the
page whenever a logician or metaphysician wishes to give an example:
‘Socrates’ was to scholastic philosophers what ‘John Doe’ long was to legal
writers. In modern times Socrates’ life has been held up as a model by
philosophers of many diVerent kinds, especially by philosophers living
under tyranny and risking persecution for refusal to conform to unrea-
soned ideology. Many thinkers have made their own the dictum that has as
good a claim as any to be his own authentic utterance: ‘the unexamined life
is not worth living’.
The hard facts of Socrates’ life do not take long to tell. He was born in
Athens about 469 bc, ten years after the Persian invasions of Greece had
been crushed at the battle of Plataea. He grew up during the years when
Athens, a Xourishing democracy under the statesman Pericles, exercised
imperial hegemony over the Greek world. It was a golden age of art and
literature, which saw the sculptures of Phidias and the building of the
Parthenon, and in which Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides produced
their great tragedies. At the same time Herodotus, ‘the father of history’,
wrote his accounts of the Persian Wars, and Anaxagoras introduced phil-
osophy to Athens.
The second half of Socrates’ life was overshadowed by the Peloponnesian
War (431–4), in which Athens was eventually forced to cede the leadership
of Greece to victorious Sparta. During the Wrst years of the war he served in
the heavy infantry, taking part in three major engagements. He acquired a
reputation for conspicuous courage, shown particularly during the retreat
after a disastrous defeat at Delium in 422. Back in Athens during the last
years of the war, he held oYce in the city’s Assembly in 406. A group of
commanders was tried for abandoning the bodies of the dead after a sea
victory at Arginusae. It was unconstitutional to try the commanders
collectively rather than individually, but Socrates was alone in voting
against the illegality, and the accused were executed.
In 404, after the war had ended, the Spartans replaced Athenian democ-
racy with an oligarchy, ‘the Thirty Tyrants’, long remembered for a reign
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
33

of terror. Instructed to arrest an innocent man, Leon of Salamis, Socrates
took no notice. He refused to accept illegal orders, but seems to have taken
no part in the revolution that overthrew the oligarchy and restored
democracy. His uprightness had by now given both democrats and aristo-
crats a grievance against him, and the restored democrats remembered also
that some of his close associates, such as Critias and Charmides, had been
among the Thirty.
An aspiring democrat politician, Anytus, with two associates, caused an
indictment to be drawn up against Socrates in the following terms:
‘Socrates has committed an oVence by not recognizing the gods whom
the state recognizes but introducing other new divinities. He has also
committed the oVence of corrupting the young. Penalty demanded:
death’ (D.L. 2. 40). We have no record of the trial, though two of Socrates’
admirers have left us imaginative reconstructions of his speech for the
defence. Whatever he actually said failed to move a suYcient number of
the 500 citizen jurors. He was found guilty, albeit by a small majority, and
condemned to death. After a delay in prison, due to a religious technicality,
Socrates died in spring 399, accepting a poisonous cup of hemlock from the
executioner.
The allegation of impiety in the indictment of Socrates was not some-
thing new. In 423 the dramatist Aristophanes had produced a comedy, The
Clouds, in which he introduces a character called Socrates, who runs a
college of chicanery which is also an institute of bogus research. Students at
this establishment not only learn to make bad arguments trump good
arguments, but also study astronomy in a spirit of irreverent scepticism
about traditional religion. They invoke a new pantheon of elemental
deities: air, ether, clouds, and chaos (260–6). The world, they are told, is
governed not by Zeus, who does not exist, but by Dinos (literally ‘Vortex’),
the rotation of the heavenly bodies (380–1). Much of the play is burlesque
that is obviously not meant to be taken seriously: Socrates measures how
many Xea-feet a Xea can leap, and explores the clouds in a ramshackle
Xying machine. But the allegation that astronomy was incompatible with
piety, if it was a joke, was a dangerous one. After all, it was only in the
previous decade that Anaxagoras had been banished for asserting that the
sun was a Wery lump. At the end of the play Socrates’ house is burnt down
by an angry crowd of people who wish to punish him for insulting the
gods and violating the privacy of the moon. To those who recalled
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
34

Aristophanes’ comedy, the events of 399 must have seemed a sorry case of
life imitating art.
Some of Socrates’ traits in The Clouds are attributed to him also by other,
more friendly writers. There is general agreement that he was pot-bellied
and snub-nosed, pop-eyed and shambling in gait. He is regularly described
as being shabby, wearing threadbare clothes, and liking to go barefoot. Even
Aristophanes represents him as capable of great feats of endurance, and
indiVerent to privation: ‘never numb with cold, never hungry for break-
fast, a spurner of wine and gluttony’ (414–17). From other sources it
appears that he was a spurner of wine not in the sense of being a teetotaller,
but as having an unusual ability to hold his liquor (Plato, Smp. 214a).
Socrates married Xanthippe, with whom he had a son, Lamprocles; a
stubborn, but perhaps ill-founded, tradition represents her as a shrew
(D.L. 2. 36–7). According to some ancient writers he had two other sons
by an oYcial concubine, Myrto (D.L. 2. 26). In antiquity, however, he was
best known for his attachment to the Xamboyant aristocrat Alcibiades,
some twenty years his junior: an attachment which, though passionate,
remained, in the terminology of a later age, platonic.
The Socrates of Xenophon
On more important issues, there is little that is certain about Socrates’ life
and thought. For further information we are dependent above all on the
two disciples whose works have come down to us intact, the soldierly
historian Xenophon, and the idealist philosopher Plato. Both Xenophon
and Plato composed, after the event, speeches for the defence at Socrates’
trial. Xenophon in addition wrote four books of memoirs of Socrates
(memorabilia Socratis) and a Socratic dialogue, the Symposium. Plato, besides his
Apology, wrote at least twenty-Wve dialogues, in all but one of which Socrates
Wgures. Xenophon and Plato paint pictures of Socrates which diVer from
each other as much as the picture of Jesus given in the gospel of Mark diVers
from that in the gospel of John. While in Mark Jesus speaks in parables, brief
aphorisms, and pointed responses to questions, the Jesus of the fourth
gospel delivers extensive discourses that resonate at several levels. There is
a similar contrast between Xenophon’s Socrates, who questions, argues,
and exhorts in a workmanlike manner, and the Socrates of Plato’s Republic,
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
35

who delivers profound metaphysical lectures in a style of layered literary
artiWce. Just as it was John’s presentation of Jesus that had the greatest
impact on later theological development, so it is the Socrates of Plato whose
ideas proved fertile in the history of philosophy.
According to Xenophon, Socrates was a pious man, punctiliously obser-
vant of ritual and respectful of oracles. In his prayers he let the gods decide
what was good for him, since the gods were omnipresent and omniscient,
knowing everyone’s words, actions, and unspoken intentions (Mem. 1. 2. 20;
3. 2). He taught that the poor man’s mite was as pleasing to the gods as the
grand sacriWces of the rich (Mem. 1. 3. 3). He was a decent, temperate
person, devoid of avarice and ambition, moderate in his desires, and
tolerant of hardship. He was not an educator, though he taught virtue
by practice as well as exhortation, and he discouraged vice by teasing and
fable as well as by reproof. He was not to be blamed if some of his pupils
went to the bad in spite of his example. Though critical of some aspects of
Athenian democracy, he was a friend of the people, and totally innocent of
crime and treason (Mem. 1. 2).
Xenophon’s major concern in his memoirs was to exonerate Socrates
from the charges made against him at his trial, and to show that his life was
such that conservative Athenians should have revered him rather than
condemned him to death. Xenophon is also anxious to place a distance
between Socrates and the other philosophers of the age: unlike Anaxagoras
he had no futile interest in physics or astronomy (Mem. 1. 1. 16), and unlike
the sophists he did not charge any fees or pretend to expertise that he
lacked (Mem. 1. 6–7).
Xenophon’s Socrates is an upright, rather wooden person, capable of
giving shrewd, commonsensical advice in practical and ethical matters. In
discussion he is quick to resolve ambiguities and to deXate cant, but he
rarely ventures upon philosophical argument or speculation. In a rare case
when he does so it is, signiWcantly, in order to prove the existence and
providence of God. If an object is useful, Socrates argues, it must be the
product of design, not chance; but our sense-organs are eminently useful
and delicately constructed. ‘Because our sight is delicate, it has been
shuttered with eyelids which open when we need to use it, and close in
sleep; so that not even the wind will damage it, eyelashes have been planted
as a screen; and our foreheads have been fringed with eyebrows to prevent
harm from the head’s own sweat’ (Mem. 1. 4. 6). Such contrivances, and the
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
36

implantation of the instincts for procreation and self-preservation, look
like the actions of a wise and benevolent craftsman (demiourgos). It is
arrogant to think that we humans are the only location of Mind (nous) in
the universe. It is true that we cannot see the cosmic intelligence that
governs the inWnite multitudinous universe, but we cannot see the souls
that control our own bodies either. Moreover, it is absurd to think that the
cosmic powers that be have no concern for humans: they have favoured
humans above all other animals by endowing them with erect posture,
multi-purpose hands, articulate language, and all-year-round sex (Mem. 1.
4. 11–12).
Despite this anticipation of the perennial Argument from Design, there
is little in Xenophon’s work that would entitle Socrates to a prominent
position in the history of philosophy. Several of the Presocratics would be
more than a match for Xenophon’s Socrates in scope, insight, and origin-
ality. The Socrates who has captured the imagination of succeeding gener-
ations of philosophers is the Socrates of Plato, and it is he with whom we
shall henceforth be concerned.
The Socrates of Plato
It is, however, an oversimpliWcation to speak of a Platonic Socrates, because
Plato’s dialogues do not assign a consistent role or personality to the
character called Socrates. In some dialogues he is predominantly a critical
inquirer, challenging the pretensions of other characters by a characteristic
technique of question and answer—elenchus—which reduces them to
incoherence. In other dialogues Socrates is quite willing to harangue his
audience, and to present an ethical and metaphysical system in dogmatic
form. In yet other dialogues he plays only a minor part, leaving the
philosophical initiative to a diVerent protagonist. Before going further,
therefore, we must digress to consider when and where the dialogues
can be taken to be presenting Socrates’ actual views, and when and
where the character Socrates is acting as a mouthpiece for Plato’s own
philosophy.
In recent centuries scholars have sought to explain these diVerences in
chronological terms: the diVerent role assigned to Socrates in diVerent
dialogues represents the development of Plato’s thought and his gradual
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
37

emancipation from the teaching of his master. The initial clue to a
chronological ordering of the dialogues was given by Aristotle, who tells
us that Plato’s Laws was written later than the Republic (Pol. 2. 6. 1264b24–7).
Socrates and Plato as portrayed by Matthew Paris in the thirteenth century. Who is
teaching whom?
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
38

There is indeed a tradition that the Laws was unWnished at Plato’s death
(D.L. 3. 37). On this basis nineteenth-century scholars sought to establish a
grouping of the dialogues, beginning from the Wnal stage of Plato’s life.
They studied the frequency in diVerent dialogues of diVerent features of
style, such as the use of technical terms, preferences between synonymous
idioms, the avoidance of hiatus, and the adoption of particular speech
rhythms.
On the basis of these stylometric studies, which by the end of the
nineteenth century had covered some 500 diVerent linguistic criteria, a
consensus emerged that a group of dialogues stood out by its similarity to
the Laws. All scholars agreed on including in the group the dialogues Critias,
Philebus, Sophist, Statesman, and Timaeus, and all agreed that the group repre-
sented the latest stage of Plato’s writing career. There was no similar
consensus about ordering within the group: but it is notable that the
group includes all the dialogues in which Socrates’ role is at a minimum.
Only in the Philebus is he a prominent character. In Laws he does not appear
at all, and in the Timaeus, Critias, Sophist, and Politicus he has only a walk-on
part while the lead role is given to another: in the Wrst two to the
protagonist named in the dialogue’s title, and in the latter two to a stranger
from Parmenides’ town of Elea. It seemed reasonable, therefore, to regard
the dialogues of this group as expressing the views of the mature Plato
rather than those of his long-dead teacher.
In dividing the earlier dialogues into groups, scholars could once again
follow a clue given by Aristotle. In Metaph. L 4. 1078b27–32 he sets out the
prehistory of Plato’s Theory of Ideas, and assigns the following role
to Socrates: ‘Two things may fairly be attributed to Socrates: inductive
arguments and general deWnitions; both are starting points of scientiWc
knowledge. But he did not regard the universal or the deWnitions as separate
entities, but [the Platonists] did, and called them Ideas of things.’ Expositions
of the Theory of Ideas are placed in the mouth of Socrates in several
important dialogues, notably Phaedo, Republic, and Symposium. In these
dialogues Socrates appears not as an inquiring questioner, but as a teacher
in full possession of a system of philosophy. By stylometric criteria
these dialogues are closer than other dialogues to the late group already
described. It is reasonable, therefore, to treat them as a middle group in the
corpus, and to regard them as representing Plato’s own philosophy rather
than Socrates’.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
39

A third group of dialogues can be identiWed by a set of common features:
(1) they are short; (2) Socrates appears as an inquirer, not an instructor; (3)
the Theory of Ideas is not presented; and (4) stylometrically they are at the
greatest remove from the late group Wrst identiWed. This group includes
Crito, Charmides, Laches, Lysis, Ion, Euthydemus, and Hippias Minor. These dialogues
are commonly accepted as those most likely to be presentations of the
philosophical views of the historical Socrates. Here too belongs the Apology,
in which Socrates is the sole speaker, on trial for his life, and which in
philosophical content and stylometric features resembles the other dia-
logues of the group. The Wrst book of the Republic, too, in both content and
style, resembles this group more than it resembles the remaining books of
the dialogue: some scholars suppose, with good reason, that it Wrst existed
as a separate dialogue, perhaps under the title Thrasymachus. It is diYcult to
assign a chronology within this early group, though some authors place
the Lysis Wrst and assign it before 399, on the basis of an ancient anecdote
that it was read to Socrates himself, who said, ‘what a load of lies this young
man tells about me’ (D.L. 3. 35).
In my view there is good reason to accept the general consensus that
thus divides the Platonic dialogues into three groups, early, middle, and
late. The division results from the striking coincidence of three independ-
ent sets of criteria, dramatic, philosophical, and stylometric. Whether we
focus on the dramatic role given to Socrates, or the philosophical content
of the dialogues, or tell-tale details of style and idiom, we reach the same
threefold grouping. Twentieth-century developments in stylometry, with
much more reWned statistical techniques, and with vast amounts of new
data obtained from computerised texts, have essentially done little more
than conWrm the consensus achieved in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth century.20
A number of dialogues, however, do not fall clearly into one of the three
groups, because the three criteria do not so happily coincide: the most
important such cases are Cratylus, Euthyphro, Gorgias, Meno, Phaedrus, Parmenides,
Protagoras, Theaetetus. Here more recent stylometric studies have thrown new
light on the problems.21 There is no space here to enter into the detailed
20 The consensus has been signiWcantly questioned only in respect of the Timaeus and its
appendix, the Critias. The debate here will be examined later when I discuss Plato’s Theory of Ideas.
21 See L. Brandwood, The Chronology of Plato’s Dialogues (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1990); G. Ledger, Re-counting Plato: A Computer Analysis of Plato’s Style (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989);
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
40

arguments for assigning each of these dialogues to a particular period, so
I will simply state the chronology that appears to me most probable after
an examination of the three sets of criteria.
Gorgias, Protagoras, and Meno seem to belong between the Wrst and second
group. Though the Theory of Ideas is absent from the discussion, the role
of Socrates is closer to the didactic philosopher of the middle dialogues
than to the agnostic inquirer of the early dialogues. The order suggested by
philosophical considerations is Protagoras, Gorgias, Meno; the order that
emerges from stylometric studies is Meno, Protagoras, Gorgias. The Cratylus in
style is close to these three, but is diYcult to place precisely. The Euthyphro is
generally considered an early dialogue, but it contains a hint of the Theory
of Ideas, and stylistic indicators place it close to the Gorgias. Accordingly,
I would place it in this intermediate group.
The Phaedrus was sometimes thought in antiquity to be the earliest of
Plato’s dialogues (D.L. 3. 38), but on both doctrinal and stylistic grounds the
dialogue Wts reasonably well into the middle group. The case is not
the same with two other very important dialogues that in style are close
to the Phaedrus, namely the Parmenides and Theaetetus. In content these works
stand at some distance from the classical Theory of Ideas, which is ignored
in the Theaetetus and subjected to severe criticism in the Parmenides. In
structure the Parmenides diVers from all other dialogues; the Theaetetus
resembles the dialogues of the early group. Internal references in the
Theaetetus look backwards to the Parmenides (183e) and forwards to the Sophist
(210d). On balance it seems sensible to place these two dialogues between
the middle and the later dialogues, but a discussion of the problems in
giving a coherent statement of Plato’s philosophical position at this period
will have to wait until we have given an account of the Theory of Ideas.
Socrates’ Own Philosophy
It was necessary to establish a plausible chronology for the Platonic texts in
order to indicate to what extent it is safe to rely on Plato as a source of
information about the historical Socrates. Having done this, we can give an
J. T. Temple, ‘A Multivariate Synthesis of Published Platonic Stylometric Data’, Literary and
Linguistic Computing, 11/2 (1996), 67–75.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
41

account of Socrates’ own philosophy as it is presented in the early dialogues
of his pupil. In the Apology Plato is anxious, like Xenophon, to defend
Socrates from the charge of atheism. He points to the inconsistency between
the two charges, that he is an atheist and that he introduces strange
divinities. He also distances him from the secular physicism of Anaxagoras.
The denial in the Apology that he had ever discussed physics (19d) does not
ring altogether true, even though it is echoed later by Aristotle (Metaph. A 6.
987b2). If Socrates had never shown any interest in issues of cosmology,
Aristophanes’ mockery would have been so wide of the mark that the jokes
would have fallen very Xat. Moreover, Plato himself in his Phaedo represents
Socrates as confessing that he at one time shared Anaxagoras’ curiosity
about whether the earth was Xat or round and whether it was in the middle
of the universe, and what was the reason for the motion and speed of the
sun and moon and other heavenly bodies (Phd. 97b–99a).
Itmay havebeenSocrates’ disillusionmentwith Anaxagoras thatmadehim
give up scientiWc inquiry and concentrate on the issues which, according to
the Apology and Aristotle, dominated the latter part of his life. According to
both Plato and Xenophon, another factor that directed his interest was an
oracle utteredinthe nameofApollobytheentrancedpriestessin theshrineat
Delphi. When asked if there was anyone in Athens wiser than Socrates, the
priestess replied in the negative. Socrates professed to be puzzled by this
response, and began to question diVerent classes of people who claimed to
possess wisdom of various kinds. It soon became clear that politicians and
poets possessed no genuine expertise at all, and that craftsmen who were
genuine experts in a particular area would pretend to a universal wisdom to
which they had no claim. Socrates concluded that the oracle was correct in
that he alone realized that his own wisdom was worthless (23b).
It was in matters of morality that it was most important to pursue
genuine knowledge and to expose false pretensions. For according to
Socrates virtue and moral knowledge were the same thing: no one who
really knew what was the best thing to do could do otherwise, and all
wrongdoing was the result of ignorance.22 This makes it all the more absurd
that he should be accused of corrupting the young. Anyone would
obviously prefer to live among good men than among bad men, who
might harm him. He cannot, therefore, have any motive for corrupting
22 For a fuller discussion of this remarkable doctrine, ‘the Socratic Paradox’, see Ch. 8 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
42

the young on purpose; and if he is doing so unwittingly he should be
educated rather than prosecuted (26a).
Socrates, in the Apology, did not claim to possess himself the wisdom that
is suYcient to keep a man from wrongdoing. Instead, he said that he relied
on an inner divine voice, which would intervene if ever he was on the point
of taking a wrong step (41d). So far from being an atheist, his whole life was
dedicated to a divine mission, the campaign to expose false wisdom which
was prompted by the Delphic oracle. What would really be a betrayal of
God would be to desert his post through fear of death. If he were told that
he could go free on condition that he abandon philosophical inquiry, he
would reply, ‘Men of Athens, I honour and love you; but I shall obey God
rather than you, and while I have life and strength I shall never cease from
the practice and teaching of philosophy’ (29d).
The early dialogues of Plato portray Socrates carrying out his philosoph-
ical mission. Typically, the dialogue will be named after a personage who
claims knowledge of a certain subject or who can be taken to represent a
certain virtue: thus the Ion, on poetry, is named after a prizewinning
rhapsode (a reciter of Homer), and the Laches, on courage, is named after
a distinguished general. Charmides and Lysis, on passion, temperance, and
friendship, are named after two bright young men who commanded a
circle of aristocratic admirers. In each dialogue Socrates seeks a scientiWc
account or deWnition of the topic under discussion, and by questioning
reveals that the eponymous protagonist is unable to give one. The dia-
logues all end with the ostensible failure of the inquiry, conWrming the
conclusion in the Apology that those who might most be expected to possess
wisdom on particular topics fail, under examination, to exhibit it.
The search for deWnitions serves diVerent purposes in diVerent dia-
logues: a deWnition of justice is sought in Republic 1 in order to determine
whether justice beneWts its possessor, and a deWnition of piety is sought
in the Euthyphro in order to settle a particular diYcult case of conscience.
But Aristotle was right to pick out the search as a notable feature of
Socratic method. The method has sometimes been criticized as involving
the fallacious claim that we cannot ever know whether some particular
action is or is not, say, just or pious unless we can give a watertight
deWnition of justice and piety. Such a claim would be inconsistent with
Socrates’ regular practice in the course of his elenchus of seeking agree-
ment whether particular actions (such as returning a borrowed knife to
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
43

a madman, or carrying out a strategic retreat in battle) do or do not
exhibit particular virtues such as justice and courage. Socrates’ method
involves only the weaker claim that unless we have a general deWnition
of a virtue we will not (a) be able to say whether the virtue universally
has a particular property, such as being teachable, or being beneWcial, or
(b) be able to decide diYcult borderline cases, such as whether a son’s
prosecuting his father for the manslaughter of an accused murderer is or
is not an act of piety.
The other feature of Socrates’ method emphasized by Aristotle, namely
the use of inductive arguments, does in fact presuppose that we can be
sure of truths about individual cases while still lacking universal deWni-
tions. Plato’s Socrates does not claim to have a watertight deWnition of
techne, or craft; but over and over again he considers particular crafts in
order to extract general truths about the nature of a craft. Thus, in Republic
1 he wishes to show that the test of a good craftsman is not whether he
makes a lot of money, but whether he beneWts the objects of his craft. To
show this he runs through the products of diVerent crafts: a good doctor
produces healthy patients, a good captain delivers safe navigation, a good
builder constructs a good house, and so on. How much money these
people make is not relevant to their goodness at their craft; it tells us
only how eYcient they are at the quite diVerent craft of moneymaking
(Rep. 1. 346a–e).
The two procedures identiWed by Aristotle are, in Socrates’ method,
closely related to each other. The inductive argument from particular
instances to general truths is a contribution to the universal deWnition,
even though the contribution in these dialogues is forever incomplete,
never leading to an exception-proof deWnition. In the absence of the
universal deWnition of a virtue, the general truths are applied to help settle
diYcult borderline cases of practice, and to evaluate preliminary hypo-
theses about the virtue’s properties. Thus, in the Republic case, the induction
is used to show that a good ruler is one who beneWts his subjects, and
therefore justice is not (as one of the characters in the dialogue maintains)
simply whatever is to the advantage of those in power.
In these early dialogues about the virtues, in spite of Socrates’ profession
of ignorance, a number of theses emerge both about knowledge and about
virtue. These will be explored in greater detail in later chapters on episte-
mology and ethics. For the moment we may notice that the issues
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
44

converge on the question: Can virtue be taught? For if virtue is knowledge,
then surely it must be teachable; and yet it is diYcult to point to any
successful teachers of virtue.
In Athens, however, there was no lack of people claiming to have the
relevant expertise, namely the sophists. At the end of the early period, and
before the central period of Plato’s writing career, we Wnd a series of
dialogues named after major sophists—Hippias, Gorgias, Protagoras—
which address the question whether virtue can be taught and which deXate
the pretensions of the sophists to possess the secret of its teachability. The
Hippias Minor sets out a serious diYculty for the idea that virtue is a craft
that can be learnt. A craftsman who makes a mistake unknowingly is
inferior to a craftsman who makes a mistake deliberately; so if virtue is a
craft, one who sins deliberately is more virtuous than one who sins in
ignorance (376b). The Gorgias argues that rhetoric, the main arrow in the
sophist’s quiver, is incapable of producing genuine virtue. The Protagoras
seems to suggest—whether seriously or ironically—that virtue is indeed
teachable, because it is the art of calculating the proportion of pleasure and
pain among the consequences of one’s actions.23
From Socrates to Plato
Whether or not this is Socrates’ last word on the teachability of virtue, a
reader of the dialogues soon Wnds a quite diVerent answer being given,
in the Meno and the Phaedo. Virtue, and the knowledge of good and evil,
which according to Socrates is identical with virtue, cannot be taught
in the present life: it can only be recovered by recollection of another
and better world. This is presented not as a particular thesis about virtue,
but as a general thesis about knowledge. In the Meno it is claimed that
a slave-boy who has never been taught geometry can be brought, by
suitable questioning, to recall signiWcant geometrical truths (82b–86a).
In the Phaedo it is argued that though we often see things that are more
or less equal in size, we never see a pair of things absolutely equal to each
other. The idea of absolute equality cannot therefore be derived from
experience, but must have been acquired in a previous life. The same
23 See Ch. 8 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
45

goes for similar ideas such as that of absolute goodness and absolute beauty
(74b–75b).
The Meno and the Phaedo therefore introduce two doctrines—the Theory
of Ideas, and the thesis of recollection—which by the common consent of
scholars belong to Plato, and not to the historical Socrates. They eVect the
‘separation’, of which Aristotle spoke, between the universal deWnitions
sought by Socrates and the empirical entities of our everyday world.
The Phaedo also contains Plato’s account of the last days of Socrates in
prison. Socrates’ friend Crito has (in the dialogue named after him) failed
to gain acceptance of a plan for escape. Socrates has rejected the proposal,
saying that he owes so much to the laws of Athens, under which he was
born and bred and lived contentedly, that he cannot now turn his back on
his covenant with them and run away (51d–54c). The arrival of a ship from
the sacred isle of Delos marks the end of the religious stay of execution, and
Socrates prepares for death by engaging his friends in a long discussion of
the immortality of the soul.24 The discussion ends with Socrates’ narrating
a series of myths about the journeys in the underworld of the soul after it
survives death.
Crito asks whether Socrates has any instructions about his burial; he is
told to remember that he will be burying only the body, and not the soul,
which is to go to the joys of the blessed. After his last bath Socrates says
farewell to his family, jokes with his gaoler, and accepts the cup of
hemlock. He is represented (with a degree of medical improbability) as
composing himself serenely as sensation gradually deserts his limbs. His last
words, like so many in his life, are puzzling: ‘Crito, I owe a cock to
Aesculapius [the god of healing]. Please remember to pay the debt.’ Once
again we ask ourselves whether he means his words literally or is
employing his unique form of irony.
It is perhaps no coincidence that it is in one and the same dialogue that
Plato records the last hours of Socrates and introduces clearly for the Wrst
time his own characteristic Theory of Ideas. As well as the physical death of
Socrates, we witness the demise of his personal philosophy, to be reincar-
nated henceforth in the more metaphysical and mythical form of Platonism.
When Socrates died, Plato was in his late twenties, having been his pupil
for about eight years. A member of an aristocratic Athenian family, Plato
24 The philosophical content of this discussion is analysed below in Ch. 7.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
46

A herm of Socrates, bearing a quotation from Plato’s Crito

would have been just old enough to have fought in the Peloponnesian
War, as his brothers Glaucon and Adeimantus certainly did. His uncles
Critias and Charmides were two of the Thirty Tyrants, but he himself took
no part in Athenian political life. At the age of 40 he went to Sicily and
became an associate of Dion, the brother-in-law of the reigning monarch,
Dionysius I; during this visit he made the acquaintance of the Pythagorean
philosopher Archytas. On his return to Athens he founded a philosophical
community, the Academy, in a private grove beside his own house. Here a
group of thinkers, under his direction, shared with each other their
interests in mathematics, astronomy, metaphysics, ethics, and mysticism.
When 60 years old he was invited back to Sicily by Dion’s nephew, who had
now succeeded to the throne as Dionysius II; but his visit was not a success
because Dion and Dionysius quarrelled with each other. A third visit as a
royal adviser was equally abortive, and Plato returned home disillusioned
in 360. He died peacefully at a wedding feast in Athens, himself unmarried,
in the year 347, being aged about 80.
Writers in antiquity wove many stories around Plato’s life, few of which
deserve credence. If we wish to put Xesh around the bare bones of his
biography, we do best to read the Letters that have traditionally been
included in his works. Though some, if not all, are the composition of
other authors, they contain information that is much more plausible than
the anecdotes to be found in the Life of Plato by Diogenes Laertius. They
profess to be from the last two decades of Plato’s life and principally concern
his involvement in the government of Syracuse and his attempt to convert a
tyranny into a constitution embodying his own political ideals.
Plato’s works as handed down to us amount to some half a million
words. Though probably some of the works in the corpus are spurious,
there are no written works attributed to Plato in antiquity that have not
survived today. However, later writers in antiquity, in addition to making
copious citations of his dialogues, from time to time attach importance to
an oral tradition of his lectures in the Academy.
Because Plato chose to write in dialogue form, and never himself appears
in them as a speaker, it is diYcult to be sure which of the varied
philosophical theses expounded by his characters were ones to which he
was himself committed. We have seen this par excellence in the case of
his Socrates, but similar caution must be exercised in attributing to him
the doctrines of the other main interlocutors in the dialogues,
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
48

Timaeus, the Eleatic Stranger in the Sophist and Statesman, and the Athenian
Stranger in the Laws. The dialogue form enabled Plato to suspend
judgement about diYcult philosophical issues, while presenting the
strongest arguments he could think of on both sides of the question
(cf. D.L. 3. 52).
The Theory of Ideas
The best known of the doctrines to be found in Plato’s dialogues is the
Theory of Ideas. In the central dialogues, from the Euthyphro onwards, the
theory is more often alluded to, taken for granted, or argued from, than
explicitly stated and formally established. The clearest short statement of
the theory is found not in the dialogues but in the seventh of the Letters
traditionally attributed to Plato, which is largely devoted to a defence of his
activities in Sicily. The authenticity of this letter has often been rejected in
modern times. There is, however, no better ground for rejecting Plato’s
Seventh Epistle to the Syracusans than there is for rejecting Paul’s Second
Epistle to the Corinthians (which it resembles in several ways). Certainly
there is no good stylometric reason for calling it into question.25 If it is not
authentic, then it is one of the clearest and most authoritative statements
of the theory to be found in all the secondary literature on Plato. Hence it
provides a useful starting point for the exposition of the theory.
The letter states the following as a fundamental doctrine that Plato has
often expounded:
For each thing that there is three things are necessary if we are to come by
knowledge: Wrst, the name, secondly, the deWnition, and thirdly, the image.
Knowledge itself is a fourth thing, and there is a Wfth thing that we have to
postulate, which is that which is knowable and truly real. To understand this,
consider the following example and regard it as typical of everything. There is
something called a circle; it has a name, which we have just this minute used.
Then there is its deWnition, a compound of nouns and verbs. We might give
‘The Wgure whose limit is at every point equidistant from its centre’ as the
deWnition of whatever is round, circular, or a circle. Thirdly, there is what
we draw, or rub out, or rotate, or cancel. The circle itself which all these symbolize
25 Ledger, Re-counting Plato, 148–50, 224, regards the Seventh Letter as authentic, and close in
time to the Philebus, the Wrst dialogue of the Wnal period.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
49

does not undergo any such change and is a quite diVerent thing. In the fourth
place we have knowledge, understanding, and true opinion on these matters—
these, collectively, are in our minds and not in sounds or bodily shapes, and thus
are clearly distinct from the circle itself and from the three entities already
mentioned. Of all these items, it is understanding that is closest to the Wfth in
kinship and likeness; the others are at a greater distance. What is true of round is
also true of straight, of colour, of good and beautiful, and just; of natural and
manufactured bodies; of Wre, water, and the other elements; of all living beings and
moral characters; of all that we do and undergo. In each case, anyone who totally
fails to grasp the Wrst four things will never fully possess knowledge of the
Wfth. (342a–d)
If I follow Plato, then, I will begin by distinguishing four things: the word
‘circle’, the deWnition of circle (a series of words), a diagram of a circle, and
my concept of a circle. The importance of being clear about these four
items is to distinguish them from, and contrast them with, a Wfth thing, the
most important of all, which he calls ‘the circle itself’. It is this that is one
of the Ideas of which Plato’s celebrated theory treats. The theory is a
wide-ranging one, as is clear from the sentence at the end of the paragraph
that lists the Welds in which the theory applies. In his other writings Plato
uses many other expressions to refer to Ideas. ‘Forms’ (eide) is probably the
most common, but the Idea or Form of X may be called ‘the X itself’, ‘that
very thing that is X’, or ‘Xness’, or ‘what X is’.
It is important to note what is absent from Plato’s list in the Seventh
Letter. He does not mention, even at the lowest level, actual material
circular objects such as cartwheels and barrels. The reason for his omission
is clear from other passages in his writings (e.g. Phd. 74a–c). The wheels and
barrel we meet in experience are never perfectly circular: somewhere or
other there will be a bend or bump which will interfere with the equi-
distance from the centre of every point on the circumference. This is true
too, for that matter, of any diagram we may draw on paper or in the sand.
Plato does not stress this point here, but it is the reason why he says that
the diagram is at a greater distance from the circle itself than my concept is.
My subjective concept of the circle—my understanding of what ‘circle’
means—is not the same as the Idea of the circle, because the Idea is an
objective reality that is not the property of any individual mind. But at least
the concept in my mind is a concept of a perfect circle; it is not merely an
imperfect approximation to a circle, as the ring on my Wnger is.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
50

In the passage I have cited, Plato arrives at the Idea of circle after starting
from a consideration of the word ‘circle’ as it occurs in the subject-place of
a sentence such as
A circle is a plane Wgure whose circumference is everywhere equidis-
tant from its centre.
However, he sometimes introduces the Idea of X by reXection on sentences
in which ‘X’ appears not in subject-place, but as a predicate.
Consider the following. Socrates, Simmias, and Cebes are all called
‘men’; they have it in common that they are all men. Now when we say
‘Simmias is a man’ we may wonder whether the word ‘man’ names or
stands for something in the way that the name ‘Simmias’ stands for the
individual man Simmias? If so, what? Is it the same thing as the word ‘man’
stands for in ‘Cebes is a man’? In order to deal with questions of this kind,
Plato introduces the Idea of Man. It is that which makes Simmias, Cebes,
and Socrates all men; it is the prime bearer of the name ‘Man’.
In many cases where we would say that a common predicate was true of
a number of individuals, Plato will say that they are all related to a certain
Idea or Form: where A, B, C, are all F, they are related to a single Form of
F. Sometimes he will describe this relation as one of imitation: A, B, C, all
resemble F. Sometimes he will talk rather of participation: A, B, C all share
in F, they have F in common between them. It is not clear how universally
we are to apply the principle that behind common predication there lies a
common Idea. Sometimes Plato states it universally, sometimes he hesitates
about applying it to certain particular sorts of predicate. Certainly he lists
Ideas of many diVerent types, such as the Idea of Good, the Idea of Bed, the
Idea of Circle, the Idea of Being. He is prepared to extend the theory beyond
single-place predicates such as ‘is round’ to two-place predicates like ‘is
distinct from’. When we say that A is distinct from B and when we say that
B is distinct from A, although we use the word ‘distinct’ twice, each time
we are applying it to a single entity.
We may state a number of Platonic theses about Ideas and their relations
to ordinary things in the world.
(1) The Principle of Commonality. Wherever several things are F, this is
because they participate in or imitate a single Idea of F (Phd. 100c;
Men. 72c, 75a; Rep. 5. 476a10, 597c).
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
51

(2) The Principle of Separation. The Idea of F is distinct from all the things
that are F (Phd. 74c; Smp. 211b).
(3) The Principle of Self-Predication. The Idea of F is itself F (Hp. Ma. 292e; Prt.
230c–e; Prm. 132a–b).
(4) The Principle of Purity. The Idea of F is nothing but F (Phd. 74c; Smp.
211e).
(5) The Principle of Uniqueness. Nothing but the Idea of F is really, truly,
altogether F (Phd. 74d, Rep. 5. 479a–d).
(6) The Principle of Sublimity. Ideas are everlasting, they have no parts and
undergo no change, and they are not perceptible to the senses (Phd.
78d; Smp. 211b).
The Principle of Commonality is not, by itself, uniquely Platonic. Many
people who are unhappy with talk of ‘participation’ are content to speak of
attributes as being ‘in common’ among many things which have them.
They may say, for instance, ‘If A, B, and C are all red, then this is because
they have the property of being red in common, and we learn the meaning
of ‘red’ by seeing what is common among the red things.’ What is peculiar
to Plato is that he seriously follows up what is implied if one uses the
metaphor of ‘having in common’.26 For instance, there must be only a
single Idea of F, otherwise we could not explain why the F things have
something in common (Rep. 597b–c).
The Principle of Separation is linked with the notion of a hierarchy
between Ideas and the individuals that exemplify them. To participate and
to be participated in are two quite diVerent relationships, and the two
terms of these relationships must be on a diVerent level.
The Principle of Self-Predication is important for Plato, because without
it he could not show how the Ideas explain the occurrence of properties in
individuals. Only what is hot will make something hot; and it is no good
drying yourself with a wet towel. So, in general, only what is itself F can
explain how something else is F. So if the Idea of Cold is to explain why
snow is cold, it must itself be cold (Phd. 103b–e).
The Idea of F is not only F, it is a perfect specimen of an F. It cannot be
diluted or adulterated by any element other than Fness: hence the
Principle of Purity. If it were to possess any property other than being F,
it would have to do so by participating in some other Idea, which would
26 I owe this point to G. E. M. Anscombe, Three Philosophers (Oxford: Blackwell, 1961), 28.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
52

surely have to be superior to it in the way that the Idea of F is superior to all
the non-ideal Fs. The notion of stratiWed relationships between Ideas opens
up a Pandora’s box which Plato, when presenting the classical Theory of
Ideas in his central dialogues, preferred to keep closed.
The Principle of Uniqueness is sometimes stated in a misleading way by
commentators. Plato frequently says that only Ideas really are, and that the
non-ideal particulars we encounter in sense-experience are between being
and not being. He is often taken to be saying that only Ideas really exist, and
that tangible objects are unreal and illusory. In context, it is clear that when
Plato says that only Ideas really are, he does not mean that only Ideas really
exist,butthatonlytheIdeaofFisreally F,whateverFmaybeintheparticular
case. Particulars are between being and not being in that they are between
being F and not being F—i.e. they are sometimes F and sometimes not F.27
For instance, only the Idea of Beauty is really beautiful, because particu-
lar beautiful things are (a) beautiful in one respect but ugly in another (in
Wgure, say, but not in complexion), or (b) beautiful at one time but not
another (e.g. at age 20 but not at age 70), (c) beautiful by comparison with
some things, but not with others (e.g. Helen may be beautiful by compari-
son with Medea, but not by comparison with Aphrodite), (d) beautiful in
some surroundings but not in others (Smp. 211 a–e).
An important feature of the classical Theory of Ideas is the Principle of
Sublimity. The particulars that participate belong to the inferior world of
Becoming, the world of change and decay; the Ideas that are participated in
belong to a superior world of Being, of eternal stability. The most sublime
of all Ideas is the Idea of the Good, superior in rank and power to all else,
from which everything that can be known derives its being (Rep. 509c).
The problem with the Theory of Ideas is that the principles that deWne it
do not seem to be all consistent with each other. It is diYcult to reconcile
the Principle of Separation with the Principles of Commonality and of Self-
Predication. The diYculty was Wrst expounded by Plato himself in the
Parmenides, where he gives an argument along the following lines. Let us
suppose that we have a number of particulars, each of which is F. Then, by
(1) there is an Idea of F. This, by (3), is itself F. But now the Idea of F and the
original particular Fs make up a new collection of F things. By (1) again, this
27 I Wrst learnt this from Vlastos’s article ‘Degrees of Reality in Plato’, in R. Bambrough (ed.),
New Essays on Plato and Aristotle (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1965).
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
53

must be because they participate in an Idea of F. But by (2) this cannot be the
Idea Wrst postulated. So there must be another Idea of F; but this in turn, by
(3), will be F, and so on ad inWnitum. If we are to avoid this regress, we must
abandon one or other of the principles that generate it. To this day scholars
are divided as to how seriously Plato took this diYculty, and which, if any, of
his principles he modiWed in order to solve it. I shall return to the question
when we engage in a fuller discussion of Plato’s metaphysics.28
Plato applied his Theory of Ideas to many philosophical problems: he
oVered them as the basis of moral values, the bedrock of scientiWc know-
ledge, and the ultimate origin of all being. One problem to which Plato
oVered his theory as an answer is often called the problem of universals:
the problem of the meaning of universal terms such as ‘man’, ‘bed’,
‘virtue’, ‘good’. Because Plato’s answer turned out to be unsatisfactory,
the problem was to remain on the philosophical agenda. In succeeding
chapters we shall see how Aristotle handled the issue. The problem had a
continuing history through the Middle Ages and up to our own time. A
number of notions that occur in modern discussions of the problem bear a
resemblance to Plato’s Ideas.
Predicates. In modern logic a sentence such as ‘Socrates is wise’ is con-
sidered as having a subject, ‘Socrates’, and a predicate, which consists of the
remainder of the sentence, i.e. ‘ . . . is wise’. Some philosophers of logic,
following Gottlob Frege, have regarded predicates as having an extra-
mental counterpart: an objective predicate (Frege called it a ‘function’)
corresponding to ‘ . . . is a man’ in a way similar to that in which the man
Socrates corresponds to the name ‘Socrates’. Frege’s functions, such as the
function x is a man, are objective entities: they are more like the Wfth items of
the Seventh Letter than like the fourth items. They share some of the
transcendental properties of Ideas: the function x is a man does not grow or
die as human beings do, and nowhere in the world can one view or handle
the function x is divisible by 7. But functions do not conform to the Principles
of Self-Predication or Uniqueness. How could one ever imagine that the
function x is a man, and only that function, was really and truly a human
being?
Classes. Functions serve as principles according to which objects can be
collected into classes: objects that satisfy the function x is human, for
28 See p. 208V below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
54

instance, can be grouped into the class of human beings. Ideas in some way
resemble classes: participation in an Idea can be assimilated to membership
of a class. The diYculty in identifying Ideas with classes arises again over the
Principle of Self-Predication. The class of men is not a man and we cannot
say in general that the class of Fs is F. However, it seems at Wrst sight as if
there are, indeed, some classes that are members of themselves, such as the
class of classes. But just as Plato was to Wnd that the Principle of Self-
Predication led him into serious problems, so modern philosophers dis-
covered that if one was allowed total freedom to form classes of classes one
would be led into paradoxes. Most notorious is the paradox of the class of
all classes that are not members of themselves. Bertrand Russell pointed
out that if this class is a member of itself it is not a member of itself, and if it
is not a member of itself then it is a member of itself. It is no accident that
Russell’s paradox bears a striking resemblance to Plato’s self-criticism in the
Parmenides.
Paradigms. It has more than once been suggested that Platonic Ideas might
be looked on as paradigms or standards: the relation between individuals
and Ideas might be thought to be similar to that between metre-long
objects and the Standard Metre by which the metre length was formerly
deWned.29 This notion Wts well the way in which for Plato particulars
imitate or resemble Ideas: to be a metre long was, precisely, to resemble
the Standard Metre, and if two things were each a metre long it was in
virtue of their common resemblance to the paradigm. However, such
paradigms fail the Principle of Sublimity: the Standard Metre was not in
heaven but in Paris.
Concrete universals. Philosophers have sometimes toyed with the notion that
in a sentence such as ‘Water is Xuid’ the word ‘water’ is to be treated as the
name of a single scattered object, the aqueous portion of the world, made
up of puddles, rivers, lakes, and so on. This would give a clear sense to
Plato’s principle that particulars participate in Ideas: this particular bottle of
water is quite literally a part of all-the-water-in-the-world. Moreover, water
is undoubtedly water, and nothing that is not water is really and truly
water. This notion also suits Plato’s preference (not often shared by his
commentators) for referring to Ideas by a concrete mode of speech (e.g.
29 The idea originated with Wittgenstein. See P. T. Geach, ‘The Third Man Again’, in R. E.
Allen (ed.), Studies in Plato’s Metaphysics (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1965).
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
55

‘the beautiful’) rather than an abstract one (e.g. ‘beauty’). However, con-
crete universals fail the Principle of Sublimity and the Principle of Purity:
the water in the universe can be located and can change in quantity and
distribution, and it has many other properties besides that of being water.
None of these notions do full justice to the many facets of Plato’s Ideas. If
one wants to see how his six principles seemed plausible to Plato it is better
to consider, not any modern logician’s technical concept, but some more
unreXective notion. Consider the points of the compass, north, south,
west, and east. Take the notion, say, of the east as one might conceive it by
naive reXection on the various idioms we in Britain use about the east.
There are many places that are east of us, e.g. Belgrade and Hong Kong.
Anything thus eastward is part of the east (participation) and is in the same
direction as the east (imitation). That is what makes whatever is east of us
east (1). The east, however, cannot be identiWed with any point in space,
however eastward it may be (2). The east is of course east of us (3), and the
east is nothing but east (4): if we say ‘The east is red’ we only mean that the
eastern sky is red. Nothing but the east is unqualiWedly east: the sun is
sometimes east and sometimes west, India is east of Iran but west of
Vietnam, but in every time and place the east is east (5). The east has no
history in time, and it cannot be seen, handled, or parcelled out (6).
I am not, of course, suggesting that points of the compass will supply
an interpretation of Plato’s principles that will make them all come out
true: no interpretation could do that since the principles form an
inconsistent set. I am merely saying that this interpretation will make
the theses look prima facie plausible in a way that the interpretations
previously considered will not. Functions, classes, paradigms, and con-
crete universals all raise problems of their own, as philosophers long after
Plato discovered, and though we cannot go back to the classical Theory
of Ideas, we have yet to give a fully satisfactory answer to the problems it
was meant to address.
Plato’s Republic
In Plato’s most famous dialogue, the Republic, the Theory of Ideas is put to
use not only for the logical and semantical purposes that we have just been
considering, but also to address problems in epistemology, metaphysics,
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
56

and ethics. These ramiWcations of the theory will be considered in later
chapters. But the Republic is best known to the world at large not for its
manifold exploitation of the theory, but for the political arrangements that
are described in its central books.
The oYcial topic of the dialogue is the nature and value of justice. After
several candidate deWnitions for justice have been examined and found
wanting in the Wrst book (which probably originally existed as a separate
dialogue), the main part of the work begins with a challenge to Socrates to
prove that justice is something worthwhile for its own sake. Plato’s
brothers Glaucon and Adeimantus, who are characters in the dialogue,
argue that justice is chosen as a way of avoiding evil. To avoid being
oppressed by others, Glaucon says, weak human beings make compacts
with each other neither to suVer nor to commit injustice. People would
much prefer to act unjustly if they could do so with impunity—the kind of
impunity a man would have, for instance, if he could make himself
invisible so that his misdeeds passed undetected. Adeimantus supports his
brother, saying that among humans the rewards of justice are the rewards
of seeming to be just rather than the rewards of actually being just, and
with regard to the gods the penalties of injustice can be bought oV by
prayer and sacriWce (2. 358a–367e).
We shall see in Chapter 8 how Socrates responds, through the remaining
books of the dialogue, to this initial challenge. Now, in the interests of
setting out Plato’s political philosophy, we should concentrate on his
immediate response. To answer the brothers he shifts from the consider-
ation of justice, or righteousness, in the individual person to the larger
issue of justice in the city-state. There, he says, the nature of justice will be
written in bigger letters and therefore easier to read. The purpose of living
in cities is to enable people with diVerent skills to supply each other’s needs
by an appropriate division of labour. Ideally, if people were content as they
once were with the satisfaction of their basic needs, a very simple commu-
nity would suYce. But in the modern luxurious age citizens demand more
than mere subsistence, and this necessitates more complicated political
arrangements, including a well-trained professional army (2. 369b–374d).
Socrates now presents a blueprint for a city with three classes. Those
among the soldiers best Wtted to rule are selected by competition to form
the upper class, called guardians; the remaining soldiers are described as
auxiliaries, and the rest of the citizens belong to the class of farmers and
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
57

artisans (2. 374d–376e). How are the working classes to be brought to accept
the authority of the ruling classes? A myth must be propagated, a ‘noble
falsehood’, to the eVect that members of the three classes have diVerent
metals in their soul: gold, silver, and bronze respectively. Citizens in
general are to remain in the class in which they were born, but Socrates
allows a limited amount of social mobility (3. 414c–415c).
The rulers and auxiliaries are to receive an elaborate education in
literature (based on a bowdlerized Homer), music (provided it is martial
and edifying), and gymnastics (undertaken by both sexes in common)
(2. 376e–3. 403b). Women as well as men are to be guardians and auxiliaries,
but this involves severe restraints no less than privileges. Members of the
upper classes are not allowed to marry; women are to be held in common
and all sexual intercourse is to be public. Procreation is to be strictly
regulated on eugenic grounds. Children are not to be allowed contact
with their parents, but will be brought up in public creches. Guardians and
auxiliaries may not own property or touch money; they will be given, free
of charge, adequate but modest provisions, and they will live in common
like soldiers in a camp (5. 451d–471c).
ThestatethatSocratesimaginesinbooks3to5oftheRepublichasbeenboth
denounced as a piece of ruthless totalitarianism and admired as an early
exercise infeminism. Ifitwas ever seriously meantasablueprint forareal-life
polity, then it must be admitted that it is in many respects in conXict with the
most basic human rights, devoid of privacy and full of deceit. Considered as a
constitutionalproposal, itdeserves allthe obloquythathas beenheaped onit
by conservatives and liberals alike. But it must be remembered that the
explicit purpose of this constitution-mongering was to cast light on the
nature of justice in the soul, as Socrates goes on to do.30 Plato, we know from
otherdialogues,delightedinteasinghisreaders;heextendedtheironyhehad
learnt from Socrates into a major principle of philosophical illumination.
However, having woven the analogy with his classbound state into his
moral psychology, Plato in later books of the Republic returns to political
theory. His ideal state, he tells us, incorporates all the cardinal virtues: the
virtue of wisdom resides in the guardians, fortitude in the auxiliaries,
temperance in the working classes, and justice is rooted in the principle
of the division of labour from which the city-state took its origin. In a just
30 See Ch. 7 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
58

state every citizen and every class does that for which they are most suited,
and there is harmony between the classes (4. 427d–434c).
In less ideal states there is a gradual falling away from this ideal. There are
Wve possible types of political constitution (8. 544e). The Wrst and best consti-
tution is called monarchy or aristocracy: if wisdom rules it does not matter
whether it is incarnate in one or many rulers. There are four other inferior
types of constitution: timocracy, oligarchy, democracy, and despotism
(8. 543c). Each of these constitutions declines into the next because of the
downgrading of one of the virtues of the ideal state. If the rulers cease to be
persons of wisdom, aristocracy gives place to timocracy, which is essentially
rule by a military junta (8. 547c). Oligarchy diVers from timocracy because
oligarchic rulers lack fortitude and military virtues (8. 556d). Oligarchs do
possess, in a rather miserly form, the virtue of temperance; when this is
Despite Plato’s proposals, it was rare for a woman to be admitted to a philosophical
school as Hipparchia is here shown, in a fourth-century-bc fresco, joining her
husband, Crates, founder of the Cynics
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
59

abandoned oligarchy gives way to democracy (8. 555b). For Plato, any step
from the aristocracy of the ideal republic is a step away from justice; but it is
the step from democracy to despotism that marks the enthronement of
injusticeincarnate(8.576a).Sothearistocraticstateismarkedbythepresence
ofallthevirtues,thetimocraticstatebytheabsenceofwisdom,theoligarchic
state by the decay of fortitude, the democratic state by contempt for temper-
ance, and the despotic state by the overturning of justice.
Plato recognizes that in the real world we are much more likely to
encounter the various forms of inferior state than the ideal constitution
described in the Republic. Nonetheless, he insists that there will be no
happiness, public or private, except in such a city, and such a city will
never be brought about unless philosophers become kings or kings become
philosophers (5. 473c–d). Becoming a philosopher, of course, involves
working through Plato’s educational system in order to reach acquaint-
ance with the Ideas.
The Laws and the Timaeus
Later in his life Plato abandoned the idea of the philosopher king and ceased
to treat the Theory of Ideas as having political signiWcance. He came to
believe that the character of the ruler was less important to the welfare of a
city than the nature of the laws under which it was governed. In his late
and longest work, the Laws, he portrays an Athenian visitor discussing with
a Cretan and a Spartan the constitution of a colony, Magnesia, to be
founded in the south of Crete. It is to be predominantly agricultural,
with the free population consisting mainly of citizen farmers. Manual
work is done largely by slaves, and craft and commerce are the province
of resident aliens. Full citizenship is restricted to 5,040 adult males, divided
into twelve tribes. The blueprint for government that is presented as a
result of the advice of the Athenian visitor stands somewhere between the
actual constitutional arrangements of Athens and the imaginary structures
of Plato’s ideal republic.
Like Athens, Magnesia is to have an assembly of adult male citizens, a
Council, and a set of elected oYcials, to be called the Guardians of the
Laws. Ordinary citizens will take part in the administration of the laws by
sitting on enormous juries. Various appointments are made by lot, so as to
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
60

ensure wide political participation. Private property is allowed, subject to a
highly progressive wealth tax (5. 744b). Marriage, far from being abolished,
is imposed by law, and bachelors over 35 have to pay severe annual Wnes
(6. 774b). Finally, legislators must realize that even the best laws are
constantly in need of reform (6. 769d).
On the other hand, Magnesia has several features reminiscent of the
Republic. Supreme power in the state rests with a Nocturnal Council, which
includes the wisest and most highly qualiWed oYcials, specially trained in
mathematics, astronomy, theology, and law (though not, like the guardians
of the Republic, metaphysics). Private citizens are not allowed to possess
gold or silver coins, and the sale of houses is strictly forbidden (5. 740c, 742a).
Severe censorship is imposed on both texts and music, and poets must be
licensed (7. 801d–2a). Female sex police, with right of entry to households,
oversee procreation and enforce eugenic standards (6. 784a–b). In divorce
courts there must be as many women judges as men (9. 930a). Women are to
join men at the communal meals, and they are to receive military training,
and provide a home defence force (7. 814a). Education is of great importance
for all classes, and is to be supervised by a powerful Minister of Education
reporting direct to the Nocturnal Council (6. 765d).
Substantive legislation is set out in the middle books of the dialogue.
Each law must have a preamble setting out its purpose, so that citizens may
conform to it with understanding. For instance, a law compelling marriage
between the age of 30 and 35 should have a preamble explaining that
procreation is the method by which human beings achieve immortality
(4. 721b). The duties of the many administrative oYcials are set out in book
6, and the educational curriculum is detailed, from playschool upward, in
book 7; the Laws itself is to be a set school text. Book 9 deals with forms of
assault and homicide and sets out the procedure relating to capital oVences
such as temple robbery. Elaborate provision is made to ensure that the
accused gets a fair trial. In civil matters the law goes into Wne detail, laying
down, for instance, the damages to be paid by a defendant who is shown to
have enticed away bees from the plaintiV’s hive (9. 843e). Hunting is to be
very severely restricted: the only form allowed is the hunting of four-
legged animals, on horseback, with dogs (7. 824a).
From time to time in the Laws Plato engages in theoretical discussion of
sexual morality, though actual sexual legislation is restricted to a form of
excommunication for adultery (7. 785d–e). In a way that has been very
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
61

common during the Christian era, but was rare in pagan antiquity, he bases
his sexual ethics on the notion that procreation is the natural purpose of
sex. The Athenian says at one point that he would like to put into eVect ‘A
law to permit sexual intercourse only for its natural purpose, procreation,
and to prohibit homosexual relations; to forbid the deliberate killing of a
human oVspring and the casting of seed on rocks and stone where it will
never take root and fructify’ (8. 838e). He realizes, however, that it will be
very diYcult to ensure compliance with such a law, and instead he
proposes other measures to stamp out sodomy and discourage all forms
of non-procreative intercourse (8. 836e, 841d). We have reached a point in
Plato’s thinking far distant from the arch homosexual banter which is such
a predominant feature of the Socratic dialogues.
One of the most interesting sections of the Laws is the tenth book, which
deals with the worship of the gods and the elimination of heresy. Impiety
arises, the Athenian says, when people do not believe that the gods exist, or
believe that they exist but do not care for the human race. As a preamble to
laws against impiety, therefore, the lawgiver must establish the existence of
the divine. The elaborate argument he presents will be considered in a later
chapter on philosophy of religion.
In the Timaeus, a dialogue whose composition probably overlapped with
that of the Laws, Plato sets out the relationship between God and the world
we live in. He returns to the traditional philosophical topic of cosmology,
taking it up at the point where Anaxagoras had, in his view, left oV
unsatisfactorily. The world of the Timaeus is not a Weld of mechanistic
causes: it is fashioned by a divinity, variously called its father, its maker,
or its craftsman (demiourgos) (28c).
Timaeus, the eponymous hero of the dialogue, is an astronomer. He
oVers to narrate to Socrates the history of the universe, from the origin of
the cosmos to the appearance of mankind. People ask, he says, whether the
world has always existed or whether it had a beginning. The answer must
be that it had a beginning, because it is visible, tangible, and corporeal, and
nothing that is perceptible by the senses is eternal and changeless in the
way that the objects of thought are (27d–28c). The divinity who fashioned
it had his eye on an eternal archetype, ‘for the cosmos is the most beautiful
of the things that have come to be, and he is the best of all causes’ (29a).
Why did he bring it into existence? Because he was good, and what is good
is utterly free from envy or selWshness (29d).
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
62

Like the Lord God in Genesis, the maker of the world looked at what he
had made and found that it was good; and in his delight he adorned it with
many beautiful things. But the Demiurge diVers from the creator of
Judaeo-Christian tradition in several ways. First of all, he does not create
the world from nothing: rather, he brings it into existence from a primor-
dial chaos, and his creative freedom is limited by the necessary properties of
the initial matter (48a). ‘God, wishing all things to be good and nothing, if
he could help it, paltry, and Wnding the visible universe in a state not of
peace but of inharmonious and disorderly motion, brought it from dis-
order into an order that he judged to be altogether better’ (30a). Secondly,
while the Mosaic creator infuses life into an inert world at a certain stage of
its creation, in Plato both the ordered universe and the archetype on which
it was patterned are themselves living beings. What is this living archetype?
He does not tell us, but perhaps it is the world of Ideas which, he concluded
belatedly in the Sophist, must contain life. God created the soul of the world
before he formed the world itself: this world-soul is poised between the
world of being and the world of becoming (35a). He then fastened the
world on to it.
The soul was woven all through from the centre to the outermost heaven, which
it wrapped itself around. By its own revolution upon itself it provided a divine
principle of unending and rational life for all time. The body of the heaven was
made visible, but the soul is invisible and endowed with reason and harmony. It is
the best creation of the best of intelligible and eternal realities. (36e–37a)
In contrast to those earlier philosophers who spoke of multiple worlds, Plato
is very Wrm that our universe is the only one (31b). He follows Empedocles in
regarding the world as made up of the four elements, earth, air, Wre, and
water, and he follows Democritus in believing that the diVerent qualities of
the elements are due to the diVerent shapes of the atoms that constitute
them. Earth atoms are cubes, air atoms are octahedrons, Wre atoms are
pyramids, and water atoms are icosahedrons. Pre-existent space was the
receptacle into which the maker placed the world, and in a mysterious way it
underlies the transmutation of the four elements, rather as a lump of gold
underlies the diVerent shapes that a jeweller may give to it (50a). In this Plato
seems to anticipate the prime matter of Aristotelian hylomorphism.31
31 See Ch. 5 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
63

Timaeus explains that there are four kinds of living creatures in the
universe: gods, birds, animals, and Wsh. Among gods Plato distinguishes
between the Wxed stars, which he regards as everlasting living beings, and
the gods of Homeric tradition, whom he mentions in a rather embarrassed
aside. He describes the infusion of souls into the stars and into human
beings, and he develops a tripartite division of the human soul that he had
introduced earlier in the Republic. He gives a detailed account of the
mechanisms of perception and of the construction of the human body.32
This construction, he tells us, was delegated by God to the lesser divinities
that he had himself made personally (69c). A full description is given of all
our bodily organs and their function, and there is a listing of diseases of
body and mind.
The Timaeus was for centuries the most inXuential of Plato’s dialogues.
While the other dialogues went into oblivion between the end of antiquity
and the beginning of the Renaissance, much of the Timaeus survived in Latin
translations by Cicero and a fourth-century Christian called Chalcidius.
Plato’s teleological account of the forming of the world by a divinity was
not too diYcult for medieval thinkers to assimilate to the creation story of
Genesis. The dialogue was a set text in the early days of the University of
Paris, and 300 years later Raphael in his School of Athens gave Plato in the
centre of the fresco only the Timaeus to hold.
32 See Ch. 7 below.
PYTHAGORAS TO PLATO
64

2
Schools of Thought:
From Aristotle to Augustine
T
he fourth century saw a shift in political power from the city-states of
classical Greece to the kingdom of Macedonia to the north. In the
same way, after the Athenians Socrates and Plato, the next great philoso-
pher was a Macedonian. Aristotle was born, Wfteen years after Socrates’
death, in the small colony of Stagira, on the peninsula of Chalcidice. He
was the son of Nicomachus, court physician to King Amyntas, the grand-
father of Alexander the Great. After the death of his father he migrated to
Athens in 367, being then 17, and joined Plato’s Academy. He remained for
twenty years as Plato’s pupil and colleague, and it can safely be said that on
no other occasion in history was such intellectual power concentrated in a
single institution.
Aristotle in the Academy
Many of Plato’s later dialogues date from these decades, and some of the
arguments they contain may reXect Aristotle’s contributions to debate. By
a Xattering anachronism, Plato introduces a character called Aristotle into
the Parmenides, the dialogue that contains the most acute criticisms of the
Theory of Ideas. Some of Aristotle’s own writings also belong to this period,
though many of these early works survive only in fragments quoted by
later writers. Like his master, he wrote initially in dialogue form, and in
content his dialogues show a strong Platonic inXuence.

In his lost dialogue Eudemus, for instance, Aristotle expounded a concep-
tion of the soul close to that of Plato’s Phaedo. He argued vigorously against
the thesis that the soul is an attunement of the body, claiming that it is
imprisoned in a carcass and capable of a happier life when disembodied.
The dead are more blessed and happier than the living, and have become
The location of the philosophical schools of Athens
66
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

greater and better. ‘It is best, for all men and women, not to be born; and
next after that—the best option for humans—is, once born, to die as
quickly as possible’ (fr. 44). To die is to return to one’s real home.
Another Platonic work of Aristotle’s youth is his Protrepticus, or exhort-
ation to philosophy. This too is lost, but it was so extensively quoted in later
antiquity that some scholars believe they can reconstruct it almost in its
entirety. Everyone has to do philosophy, Aristotle says, for arguing against
the practiceof philosophy is itself aform of philosophizing. But the best form
of philosophy is the contemplation of the universe of nature. Anaxagoras is
praised for saying that the one thing that makes life worth living is to observe
the sun and the moon and the stars and the heavens. It is for this reason that
God made us, and gave us a godlike intellect. All else—strength, beauty,
power, and honour—is worthless (Barnes, 2416).
The Protrepticus contains a vivid expression of the Platonic view that the
soul’s union with the body is in some way a punishment for evil done in an
earlier life. ‘As the Etruscans are said often to torture captives by chaining
corpses to their bodies face to face, and limb to limb, so the soul seems to be
spread out and nailed to all the organs of the body’ (ibid.). All this is very
diVerent from Aristotle’s eventual mature thought.
It is probable that some of Aristotle’s surviving works on logic and
disputation, the Topics and Sophistical Refutations, belong to this period.
These are works of comparatively informal logic, the one expounding
how to construct arguments for a position one has decided to adopt,
the other showing how to detect weaknesses in the arguments of others.
Though the Topics contains the germ of conceptions, such as the categories,
that were to be important in Aristotle’s later philosophy, neither work
adds up to a systematic treatise on formal logic such as we are to be given in
the Prior Analytics. Even so, Aristotle can say at the end of the Sophistical
Refutations that he has invented the discipline of logic from scratch: nothing
at all existed when he started. There are many treatises on rhetoric, he
says, but
on the subject of deduction we had nothing of an earlier date to cite, but needed to
spend a long time on original research. If, then, it seems to you on inspection that
from such an unpromising start we have brought our investigation to a satisfac-
tory condition comparable to that of traditional disciplines, it falls to you my
students to grant me your pardon for the shortcomings of the inquiry, and for its
discoveries your warm thanks. (SE 34. 184a9–b8)
67
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

It is indeed one of Aristotle’s many claims on posterity that he was logic’s
founder. His most important works on the subject are the Categories, the de
Interpretatione, and the Prior Analytics. These set out his teaching on simple
terms, on propositions, and on syllogisms. They were grouped together,
along with the two works already mentioned, and a treatise on scientiWc
method, the Posterior Analytics, into a collection known as the Organon, or
‘tool’ of thought. Most of Aristotle’s followers thought of logic not as itself
a scientiWc discipline, but as a propaedeutic art which could be used in any
discipline; hence the title. The Organon, though shown already in antiquity
to be incomplete as a system of logic, was regarded for two millennia as
providing the core of the subject.1
While Aristotle was at the Academy, King Philip II of Macedon, who
succeeded his father in 359, adopted an expansionist policy and waged war
on a number of Greek city-states, including Athens. Despite the martial
eloquence of Aristotle’s contemporary Demosthenes, who denounced the
Macedonian king in his ‘Philippics’, the Athenians defended their interests
only half-heartedly. After a series of humiliating concessions they allowed
Philip to become, by 338, master of the Greek world. It cannot have been an
easy time to be a Macedonian resident in Athens.
Within the Academy, however, relations seem to have remained cordial.
Later generations liked to portray Plato and Aristotle embattled against
each other, and some in antiquity likened Aristotle to an ungrateful colt
who had kicked his mother (D.L. 5. 1). But Aristotle always acknowledged a
great debt to Plato, whom on his death he described as the best and
happiest of mortals ‘whom it is not right for evil men even to praise’. He
took a large part of his philosophical agenda from Plato, and his teaching is
more often a modiWcation than a repudiation of Plato’s doctrines. The
philosophical ideas that are common to the two philosophers are more
important than the issues that divide them—just as, in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries, the opposing schools of rationalists and
empiricists had much more in common with each other than with the
philosophers who preceded and followed them.
Already, however, during his period at the Academy, Aristotle began to
distance himself from Plato’s Theory of Ideas. In his pamphlet On Ideas he
maintained that the arguments of Plato’s central dialogues establish only
1 Aristotle’s logic is considered in detail in Ch. 3.
68
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

that there are, in addition to particulars, certain common objects of the
sciences; but these need not be Ideas. He employs against Ideas a version of
an argument that we have already encountered in Plato’s own dialogues—
he calls it the ‘Third Man argument’ (Barnes, 2435). In his surviving works
Aristotle often take issue with the theory. Sometimes he does so politely, as
where, in the Nicomachean Ethics, he introduces a series of arguments against
the Idea of the Good with the remarks that he has an uphill task because
the Forms were introduced by his good friends. However, his duty as a
philosopher is to honour truth above friendship. In the Posterior Analytics,
however, he dismisses Ideas contemptuously as ‘tarradiddle’ (1. 22. 83a33).
More seriously, in his Metaphysics he argues that the theory fails to solve
the problems it was meant to address. It does not confer intelligibility on
particulars, because immutable and everlasting forms cannot explain how
particulars come into existence and undergo change. Moreover, they do
not contribute anything either to the knowledge or to the being of other
things (A 9. 991a8 V.). All the theory does is to bring in new entities equal in
number to the entities to be explained: as if one could solve a problem by
doubling it (A 9. 990b3).
Aristotle the Biologist
When Plato died in 347, his nephew Speusippus became head of the
Academy, and Aristotle left Athens. He migrated to Assos on the north-
western coast of what is now Turkey. The city was under the rule of
Hermias, a graduate of the Academy, who had already invited a number of
Academicians to form a new philosophical institute there. Aristotle became
a friend of Hermias, and married a close relation of his, Pythias, with whom
he had two children. In 343 Hermias met a tragic end: having negotiated,
with Aristotle’s help, an alliance with Macedon, he was treacherously
arrested and eventually cruciWed by the Great King of Persia. Aristotle
saluted his memory in an ‘Ode to Virtue’, his only surviving poem.
During his period in Assos, and during the next few years, when he lived
at Mytilene on the island of Lesbos, Aristotle carried out extensive scientiWc
research, particularly in zoology and marine biology. These researches
were written up in a book later known, misleadingly, as the History of
Animals, to which he added two shorter treatises, On the Parts of Animals and
69
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

The frontispiece of a fifteenth-century manuscript translation of Aristotle’s History of
Animals

On the Generation of Animals. Aristotle does not claim to have founded the
science of zoology, and his books contain copious citations of earlier
writers, accompanied by a judicious degree of scepticism about some of
their wilder reports. However, his detailed observations of organisms of
very various kinds were quite without precedent, and in many cases they
were not superseded until the seventeenth century.
Though he does not claim to be the Wrst zoologist, Aristotle clearly
saw himself as a pioneer, and indeed felt some need to justify his interest
in the subject. Previous philosophers had given a privileged place to the
observation of the heavens, and here was he prodding sponges and watching
the hatching of grubs. In his defence he says that while the heavenly bodies
are marvellous and glorious, they are hard to study because they are so
distant and diVerent from ourselves. Animals, however, are near at hand,
and akin to our own nature, so that we can investigate them with much
greater precision. It is childish to be squeamish about the observation of the
humbler animals. ‘We should approach the investigation of every kind of
animal without being ashamed, for each of them will exhibit to us some-
thing natural and something beautiful’ (PA 1. 5. 645a20–5).
The scope of Aristotle’s researches is astonishing. Much of his work is
taken up with classiWcation into genus (e.g. Testacea) and species (e.g. sea-
urchin). More than 500 species Wgure in his treatises, and many of them are
described in detail. It is clear that Aristotle was not content with the
observation of a naturalist: he also practised dissection like an anatomist.
He acknowledges that he found dissection distasteful, particularly in the
case of human beings: but it was essential to examine the parts of any
organism in order to understand the structure of the whole (PA 1. 5.
644b22–645a36).
Aristotle illustrated his treatises with diagrams, now sadly lost. We can
conjecture the kind of illustrations he provided when we read passages
such as the following, where he is explaining the relationship between the
testicles and the penis.
In the accompanying diagram the letter A marks the starting point of ducts
leading down from the aorta; the letters JJ mark the heads of the testicles and
the ducts that descend to them; the ducts leading from them through the testicles
are marked YY, and the reverse ducts containing white Xuid and leading to the
testicles are marked ´´; the penis D, the bladder ¯, and the testicles XX. (HA 3. 1.
510a30–4)
71
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

Only a biologist could check the accuracy of the myriad items of infor-
mation that Aristotle oVers us about the anatomy, diet, habitat, modes of
copulation, and reproductive systems of mammals, birds, reptiles, Wsh, and
insects. The twentieth-century biologist Sir D’Arcy Thompson, who made
the canonical translation of the History of Animals into English, constantly
draws attention to the minuteness of his detailed investigations, coupled
with vestiges of superstition. There are some spectacular cases where
Aristotle’s unlikely stories about rare species of Wsh were proved accurate
many centuries later.2 In other places Aristotle states clearly and fairly
biological problems that were not solved until millennia had passed. One
such case was the question whether an embryo contained all the parts of
an animal in miniature form from the beginning, or whether wholly new
structures were formed as the embryo develops (GA 2. 1. 734a1–735a4).
The modern layman can only guess which parts of passages like the
following are accurate, and which are fantasy.
All animals that are quadrupedal, blooded, and viviparous are furnished with teeth;
but, to begin with, some have teeth in both jaws, and some do not. For instance,
horned quadrupeds do not; for they have not got the front teeth in the upper jaw;
and some hornless animals, also, do not have teeth in both jaws, as the camel.
Some animals have tusks, like the boar; and some have not. Further, some animals
are saw-toothed, such as the lion, the leopard, and the dog; and some have teeth
that do not interlock, as the horse and the ox; and by ‘saw-toothed’ we mean such
animals as interlock the sharp-pointed teeth. (HA 2. 1. 501a8 V.)
With such Wsh as pair, eggs are the result of copulation, but such Wsh have them
also without copulation; and this is shown in the case of some river-Wsh, for the
minnow has eggs when quite small—almost, one might say, as soon as it is born.
These Wshes shed their eggs, and, as is stated, the males swallow the greater part of
them, and some portion of them goes to waste in the water; but such of the eggs as
the female deposits in suitable places are saved. If all the eggs were preserved, each
species would be vast in number. The greater number of these eggs are not
productive, but only those over which the male sheds the milt; for when the
female has laid her eggs, the male follows and sheds its milt over them, and from
all the eggs so besprinkled young Wshes proceed, while the rest are left to their fate.
(HA 6. 3. 567a29–b6)
It is easier to form a quick judgement about Aristotle’s attempts to link
features of human anatomy to traits of character. He tells us, for instance,
2 See G. E. R. Lloyd, Aristotle: The Growth and Structure of his Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1968), 74–81.
72
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

that those who have Xat feet are likely to be rogues, and that those who
have large and prominent ears have a tendency to irrelevant chatter (HA 1.
11. 492a1).
Despite an admixture of old wives’ tales, Aristotle’s biological works must
strike us as a stupendous achievement, when we remember the conditions
under which he worked, unequipped with any of the aids to investigation
that have been at the disposal of scientists since the early modern period.
He, or one of his research assistants, must have been gifted with remarkably
acute eyesight, since some of the features of insects that he accurately
reports were not again observed until the invention of the microscope.
His inquiries were conducted in a genuinely scientiWc spirit, and he is always
ready to confess ignorance where evidence is insuYcient. With regard to the
reproductive mechanism in bees, for example, he has this to say:
The facts have not yet been suYciently ascertained. If ever they are, then we must
trust observation rather than theory, and trust theories only if their results
conform with the observed phenomena. (GA 3. 10. 760b28–31).
The Lyceum and its Curriculum
About eight years after the death of Hermias, Aristotle was summoned to
the Macedonian capital by King Philip II as tutor to his 13-year-old son, the
future Alexander the Great. We know little of the content of his instruc-
tion: the Rhetoric for Alexander that appears in the Aristotelian corpus is
commonly regarded as a forgery. Ancient sources say that Aristotle did
write essays on kingship and colonization for his pupil, and gave him his
own edition of Homer. Alexander is said to have slept with this book under
his pillow; and when he became king in 336 and started upon his spectacu-
lar military career, he arranged for biological specimens to be sent to his
tutor from all parts of Greece and Asia Minor.
Within ten years Alexander had made himself master of an empire
that stretched from the Danube to the Indus and included Libya and
Egypt. While Alexander was conquering Asia, Aristotle was back in Athens,
where he established his own school in the Lyceum, a gymnasium just
outside the city boundary. Now aged 50, he built up a substantial library,
and gathered around him a group of brilliant research students, called
‘Peripatetics’ from the name of the avenue (peripatos) in which they walked
73
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

and held their discussions. The Lyceum was not a private club like the
Academy; many of the lectures given there were open to the general public
without fee.
Aristotle’s anatomical and zoological studies had given a new and
deWnitive turn to his philosophy. Though he retained a lifelong interest
in metaphysics, his mature philosophy constantly interlocks with empirical
science, and his thinking takes on a biological cast. Most of the works that
have come down to us, with the exception of the zoological treatises,
probably belong to this second Athenian sojourn. There is no certainty
about their chronological order, and indeed it is probable that the main
treatises—on physics, metaphysics, psychology, ethics, and politics—were
constantly rewritten and updated. In the form in which they have survived
it is possible to detect evidence of diVerent layers of composition, though
no consensus has been reached about the identiWcation or dating of these
strata.
In his major works Aristotle’s style is very diVerent from that of Plato or
any of his other philosophical predecessors. In the period between Homer
and Socrates most philosophers wrote in verse, and Plato, writing in the
great age of Athenian tragedy and comedy, composed dramatic dialogue.
Aristotle, an exact contemporary of the greatest Greek orator Demos-
thenes, preferred to write in prose monologue. The prose he wrote is
commonly neither lucid nor polished, though he could compose passages
of moving eloquence when he chose. It may be that the texts we have are
the notes from which he lectured; perhaps even, in some cases, notes taken
at lectures by students present. Everything Aristotle wrote is fertile of ideas
and full of energy; every sentence packs a massive intellectual punch. But
eVort is needed to decode the message of his jagged clauses. What has been
delivered to us from Aristotle across the centuries is a set of telegrams
rather than epistles.
Aristotle’s works are systematic in a way that Plato’s never were. Even in
the Laws, which is the closest to a textbook that Plato ever wrote, we Xit
from topic to topic, and indeed from discipline to discipline, in a discon-
certing manner. None of the other major dialogues can be pigeon-holed as
relating to a single area of philosophy. It is, of course, anachronistic to
speak of ‘disciplines’ when discussing Plato: but the anachronism is not
great because the notion of a discipline, in the modern academic sense, is
made very explicit by Aristotle in his Lyceum period.
74
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

There are three kinds of sciences, Aristotle tells us in the Metaphysics
(E 1. 1025b25): productive, practical, and theoretical sciences. Productive
sciences are, naturally enough, sciences that have a product. They include
engineering and architecture, with products like bridges and houses, but
also disciplines such as strategy and rhetoric, where the product is some-
thing less concrete, such as victory on the battleWeld or in the courts.
Practical sciences are ones that guide behaviour, most notably ethics and
politics. Theoretical sciences are those that have no product and no practical
goal, but in which information and understanding is sought for its own sake.
There are three theoretical sciences: physics, mathematics, and theology
(Metaph. E 1. 1026a19). In this trilogy only mathematics is what it seems to
be. ‘Physics’ means natural philosophy or the study of nature (physis). It is a
much broader study than physics as understood nowadays, including
chemistry and meteorology and even biology and psychology. ‘Theology’
is, for Aristotle, the study of entities above and superior to human beings,
that is to say, the heavenly bodies as well as whatever divinities may inhabit
the starry skies. His writings on this topic resemble a textbook of astronomy
more than they resemble any discourse on natural religion.
It may seem surprising that metaphysics, a discipline theoretical par
excellence, does not Wgure in Aristotle’s list of theoretical sciences, since so
much of his writing is concerned with it, and since one of his longest
treatises bears the title Metaphysics. The word, in fact, does not occur in
Aristotle’s own writings and Wrst appears in the posthumous catalogue of
his works. It simply means ‘after physics’ and refers to the works that were
listed after his Physics. But he did in fact come to recognize the branch of
philosophy we now call ‘metaphysics’: he called it ‘First Philosophy’ and he
deWned it as the discipline that studies Being as Being.3
Aristotle on Rhetoric and Poetry
In the realm of productive sciences Aristotle wrote two works, the Rhetoric
and the Poetics, designed to assist barristers and playwrights in their respect-
ive tasks. Rhetoric, Aristotle says, is the discipline that indicates in any
given case the possible means of persuasion: it is not restricted to a
3 See Ch. 5 below.
75
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

particular Weld, but is topic-neutral. There are three bases of persuasion by
the spoken word: the character of the speaker, the mood of the audience,
and the argument (sound or spurious) of the speech itself. So the student
of rhetoric must be able to reason logically, to evaluate character, and to
understand the emotions (1. 2. 1358a1–1360b3).
Aristotle wrote more instructively about logic and character in other
treatises, but the second book of the Rhetoric contains his fullest account of
human emotions. Emotions, he says, are feelings that alter people’s judge-
ments, and they are accompanied by pain and pleasure. He takes each
major emotion in turn, oVering a deWnition of the emotion and a list of its
objects and causes. Anger, for instance, he deWnes as a desire, accompanied
by pain, for what appears to be revenge for what appears to be an unmer-
ited slight upon oneself or one’s friends (2. 2. 1378a32–4). He gives a long list
of the kinds of people who make us angry: those who mock us, for
instance, or those who stop us drinking when we are thirsty, or those
who get in our way at work.
Also those who speak ill of us, and show contempt for us, in respect of the things
we most care about. Thus those who seek a reputation as philosophers get angry
with those who show disdain for their philosophy; those who pride themselves
upon their appearance get angry with those who disparage it, and so on. We feel
particularly angry if we believe that, either in fact or in popular belief, we are
totally or largely lacking in the respective qualities. For when we are convinced
that we excel in the qualities for which we are mocked, we can ignore the
mockery. (2. 2. 1379a32–b1)
Aristotle takes us on a detailed tour of the emotions of anger, hatred, fear,
shame, pity, indignation, envy, and jealousy. In each case his treatment is
clear and systematic, and often shows—as in the above passage—acute
psychological insight.
The Poetics, unlike the Rhetoric, has been very widely read throughout
history. Only its Wrst book survives, a treatment of epic and tragic poetry.
The second book, on comedy, is lost. Umberto Eco, in The Name of the Rose,
wove a dramatic Wction around its imagined survival and then destruction
in a fourteenth-century abbey.
To understand Aristotle’s message in the Poetics one must know some-
thing of Plato’s attitude to poetry. In the second and third books of the
Republic Homer is attacked for misrepresenting the gods and for encour-
aging debased emotions. The dramatic representations of the tragedians,
76
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

too, are attacked as deceptive and debasing. In the tenth book the Theory
of Ideas provides the basis for a further, and more fundamental, attack on
the poets. Material objects are imperfect copies of the truly real Ideas;
artistic representations of material objects are therefore at two removes
from reality, being imitations of imitations (597e). Drama corrupts by
appealing to the lower parts of our nature, encouraging us to indulge in
weeping and laughter (605d–6c). Dramatic poets must be kept away from
the ideal city: they should be anointed with myrrh, crowned with laurel,
and sent on their way (398b).
One of Aristotle’s aims was to resolve this quarrel between poetry and
philosophy. Imitation, he says, so far from being the degrading activity that
Plato describes, is something natural to humans from childhood. It is one
of the features that makes men superior to animals, since it vastly increases
their scope for learning. Secondly, representation brings a delight all of its
own: we enjoy and admire paintings of objects which in themselves would
annoy or disgust us (Po. 4. 1448b5–24).
Aristotle oVers a detailed analysis of the nature of tragic drama. He
deWnes tragedy in the following terms.
A tragedy is a representation of a grand, complete, and signiWcant action, in
language embellished appropriately in the diVerent parts of the work, in dramatic,
not narrative form, with episodes arousing pity and fear so as to achieve puriWca-
tion (katharsis) of these emotions. (6. 1449b24 V.).
No one is quite sure what Aristotle meant by katharsis, or puriWcation.
Perhaps what he wanted to teach is that watching tragedy helps us to
put our own sorrows and worries into perspective, as we observe the
catastrophes that have overtaken people who were far superior to the
likes of ourselves. Pity and fear, the emotions to be puriWed, are most easily
aroused, he says, if the tragedy exhibits people as the victims of hatred and
murder where they could most expect to be loved and cherished. That
is why so many tragedies concern feuds within a single family (14.
1453b1–21).
Six things, Aristotle says, are necessary for a tragedy: plot, character,
diction, thought, spectacle, and melody (6. 1450a11 V.). It is the Wrst two of
these that chieXy interest him. Stage setting and musical accompaniment
are dispensable accessories: what is great in a tragedy can be appreciated
from a mere reading of the text. Thought and diction are more important:
77
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

it is the thoughts expressed by the characters that arouse emotion in the
hearer, and if they are to do so successfully they must be presented
convincingly by the actors. But it is character and plot that really bring
out the genius of a tragic poet, and Aristotle devotes a long chapter to
character, and no less than Wve chapters to plot.
The main character or tragic hero must be neither supremely good nor
supremely bad: he should be a person of rank who is basically good, but
comes to grief through some great error (hamartia). A woman may have the
kind of goodness necessary to be a tragic heroine, and even a slave may be a
tragic subject. Whatever kind of person is the protagonist, it is important
that he or she should have the qualities appropriate to them, and should
be consistent throughout the drama. (15. 1454a15 V.). Every one of the
dramatis personae should possess some good features; what they do should
be in character, and what happens to them should be a necessary or
probable outcome of their behaviour.
The most important element of all is plot: the characters are created for
the sake of the plot, and not the other way round. The plot must be a self-
contained story with a clearly marked beginning, middle, and end; it must be
suYciently short and simple for the spectator to hold all its details in mind.
Tragedy must have a unity. You do not make a tragedy by stringing together
a set of episodes connected only by a common hero; rather, there must be
a single signiWcant action on which the whole plot turns (8. 1451a21–9).
In a typical tragedy the story gradually gets more complicated until a
turning point is reached, which Aristotle calls a ‘reversal’ (peripeteia). That is
the moment at which the apparently fortunate hero falls to disaster,
perhaps through a ‘revelation’ (anagnorisis), namely his discovery of some
crucial but hitherto unknown piece of information (15. 1454b19). After the
reversal comes the denouement, in which the complications earlier intro-
duced are gradually unravelled (18. 1455b24 V.).
These observations are illustrated by constant reference to actual Greek
plays, in particular to Sophocles’ tragedy King Oedipus. Oedipus, at the
beginning of the play, enjoys prosperity and reputation. He is basically a
good man, but has the fatal Xaw of impetuosity. This vice makes him kill a
stranger in a scuZe, and marry a bride without due diligence. The ‘revela-
tion’ that the man he killed was his father and the woman he married was
his mother leads to the ‘reversal’ of his fortune, as he is banished from his
kingdom and blinds himself in shame and remorse.
78
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

Aristotle’s theory of tragedy enables him to respond to Plato’s complaint
that playwrights, like other artists, were only imitators of everyday life,
which was itself only an imitation of the real world of the Ideas. His answer
is given when he compares drama with history.
From what has been said it is clear that the poet’s job is to describe not something
that has actually happened, but something that might well happen, that is to say
something that is possible because it is necessary or likely. The diVerence between a
historian and a poet is not a matter of prose v. verse—you might turn Herodotus
into metre and it would still be history. It is rather in this matter of writing what
happens rather than what might happen. For this reason poetry is more philo-
sophical and more important than history; for poetry tells us of the universal,
history tells us only of the particular. (9. 1451b5–9)
What Aristotle says here of poetry and drama could of course be said of
other kinds of creative writing. Much of what happens to people in
everyday life is a matter of sheer accident; only in Wction can we see the
working out of character and action into their natural consequences.
Aristotle’s Ethical Treatises
If we turn from the productive sciences to the practical sciences, we Wnd
that Aristotle’s contribution was made by his writings on moral philosophy
and political theory. Three treatises of moral philosophy have been handed
down in the corpus: the Nicomachean Ethics (NE) in ten books, the Eudemian
Ethics (EE) in seven books, and the Magna Moralia in two books. These texts
are highly interesting to anyone who is interested in the development of
Aristotle’s thought. Whereas in the physical and metaphysical treatises it is
possible to detect traces of revision and rewriting, it is only in the case of
ethics that we have Aristotle’s doctrine on the same topics presented in
three diVerent and more or less complete courses. There is, however, no
consensus on the explanation of this phenomenon.
In the early centuries after Aristotle’s death no great use was made of
his ethical treatises by later writers; but the EE is more often cited than the
NE, and the NE does not appear as such in the earliest catalogues of his
Works. Indeed there are traces of some doubt whether the NE is a genuine
work of Aristotle or perhaps a production of his son Nicomachus. However,
79
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

from the time of the commentator Aspasius in the second century ad it has
been almost universally agreed that the NE is not only genuine but also the
most important of the three works. Throughout the Middle Ages, and since
the revival of classical scholarship, it has been treated as the Ethics of
Aristotle, and indeed the most generally popular of all his surviving works.
Very diVerent views have been taken of the other works. While the NE
has long appealed to a wide readership, the EE, even among Aristotelian
scholars, has never appealed to more than a handful of fanatics. In the
nineteenth century it was treated as spurious, and republished under the
name of Aristotle’s pupil Eudemus of Rhodes. In the twentieth century
scholars have commonly followed Werner Jaeger4 in regarding it as a
genuine but immature work, superseded by an NE written in the Lyceum
period. As for the Magna Moralia, some scholars followed Jaeger in rejecting
it as post-Aristotelian, whereas others have argued hotly that it is a genuine
work, the earliest of all three treatises.
There is a further problem about the relationship between the NE and
the EE. In the manuscript tradition three books make a double appearance:
once as books 5, 6, and 7 of the NE, and once as books 4, 5, and 6 of the EE. It
is a mistake to try to settle the relationship between the NE and the EE
without Wrst deciding which was the original home of the common books.
It can be shown on both philosophical and stylometric grounds that these
books are much closer to the EE than to the NE. Once they are restored to
the EE the case for regarding the EE as an immature and inferior work
collapses: nothing remains, for example, of Jaeger’s argument that the EE is
closer to Plato, and therefore earlier, than the NE. Moreover, internal
historical allusions suggest that the disputed books, and therefore now
the EE, belong to the Lyceum period.
There are problems concerning the coherence of the NE itself. At the
beginning of the twentieth century the Aristotelian Thomas Case, in a
celebrated article in the eleventh edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica,
suggested that ‘the probability is that the Nicomachean Ethics is a collection
of separate discourses worked up into a tolerably systematic treatise.’ This
remains highly probable. The diVerences between the NE and the EE do not
admit of a simple chronological solution: it may be that some of the
discourses worked up into the NE antedate, and others postdate, the EE,
4 Aristotle: Fundamentals of the History of his Development, trans. R. Robinson (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1948).
80
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

which is itself a more coherent whole. The stylistic diVerences that separate
the NE not only from the EE but also from almost all Aristotle’s other
works may be explicable by the ancient tradition that the NE was edited by
Nicomachus, while the EE, along with some of Aristotle’s other works, was
edited by Eudemus. As for the Magna Moralia, while it follows closely the
line of thought of the EE, it contains a number of misunderstandings of its
doctrine. This is easily explained if it consists of notes made by a student at
the Lyceum during Aristotle’s delivery of a course of lectures resembling
the EE.5
The content of the three treatises is, in general, very similar. The NE
covers much the same ground as Plato’s Republic, and with some exagger-
ation one could say that Aristotle’s moral philosophy is Plato’s moral
philosophy with the Theory of Ideas ripped out. The Idea of the Good,
Aristotle says, cannot be the supreme good of which ethics treats, if only
because ethics is a practical science, about what is within human power to
achieve, whereas an everlasting and unchanging Idea of the Good could
only be of theoretical interest.
In place of the Idea of the Good, Aristotle oVers happiness (eudaimonia) as
the supreme good with which ethics is concerned, for, like Plato, he sees an
intimate connection between living virtuously and living happily. In all the
ethical treatises a happy life is a life of virtuous activity, and each of them
oVers an analysis of the concept of virtue and a classiWcation of virtues of
diVerent types. One class is that of the moral virtues, such as courage,
temperance, and liberality, that constantly appeared in Plato’s ethical
discussions. The other class is that of intellectual virtues: here Aristotle
makes a much sharper distinction than Plato ever did between the intellec-
tual virtue of wisdom, which governs ethical behaviour, and the intellectual
virtue of understanding, which is expressed in scientiWc endeavour and
contemplation. The principal diVerence between the NE and the EE is that
in the former Aristotle regards perfect happiness as constituted solely by the
activity of philosophical contemplation, whereas in the latter it consists of
the harmonious exercise of all the virtues, intellectual and moral.6
5 The account here given of the relationship between the Aristotelian ethical treatises is
controversial. I have expounded and defended it in The Aristotelian Ethics (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1978) and, with corrections and modiWcations, in Aristotle on the Perfect Life (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1992).
6 Aristotle’s ethical teaching is explained in detail in Ch. 8 below.
81
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

Aristotle’s Political Theory
Even in the EE it is ‘the service and contemplation of God’ that sets the
standard for the appropriate exercise of the moral virtues, and in the NE
this contemplation is described as a superhuman activity of a divine part of
ourselves. Aristotle’s Wnal word here is that in spite of being mortal we
must make ourselves immortal as far as we can. When we turn from the
Ethics to their sequel, the Politics, we come down to earth. ‘Man is a political
animal’, we are told: humans are creatures of Xesh and blood, rubbing
shoulders with each other in cities and communities.
Like his work in zoology, Aristotle’s political studies combine observa-
tion and theory. Diogenes Laertius tells us that he collected the
constitutions of 158 states—no doubt aided by research assistants in
the Lyceum. One of these, The Constitution of Athens, though not handed
down as part of the Aristotelian corpus, was found on papyrus in 1891.
In spite of some stylistic diVerences from other works, it is now generally
regarded as authentic. In a codicil to the NE that reads like a preface to
the Politics, Aristotle says that, having investigated previous writings on
political theory, he will inquire, in the light of the constitutions collected,
what makes good government and what makes bad government,
what factors are favourable or unfavourable to the preservation of
a constitution, and what constitution the best state should adopt (NE 10.
9. 1181b12–23).
The Politics itself was probably not written at a single stretch, and here as
elsewhere there is probably an overlap and interplay between the records of
observation and the essays in theory. The structure of the book as we have
it corresponds reasonably well to the NE programme: books 1–3 contain a
general theory of the state, and a critique of earlier writers; books 4–6
contain an account of various forms of constitution, three tolerable
(monarchy, aristocracy, polity) and three intolerable (tyranny, oligarchy,
and democracy); books 7 and 8 are devoted to the ideal form of consti-
tution. Once again, the order of the discourses in the corpus probably
diVers from the order of their composition, but scholars have not reached
agreement on the original chronology.
Aristotle begins by saying that the state is the highest kind of commu-
nity, aiming at the highest of goods. The most primitive communities are
families of men and women, masters and slaves. He seems to regard the
82
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

division between master and slave as no less natural than the division
between men and women, though he complains that it is barbaric to treat
women and slaves alike (1. 2. 1252a25–b6). Families combine to make a
village, and several villages combine to make a state, which is the Wrst self-
suYcient community, and is just as natural as is the family (1. 2. 1253a2).
Indeed, though later than the family in time, the state is prior by nature, as
an organic whole like the human body is prior to its organic parts like
hands and feet. Without law and justice, man is the most savage of animals.
Someone who cannot live in a state is a beast; someone who has no need of
a state must be a god. The foundation of the state was the greatest of
benefactions, because only within a state can human beings fulWl their
potential (1. 2. 1253a25–35).
Among the earlier writers whom Aristotle cites and criticizes Plato
is naturally prominent. Much of the second book of the Politics is devoted
to criticism of the Republic and the Laws. As in the Ethics there is no Idea of
the Good, so in the Politics there are no philosopher kings. Aristotle
thinks that Platonic communism will bring nothing but trouble: the use
Aristotle saw women as inferior to men. Legend took revenge, as in this illustration to
a text of Petrarch, showing him ridden and beaten by his wife, Phyllis.
83
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

of property should be shared, but its ownership should be private. That
way owners can take pride in their possessions and get pleasure out of
sharing them with others or giving them away. Aristotle defends the
traditional family against the proposal that women should be held in
common, and he frowns even on the limited military and oYcial role
assigned to women in the Laws. Over and over again he describes Plato’s
proposals as impractical; the root of his error, he thinks, is that he tries to
make the state too uniform. The diversity of diVerent kinds of citizen is
essential, and life in a city should not be like life in a barracks (2. 3.
1261a10–31).
However, when Aristotle presents his own account of political consti-
tutions he makes copious use of Platonic suggestions. There remains a
constant diVerence between the two writers, namely that Aristotle makes
frequent reference to concrete examples to illustrate his theoretical points.
But the conceptual structure is often very similar. The following passage
from book 3, for instance, echoes the later books of the Republic.
The government, that is to say the supreme authority in a state, must be in the
hands of one, or of a few, or of the many. The rightful true forms of government,
therefore, are ones where the one, or the few, or the many, govern with a view to
the common interest; governments that rule with a view to the private interest,
whether of the one, or the few, or the many, are perversions. Those who belong to
a state, if they are truly to be called citizens, must share in its beneWts. Government
by a single person, if it aims at the common interest, we are accustomed to call
‘monarchy’; similar government by a minority we call ‘aristocracy’, either because
the rulers are the best men, or because it aims at the best interests of the state and
the community. When it is the majority that governs in the common interest we
call it a ‘polity’, using a word which is also a generic term for a constitution . . .
Of each of these forms of government there exists a perversion. The perversion of
monarchy is tyranny; that of aristocracy is oligarchy; that of polity is democracy.
For tyranny is a monarchy exercised solely for the beneWt of the monarch,
oligarchy has in view only the interests of the wealthy, and democracy the
interests only of the poorer classes. None of these aims at the common good of
all. (3. 6. 1279a26–b10)
Aristotle goes on to a detailed evaluation of constitutions of these various
forms. He does so on the basis of his view of the essence of the state. A state,
he tells us, is a society of humans sharing in a common perception of what
is good and evil, just and unjust; its purpose is to provide a good and happy
life for its citizens. If a community contains an individual or family of
84
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

outstanding excellence, then monarchy is the best constitution. But such a
case is very rare, and the risk of miscarriage is great: for monarchy corrupts
into tyranny, which is the worst of all constitutions. Aristocracy, in theory,
is the next best constitution after monarchy, but in practice Aristotle
preferred a kind of constitutional democracy, for what he called ‘polity’
is a state in which rich and poor respect each others’ rights, and in which
the best-qualiWed citizens rule with the consent of all the citizens (4. 8.
1293b30 V.). The corruption of this is what Aristotle calls ‘democracy’,
namely, anarchic mob rule. Bad as democracy is, it is in Aristotle’s view
the least bad of the perverse forms of government.
At the present time we are familiar with the division of government into
three branches: the legislature, the executive, and the judiciary. The
essentials of this system is spelt out by Aristotle, though he distributes
the powers in a somewhat diVerent way from, say, the US constitution. All
constitutions, he tells us, have three elements: the deliberative, the oYcial,
and the judicial. The deliberative element has authority in matters of war
and peace, in making and unmaking alliances; it passes laws, controls the
carrying out of judicial sentences, and audits the accounts of oYcers.
The oYcial element deals with the appointment of ministers and civil
servants, ranging from priests through ambassadors to the regulators of
female aVairs. The judicial element consists of the courts of civil and
criminal law (4. 12. 1296b13–1301a12).
Two elements of Aristotle’s political teaching aVected political insti-
tutions for many centuries: his justiWcation of slavery and his condemna-
tion of usury. Some people, Aristotle tells us, think that the rule of masters
over slaves is contrary to nature, and is therefore unjust. They are quite
wrong: a slave is someone who is by nature not his own but another man’s
property. Slavery is one example of a general truth, that from their birth
some people are marked out for rule and others to be ruled (1. 3. 1253b20–3;
5. 1254b22–4).
In practice much slavery is unjust, Aristotle agrees. There is a custom
that the spoils of war belong to the victors, and this includes the right to
make slaves of the vanquished. But many wars are unjust, and victories in
such wars entail no right to enslave the defeated. Some people, however,
are so inferior and brutish that it is better for them to be under the rule of a
kindly master than to be left to their own devices. Slaves, for Aristotle, are
living tools—and on this basis he is willing to grant that if non-living tools
85
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

could achieve the same purpose there would be no need for slavery. ‘If
every instrument could achieve its own work, obeying or anticipating the
will of others, like the statues of Daedalus . . . if the shuttle could weave and
the plectrum pluck the lyre in a similar manner, overseers would not need
servants, nor masters slaves’ (1. 4. 1253b35–54a1). So perhaps, in an age of
automation, Aristotle would no longer defend slavery.
Though not himself an aristocrat, Aristotle had an aristocratic disdain
for commerce. Our possessions, he says, have two uses, proper and im-
proper. The proper use of a shoe, for instance, is to wear it: to exchange it
for other goods or for money is an improper use (1. 9. 1257a9–10). There is
nothing wrong with basic barter for necessities, but there is nothing
natural about trade in luxuries, as there is in farming. In the operation of
retail trade money plays an important part, and money too has a proper
and an improper use.
The most hated sort of wealth-getting is usury, which makes a proWt out of money
itself, rather than from its natural purpose, for money was intended to be used for
exchange, not to increase at interest. It got the name ‘interest’ (tokos), which means
the birth of money from money, because an oVspring resembles its parent. For this
reason, of all the modes of getting wealth this is the most unnatural. (1. 10. 1258b5–7)
Aristotle’s hierarchical preference places farmers at the top, bankers at the
bottom, with merchants in between. His attitude to usury was one source
of the prohibition, throughout medieval Christendom, of the charging of
interest even at a modest rate. ‘When did friendship’, Antonio asks Shylock
in The Merchant of Venice, ‘take a breed for barren metal of his friend?’
One of the most striking features of Aristotle’s Politics is the almost total
absence of any mention of Alexander or Macedon. Like a modern member
of Amnesty International, Aristotle comments on the rights and wrongs of
every country but his own. His own ideal state is described as having no
more than a hundred thousand citizens, small enough for them all
to know one another and to take their share in judicial and political
oYce. It is very diVerent from Alexander’s empire. When Aristotle says
that monarchy is the best constitution if a community contains a person or
family of outstanding excellence, there is a pointed absence of reference to
the royal family of Macedon.
Indeed, during the years of the Lyceum, relations between the world-
conqueror and his former tutor seem to have cooled. Alexander became
86
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

more and more megalomaniac and Wnally proclaimed himself divine.
Aristotle’s nephew Callisthenes led the opposition to the king’s demand,
in 327, that Greeks should prostrate themselves before him in adoration.
He was falsely implicated in a plot, and executed. The magnanimous and
magniWcent man who is the hero of the earlier books of the NE has some of
the grandiose traits of Alexander. In the EE, however, the alleged virtues of
magnanimity and magniWcence are downgraded, and gentleness and dig-
nity take centre stage.7
Aristotle’s Cosmology
The greater part of Aristotle’s surviving works deal not with productive or
practical sciences, but with the theoretical sciences. We have already
considered his biological works: it is time to give some account of his
physics and chemistry. His contributions to these disciplines were much
less impressive than his researches in the life sciences. While his zoological
writings were still found impressive by Darwin, his physics was superannu-
ated by the sixth century ad.
In works such as On Generation and Corruption and On the Heavens Aristotle
bequeathed to his successors a world-picture that included many features
inherited from the Presocratics. He took over the four elements of Empedo-
cles, earth, water, air, and Wre, each characterized by the possession of a
unique pair of the properties heat, cold, wetness, and dryness: earth being
coldanddry,airbeinghotandwet,andsoforth.Eachelementhaditsnatural
place in an ordered cosmos, and each element had an innate tendency to
move towards this natural place. Thus, earthy solids naturally fell, while Wre,
unless prevented, rose ever higher. Each such motion was natural to its
element; other motions were possible, but were ‘violent’. (We preserve a relic
of Aristotle’s distinction when we contrast natural with violent death.)
In his physical treatises Aristotle oVers explanations of an enormous
number of natural phenomena in terms of the elements, their basic
properties, and their natural motion. The philosophical concepts which
he employs in constructing these explanations include an array of diVerent
notions of causation (material, formal, eYcient, and Wnal), and an analysis
7 See my The Aristotelian Ethics, 233.
87
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

of change as the passage from potentiality to actuality, whether (as in
substantial change) from matter to form or (as in accidental change) from
one to another quality of a substance. These technical notions, which he
employed in such an astonishing variety of contexts, will be examined in
detail in later chapters.
Aristotle’s vision of the cosmos owes much to his Presocratic precursors
and to Plato’s Timaeus. The earth was in the centre of the universe: around it
a succession of concentric crystalline spheres carried the moon, the sun,
and the planets in their journeys around the visible sky. The heavenly
bodies were not compounds of the four terrestrial elements, but were
made of a superior Wfth element or quintessence. They had souls as well as
bodies: living supernatural intellects, guiding their travels through the
cosmos. These intellects were movers which were themselves in motion,
and behind them, Aristotle argued, there must be a source of movement
not itself in motion. The only way in which an unchanging, eternal mover
could cause motion in other beings was by attracting them as an object of
love, an attraction which they express by their perfect circular motion. It is
thus that Dante, in the Wnal lines of his Paradiso, Wnds his own will, like a
smoothly rotating wheel, caught up in the love that moves the sun and all
the other stars.
Even the best of Aristotle’s scientiWc work has now only a historical
interest. The abiding value of treatises such as his Physics is in the philo-
sophical analyses of some of the basic concepts that pervade the physics of
diVerent eras, such as space, time, causation, and determinism. These are
examined in detail in Chapter 5. For Aristotle biology and psychology were
parts of natural philosophy no less than physics and chemistry, since they
too studied diVerent forms of physis, or nature. The biological works we have
already looked at; the psychological works will be examined more closely
in Chapter 7.
The Aristotelian corpus, in addition to the systematic scientiWc treatises,
contains a massive collection of occasional jottings on scientiWc topics, the
Problems. From its structure this appears to be a commonplace book in
which Aristotle wrote down provisional answers to questions that were put
to him by his students or correspondents. Because the questions
are grouped rather haphazardly, and often appear several times—and are
sometimes given diVerent answers—it seems unlikely that they were
generated by Aristotle himself, whether as a single series or over a lifetime.
88
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

But the collection contains many fascinating details that throw insight into
the workings of his omnivorous intellect.
Some of the questions are the kind of thing a patient might bring to a
doctor. Ought drugs to be used, rather than surgery, for sores in the
armpits and groin? (1. 34. 863a21). Is it true that purslane mixed with salt
stops inXammation of the gums? (1. 38. 863b12). Does cabbage really cure a
hangover? (3. 17. 873b1). Why is it diYcult to have sex under water? (4. 14.
878a35). Other questions and answers make us see Aristotle more in the role
of agony aunt. How should one cope with the after-eVects of eating garlic?
(13. 2. 907b28–908a10). How does one prevent biscuit from becoming hard?
(21. 12. 928a12). Why do drunken men kiss old women they would never
kiss when sober? (30. 15. 953b15). Is it right to punish more seriously thefts
from a public place than thefts from a private house? (29. 14. 952a16). More
seriously, why is it more terrible to kill a woman than a man, although the
male is naturally superior to the female? (29. 11. 951a12).
A whole book of the Problems (26) is devoted essentially to weather
forecasting. Other books contain questions that simply reXect general
curiosity. Why does the noise of a saw being sharpened set our teeth on
edge? (7. 5. 886b10). Why do humans not have manes? (10. 25. 893b17). Why
do non-human animals not sneeze or squint? (Don’t they?) (10. 50. 896b5; 54.
897a1). Why do barbarians and Greeks alike count up to ten? (15. 3. 910b23).
Why is a Xute better than a lyre as an accompaniment to a solo voice? (19. 43.
922a1). Very often, the Problems ask ‘Why is such and such the case?’ when a
more appropriate question would have been ‘Is such and such the case?’ For
instance, Why do Wshermen have red hair? (37. 2. 966b25). Why does a large
choir keep time better than a small one? (19. 22. 919a36).
The Problems let us see Aristotle with his hair down, rather like the table
talk of later writers. One of his questions is particularly endearing to those
who may have found it hard to read their way through his more diYcult
works: Why is it that some people, if they begin to read a serious book, are
overcome by sleep even against their will? (18. 1. 916b1).
The Legacy of Aristotle and Plato
When Alexander the Great died in 323, democratic Athens became uncom-
fortable even for an anti-imperialist Macedonian. Saying that he did not
89
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

wish the city that had executed Socrates ‘to sin twice against philosophy’,
Aristotle escaped to Chalcis, where he died in the following year. His will,
which survives, makes thoughtful provision for a large number of friends
and dependants. His library was left to Theophrastus, his successor as head
of the Lyceum. His own papers were vast in size and scope—those that
survive today total around a million words, and it is said that we possess
only one-Wfth of his output. As we have seen, in addition to philosophical
treatises on logic, metaphysics, ethics, aesthetics, and politics, they included
historical works on constitutions, theatre and sport, and scientiWc works
on botany, zoology, biology, psychology, chemistry, meteorology, astron-
omy, and cosmology.
Since the Renaissance it has been traditional to regard the Academy and
the Lyceum as two opposite poles of philosophy. Plato, according to this
tradition, was idealistic, utopian, other-worldly; Aristotle was realistic,
utilitarian, commonsensical. Thus, in Raphael’s School of Athens Plato, wear-
ing the colours of the volatile elements air and Wre, points heavenwards;
Aristotle, clothed in watery blue and earthy green, has his feet Wrmly on
the ground. ‘Every man is born an Aristotelian or a Platonist,’ wrote
S. T. Coleridge. ‘They are the two classes of men, besides which it is
next to impossible to conceive a third.’ The philosopher Gilbert Ryle in
the twentieth century improved on Coleridge. Men could be divided
into two classes on the basis of four dichotomies: green versus blue,
sweet versus savoury, cats versus dogs, Plato versus Aristotle. ‘Tell me
your preference on one of these pairs’, Ryle used to say, ‘and I will tell
you your preference on the other three.’8
In fact, as we have already seen and will see in greater detail later, the
doctrines that Plato and Aristotle share are more important than those
that divide them. Many post-Renaissance historians of ideas have been less
perceptive than the many commentators in late antiquity who saw it as
their duty to construct a harmonious concord between the two greatest
philosophers of the ancient world.
It is sometimes said that a philosopher should be judged by the import-
ance of the questions he raises, not the correctness of the answers he gives.
If that is so, then Plato has an uncontestable claim to pre-eminence as a
philosopher. He was the Wrst to pose questions of great profundity, many of
8 Preference for an item on the left of a pair was supposed to go with preference for the other
leftward items, and similarly for rightward preferences.
90
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

which remain open questions in philosophy today. But Aristotle too can
claim a signiWcant contribution to the intellectual patrimony of the world.
For it was he who invented the concept of Science as we understand it
today and as it has been understood since the Renaissance.
First, he is the Wrst person whose surviving works show detailed obser-
vations of natural phenomena. Secondly, he was the Wrst philosopher to
have a sound grasp of the relationship between observation and theory in
scientiWc method. Thirdly, he identiWed and classiWed diVerent scientiWc
disciplines and explored their relationships to each other: the very concept
of a distinct discipline is due to him. Fourthly, he is the Wrst professor to
have organized his lectures into courses, and to have taken trouble over
their appropriate place in a syllabus (cf. Pol. 1. 10. 1258a20). Fifthly, his
Lyceum was the Wrst research institute of which we have any detailed
knowledge in which a number of scholars and investigators joined in
collaborative inquiry and documentation. Sixthly, and not least important,
he was the Wrst person in history to build up a research library—not simply
a handful of books for his own bookshelf, but a systematic collection to be
used by his colleagues and to be handed on to posterity.9 For all these
reasons, every academic scientist in the world today is in Aristotle’s debt.
He well deserved the title he was given by Dante: ‘the master of those who
know’.
Aristotle’s School
Theophrastus (372–287), Aristotle’s ingenious successor as head of the
Lyceum, continued his master’s researches in several ways. He wrote
extensively on botany, a discipline that Aristotle had touched only lightly.
He improved on Aristotle’s modal logic, and anticipated some later Stoic
innovations. He disagreed with some fundamental principles of Aristotle’s
cosmology, such as the nature of place and the need for a motionless
mover. Like his master, he wrote copiously, and the mere list of the titles of
his works takes up sixteen pages in the Loeb edition of his life by Diogenes
Laertius. They include essays on vertigo, on honey, on hair, on jokes, and
on the eruption of Etna. The best known of his surviving works is a book
9 See L. Casson, Libraries in the Ancient World (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2001), 28–9.
91
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

A Venetian representation of King Ptolemy and his library at Alexandria

entitled Characters, modelled on Aristotle’s delineation in his Ethics of
individual virtues and vices, but sketching them with greater reWnement
and with a livelier wit. He was a diligent historian of philosophy, and the
part of his doxography that survives, On the Senses, is one of our main sources
for Presocratic theories of sensation.
One of Theophrastus’ pupils, Demetrius of Phaleron, was an adviser to
one of Alexander’s generals, Ptolemy, who made himself king of Egypt in
305. It is possible that it was he who suggested the creation in the new city
of Alexandria of a library modelled on that of Aristotle, a project that was
carried out by Ptolemy’s son Ptolemy II Philadelphus. The history of
Aristotle’s own library is obscure. On Theophrastus’ death it seems to
have been inherited not by the next head of the Lyceum, the physicist
Strato, but by Theophrastus’ nephew Neleus of Skepsis, one of the last
surviving pupils of Aristotle himself. Neleus’ heirs are said to have hidden
the books in a cave in order to prevent them from being conWscated by
agents of King Eumenes, who was building up a library at Pergamon to rival
that of Alexandria. Rescued by a bibliophile and taken to Athens, the story
goes, the books were conWscated by the Roman general Sulla when he
captured the city in 86 bc, and shipped to Rome, where they were Wnally
edited and published by Andronicus of Rhodes around the middle of the
Wrst century bc (Strabo 609–9; Plutarch, Sulla 26).10
Every detail of this story has been called in question by one or another
scholar,11 but if true it would account for the oblivion that overtook
Aristotle’s writings between the time of Theophrastus and that of Cicero.
It has been well said that ‘If Aristotle could have returned to Athens in 272
bc, on the Wftieth anniversary of his death, he would hardly have recog-
nized it as the intellectual milieu in which he had taught and researched
for much of his life.’12
It was not that philosophy at that date was dormant in Athens: far from
it. Though the Lyceum under Strato was a shadow of itself, and the
10 Puzzlingly, our best ancient catalogue of the Andronican edition appears to have been
made by a librarian at Alexandria. Is it possible that Mark Antony acquired the corpus from an
heir of the proscribed Sulla and shipped them oV to Cleopatra to Wll the gaps in her recently
destroyed library, just as her earlier lover Julius Caesar had pillaged the Pergamum library for
her beneWt?
11 See J. Barnes, in J. Barnes and M. GriYn, Philosophia Togata, vol. ii (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1997), 1–23.
12 Introd. to LS, 1.
93
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

Platonic Academy under its new head Arcesilaus had given up metaphysics
in favour of a narrow scepticism, there were two Xourishing new schools of
philosophy in the city. The best-known philosophers in Athens were
members neither of the Academy nor of the Lyceum, but were the
founders of these new schools: Epicurus, who established a school
known as The Garden, and Zeno of Citium, whose followers were called
Stoics because he taught in the Stoa, or painted portico.
Epicurus
Epicurus was born into a family of Athenian expatriates in Samos, and paid
a brief visit to Athens in the last year of Aristotle’s life. During early travels
he studied under a follower of Democritus, and established more than one
school in the Greek islands. In 306 he set up house in Athens and lived
there until his death in 271. His followers in the Garden included women
and slaves; they lived in seclusion and ate simple fare. He wrote 300 books,
we are told, but all that survive intact are three letters and two groups of
maxims. His philosophy of nature is set out in a letter to Herodotus and a
letter to Pythocles; in the third letter, to Menoecus, he summarizes his
moral teaching. The Wrst set of maxims, forty in number, has been
preserved, like the three letters, in the life of Epicurus by Diogenes Laertius:
it is called Kyriai Doxai, or major doctrines. Eighty-one similar aphorisms
were discovered in a Vatican manuscript in 1888. Fragments from Epicurus’
lost treatise On Nature were buried in volcanic ash at Herculaneum when
Vesuvius erupted in ad 79. Painstaking eVorts to unroll and decipher them,
begun in 1800, continue to the present day. But for most of our knowledge
of his teachings, however, we depend on the surviving writings of his
followers, especially a much later writer, the Latin poet Lucretius.
The aim of Epicurus’ philosophy is to make happiness possible by
removing the fear of death, which is the greatest obstacle to tranquillity.
Men struggle for wealth and power so as to postpone death; they throw
themselves into frenzied activity so that they can forget its inevitability. It is
religion that causes us to fear death, by holding out the prospect of
suVering after death. But this is an illusion. The terrors held out by religion
are fairy tales, which we must give up in favour of a scientiWc account of
the world.
94
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

This scientiWc account is taken mainly from Democritus’ atomism.
Nothing comes into being from nothing: the basic units of the world are
everlasting, unchanging, indivisible units or atoms. These, inWnite in
number, move about in the void, which is empty and inWnite space: if
there were no void, movement would be impossible. This motion had no
beginning, and initially all atoms move downwards at constant and equal
speed. From time to time, however, they swerve and collide, and it is from
the collision of atoms that everything in heaven and earth has come into
being. The swerve of the atoms allows scope for human freedom, even
though their motions are blind and purposeless. Atoms have no properties
other than shape, weight, and size. The properties of perceptible bodies are
not illusions, but they are supervenient on the basic properties of atoms.
There is an inWnite number of worlds, some like and some unlike our own
(Letter to Herodotus, D.L. 10. 38–45).
Like everything else, the soul consists of atoms, diVering from other
atoms only in being smaller and subtler; these are dispersed at death and
the soul ceases to perceive (Letter to Herodotus, D.L. 10. 63–7). The gods
too are built out of atoms, but they live in a less turbulent region, immune
to dissolution. They live happy lives, untroubled by concern for human
beings. For that reason belief in providence is superstition, and religious
rituals a waste of time (Letter to Menoecus, D.L. 10. 123–5). Since we are
free agents, thanks to the atomic swerve, we are masters of our own fate:
the gods neither impose necessity nor interfere with our choices.
Epicurus believed that the senses were reliable sources of information,
which operate by transmitting images from external bodies into the atoms
of our soul. Sense-impressions are never, in themselves, false, though we
may make false judgements on the basis of genuine appearances. If appear-
ances conXict (if, for instance, something looks smooth but feels rough)
then the mind must give judgement between these competing witnesses.
Pleasure, for Epicurus, is the beginning and end of the happy life. This
does not mean, however, that Epicurus was an epicure. His life and that of
his followers was far from luxurious: a good piece of cheese, he said, was as
good as a feast. Though a theoretical hedonist, in practice he attached
importance to a distinction he made between diVerent types of pleasure.
There is one kind of pleasure that is given by the satisfaction of our desires
for food, drink, and sex, but it is an inferior kind of pleasure, because it is
bound up with pain. The desire these pleasures satisfy is itself painful, and
95
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

its satisfaction leads to a renewal of desire. The pleasures to be aimed at are
quiet pleasures such as those of private friendship (Letter to Menoecus,
D.L. 10. 27–32).
To his last, Epicurus insisted that for a philosopher pleasure, in any
circumstances, could outweigh pain. On his deathbed he wrote the
following letter to his friend Idomeneus: ‘I write this to you on the blissful
day that is the last of my life. Strangury and dysentery have set in, with the
greatest possible intensity of pain. I counterbalance them by the joy I have
in the memory of our past conversations’ (D.L. 10. 22). He lived up to his
conviction that death, though inescapable, is, if we take a truly philosoph-
ical view of it, not an evil.
Stoicism
Stoics, like Epicureans, sought tranquillity, but by a diVerent route. The
founder of Stoicism was Zeno of Citium (334–262 bc). Zeno was born in
Cyprus, but migrated to Athens in 313. He read Xenophon’s memoir of
Socrates, which gave him a passion for philosophy. He was told that the
nearest contemporary equivalent of Socrates was Crates the Cynic. Cyni-
cism was not a set of philosophical doctrines, but a way of life expressing
contempt for wealth and disdain for conventional propriety. Its founder
was Diogenes of Sinope, who lived like a dog (‘cynic’ means ‘dog-like’) in a
tub for a kennel, wearing coarse clothes and subsisting on alms. A contem-
porary of Plato, for whom he had no great respect, Diogenes was famous
for his snub to Alexander the Great. When the great man visited him and
asked, ‘What can I do for you’, Diogenes replied, ‘You can move out of my
light’ (D.L. 6. 38). Crates, impressed by Diogenes, gave his wealth to the
poor and imitated his bohemian lifestyle; but he was less misanthropic, and
had a keen sense of humour that he expressed in poetic satire.
Zeno was Crates’ pupil for a time, but he did not become a cynic and
drop out of society, though he avoided formal dinners and was fond of
basking in the sun. After some years as a student of the Academy, he set up
his own school in the Stoa Poikile. He instituted a systematic curriculum of
philosophy, dividing it into three main disciplines, logic, ethics, and phys-
ics. Logic, said his followers, is the bones of philosophy, ethics the Xesh, and
physics the soul (D.L. 7. 37). Zeno studied under the great Megarian
96
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

logician Diodorus Cronos, and was a fellow pupil of Philo, who laid the
ground for a development of logic which marked, in some areas, an
improvement on Aristotle.13 He himself, however, was more interested in
ethics.
It may seem surprising that a moralist like Zeno should give physics the
highest place in the curriculum. But for Zeno, and later Stoics, physics is
the study of nature and nature is identiWed with God. Diogenes Laertius
tells us, ‘Zeno says that the whole world and heaven are the substance of
Alexander standing in Diogenes’ light (Rome, Villa Albani)
13 On Diodorus and Philo, see Ch. 3 below.
97
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

God’ (7. 148). God is an active principle, matter is an active principle; both
of them are corporeal, and together they constitute an all-pervasive cosmic
Wre (LS 45g).
Zeno’s writings do not survive: the most famous of them in antiquity
was his Republic. This combined Platonic utopianism with some cynic
elements. Zeno rejected the conventional educational system, and thought
it a waste of eVort to build gymnasia, law courts, and temples. He recom-
mended community of wives, and thought that men and women should
wear the same, revealing, clothing. Money should be abolished and there
should be a single legal system for all mankind, who should be like a herd
grazing together nurtured by a common law (LS 67a).
In spite of these communistic proposals, which many of his own
later disciples found shocking, Zeno in his lifetime was held in honour
by the Athenians, who gave him the freedom of the city. King Antigonus
of Macedon invited him to become his personal philosopher, but
Zeno pleaded old age and sent to court instead two of his brightest
pupils.
After Zeno’s death his place as head of the Stoa was taken by Cleanthes
(331–232), a converted boxer of a religious bent. Cleanthes wrote a hymn to
Zeus, later quoted by St Paul in a sermon in Athens, which exalted the
Stoic active principle in terms that were appropriate enough for Judaeo-
Christian monotheism. The underlying Stoic conception of God is very
diVerent, however, from that of the biblical religions. God is not separate
from the universe but is a material constituent of the cosmos. In his prose
writings Cleanthes expounded in detail the way in which the divine Wery
element provided the vital power for all the living beings in the world
(Cicero, ND 2. 23–5).14
Cleanthes was succeeded as head of the school by Chrysippus of Soli,
who governed it from 232 to 206. Chrysippus had been Cleanthes’ pupil,
but he seems to have had no great respect for his teacher. ‘You tell me your
theorems’, he is said to have told him, ‘and I’ll supply them with proofs.‘
He spent some time as a student at the Academy, inoculating himself
against scepticism. He was the most intelligent and the most industrious of
the Hellenistic Stoics. His literary output was prodigious: his housekeeper
reported that he wrote at a rate of 500 lines a day, and he left 705 books
14 On Cleanthes’ theology, see Ch. 9 below.
98
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

behind. Nothing but fragments survive. But it is clear that it was he who
rounded Stoicism into a system; it used to be said, ‘If there had been no
Chrysippus, there had been no Stoa’ (D.L., 6. 183).
It is diYcult to separate out precisely the contributions of the three early
Stoics, since their works have all been lost. However, there is little doubt
that Chrysippus deserves the main share of the credit for the signiWcant
advances in logic that will be examined in detail in the next chapter. In
physics he substituted breath (pneuma) for Cleanthes’ Wre as the vital
principle of animals and plants. He accepted the Aristotelian distinction
between matter and form, but as a good materialist he insisted that form
too was bodily, namely pneuma. The human soul and mind are made out of
this pneuma; so too is God, who is the soul of the cosmos, which, in its
entirety, constitutes a rational animal. If God and the soul were not
themselves bodily, Stoics argued, they would not be able to act on the
material world.
The fully developed Stoic physical system can be summarized as follows.
Once upon a time, there was nothing but Wre; gradually there emerged
the other elements and the familiar furniture of the universe. Later, the
world will return to Wre in a universal conXagration, and then the whole
cycle of its history will be repeated over and over again. All this happens in
accordance with a system of laws which may be called ‘fate’ (because
the laws admit of no exception), or ‘providence’ (because the laws
were laid down by God for beneWcent purposes). The divinely designed
system is called Nature, and our aim in life should be to live in accord with
Nature.
Chrysippus was also the principal author of the Stoic ethical system,
which is based on the principle of submission to Nature. Nothing can
escape Nature’s laws, but despite the determinism of fate human beings are
free and responsible. If the will obeys reason it will live in accordance with
Nature. It is this voluntary acceptance of Nature’s laws that constitutes
virtue, and virtue is both necessary and suYcient for happiness.15
The Stoics all agreed that because society is natural to human beings, a
good man, in his aim to be in harmony with Nature, will play some part in
society and cultivate social virtues. But Chrysippus had a number of ethical
and political views that marked him out from other Stoics. Like Zeno, he
15 The Stoic ethical system is considered in greater detail in Ch. 8 below.
99
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

wrote a Republic, in which he is alleged to have defended incest and
cannibalism(LS67f).ChrysippusdiVeredfromsomeofhisfellowsininsisting
that a philosopher need not devote himself to scholarship: for a Stoic it
was acceptable, indeed praiseworthy, to take part in public life (LS 67w).
Scepticism in the Academy
During the latter part of the third century Stoic doctrine came under
attack from the Academy. The academic heirs of Plato began to take their
inspiration from Plato’s questioning master, Socrates, and turned to a form
of scepticism. The leader of the Academy from 273 to 242 was Arcesilaus, a
pupil of Pyrrho of Elis, a man often regarded as the founder of philosoph-
ical scepticism. Pyrrho, an older contemporary of Epicurus, who had served
as a soldier in Alexander’s army, taught that nothing could be known and,
accordingly, wrote no books. It was Arcesilaus and another of Pyrrho’s
pupils, Timon, who brought scepticism to Athens in the early years of the
third century. Timon denied the possibility of Wnding any self-evident
principles to serve as the foundation of sciences. In the absence of such
axioms, all lines of reasoning must be circular or endless.
The scepticism of Timon and Arcesilaus came to fruition, in a modiWed
and more sophisticated form, with the work of Carneades, who headed the
Academy from 155 to 137. Like Pyrrho, Carneades left no writings, but his
arguments were recorded by a pupil who attended his highly popular
lectures. They have come down to us principally through the good oYces
of Cicero, who was once taught by Carneades’ pupil Philo. In 155 Carneades
was sent by Athens, along with a Stoic and a Peripatetic philosopher, on an
embassy to Rome. During this embassy he displayed his rhetorical skill by
arguing on successive days for and against justice. Cato the Roman Censor,
who heard his performance, sent him packing as a subversive inXuence
(LS 68m).
Arcesilaus criticized the Stoics because they had claimed to found their
search for truth upon mental impressions incapable of falsehood:
there were, he argued, no such impressions. Carneades too attacked Stoic
epistemology, and taught that probability, not unattainable truth, should
be the guide to life. Though not himself an atheist, he ridiculed mercilessly
both the traditional pantheon and Stoic pantheism. His arguments against
100
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

the Stoic theory of divination were adopted and skilfully developed by
Cicero.16
Lucretius
No philosopher of the second century was as intelligent or persuasive as
Carneades, and in the Wrst century primacy in philosophy passed from
Greek to Latin authors. Latin philosophy, like Greek philosophy, began in
verse and only later turned to prose. The Wrst complete Latin philosophical
work that has reached us is a long and magniWcent poem in hexameter
verse, On the Nature of Things, by Lucretius.
Almost nothing is known of Lucretius’ life: we can conjecture the rough
dating of his poem by noting that it was read by Cicero in 54, and was
dedicated to one C. Memmius, who stood for the consulship in 53.
Lucretius was an adoring admirer of Epicurus, and the six books of the
poem set out the Epicurean system in verse which, as Cicero observed,
always displays great artistry and sometimes shows Xashes of genius.
Lucretius himself described his poetic skill as honey to disguise the worm-
wood of philosophy (1. 947). Parts of the poem were translated into English
by John Dryden. Had he completed the task, his version would have been a
worthy rival of Pope’s Essay on Man.
Lucretius begins his poem by praising the bravery of Epicurus in throwing
oV the fear of religion. People cannot stand up to the tyranny of priests,
because they fear eternal punishment; but that is only because they don’t
understand the nature of the soul. In his Wrst book Lucretius sets out
Epicurean atomism: nature consists of simple bodies and empty void, bodies
perceived by sense, and void established by reason. Bodies are made out of
atoms as words are made out of letters: the words ‘ignis’ and ‘lignum’ are
made up of almost the same letters, just as the things they signify, namely
Wre and wood, are made up of almost the same atoms (1. 911–14).
In a famous passage early in the second book Lucretius describes the
philosopher looking down, from the heights of virtue, on the petty
struggles of mankind. He extols the Epicurean pursuit of simple pleasures
and avoidance of unnecessary desires.
16 The debate between Stoics and Sceptics is considered in detail in Ch. 4 below.
101
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

O wretched man! in what a mist of life
Enclosed with dangers and with noisy strife
He spends his little span; and overfeeds
His crammed desires, with more than nature needs!
For nature wisely stints our appetite
And craves no more than undisturbed delight;
Which minds unmixed with cares and fears obtain;
A soul serene, a body void of pain.
So little this corporeal frame requires,
So bounded are our natural desires,
That wanting all, and setting pain aside,
With bare privation sense is satisWed.
(2. 16–28)
The third book sets out the Epicurean theory of the soul and the mechan-
isms of sensation. Once we understand the material nature of the soul, we
realize that fears of death are childish. A dead body cannot feel, and death
leaves no self behind to suVer. It is those who survive who have the right to
grieve. Give up fear of death, Lucretius tells his patron,
For thou shalt sleep, and never wake again,
And, quitting life, shalt quit thy living pain.
But we, thy friends, shall all those sorrows Wnd
Which in forgetful death thou leav’st behind;
No time shall dry our tears, nor drive thee from our mind.
The worst that can befall thee, measured right,
Is a sound slumber, and a long goodnight.
(3. 90–6)
Even Epicurus had to die, though his genius shone so brightly in compari-
son with other thinkers that he reduced them to nothing just as the rising
sun puts out the stars (3. 1042–4).
Lucretius’ fourth book, on the nature of love, is full of lively description
of sexual activity, as well as atomistic explanations of the underlying
physiology. No doubt it was the content of this book that gave rise to
the legend, reported by St Jerome and dramatized by Tennyson, that
Lucretius wrote the poem in the lucid intervals of a madness brought on
by over-indulgence in an aphrodisiac.
St Jerome also preserves a tradition that the poem was left unWnished
and edited, after the poet’s death, by Cicero. This seems unlikely, for
Cicero, having expressed his admiration on Wrst reading of the poem,
never mentions it in his own philosophical writing, even though he
devotes considerable attention to the Epicurean system.
102
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

Cicero
Cicero himself was eclectic in his philosophy, which is a boon to the
historian, since his writings provide information about a variety of philo-
sophical tendencies. He made his Wrst acquaintance with the diVerent
philosophical schools when he studied in Athens in his late twenties.
Later he studied at Rhodes under the Stoic Posidonius. He was greatly
inXuenced by Philo of Larissa, the last head of the Academy, who came to
Rome from Athens in 88 bc. He kept in his house, as personal guru, the
Stoic Diodotus until his death in 60.
For a long time Cicero’s busy life in politics and in the courts did
not leave him much leisure for any philosophy except political philosophy.
In the late 50s he imitated Plato by writing a Republic and a Laws, which
have survived only in part. He withdrew from public life, however, when
Julius Caesar came to supreme power after a civil war in which he himself
had taken the opposite side. Cicero spent much of Caesar’s dictatorship
in literary activity, and after the death of his only daughter, Tullia,
in February 45 he wrote ever more frantically so as to forget his
grief. Most of his philosophical works were written in the years 45
and 44.
The two Wrst in the series are now lost, a Consolatio on the death of Tullia,
and the Hortensius, an exhortation to the study of philosophy that was to
play a dramatic part in the life of St Augustine. Ten other works, however,
survive, impressive in their range and eloquence.
Cicero set himself the task of creating a Latin philosophical vocabulary,
so that Romans could study philosophy in their own language.
Many, indeed, of the philosophical terms of modern languages derive
from his Latin coinages. In his own opinions, he took elements from
diVerent philosophical tendencies. In epistemology he favoured the mod-
erate sceptical opinion that he had learnt from Philo: he presents the
academic system and its variants in his Academica, which appeared in two
diVerent versions. In ethics he favoured the Stoic rather than the Epicurean
tradition. He looked to moral philosophy for consolation and reassurance.
In his de Finibus and Tusculan Disputations he writes, often with great passion
and beauty, on the relation between emotion, virtue, and happiness.
His works On the Nature of the Gods and On Fate contain interesting discussions
of philosophical theology and the issue of determinism, and his On
103
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

Divination puts to good use arguments he had learnt, at a remove, from
Carneades.17
Cicero wrote philosophy without profundity, but his arguments are
often acute, his style is always elegant, and he is capable of great warmth.
His essays on friendship and old age have been popular throughout the
ages. His Wnal work on moral philosophy, On Duties (de OYciis), was ad-
dressed to his son shortly after the assassination of Julius Caesar in March
44. It was, during various periods of history, regarded as an essential item in
the education of a gentleman.
After Caesar’s death Cicero returned to politics with a series of bitter
attacks on the Caesarian consul Mark Antony. After Antony went into
partnership with Caesar’s adopted son Octavian, Cicero was executed in the
putsch that they jointly organized. He did not live to see the quarrel
between the two that led to Antony’s defeat at Actium in 31. He was
dead before Octavian became the Wrst Roman emperor, changing his name
to Augustus.
Judaism and Christianity
For the long-term development of philosophy the most important event in
the Wrst century of the Roman Empire was the career of Jesus of Nazareth.
The impact of his teaching on philosophy was, of course, delayed and
indirect, and his own moral doctrine was not without precedent. He
taught that we should not render evil for evil; but so had Plato’s Socrates.
He urged his hearers to love their neighbours as themselves; but he was
quoting the ancient Hebrew book of Leviticus. He told us that we must
refrain not just from wrong deeds, but from wrong thoughts and desires;
Aristotle too had said that the really virtuous person is one who never even
wants to do wrong. Jesus taught his disciples to despise the pleasures and
honours of the world; but so, in their diVerent ways, did the Epicureans
and the Stoics. Considered as a moral philosopher, Jesus was not a great
innovator: but that, of course, was not at all how he and his disciples saw
his role.
The framework of Jesus’ teaching was the world-view of the Hebrew
Bible, according to which the Lord God Yahweh had created, by mere Wat,
17 See Ch. 9 below.
104
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

heaven and earth and all in them. The Jews were God’s chosen people,
uniquely privileged by their possession of the divine law revealed to Moses.
Like Heraclitus and other Greek and Jewish thinkers, Jesus predicted that
there would be a divine judgement on the world, amid cosmic catastrophe.
Unlike the Stoics, who placed the cosmic denouement in the indeWnite and
distant future, Jesus saw it as an imminent event, in which he would
himself play a crucial role as the Messiah.
Around the time of Jesus’ cruciWxion (c. ad 30) Jewish ideas were gaining
a hearing in Rome. Since the Hebrew Scriptures had been translated into
Greek in Alexandria in the time of the Wrst Ptolemys, there had been a
substantial Greek-speaking Jewish diaspora. In the Wrst century ad the
outstanding representative of Hellenistic Jewish culture was Philo, who
led a delegation to the emperor Caligula in 40 to protest against the
persecution of the Jews in Alexandria and the imposition of emperor-
worship. He wrote a life of Moses and a series of commentaries on the
Pentateuch designed to make the Hebrew Scriptures intelligible and palat-
able to those educated in Greek culture.
In its early days Christianity spread through the empire via the Greek-
speaking diaspora, but it soon came into contact with Gentile philosophy.
St Paul, preaching the gospel in Athens, held a debate with Epicurean and
Stoic philosophers, and the sermon against idolatry placed in his mouth in
the Acts of the Apostles is skilfully crafted, and shows an awareness of
matters at issue between the philosophical sects. Taking his cue from the
altar of the unknown God, Paul undertook to show the philosophers
the god whom they worshipped in ignorance.
[God] is not far from every one of us. For in him we live, and move, and have our
being; as certain also of your own poets have said, for we are also his oVspring.
Forasmuch then as we are the oVspring of God we ought not to think that the
Godhead is like unto gold or silver or stone, graven by art and man’s device. (Acts
17: 27–9)
The ‘poet’ Paul quoted was Cleanthes, the second head of the Stoa. Later
legend imagined Paul in philosophical discourse with the Stoic philosopher
Seneca. The story was no doubt untrue, but it was not wholly fanciful. Paul
once appeared in court before Seneca’s brother Gallio, and he had friends
in the palace of Seneca’s master Nero.
105
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

The Imperial Stoa
Seneca was the most signiWcant philosopher of the Wrst century. Born in
Spain, at Cordoba, at the beginning of the Christian era, he was in 49 made
tutortothe12-year-oldNero.WhenNerocametothethronein54hebecame
a senior adviser, and guided the emperor through a period of comparatively
goodgovernment,whichcametoanendintheyear59whenNeromurdered
his own mother. Seneca lost all inXuence on Nero after 62 and gradually
withdrew from public life. In 65 he was forced to slit his veins for alleged
participation in a plot against the tyrant, and died a Socratic death.
Seneca wrote a number of tragedies, and left a scrapbook of questions
on physical phenomena, but his reputation as a philosopher rests on
his ten ethical dialogues, and his 124 moral epistles, mostly written during
the period of his retirement. Seneca’s style is more exhortatory than
argumentative; he prefers preaching to debate. He was not interested in
logic, and he had a philistine attitude to the liberal arts: he compared a
person over-learned in literature to a man with an over-furnished house
(Ep. 88. 36). He had a certain interest in the physical sciences, and wrote a
treatise On Natural Questions, but he likes to draw a moral from natural
phenomena, and of the three branches of Stoic philosophy it is ethics that
is his main concern.
He urges us to strive towards liberation from the passions. In the longest
and best known of his dialogues, On Anger, he insists on the crucial
diVerence between bodily turmoil on the one hand, and the false judge-
ments which were the essential element from which we need puriWcation.
On this issue, earlier Stoics had not spoken with a single voice. ‘None of
those things that strike the mind fortuitously should be called passions:
they are not things the mind causes but things that happen to it. It is not
passion to be aVected by the appearances of things that present themselves;
passion consists in surrendering oneself to them and following up this
fortuitous impact’ (2. 3. 1). Weeping, turning pale, sudden intakes of
breath, and sexual arousal are not passions, but mere bodily phenomena:
it is what happens in the mind that matters. Seneca is able to conduct the
Stoic crusade against the passions with greater clarity and energy once
this distinction has been made.
Seneca was a materialist, accepting the Stoic doctrine that the human
mind was a material part of a material divine world-soul (Ep. 66. 12). But
106
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

he often writes about the relation between soul and body in a manner that
is distinctly other-worldly. ‘The human heart is never more divine than
when it meditates on its own mortality, and realises that a human being
is born in order to give up life, and that this body is not a home but a
short-term hostelry which one must leave as soon as one sees one is
becoming a burden on one’s host’ (120. 14). Seneca recognizes the diYculty
of the Stoic path to virtue. He distinguishes between three stages in
moral progress. There are those who have given up some vices but not
all—they are without avarice, but not without anger; without lust but
not without ambition; and so on. Then there are those who have given up
all passions but are not yet safe from relapse. The third class, the closest
approximation to wisdom, consists of those who are beyond relapsing,
but have not yet acquired secure self-conWdence in their virtue (Ep. 75. 8–14).
Seneca also made popular the distinction in Stoicism between doctrines
and precepts. The doctrines provided the general philosophical framework;
the precepts enabled the true concept of the highest good to Wnd expres-
sion in speciWc prescriptions to individuals (Ep. 94. 2). This distinction
enabled Stoics to counter the allegation that their system was too elevated
to be of any practical use, and justiWed the philosopher in giving the kind of
pastoral advice of which Seneca’s own letters are full.
Many, in both ancient and modern times, have regarded Seneca as a
hypocrite: a man who praised mercy but was implicated in a tyrant’s
crimes; a man who preached the worthlessness of earthly goods but piled
up a gigantic fortune. In his defence it can be said that he acted as a
restraining inXuence on Nero, and that in his last years he sought genuine
detachment from the world. He was under no illusion that he lived up to
Stoic standards. ‘I am a long way, not only from perfection, but from being
a halfway decent person,’ he wrote (Ep. 57. 3).
Seneca was the founding father of the Imperial Stoa. Two other prom-
inent members of the school show how wide was the appeal of Stoicism
under the empire: the slave Epictetus and the emperor Marcus Aurelius.
The Stoics of the imperial period were far less interested in logic and
physics than their predecessors in Hellenistic times, and like Seneca
both Epictetus and Marcus are remembered principally for their moral
philosophy.18
18 J. Barnes, Logic and the Imperial Stoa (Leiden: Brill, 1997) has made a gallant case for the logical
competence of Epictetus.
107
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

Epictetus’ dates are uncertain, but we know that he was banished from
Rome, along with other philosophers, by the emperor Domitian in ad 89.
Freed from slavery, though permanently lamed, he set up a school in
Epirus; his admirer Arrian published four books of his discourses and a
handbook of his main teachings (enchiridion). Epictetus is one of the most
readable of the Stoics, and has a rugged and jocular style, making constant
use of cross-talk with imaginary interlocutors. Because of this, many
people beside philosophers have found him attractive. Matthew Arnold
lists him, along with Homer and Sophocles, as one of three men who have
most enlightened him:
He, whose friendship I not long since won,
That halting slave, who in Nicopolis
Taught Arrian, when Vespasian’s brutal son
Cleared Rome of what most shamed him.
Typical of Epictetus’ style is the following passage on suicide, where he
imagines people suVering from tyranny and injustice addressing him thus:
Epictetus, we can no longer endure imprisonment in this bodikin, feeding it and
watering it and resting it and washing it, and being brought by it into contact with
so-and-so and such-and-such. Aren’t these things indiVerent, indeed a very
nothing, to us? Death isn’t an evil, is it? Aren’t we God’s kin, and don’t we
come from him? Do let us go back where we came. (1. 9. 12)
He responds as follows:
Men, wait for God. When he gives the signal and releases you from this service,
then you may go to him. For the time being, though, stay at the post where he has
stationed you.
Rather than seek refuge in suicide, we should realize that none of the
world’s evils can really harm us. To show this, Epictetus identiWes the self
with the moral will (prohairesis).
When the tyrant threatens and summons me, I answer, ‘Who is it that you are
threatening?’ If he says, ‘I will put you in chains,’ I respond, ‘It is my hands and my
feet he is threatening.’ If he says, ‘I will behead you,’ I respond, ‘It is my neck he is
threatening.’ . . . So doesn’t he threaten you at all? No, not so long as I regard all this
as nothing to me. But if I let myself fear any of these threats, then yes, he does
threaten me. Who then is left for me to fear? A man who can master the things in
my own power?—There is no such man. A man who can master the things that
are not in my power?—Why should I trouble myself about him? (Disc. 1. 29)
108
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

In many periods Epictetus’ writings have been found comforting by those
who have had to live under the rule of tyrants. But in his own time the
person who was most impressed by them was himself the ruler of the
Roman world. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus became emperor in 161 and
spent much of his life defending the frontiers of the Roman Empire, now at
its furthest extent. Though himself a Stoic, he founded chairs of philoso-
phy at Athens for all of the major schools, Platonic, Peripatetic, and
Epicurean. During his military campaigns he found time to make entries
into a philosophical notebook, which has been known in modern times as
the Meditations. It is a collection of aphorisms and discourses on themes such
as the brevity of life, the need to work for the common good, the unity of
mankind, and the corrupting nature of power. He sought to combine
patriotism with a universalist viewpoint. ‘My city and country,’ he says, ‘so
far as I am Antoninus, is Rome; but so far as I am a man, it is the world.’ He
hails the universe as ‘Dear City of Zeus’.
One of Marcus Aurelius’ friends was the medical doctor Galen, who
came to Rome after being physician to the gladiators of Pergamum. His
voluminous writings belong rather to the history of medicine than to that
of philosophy, though he was a serious logician and once wrote a treatise
with the title That a Good Doctor Must Be a Philosopher. He corrected Aristotle’s
physiology on an important point which was crucial for a true appreciation
of the mind–body relationship. Aristotle had believed that the heart was
the seat of the soul, regarding the brain as a mere radiator to cool the
blood. Galen discovered that nerves arising from the brain and spinal cord
are necessary for the initiation of muscle contraction, and hence he
regarded the brain, and not the heart, as the primary seat of the soul.
Early Christian Philosophy
With Marcus Aurelius, Stoicism took its last bow, and Epicureanism was
already in retirement. Among the schools of philosophy to whom the
emperor assigned chairs in Athens, one was conspicuous by its absence:
Christianity. Indeed, Marcus instituted a cruel persecution of Christians,
and dismissed their martyrdoms as histrionic. One of those who was
executed in his reign was Justin, the Wrst Christian philosopher, who had
dedicated to him an Apologia for Christianity.
109
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

It was at the end of the second century that Christians Wrst made
substantial attempts to harmonize the religion of Jesus and Paul with the
philosophy of Plato and Aristotle. Clement of Alexandria published a set of
Miscellanies (Stromateis), written in the style of table talk, in which he argued
The campaigns of Marcus Aurelius, depicted on his column in Rome
110
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

that the study of philosophy was not only permissible, but necessary, for the
educated Christian. The Greek thinkers were pedagogues for the world’s
adolescence, divinely appointed to bring it to Christ in its maturity. Clement
enrolled Plato as an ally against dualist Christian heretics, he experimented
with Aristotelian logic, and he praised the Stoic ideal of freedom from
passion. In the manner of Philo, he explained away as allegorical aspects of
the Bible,andespeciallythe OldTestament, whichrepelled educated Greeks.
In this he founded a tradition that was to have a long history in Alexandria.
Clement was an anthologist and a popularizer; his younger Alexandrian
contemporary Origen (185–254) was an original thinker. Though he
thought of himself primarily as a student of the Bible, Origen had sat at
the feet of the Alexandrian Platonist Ammonius Saccas, and he incorpor-
ated into his system many philosophical ideas which mainstream Christians
regarded as heretical. He believed, with Plato, that human souls existed
before birth or conception. Formerly free spirits, human souls in their
embodied state could use their free will to ascend, aided by the grace of
Christ, to a heavenly destiny. In the end, he believed, all rational beings,
sinners as well as saints, and devils as well as angels, would be saved and Wnd
blessedness. There would be a resurrection of the body which (according to
some of our sources) he believed would take spherical form, since Plato had
decreed that the sphere was the most perfect of all shapes.
Origen’s eccentric teaching brought him into conXict with the local
bishops, and his loyalty to Christianity laid him under the ban of the
empire. He was exiled to Palestine, where, against his pagan fellow Platonist
Celsus, he used philosophical arguments to defend Christian belief in God,
freedom, and immortality. He died in 254 after repeated torture in the
persecution of the emperor Decius.
The Revival of Platonism and Aristotelianism
While Christian philosophy was in its infancy, and while Stoicism and
Epicureanism were in decline, there had been a fertile revival of the
philosophy of Plato and Aristotle. Plutarch (c.46–c.120) was born in
Boeotia and spent most of his life there, but he had studied at Athens
and at least once gave lectures in Rome. He is best known as a historian
for his parallel lives of twenty-three famous Greeks paired with twenty-
111
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

three famous Romans, which in an Elizabethan translation by Sir Thomas
North provided the plot and much of the inspiration for Shakespeare’s
Roman plays. But he also wrote some sixty short treatises on popular
philosophical topics, which were collected under the title Moralia. He was
a Platonist and commented on the Timaeus. He wrote a number of
polemical treatises against the Stoics and Epicureans which contributed
to the decline of those systems: they bear parallel titles such as On the
Contradictions of the Epicureans and On the Contradictions of the Stoics or On Free Will
in Reply to Epicurus and On Free Will in Reply to the Stoics. One of the longest of
his surviving essays bears the title That Epicurus Actually Makes a Pleasant Life
Impossible, and another is an attack on an otherwise unknown work by
Colotes, one of Epicurus’ earliest disciples. Though his works are not
often read by philosophers for their own sake, they have long been
quarried by historians for the information they provide about their targets
of attack.
More important, initially, than the incipient revival of Platonism was
the beginning of a tradition of scholarly commentary on the Aristotelian
corpus. The oldest surviving commentary on a text is the second-
century work of Aspasius on the Ethics, which inaugurates the custom
of treating the Nicomachean Ethics as canonical. At the end of the century
Alexander of Aphrodisias was appointed to the Peripatetic chair in
Athens, and he produced extensive commentaries on the Metaphysics,
the de Sensu, and some of the logical works. In pamphlets on the soul,
and on fate, he presented his own developments of Aristotelian ideas.
Aristotle had spoken, obscurely, of an active intellect that was respon-
sible for concept formation in human beings. Alexander identiWed this
active intellect with God, an interpretation that was to have a great
inXuence on Aristotle’s later Arab followers, while being rejected by
Christians, who regarded the active intellect as a faculty of each individ-
ual human being.
Plotinus and Augustine
It was Plato, however, not Aristotle, who was to be the dominant philo-
sophical inXuence during the twilight of classical antiquity. Contemporary
with the Christian Origen, and a fellow pupil of Ammonius Saccas, was the
112
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

last great pagan philosopher, Plotinus (205–70). After a brief military career
Plotinus settled in Rome and won favour at the imperial court. He toyed
with the idea of founding a Platonic republic in Campania. His works were
edited after his death in six groups of nine treatises (Enneads) by his disciple
and biographer Porphyry. Written in a taut and diYcult style, they cover a
variety of philosophical topics: ethics and aesthetics, physics and cosmol-
ogy, psychology, metaphysics, logic, and epistemology.
The dominant place in Plotinus’ system is occupied by ‘the One’: the
notion is derived, through Plato, from Parmenides, where Oneness is a key
property of Being. The One is, in a mysterious way, identical with the
Platonic Idea of the Good: it is the basis of all being and the standard of all
value, but it is itself beyond being and beyond goodness. Below this supreme
and ineVable summit, the next places are occupied by Mind (the locus of
Ideas) and Soul, which is the creator of time and space. Soul looks upward to
Mind, but downward to Nature, which in turn creates the physical world.
At the lowest level of all is bare matter, the outermost limit of reality.
These levels of reality are not independent of each other. Each level
depends for its existence and activity on the level above it. Everything has
its place in a single downward progress of successive emanations from the
One. This impressive and startling metaphysical system is presented by
Plotinus not as a mystical revelation but on the basis of philosophical
principles derived from Plato and Aristotle. It will be examined in detail
in Chapter 9 below.
Plotinus’ school in Rome did not survive his death, but his pupils and
their pupils carried his ideas elsewhere. A Neoplatonic tradition throve in
Athens until the pagan schools were closed down by the Christian emperor
Justinian in 529. But it was Christians, not pagans, who transmitted
Plotinus’ ideas to the post-classical world, and foremost among them was
St Augustine of Hippo, who was to prove the most inXuential of all
Christian philosophers.
Augustine was born in a small town in present-day Algeria in 354. The son
of a Christian mother and a pagan father, he was not baptized as an infant,
though he received a Christian education in Latin literature and rhetoric.
Most of what we know of his early life comes from his own autobiography,
the Confessions, a portrait, by a biographer nearly as gifted as Boswell, of a
mind more capacious than Johnson’s.
113
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

Having acquired a smattering of Greek, Augustine qualiWed in rhetoric
and taught the subject at Carthage, a city which he described as ‘a cauldron
of unholy loves’. At the age of 18, reading Cicero’s Hortensius, he was Wred
with a love of Plato. For about ten years he was a follower of Manichaeism,
a syncretic religion which taught that there were two worlds, one of
spiritual goodness and light created by God, and one of Xeshly darkness
created by the devil. The distaste for sex left a permanent mark on
Augustine, though for several years in early manhood he lived with a
mistress and had with her a son, Adeodatus.
In 383 he crossed the sea to Rome and quickly moved to Milan, then the
capital of the western part of the now divided Roman Empire. There
he became friends with Ambrose, the bishop of Milan, a great champion
of the claims of religion and morality against the ruthless secular power of
the emperor Theodosius. The inXuence of Ambrose, and of his mother,
Monica, turned Augustine in the direction of Christianity. After a period of
hesitation he was baptized in 387.
For some time after his baptism Augustine remained under the philo-
sophical inXuence of Plotinus. A set of dialogues on God and the human
soul articulated a Christian Neoplatonism. Against the Academics set out a
detailed line of argument against Academic Scepticism. In On Ideas he
presented his own version of Plato’s Theory of Ideas: the Ideas have no
extra-mental existence, but they exist, eternal and unchangeable, in the
mind of God. He wrote On Free Choice on human freewill, choice, and
the origin of evil, a text still used in a number of philosophy departments.
He also wrote a donnish Platonic tract, the 83 DiVerent Questions. He also
wrote six books on music, and an energetic work On the Teacher, reXecting
imaginatively on the nature and power of words.
All these works were written before Augustine found his Wnal vocation
and was ordained as a priest in 391. He became after a short period bishop of
Hippo in Algeria, where he resided until his death in 430. He had a
prodigious writing career ahead of him, including his masterpiece
The City of God, but the year 391 marks an epoch. Up to this point Augustine
showed himself the last Wne Xower of classical philosophy. From then
onwards he writes not as the pupil of the pagan Plotinus, but as the father
of the Christian philosophy of the Middle Ages. We shall follow him into
this creative phase in the next volume of this work.
114
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

Augustine did not see himself, in his maturity, as a philosophical
innovator. He saw his task as the expounding of a divine message that
had come to him from Plato and Paul, men much greater than himself,
and from Jesus, who was more than man. But the way in which succeeding
generations have conceived and understood the teaching of Augustine’s
masters has been in great part the fruit of Augustine’s own work. Of all the
philosophers in the ancient world, only Aristotle had a greater inXuence
on human thought.
115
ARISTOTLE TO AUGUSTINE

3
How to Argue:
Logic
L
ogic is the discipline that sorts out good arguments from bad
arguments. Aristotle claimed to be its founder, and his claim is no
idle boast. Of course, human beings had been arguing, and detecting
fallacies in other people’s arguments, since human society began; as John
Locke said, ‘God did not make men barely two legged and leave it to
Aristotle to make them rational.’ None the less, it is to Aristotle that we
owe the Wrst formal study of argumentative reasoning. But here as else-
where, there is Wrst of all a debt to Plato to be acknowledged. Following the
lead of Protagoras, Plato made important distinctions between parts of
speech, distinctions that form part of the basis on which logic is built. In
the Sophist he introduces a distinction between nouns and verbs, verbs being
signs of actions, and names being signs of the agents of those actions. A
sentence, he insists, must consist of at least one noun and at least one verb:
two nouns in succession, or two verbs in succession, will never make a
sentence. ‘Walks runs’ is not a sentence, nor is ‘Lion stag’. The simplest
kind of sentence will be something like ‘A man learns’ or ‘Theaetetus Xies’,
and only something with this kind of structure can be true or false (Sph.
262a–263b). The splitting of sentences into smaller units—of which this is
only one possible example—is an essential Wrst step in the logical analysis
of argument.
Aristotle left a number of logical treatises, which are traditionally placed
at the beginning of the corpus of his works in the following order:
Categories, de Interpretatione, Prior Analytics, Posterior Analytics, Topics, Sophistical
Refutations. This order is neither the one in which the works were written

nor the one in which it is most fruitful to read them. It is best to begin with
the consideration of the Prior Analytics, the most substantial and the least
controversial of his contributions to the discipline of logic which he
founded.
Aristotle’s Syllogistic
The Prior Analytics is devoted to the theory of the syllogism, a central
method of inference that can be illustrated by familiar examples such as
Every Greek is human.
Every human is mortal.
Therefore,
Every Greek is mortal.
Aristotle sets out to show how many forms syllogisms can take, and which
of them provide reliable inferences.
For the purposes of this study, Aristotle introduced a technical vocabu-
lary which, translated into many languages, has played an important
part in logic throughout its history (1. 1. 24a10–b15). The word ‘syllogism’
itself is simply a transliteration into English of the Greek word ‘syllogismos’
which Aristotle uses for inferences of this pattern. It is deWned at the
beginning of the Prior Analytics: a syllogism is a discourse in which
from certain things laid down something diVerent follows of necessity
(1. 1. 24b18).
The example syllogism above contains three sentences in the indicative
mood and each such sentence is called by Aristotle a proposition (protasis): a
proposition is, roughly speaking, a sentence considered in respect of its
logical features. The third of the propositions in the example—the one
preceded by ‘therefore’—is called by Aristotle the conclusion of the syllogism.
The other two propositions we may call premisses, though Aristotle does not
have a consistent technical term to diVerentiate them.
The propositions in the above example begin with the word ‘every’: such
propositions are called by Aristotle universal propositions (katholou). They
are not the only kind of universal propositions: equally universal is a
proposition such as ‘No Greeks are horses’; but whereas the Wrst kind
of proposition was a universal aYrmative (kataphatikos), the second is a univer-
sal negative (apophatikos).
117
LOGIC

Contrasted with universal propositions there are particular propositions
(en merei) such as ‘Some Greeks are bearded’ (a particular afWrmative) or
‘Some Greeks are not bearded’ (a particular negative). In propositions of all
these kinds, Aristotle says, something is predicated of something else: e.g.
mortal is predicated of human in one case, and horse of Greek in another.
The presence or absence of a negative sign determine whether these
predications are afWrmations or negations respectively (1. 1. 24b17).
The items that enter into predications in propositions are called by
Aristotle terms (horoi). It is a feature of terms, as conceived by Aristotle,
that they can either Wgure as predicates themselves or have other terms
predicated of them. Thus, in our Wrst example, human is predicated of
something in the Wrst sentence and has something predicated of it in the
second.
Aristotle assigns the terms occurring in a syllogism three distinct roles.
The term that is the predicate of the conclusion is the major term; the term
of which the major is predicated in the conclusion is the minor term; and the
term that appears in each of the premisses is the middle term (1. 4. 26a21–3).1
Thus, in the example given ‘mortal’ is the major term, ‘Greek’ the minor
term, and ‘human’ the middle term.
In addition to inventing these technical terms, Aristotle introduced the
practice of using schematic letters to bring out patterns of argument: a
device that is essential for the systematic study of inference and which is
ubiquitous in modern mathematical logic. Thus, the pattern of argument
we illustrated above is set out by Aristotle not by giving an example, but by
the following schematic sentence:
If A belongs to every B, and B belongs to every C, A belongs to
every C.2
If Aristotle wishes to produce an actual example, he commonly does it not
by spelling out a syllogistic argument, but by giving a schematic sentence
and then listing possible substitutions for A, B, and C (e.g. 1. 5. 27b30–2).
1 Aristotle’s use of these terms in the Prior Analytics is not consistent: the account given here,
from which he departs in considering the second and third Wgures of syllogism, has been
accepted as canonical since antiquity (see W. C. Kneale and M. Kneale, The Development of Logic
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962), 69–71).
2 Note that beside being cast in schematic form, Aristotle’s exposition of syllogisms follows
the pattern ‘If p and q, then necessarily r’ rather than ‘p, q therefore r’.
118
LOGIC

All syllogisms will contain three terms and three propositions; but given
that there are the four diVerent kinds of proposition Aristotle has distin-
guished, and that there are diVerent orders in which the terms can appear
in the premisses, there will be many diVerent syllogistic inference patterns.
Unlike our initial example, which contained only afWrmative universal
propositions, there will be triads containing negative and particular
propositions. Again, unlike our example in which the middle term
appeared in the Wrst premiss as a predicate and in the second as a subject,
there will be cases where the middle is subject in each premiss and cases
where it is predicate in each premiss. (By Aristotle’s preferred deWnition,
the conclusion will always have the minor term as its subject and the
major as its predicate.)
Aristotle grouped the triads into three Wgures (schemata) on the basis of
the position occupied in the premisses by the middle term. The Wrst Wgure,
illustrated by our initial example, has the middle once as predicate and
once as subject (the order in which the premisses are stated is immaterial).
In the second Wgure the middle term appears twice as subject, and in the
third Wgure it appears twice as predicate. Thus, using S for the minor, M for
the middle, and P for the major term, we have these Wgures:
(1)
(2)
(3)
S–M
M–S
S–M
M–P
M–P
P–M
Therefore, S–P
S–P
S–P
Aristotle was mainly interested in syllogisms of the Wrst Wgure, which he
regarded as alone being ‘perfect’, by which he probably meant that they had
anintuitivevaliditythatwaslackingtosyllogismsinotherWgures(1.4.25b35).
Predicationoccursinallpropositions,butitcomesindiVerentformsinthe
four diVerent kinds of proposition: universal afWrmative, universal negative,
particular afWrmative, particular negative. Thus the predication S–P can be
either ‘All S is P’, ‘No S is P’, ‘Some S is P’, or ‘Some S is not P’. Within each
Wgure, therefore, we have many possible patterns of inference. In the Wrst
Wgure, for instance, we have, among many possibilities, the two following.
Every Greek is human.
Some animals are dogs.
No human is immortal.
Some dogs are white.
No Greek is immortal.
Every animal is white.
119
LOGIC

Triads of these diVerent kinds were, in later ages, called ‘moods’ of the
syllogism. Both of the given triads exemplify the pattern of a syllogism of
the Wrst Wgure, but there is obviously a great diVerence between them: the
Wrst is a valid argument, the second is invalid, having true premisses and a
false conclusion.3
Aristotle sets himself the task of determining which of the possible
moods produces a valid inference. He addresses it by trying out the various
possible pairs of premisses and asking whether any conclusion can be
drawn from them. If no conclusion can be validly drawn from a pair of
premisses, he says that there is no syllogism. For instance, he says that if B
belongs to no C, and A belongs to some B, there cannot be a syllogism; and
he gives the terms ‘white’, ‘horse’, ‘swan’ as the test instance (1. 3. 25a38).
What he is doing is inviting us to consider the pair of premisses ‘No swan is
a horse’ and ‘Some horses are white’ and to observe that from these
premisses no conclusion can be drawn about the whiteness or otherwise
of swans.
His procedure appears, at Wrst sight, to be both haphazard and intuitive;
but in the course of his discussion he is able to produce a number of general
rules which, between them, are adequate to determine which moods yield
a conclusion and which do not. There are three rules which apply to
syllogisms in all Wgures:
(1) At least one premiss must be universal.
(2) At least one premiss must be afWrmative.
(3) If either premiss is negative, the conclusion must be negative.
These rules are of universal application, but they take more speciWc
form in relation to particular Wgures. The rules peculiar to the Wrst
Wgure are
(4) The major premiss (the one containing the major term) must be
universal.
(5) The minor premiss (the one containing the minor term) must be
afWrmative.
3 No valid argument has true premisses and a false conclusion, but of course there can be
valid arguments from false premisses to false conclusions, and invalid arguments for true
conclusions.
120
LOGIC

If we apply these rules we Wnd that there are four, and only four, valid
moods of syllogism in the Wrst Wgure.
Every S is M
Every S is M
Some S is M
Some S is M
Every M is P
No M is P
Every M is P
Every M is not P
Every S is P
No S is P
Some S is P
Some S is not P
Aristotle also oVers rules to determine the validity of moods in the second
and third Wgures, but we do not need to go into these since he is able
to show that all second- and third-Wgure syllogisms are equivalent to
Wrst-Wgure syllogisms. In general, syllogisms in these Wgures can be
transformed into Wrst-Wgure syllogisms by a process he calls ‘conversion’
(antistrophe).
Conversion depends on a set of relations between propositions of
diVerent forms that Aristotle sets out early in the treatise. When we have
particular afWrmative and universal negative propositions, the order of the
terms can be reversed without alteration of sense: Some S is P if and only if
some P is S, and no S is P if and only if no P is S (1. 2. 25a5–10). (By contrast,
‘Every S is P’ may be true without ‘Every P is S’ being true.)
Consider the following syllogism in the third Wgure: ‘No Greek is a bird;
but all ravens are birds; therefore no Greek is a raven’. If we convert the
minor premiss into its equivalent ‘No bird is a Greek’ we have a Wrst-Wgure
syllogism in the second of the moods tabulated above. Aristotle shows in
the course of his treatise that almost all second- and third-Wgure syllogisms
can be reduced to Wrst-Wgure ones by conversion in this manner. In the
rare cases where this is not possible he transforms the second- and third-
Wgure syllogisms by a process of reductio ad absurdum, showing that if one
premiss of the syllogism is taken in conjunction with the negation of its
conclusion as a second premiss, it will yield (by a deduction in the Wrst
Wgure) the negation of the original second premiss as a conclusion (1. 23.
41a21 V.).
Aristotle’s syllogistic was a remarkable achievement: it is a systematic
formulation of an important part of logic. Some of his followers in later
times—though not in antiquity or the Middle Ages—thought that syllo-
gistic was the whole of logic. Immanuel Kant, for instance, in the preface to
the second edition of his Critique of Pure Reason, said that since Aristotle logic
had neither advanced a single step nor been required to retrace a single
step.
121
LOGIC

In fact, however, syllogistic is only a fragment of logic. It deals only with
inferences that depend on words like ‘all’ or ‘some’, which classify the
premisses and conclusions of syllogisms, not with inferences that depend
on words like ‘if’ and ‘then’, which, instead of attaching to nouns, link
whole sentences. As we shall see, inferences such as ‘If it is not day, it is
A head of Aristotle attributed to Lysippus (fourth century bc)
122
LOGIC

night; but it is not day; therefore it is night’ were formalized later in
antiquity. Another gap in Aristotle’s syllogistic took longer to Wll. Though
it was concerned above all with words like ‘all’, ‘every’, and ‘some’
(quantiWers, as they were later to be called), it could not cope with
inferences in which such words occurred not in subject place but some-
where in the grammatical predicate. Aristotle’s rules would not provide for
assessing the validity of inferences containing premisses such as ‘Every boy
loves some girl’ or ‘Nobody can avoid every mistake.’ It took more than
twenty centuries before such inferences were satisfactorily formalized.
Aristotle may perhaps, for a moment, have thought that his syllogistic
was sufWcient to deal with every possible valid inference. But his own
logical writings show that he realized that there was much more to logic
than was dreamt of in his syllogistic.
The de Interpretatione and the Categories
The de Interpretatione is principally interested, like the Prior Analytics, in general
propositions beginning with ‘every’, ‘no’, or ‘some’. But its main concern is
not to link them to each other in syllogisms, but to explore the relations of
compatibility and incompatibility between them. ‘Every man is white’ and
‘No man is white’ can clearly not both be true together: Aristotle calls such
propositions contraries (enantiai) (7. 17b4–15). They can, however, both be false,
if, as is the case, some men are white and some men are not. ‘Every man is
white’ and ‘Some man is not white’, like the earlier pair, cannot be true
together; but—on the assumption that there are such things as men—
they cannot be false together. If one of them is true, the other is false; if one
of them is false, the other is true. Aristotle calls such a pair contradictory
(antikeimenai) (7. 17b16–18).
Just as a universal afWrmative is contradictory to the corresponding
particular negative, so too a universal negative contradicts, and is contra-
dicted by, a particular afWrmative: thus ‘No man is white’ and ‘Some man is
white’. Two corresponding particular afWrmatives are neither contrary nor
contradictorytoeachother:‘Somemaniswhite’and‘Somemanisnotwhite’
can be, and in fact are, both true together. Given that there are men, the
propositions cannot, however, both be false together. This relationship was
not given a name: later followers called it the relationship of subcontrariety.
123
LOGIC

 Contra        dictory
 Contra   dictory
Contrary
Universal affirmative
Universal negative
Every man is white
No man is white
Particular affirmative
Particular negative
Some man is white
Some man is not white
Subcontrary
The relationships set out in the de Interpretatione can be set out, and have
been set out for centuries by Aristotle’s followers, in a diagram known as a
square of opposition.
The propositions that enter into syllogisms and into the square of
opposition are all general propositions, whether they are universal or
particular. That is to say, none of them are propositions about individuals,
containing proper names, such as ‘Socrates is wise’. Of course, Aristotle was
familiar with singular propositions, and one such, ‘Pittacus is generous’,
turns up in an example in the Wnal chapter of the Prior Analytics (2. 27. 70a25).
But its appearance is incongruous in a treatise whose standard assumption
is that all premisses and conclusions are quantiWed general propositions. In
the de Interpretatione singular propositions are mentioned from time to time,
principally to point a contrast with general propositions. It is a simple
matter, for instance, to form the contradictory of ‘Socrates is white’: it is
‘Socrates is not white’ (7. 17b30). But to Wnd a systematic treatment of
singular propositions we must turn to the Categories.
Whereas the Analytics operates with a distinction between propositions
and terms, the Categories starts by dividing ‘things that are said’ into
complex (kata symploken) and simple (aneu symplokes) (2. 1a16). An example of
a complex saying is ‘A man is running’; simple sayings are the nouns and
verbs that enter into such complexes: ‘man’, ‘ox’, ‘run’, ‘win’, and so on.
Only complex sayings can be statements, true or false; simple sayings are
neither true nor false. A similar distinction appears in the de Interpretatione,
where we learn that a sentence (logos) has parts that signify on their own,
124
LOGIC

while on the other hand there are signs that have no signiWcant parts.
These simple signs come in two diVerent kinds, names (Int. 2. 16a20–b5) and
verbs (Int. 3. 16b6–25): the two are distinguished from each other, we learn,
because a verb, unlike a noun, ‘signiWes time in addition’, i.e. has a tense.
But in the Categories there is a much richer classiWcation of simple sayings. In
the fourth chapter of the treatise Aristotle has this to say:
Each one signiWes either substance (ousia), or how big, or what sort, or in relation to
something, or where, or when, or posture, or wearing, or doing, or being acted on.
To give a rough idea substance is e.g. human, horse; how big is e.g. four-feet, six-
feet; what sort is e.g. white, literate; in relation to something is e.g. double, half,
bigger than; where is e.g. in the Lyceum, in the forum; when is e.g. yesterday,
tomorrow, last year; posture is e.g. is lying, is sitting; wearing is e.g. is shod, is
armed; doing is e.g. cutting, burning; being acted on is e.g. being cut, being burnt.
(4. 1b25–2a4)
This compressed and cryptic passage has received repeated commentary
and has exercised enormous inXuence over the centuries. These ten things
signiWed by simple sayings are the categories that give the treatise its name.
Aristotle in this passage indicates the categories by a heterogeneous set of
expressions: nouns (e.g. ‘substance’), verbs (e.g. ‘wearing’), and interroga-
tives (e.g. ‘where?’ or ‘how big?’). It became customary to refer to every
category by a more or less abstract noun: substance, quantity, quality,
relation, place, time, posture, vesture, activity, passivity.
What are categories and what is Aristotle’s purpose in listing them? One
thing, at least, that he is doing is listing ten diVerent kinds of expression
that might appear in the predicate of a sentence about an individual
subject. We might say of Socrates, for example, that he was a man, that
he was Wve feet tall, that he was wise, that he was older than Plato, and that
he lived in Athens in the Wfth century bc. On a particular occasion his
friends might have said of him that he was sitting, wearing a cloak, cutting
a piece of cloth, and being warmed by the sun. Obviously, the teaching of
the Categories makes room for a variety of statements much richer than the
regimented propositions of the Prior Analytics.
The text makes clear, however, that Aristotle is not only classifying
expressions, pieces of language. He saw himself as making a classiWcation
of extra-linguistic entities, things signiWed as opposed to the signs that
signify them. In Chapter 6 we shall explore the metaphysical implications
of the doctrine of the categories. But one question must be addressed
125
LOGIC

immediately. If we follow Aristotle’s lead, we shall easily be able to categor-
ize the predicates in sentences such as ‘Socrates was pot-bellied’, ‘Socrates
was wiser than Meletus’. But what are we to say about the ‘Socrates’ in such
sentences? Aristotle’s list seems to be a list of predicates not of subjects.
The answer to this is given in the succeeding chapter of the Categories.
Substance—strictly so called, primarily and par excellence—is that which is neither
said of a subject nor is in a subject, e.g. such-and-such a man, such-and-such a
horse.
Second substances are the species and genera to which the primary substances
belong. Thus, such-and-such a man belongs in the species human, and the genus
of this species is animal; so both human and animal are called second substances.
(5. 2a11–19)
When Aristotle speaks of a subject in this passage, it is clear that he is
talking not about a linguistic expression, but about what the expression
stands for. It is the man Socrates, not the word ‘Socrates’, that is the Wrst
substance. The substance that appeared Wrst in the list of categories, it now
emerges, was second substance: so the sentence ‘Socrates was human’
predicated a second substance (a species) of a Wrst substance (an individual).
When Aristotle in this passage contrasts a Wrst substance with things that
are in a subject, what he has in mind as being in a subject are the items
signiWed by predicates in the other categories. Thus, if ‘Socrates is wise’ is
true, then Socrates’ wisdom is one of the things that are in Socrates (cf. 2.
1a25).
Aristotle goes through the categories, discussing them in turn. Some,
such as substance, quantity, and quality, are treated at length; others, such
as activity and passivity, are brieXy touched on; yet others, such as posture
and vesture, pass into oblivion. Detailed logical points are made in order to
mark the distinctions between diVerent categories. For example, qualities
often admit of degrees, while particular quantities do not: one thing can be
darker than another, but cannot be more four-foot-long than another
(7. 6a19; 8. 10b26). Within individual categories, further subclasses are
identiWed. There are, for instance, two types of quantity (discrete and
continuous) and four types of quality, which Aristotle illustrates with
the following examples: virtue, healthiness, darkness, shape. The criteria
by which he distinguishes these types are not altogether clear, and the
reader is left in doubt whether a particular item can occur in more than
one of these classes, or indeed in more than one category. Aristotle’s
126
LOGIC

commentators through the ages have laboured to Wll his gaps and reconcile
his inconsistencies.
The Categories contains more than the theory of categories: it deals also
with a mixed bag of other logical topics. It is clear that the treatise we have
was not written as a single whole by Aristotle, though there is no need to
question, as some scholars have done, that it is his authentic work.4
One cluster of topics discussed is that of homonymy and synonymy.
These words are transliterations of the Greek words Aristotle uses; but
whereas the English words signify properties of bits of language, the Greek
words as he uses them signify properties of things in the world. Aristotle’s
account can be paraphrased thus: if A and B are called by the same name
with the same meaning, then A is synonymous with B; if A and B are called
by the same name with a diVerent meaning, then A is homonymous with
B. Because of peculiarities of Greek idiom, we have to tweak Aristotle’s
examples in English, but it is clear enough what he has in mind. A Persian
and a tabby are synonymous with each other because they are both called
cats; but they are only homonymous with the nine-tailed whip that is also
called a cat. The diVerence between homonymous and synonymous
things, Aristotle says, is that homonymous things have only the name in
common, whereas synonymous things have both the name and its deWni-
tion in common.
Aristotle’s distinction between homonymous and synonymous things is
an important one which is easily adapted—and was indeed later adapted by
himself—into a distinction between homonymous and synonymous bits of
language, that is to say between expressions that have only the symbol in
common and those that have also the meaning in common.
The study of homonymy was important for the treatment of fallacies in
arguments due to the ambiguity of terms used. It is undertaken for these
purposes in the Topics, and Aristotle gives rules for detecting it. ‘Sharp’, for
instance, has one meaning as applied to knives, and another as applied to
musical notes: the homonymy is made obvious because in the case of
knives the opposite of ‘sharp’ is ‘blunt’, whereas in the case of notes the
opposite is ‘Xat’ (Top. 1. 15. 106a13–14). In the course of his studies Aristotle
came to draw a distinction between mere chance homonymy (as in the
English word ‘bank’, which is used both for the side of a river and for a
4 With the exception of 8. 11a10–18, an editorial insertion to link together two of the disparate
elements and to explain gaps in the treatment of the later categories.
127
LOGIC

moneylending institution) and homonymy of a more interesting kind,
which his followers called ‘analogy’ (NE 1. 6. 1096a27 V.). His standard
example of an analogical expression is ‘medical’: a medical man, a medical
problem, and a medical instrument are not all medical in the same way.
However, the use of the words in these diVerent contexts is not a mere
pun: medicine, the discipline that is practised by the medical man, provides
a primary meaning from which the others are derived (EE 7. 2. 1236a15–22).
Aristotle made use of this doctrine of analogy in a variety of ethical and
metaphysical contexts, as we shall see.
In Aristotle’s logical writings we Wnd two diVerent conceptions of the
structure of a proposition and the nature of its parts. One conception can
trace its ancestry to Plato’s distinction between nouns and verbs in the
Sophist. Any sentence, Plato there insisted, must consist of at least one verb
and one noun (262a–263b). It is this conception of a sentence as constructed
from two quite heterogeneous elements that is to the fore in Aristotle’s
Categories and de Interpretatione. This conception of propositional structure has
also been paramount in modern logic since the time of Gottlob Frege, who
made a sharp distinction between words that name objects, and predicates
that are true or false of objects.
In the syllogistic of the Prior Analytics the proposition is conceived in quite
a diVerent way. The basic elements out of which it is constructed are terms:
elements that are not heterogeneous like nouns and verbs, but that can
occur indiVerently, without change of meaning, either as subjects or as
predicates.5 To be sure, two terms in succession (like ‘man animal’) do not
compose a sentence: other elements, a quantiWer and a copula, such as ‘is’,
must enter in if we are to have a proposition capable of occurring in a
syllogism, such as ‘Every man is an animal’. Aristotle shows little interest in
the copula, and his attention now focuses on the quantiWers and their
relations to each other. The features that diVerentiate subjects from
predicates drop out of consideration.6
One of the dysfunctional features of the doctrine of terms is that it
fosters confusion between signs and what they signify. When Plato talks
5 Cf. 43a25–31. Instead of a distinction between noun and verb we here have a distinction
between proper names (which are not predicates but of which things are predicated) and terms
(which are both predicates and predicated of).
6 Modern admirers of Frege naturally regard the theory of terms as a disaster for the
development of logic. Peter Geach has written, ‘Aristotle was logic’s Adam; and the doctrine
of terms was Adam’s fall’ (Logic Matters (Oxford: Blackwell, 1972), 290).
128
LOGIC

about nouns and verbs, he makes quite clear that he is talking about signs.
He clearly distinguishes between the name ‘Theaetetus’ and the person
Theaetetus whose name it is; and he is at pains to point out that the
sentence ‘Theaetetus Xies’ can occur even though what it tells us, namely
the Xying of Theaetetus, is not among the things there are in the world. It
takes him some trouble to bring out the distinction between signs and
signiWed, because of the lack of inverted commas in ancient Greek. This
valuable device of modern languages makes it easy for us to distinguish the
normal case where we are using a word to talk about what it signiWes, and
the special case in which we are mentioning a word to talk about the word
itself, as in ‘ ‘‘Theaetetus’’ is a name’. The doctrine of terms, on the other
hand, makes it all too easy to confuse use with mention.
Take a syllogism whose premisses are ‘Every human is mortal’,
‘Every Greek is human’. Shall we say, as Aristotle’s language sometimes
suggests, (e.g. APr. 1. 4. 25b37–9) that here mortal is predicated of human,
and human is predicated of Greek? This does not seem quite right: what
occurs as a predicate is surely a piece of language, and so perhaps we
should say instead: ‘mortal’ is predicated of human and ‘human’ is predi-
cated of Greek. But then we seem to have four terms, not three, in our
syllogism, since ‘ ‘‘human’’ ’ is not the same as ‘human’. We cannot remedy
this by rephrasing the Wrst proposition thus: ‘mortal’ is predicated
of ‘human’. It is human beings themselves, not the words they use to
refer to themselves, that are mortal. There is no doubt that Aristotle
sometimes fell into confusion between use and mention; the wonder is
that, given the quicksand provided by the doctrine of terms, he did not do
so more often.
Aristotle on Time and Modality
A feature of propositions as discussed in the Categories and the de Interpretatione
is that they can change their truth-values. At Cat. 1. 5. 4a24, when discussing
whether it is peculiar to substances to be able to take on contrary proper-
ties, he says ‘The same statement seems to be both true and false. If, for
example, the statement that somebody is sitting is true, after he has stood
up that same statement will be false.’ According to a common modern
conception of the nature of the proposition, no proposition can be at one
129
LOGIC

time true and at another false. A sentence such as ‘Theaetetus is sitting’,
which is true when Theaetetus is sitting, and false at another time, would
on this view be said to express a diVerent proposition at diVerent times, so
that at one time it expresses a true proposition, and at another time a false
one. And a sentence asserting that ‘Theaetetus is sitting’ was true at time t is
commonly treated as asserting that the proposition that ascribes sitting at
time t to Theaetetus is true timelessly. On this account, no proposition is
signiWcantly tensed, but any proposition expressed by a tensed sentence
contains an implicit reference to time and is itself timelessly true or false.
Aristotle nowhere puts forward such a theory according to which tensed
sentences are incompletely explicit expressions of timeless propositions. For
him uttered sentences do indeed express something other than themselves,
namely thoughts in the mind; but thoughts change their truth-values just
as sentences do (Cat. 1. 5. 4a26–8).7 For Aristotle, a sentence or proposition
such as ‘Theaetetus is sitting’ is signiWcantly tensed, and is at some times
true and at others false. It becomes true whenever Theaetetus sits down,
and becomes false whenever Theaetetus ceases to sit.
There is, for Aristotle, nothing in the nature of the proposition as such
that prevents it from changing its truth-value: but there may be something
about the content of a particular proposition that entails that its truth-
value must remain Wxed.
Logicians in later ages regularly distinguished between propositions that
can, and propositions that cannot, change their truth-value, calling the
former contingent and the latter necessary propositions. The roots of this
distinction are to be found in Aristotle, but he speaks by preference of
predicates, or properties, necessarily or contingently belonging to their
subjects. In both the de Interpretatione and the Categories he discusses propos-
itions such as ‘A must be B’ and ‘A can be not B’: propositions later called
by logicians ‘modal propositions’.
In the de Interpretatione he introduces the topic of modal propositions by
saying that whereas ‘A is not B’ is the negation of ‘A is B’, ‘A can be not B’ is
not the negation of ‘A can be B’. A piece of cloth, for instance, has the
possibility of being cut, but it also has the possibility of being uncut.
However, contradictories cannot be true together. Hence the negation of
‘A can be B’ is not ‘A can be not B’ but rather ‘A cannot be B’. In the
7 The truth-value of a proposition is its truth or its falsity, as the case may be.
130
LOGIC

straightforward categorical statement, whether we take the ‘not’ as going
with the ‘is’ or the ‘B’ makes no practical diVerence. In the modal
statement, whether we take the ‘not’ as going with the ‘can’ or the ‘B’
makes a great diVerence. Aristotle likes to bring out this diVerence by
rewriting ‘A can be B’ as ‘It is possible for A to be B’, rewriting ‘A can be not
B’ as ‘It is possible for A to be not B’, and rewriting ‘A cannot be B’ as ‘It is
not possible for A to be B’ (Int. 12. 21a37–b24). This rewriting allows the
negation sign to be unambiguously placed, and brings out the relationship
between a modal proposition and its negation.
Modal expressions other than ‘possible’, such as ‘impossible’ and ‘neces-
sary’, are to be treated similarly. The negation of ‘It is impossible for A to be
B’isnot‘ItisimpossibleforAnottobeB’but‘ItisnotimpossibleforAtobeB’;
the negation of ‘It is necessary for A to be B’ is not ‘It is necessary for A to
be not B’ but ‘It is not necessary for A to be B’ (Int. 13. 22a2–10).
These modal notions are interrelated. ‘Impossible’ is obviously enough
the negation of ‘possible’, but more interestingly ‘necessary’ and ‘possible’
are interdeWnable. What is necessary is what is not possible not to be, and
what is possible is what is not necessary not to be. If it is necessary for A to
be B, then it is not possible for A not to be B, and vice versa. Moreover, if
something is necessary, then a fortiori it is possible, and if it is not possible,
then a fortiori it is not necessary. Aristotle arranges the diVerent cases in a
square of opposition similar to that I exhibited above for categorical
propositions.
It is necessary for A to be B
It is necessary for A not to be B
It is impossible for A not to be B
It is impossible for A to be B
It is possible for A to be B
It is possible for A not to be B
It is not necessary for A not to be B
It is not necessary for A to be B
131
LOGIC

In each corner of this diagram the pairs of propositions are equivalent
to each other: this brings out the interdeWnability of the modal terms.
The operators ‘necessary’, ‘possible’, and ‘impossible’ in this square of
opposition are related to each other in a way parallel to the quantiWers
‘all’, ‘some’, and ‘no’ in the categorical square of opposition. As in the
categorical case, the propositions in the upper corners are contraries: they
cannot both be true together, but they can both be false together. Propos-
itions in one corner are the contradictories of propositions in the diagonally
opposite corner. The pair of propositions in the upper corners entail the pair
of propositions immediately below them, but not conversely. Propositions
in the lower corners are compatible with each other: they can both be true
together, but they cannot both be false together (Int. 13. 22a14–35).
In this scheme all necessary propositions are also possible, though
the converse is not true. There is, however, as Aristotle remarks, another
use of ‘possible’ in which it is contrasted with ‘necessary’ and inconsistent
with it. In this other use, ‘It is possible that A is not B’ is not just consistent
with ‘It is possible that A is B’ but actually follows from it (Int. 12. 21b35). In
this use ‘possible’ would be equivalent to ‘neither necessary nor impossible’.
There is another word, ‘contingent’ (endechomenon), which is available
to replace ‘possible’ in this second use, and Aristotle often uses it for
that purpose (e.g. Apr. 1. 13. 32a18–21; 15. 34b25). Thus propositions can
be divided into three classes: the necessary, the impossible, and between
the two, the contingent (i.e. those that are neither necessary nor impos-
sible).
One of the most interesting passages in Aristotle’s Organon is the ninth
chapter of the de Interpretatione, in which he discusses the relation between
tense and modality in propositions. He begins by saying that for what is and
what has been, it is necessary that the afWrmation or the negation should be
true or false (18a27–8). It transpires that he is not saying simply that if ‘p’ is a
present- or past-tense proposition, then ‘Either p or not p’ is necessarily
true: that is something that holds of all propositions, no matter what their
tense (19a30). Nor is he saying just that if ‘p’ is a present- or past-tense
proposition, it is either true or false: it turns out later that he thinks this is
true also of future-tense propositions. What he is saying is that if ‘p’ is a
present- or past-tense proposition, then ‘p’ is a necessary proposition. The
necessity in question is clearly not logical necessity: it is not a matter of
logic that Queen Anne is dead. The necessity is the kind of necessity that is
132
LOGIC

expressed in the proverbs that what’s done cannot be undone, and that it is
no use crying over spilt milk (cf. NE 6. 2. 1139b7–11).
The central part of de Interpretatione 9 is an inquiry into whether this kind
of necessity that applies to present and past propositions applies also to all
future propositions. There are, no doubt, universally necessary truths that
apply to the future as well as to the present and to the past: but Aristotle’s
attention focuses on singular propositions such as ‘This coat will be cut up
before it wears out’, ‘There will be a sea-battle tomorrow’. The truth or
falsity of such propositions is not, on the face of it, entailed by any universal
generalization.
However, it is possible to construct a powerful argument to the eVect
that such a proposition about the future, if it is true, is necessarily true. If
A says that there will be a sea-battle tomorrow, and B says that there will
not be, then one or other will be speaking the truth. Now there are
relations between propositions in diVerent tenses: for instance, if ‘Socrates
will be white’ is now true, then ‘Socrates will be white’ has been true in the
past, and indeed was always true in the past. So—the argument goes—
If it was always true to say it is or will be, then it is impossible for that not to be or
to be going to be. But if it is impossible for something not to come about, then it
cannot not come about. But if it cannot not come about, then it is necessary for
it to come about. Therefore everything that is going to come about is, of necessity,
to come about. (9. 18b11–25)
The argument that Aristotle is considering began by supposing that
someone says, for example, ‘There will be a sea-battle tomorrow’ and
someone else ‘There will not be a sea-battle tomorrow’ and pointing out
that one or the other is speaking truly. But, he goes on, a similar prediction
might have been made long ago, ‘There will be a sea-battle ten thousand
years hence’, and this too, or its contradictory, will be true. Indeed, it
makes no diVerence whether any prediction has ever been made. If in the
whole of time either the proposition or its contradictory has been the
truth, it was necessary for the thing to come about. Since of whatever
happens ‘It will happen’ was always previously true, everything must
happen of necessity (9. 18b26–19a5).
It will follow, Aristotle says, that nothing is a matter of chance or
happenstance. Worse, there will be no point in deliberating and choosing
between alternatives. But in fact, he says, there are many obvious examples
133
LOGIC

of things turning out one way when they could have turned out another,
like a cloak that could have been cut up but wore out Wrst. ‘So it is clear
that not everything is or happens of necessity, but some things are a matter
of happenstance, and the afWrmation is not true rather than the negation;
and with other things one is true rather and for the most part, but still it is
open for either to happen and the other not’ (9. 19a18–22).
How then are we to deal with the argument to the eVect that everything
happens of necessity? Because Aristotle says that in some cases ‘the afWrma-
tion is not true rather than the negation’, some have thought that his
solution was that future contingent propositions lack a truth-value: not
only are they not necessarily true or false, they are not true or false at all.
However, this can hardly be what he means; for at 18b17 he says that it is
not open to us to say that neither ‘It will be the case that p’ nor ‘It will not
be the case that p’ is true. One reason he gives for this is that it is obviously
impossible that they should both be false; but that does not rule out their
both having some third value. His argument to rule this out is not
altogether clear, but it appears to be something like this: if neither ‘There
will be a sea-battle tomorrow’ nor ‘There will not be a sea-battle tomorrow’
is true today, then neither ‘There is a sea-battle today’ nor ‘There is not a
sea-battle today’ will be true tomorrow.
At the end of the discussion it seems clear that Aristotle accepts that
future contingent propositions can be true, but that they are not necessary
in the way that present and past propositions are. Everything is necessary-
when-it-is, but that does not mean it is necessary, period. It is necessary
that there should or should not be a sea-battle tomorrow, but it is not
necessary that there should be a sea-battle and it is not necessary that there
should not be a sea-battle (9. 19a30–2).
What is less clear is how Aristotle disarms the powerful argument he
built up in favour of universal necessity. The distinction just enunciated is
not sufWcient by itself to do so, for it does not take account of the appeal to
the past truth of future contingents that was part of the argument. Since
on his own admission the past is necessary, past truths about future events
must be necessary, and therefore the future events themselves must be
necessary. The solution must come through an analysis of the notion of
past truths: we must distinguish between truths that are stated in the past
tense, and truths that are made true by events in the past. ‘It was true ten
thousand years ago that there was going to be a sea-battle tomorrow’, for
134
LOGIC

all its past tense, is not really a proposition about the past. But this solution
is nowhere clearly enunciated by Aristotle, and the problem he set out
recurred in many diVerent forms in later antiquity and in the Middle Ages.8
In the Prior Analytics Aristotle explores the possibility of constructing
syllogisms out of modal propositions. His attempt to construct a modal
syllogistic is nowadays universally regarded as a gallant failure; and even in
antiquity its faults were realized. His successor Theophrastus worked on it
and improved it, but even so it must be regarded as unsatisfactory. The
reason for the lack of success has been well explained by Martha Kneale: it
is Aristotle’s indecision about the best way to analyse modal propositions.
If modal words modify predicates, there is no need for a special theory of modal
syllogisms. For these are only ordinary assertoric syllogisms of which the premises
have peculiar predicates. On the other hand, if modal words modify the whole
statements to which they are attached, there is no need for a special modal
syllogistic, since the rules determining the logical relations between modal state-
ments are independent of the character of the propositions governed by the modal
words.9
The necessary basis for a modal logic, she concludes, is a logic of unana-
lysed propositions such as was developed by the Stoics. This statement
needs qualiWcation. It is true that the Xowering of modal logic in the
twentieth century depended on just such a propositional calculus. But
there were also signiWcant developments in modal logic in the Middle Ages
within an Aristotelian context, when Aristotle’s own modal syllogistic was
superseded by much more sophisticated systems. Again, not all propos-
itions in which words such as ‘can’ and ‘must’ occur within the predicate
can be replaced by propositions in which the modal operator attaches to an
entire nested proposition. ‘I can speak French’, for instance, does not have
the same meaning as ‘It is possible that I am speaking French’. Aristotle
makes a distinction between two-way possibilities (such as a man’s ability to
walk, or not to walk, as he chooses) and one-way possibilities (Wre can burn
8 This passage of the de Interpretatione has also been the subject of voluminous discussion in
modern times. My interpretation owes a lot to that of G. E. M. Anscombe, whose ‘Aristotle and
the Sea-Battle’ of 1956 (From Parmenides to Wittgenstein (Oxford: Blackwell, 1981) ) is still, nearly Wfty
years on, one of the best commentaries on the passage. For a carefully argued alternative
account, see S. Waterlow, Passage and Possibility: A Study of Aristotle’s Modal Concepts (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1982), 78–109.
9 Kneale and Kneale, The Development of Logic, 91.
135
LOGIC

wood, and if it has wood placed on it, it will burn it, and there are no two
ways about it) (Int. 22b36–23a11). The logic of the two-way abilities exercised
in human choice has not, to this day, been adequately formalized.
Stoic Logic
In the generation after Aristotle modal logic was developed in an interest-
ing way in the school of Megara. For Diodorus Cronos a proposition is
possible iV it either is or will be true, is impossible iV it is false and will never
be true, and is necessary iV it is true and will never be false.10 Diodorus, like
Aristotle, accepted that propositions were fundamentally tensed and could
change their truth-values; but unlike Aristotle he does not need to make a
sharp distinction between actuality and potentiality, since potentialities are
deWned in terms of actualities. Propositions, on Diodorus’ deWnitions,
change not only their truth-values but also their modalities. ‘The Persian
Empire has been destroyed’ was untrue but possible when Socrates was
alive; after Alexander’s victories it was true and necessary (LS 38e). For
Diodorus, as for Aristotle, a special necessity applies to the past.
It is a feature of Diodorus’ deWnition of possibility that there are
no possibilities that are forever unrealized: whatever is possible is or will
be one day true. This appears to involve a form of fatalism: no one can ever
do anything other than what they in fact do. Diodorus seems to have
supported this by a line of reasoning that became known (we know not
why) as the Master Argument. Starting from the premiss (1) that
past truths are necessary, Diodorus oVered a proof that nothing is possible
that neither is nor will be true. Let us suppose (taking an example used
in ancient discussions of the argument) that there is a shell in shallow
water, let us call it Nautilus, which will never in fact be seen. We can
construct an argument from this premiss to show that it is impossible for
it to be seen.
(2) Nautilus will not ever be seen.
(3) It has always been the case that
Nautilus will not ever be seen.
(a plausible consequence of (2))
10 ‘IV ’ is a logician’s abbreviation for ‘if and only if ’.
136
LOGIC

Chrysippus, greatest of Stoic logicians, in a statue in the Louvre (third century ad)

(4) It is necessary that Nautilus will
not ever be seen.
(from (4) and (1))
(5) It is impossible that Nautilus
will ever be seen.
(necessarily not ¼
impossible that)
Though we do not know the precise form of Diodorus’ proof, it is easy
enough to generalize this line of argument to show that only what will
happen, can happen.
The argument is obviously akin to one that we met in discussing
Aristotle’s treatment of future contingents. Diodorus’ argument appears
to be Xawed by an ambiguity in the premiss that past truths are necessary.
What is a past truth? If it means a true proposition in the past tense, then
there is no guarantee that it is necessary. To see this, we have only to think
of a negative proposition in the past tense, such as ‘The Persian Empire has
not been destroyed.’ This proposition was true in the time of Socrates, but
it was not necessary: it was about to change its truth-value from true to
false. On the other hand, if a past truth is a proposition that is made true by
an event in the past, then past truths are indeed necessary; but a propos-
ition such as (4) is not a past truth and hence does not entail (5).11
Diodorus’ pupil Philo abandoned his master’s modal deWnitions, and
explained possibility in terms of the internal properties of a proposition
rather than in terms of its truth-values over time. We do not know how his
explanation went, but we know that on his account a piece of wood would
be capable of being burnt even if it was never burnt and even if it spent its
whole existence on the bed of the ocean (LS 38b).
Philo’s major contribution to logic was his deWnition of the conditional.
‘If p, then q’, he said, was false in the case in which p was true and q false, and
true in the three other possible cases. The truth of a conditional propos-
ition, on this view, does not depend at all on the content of the antecedent
or the consequent, but only on their truth-values. Thus, ‘If it is night, it is
day’ will be true whenever it is daytime, and on the assumption that the
atomic theory is true, ‘If there are no atoms, there are atoms’ is true. In
treating the conditional in this way Philo anticipated the truth-functional
deWnition of material implication used in modern propositional logic.
11 See A. N. Prior, Time and Modality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1957), 86–7; Jonathan Barnes in
CHHP 89–92.
138
LOGIC

However, the truth-values that determine the truth or falsity of his
conditionals are changeable truth-values. This has disadvantages for the
formulation of logic, since ‘If p, then p’ is no longer a logical law: ‘If I am
sitting, I am sitting’ comes out false, as a Philonian conditional, if I rise to
my feet between the antecedent and the consequent.
Nonetheless, Philo’s deWnition seems to have been adopted by the
Stoic logicians who were the Wrst to oVer a formalization of propositional
logic. Where Aristotle used letters as variables in his logical texts, the Stoics
used numbers; this is a trivial diVerence, but more importantly, where
Aristotle’s variables stood in for terms, Stoic variables stood in for
whole sentences, or rather for elements that are capable of being whole
sentences. In ‘If the stars are shining, it is night’ neither the antecedent, ‘the
stars are shining’, nor the consequent, ‘it is night’, are complete sentences,
but eachset of words is capable of standing onits own as acomplete sentence.
Stoic propositional logic was embedded in an elaborate theory of
language and signiWcation. The Stoics made a distinction between sound
(phone), speech (lexis), and saying (logos). The roar of a beast or of the sea is a
sound, but only articulate sound counts as speech. Not all speech, how-
ever, is meaningful: humans can utter nonsense words like ‘hey nonny no’.
Only meaningful speech counts as saying anything (D.L. 7. 57). The sounds
and speech of a Greek can be taken in by a non-Greek-speaking barbarian,
but the meaning is understood only by someone who knows the language
(S.E., M 8. 11–12).
The word ‘logos’, which I have translated ‘saying’, is a Greek word
of very wide meaning: in diVerent contexts it can mean ‘word’, ‘sentence’,
‘language’, ‘reason’. It is a noun connected with the common verb
‘legein’, meaning ‘to say’. The Stoics coined a new word from this verbal
root, ‘lekton’. This means literally ‘thing said’, but I will leave the
word as an untranslated technicality, since there is no exact English
equivalent.
The lekton plays an important part in the Stoic treatment of the distinc-
tion between signs and what they signify. Consider a sentence such as ‘Dion
is walking’, a proposition which may be true or false. Sextus Empiricus,
discussing some such sentence, tells us this:
The Stoics said that three items are linked together, the signiWcation, the signiWer,
and the topic (tunchanon). The signiWer is a sound, such as ‘Dion’, the signiWcation is
139
LOGIC

the matter that is portrayed (deloumenon) by it. . . . and the topic is the external object
such as Dion himself. Of these three items two, the sound and the topic, are
material, but one is intangible, the matter signiWed, i.e. the lekton, which is what is
true or false. (S.E., M 8. 11–12)
The lekton is what is said by the sentence, namely that Dion is walking. This, as
Sextus says, is not a tangible entity like Dion himself, or the name ‘Dion’, or
the whole sentence ‘Dion is walking’. Dion, the man, is the topic of the
sentence, that is to say, what the sentence is about. Whether the sentence is
true or false depends on whether the matter it portrays12 obtains or not, i.e.
on whether Dion is or is not walking. On the basis of passages such as this,
then, we can say that a lekton is the content of a sentence in the indicative
(cf. Seneca, Ep. 117. 13).
Two qualiWcations need to be made, however, to this deWnition of lekton.
First, Diogenes Laertius tells us that the Stoics distinguished between
self-standing and defective lekta. He oVers ‘active and passive predicates’ as a
gloss on ‘incomplete lekton’, and explains that a defective lekton is one that
has a linguistic expression that is incomplete, such as ‘is writing’, which
evokes the question ‘Who?’ A defective lekton, therefore, would be what is
said by a predicate, e.g. we may say of someone that he is writing. Such a lekton
remains defective until we make clear who we are talking about, thus
specifying a topic, e.g. Socrates (D.L. 7. 63).
Secondly, indicative sentences are not the only ones whose contents
provide examples of lekta. There are also interrogative sentences, which
come in two kinds: the questions that can be answered by ‘yes’ or
‘no’, such as ‘Is it day?’, and the questions that need more complicated
answers such as ‘Where do you live?’ Again, there are commands, like ‘Take
a bath’ and exclamations like ‘Isn’t the Parthenon beautiful!’ (D.L. 7. 66–7).
In fact, the deWnition I oVered of lekton as the content of a sentence in the
indicative really Wts only one particular, though most important, kind of
lekton. This is what the Stoics called an axioma. Several deWnitions of axioma are
oVered. ‘An axioma is what is true or false, a complete matter capable of
assertion in and by itself.’ ‘An axioma is something which can be asserted or
denied in and by itself, such as ‘‘it is day’’ or ‘‘Dion is walking’’ ’ (D.L. 7. 65).
While an axioma is capable of being a self-standing assertion, it need not be
12 The customary translation of deloumenon as ‘revealed’ is unsatisfactory since you can only
reveal what is in fact the case. If the sentence is false, there is no matter to be revealed.
140
LOGIC

asserted. Neither of the two quoted axiomata are asserted in ‘If Dion is
walking, then it is day’. Hence some authors translate the word as ‘asser-
table’.13 The translation is accurate, but cumbrous, and instead I shall use
‘proposition’ to render axioma, since the meaning of the Greek word, as
explained, is close to one of the standard meanings of the English word. It is
important to remember, however, that a Stoic proposition is unlike an
Aristotelian proposition in that it is not a sentence itself, but something
abstract that is said by a sentence; and that it is unlike a proposition as
discussed by modern logicians since it is something that can change its
truth-value over time.
The Stoics distinguished between simple and non-simple propositions.
Simple propositions are constantly illustrated by ‘It is day’ and ‘It is night’;
but they include three kinds of subject–predicate propositions, which diVer
depending on whether their subject is a demonstrative, a proper name, or a
pronoun functioning as a quantiWer. ‘That one is walking’ they called
a deWnite proposition, ‘Someone is walking’ an indeWnite proposition, and
‘Socrates is walking’ an intermediate proposition. Non-simple propositions
are those that are compounded out of diVerent propositions by means of
one or more connectives (sundesmoi). Examples are ‘If it is day, it is light’,
‘Since it is day, it is light’, ‘Either it is day or it is night’ (D.L. 7. 71).
It is in their treatment of non-simple propositions that the Stoics
approached most nearly to the modern propositional calculus based on
truth-functional operators.14 A number of diVerences, however, need to be
marked.
In the modern calculus the negation sign is treated as a truth-functional
operator, on a par with binary connectives such as ‘and’, ‘or’, and ‘if ’.
The Stoics, by contrast, classiWed negative propositions as simple propos-
itions. They did, however, recognize the possibility of negating a proposition
by attaching a negative sign to the entire proposition and not just to the
predicate, the procedure that is essential to the operation of the propos-
itional calculus. Thus, they preferred ‘Not: it is day’ to ‘It is not day’. They
recognized further that negation could be applied to complex as well as
simple propositions; and they realized that in such a case care needed to be
13 e.g. Suzanne Bobzien in CHHP 93 V.
14 A logical operator (i.e. a symbol that forms a new proposition out of one or more other
propositions) is truth-functional iV the truth-value of the new proposition depends only on the
truth-value of the original propositions, and not on their content.
141
LOGIC

exercised in order to sort out genuine from spurious contradictories. ‘It is
day and it is light’ was not the contradictory of ‘It is day and it is not light’.
The contradictory must be formed by attaching the negation sign at the
beginning so that it governs the entire proposition. Thus the notion of scope
enters into the history of logic, (S.E., M. 8. 88–90).
Another diVerence between Stoic logic and modern propositional logic
comes out in the treatment of individual connectives. ‘Or’ in modern
propositional logic is treated by convention as an inclusive connective: this
is to say, ‘p or q’ comes out true if p and q are both true and not just when
only one of them is true. The Stoics seem to have been undecided between
this view and the exclusive interpretation according to which ‘p or q’ is true
if and only if one and only one of the constituent propositions is true.
Moreover, the Stoics allowed among the connectives that form complex
propositions some that are not truth-functional. Whether a proposition of
the form ‘Since p then q’ is true is determined not simply by the truth-
values of the constituent propositions.
With regard to the conditional connective ‘if’, there is some uncertainty
how far the Stoics accepted Philo’s truth-functional interpretation of it,
according to which ‘If p then q’ is true in every case except when ‘p’ is true
and ‘q’ is false. Sextus Empiricus roundly attributes this view to them in the
following passage:
A sound conditional is one that does not have a true antecedent and a false
consequent. A conditional may have a true antecedent and a true consequent, e.g.
‘If it is day it is light’. It may have a false antecedent and a false consequent, e.g. ‘If
the earth Xies, the earth has wings’. It may have a true antecedent and a
false consequent, e.g. ‘If the earth exists, the earth Xies’. Or it may have a false
antecedent and a true consequent, e.g. ‘If the earth Xies, the earth exists’. Of these
they say that only the one with the true antecedent and the false consequent is
unsound, all the others are sound. (S.E., P. 2. 104–6)
The examples given here support Sextus’ assertion that the Stoics inter-
preted the conditional truth-functionally. It is characteristic of such an
interpretation that the truth of a conditional does not demand any link
between the content of the antecedent and the content of the consequent.
While ‘If the earth Xies, the earth has wings’ may be linked by the thought
that whatever Xies has wings, no such link connects ‘the earth exists’ with
‘the earth Xies’. Of course, the conditionals in which the Stoics were most
interested were ones in which such a link did exist; as in an example given
142
LOGIC

by Sextus shortly afterwards: ‘If she has milk, she has conceived’. But the
same would be true of most of the examples in a modern textbook even
though the logic it expounds is Wrmly based on a truth-functional inter-
pretation of the basic form of conditional.
On the other hand, there are passages suggesting that at least some
Stoics took a diVerent view of the truth-conditions of conditional propos-
itions. Chrysippus is reported as saying that in ‘If p then q’ the connective
declared that q followed from p. This was glossed, by himself or by another
Stoic, in the following way:
A conditional is true when the contradictory of its consequent conXicts with its
antecedent. For instance, ‘If it is day, it is light’ is true because ‘It is not light’, the
contradictory of the consequent, conXicts with ‘It is day’. A conditional is false
when the contradictory of its consequent does not conXict with the antecedent,
such as ‘If it is day, Dion is walking’ because ‘Not: Dion is walking’ does not conXict
with ‘It is day’. (D.L. 7. 73)
Here it seems clear that ‘conXict’ must refer to some kind of incompati-
bility of content between antecedent and consequent, and not just a
diVerence of truth-value. But the exact nature of the incompatibility (is
it logical? is it discovered empirically?) remains unclear.
It is, fortunately, not necessary to resolve these uncertainties in order to
present and evaluate the Stoic theory of inference. Whereas Aristotle had
indicated each of his syllogisms by listing the conditional necessary truths
corresponding to them, the Stoics present their arguments in the form of
inference schemata, sometimes using numbers as variables and sometimes
using standard examples, and sometimes a mixture of the two as in ‘If Plato
is alive, Plato is breathing. But the Wrst, therefore the second.’ An inference,
most Stoics said, must consist of a Wrst premiss (lemma), a second premiss
(proslepsis), and a conclusion (epiphora). It was a minority view that an
inference might sometimes have only a single premiss (D.L. 7. 76).
The criterion for the invalidity of an inference was analogous to the one
Chrysippus oVered for the truth-value of a conditional. An inference was
valid (perantikos) if the contradictory of the conclusion conXicted with the
conjunction of the premisses; if it did not conXict, then the inference was
invalid. A typical invalid inference was ‘If it is day, it is light. But it is day.
Therefore Dion is walking’ (D.L. 7. 77). Nowadays we are accustomed to
distinguish between valid inferences and sound inferences. An inference
143
LOGIC

may be valid but unsound if one or more of its premisses is untrue. The
Stoics made a similar distinction, but used the Greek word for ‘true’, alethes,
to correspond to ‘sound’ and ‘false’ to correspond to ‘unsound’. An
inference was unsound, they said, if either it was invalid or it contained
some falsity in its premisses (D.L. 7. 79).
Inferences came in various forms, called ‘moods’. Chrysippus listed
Wve basic forms of valid inference, or ‘indemonstrable moods’ (D.L. 7. 79).
They may be set out as follows, using cardinal numbers rather than ordinals.
(A) If 1 then 2; but 1; therefore 2.
(B) If 1 then 2; but not 2; therefore not 1.
(C) Not both 1 and 2; but 1; therefore not 2.
(D) Either 1 or 2; but 1; therefore not 2.
(E) Either 1 or 2; but not 2; therefore 1.
All valid inferences, Chrysippus believed, could be reduced to these primi-
tive forms, and in his many lost works he seems to have proved many
theorems which reduced more complex and derivative moods to these
simple patterns. Thus, if we take
(F) If 1, then if 1 then 2; but 1; therefore 2,
we can show this is a valid inference schema by deriving from the two
premisses in accordance with (A) ‘If 1 then 2’, and then using (A) once more
to derive, from this conclusion and the second premiss ‘2’ (S.E., M 8. 234–6).
On the face of it, Chrysippus’ Wve primitive schemata form neither a
complete nor an irreducible basis for deductions within the propositional
calculus. There is no primitive proposition to justify the inference of ‘p’ from
‘both p and q’; this, no doubt, is because of the reluctance to consider
inferences with only a single premiss. The fourth primitive schema is valid
onlyif‘or’isgivenitsexclusiveinterpretation;butifitis,thenitisnotneeded,
since any inference that it validates will already have been validated by (C).
In late antiquity Aristotelian logic and Stoic logic were regarded as rivals,
and while the Stoics’ own writings have not survived, we have much
evidence of polemics between supporters of the two systems. With the
hindsight of millennia we can see that the systems were not in general
incompatible with each other, but were formulations of diVerent areas of
logic, each of them precursors of diVerent, but complementary, modern
developments, in the propositional and predicate calculus.
144
LOGIC

4
Knowledge and its Limits:
Epistemology
T
here is a branch of philosophy nowadays called epistemology: the
inquiry into what can be known, and how we can know it. We all have
many beliefs on many topics; which, if any of them, can count as real
knowledge? What is the mark of genuine knowledge and how does it diVer
from mere belief? Is there a reliable way to acquire knowledge of the truth
to eliminate false beliefs that are mere seemings? These questions occupied
the attention of Greek thinkers from an early stage.
Presocratic Epistemology
Parmenides might well claim to be the founder of epistemology: at least he is
the Wrst philosopher to make a systematic distinction between knowledge
and belief. At the beginning of his great poem a goddess promises that he will
learn all things, both reliable truth and the untrustworthy opinions of
mortals. The poem is in two parts: the way of truth and the way of seeming.
The way of truth sets out Parmenides’ theory of Being, which we will
consider in Chapter 6 on metaphysics. The way of seeming deals with the
world of the senses, the world of change and colour, the world of empty
names. Mortals who do not accept the way of truth, sunk in metaphysical
error, know nothing at all. Deaf, dazed, and blind, they can be called ‘two-
headed’ because of the internal inconsistencies of their beliefs (KRS 293).
A sharp contrast between reality and appearance also appears in the
writing of a very diVerent philosopher, Democritus. For him, atoms and

the void are the only two realities and the qualities perceived by the senses
are mere appearances. To show that sense-appearances cannot be the truth
about things, he argues that they conXict with each other. The sick and the
healthy do not agree about the taste of things, men disagree with other
animals, and sensory properties appear diVerent even to the same individ-
ual at diVerent times (Aristotle, Metaph C 5. 1009b7). Sense-appearances lead
only to belief, not to truth. ‘By convention sweet,’ he is quoted as saying,
‘by convention bitter; by convention hot, by convention cold; by conven-
tion colour, but in reality atoms and void’ (KRS 549). To say that a
proposition such as ‘The wind is cold’ enunciates a false belief seems not
quite the same as saying that it enunciates something that is true only by
convention; but whatever exactly Democritus meant, it is clear that he
maintained that the senses did not deliver truths about an independent
reality.
If I stand in the same wind as you and pronounce it hot, while
you pronounce it cold, Democritus would say that neither of us is speaking
the truth. The sophist Protagoras took up a quite opposite position: he
claimed that each of us is speaking the truth. (Plato, Tht. 151e). ‘Man is the
measure of all things,’ he famously said; ‘both of things that are that they
are, and of things that are not that they are not’ (KRS 551). Whatever
appears true to a particular person is true for that person. All beliefs,
therefore, are true: but they have only a relative truth. There is no such
thing as the independent, objective truth that Democritus sought, and
failed to Wnd, in sense-appearance. Democritus objected that Protagoras’
doctrine was self-refuting. If all beliefs are true, then among true beliefs is
the belief that not every belief is true (DK 68 A114).
Protagoras might have tried to counter this objection by restricting his
claim to the case of sense-perception. The expression ‘It appears to me
that . . . ’, and its equivalent in Greek, can cover either sense-impressions or
opinions, and this fact is exploited by Democritus in his refutation. Histor-
ically, however, Protagoras did not take this route of escape: his interests
extended far wider than the realm of sense-perception. Diogenes Laertius
tells us that he said that there were two opposed accounts of every matter,
and Seneca that he claimed that on every issue one could argue equally
well on either side.1 If A oVers arguments for p, and B oVers arguments for
1 D. L. 9. 51; DK 80 A20. See J. Barnes, The Presocratic Philosophers, rev. edn. (London: Routledge,
1982), ii. 243.
146
EPISTEMOLOGY

not-p, and both sets of arguments are equally good, how should I decide
between them? Protagoras appears to suggest that I should not decide, but
accept both. But does not this involve accepting both sides of a contradic-
tion? On the contrary, Protagoras denied that contradiction was possible
(D.L. 9. 53). What is really accepted is not ‘p’ and ‘not-p’ but ‘ ‘‘p’’ is true for
A’ and ‘ ‘‘not-p’’ is true for B’.
For Protagoras, all truth is relative, and not just truth about obviously
subjective matters such as the feel of the wind. For this thesis, so far as we
know, he did not oVer any argument, merely the analogy between sense-
appearances and beliefs, and a personal claim to be able to match any
argument pro with an argument contra. But the thesis does give him an
escape from Democritus’ trap. He can accept ‘Some beliefs are false’ as
true—but true for Democritus. He can continue to believe that ‘No beliefs are
false’ is true—true, of course, for himself, for Protagoras. There has to be
some other way of sorting out the issue between the two of them—a way
which Plato, as we shall see, attempted to provide.
Protagoras is sometimes described as a sceptic. In one way this is an odd
description. A sceptic is someone who thinks the discovery of truth is
diYcult, perhaps impossible. For Protagoras it is all too easy: you only have
to frame a belief and, hey presto, it is true. But from the point of view of
someone like Democritus, the replacement of a universal, objective con-
cept of truth with a relative one is itself a very deep form of scepticism. The
only kind of truth really worth seeking is, for a relativist, impossible to
discover because it does not exist.
Democritus himself, however, was in no strong position to reject
scepticism. He claimed that there were two kinds of knowledge, one
through the senses and one through the intellect. Only intellectual
knowledge is legitimate knowledge; the Wve senses deliver only a bastard
version (S.E., M. 7. 130–9). There is, however, a problem: the intellectual
knowledge expressed in the atomic theory is based in part on empirical
evidence: and this comes from the cheating senses. Galen, quoting the
dictum about the conventionality of sense-properties, says, ‘Having slan-
dered appearances, [Democritus] makes the senses address the intellect
thus: ‘‘Mind, you wretch! You take your evidence from us and then you
throw us over! Our overthrow is your downfall too’’ ’ (KRS 552).
Logically, then, perhaps Democritus should have ended up not as an
atomist but as a sceptic. One of his pupils, Metrodorus of Chios, is known
147
EPISTEMOLOGY

to have made an extreme statement of scepticism: ‘None of us knows
anything, not even whether we know or do not know, nor even what
knowing and not knowing are’ (DK 70 B1). But this was at the beginning of
a book of atomistic physics, so it is hard to know how seriously to take this
manifesto. The sophist Gorgias, on the other hand, oVered an argument to
show that knowledge of reality was impossible. It went like this. If objects of
thought (ta phronoumena) are not real (onta), then what is real is not an object
of thought. But objects of thought are not real; for if any of them are, all of
them are, just as they are thought. But just because someone thinks of a
man Xying or chariots running on the sea, that does not mean that there is
a Xying man or chariots running on the sea. Hence it is not the case that
what is thought of is real; and therefore what is real is not an object of
thought (DK 82 B3).
We do not know whether Gorgias meant this argument seriously or not.
We need not question that if no object of thought is a reality, then no
reality is an object of thought. The weak point in the argument seems to be
the claim that if some object of thought is real, then all objects of thought
are real. The very choice of examples suggests that we can distinguish
between those cases where an object of thought is not real and those cases
where it is real (i.e. when the thought has a reality corresponding to it).
Socrates, Knowledge, and Ignorance
Protagoras and Gorgias were sophists, and it was a regular complaint
against the sophists that they were purveyors of scepticism. Some thought
that Socrates was tarred with the same brush. Socrates certainly went
round puncturing other people’s claims to knowledge, and prided himself
on his awareness of his own ignorance. But he never challenged claims to
knowledge when made by craftsmen and experts in their own particular
Welds. Indeed, over and over again, in Plato’s Socratic dialogues, we are
given a run through half a dozen arts and crafts—shoemaking, shipbuild-
ing, navigation, cookery, medicine—to provide a paradigm of knowledge
against which to test and Wnd wanting the pretensions of those who
claim moral and political knowledge. If Socrates was a sceptic, his scepti-
cism was of a limited and contingent kind. It was only of certain important
things that knowledge was unavailable; and it was not necessarily
148
EPISTEMOLOGY

Socrates seen through Roman eyes in a wall-painting from Ephesus

unavailable to human beings, it was just not to be found in the Athens of
the day.
But in order to evaluate Socrates’ epistemology, and still more in order
to understand the epistemological theses that Plato in his dialogues puts in
Socrates’ mouth, it is necessary to discuss the diVerent Greek words that
correspond more or less to the English word ‘knowledge’. The word
‘epistemology’ itself is derived from the Greek word ‘episteme’ a word
that is often used to indicate knowledge of a rather grand kind, so that one
of its English equivalents is ‘science’. Besides the verb ‘epistamai’ which goes
with this noun, there are humbler words for more everyday knowledge
and acquaintance. Hence, someone who denies the possibility of episteme in a
particular area is not necessarily a sceptic ruling out the possibility of all
knowledge.
The Delphic oracle pronounced that no one was wiser than Socrates.
After interrogating those who had a reputation for wisdom (sophia),
Socrates came to the conclusion that he was wiser than them in that he
did not falsely believe he knew matters that he did not know. Questioning
the politicians and the poets, he concluded that they did not have any real
knowledge of the areas in which they had made their reputation. When he
went to the craftsmen, however, he did Wnd that they had knowledge
(episteme) of many things where he was ignorant, and to that extent they
were wiser than he was. The problem was that on the basis of their
particular expertise, they foolishly thought themselves wise on totally
diVerent, and more important, topics. Socrates decided that he was better
oV than they, lacking both their wisdom and their ignorance (Apol. 22d–e).
In Plato’s Socratic dialogues there is always someone who claims know-
ledge in a particular area; typically, a character will claim to know the
nature of a particular virtue or craft. Thus, Euthyphro claims to have
knowledge of piety and impiety (Euthphr. 4e–5a), Meno is happy to accept
that he knows what virtue is (Men. 71d–e), and even the modest Charmides
thinks he knows what modesty is. Socrates then questions such a character
in order to get the knowledge expressed in a deWnition. As each deWnition is
produced, he declares it deWcient, either producing counter-examples or
revealing ambiguities in its terms. Counter-examples can take two forms:
they can show either that the deWnition covers more than it should, or that
it covers less than it should. Thus, when Cephalus in Republic 1 says that
justice is telling the truth and returning what is borrowed, Socrates
150
EPISTEMOLOGY

complains that returning a borrowed weapon to a mad friend is not just
(Rep. 331c–d). On the other hand, when Laches, in the dialogue called after
him, says that courage is standing at one’s post without running away,
Socrates points out that tactical retreat can be an expression of courage
(191c). Sooner or later, the alleged expert has to admit that his deWnition
breaks down; and the failure to be able to produce a satisfactory deWni-
tion is taken to show that the claim to knowledge was unjustiWed.
The questioning Socrates, in Plato’s dialogues, is never satisWed with
being oVered a list of items falling under a certain concept such as virtue or
knowledge. Meno tells him that there are many diVerent kinds of virtue: one
for males, one for females, one for children; one for slaves and one for
freemen; one for the young and one for the old. Socrates says that this is no
use: it is like telling someone who wants to know what a bee is that there
are many diVerent kinds of bee. Bees of diVerent kinds, Socrates says, do
not diVer from one another in so far as they are bees; and what we want
to Wnd out is that very thing in which they are all the same and do not diVer
from one another (Men. 72c). So too with virtue. Socrates, we might say, is
looking for the essence of virtue.
Knowledge of the essence of something is clearly a very special kind of
knowledge: and ever since Plato’s Socrates it has been for many philoso-
phers a paradigm of knowledge. Other philosophers, in recent times, have
criticized Socratic insistence on knowledge of essences. Wittgenstein
pointed out that among the items that most interest philosophers some
may not have such an essence at all. He denied, for instance, that every-
thing we call language possesses one feature in common which makes us
use the same word for all. Rather, these phenomena are related to one
another in many diVerent ways, just as diVerent members of the same
family will resemble each other in diVerent features such as build, gait,
colour, temperament, and so on.2 Even where X does have an essence,
being able to deWne that essence or to articulate an exceptionless criterion
for distinguishing Xs from not Xs is not a necessary condition for being
genuinely able to tell an X when one sees one. Thus, I can know that a
computer is not alive without being able to produce a watertight criterion
to separate life from non-life.3
2 L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations (Oxford: Blackwell, 1958), 1. 66–7.
3 The denial of this is called by Peter Geach ‘the Socratic Fallacy’ (God and the Soul (London:
Routledge, 1969), 40).
151
EPISTEMOLOGY

We can agree that knowledge, in the everyday sense of the English word,
can be present in the absence of the power to deWne and delimit. It might
well be thought, however, to be the special task of the philosopher to seek
for essences, or, as the case may be, to lay out the family resemblances
between diVerent applications of a concept. The goal of this special task is
to reach a level of knowledge, or at least understanding, that is superior to
that possessed by the ordinary informal employer of a concept. And it was
for this level of insight that Plato, in his mature dialogues, came to reserve
the Greek word ‘episteme’.
Knowledge in the Theaetetus
One of the richest of Plato’s dialogues, the Theaetetus, is devoted to the
question: What is knowledge (episteme)? (145e). This dialogue, though not
an early one, has the structure usual for a Socratic dialogue: the protagon-
ist (in this case a brilliant young mathematician) oVers a series of
deWnitions, all in turn are rejected by Socrates, and the drama ends with
a proclamation of ignorance. The young Theaetetus, at the beginning
of the dialogue, is pregnant with a reply to the question, ‘What is know-
ledge?’ Socrates oVers himself as midwife to bring it to birth (149a–151d);
but the pregnancy turns out to be imaginary, with only a phantom
oVspring.
Theaetetus’ Wrst proposal is that knowledge consists of things like
geometry and astronomy, on the one hand, and shoemaking and carpen-
try on the other (146d). This will not do: Socrates is never happy with a list,
and he says that if we tried to deWne geometry and carpentry the word
‘knowledge’ itself would turn up in the deWnition. Theaetetus next sug-
gests that knowledge is perception: to know something is to perceive it
with the senses (151e). Socrates observes that since only what is true can be
known, knowledge can be sense-perception only if such perception is
always correct. But this can only be the case if we accept the thesis of
Protagoras that whatever seems to a particular person is true for him.
With regard to momentary sensations, Protagoras’ thesis may be given
plausibility by the thesis of Heraclitus that the world is in constant Xux. The
colours we see are not stable objects: when my eye encounters a piece of
marble, the whiteness of the marble and my vision of that whiteness are two
152
EPISTEMOLOGY

momentary items, twins begotten together by the encounter of the parent
eye and the parent marble (156c–d). If, then, on a particular occasion I say
‘This is white’, I cannot be wrong: no one else is in a position to contradict
me. The same is true of other kinds of sense-perception (157a).
Let us suppose we concede to Protagoras that, in such a case, what the
perceiver says goes. Still, Socrates insists, there are many other kinds of case
where it would be absurd to make such a claim. We have dreams in which
we think we are Xying; a man may go mad and think he is a god. Surely
these are cases where what seems to a person is not true? And even the
ordinary cases, where the perception is not erroneous, cannot be cases of
real knowledge. For how can we be sure that we are not dreaming? Half
our life is spent abed, and it is a commonplace that it is impossible to prove
that one is awake and not asleep (158c–e).
At this point Socrates oVers Theaetetus (and Protagoras) a response—
rather a feeble response, since it deals with the case not of dreamers or
madmen, but of sick people whose senses are aVected by their disease.
Suppose Socrates falls ill, and sweet wine begins to taste sour to him. On
the Heraclitean account, the taste of the wine is the oVspring of the wine
and the taster. Socrates sick is a diVerent taster from Socrates healthy, and
with a diVerent parent naturally the oVspring diVers. It may not be true
that the wine is sour, but it is, in his sickness, sour for Socrates. So we do
not have here a case of erroneous perception, and the equivalence of
knowledge and perception is not yet defeated.
Socrates in the dialogue moves on to diVerent terrain. There are cases of
perception without knowledge: we can hear a foreign language spoken,
and yet not know the language (163b). There are cases of knowledge
without perception: when we shut our eyes and recall something we
have seen, we know what it looks like and yet are no longer seeing it
(164a). But if knowing ¼ perception, then both these must be cases of
simultaneously knowing and not knowing, and surely that is an absurdity?
But even now, Socrates is willing to allow Protagoras a way out. It is easy to
have cases of simultaneous perception and non-perception: if you wear an
eyepatch you see something with one eye but not with the other. So if
perception ¼ knowledge, it is no surprise that you can both know and
not know at the same time (165c).
In discussing Theaetetus’ identiWcation of knowledge and perception,
Plato’s Socrates gives Protagoras a surprising amount of rope. But he is, in
153
EPISTEMOLOGY

the end, conWdent that Protagoras hangs himself on Democritus’ hook. It
seems to all men that some men know better than others: if so, that
must—according to Protagoras—be true for all men. It seems to most
people that Protagoras’ thesis is false; if so, his thesis must be, on his own
account, more false than true, since the unbelievers outnumber the
believers (170b–171d). But his thesis can be attacked more directly. How-
ever plausible it may be if applied to sense-perception, it cannot apply to
medical diagnosis or political prediction. Even if each man is an authority
on what he senses now, he is not the measure of what he will feel or perceive:
a physician knows better than a patient whether the patient will later feel
hot or cold, and a vintner will know better than a drinker whether a wine,
come next year, will taste sweet or dry (178c).
The Wnal argument by which Socrates leads Theaetetus to abandon the
proposal that knowledge is perception is this. The objects of the senses
are delivered to us through diVerent channels: we see with our eyes and
hear with our ears. Colours are not the same as sounds; we cannot hear
colours and we cannot see sounds. But what of the judgement ‘Colours are
not the same as sounds’? Where does that piece of knowledge come from? It
cannot come from the eyes, since they cannot see sounds; it cannot come
from the ears, since they cannot hear colours. Moreover, there are no
organs for detecting sameness, in the way that there are organs for seeing
and hearing. The soul itself contemplates the common terms that apply to
the deliverances of all of the senses (184b–185d).
Theaetetus, in response to this argument, moves to a second proposed
deWnition of knowledge. Knowledge is not perception (aesthesis); it is
thought (doxa), and thought is an activity of the soul by itself. When the
mind is thinking, it is as if it were talking to itself, asking and answering
questions, and silently forming opinions. Knowledge cannot be identiWed
outright with thought, because there are false thoughts; but perhaps we
can say that knowledge is true thought (187a5).
Socrates, after an interesting diversion in which he points out that the
notion of ‘false thought’ is not without its problems, oVers an objection to
this deWnition. There are cases where people have true thoughts, and form
true opinions, without having actual knowledge. If a jury is persuaded by a
clever attorney to bring in a certain verdict, then if the verdict accords with
the facts, the jurors will have formed a true opinion. But do their true
thoughts amount to knowledge? Not really, says Socrates: only an eyewit-
154
EPISTEMOLOGY

ness is in a position really to know what happened in a case of alleged
assault or robbery. So knowledge cannot be deWned as true thought.
Socrates showed earlier that knowledge is not perception by giving an
example of a piece of knowledge for which perception was insuYcient. He
has now shown that knowledge is not true opinion by giving an example of
a piece of knowledge for which perception was necessary. It might be
expected that Theaetetus might have responded by oVering an account
of knowledge embracing both perception and thought in some relation to
each other. Instead he oVers an elaboration of his second deWnition.
Knowledge, he now suggests, is true thought plus a logos; and he proposes
three forms that the logos may take (206c).
‘Logos’, as has been remarked, is a diYcult word to translate because it
corresponds to many diVerent English words: ‘word’ itself, ‘sentence’,
‘discourse’, ‘reason’. In the present context it is clear that for Theaetetus
a true thought with a logos is a thought that is somehow articulated in a
way that a thought without a logos is not: but I shall leave the word
untranslated while explaining the diVerent kinds of articulation he has in
mind.
One way in which one can give a logos of a thought is by expressing it in
words. But being able to articulate a thought in this sense cannot be what
makes the diVerence between true thought and knowledge, since anyone
who is not dumb is capable of doing so (206d–e).
More plausibly, a logos may be a kind of analysis. To know what X is is to
be able to analyse it into its elements. Thus one can exhibit knowledge of a
word by spelling it out in letters. If that is what knowledge is, then
knowledge of reality must be exhibited in analysing it into the ultimate
elements of which it is composed. But the analogy with spelling places us
in a diYculty. The word ‘Socrates’ can be analysed into its elements, such
as the letter S. But the letter S cannot be further analysed; unlike the word
‘Socrates’, the letter S has no spelling. So if knowledge involves analysis, the
ultimate, unanalysable elements of the universe cannot be known. And if
the elements of a complex cannot be known, how can the complex itself be
known? Moreover, a mere listing of the elements of a complex is insuY-
cient for knowledge unless the elements are put together in the correct
way (207b).
Theaetetus’ Wnal account of giving a logos of an object is giving a descrip-
tion that is uniquely true of it: thus one might give a logos of the sun by
155
EPISTEMOLOGY

saying that it is the brightest of the heavenly bodies. But does this amount
to real knowledge of the sun? Surely, being able to oVer some deWnite
description of X is a necessary condition of having any thought at all about
X; it is not suYcient to turn a true thought about X into a piece of genuine
knowledge.
At this point Theaetetus gives up. The thoughts he has delivered with
the aid of Socrates’ midwifery turn out to be mere wind-eggs. We are far
from having reached a deWnition of knowledge; and hence all the use of
words like ‘know’ and ‘not know’ throughout the dialogue turns out to
have been illegitimate (196e).
Perhaps Theaetetus gave up too soon. If he had oVered a fourth account
of ‘logos’ as meaning something like ‘justiWcation’, ‘reason’, or ‘evidence’,
then his deWnition of knowledge as true belief plus logos would have been
found satisfactory by many a philosopher during the subsequent millennia
of philosophy. But Plato’s Socrates was a hard man to satisfy, and Plato
himself, in the sixth and seventh books of his Republic, has his Socrates
present quite a diVerent epistemology in quite a diVerent style.
Knowledge and Ideas
The presentations in the two dialogues diVer above all because the Republic
appeals, as the Theaetetus does not, to Plato’s Theory of Ideas. Common to
both dialogues is the principle that what is known must be true; knowledge
can only be of what is. The Ideas are relevant in the Republic because Plato is
committed to the thesis that only the Ideas really are: that is to say,
everything other than an Idea is what it is only in a qualiWed sense.
Beautiful things other than the Idea of Beauty, for instance, are beautiful
only at one time and not another, or beautiful only in one part and not in
another. Nothing except the Idea of Beauty is just beautiful, period (Smp.
211a). The Ideas make their Wrst appearance in the Republic in the Wfth book,
where Plato is describing the philosopher. He describes him as the lover of
truth, and distinguishes him from the mere dilettante, the lover of sights
and sounds.
The non-philosopher does not know the diVerence between beautiful
objects and beauty itself: he is living in a dream, mistaking an image for
reality (Rep. 476c–d). For the state of mind (dianoia) of such a person, Plato
156
EPISTEMOLOGY

uses the word ‘doxa’, which in the Theaetetus was used for thought, or belief.
He contrasts it with the knowledge that belongs to the philosopher—here
called gnome. If knowledge must be knowledge of what is, and only an
Idea utterly is, then knowledge must be knowledge of Ideas. If there is
anything at the opposite pole from an Idea, something that utterly is
not, that is totally unknowable. But most things that are F are partly
F and partly not F, F in one respect and not in another. They are set in
between what is utterly F and what is utterly not F. These are the objects
of doxa.
At this point a fundamental diVerence emerges between the Republic and
the Theaetetus. In the Theaetetus we sought to locate the essential characteris-
tic of knowledge as a feature of the state of mind of the knower: is it a
matter of sensation? must it include a logos? But in the Republic the
diVerence between knowledge and belief is a diVerence between objects:
between what is known and what is thought of. This point is made quite
explicitly. Knowledge and thought, Plato says, are powers (dynameis), just as
sight and hearing are powers. Powers do not have colours or shapes by
which we can tell one from another. ‘In the case of a power I look only at
what it is concerned with and what it does to it, and by reference to that
I call each the power it is’ (477d). Sight is a power to discriminate colour,
and hearing a power to discriminate sound: it is the diVerence between the
objects, colour and sound, that distinguishes these two powers from each
other. Similarly, Plato proposes, the diVerence between knowledge and
belief is to be determined by noting the diVerences between the two kinds
of object with which they deal (478b6 V.).
In book 6 Plato takes this line of argument further, and subdivides
gnome and doxa. Doxa, or thought, has the visible world as its realm, but
it comes in two diVerent forms that have diVerent objects. One form
is imagination (eikasia), whose objects are shadows and reXections;
another form is belief (pistis), whose objects are the living creatures
about us and the works of nature or of human hands. The realm of
gnosis, of knowledge, is likewise divided into two. Knowledge par excel-
lence is noesis, or understanding, whose object is the Ideas that are the
province of the philosopher. But there is also another kind of know-
ledge, typical of the mathematician, to which Plato gives the name
dianoia (509c5 V.). The abstract objects of the mathematician share with
the Ideas the characteristic of eternity and unchangeability: they
157
EPISTEMOLOGY

belong to the world of being, not of becoming. But they also share a
characteristic with ordinary terrestrial objects, namely they are mul-
tiple and not single. The geometer’s circles, unlike the Ideal Circle,
can intersect with each other; and the arithmetician’s twos, unlike the
one and only Idea of Two, can be added to each other to make four
(cf. 525c–526a).
Plato distinguishes between the mathematician and the philosopher on
the basis not only of the diVerent objects of their disciplines, but also of the
diVerent methods of their investigation. Mathematicians, he complains,
start from hypotheses which they treat as obvious and do not feel called
upon to give an account of. The philosopher, however, though starting
likewise from hypotheses, does not, like the mathematician, immediately
According to Plato, human knowledge is like that of prisoners chained in a cave who
can see nothing except shadows cast on the inner wall by puppets on a screen at the
entrance. Only the mathematician and the philosopher can escape from the cave into
the real world of daylight. (Flemish school, sixteenth century)
158
EPISTEMOLOGY

move down from hypotheses to conclusions, but ascends Wrst from
hypotheses to an unhypothetical principle, and only then redescends
from premiss to conclusion. Philosophical method is called by Plato
‘dialectic’; and dialectic, he says, ‘treats its assumptions, not as Wrst prin-
ciples, but literally as hypotheses, like stepping stones or starting points
on a journey up to an unhypothetical Wrst principle’. Having grasped
this principle, dialectic ‘goes into reverse, and, keeping hold of what
follows from the principle, Wnally comes down to a conclusion’ (511b).
The upward path of dialectic is described again in book 7 as a course of
‘taking up what has been laid down and travelling up to the Wrst prin-
ciple of all’. ‘Taking up what has been laid down’ is equivalent to unhy-
pothesizing the hypotheses, which in a particular case may mean either
abandoning a hypothesis, or placing it on an unhypothetical foundation
(533c).
Scholars have not been able to reach agreement on the precise nature
of dialectic, as envisaged by Plato, but in broad outline we can say that the
dialectician operates as follows. He takes a hypothesis, a questionable
assumption, and tries to show that it leads to a contradiction. When
he reaches a contradiction, he abandons the hypothesis and goes on to
test the other premisses used to derive the contradiction, and so on until he
reaches a premiss that is unquestionable. The procedure can be illustrated
in the Republic itself.
In book 1 three characters in the dialogue, Cephalus, Polemarchus, and
Thrasymachus, each oVer deWnitions of justice, which are shown by
Socrates to be unsatisfactory. Cephalus’ proposal that justice is telling the
truth and returning what is borrowed is refuted because, Socrates claims, it
is not just to return a weapon to a mad friend (331c). But this refutation
depends on an implicit deWnition of justice as doing good to one’s friends
and harm to one’s enemies. When this deWnition is made explicit by
Polemarchus (332b V.), it is refuted on the grounds that it is never just to
harm any man at all. This refutation, in its turn, depends on the premiss
that justice is human goodness: it is surely preposterous to think that a
good man could exercise his goodness in making others less good. But
Thrasymachus leaps in to challenge this premiss: justice is not goodness,
but weakness and foolishness (338c). Eventually, Thrasymachus too is
refuted, when he is forced to agree that the just man will have a better
life than the unjust (354a). His surrender is exacted by a number of
159
EPISTEMOLOGY

hypotheses that are themselves questionable and most of which are ques-
tioned elsewhere in the Republic.
For instance, one hypothesis assumed against Thrasymachus is that it is
the soul’s function to direct the person whose soul it is. This hypothesis
is reviewed when, in book 4, Socrates divides the soul into three parts: this
directing function belongs not to the whole soul but only to reason.
In establishing the trichotomy Socrates appeals to the following principle:
it is not the case ‘that the same thing can ever act or be acted upon in
two opposite ways, or be two opposite things, at the same time, in respect
of the same part of itself, and in relation to the same object’ (437a). This,
which seems at Wrst to be a harmless principle of non-contradiction, turns
out to be, in Plato’s eyes, a hypothesis that is not true of anything except
the Ideas. So the dialectician on his upward path has to move into the
realm of Ideas.
The path to a full understanding of the nature of justice would go
through the diVerent degrees of cognition identiWed by Plato on book 6.
The Wrst degree is what Plato calls imagination. Someone who reads the
poets and watches dramatic spectacles (provided the texts are of an
approved kind) will have seen justice triumphing on the stage and will
have learnt that the gods are unchanging, good, and truthful (382c). From
this he will proceed to true belief about justice: this will be equivalent to
competence in the human justice that operates in the law courts. But to
learn what ideal justice is, and to see how it takes its place in the system of
Ideas which is presided over by the supreme Idea, the Idea of Good, will be
the task of dialectic. Sadly, as he approaches the end of the upward path of
dialectic, to learn from goodness itself the Wrst principles of law and
morality, the Socrates of the Republic, like Moses on Mount Sinai, disappears
into a cloud. He can talk only in metaphor, and cannot give even a
provisional account of goodness itself (506d).
The obscurity of the Theory of Ideas, and in particular of the Idea of the
Good, means that there is a hole at the centre of the epistemology of
the Republic. What it is to have knowledge of an Idea, and how such
knowledge is acquired, is never there explained. Other dialogues—the
Phaedo, the Meno—put forward a startling suggestion to Wll this gap.
Knowledge of Ideas is essentially recollection: recollection of acquaintance
in an earlier, more spiritual life. This proposal, more metaphysical than
epistemological, will be considered in a later chapter.
160
EPISTEMOLOGY

Aristotle on Science and Illusion
In epistemology, as in other matters, Aristotle’s agenda was set by Plato.
He accepted Plato’s distinction between the senses and the intellect, and
attached great importance to it, often attacking earlier thinkers, such as
Empedocles and Democritus, for failing to appreciate the distinction
between sensation and thought (e.g. Metaph. G 5.1009b14 V.). With the
Theaetetus in mind, he addressed once again the Protagorean question of
the reliability and fallibility of the senses. Finally, he took over and
developed the Platonic catalogue of diVerent intellectual states; and set
out criteria for the attainment of the highest such state, namely scientiWc
knowledge.
Plato frequently emphasized the unstable and confusing nature of sense-
experience. For instance, in the tenth book of the Republic he wrote, ‘Things
look crooked when seen in water and straight when seen out of it; things
can look both concave and convex because colours mislead the eye; and all
kinds of similar confusion are manifest in our souls’ (602c–d). He con-
trasted this with the constancy of the results of the calculations and
measurements carried out by the reasoning part of the soul.
Aristotle considers the epistemic status of the senses in the course of
defending the principle of contradiction against Protagorean arguments in
Metaphysics C (5. 1009b1 V.). The problem arises from the occurrence of
conXicting sense-impressions. We have these four propositions.
(1) Sense says that p.
(2) Sense says that not-p.
(3) What Sense says is true.
(4) Not both p and not-p.
This is an inconsistent quartet: any three of the propositions can be used to
prove the falsity of the fourth. This possibility is used in diVerent ways by
diVerent protagonists in to the debate that Aristotle is addressing. Demo-
critus and Plato, followed by sceptics ancient and modern, accept (1), (2), and
(4) as showing the falsity of (3). Aristotle’s Protagoreans accept (1), (2),
and (3) as showing the falsity of (4). In modern times some philosophers
have sought to defend (3) and (4) by qualifying (1) and (2) and introducing
the notion of sense-data. Sense, according to these philosophers, does not
really say that the stick is straight and that the stick is not straight; it
161
EPISTEMOLOGY

says that here and now there is a visual non-straight-looking sense-datum,
and here and now there is a tactile straight-feeling sense-datum.
Aristotle, like the sense-datum theorists, deals with the inconsistent
quartet by qualifying (1) and (2). But he does not do so by altering the
content of p. The senses do tell us about external realities and not about an
alleged purely mental entity such as a sense-datum. He solves his problems
by focusing on Sense. Wherever we have an apparent case of Sense saying
that p, and Sense saying that not-p, we really have a case of one sense S1
saying that p, and another sense S2 saying that not-p. Not all that the senses
tell us is true, and if S1 and S2 tell us diVerent stories we can give reasons
for making a choice between them.
It is an essential part of the Protagorean contention that where two
judgements of sense conXict, there should be no reason for preferring the
one to the other in regard of truth. But someone might say that in the case
of the conXict of tastes between healthy and sick, we are to prefer the
report of the healthy, since this is the opinion of the majority. The reply to
this that Aristotle oVers Protagoras is that we cannot treat majority opinion
as the criterion of truth. If a worldwide epidemic broke out, those now
called healthy might be outnumbered, and there would no longer be
reason to accept as true their opinion that honey is sweet (Metaph. C. 5.
1009a1–5).
Aristotle can agree that the reason for preferring healthy perception to
diseased perception must be something other than statistical. But he
counters the Protagorean conclusion by saying that everyone does in fact
grade appearances and no one treats them as all equally trustworthy. If you
doze oV in Libya and dream you are in Athens, you do not, on waking, set
oV for the Athens theatre (Metaph. C. 5. 1010b11). Aristotle oVers a number
of criteria for ranking sense-appearances when it is necessary to choose
between them, the most important of which is that a sense has priority
when it is judging its proper object.
The proper object of each sense is deWned in the de Anima (2. 6. 418a12) as
being that which cannot be perceived by another sense, and that about
which it is impossible to be deceived: colour is the proper object of sight,
sound of hearing, and Xavour of taste. Aristotle’s Wrst point is clear enough:
we cannot taste a colour, hear a Xavour, or see a sound. But what is meant
by saying that a sense cannot be deceived about its proper object? Aristotle
is quick to explain that if I see something white, I can be mistaken about
162
EPISTEMOLOGY

whether it is a man or something else, but not about whether it is white or
not (3. 6. 430b29). This makes it look as if he is saying simply that if when
you use your eyes, and conWne yourself to making statements about how
things look to you here and now, then you cannot go wrong. But this
cannot be what he means, for he clearly envisages there being genuine
conXicts between two deliverances of a single sense, and he oVers rules for
sorting them out: in the case of sight, for instance, prefer a closer glimpse
to a more distant one.
So the infallibility of the senses about their proper objects, for Aristotle,
does not mean that whatever appears to a particular sense within its own
competence is true. Not all statements made about colour on the basis of
using our eyes are true: what appears to be red may not be red. Statements
such as ‘That is red’ made on the basis of visual experience are not incor-
rigible. What is special about them is that they can be corrected only by a
further use of the same sense. If we are not sure whether a thing really is
the colour it looks from here to me now, we check by having a better look,
by looking closer, by looking in a better light. Against the verdict of any
particular look an appeal lies; but where what is in question is colour, the
appeal can never go to a court higher than that of sight. With qualities
proper to other senses, or senses perceptible by more than one sense (the
‘common sensibles’), sight does not have the Wnal verdict (Metaph. C. 5.
1010b15–18). So, generalizing: each sense is the Wnal judge in the case of its
proper object, though it has to get into the right condition and position to
judge. Where S1 and S2 tells us diVerent things about sensory properties, S1
is to be preferred over S2 if S1 is the proper sense, and S2 is the alien sense,
for the property in question. Between two verdicts of the proper sense, we
are to choose the one delivered in optimum conditions: near, not far;
healthy, not ill; awake not asleep; and so on.
It is thus that Aristotle seeks to avoid both Protagoras’ phenomenalism
and Plato’s intellectualism. He insists that our knowledge depends on the
senses both for the concepts we employ and for the unproved premisses
from which we start. We form concepts thus: Wrst there is sensation and
then there is memory; memories build up into experience and out of
individual experience we form a universal concept, which is the basis of
both practical skill (techne) and theoretical knowledge (episteme) (APo. 19.
100a3). It is for experience, Aristotle says in the Prior Analytics (1. 30 46a17–22),
to provide the principles of any subject. Astronomers begin with their
163
EPISTEMOLOGY

experience of the heavens, and only after mastering astronomical phenom-
ena do they go on to seek causes and oVer proofs. A similar method should
be adopted in the life sciences (APr. 1. 1. 639b7–10, 640b14–18).
Science begins, but does not end, with experience, and, like Plato,
Aristotle has an elaborate classiWcation of cognitive and intellectual
states. Both philosophers regard moral virtue and intellectual excellence
as two species of a particular genus; but whereas Plato (no doubt under
the inXuence of Socrates) tended to treat virtue as if it was a special kind
of science, Aristotle treats science as a special kind of virtue. The Aristotelian
counterpart of Plato’s anatomy of knowledge occurs in one of the common
books of the Ethics (NE 6, EE 5) where he is dealing with intellectual virtues.
The Greek word ‘arete’ corresponds to both ‘virtue’ and ‘excellence’; so
I shall leave it, in the present context, untranslated.
The nature of the arete of anything depends upon its ergon, that is to say
its job or characteristic output. The ergon of the mind and all its faculties is
the production of true and false judgements (NE 6. 2. 1139a29). That, at
least, is its ergon in the sense of its characteristic activity, its output whether
it is working well or ill; its activity when it is working well and doing its job,
and therefore its ergon in the strict sense, is truth alone (2. 1139b12). The
intellectual aretai, then, are excellences that make an intellectual part of the
soul come out with truth. There are Wve states of mind that have this
eVect—techne, episteme, phronesis, sophia, nous—which we may translate as skill,
science, wisdom, understanding, and insight (3. 1139b16–17).
Skill and wisdom are both forms of practical knowledge: knowledge of
what to do and how to bring things about. Skills, such as architecture or
medicine, are exercised in the production (poiesis) of something other than
their exercise, whether their output is concrete, like a house, or abstract,
like health. Wisdom, on the other hand, is concerned with human activity
(praxis) itself rather than with its output: it is deWned as a ratiocinative
excellence that ascertains the truth concerning what is good and bad for
human beings (4. 1140b5, b21).
It is characteristic of the wise man to deliberate well about goods
attainable by action: he is not concerned with things that cannot be
other than they are (7. 1141b9–13). Thus wisdom diVers from science and
understanding, which are concerned with unchanging and eternal
matters. The rational part of the soul is divided into two parts: the logistikon
that deliberates and the epistemonikon that is concerned with the eternal
164
EPISTEMOLOGY

truths. Each of these parts has its proper arete: wisdom for the former and
understanding for the latter. Other intellectual virtues turn out to be parts
of either phronesis or sophia: sophia, for instance, consists of nous plus episteme
(7. 1141b3–4).
Sophia, Aristotle tells us, has as its subject matter divine, honourable, and
useless things: it is what was practised by famous philosophers such as
Thales and Anaxagoras. What nous is, is not immediately clear: it is a word
often used for the whole human intellectual apparatus, for the cognitive as
opposed to the aVective part of the mind (cf. 1. 1139a17, 2. 1139b5). Here,
however, it appears to mean insight into the Wrst principles of theoretical
science: the understanding of unproven necessary truths which is the basis
of episteme (6. 1140b31–41a9). It is this which, in conjunction with episteme,
constitutes sophia, the highest human intellectual achievement.
The Ethics does not spell out what is involved in episteme or science. That is
laid out, explicitly and at length, in the Wrst six chapters of Posterior Analytics
1. Aristotle accepts that to know something is the case is to be genuinely
acquainted with the explanation of its being the case and to be aware that it
cannot be otherwise. If that is what knowledge is, Aristotle says, ‘It is
necessary for demonstrative knowledge to depend on things that are
true and primitive and immediate and better known than the conclusion,
to which they must also be prior and of which they must be explanatory’
(APo. 1. 2. 70a20–2). A body of scientiWc knowledge is built up out of
demonstrations. A demonstration is a particular kind of syllogism: one
whose premisses can be traced back to principles that are true, necessary,
universal, and immediately intuited. These Wrst, self-evident principles are
related to the conclusions of science as axioms to theorems.
There is an unsolved problem about the account of science in the Posterior
Analytics: it bears no resemblance to the substantial corpus of Aristotle’s
own scientiWc works. Generations of scholars have tried in vain to Wnd in
his writings a single instance of a demonstrative syllogism. To be sure, the
Posterior Analytics is not a treatise on scientiWc method, but a set of guidelines
for scientiWc exposition.4 But Aristotle’s treatises are themselves expository,
not methodological, and they do not even approximate to the pattern of
the Posterior Analytics.
4 See J. Barnes, ‘Aristotle’s Theory of Demonstration’, in J. Barnes, M. SchoWeld, and
R. Sorabji (eds.), Articles on Aristotle, i: Science (London: Duckworth, 1975).
165
EPISTEMOLOGY

It is not only the Aristotelian corpus that lacks an Aristotelian science:
the whole history of scientiWc endeavour contains no perfect instance of
any such science. Many of the examples given by Aristotle are drawn from
arithmetic or geometry, and his thought was clearly inXuenced by the
mathematicians of his time. When, after Aristotle’s death, Euclid presented
his axiomatized geometry, it looked as if the scientiWc ideal of the Posterior
Analytics had been fulWlled: but after more than two millennia it was
discovered that one of Euclid’s axioms lacked the necessary self-evidence.
A similar fate, in the twentieth century, overtook Gottlob Frege’s project of
axiomatizing logic and arithmetic. Spinoza’s seventeenth-century attempt
to axiomatize philosophy itself served only to show that the ideal held up
in the Posterior Analytics was a will-o’-the-wisp.
Epicurean Epistemology
In the Hellenistic period epistemology came to occupy a more fundamen-
tal position in philosophy than it had done for either Plato or Aristotle.
It was Epicurus who Wrst gave it a name as a separate branch of philosophy.
He called it ‘canonic’, from the Greek word ‘kanon’, meaning a rule
or measuring rod. More often than ‘canon’ Epicurus and other Hellenistic
philosophers made use of the word ‘criterion’. According to Epicurus
the three criteria of truth are sensations, concepts (prolepseis), and feelings.
Sensation is the foundation of knowledge for Epicurus, and he held a
strong form of the thesis that the senses are infallible with regard to their
proper objects. This is set forth elegantly by Lucretius:
Truth’s very notion from the senses came.
What witness, then, to challenge them can claim?
Against the senses’ faith to win the day
What greater truth can chase the false away?
What right has reason sense to criticize
When from false sense that reason took its rise?
If what the senses tell us is not true
Then reason’s self is naught but falsehood too.
Can ears deliver verdict on the eyes?
Can touch convict the ears, or taste the touch, of lies?
(4. 478–87)
166
EPISTEMOLOGY

The opening of a book of Lucretius’ De Rerum Natura in an illuminated manuscript from
the British Library

Lucretius, like Aristotle, points out that one sense cannot be corrected
by another with regard to its proper object. But the Epicureans go
further than Aristotle in claiming a sense cannot even correct its
own impressions: each impression is of equal reliability and hence
whatever appears to a sense at any time is true (Lucretius 4. 497–9;
D.L. 10. 31).
By treating all appearances as on a par, instead of grading them in terms
of reliability, Epicureans rule out Aristotle’s method of dealing with con-
Xicting impressions, such as that of a tower that looks round from a
distance but square close up. Instead, they claim that in such a case we
have two equally valid impressions, but impressions of diVerent objects.
Sextus Empiricus explains how Epicurus would deal with the problem, by
invoking his atomistic explanation of sight as an encounter with a stream
of images Xowing from an object of vision.
I would not say that sight is deceived when from a great distance it sees a tower
as small and round, and from nearby as large and square. Rather, it is quite
correct. When what is perceived appears small and so-shaped, it really is small and
shaped like that, because the edges of the images have been rubbed oV as a result of
their journey through the air. And when it appears big and of a diVerent shape,
once again it really is big and of that shape. But the two are not the same.
(M. 7. 208)
Our common impression that these are two glimpses of the same thing,
Epicurus says, is due not to perception but to ‘distorted belief’. He deals in a
similar way with other objections to the infallibility of sensation, such as
dreams and delusions. When Orestes thought he saw the Furies, his sight
was not deceived because there were genuine images present; it was his
mind that erred in taking them as solid bodies (S.E., M. 8. 63). We must
distinguish sharply between a sense-impression (phantastike epibole) and an
accompanying, but distinct, belief (D.L. 10. 51).
Sensations, therefore, the Wrst criteria of truth, in spite of their
infallibility, provide only a rather slender base for the structure of our
knowledge. We need to turn to the second set of criteria, namely concepts.
Epicurus’ word ‘prolepsis’ is often translated ‘preconceptions’, but that
is misleading, partly because it suggests prejudice, partly because it suggests
something that would be expressed by a whole proposition, while most
of the examples we are given are expressed by single words, such as
‘body’, ‘man’, ‘cow’, ‘red’. A concept is a general notion of what kind of
168
EPISTEMOLOGY

thing is signiWed by such a word (which may, of course, be expressed in a
sentence of paraphrase, such as ‘A cow is an animal of such-and-such
a kind’). The ‘pro’ in ‘prolepsis’ is meant to indicate that a concept of X is
not a set of information about X derived from experience, but rather
a template by which we recognize in advance whether an individual
presented in experience is or is not an X. Concepts are not things that
have to be proved: they are themselves employed in any proof (D.L. 10. 33,
38). It remains obscure, in both Epicurus and his followers, whence
concepts originate. They cannot all be the result of experience, since
they provide the means by which we sort sensations, which are the basis
of experience. But some of them do seem to be the result of experience—
perhaps misinterpreted experience, like the concept of God (Lucretius
5. 1169–71).
Sensations and concepts, for Epicurus, are both ‘evident’ (so too are
feelings, but they will be considered in a diVerent context). It is on
these evident elements that we must base our beliefs in what is not evident.
We start with the senses, he said, and then must infer the non-evident by
reasoning from their testimony (D.L. 10. 39). Conjectures and theories
are false if the senses bear witness against them (D.L. 10. 50–1). A conjecture
is true if it is conWrmed by the senses; a theory is true if it is not impugned
by the senses (S.E., M. 213). The latter claim seems surprising: may not
more than one incompatible theory be consistent with the evidence?
The Epicureans accepted this possibility; thus Lucretius accepts that there
may be diVerent explanations of the movements of the stars, just as
there may be diVerent hypotheses about the cause of death of a corpse
on a slab (6. 703–11). In such a case they should all be accepted: each
of them is likely to be true in one or other of the many worlds in
the universe, even if we do not know which is true in our world
(5. 526–33).
Stoic Epistemology
The early Stoics shared with the Epicureans a number of assumptions about
the nature of knowledge. Like them, they believed it must have a dual basis
of infallible sense-impressions and primitive and acquired concepts. On the
topic of concepts they are more informative than the Epicureans, and they
169
EPISTEMOLOGY

give an account of their origin that closely resembles Aristotle’s. When a
man is born, his mind is like a blank sheet of paper, and as he develops
towards the use of reason, concepts are written on the page. The earliest
concepts come from the senses: individual experiences leave behind
memory, and memory builds up experience. Some concepts are acquired
from teaching or devised for a purpose; others arise naturally and spontan-
eously, and it is these that deserve the name ‘prolepsis’ (LS 39e). Concepts of
this kind are common to all humans: disagreement arises only when they
are applied to particular cases, as when the same action is described by one
man as courageous and by another as lunatic (Epictetus 1. 22. 3).
The Stoics developed a more elaborate classiWcation of mental states
than ever the Epicureans did. They wanted to propound an epistemology
that would withstand sceptical challenge. In addition to the two states of
knowledge (episteme) and belief (doxa) that had been contrasted since Plato,
they introduced a third state, cognition (katalepsis).5 The Stoics, Sextus
Empiricus tells us,
say there are three things connected to each other, knowledge and belief and
located between them cognition. Knowledge is cognition that is sound and Wrm
and unchangeable by argument; belief is weak and false assent, and cognition is in
between the two: it is assent to a cognitive appearance. (M 7. 150–1)
A new element is here added to the deWnition of knowledge: knowledge is
unchangeable by argument. This seems a sound insight. If I claim to know
that p, I am claiming, among other things, that no one is going to (rightly)
argue me out of believing that p. This is unlike the case where I believe that
p but am open to conviction that not-p. This latter is what is meant by
saying that belief is weak assent. It is also (possibly) false: there is nothing
absurd in saying ‘X believes that p, but it is false that p’ as there is in saying
‘X knows that p, but it is false that p’. But the most interesting point in this
passage is the deWnition of cognition in terms of cognitive appearance
(phantasia kataleptike).
‘Appearance’ is a broad term, including not only what appears to the
senses but candidates for belief of other kinds. Cognitions, likewise, may
result from the senses or from reason (D.L. 7. 52). An appearance is not the
5 This translation is now standard, being used by Long and Sedley (LS 254) and Frede (CHHP
296 V.). I use it with reluctance, since the word ‘cognition’ is associated with much confusion in
modern philosophy of mind.
170
EPISTEMOLOGY

same thing as a belief: belief involves an extra item, namely assent; assent,
unlike appearance, is a voluntary matter. An appearance is cognitive if it is
worthy of assent. Cognition is between knowledge and belief in that, unlike
belief, it is never false, and unlike knowledge, it does not involve the
resolution never to change one’s mind.6
A cognitive appearance, we are told, is ‘that which arises from what is
and is stamped and impressed exactly in accordance with what is’ (D.L. 7.
46; Cicero, Acad. 2. 77). Well and good: clearly such an impression (as we
may call it) is worthy of assent. A wise man will have no mere beliefs, Zeno
said (Cicero, Acad. 2. 77); and no doubt this can be achieved if the wise man
assents only to cognitive appearances. But how do I know whether an
appearance is cognitive or not? Is it a matter of an appearance being so clear
and distinct that it actually forces my assent, so that I cannot help but
believe? Or does it have certain features that I can use as a criterion by
which I decide to confer an assent that I might have withheld? Our
evidence is not totally clear, but we are given some indications by the
examples that survive.
First, we are told that the impressions of the insane are not cognitive.
(Sometimes, indeed, the Stoics denied that they were genuine impressions,
calling them instead ‘phantasms’; D.L. 7. 49.) They ‘arise purely externally
and fortuitously, so that they are often not positive about them and do not
assent to them’ (S.E., M. 7. 248). But suppose they do assent to them: clearly
that does not make them cognitive, since they are not true and only a true
appearance can be cognitive. But what epistemological rule have the insane
violated? Well, perhaps they have not examined the degree of detail in their
impression: for a second piece of information we are given is that a
cognitive impression must be highly comprehensive, so that all the char-
acteristics of its original are reproduced. ‘Just as the seals on rings always
stamp their features accurately on the wax, so those impressions that create
cognition of objects should incorporate all their peculiarities’ (S.E.,
M. 2. 750). However, if cognitive impressions are ones that are fully
comprehensive in detail, they must be very few and far between.
Perhaps, we might conjecture, cognitive impressions have a specially
persuasive quality that marks them out. The Stoics did indeed classify
impressions in terms of their persuasiveness into four classes:
6 So Frede, CHHP 296 V.
171
EPISTEMOLOGY

(1) Persuasive; e.g. ‘It is day’, ‘I am talking’.
(2) Unpersuasive; e.g. ‘If it is dark, it is day’.
(3) Persuasive and unpersuasive; e.g. philosophical paradoxes.
(4) Neither persuasive nor unpersuasive; e.g. ‘The number of all the
stars is odd’.
However, persuasiveness is not a guarantee of truth: the bent appear-
ance of an oar in water is persuasive enough, but is a false impression
for all that. No doubt a man who is wise will resist the temptation
to accept all persuasive appearances, and will restrict his assent to
appearances that are not only persuasive but reasonable. Thus, Posido-
nius tells us, in addition to oVering cognitive impressions as the criter-
ion of truth, some older Stoics identiWed the criterion as being right
reason (D.L. 7. 54).
However, the matter is further complicated. In addition to cognitive
impressions there are reasonable impressions. A Stoic, trapped by King
Ptolemy Philopator into taking wax pomegranates for the genuine article,
replied that he had given his assent not to the proposition that they were
pomegranates, but to the proposition that it was reasonable (eulogon) to
believe that they were. A reasonable impression, he said, was compatible
with falsehood (D.L. 7. 177) If so, it seems, the assessment of whether an
appearance is or is not cognitive cannot be a matter of reason. The early
Stoics give us no further assistance in determining the identifying feature of
cognitive impressions.
The weakness of the Stoic position was exposed by Arcesilaus, the head
of the New Academy during the latter part of the third century. He
challenged the Stoic deWnition of a cognitive impression as ‘something
stamped and impressed from something that is, exactly as it is’. Could there
not be, he asked, a false impression indiscernible from a true one? Zeno
agreed that if an impression was such that there could be a false one exactly
like it, then (even if true) it could not be a cognitive impression. Accord-
ingly he modiWed the deWnition, adding ‘and of such a kind that it could
not arise from what is not’ (Cicero, Acad. 2. 77; S.E., M. 7. 251). But it is not
clear how the Stoics were to establish in which cases such unmistakable
distinguishing marks were to be found, or respond to a sceptical claim that
wherever there was a true appearance a false indiscernible replica could
be imagined.
172
EPISTEMOLOGY

Academic Scepticism
It is not surprising that Stoic epistemology should be challenged from
a sceptical angle. It was surprising, however, that the challenge should
come from the Academy, from the heirs of Plato. Surely the Platonic
corpus contains some of the most dogmatic philosophy ever to be devised.
The leaders of the later Academy, however, Arcesilaus and his successor,
Carneades, traced their ancestry further back. They appealed to Socrates,
whose question and answer technique so famously punctured false claims
to knowledge (Cicero, Fin. 2. 2). Socrates himself claimed no philosophical
knowledge, and left no philosophical writings; and Arcesilaus and
Carneades followed him in both respects. But they went further
than Socrates in commending a much more radical scepticism: a suspen-
sion of belief not only on philosophical but also on the most everyday
topics.
Though Arcesilaus and Carneades left no writings, we are reasonably
well informed about their philosophical teachings because Cicero, who had
been taught by Carneades’ pupil Philo, was much attracted to Academic
Scepticism, and left a lively account of the to and fro of sceptical debate in
his Academica. From him and other sources we learn that the Academics
presented a battery of arguments to show that there could be no infallible
impressions.
There is no true impression arising from sensation that cannot be paired
with another impression, indistinguishable from it, which is non-cognitive.
But if two impressions are indistinguishable, it cannot be the case that one
of them is cognitive and the other not. Therefore no impression, even if
true, is cognitive. To illustrate this argument, consider the case of identical
twins, Publius Geminus and Quintus Geminus. If someone looking at
Publius thinks he is looking at Quintus, he has an impression that corres-
ponds in every detail to the one he would have if he were in fact looking at
Quintus. Hence, his impression is not a cognitive one: it does not answer to
the Wnal clause of Zeno’s deWnition: ‘of such a kind as could not arise from
what is not’ (Cicero, Acad. 2. 83–5).
In reply, the Stoics seem to have denied the possibility of any pair of
objects resembling each other in every respect. They propounded the thesis
later known as the identity of indiscernibles: no two grains of sand, no two
wisps of hair, were totally alike. The Academics complained that the thesis
173
EPISTEMOLOGY

was gratuitous; but it is surely no more gratuitous than their own claim
that true impressions are always liable to be confused with false replicas.
In fact, the Stoic reply seems to be either unnecessary or insuYcient,
depending on how we interpret the sceptical challenge. If only a genuine
possibility of a mistake prevents an impression from being cognitive, then
in order to preserve cognitive impressions the Stoic need not claim that in
all cases a true impression will be irreplaceable by a false one: he need only
claim that there are some cases in which this is so. On the other hand, if the
mere imaginability of a deceptive replica is suYcient to undermine the
cognitivity of an impression, then the identity of indiscernibles will not
restore it. I may be as certain as I am of anything that I am talking to you:
but isn’t it imaginable that you have an identical twin, quite unknown to
me, and that it is he whom I am addressing?
There are various degrees of scepticism. A sceptic may simply be some-
one who denies the possibility of genuine knowledge (in some, or all, areas
of inquiry). Such a sceptic need have no objection to the holding of beliefs
on various topics, provided that the person holding them does not claim
that those beliefs have the status of knowledge. He may very well have a set
of beliefs himself, including the belief that there is no such thing as
knowledge. There is no inconsistency here, provided he does not claim
to know that there is no knowledge. Arcesilaus went so far as to reprove
Socrates for claiming to know that he knew nothing (Cicero, Acad. 1. 45).
A more radical sceptic, however, may question not only the possibility of
knowledge but also the propriety of belief. He may recommend abstinence
from not only the resolute assent characteristic of certainty, but also the
tentative assent characteristic of opinion. Arcesilaus appears to have been a
sceptic of this kind: he maintained, Cicero tells us (Acad. 1. 44; LS 68a), ‘no
one should assert or aYrm anything or oVer it assent; instead we should
curb our rashness and hold it back from any slip. It would be rash indeed to
approve something false or unknown, and nothing is more disgraceful
than to allow assent and approval to outrun cognition.’ Arcesilaus made a
practice of oVering arguments pro and con every thesis, so as to facilitate
the suspension of assent that he recommended (Fin. 5. 10). Scholars are
uncertain whether his arguments were all purely ad hominem or whether he
did (inconsistently) assert as true his own sceptical philosophical position.7
7 See SchoWeld, in CHHP 334.
174
EPISTEMOLOGY

According to some of our ancient sources, Carneades was a sceptic of the
less radical kind who, while rejecting the possibility of knowledge, accepted
that the wise man could legitimately hold mere belief. The two Academics
focus their attack on Zeno at diVerent points. Zeno held that no wise man
would hold mere belief, but if he relied only on cognitive impressions his
assents would all count as knowledge. Arcesilaus and Carneades agree
with each other that there are no cognitive impressions and therefore no
knowledge, but the former concludes that the wise man will give no assent,
while the latter concludes that the wise man will hold mere belief (Cicero,
Acad. 2. 148).
On another account, however, in evaluating Carneades’ position we
need to make a more subtle analysis of the mental phenomena studied by
the epistemologist. Instead of simply distinguishing between an appearance
and assent to the appearance, we have to introduce a new notion of
impulse (horme). While assent is voluntary and can be withheld, appearance,
we know, is outside our control. But appearance is inevitably followed by
impulse, and it is possible to follow this without the mental assent in which
truth is to be found and falsehood to be avoided (Plutarch, adversus Coloten
1122 LS 69a; Cicero, Acad. 2. 103–4 LS 69i).
This distinction appears to have been introduced in order to answer a
common objection to radical scepticism: if the sceptic suspends judgement,
how can he live a normal life. How can he get into a bath if, for all he
knows, it is a chasm? The answer is that he does not judge, rashly, that it
really is a bath; but he is swept along by his bath-entering impulse. In non-
philosophical discussions a wise man may even follow his impulses so far as
to give the answers ‘yes’ and ‘no’ to questions.
Pyrrhonian Scepticism
In the Wrst century bc there grew up a new fundamentalist school of
scepticism which regarded the Academics as having watered down scepti-
cism in unacceptable ways. The founder of this school was Aenesidemus,
but he and his followers described their version of scepticism as Pyrrhon-
ism, after Pyrrho of Elis, a soldier in the army of Alexander the Great,
whom they regarded as their founding father. Aenesidemus wrote a lost
book of Pyrrhonian discourses that set out his diVerences with Academic
175
EPISTEMOLOGY

Scepticism. He collected together sceptical arguments of the kind that we
have encountered in this chapter, and grouped them under ten headings,
which achieved fame as the Ten Tropes of Aenesidemus. Our knowledge of
them, as of much else in ancient scepticism, derives from the writings of
Sextus Empiricus, a Pyrrhonian sceptic of the second century ad.
Sextus left three books of Outlines of Pyrrhonism and eleven books Against the
Professors. In these books appear almost all the sceptical arguments from
illusion that appeared in the later literature, and many that no one cared to
use again. We Wnd in him the yellow look of jaundice, the after-image on
the book, vision distorted by pressure on the eyeball, concave and convex
mirrors, wine which tastes sour after Wgs and sweet after nuts, ships
apparently stationary on the horizon, oars bent in water, smells more
pungent in the bathroom, the Xeeting Xashes of colour on the necks of
pigeons, and, of course, our old friend the tower that looks round from
afar and square close at hand.
Sextus’ own version of scepticism turns out not to be as diVerent from
Academic Scepticism as he would have us believe. Sceptics, without giving
assent to anything, still seem, for him, to be able to have views, not only
about perceptual matters of everyday life, but even on philosophical issues.
Sextus’ works are of value to us, not because they give a new turn to the
sceptical discussion, but because they are a treasury of information about
the reasoning of earlier and more original sceptics. He brought to an end
the sceptical tradition he chronicled.
The study of ancient epistemology can teach us much about the nature
of knowledge and the limits of scepticism. Several insights became part of
the patrimony of all future philosophy: knowledge can only be of what is
true; knowledge is only knowledge if it can appeal implicitly or explicitly to
some kind of support, whether from experience, reasoning, or some other
source; and one who claims knowledge must be resolute, excluding the
possibility of being rightly converted, at a later stage, to a diVerent view.
However, ancient epistemology is bedevilled by two diVerent but related
fallacies. Both of them are generated by a misunderstanding of the truth
that whatever is knowledge must be true. One of the fallacies haunts
classical epistemology, up to the time of Aristotle; the other fallacy haunts
Hellenistic and imperial epistemology.
The Wrst fallacy is this. ‘Whatever is knowledge must be true’ may be
interpreted in two ways.
176
EPISTEMOLOGY

(1) Necessarily, if p is known, p is true
or
(2) If p is known, p is necessarily true.
(1) is true but (2) is false. It is a necessary truth that if I know you are sitting
down, then you are sitting down; but if I know you are sitting down it is
not a necessary truth that you are sitting down; you may get up at any
moment. Plato and Aristotle, over and over again, seem to regard (2) as
indistinguishable from (1). Given the necessary connection between know-
ledge and truth, they seem to think, only what is necessary can be known.
From the acceptance of (2) there Xows the construction of the theory of
eternal and immutable Ideas, and there Xows the impossible ideal of
Aristotelian science.
If whatever is knowledge must be true, then it may seem that knowledge
must be the exercise of a faculty that cannot err. This is the form that the
fallacy takes in Hellenistic times. The Epicureans and Stoics, unlike Plato
and Aristotle, are prepared to countenance knowledge not just of eternal
truths, but of mundane contingencies such as that Dion is now walking.
But this, they claim, is possible only if we have faculties—whether sense or
reason—that are capable of infallible operation. This Hellenistic fallacy is
just the mirror image of the classical fallacy. Let F stand for some faculty.
Then it is true that
It is impossible, if F knows that p, that F has gone wrong.
But that is not the same as, nor is it true that,
If F knows that p, then it was impossible for F to go wrong.
The epistemological fallacy, both in its classical and in its Hellenistic form,
would cast long shadows through philosophy’s history.
177
EPISTEMOLOGY

5
How Things Happen:
Physics
I
n earlier chapters we saw how Greek thinkers, from Thales to Plato,
developed an elaborate picture of the universe we live in. Though
of great historic interest, their physical theories have been superseded by
the progress of science, and can no longer oVer us enlightenment
about the world. The same is true of Aristotle’s world-picture; but in
addition to physical speculation, Aristotle oVered, to a much greater extent
than any of his predecessors, a philosophical examination of underlying
concepts that are basic to physical explanation of many diVerent kinds. His
philosophy of physics, unlike his physical system itself, contains much that
remains of abiding interest.
The second of Aristotle’s categories is the category of quantity: this is the
one that answers to the question ‘how big?’, and Aristotle has in mind
answers such as ‘four feet long’, ‘six feet high’ (Cat. 4. 1b28). There are two
kinds of quantities, he tells us, discrete and continuous. A discrete quantity
would be, for example, an army of a thousand men (cf. Metaph. D 13.
1020a7); as examples of continuous quantities, we are given lines, surfaces,
bodies, time, and place (Cat. 6. 4b20 V.). Aristotle’s treatment of the con-
tinuum and of continuous quantities is fundamental to his philosophy of
physics, and the Wrst part of this chapter will be devoted to these topics.
The Continuum
At the beginning of book 6 of the Physics Aristotle introduces three terms to
indicate diVerent relationships between quantiWed items: they may be

successive (ephexes), adjacent (hama), or continuous (syneches). Two items are
successive if between them there is nothing of the same kind as themselves.
Thus, two islands in an archipelago are successive if there is only sea
between them; two days are successive if there is no day, but only
night, between them. Two items are adjacent, Aristotle says, if they have
two boundaries in contact with each other, and they are continuous if
there is only a single common boundary between them (231a18–25). He
uses these deWnitions to base an argument that a continuum cannot
be composed of indivisible atoms.
A line, for instance, cannot be composed of points that lack magnitude.
Since a point has no parts, it cannot have a boundary distinct from itself:
two points therefore cannot be either adjacent or continuous. If you say
that the boundary of a point is identical with the point itself, then two
points that were continuous would be one and the same point. Nor can
points be successive to each other: between any two points on a continuous
line we can always Wnd other points on the same line (231a29–b15).
Similar reasoning, Aristotle says, applies to spatial magnitude, to time,
and to motion: all three are continua of the same kind. Time cannot be
composed of indivisible moments, because between any two moments
there is always a period of time; and an atom of motion would in fact
have to be a moment of rest.
Divisibility, indeed, is a deWning feature of quantity or magnitude, and
is so used in Aristotle’s lexicon of philosophical terms in Metaphysics
D (1020a7): ‘We call a quantity whatever is divisible into two or more
constituent parts of which each is of a kind to be a single individual entity.’
We shall have to explore later what ‘being of a kind to be an individual’
amounts to.
Points or moments, therefore, which were indivisible would lack mag-
nitude, and zero magnitude, however often repeated, could never add up
to any magnitude. By another route, therefore, we reach the conclusion
that a continuous quantity is not composed of indivisible items. If a
magnitude can only be divided into other magnitudes, and every magni-
tude must be divisible, it follows that every magnitude is inWnitely divisible.
Aristotle’s notion of inWnite divisibility is not easy to grasp, and he was
fully aware of this. In On Generation and Corruption he spells out at length a line
of objection to his thesis, and suggests that it was the line of argument that
led Democritus to espouse atomism. The argument goes like this.
179
PHYSICS

If matter is divisible to inWnity, then let us suppose that this division has
been carried out—for if matter is genuinely so divisible, there will be
nothing incoherent in this supposition. How large are the fragments
resulting from this division? If they have any magnitude at all, then, on
the hypothesis of inWnite divisibility, it would be possible to divide them
further; so they must be fragments with no extension, like a geometrical
point. But whatever can be divided can be put together again: if we saw a
log into many pieces, even pieces as small as sawdust, we can put them
together again into a log of the same size. But if our fragments have no
magnitude, then how can they ever have added up to make the extended
chunk of matter with which we began? Matter cannot consist of mere
geometrical points, not even of an inWnite number of them, so we have to
conclude that divisibility comes to an end, and the smallest possible
fragments must be bodies with sizes and shapes (1. 2. 316a14–317a3).
Aristotle in several places sets out to answer this diYculty (Ph. 3. 6.
206a18–25; 7. 207b14). ‘Divisible to inWnity’, he insists, means ‘unendingly
divisible’, not ‘divisible into inWnitely many parts’. However often a magni-
tude has been divided, it can always be divided further. It is inWnitely
divisible in the sense that there is no end to its divisibility. The continuum
does not have an inWnite number of parts; indeed Aristotle regarded the
idea of an actually inWnite number as incoherent. The inWnite, he says, has
only a potential existence (3. 6. 206a18).
This is a sound answer to the Democritean argument: but Aristotle goes
on to gild the lily. He oVers a distinction between diVerent kinds of
potentiality. A block of marble has the potentiality to become a statue:
when this is realized, the statue will be there, all of it at once. But the parts
into which a temporal period or series can be divided have a diVerent kind
of potentiality. They cannot be all there at once: when I wake up, the day
ahead contains both morning and afternoon, but they cannot both occur
at once.
This seems an injudicious move, on several counts. First of all, Aristotle
is defending a thesis about the continuum in general: it seems perverse to
defend it by appealing to a property which may be peculiar to a particular
form of continuum, namely time. Secondly, the argument for the inWnite
divisibility of the continuum is not concerned with the process of division.
Democritus, in the argument Aristotle oVers him, says that if something is
inWnitely divisible, it does not matter whether the division can be carried
180
PHYSICS

out simultaneously, the question is whether the result of the division is
something coherently conceivable (GC 1. 2. 316a18). Thirdly, the contrast
with the potentiality of producing a statue is a false trail.
In one of his sonnets Michelangelo gives a powerful evocation of the
potentialities inherent in a block of marble.
There’s not a concept in an artist’s mind,
However great, but in a marble block
It’s hidden there for someone to unlock
Whose intellect can teach his hand to Wnd.1
The simultaneous actualization, from a single block of marble, of all the
concepts of all the greatest artists would be just as impossible as the
simultaneous actualization of all the parts of the continuum. In general,
it is a fallacy to argue from
(1) It is both possible that p and possible that q
to
(2) It is possible that both p and q,
and to see this one has only to look at the case where ‘q’ is ‘not p’. Hence, in
order to answer Democritus, Aristotle does not need to introduce his
distinction between powers that are, and powers that are not, simultan-
eously actualizable. It is suYcient to point out (as he does; GC 1. 2. 317a8)
that there is a diVerence between saying that whatever is continuous can be
divided at any point and saying that whatever is continuous can be divided
at every point.
But we should look more closely at the sonnet. While the hand and
intellect of Michelangelo were unsurpassed at realizing the potentialities
of marble, it may be questioned whether his poem shows an adequate
philosophical grasp of the nature of potentiality. Clearly, he thinks of
potential statues as shadowy realities, already present there in some
mysterious way within the uncut marble. If one conceives of potentialities
as shadow actualities, then it seems that one can count them and
1 Non ha l’ottimo artista alcun concetto
Ch’un marmo solo in se` non circoscriva
Col suo soverchio, e solo a quello arriva
La man che ubbidisce all’intelletto.
181
PHYSICS

quantify over them. Whatever is inWnitely divisible, in that case, would
have an inWnite number of parts. But the temptation to think of
potentialities in this way must be resisted, whether in Michelangelo or in
Democritus.
Aristotle on Place
The Wfth of Aristotle’s categories is place, the answer to the question
‘where?’, of which a typical answer is ‘in the Lyceum’ (Cat. 4. 2a1). We are
not told anything further about this category in the Categories, but the fourth
book of the Physics contains six chapters on place (a diYcult topic, he tells us,
on which he has found no help from his predecessors; 4. 1. 208a32–3). Every
body, prima facie at least, is in some place, and can move from place to place.
The same place can be occupied at diVerent times by diVerent bodies, as a
Xask can contain Wrst water and then air. So place cannot be identical with
the body that occupies it (4. 1. 208b29–209a8). What, then, is it?
The answer that Aristotle eventually reaches is that the place of a thing
is the Wrst motionless boundary of whatever is containing it. Thus, the
Medieval imagination here shows Alexander the Great as Aristotle’s research assistant
exploring the sea-bed in a glass diving bell
182
PHYSICS

place of a pint of wine is the inner surface of the Xask containing it—
provided the Xask is stationary. But suppose the Xask is in motion, on a
punt perhaps Xoating down a river? Then the wine will be moving too,
from place to place, and its place has to be given by specifying its position
relative to the motionless river banks (4. 5. 212b15). So too with a tree in a
stream, surrounded by rushing water: its place is given by the unmoving
bed in which it is rooted.2
As is clear from these examples, for Aristotle a thing is not only in the
place deWned by its immediate container, but also in whatever contains that
container. Thus, just as a child may write out his address as 1 High Street,
Oxford, England, Europe, The Earth, The Universe, so Aristotle says, ‘You
are now in the universe because you are in the atmosphere and the
atmosphere is in the universe; and you are in the atmosphere because
you are on the earth, and you are on the earth because you are in your
own particular place.’ The universe is the place that is common to
everything.
If to be in place is to be within a container, it follows that the universe is
not in place at all: and this is a conclusion that Aristotle himself draws.
‘The universe is not anywhere; for whatever is somewhere must not only
exist itself, but also have something alongside it in which it is and which
contains it. But there is nothing outside the entire universe’ (Ph. 4. 5.
212b14–17). And if the universe is not in place, it cannot move from place
to place.
It is clear that place as described by Aristotle is quite diVerent from space
as often conceived since Newton as an inWnite extension or cosmic grid.
Newtonian space would exist whether or not the material universe had
been created. For Aristotle, if there were no bodies there would be no place;
there can, however, be a vacuum, a place empty of bodies, but only if the
place is bounded by actual bodies (4. 1. 208b26). His concept of place,
therefore, can avoid the diYculties that have led philosophers such as
Kant to deny the reality of space. However, he adds to his basic concept a
signiWcant element that is irredeemably anachronistic: the notion of
natural place.
In an ordered cosmos, Aristotle believed, each of the four elements,
earth, air, Wre, and water, had a natural place, which exercised a causal
2 See W. D. Ross, Aristotle, 86; id., Aristotle’s Physics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1936), 575.
183
PHYSICS

inXuence: air and Wre were by nature carried upward, water and earth were
carried downward. Each such motion was natural to its element; other
motions were possible, but were ‘violent’. In the universe as we Wnd it,
these natural motions are hindered by various factors, so that few things
are actually in their natural place; but the actual distribution of the
elements is to be explained inter alia by their tendency to seek their natural
place, the place where it is best for them to be (4. 1. 208b9–22). We preserve a
relic of Aristotle’s distinction between natural and violent motions when
we contrast natural with violent death. But none of Aristotle’s modern
admirers defends this rather class-bound vision of the universe, in which
each element knows its place and is happiest to be in the station to which
nature has assigned it.
Aristotle on Motion
Aristotle’s fundamental account of motion, however, is not vitiated by the
antiquated theory with which it was conjoined: indeed it was one of the
most subtle components of his philosophy of physics. ‘Motion’ (kinesis) was
for him a broad term, including changes in several diVerent categories,
such as growth in size or change in colour (Ph. 3. 1. 200b32). Movement
from place to place, however, local motion, provides a paradigm which can
be used to expound his theory.
The deWnition of motion that Aristotle oVers in the third book of the
Physics is not, at Wrst glance, very illuminating. ‘Motion’, he says, ‘is
the actuality of what is in potentiality, in so far as it is in potentiality.’
Let us spell this out. If a body X is to move from point A to point B, it must
be able to do so: when it is at A it is only potentially at B. When this
potentiality has been realized, then X is at B. But it is then at rest, and not
in motion. So motion from A to B is not simply the actualization of a
potential at A for being at B. Shall we say that it is a partial actualization of
that potentiality? That will not quite do, either, because a body stationary
at the mid-point between A and B might be said to have partially actualized
that potentiality. We have to say that it is an actualization of a potentiality
that is still being actualized: and that is what Aristotle’s deWnition amounts
to. While at A, the body has in fact two diVerent potentialities: a potential-
ity to be at B, and a potentiality to move to B. Aristotle illustrates the point
184
PHYSICS

with other examples of kinesis: the gradual heating of a body, the carving of
a statue, the healing of a patient, the building of a house (3. 1. 201a10–15).
Motion, he says, is a notion diYcult to grasp, and this is because it is as it
were halfway between straight potentiality and straight actuality. He sums
up his account in a slogan, saying that motion is an incomplete or
imperfect actuality of an imperfect potentiality (3. 2. 201b31). Being at B
would be the perfect actuality; moving to B is the imperfect actuality. The
potentiality for being at B is the perfect potentiality; the potentiality for
moving to B is the imperfect potentiality.
Motion is a continuum: a mere series of positions between A and B is not
a motion from A to B. If X is to move from A to B, it has to pass through
any intermediate point between A and B; but passing through a point is not
the same as being located at that point. Aristotle argues that whatever is
moving already has been moving. If X, travelling from A to B, passes
through the mid-point K, it must already have passed through an earlier
point J halfway between A and K. However short the distance between
A and J, that too is divisible, and so on ad inWnitum. At any point at which
X is moving, there will be an earlier point at which it was already moving
(cf. Ph. 6. 5. 236b33–5). It follows that there is no such thing as a Wrst instant
of motion.
Aristotle’s account of motion is embedded within a careful analysis of
the semantic properties of Greek verbs. English, unlike Greek, has a special
continuous form of each tense. The diVerence between ‘He runs’ and ‘He is
running’ is clear enough in English. So too is the diVerence between
‘Whatever moves has moved before’ (which is doubtful) and ‘Whatever is
moving has been moving before’ (which is true). In Greek Aristotle has to
go to some pains to make clear that he is talking not about whatever
moves, but whatever is moving. He does, however, maintain not just that
whatever is moving has been moving before, but that whatever is moving
has moved before (Ph. 5. 6. 237b5).
For Aristotle, there are some verbs that signify kineseis (motions) and
some that signify energeiai (actualities) (Metaph. h 6. 1048b18–36). Kinesis, as has
been said, includes not only motion but many diVerent kinds of change
and production: Aristotle gives as examples learning something, building a
particular house, walking to a particular place. As examples of energeiai he
gives seeing, knowing, and being happy. He distinguishes between his two
classes of verbs by means of subtle linguistic points.
185
PHYSICS

Verbs of the Wrst kind signify activities that are imperfect in the
following sense: if I am ðing, then I have not yet ðd (if I am still building
this house, I have not yet built it, and so on). The activities they signify are
activities that take time (NE 10. 4. 1174b8). Activities or achievements of the
second kind, however, do not take time, but rather last or continue over
time. A kinesis can be faster or slower, and can be completed or interrupted;
not so an energeia. I may learn something quickly, but I cannot know it
quickly; I may be interrupted while learning, but not while knowing (NE
10. 4. 1173a33; Metaph. H 6. 1048b19).
Energeiai such as knowing are states. Besides states such as knowledge,
there are secondary energeiai, or actualities that are the exercise of such
states. Thus, we have a triadic sequence: I learn Greek, I know Greek, I
speak Greek. Secondary actualities have some of the features of motions
and some of the features of activities: speaking Greek is not an imperfect
process towards a terminus, in the way that learning Greek is; on the other
hand it can be interrupted in a way that knowing Greek cannot.
Aristotle’s classiWcations can be looked on as a study in what grammar-
ians call the aspect of verbs, which, in Greek rather more than in English,
often gets entangled with the tense of verbs. We still use Aristotle’s termin-
ology in distinguishing, for instance, between the imperfect tense (which
tells was what was happening) and the perfect tense (which tells us what has
been done). We have already encountered Aristotle’s treatment of tense,
when in Chapter 3 we studied his treatment of past- and future-tense
propositions in the de Interpretatione. It is now appropriate to look at his
formal treatment of the topic of time in the Physics (4. 10–14).
Aristotle on Time
For Aristotle extension, motion, and time are three fundamental continua,
in an intimate and ordered relation to each other. His paradigm of change
is local motion, motion over distance: motion acquires its continuity from
the continuum of spatial extension. Time, in its turn, derives its continuity
from the continuity of motion (Ph. 4. 11. 219a10–14). Thus Aristotle’s
account of time is parasitic on his account of motion: his formal deWnition,
indeed, is this: time is the number of motion in respect of before and after
(4. 11. 219b1).
186
PHYSICS

Clearly motion and time are closely linked; but might not one question
the priority that Aristotle thus gives to motion? Motions, and changes of
any kind, are clearly impossible without time. If X is to move from A to B,
it must Wrst be at A and then be at B, and any change must involve an earlier
state and a later state. But is time impossible without motion? Can we not
conceive of a static, or indeed empty, universe enduring over a longer or
shorter period of time?
Aristotle believed not: where there was no motion there was no time
(4. 11. 219a1). Not that time is identical with motion: motions are motions
of particular things, and diVerent kinds of changes are motions of diVerent
kinds, but time is universal and uniform. Motions, again, may be faster or
slower; not so time. Indeed it is by the time they take that the speed of
motions is determined (4. 10. 218b9; 14. 223b4). Nonetheless, Aristotle says,
‘we perceive motion and time together’ (4. 11. 219a4).
We tell how much time has passed by observing the process of some
change. We, nowadays, Wnd out what the time is by Wnding out what point
the Wngers of the clock have reached in their journey round the clock face.
Analogous points can be made about whatever processes are being used as
clocks in hourglasses or clepsydras. More importantly, for Aristotle, we
measure days and months and years by observing the sun and moon and
stars upon their celestial travels.
The part of a journey that is nearer its starting point comes before the
part that is nearer its end. This spatial relation of nearer and further
underpins the relation of before and after in motion; and this is the ‘before’
and ‘after’ that appears in Aristotle’s deWnition of time. It is the before and
after in motion that provides the earlier and later in time. Thus temporal
order is, on Aristotle’s view, derived from the ultimately spatial ordering of
stretches of motion.
When Aristotle says that time is the number of motion, this ordering is
no doubt one of the things he has in mind: we can list parts of the motion
as Wrst, second, third, and so on. But he may well have in mind cardinal as
well as ordinal numbering, since time has a metric as well as a topological
element. We can often say not only that A came before B, but also how long
before. This seems implicit when Aristotle explains that when he speaks of
‘number’ he means what is counted, not the unit of counting (Ph. 4. 11.
219a9). To make it explicit he might have added to his deWnition that time is
numbering not only in respect of before and after, but also in respect of
187
PHYSICS

faster and slower. For as a proof of the universality of time he oVers the fact
that any change whatever can be measured in terms of velocity (Ph. 4. 13.
222b30).
What is the relationship between time as it appears in Aristotle’s deWni-
tion (the earlier–later series) and time as expressed by tense (past, present,
and future)? Aristotle links the two by his concept of ‘the now’ (to nun).
We say ‘earlier’ and ‘later’ with reference to distance from the now; and the now is
the boundary between the past and the future . . . But ‘earlier’ is used in opposite
ways in respect to past time and future time: in the past we call earlier that which
is further from the now, and later that which is nearer to the now; in the future
we call earlier that which is nearer to the now, and later that which is further
away. (Ph. 4. 14. 223a5–14)
Aristotle frequently talks of the ‘now’. He seems to use it for two diVerent
purposes: one, the most natural usage, to indicate present time; another,
more technical one, in which it seems to mean ‘instant’ or ‘moment’. In
this second use one can speak of earlier and later nows (Ph. 4. 10. 218b24; 11.
220a21). In the passage just quoted he appears to be amalgamating the two
uses, to mean ‘the present instant’. This is unfortunate, because the present
instant is an incoherent notion. ‘Present’ is an adjective applicable only to
periods, such as the present year or the present century. Instants are the
boundaries of periods, and future periods are bounded by future instants,
and past intervals by past instants. But present periods are bounded not by
present instants, but by two instants, one of which is past and the other
future. There is no instantaneous present.3
The thesis that the present is an instant sorts ill with another thesis to
which Aristotle attaches considerable importance, namely his claim that
there can be no motion at an instant. If now is an instant, and there is no
motion at an instant, then nothing is in motion now. This argument can
be repeated at any time whatever; so it seems that motion must be forever
unreal. But what, in any case, are we to make of this second thesis in its
own right?
We can readily agree that no object can move at an instant. There
cannot be movement between t and t, any more than there can be
3 G. E. L. Owen (‘Aristotle on Time’, in J. Barnes, M. SchoWeld, and R. Sorabji (eds.), Articles on
Aristotle, iii: Metaphysics (London: Duckworth, 1975), 151) suggests that the confusion here
originates in Plato’s Parmenides 152a–e and is not dispelled until Chrysippus.
188
PHYSICS

movement from A to A. But it does not follow from that that no object
can be moving at an instant, any more than that no object can be moving at a
point. Aristotle, however, is not just making a fallacious inference from
one acceptation of the Greek present tense to another; as we have seen, he
is well capable of steering his way through any possible semantic confusion
of this kind. He oVers an argument for the stronger conclusion, based on
the premiss we have already seen: that whatever is moving has already been
moving. But the correct conclusion to draw from this argument is not that
nothing can be moving at a moment, but that nothing can be moving for a
single moment only.
The truth that lies behind Aristotle’s claim is that we can only talk of X
moving at time t if t is a moment within a period of time, t0 to t00, during
which X is in movement; just as we can only talk of X moving at point p if p
is a point on a track between p0 and p00 along which X is in movement. The
notion of velocity at a point is then a derivative (which may be simple or
complex, depending on the movement’s uniformity or lack of it) from the
length of time, t0 to t00, that X takes to get from p0 to p00.
Aristotle on Causation and Change
In his philosophical lexicon in Metaphysics D, and also in Physics 2. 3
(194b16–195b30), Aristotle distinguishes four types of cause, or explanation.
First, he says, there is that of which and out of which a thing is made, such
as the bronze of a statue and the letters of a syllable. This is called the
material cause. Secondly, he says, there is the form and pattern of a thing,
which may be expressed in its deWnition: his example is that the proportion
of the length of two strings in a lyre is the cause of one note being an octave
away from the other. The third type of cause is the origin of a change or
state of rest in something; Aristotle’s followers often called it the ‘eYcient
cause’. Aristotle gives as examples a person reaching a decision, a father
who begets a child, a sculptor carving a statue, a doctor healing a patient,
and in general anyone who makes a thing or changes a thing. The fourth
and last type of cause is the end or goal, that for the sake of which
something is done; it is the type of explanation we give if someone asks
us why we are taking a walk, and we reply ‘In order to keep healthy’. This
last kind of cause became known as the ‘Wnal cause’.
189
PHYSICS

In modern philosophy causation is standardly thought of as a relation
between two events, one being cause and the other eVect. Clearly, Aristotle
structures causation rather diVerently. He does occasionally speak of events
causing events (the Athenian expedition to Sardis caused the war with
Persia; APo. 2. 11. 94a36), but none of the causes he mentions in his
canonical list are episodic events. Most are substantial entities, human
beings, for instance, or chunks of bronze; some are enduring states, such
as the proportion between the strings of the lyre, or the skill of the sculptor
(which is the more immediate cause of the statue; Ph. 2. 3. 195a6). EVects,
too, as he describes them, may be in many categories: states, actions, and
products. The eVects of the third type of cause, eYcient causes, as stated
include substances (a child), artefacts (a statue), and events (the healing of
a patient). But it would not do violence to Aristotle’s concept to say that, in
the case of eYcient causation, what is brought about is always an event,
either a change in something (the recovery of the patient) or the coming
into being of something (the procreation of the child, the fabrication of the
statue).
The diVerence between Aristotelian and modern notions of cause is so
notable that some scholars reject the traditional translation of aitia as cause;
they prefer other terms such as ‘explanation’, or speak of the four becauses
rather than the four causes. Aristotle himself tells us that they are four
types of answer to the question ‘why?’
The ultimate answer to a ‘why’ may take us, in the case of unchanging things like
mathematics, to the ‘what’ (to the deWnition of straight, or commensurable, or the
like); or it may take us to the originating change (why did they go to war? because
there had been a raid), or to the purpose (so as to come into power) or, in the case
of things that come into being, to the matter. (Ph. 2. 7. 198a14–21)
Here we meet the same four items, but in the order: formal, eYcient, Wnal,
material.
When listing his four causes, Aristotle gives mathematical examples of
formal causes. But the forms whose causation interests him most are the
forms or natures of living beings: it is these that provide the internal
explanation for the life-cycles and characteristic activities of plants and
animals. In these cases, formal and Wnal causes coincide: the mature
realization of natural form being the end to which the activities of the
organism tend. But he was also interested in the explanation of inter-
190
PHYSICS

changes between non-living substances, of which he would give as an
example the turning of water into steam. In such cases he uses the formal
and material causes as explanatory principles.
Change, for Aristotle, could take place in many diVerent categories:
growth, for instance, was change in the category of quantity, and a change
in a quality (e.g. of colour) was called an alteration (GC 1. 5. 320a13). Local
motion, as we have seen, is change in the category of place. But change in
the category of substance, where there is a change from one kind of thing
into another, was a very special kind of change. When a substance under-
goes a change of quantity or quality, the same substance remains through-
out, with its substantial form. But if one kind of thing turns into another,
does anything remain throughout? Aristotle answers: matter.
We have a case of alteration when the subject of change is perceptible and persists,
and merely changes its properties . . . A body, for instance, while remaining the
same body, is now healthy and now ill; some bronze may be now circular and now
angular, and yet the same bronze. But when nothing perceptible persists in its
identity as a subject of change, and the thing changes as a whole (when e.g. semen
becomes blood, or water changes into air, or air totally into water), such an
occurrence is a case of one substance coming to be and another substance ceasing
to be . . . Matter, in the most proper sense of the term, is to be identiWed with the
underlying subject which is receptive of coming-to-be and passing away. (GC 1. 4.
319b8–320a2)
What is the nature of this matter that underlies substantial change?
Aristotle constantly explains the relationship of matter to form in living
things (e.g. in the formation of a foetus, as he archaically described it above)
by analogy with artefacts. ‘As the bronze is to the statue, the wood is to the
bed, or the formless before receiving form is to the formed object, so is the
underlying nature to the substance’ (Ph. 1. 7. 191a9–12). The analogy is not
easy to grasp. What is the underlying nature that remains through sub-
stantial change in the way in which wood remains wood before and after
being made into a bed? Surely the reshaping of wood or bronze is an
example of an accidental, not a substantial change.
Things do not yet get any clearer when Aristotle tells us,
By matter I mean what in itself is neither of any kind nor of any size nor
describable by any of the categories of being. For it is something of which all
these things are predicated, and therefore its essence is diVerent from that of all
the predicates. All the other categories are predicated of substance, but substance
191
PHYSICS

of matter. Therefore the ultimate subject is of itself neither of any kind or any size
nor anything else. (Metaph. F 3. 1029a21–5)
An entity that is not of any kind or any size or any shape, and of which
nothing at all can be said, appears to be highly mysterious. But that is not
what Aristotle is inviting us to accept. His ultimate matter (he sometimes
calls it prime matter) is not in and of itself of any kind. It is not in and of itself
any particular size, because it can grow or shrink; it is not in and of itself
water, and it is not in and of itself steam, because it is each of these in turn.
This does not mean that there is any time at which it is not of any size, or
any time in which it is neither water nor steam nor anything else.
How then is a chunk of matter to be identiWed? Well, in everyday life we
are familiar with the idea that one and the same parcel of stuV may be Wrst
one kind of thing, and then another kind of thing. A bottle containing a
pint of cream may be found, after shaking, to contain not cream but
butter. The stuV that comes out of the bottle is the same stuV as the stuV
that went into the bottle: nothing has been added to it and nothing has
been taken from it. But what comes out is diVerent in kind from what goes
in. It is from cases such as this that the Aristotelian notion of matter is
derived.
The Stoics on Causality
The Stoic account of causes is both simpler and more complex than
the Aristotelian one. It is simpler in that the Stoics do not count the
material, formal, and Wnal causes as causes properly so called, and they
mock Aristotle’s followers’ ‘crowd of causes’ (Seneca, Ep. 65. 4). Their
treatment of eYcient causes, however, is more complex, in that they
adopt a canonical form for the description of causation, and they oVer a
rich classiWcation of diVerent kinds of cause. Most importantly, unlike
Aristotle, they oVer a law of universal causation, which needs to be spelt
out and defended.
The Stoics’ standard analysis of causation was of the following form:
A brings it about that B is F. A, the cause, must be a body, and so must
B; but the eVect, B’s being F, is not a body but an abstract entity, a lekton.
This is explained by Sextus:
192
PHYSICS

The Stoics say that every cause is a body that becomes for another body a cause of
something non-bodily. For instance a scalpel, which is a body, becomes for the
Xesh, another body, a cause of the non-bodily predicate being cut. Again a Wre, which
is a body, becomes for the wood, another body, a cause of the non-bodily predicate
being burnt. (M. 9. 211)
While A and B are both material entities, the Stoics used the term ‘matter’
specially to refer to B, the passive element in causation (Seneca, Ep. 65. 2 LS
55e). So in Stoic causation we have a triad of cause, matter, and eVect.
The Stoics introduced the notions of joint causes (sunaitia) and auxiliary
causes (sunerga). Two oxen are joint causes of the movement of the plough
if neither of them can pull it alone; I am an auxiliary cause if I help you lift
a load which you can, at a pinch, manage by yourself (LS 55i). The
recognition of joint and auxiliary causes was important, because it shows
that it can often be misleading to speak of the cause of a particular state or
event. Causes form not a chain, but a network.
For the Stoics it is not only changes and beginnings of existence that
need causes: there are also sustaining causes (aitiai synektikai) that bring it
about that things continue in existence. Bodies of all kinds, for instance, are
held together by an active and tenuous Xuid called pneuma, literally ‘breath’,
which is responsible for the cohesion of the universe. Living bodies are kept
alive by the soul, which is their sustaining cause. It is characteristic of such
causes that if they cease to operate, their eVects cease to obtain.
Zeno, indeed, stated this characteristic as a feature of all causes (LS 55a);
but other Stoics seem to have allowed another category of antecedent
(prokatarktikai) causes, whose eVect remained after they had been removed
(LS 55i). It seems obvious enough that a house may remain in existence
long after the builder has ceased working. What Zeno seems to have had in
mind were sustaining causes that sustained something other than existence
or life: it is prudence, for instance, that brings it about that a man is
prudent, and he is prudent only for so long as his prudence lasts. Prudence,
it must be remembered, was for Stoic materialists a physical ingredient of a
person (LS 55a).
The way in which the existence of antecedent causes is to be reconciled
with Zeno’s theory of sustaining causes seems to have been this: an
antecedent cause brings it about that an object possesses an internal feature
that is itself a sustaining cause simultaneous with the eVect to be explained.
This, certainly, was the form the theory took when it was employed to
193
PHYSICS

underpin medical practice: when a patient catches a chill, the coldness of
the air is an antecedent cause, and the patient’s fever is the internal and
enduring state that is the sustaining cause of his symptoms.4
Chrysippus was famous for using the illustration of a garden roller or a
child’s spinning top. The top will not move unless the child strikes it: but
once struck it will continue to spin ‘of its own force and nature’ (Cicero, Fat.
43). The crack of the whip is an antecedent cause, but the top’s internal force
is the principal cause. Likewise the roller, once pushed, will continue to roll
of its own accord. This illustration was used in an attempt to reconcile the
Stoic theory of causality with the possibility of human responsibility.
Causation and Determinism
The Stoics believed not just in universal causation, that is to say, the thesis
that everything has a cause; they believed also in universal causal deter-
minism, that is to say, that everything has a cause by which it was
determined. Alexander reports them thus:
Nothing in the world is or comes about without a cause, because nothing of what
it contains is independent from, or isolated from, all that has gone before. For the
world would be torn apart and shattered, and no longer remain a unity under the
governance of a single order and policy, if any uncaused motion were introduced.
That would be the case unless all the things that are and come about have
preceding causes from which they follow of necessity. (Alexander of Aphrodisias,
Fat. 191. 30 LS 55n)
Note the extreme position of the Stoics. They claim not just that every
beginning of existence has a cause, but that everything that happens has a
cause. Further they claim that every cause is a necessitating cause: given the
cause, the eVect cannot but happen. They maintain not just universal
causation, but universal determinism. This doctrine, which was to be
hugely inXuential henceforth, is a Stoic invention. It lurks no doubt in
ancient atomism (Cicero, Fat. 23), but Democritus does not spell it out with
anything like Stoic clarity. Neither of the Stoics’ causal claims was accepted
by Aristotle, and the Epicureans, while accepting the universality of caus-
ation, did not accept the universality of necessity.
4 See texts in Hankinson, CHHP 487–91.
194
PHYSICS

This uniWed, successive, inescapable series of necessitating causes was
called, by the Stoics and their critics, Fate (LS 55f). The doctrine of fate was
immediately subjected to philosophical criticism from several quarters, and
Cicero’s On Fate gives a lively account of arguments levelled against it and
Stoic responses to those arguments. One famous argument was called the
Lazy Argument (argos logos); its purpose was to show that if determinism was
true, there was no point in doing anything whatever.
The argument imagines someone addressing a Stoic patient on his
sickbed. ‘If it is fated that you will recover from this illness, then whether
or not you call a doctor you will recover; likewise, if it is fated that you will
not recover from this illness, then whether or not you call a doctor you
will not recover. One or the other is your fate: so there is no point in
calling a doctor’ (Fat. 29 LS 55s0). Obviously, an argument of the same kind
can be applied to any of the normal actions of life: another source imagines
it being used to persuade a boxer that there is no point in putting up his
guard.
In response, Chrysippus made a distinction between simple and complex
facts. ‘Socrates will die on such and such a day’ may be true whatever
Socrates does; but ‘Laius will beget Oedipus’ cannot be true unless Laius
copulates with his wife. If the patient’s recovery is a complex fact linked to
calling a doctor, then calling the doctor will be no less fated than the
eventual recovery.
If the history of the world is a single tissue of interconnected events, it is
not clear how far Chrysippus is entitled to make his distinction between
simple and complex facts: perhaps Socrates’ death is co-fated (to use
Chrysippus’ term) with several of his actions, such as his behaviour when
on trial. Indeed, perhaps everything is co-fated with everything else.
Nonetheless, Chrysippus is entitled to reject the Lazy Argument.
Consider the propositions
(1) If I call the doctor, I will recover.
(2) If I do not call the doctor, I will recover.
If I am fated to recover, then the consequent of each of these propositions is
true; and if we interpret each of the propositions truth-functionally, in the
manner of Philo, each of them will on that supposition be true. In that
sense it will be true that whether or not I call the doctor I will recover. But
as these propositions are normally used in guiding behaviour, they must be
195
PHYSICS

understood not simply truth-functionally, but also as supporting the
corresponding counterfactuals
(3) If I called the doctor, I would recover.
(4) If I did not call the doctor, I would recover.
But a Stoic has no reason to accept (4).5
Determinism and Freedom
More serious was the argument that if determinism is true, human
responsibility for action evaporates, and praise and blame become pointless.
This argument was mounted both by Epicureans and by Academics.
Necessity is accountable to no one, Epicurus said, and what depends on
us, what attracts blame and its converse, must be free of the overlordship of
fate (LS 20a). To reconcile this freedom with their own atomistic system,
Epicureans hypothesized that atoms engaged in unpredictable swerves.
Thus Lucretius:
Lest mind should suVer from compulsive force
And helpless trace a predetermined course
A travelling atom deviates a space
And swerves at no Wxed time and no Wxed place.
(2. 290)
Neither in antiquity nor in modern times has it been clear how such a
random quantum jerk would be a suYcient condition for human freedom;
and not only Stoics, but Academics too, considered the swerve not only
insuYcient but unnecessary.
Carneades, Cicero tells us,
showed that the Epicureans could defend their case without this Wctitious swerve.
They taught that some voluntary motion of the mind was possible, and a defence
of this doctrine was better than the introduction of the swerve, especially as they
could assign no cause to it. By defending it they had an answer to Chrysippus:
they could agree that no motion lacks a cause without conceding that everything
that happens is a result of antecedent causes. For there are no external antecedent
causes of the operation of our will. (Fat. 33)
5 The Lazy Argument appears across the centuries in many diVerent contexts, e.g. in John
Milton’s de Doctrina Christiana in an argument against Calvinist predestination.
196
PHYSICS

Voluntary motion, by its intrinsic nature, is in our power and obedient to
us; and it is this intrinsic nature that is its cause.
Carneades is here oVering the Epicureans an answer to Chrysippus; yet
Chrysippus is reported as stating his own position in a way very similar
to that of Carneades. Chrysippus, as I remarked earlier, was fond of using
the examples of the spinning top and the garden roller to explain
causation; and he uses them to make room for responsible action. Our
assent to any proposition or proposal is triggered by external stimuli, as
the top begins to spin only when the child whips it. But the actual assent
is in our power, and this preserves responsibility without violating fate. ‘If
something could be brought about without an antecedent cause,
it would be false that everything happens through fate; but if it is
probable that there is an antecedent cause for whatever happens, what
possible reason is there for denying that all things happen through fate?’
(Cicero, Fat. 43).
The diVerence appears to be this. Carneades denies that voluntary
actions have an external antecedent cause; Chrysippus aYrms that they
have, but appears here to deny that they are necessitated by it. How is this
to be reconciled with the universal determinism the Stoics maintained
elsewhere? To answer this question we must look more closely at the
analogy with the top. The top is set in motion by the whip, but it moves in
the way it does (a way diVerent from the motion, say, of a garden roller)
because of its own nature. Similarly, the mind’s assent, when a stimulus is
presented to it, is given because of its own nature. The assent falls under
the overarching rule of fate if it is the only possible outcome of the joint
causes, the external stimulus and the agent’s own nature. But it is not
necessitated by the external, antecedent cause, and in this sense Chrysippus
can deny that it is necessary.
Many philosophers in later ages have claimed that if a human agent is
responsible for an action X, it must have been possible for her, at the
moment of action, both to do and not to do X. Such freedom of alternative
choice was later given the technical name of ‘liberty of indiVerence’.
Chrysippus is not claiming that liberty of indiVerence is compatible with
fate: he is interested rather in what later philosophers called ‘liberty of
spontaneity’. An agent enjoys liberty of spontaneity if he does X because he
wants to do X. Chrysippus’ humans do enjoy liberty of spontaneity,
because they do X because they assent to X, and they assent to X because
197
PHYSICS

of their own nature and character. The responsibility that he defends is the
autonomy of the agent to act unforced by external causes and stimuli.
From the time of Chrysippus up to the present day philosophers have
debated how far it is possible to reconcile determinism and freedom. One of
the most interesting contributions in the ancient world was made by St
Augustine, in his work on the freedom of the will, written in the year of his
conversion to Christianity. However, since he locates his discussion in an
ethical and theological context, we shall wait to consider it until Chapter 8.
198
PHYSICS

6
What There Is:
Metaphysics
T
he central topic of metaphysics is ontology: the study of Being. The
word ‘ontology’ derives from the Greek word ‘on’ (in the plural
‘onta’), which is the present participle of ‘einai’, the verb ‘to be’. In
Greek, as in English, a deWnite article can be placed in front of a participle
to mark out a class of people or things: as when we talk of the living or of
the dying, meaning all the people who are now living or all the people who
are now dying. The founder of ontology was Parmenides, and he deWned
his topic by placing the deWnite article ‘to’ in front of the participle ‘on’. ‘To
on’, literally ‘the being’, on the model of ‘the living’, means: all that is. It is
customary to translate the expression into English as ‘Being’ with an initial
capital. Without a capital, the English word ‘being’ has, in philosophy, two
uses, one corresponding to the Greek participle and one to the Greek
inWnitive. A being, we can say, using the participle, is an individual that is;
whereas being (using the verbal noun) is, as it were, what any individual
being is engaged in. The totality of individual beings make up Being.
These rather tedious grammatical distinctions need making, because
neglect of them can lead, and has led, even great philosophers into
confusion. In order to understand Parmenides, one further important
distinction has to be made: between being and existence.
‘To be’ in English, and its equivalent in Greek, can certainly mean ‘to
exist’. Thus, Wordsworth tells us, ‘She lived unknown, and few could
know j When Lucy ceased to be.’ In English the use is largely poetic, and
it is not natural to say such things as ‘The pyramids are, but the Colossus of
Rhodes is not’, when we mean that the pyramids are still in existence,

while the Colossus is not. But analogous statements would be quite natural
in ancient Greek, and this sense of ‘be’ is certainly involved in Parmenides’
talk of Being. All that there is, all that exists, is included in Being.
However, the Greek verb ‘to be’ occurs not only in sentences such as
‘Troy is no more’ but also in sentences of many diVerent kinds, such
as ‘Helen is beautiful’, ‘Aphrodite is a goddess’, ‘Achilles is brave’, and so on
through all the diVerent modes that Aristotle was to dignify as categories.
For Parmenides, Being is not just that which exists, but that of which any
sentence containing ‘is’ is true. Equally, being is not just existing (being,
period) but being anything whatever: being hot or being cold, being earth
or being water, and so on. Thus interpreted, Being is a realm both richer
and more puzzling than the totality of existents.
Parmenides’ Ontology
Let us now look in detail at some of Parmenides’ mysterious claims,
expressed in his rugged verse, which I have tried to render in an equally
clumsy translation.
What you can call and think must Being be
For Being can, and nothing cannot, be.
(DK 28 B6)
The Wrst line (literally: ‘What is for saying and for thinking must be’)
expresses the universality of Being: whatever you can call by any name,
whatever you can think of, must be. Why so? Presumably because if I utter
a name or think a thought, I must be able to answer the question ‘What is it
that you are talking about or thinking of?’ The message of the second line
(literally ‘It is for being be but nothing is not’) is that anything that can be
at all must be something or other; it cannot be just nothing.
The matter becomes clearer when Parmenides, in a later fragment,
introduces a negative notion to correspond to Being.
Never shall this prevail, that Unbeing is;
Rein in your mind from any thought like this.
(DK 28 B7, 1–2)
My ‘Unbeing’ represents the negation of Parmenides’ participle (me eonta).
I use the word instead of some formula such as ‘not-being’ because the
context makes clear that Parmenides’ Greek expression, though a perfectly
200
METAPHYSICS

Parmenides and Heraclitus, neighbours in Raphael’s School of Athens

natural one, is meant to designate a polar opposite of Being. If Being is that
of which something or other, no matter what, is true, then Unbeing is
that of which nothing at all is true. And that, surely, is nonsense: not only
can it not exist, it cannot even be thought of.
Unbeing you won’t grasp—it can’t be done—
Nor utter; being thought and being are one.
If we understand ‘Unbeing’ as meaning that to which no predicate can be
attached, then it is surely correct to say that it is something unthinkable. If,
in answer to your question ‘What kind of thing are you thinking of?’, I say
that it isn’t any kind of thing, you will be puzzled. If, further, I cannot tell
you what it is like, or indeed tell you anything at all about it, you may
justly conclude that I’m not thinking of anything, indeed not really
thinking at all. If we understand Parmenides in this sense, we can agree
that to be thought of and to be go together.
But granting this much, we may still want to protest against the
sweeping claim that being thought and being are one. It may be the case
that if I am to think of X I must be able to attach, in thought, some
predicate to X. But it is not the case that any thought I have about X must
be true: I can think that X is P when X is not P. If we take the dictum in that
way, then it is false: being thought and being true are two very diVerent
things.
Again, we can agree that Unbeing cannot be thought of without
agreeing that what does not exist cannot be thought of. We can think of
Wctional heroes and chimerical beasts who never existed. If it were true that
what does not exist cannot be thought of, we could prove that things exist
simply by thinking of them. Did Parmenides believe we could? Given the
contortions of his language, it is hard to be sure. Some scholars claim that
he confused the ‘is’ of predication (involved in the true claim that Unbeing
cannot be thought of) with the ‘is’ of existence (involved in the false claim
that the non-existent cannot be thought of). It is, I think, more helpful to
say rather that Parmenides always treats ‘to be’—in any of its uses—as a
fully Xedged verb. That is to say, he thinks of ‘being water’ or ‘being air’
as related to ‘being’ in the same way as ‘running fast’ and ‘running slowly’
is related to ‘running’. In a sentence of the form ‘S is P’, instead of thinking
of the ‘is’ as a copula and the ‘P’ as a predicate, he thinks of the ‘is’ as a verb
and the ‘P’ as analogous to an adverb. A person who Wrst runs fast and then
202
METAPHYSICS

runs slowly is running all the time. Similarly, for Parmenides, stuV which is
Wrst water and then air goes on be-ing all the time. Change is never from
not-being to being, or vice versa; the most there can ever be is variation of
being.
Interpreting Parmenides in this way helps us to understand how he
draws some very remarkable conclusions from the theses of the universal-
ity of Being and the inconceivability of Unbeing.
One road there is, signposted in this wise:
Being was never born and never dies.
Four-square, unmoved, no end it will allow.
It never was, nor will be; all is now,
One and continuous. How could it be born
Or whence could it be grown? Unbeing?—No—
That mayn’t be said or thought; we cannot go
So far ev’n to deny it is. What need,
Early or late, could Being from Unbeing seed?
Thus it must altogether be or not.
(DK 28 B8. 1–11)
From the principle ‘Nothing can come from nothing’ many philosophers
of diVerent persuasions have drawn the conclusion that the world must
always have existed. Other philosophers, too, have oVered as a supporting
argument that there could be no suYcient reason for a world to come into
existence at one moment rather than another, earlier or later. But Par-
menides’ claim that Being has no beginning and no end takes a much more
sweeping form. Being is not only everlasting, it is not subject to change
(‘four-square, unmoved’) or even to the passage of time (it is all now, and
has no past or future). What could diVerentiate past from present and
future? If it is no kind of being, then time is unreal; if it is some kind of
being, then it is all part of Being. Past, present, and future are all one Being.
By similar arguments Parmenides seeks to show that Being is undivided.
What could separate Being from Being? Being? In that case there is no
division, but continuous Being. Unbeing? In that case any division is unreal
(DK 28 B8. 22–5). We might expect him to argue in a parallel fashion that
Being is unlimited. What could set limits to Being? Unbeing cannot do
anything to anything; and if we imagine that Being is limited by Being,
then Being has not yet reached its limits. Some of Parmenides’ followers
argued thus (Aristotle, GC 1.8. 325a15), but this is not how Parmenides
203
METAPHYSICS

himself seems to have seen matters. When he comes to sum up his
teaching, starting from premisses that are by now familiar he reaches a
rather startling conclusion.
To think a thing’s to think it is, no less.
Apart from Being, whate’er we may express
Thought does not reach. Naught is or will be
Beyond Being’s bounds, since Destiny’s decree
Fetters it whole and still. All things are names
Which the credulity of mortals frames—
Birth and destruction, being all or none,
Changes of place, and colours come and gone.
But since a bound is set embracing all
Its shape’s well rounded like a perfect ball.
(DK 28 B8, 34–43)
It is not at all clear how the concept of the universe as a perfect sphere is
either coherent in itself or reconcilable with the rest of Parmenides’
teaching. However that may be, there is a more pressing question. If this
is the nature of Being, uniform, unchanging, immobile, and timeless, what
are we to make of the multiplicity of changing properties that we normally
attribute to items in the world on the basis of sense-experience? These, for
Parmenides, belong to the Way of Seeming. If we want to follow the Way of
Truth, we must keep our minds Wxed on Being.
While Parmenides and his disciples, in Greek Italy, were stressing that
only what is utterly stable is real, Heraclitus, across the seas in Greek Asia,
was stressing that what is real is in total Xux. Heraclitus was given to
speaking in riddles: to express his philosophy of universal change he used
both Wre and water as images. The world is an ever-living Wre, now Xaring
up, now dying down; Wre is the currency into which everything can be
converted just as gold and goods are exchanged for each other (DK 22 B30,
B90). But the world is also an ever-Xowing river. If you step into a river, you
cannot put your feet twice into the same water. Getting rather carried
away by his metaphor, Heraclitus went on to say—if Plato reports him
honestly—that you cannot step twice into the same river (Cra. 402a).
However that may be, he seems undoubtedly to have claimed that all
things are in motion all of the time (Aristotle, Ph. 8. 3. 253b9). If we do not
notice this, it is because of the defects of our senses. For Heraclitus, then, it
is change that is the Way of Truth, and stability that is the Way of Seeming.
204
METAPHYSICS

Plato’s Ideas and their Troubles
Parmenides and Heraclitus laid out a battleWeld for centuries of philosoph-
ical warfare. Much of Plato’s most energetic philosophizing was devoted to
the task of reconciling, or disarming, these two champions. One of his
characters tells us that the true philosopher must refuse to accept either
the doctrine that all reality is changeless, or the doctrine that reality is
everywhere changing. ‘Like a child who wants to have his cake and eat it he
must say that Being, the sum of all, is both at once—all that is unchange-
able, and all that is in change’ (Sph. 249c–d).
Aristotle tells us that Plato began to philosophize under the inXuence of
Heraclitean ideas, and retained them well on in life (Metaph. A 6. 987a31–3).
In the Theaetetus Plato oVers a theory of perception that endeavours to
preserve the truth in Heraclitus’ insights without accepting the universal
Xux. We will consider this in Chapter 7, concentrating for the present on
his treatment of Parmenidean problems.
During his life Plato made three systematic attempts to cope with the
metaphysical issues raised by the two giants. The Wrst is the Theory of
Ideas, as presented in the Symposium, Phaedo, and Republic. Very crudely, one
can say that in this phase Plato’s Socrates divided the realm of philosophy
in two, and handed over the intelligible universe of the Ideas to Parmeni-
des, and the perceptible universe of the senses to Heraclitus. In the second
phase Parmenides himself, in the dialogue named after him, is represented
as exposing for Socrates some unacceptable consequences of the Ideal
theory. In the Wnal phase, in the Sophist, a third protagonist, an unnamed
stranger from Elea, leads us to disown not only Parmenides and Heraclitus,
but also Plato’s own Theory of Ideas, in favour of an elaborate solution that
will supersede all three and enable us to have our metaphysical cake
and eat it.
As we have seen, the Ideas, as represented in the early middle dialogues,
belong in an eternal world that is as unchanging as the Being revealed by
Parmenides’ way of Truth. The entities that inhabit the empirical world, on
the other hand, are in a Heraclitean Xux, constantly Xitting between being
and non-being. Plato is not, however, even-handed between the two
protagonists: the Parmenidean world is far superior to the Heraclitean
one; the unchanging world of Ideas is more real, and contains more
truth, than the Xickering world of experience. Only intellectual insight
205
METAPHYSICS

Plato, here idealized in a head from the Vatican, had a gift almost unique among
philosophers for criticizing and revizing his own most cherished ideas

into Ideas gives knowledge; the senses can provide nothing better than true
belief.
But while the realm of the Ideas is unchanging, it is not uniform or
homogeneous like Parmenides’ Being. Being is undiVerentiated and single,
whereas there are many diVerent Ideas in some kind of relation to each
other. They appear to be hierarchically ordered, under the Idea of Good,
which appears to trump any notion of Being (Rep. 6. 509b). No doubt the
other Ideas owe it to the Idea of Good that they are Ideas at all: a bed is a
Perfect or Ideal Bed because it participates in Perfection and is the best
possible bed. But the relations between the diVerent subordinate ideas are
not at all spelt out; there is certainly no suggestion that they are all one
with each other in some sublime Parmenidean sphere.
It is not surprising, then, that when Plato comes to place a critical
evaluation of the Theory of Ideas in the mouth of Parmenides, it is the
One, the Idea of Unity, that is the focus of discussion.
The Parmenides is the most diYcult of Plato’s dialogues to interpret, and
many scholars have confessed themselves baZed by it. It falls into two
parts. The Wrst part resembles one of the earlier Socratic dialogues in which
a self-styled expert is shown to be unqualiWed to hold forth on the topic of
his alleged expertise. The startling thing is that the usual roles are reversed.
Instead of the inquiring Socrates puncturing the pretensions of some
famous sophist, it is the young Socrates himself who is put to the question,
and the topic of the quiz from which he emerges humiliated is none other
than the Theory of Ideas. Parmenides, who is the successful inquisitor, tells
Socrates that he is insuYciently trained in dialectic, and needs further
exercise. The second part of the dialogue purports to illustrate the kind of
exercise that Socrates needs. Starting from a pair of hypotheses about One
and Being, which appear between them to exhaust the possibilities, Par-
menides shows by a series of tight but often implausible arguments that
whichever arm of the contradiction we accept we are led to wholly
unpalatable conclusions.
Scholars disagree about both the nature of each of the two parts and
their relation to each other. Are the criticisms of the Ideas in the Wrst part
regarded by Plato as seriously damaging to his theory? If so, does he have a
remedy to propose, or is he just candidly confessing his perplexity? Are the
proofs in the second part meant as jokes or as serious arguments? If the
latter, did Plato mean us to detect fallacies in them, or did he himself
207
METAPHYSICS

regard them as valid? Either way, what is the relevance of the second part to
the assault on the Ideas in the Wrst part?1
Before outlining the main problems for the Theory of Ideas that are put
forward in the Wrst part, it is worth repeating at this point the six principles
that we identiWed in Chapter 1 as constituting the core of the classical
Theory.
(1) The Principle of Commonality. Wherever several things are F, this is
because they participate in or imitate a single Idea of F (Rep. 5. 476a).
(2) The Principle of Separation. The Idea of F is distinct from all the things
that are F (Phd. 74c).
(3) The Principle of Self-Predication. The Idea of F is itself F.
(4) The Principle of Purity. The Idea of F is nothing but F (Phd. 74c).
(5) The Principle of Uniqueness. Nothing but the Idea of F is really, truly,
altogether F (Phd. 74d; Rep. 5. 479a–d).
(6) The Principle of Sublimity. Ideas are everlasting, they have no parts and
undergo no change, and they are not perceptible to the senses (Phd.
78d).
The problems set out in the Wrst part of the dialogue are as follows.
1. According to the theory, particular Fs are F because they participate in
the Idea of F. But what does ‘participation’ mean? Does a particular F share
only a part of the Idea, or does it contain the whole of the Idea? There are
diYculties either way. If a particular large thing L has the whole Idea of Large,
then the Idea seems to be scattered and lack the unity of an Idea; but if
L shares only a part of the Large, then it is large by something which is itself
small, because being only a part it must be smaller than the Large (131a V.).
2. It is essential to the theory that wherever several things are F they
derive this from some other entity which is the Idea of F. Thus, the several
large things derive their largeness from the Idea of Large. But if we put
together the original set of large things plus the Idea, we have a new set of
large things, which must derive their largeness from some other entity. ‘So
another form of largeness will appear, alongside the Idea of Large and the
things that participated in it, and then another again over all of these’—so
that we are set oV on an inWnite regress (132b). This line of thought much
1 In what follows I am indebted to Constance C. Meinwald’s Plato’s Parmenides (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1991), though I diVer from her on important points of interpretation.
208
METAPHYSICS

impressed Aristotle, who, substituting ‘man’ instead of ‘large’ for F in the
original premiss, named it the Third Man argument, after the Man who
would appear as a Super-idea, after (a) the men in the world and (b) the
Ideal Man.
3. There is a special diYculty with relational predicates. Suppose I am a
slave. According to the theory, that must be because I resemble the Ideal
Slave. But who is the Ideal Slave’s owner? Surely, the Ideal Owner. But I am
not a slave of the Ideal Owner but of whoever is my terrestrial slave-owner.
So the relationships between entities in the world cannot be explained by
relationships between the Ideas (133e).
These diYculties are genuine problems for the Theory of Ideas, and surely
Plato means us to realize this. At the very least they demand substantial
modiWcation of the theory, and in other dialogues Plato undertakes such
modiWcation. In the Parmenides, however, he does not explicitly present the
necessary modiWcations. We might expect, though, that the second part of
the dialogue oVers some guidance over the lines the modiWcation needs to
take.
A major problem with the second part is that it is not clear exactly what
is the pair of hypotheses from which Parmenides starts his argument
(137b). He describes the hypotheses as hypotheses about the One itself,
but the Greek in which they are stated can be rendered in several ways. The
two following pairs are the most promising translations:
(1) If the One is
v.
If the One is not.
(2) If it is one
v.
If it is not one.
(2) is the reading that best Wts the Greek of the received text of this passage of
the dialogue, where no deWnite article occurs before the word ‘one’ (hen).
Indeed, even the most enthusiastic partisans of the Wrst reading agree that it
can only be sustained if one amends the text at this point. On the other hand,
(1) seems to be a better Wt not only to the immediately preceding wording,
but to the whole series of subsequent arguments, which quite frequently
unambiguously refer to the One, with a deWnite article. Moreover, anyone
who accepts reading (2) has to answer the question what the ‘it’ stands for.
On my view, there is no need to amend the text. The second reading,
which is the most natural translation, can easily be reconciled with the
subsequent argument. There are two ways to do this.
209
METAPHYSICS

The Wrst is to take the ‘it’ in question to be the same as the ‘it’ which is the
subjectoftheWayofTruthinthepoemofthehistoricalParmenides:namely,
Being. The references to the One in the course of the subsequent arguments
are easy to account for. They occur in the course of following out the
hypothesis that ‘It (sc. Being) is One’. If that hypothesis is true, then there is
one pre-eminent subject to which the predicate ‘One’ applies, namely Being
itself. This subject can quite naturally be referred to as ‘the One’, and it is
proleptically so referred to by Parmenides at 137b3. However, this interpret-
ation becomes harder to sustain when Parmenides proceeds to examine the
negative hypothesis, which on this account would be ‘that Being is not one’.
A second interpretation, therefore, is preferable. The ‘it’ should be read
as ‘the One’. In that case, the two hypotheses are ‘The One is one’ and ‘The
One is not one’. Initially, this may seem a very implausible reading: surely
the second hypothesis rules itself out instantly as being self-contradictory.
But if we reXect, we see that this is not so. Some of the major problems
with the Theory of Ideas that were laid out in the Wrst part of the dialogue
derived from the principle of self-predication, namely that the Idea of F is
itself F (see p. 208 above). It is appropriate that the second part of the
dialogue should not take self-predication for granted, but explore
the consequences, in the case of one pre-eminent Idea, of its denial as
well as of its aYrmation.
The dialectic begins with the protagonist Parmenides inquiring what
predicates attach to the One, and what predicates attach to other things, on
the basis of the Wrst hypothesis. If the One is one, then the One is not a
whole with parts (137d). It is without limit and without place (138b). It is
unchanging, but it is also not at rest (139b). It is neither diVerent from, nor
the same as, itself or another (139e), and it is neither like nor unlike itself or
anything else (140b). It is neither greater nor less than itself or anything else
(140d). It is not situated in time, and since it does not belong in the past,
present, or future, it cannot have any share in being at all. The conclusion
is this:
Therefore the One in no way is. Therefore it is not in such a way as to be one,
because in that case it would be a being and a partaker of being. But, as it seems,
the One is not one and is not at all, if we have to trust this argument. But if
something is not, then nothing can belong to it or be about it. So it has no name,
no sentence or thought can be about it, and there can be no sensation or
knowledge of it. (142a)
210
METAPHYSICS

We are pretty clearly not intended to accept this conclusion as a true
statement about the One. Parmenides’ interlocutor in the dialogue, Aris-
totle (no relation), who is commonly a complete yes-man, interposes a rare
note of dissent when asked if this conclusion is possible. If it were true, it
would cut the ground from under the arguments that lead to it, since they
all purport to speak about the One, which according to this conclusion
cannot be done. The dialectic up to this point must be intended as a reductio
ad absurdum: but a reductio of what? Surely of the hypothesis that the One is
one and nothing but one. But of course an important part of the Theory of Ideas
was the Principle of Purity: that the Idea of F was F and nothing but F. So
the dialectic, to this point, is a recantation of an important element in the
theory.
At this point Parmenides makes a fresh start from the hypothesis that
the One is one and proves that the One is a whole with ever so many parts
(142b, 143a), bounded and shaped (145b), located both in itself and else-
where, both in motion and at rest, both the same as and diVerent from
itself and from other things (146b), both like and unlike itself and other
things (148c), simultaneously equal to, greater than, and less than itself and
other things (151b). It is and becomes older and younger than itself and
other things, but equally it neither is nor becomes older or younger than
itself nor other things (155c). It belongs to past, present, and future, and it
partakes in being, though being and oneness are not the same (if they were,
Plato argues, ‘is one’ would mean the same as ‘one one’) (142c). So there is
no problem in naming it, speaking of it, and arguing about it (155e).
There is clearly a close parallel between these two Wrst sections of
the dialectic. At each stage of each argument we are presented with a
pair of opposite predicates (e.g. in motion, at rest). In the Wrst section
Parmenides argues that neither of these predicates apply to the One. In the
second section he argues that both of these predicates apply to the One.
Between them, the two sections throw a damaging light on the Theory of
Ideas. The Wrst section shows the folly of holding that the Idea of F is
nothing but F (the Principle of Purity). The second section shows the
falsehood of holding that nothing but the Idea of F is F (the Principle of
Uniqueness).
But the two sections are not meant to be on all fours with each other.
The conclusion of the Wrst section is, as we have seen, self-stultifying and
the whole argument can only be taken seriously as a reductio ad absurdum. The
211
METAPHYSICS

second section, however, leads to a conclusion that, though it may be
surprising, can be understood in a way which is in no way self-refuting.
Summing up the results of this section, Parmenides says that the One
sometimes partakes of being and sometimes does not. His words echo the
complaint made in the Republic about the ordinary objects of sense-percep-
tion, namely that they roll about between being and non-being. But now it
is a form that displays this pattern, whereas in the heyday of the theory
what marked oV Ideas from common or garden objects was that they did
not roll about. The Idea of F was not sometimes F and sometimes not F, nor
was it F in one respect and not F in another respect. What is now said about
the One marks a very signiWcant departure from the original Theory of
Ideas.
In the case of the sensible particulars, we could specify the times,
respects, relations, and so forth that made them—without any violation
of the principle of non-contradiction—both F and not F. What we now
have to do is to draw appropriate distinctions to see how both a predicate
and its opposite can be true in diVerent respects, of the One, and by
implication, of other Forms. It is to be noted that the subjects of all
Parmenides’ predications are Ideas, or at least they are all items referred
to by universal terms, not individual names: the expressions for them are
things like ‘the same’, ‘the other’, not ‘Callias’, or ‘Dio’.
In order to resolve some of the problems about Ideas, Plato introduces a
distinction between two types of predication. Using a terminology which
belongs to a later period, we can say that he makes a distinction between
predication per se and predication per accidens. The diVerence between the
two can be brought out thus: S is P per se if being P is part of what it is to be
S. Thus, an oak is a tree per se. (If we allow improper as well as proper parts
of what it is to be S, then an oak is oak per se.) S is P per accidens, on the other
hand, if S is as a matter of fact P, but it is no part of being S to be P. Thus, if
oaks are as a matter of fact plentiful in a certain area, ‘plentiful’ is
predicated only per accidens.2
We have seen that Plato, in the Parmenides, abandoned the Principles of
Purity and Uniqueness. With respect to the Principle of Self-predication he
makes use of his distinction between types of predicate. The Large is indeed
2 The Latin terms are meant to correspond to, though they are not translations of, Plato’s
Greek terms pros heauto (with respect to itself) and pros alla (with respect to others).
212
METAPHYSICS

large: being large is an improper part of what it is to be large. But other
things are not large per se. If my house is large, that is not because being
large is part of what it is to be a house. Hence ‘large’ is not predicated in the
same way of large things and of the Large; and hence the Large and
the other large things cannot be grouped together to form a set as they
have to be in order to generate the regress nicknamed the Third Man.
Similarly, the Slave belongs per se to the Owner: for belonging to an
owner is part of what it is to be a slave. But the relations between human
slaves and human owners, and the relations between both and the Ideal
Slave and the Ideal Owner are not per se but per accidens. Both sets of
relationship, relationships between individuals and between forms, can
function side by side without conXict.
Finally, we can revisit the notion of participation. A major diYculty in
understanding how many things can share in a single Idea was that this
seemed to divide an Idea into parts. We can now say that a Form is one per
se if it is part of what it is to be a Form that it should be single and unique:
otherwise it will not achieve the purpose for which it was invented, to
mark what is common to things bearing the same name. But if there are
many individuals instantiating the Form, then it will be many per accidens.
The common thread that runs through the dialectical arguments and
the suggested solutions to the Parmenidean diYculties about the Theory of
Forms is this: nothing can be predicated in the same way of individuals and
of the Forms in which the individuals partake. One modern analogue of
the Platonic notion of participation is that of class membership: if x
participates in the Form of F, x is a member of the class of Fs. Equally, a
modern analogue of the message of the Parmenides is that one cannot simply
predicate of classes what one predicates of individuals. The paradox that
results if we talk of the class of all classes that are not members of
themselves is the lineal descendant of the paradoxes of the Parmenides.
The adaptation of the Theory of Ideas into a Theory of Forms is carried
out further in the dialogue the Sophist. The oYcial purpose of the dialogue is
to Wnd a deWnition of a sophist. The deWnition eventually oVered is clearly
intended as a joke. What the search for the deWnition is meant to illustrate
is a method of deWnition that is still popular in parlour games. In such
games the respondent thinks of an object that it is the questioner’s task to
identify by putting a series of questions oVering a dichotomy. Is it living or
non-living? If living, is it an animal or a plant? If an animal, is it human
213
METAPHYSICS

or non-human? And so on. In the course of the dialogue Plato examines
the metaphysical presuppositions of such a style of deWnition.
What the pursuit of a deWnition by division will reveal, if it is carried out
in a serious manner, is a tree structure in which species will appear under
genera, and narrower genera under broader genera: human under animal,
animal under living being, and so on. This tree structure is related to the
predication per se which we found an important feature of the Parmenides.
For anything that appears above F in a genus–species tree structure will be
something that is predicated per se. Thus, being an animal is part of what it
is to be human; being a living thing is part of what it is to be an animal.
On the way to the deWnition of the sophist we have to address the
problem of false thought and false discourse. One cannot distinguish
the fraudulent sophist from the true philosopher without discussing the
nature of falsehood. But how can we talk about falsehood without falling
into the traps set out by the historical Parmenides in his poem (237a)? To
say what is false is to say what is not. But what is not is surely Unbeing, and
Unbeing is nonsense for reasons that Parmenides gave (238e). It seems to be
impossible, therefore, to say what is false without talking nonsense. Shall
we revise our account, then, and maintain that to say what is false is to say
that what is, is not, or that what is not, is? Will this avoid Parmenides’
censure?
To deal with this problem we have to disarm Parmenides by forcing him
to agree that what is not, in some respect is, and what is, in a manner is not
(241d). Motion, for instance, is not rest, but that does not mean that
motion is not anything at all (250b). There are many things that even
Being is not: for instance, Being is not motion and Being is not rest
(250c–e).
In the Sophist as in the Parmenides Plato is interested in the relationships
between diVerent Forms. Here, he describes this topic as ‘the interweaving
of Forms’, which he says is what underpins language (259e). We dig a pit for
ourselves if we assume either that no Forms can combine with each other
or that all can (251e–252e). Clearly, some can and some cannot, and we
need to inquire which Forms can combine with which other Forms. Being
(to on) here occupies the central role in this inquiry that the One (to hen)
occupied in the Parmenides. But in addition to Being four other forms—
motion, rest, sameness, and diVerence—are considered and their interrela-
tions explored.
214
METAPHYSICS

DiVerence turns out to have a crucial relationship to Being (256d–e).
When we speak of what is not, we are not talking of Unbeing, the contrary
of Being: we are speaking simply of something that is diVerent from one of
the things there are (257b). The non-beautiful diVers from the beautiful
and the unjust diVers from the just; but the non-beautiful and the unjust
are no less real than the beautiful and the just (257e–258a). If we lump
together all the things that are non-something, or unsomething, then we
get the category of non-being, which is just as real as the category of Being.
So we have blown open the prison into which Parmenides had conWned us
(258c).
We are now in a position to give an account of falsehood in thought and
speech. The problem was that it was not possible to think or say what was
not, because Unbeing was nonsense. But now that we have found that
non-being is perfectly real, we can use this to explain false thoughts and
false sentences.
A typical sentence consists of a noun and a verb, and it says something
about something (262a–e). ‘Theaetetus is sitting’ and ‘Theaetetus is Xying’
are both sentences about Theaetetus, but one of them is true and one false
(263b). They say diVerent things about Theaetetus, and the true one says a
thing about him that is among the things that he is, while the false one says
a thing about him that is among the things that he is not. Flying is not
Unbeing, it is a thing that is—there is quite a lot of it about—but it is a
thing that is diVerent from the things that Theaetetus is, the things that
can truly be said of Theaetetus (263b).
From time to time in the Sophist Plato describes the controversy over the
nature of Being in terms of a battle between groups of philosophical
adversaries. In one place it is a battle between giants and gods, giants
being materialists who think there is nothing but bodies, and gods being
idealists who accept non-bodily Forms as described in the Theory of Ideas
(246a V.). Elsewhere the materialists appear, under the leadership of Hera-
clitus, as the proponents of universal Xux (since all bodies are constantly
changing) while the chief of the friends of Forms appears to be Parmenides,
with his doctrine that all reality is changeless. Finally we are told that the
true philosopher must turn a deaf ear to Heraclitus, and also reject the
doctrine that all true reality is changeless, whether put forward by the
champion of a single Form (Parmenides) or the champion of many Forms
(the Plato of the theory).
215
METAPHYSICS

The Sophist shows us the way to have our cake and eat it and say that
Being encompasses all that is unchangeable and all that is in change (271d).
Aristotelian Forms
Aristotle was a severe critic of the Theory of Ideas. Sometimes he criticizes
it respectfully (e.g. NE 1. 6. 1096a11 V.: Plato is my friend, but truth is a
greater one), and sometimes contemptuously (e.g. APo. 1. 22. 83a28: farewell
to such tarradiddle). His critique, whether rude or civil, always seem
directed to the theory as presented in the middle dialogues, and not to
Whether or not Aristotle refuted Platonism, Filippino Lippi was in no doubt that
Aquinas had done so (Caraffa Chapel, S. Maria sopra Minerva, Rome)
216
METAPHYSICS

the developments of the Theory of Forms in the Parmenides and the Sophist.
He does, however, often tacitly make use of Plato’s later thoughts in his
own writings, in particular when developing his own theory of forms in
Metaphysics F. There, he treats on equal terms problems with Plato’s theory
and diYculties in his own. The book is dense and diYcult, and the account
of it I now give can only claim to be one possible thread to guide us
through its labyrinth.
The diVerence between Aristotelian forms and Platonic Forms is that for
Aristotle forms are not separate (chorista): any form is the form of some
actual individual. As we have seen in our account of Aristotelian physics,
form is paired with matter, and the paradigm examples of forms are the
substantial or accidental forms of material substances. Aristotle cannot
avoid, however, the questions for which Plato sought a solution in his
theory. He must, for instance, provide his own answer to someone who
asks what is common to the many things that are called by the same name
or fall under the same predicate. He must, that is, oVer an account of
universal terms.
In Metaphysics F Aristotle discusses the relationships between being,
substance, matter, and form. He there works to relate the teaching of
the Categories on substance and predication with the teaching of the Physics
on matter and form, and he combines the two together, with modiWcation
and ampliWcation, into a treatise on Being. ‘The question that was asked of
old, and is asked now, and always will be asked and always will be a
problem is ‘‘what is Being?’’ And this is the question; ‘‘what is substance?’’ ’
(F 1. 1028b2–4).
The reason he gives for eliding the two questions recalls the Categories.
Whatever there is must be either a substance or something that belongs to
a substance, such as a quantity or a quality of it. When we are listing the
things that there are, we may count, if you like, health and goodness; but
any actual health is someone’s health, and any actual goodness is the
goodness of something or other. If we ask, in such cases, what really and
truly is, the answer will be: this healthy person, this good dog (F 1.
1028a24–30).
So Aristotle can regard it as obvious that material entities like animals
and plants and earth and water and the sun and the stars are substances (D
8. 1017b8; F 3. 1028b8). He puts on one side, for later treatment that we have
no space to follow, a number of further questions. Are surfaces, lines, and
217
METAPHYSICS

points substances? Are numbers substances? But he addresses right away,
though in a roundabout manner, the great Platonic question: Are there
separate substances of any kind, distinct from those we can perceive with
our senses? (F 3. 1028b8–32).
Essence and Quiddity
We saw that in the Parmenides Plato introduced a form of predication per se:
S is P per se if being P is part of what it is to be S. Aristotle is keenly
interested in this form of predication. In the Categories it is predication in
the category of (second) substance. In the Metaphysics it is predication
that answers the question what kind of thing something is (ti esti). Some-
times Aristotle speaks of the ‘what-is-it?’ of a thing; and in the context
of the present discussion he often uses an almost untranslatable expression,
to ti en einai, composed of the deWnite article, the question ‘what-is-it?’
and the inWnitive of the verb ‘to be’. This translates literally as ‘the what-
is-it to be’ of a thing, i.e. the type of being that answers the question ‘What
is it?’
Latin commentators on Aristotle sometimes used the word ‘quidditas’ to
correspond to this Greek expression; the Latin question ‘Quid est?’ corres-
ponds to the Greek question ‘Ti esti’. Many English scholars use ‘essence’as
a translation. That is quite possible; but I shall take my cue from the Latin
and use the word ‘quiddity’. ‘Essence’ is, of course, itself a Latinism,
deriving from the Latin verb for being, ‘esse’, just as the Greek ‘ousia’
derives from the Greek word for being. There is good reason, however, to
stick with the traditional translation ‘substance’ for ‘ousia’. We can then
use the word ‘essence’ to cope with another crabbed Aristotelian construc-
tion. We can speak, for example, of the essence of gold where Aristotle
would speak of ‘the for-gold being’, using the inWnitive after the Greek
dative case, meaning ‘what it is for gold to be gold’. This last construction,
again, is descended from Plato’s concern with questions about what is and
what is not part of what being gold involves. For most purposes, ‘quiddity’
and ‘essence’ can be treated as synonyms.
With these preliminaries, we can state the agenda that Aristotle sets for
himself at the beginning of the central section of Metaphysics F. ‘Substance’,
he says, has four principal meanings: the quiddity, the universal, the genus,
218
METAPHYSICS

and the subject. He treats of each of these four items in later chapters: the
subject in chapter 3, the quiddity in chapters 4 and 5, the genus not until
chapter 12, and Wnally the universal in chapter 14.
The subject (to hypokeimenon) turns out to be the same as the Wrst substance
of the Categories: it is that of which everything is predicated and which is
itself predicated of nothing. Such Wrst substances, we are told, are compos-
ites of matter and form; in the way that a statue is related to its bronze and
its shape (1029a3–5): so much is familiar to us from the Physics. But matter is
not substance (because pure matter cannot exist alone; 1029a27), and if we
are to discover whether form is substance, we have to investigate its
relation to quiddity.
In treating of quiddity Aristotle makes use of a distinction he drew in his
lexicon in Metaphysics D (1017a7) between being per se (kath’auto) and being per
accidens (kata sumbebekos). I have already used these expressions in giving an
account of the Parmenides, though Plato’s Greek expressions are not quite
the same. The Latin phrases are simply transverbalizations of Aristotle’s
Greek expressions. It is futile to seek to render them into English, since the
meaning of any English equivalents, as of the Latin and Greek phrases,
would have to be gleaned from the contexts in which they occur. The
phrases are used in various contexts, for instance in that of causation. A
builder is a per se cause of a house: he builds it qua builder. But if the builder
happens also to be blind, then the headline ‘Blind man builds house’ gives
not the per se but the per accidens cause of the house.
The distinction is applied to the case of being in the following way.
Entities in all ten of the categories, he tells us, are examples of per se beings:
a thing’s colour or shape is as much a per se being as the thing itself (D 7.
1017a22). Clearly, the distinction between per se and per accidens is not the
same as that between substance and accident. Accidents, confusingly, are
per se beings. It is a substance-qualiWed-by-an-accident that is a per accidens
being. So while the wisdom of Socrates is a per se being, wise Socrates is not;
he is a being per accidens.
Aristotle uses his deWnition in deWning quiddity: a quiddity is what a
thing is said to be per se. You may be a scholar, but you are not a scholar
per se as you are a person per se (F 4. 1029b15). ‘The scholar Theophrastus’
names a per accidens being. However, ‘the man Theophrastus’ names a per se
being, and ‘Theophrastus is a man’ is a per se predication. Being a man is
the quiddity or essence of Theophrastus.
219
METAPHYSICS

A quiddity, we are further told, is what is given by a deWnition. This is
puzzling, for surely not only per se beings have deWnitions. No doubt, for
Aristotle, a postman would be a per accidens being: but can we not deWne
‘postman’ as ‘man who brings the post’ (cf. 1029b27)? Aristotle responds
that we do not always have a deWnition of X when we have a series of words
equivalent to ‘X’: otherwise the whole epic would be a deWnition of the
word ‘Iliad’ (F 4. 1030a9). A deWnition must be in terms of species and
genus, and only such a deWnition will generate a quiddity (F 4. 1030a12).
Accidents as well as substances can be deWned in this way: we can ask
what ‘triangular’ means as well as asking what a horse is. To allow for this
Aristotle is willing to soften his original strict account of deWnition.
‘DeWnition’, he says, like ‘being’, ‘quiddity’, and ‘essence’, are all analogous
terms: all four of them belong primarily only to substances, just as ‘health’
is predicated primarily of patients and only secondarily of medicines and
instruments. Secondarily, they can be applied to accidents, and thirdly
even to per accidens beings (F 4. 1030b1; 5. 1031a9).
Aristotle next asks: what is the relation between a thing and its quiddity?
His answer is that they are identical: and this takes us by surprise, since a
thing is surely concrete and a quiddity is surely abstract. His initial
justiWcation of his surprising claim is that a thing is surely the same
substance as itself, and a thing’s quiddity is called its substance. The
Categories seems to oVer a fairly straightforward way of sorting out the
mystery here: Socrates, for example, is identical with a Wrst substance, and
his quiddity is his second substance. But here in Metaphysics F Aristotle is
looking for the answer to the question, what is really meant by ‘second
substance’? In ‘Socrates is human’ what does ‘human’ signify?
The Wrst answer Aristotle considers is that of Plato: it stands for a
Humanity that is something distinct from Socrates. Aristotle uses a variant
of the Third Man argument to show that this will not do. If a horse was
distinct from its quiddity, the horse’s quiddity would have its own distinct
quiddity, and so on for ever. The chapter ends with the remark, ‘It is clear
then that for things that are primary and spoken of per se the thing and its
essence are one and the same’ (F 6. 1032a8).
What this seems to mean is this. In a sentence such as ‘Socrates is wise’
the word ‘wise’ signiWes an accident, the wisdom of Socrates, which is
distinct from Socrates. But in ‘Socrates is human’ the word ‘human’ does
not signify anything distinct from Socrates himself. We need to distinguish
220
METAPHYSICS

between Socrates and his wisdom because they have two diVerent histories:
as Socrates gets older, Socrates’ wisdom may increase or perhaps evaporate.
But Socrates and his humanity do not have two diVerent histories: to be
Socrates is to be human, and if Socrates ceases to be a human being he
ceases to exist.
But is there not still the diVerence between concrete and abstract to be
taken account of ? Aristotle helps us with this in his discussion of coming-
into-being in chapters 7 and 8, where he makes the point that when a thing
comes into being, neither its form nor its quiddity begins to exist. Using his
long-overworked analogy, he says that if I manufacture a bronze sphere, I
do not thereby make either the bronze or the spherical shape. He goes on
to generalize:
What comes into existence must always be divisible, and there must be two
identiWable components, one matter and the other form. . . . it is clear from
what has been said that the part which is called form or substance does not
come into existence; what comes into existence is the composite entity which
bears its name. (F 8. 1033b16–19)
He goes on to draw an anti-Platonic conclusion: if everyday enmattered
forms do not come into existence at all, there is no need to invoke separate,
Ideal, Forms to explain how forms come into existence (F 8. 1033b26).
We do not even need to invoke Forms to explain how an individual
substance gets its form. Human beings derive their form not from an Ideal
Human, but from their parents (F 8. 1033b32). The father (plus the mother,
though Aristotle was ignorant of this) is responsible for introducing form
into the appropriate matter. ‘The Wnal product, a form of such-and-such a
kind in this Xesh and these bones, is Callias or Socrates. What makes them
distinct is their matter, which is distinct; but they are the same in form (for
that is not subdivided)’ (F 8. 1034a8). In this passage Aristotle enunciates a
thesis that was to have a long history, namely the thesis that matter is the
principle of individuation. According to this thesis, however diVerent two
things may be from each other, it is not the diVerences between their
properties or characteristics that make them distinct from each other. For
it is possible for things to resemble each other totally without being
identical with each other. Two peas, for instance, however alike they are,
are two peas and not one pea because they are two diVerent parcels of
matter.
221
METAPHYSICS

In some places Aristotle identiWes form and quiddity (e.g. F 7. 1032a33)
and he goes on to say that in the case of humans and other animals,
the form and the quiddity are to be identiWed with the soul (F 10. 1035b14).
This presents a problem: if the soul is the quiddity, and the quiddity is
the same as what has the quiddity, does this mean that Socrates is
identical with Socrates’ soul? Aristotle seems brieXy ready to contemplate
this possibility (F 11. 1037a8), but that is not his considered opinion, and
he goes on to qualify his identiWcation of soul, form, and quiddity. ‘Man
and horse and whatever is predicated universally of individuals are not
substance. Substance is the composite of this deWnition and this matter
taken universally’ (F 10. 1035b27). That means that having Xesh and
blood is indeed part of being human; but having this particular Xesh
and blood is not part of being human. It is part, however, of being
Socrates.
We may wonder what is the relationship between the pair matter–form
and the pair body–soul. Aristotle at F 11. 1037a5 says that an animal is
composed of body and soul, and he clearly identiWes body with matter, but
at that point he says not that the soul is form, but that it is Wrst substance.
He goes on shortly afterwards to say that the primary substance is the form
inherent in the thing, and that substance (of another kind) is the compos-
ite of this and the matter (F 11. 1037a29). To make this cohere with his
earlier teaching, we have to assume that he is here calling ‘Wrst substance’
what in the Categories he called ‘second substance’!
We are left, however, with a serious problem. In studying an
earlier passage of the Metaphysics we had good reason to conclude that
Aristotle was teaching that in ‘Socrates is human’ the predicate ‘human’
signiWed nothing other than Socrates. Now it seems to be suggested that it
signiWes Socrates’ form or soul: it is that which provides the deWnition of
Socrates, and it is here being distinguished from Socrates’ matter. Socrates’
body is clearly part of Socrates: but is it part of Socrates’ deWnition or
quiddity?
Some light is thrown on this by Aristotle’s treatment of deWnition.
DeWnitions have parts, and the substances they deWne also have parts:
Aristotle takes a chapter to explain that if A is a part of X this does not
always mean that the deWnition of A has to be part of the deWnition of X.
(You don’t have to mention an acute angle in deWning a right angle; just
the reverse, in fact; F 11. 1035b6.) The deWnition has to mention parts of the
222
METAPHYSICS

form, but not parts of the matter. Parts of the form are to be identiWed by
the method of deWnition by division, into genus and species, that we met in
Plato’s later dialogues.
We can now see why it is misguided to ask whether Socrates’ body is part
of his quiddity. Body and soul are parts of Socrates (parts of a rather special
kind, as will be explained in the next chapter). Being rational and being
animal are parts of the quiddity of Socrates, and being animal includes
having a body (an organic body of a particular kind). But having a body is not at
all the same as a body. To ask whether Socrates’ body is part of his quiddity is
to fall into the confusion of concrete and abstract of which we were earlier
tempted to accuse Aristotle himself. On the other hand, we must say
something similar about soul. The soul cannot simply be identiWed with
the quiddity, as Aristotle sometimes incautiously suggests: to be human is to
have a soul of an appropriate kind incarnate in an organic body.
We have done our best to make sense of the doctrine of substance in the
Metaphysics. The topic was introduced by Aristotle as a method of answering
the fundamental question, What is being? It is now time to address that
question frontally.
Being and Existence
It is clear that Aristotle uses the expression to on in the same manner as
Parmenides: Being is whatever is anything whatever. Whenever Aristotle
explains its meaning he does so by explaining the sense of the Greek verb
‘to be’ (e.g. D 7. 1017a6 V.; F 2. 1028a19 V.).
Being contains whatever items can be the subjects of true sentences
containing the word ‘is’, whether or not the ‘is’ is followed by a predicate.
Both ‘Socrates is’ and ‘Socrates is wise’ tell us something about Being.
Predicates in all the categories, Aristotle tells us, signify being, because any
verb can be replaced by a predicate that will contain the copula ‘is’:
‘Socrates runs’, for instance, can be replaced by ‘Socrates is a runner’.
Every being in any category other than substance is a property or mod-
iWcation of substance. That is why the study of substance is the way to
understand the nature of Being.
With Aristotle, as with Parmenides, it is a mistake to equate being with
existence. In the dictionary entry for ‘being’ in the philosophical lexicon
223
METAPHYSICS

Metaphysics D existence is not even mentioned as one of the senses of the
word. This is surprising, for from time to time in his logical works he seems
to have identiWed it as a special sense. Thus in Sophistical Refutations he makes
the point that ‘to be something is not the same as to be, period’, i.e. to be
and to be F are not the same (5. 167a2). He uses this principle to dissolve
fallacious inferences such as ‘What is not is, because what is not is thought
of’ or ‘X is not, because X is not a man’. He makes a similar move in
connection with the being F of that which has ceased to be: e.g. from
‘Homer is a poet’ it does not follow that he is (Int. 11. 21a25).
In a famous passage of Posterior Analytics (11. 7. 92b14) Aristotle says ‘to be is
not part of the substance (ousia) of anything, because what is (to on) is not a
genus’. This can be taken as saying that existence is not part of the essence
of anything: i.e. that there is such a thing is not what anything is. If that is what
it means, then it deserves the compliment paid by Schopenhauer when he
said that with prophetic insight Aristotle forestalled the Ontological Argu-
ment.3 But it is not clear that this is the only sense that can be given to the
passage.
The premiss that to on is not a genus need not mean that there is no such
kind of thing as the things that there are, true though that may be. Aristotle
elsewhere argues that being is not a genus because a genus is diVerentiated
into species by diVerences that are distinct from it, whereas any diVerentia
is a being of some kind (Metaph. B 3. 998b21). The clearest case where ‘be’
must mean ‘exist’ is when it is attached to ‘entia per accidens’: when he says
‘wise Socrates is’ and distinguishes it from ‘Socrates is wise’ he can hardly
mean anything else than that wise Socrates exists, and is among the things
that there are. It is much more diYcult to decide, when Aristotle writes
simply ‘Socrates is’, whether this means that Socrates exists or that Socrates
is a subject of predication: we cannot pin him down to the distinction that
seems so clear to us between the copula ‘is’ and the ‘is’ of existence.
When ‘is’ does occur as a copula, joining subject and predicate, we may ask
what it signiWes. Two possible accounts are suggested by the Aristotelian
texts. One is that it has no signiWcation: it is an incomplete symbol, not to be
construed by itself, but to be taken with the predicate-term that follows it, so
that ‘ . . . is white’ is to be taken as standing for the accidental form being
3 See G. E. M. Anscombe, in Anscombe and P. T. Geach, Three Philosophers (Oxford: Blackwell,
1961), 20–1.
224
METAPHYSICS

‘white’. There will then be no general answer to the question what ‘is’
denotes, but there will in general be an answer to the question what ‘ . . . is P’
denotes, namely an entity in one of the ten categories.
The other, which is easier to Wt to the texts, is that it stands for being,
where ‘being’ is to be taken as a verbal noun like ‘running’. If we say this, it
seems that we must add that there are various types of being: the being that
is denoted by ‘is’ in the substantial predicate ‘ . . . is a horse’ is substantial
being, whereas the being that is denoted by ‘is’ in the accidental predicate
‘ . . . is white’ is accidental being of a kind corresponding to the category of
quality. Further, more detailed, diVerence can be drawn between diVerent
kinds of being and therefore diVerent senses of ‘is’.
A passage that strongly supports this reading is the second chapter of
Metaph. H. Here Aristotle says that there are many ways in which things
diVer from each other. Sometimes it is because there are diVerent ways in
which their components are combined: sometimes these are mingled, as in
a punch, sometimes they are tied together, as in a sheaf, sometimes they
are glued together, as in a book. Sometimes the diVerence is one of
position: a stone block may be a threshold or a lintel according as it is
above or below a door. Time makes the diVerence between breakfast and
supper, and direction makes the diVerence between one wind and another.
He goes on to say that ‘is’ is said in as many diVerent senses. A threshold is
because it is placed in such and such a position, and so its being is to be so
placed. For ice to be is for it to be solidiWed in such and such a way (G 3.
1043b15 V.).
While it is a mistake to look to Aristotle’s treatment of being for an
account of existence, it would be wrong to think that he is unaware of the
issues that have exercised philosophers in this area. When philosophers ask
themselves which things really exist and which do not, they may be
worrying about the contrast between the concrete and the abstract (e.g.
Socrates v. wisdom, Socrates v. humanity), or the contrast between the
Wctional and the factual (e.g. Pegasus v. Bucephalus), or the contrast
between the extant and the defunct (the Great Pyramid v. the Pharos of
Alexandria). In diVerent places Aristotle treats of all three problems.
We have seen at length how Aristotle deals with abstractions by intro-
ducing the categories. Accidents are modiWcations of substance, so that
statements about abstractions, such as colours, actions, and changes, are
analysable into ones about Wrst substances. Predicates in the category of
225
METAPHYSICS

substance, on the other hand, do not involve the existence of any entity—
such as a Form of Humanity—distinct from the individual substance of the
appropriate kind.
Aristotle
provides
himself
with
the
means
to
deal
with
the
problems about Wctions by introducing a sense of ‘is’ in which it
means ‘is true’ (D 7. 1017a31). A Wction is a genuine thought, but it is not,
i.e. is not true. With regard to the extant and the defunct, Aristotle
solves problems about things that come into existence and go out of
existence by means of the doctrine of matter and form. To exist is to be
matter under a certain form, to be a thing of a certain kind. Socrates ceases
to exist if he ceases to possess his form, that is, if he ceases to be a human
being.
We have still not explicitly considered the most important of Aristotle’s
contributions to metaphysics, namely the doctrine of actuality and poten-
tiality. If we consider any item, from a pint of milk to a policeman, we shall
Wnd a number of things true of that item and a number of other things
which, though not at that time true of it, can become true of it at some
other time. Thus, the pint of liquid is milk, but it can be turned into butter;
the policeman is fat, prone, and speaks only English, but if he wants to he
can become slim, start mowing the lawn, and learn French. The things that
something currently is, or is doing, are called by Aristotle its actualities
(energeiai); the things that it can be, or can do, are its potentialities (dynameis).
Thus the liquid is actually milk but potentially butter; the policeman is
actually fat but potentially slim; and so on. Potentiality, in contrast to
actuality, is the ability to undergo a change of some kind, whether through
one’s own action or through the action of other agents upon oneself.
A change from fat to slim is an accidental change: in such a case a substance
has the potentiality to be now F and now not F. A change, however, from
milk to butter would be, for Aristotle, a substantial change. It is not the
substance, but the matter, that has the potentiality to take on diVerent
substantial forms.
Of course in studying the pairs matter–form and substance–accident, we
have in fact become acquainted with particular types of potentiality and
actuality. The importance of the analysis in the history of metaphysics is
that Aristotle saw it as a way of disarming the challenges of Parmenides,
Heraclitus, and Plato. The early metaphysicians had spelt out the paradoxes
that could be generated either by saying that being came from being, or
226
METAPHYSICS

that being came from non-being. Aristotle wants to cut between the two by
saying that actual being comes from potential being. This, of course, is not
a magic formula that will dissolve all philosophical puzzlement: but it is an
appropriate template in which to insert detailed analyses of diVerent types
of possible change.
Aristotle did not call his own investigations ‘Metaphysics’; that name
initially just meant ‘After Physics’ and was given it by his editors to mark
the text’s place in the corpus. He does, however, say that there is a
discipline ‘which theorizes about Being qua being, and the things which
belong to Being taken in itself’ (C 1. 1003a21). This discipline is called ‘Wrst
philosophy’, and it interests itself in Wrst principles and supreme causes.
Aristotle seems to give two conXicting accounts of its subject matter: one
that, unlike the special sciences, it deals with Being as a whole; the other
that it deals with a particular kind of being, namely divine, independent,
and immutable substance (for this reason he sometimes calls it ‘theology’).
Are we to say that these are two diVerent accounts of Being qua being?
No: there is no such thing as Being qua being: there are only diVerent
ways of studying Being. You can study Being qua being, but that is not
to study a mysterious object but rather to undertake a particular sort
of study. This study, like all Aristotelian sciences, is an inquiry into
causes: and when we study Being qua being we are looking for the most
universal and primary causes. Contrast this with the other disciplines:
when we study human physiology, we study humans qua animals, that
is to say we study the structures and functions that humans have in
common with animals. But of course there is no such entity as a human
qua animal.
To study something as a being is to study it in virtue of what it has
in common with all other things. (Precious little, you might think: and
Aristotle himself says, as we have seen, that nothing can have being as
its essence or nature.) But a study of the universe as being is to study it
as a single overarching system embracing all the causes of things
coming into being and remaining in existence. At the supreme point
of the hierarchy of Aristotelian causes—as we shall see more fully in
Chapter 9—are the heavenly moved and unmoved movers that are the
Wnal causes of all generation and corruption. When Aristotle says that
Wrst philosophy studies the whole of Being, he is assigning to it the Weld
it is to explain; when he says that it is the science of the divine, he is
227
METAPHYSICS

assigning to it its ultimate principles of explanation. Thus Aristotle’s
Wrst philosophy is both the science of Being qua being, and also
theology.
Epicureans and Stoics devoted little attention to the ontological questions
that preoccupied Plato and Aristotle. One development, however, deserves
a brief remark.
In one of his letters Seneca writes to explain to a friend how things are
classiWed by species and genus: man is a species of animal, but above the
genus animal there is the genus body, since some bodies are animate and
others (e.g. rocks) are not. Is there a genus above body? Yes: there is the
genus of what there is (quod est): for of the things there are, some are bodily
and some are not. This, according to Seneca, is the supreme genus.
The Stoics want to place above this yet another, more primary genus. To these
Stoics the primary genus seems to be ‘something’—let me explain why. In nature,
they say, some things are and some things are not, and nature includes even those
things that are not—things that enter the mind, like Centaurs, giants and
whatever other delusory Wctions take on an image although they lack substance.
(Ep. 58. 11–15)
Here, we can see clearly identiWed a use of the verb ‘to be’ in the sense of
‘exist’ without any of the complications dating from Parmenides.4 This is a
great advance. On the other hand, in treating the existent and the non-
existent as two species of a single supreme ontological genus, namely
‘something’ (ti, quid), the Stoics sowed the seed of centuries of philosophical
confusion. We shall meet the fruits of this confusion in later volumes. Its
most elaborate product is the ontological argument for the existence of
God; its most fashionable oVspring is the distinction between worlds that
are actual and worlds that are possible.
Despite the signiWcance of this Stoic development, it is not until we
come to the Neoplatonists that metaphysics resumes its importance in the
ancient world as the prime element of philosophy. But in an author such
as Plotinus, metaphysics has taken such a theological turn that his teaching
is best considered in Chapter 9 devoted to the philosophy of religion.
4 See LS i. 163.
228
METAPHYSICS

7
Soul and Mind
T
he soul is much older than philosophy. In many places and in many
cultures human beings have imagined themselves surviving death,
and the ancient equivalents of the world ‘soul’ Wrst appear as an expression
for whatever in us is immortal. Once philosophy began, the possibility of an
afterlife and the nature of the soul came to be one of its central concerns,
straddling the boundary between religion and science.
Pythagoras’ Metempsychosis
Pythagoras, often venerated as the Wrst of philosophers, was also renowned
as a champion of survival after death. He did not, however, believe as many
others have done that at death the soul entered a diVerent and shadowy
world; he believed that it returned to the world we all live in, but it did so
as the soul of a diVerent body. He himself claimed to have inherited his soul
from a distinguished line of spiritual ancestors, and reported that he could
remember Wghting, some centuries earlier, as a hero at the siege of Troy.
Such transmigration (which need not continue for ever) was quite diVer-
ent from the blessed immortality of the gods, altogether exempt from
death (D.L. 8. 45).
Souls could transmigrate in this way, according to Pythagoras, not only
between one human and another, but also across species. He once stopped
a man whipping a puppy because he claimed to have recognized in its
whimper the voice of a dead friend (D.L. 8. 36). Shakespeare was struck by
this doctrine, and refers to it several times. Malvolio, catechized about
Pythagoras in Twelfth Night, tells us that his belief was

Pythagoras calculating for his disciples the height of long-dead Hercules (from a
Wfteenth-century manuscript of Aulus Gellius)

That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.
(iv. ii. 50–1)
And when Shylock is abused in The Merchant of Venice, the possibility is raised
of migration in the reverse direction.
Thou almost mak’st me waver in my faith
To hold opinion with Pythagoras
That souls of animals infuse themselves
Into the trunks of men.
(iv. i. 130–3)
Pythagoras did not oVer philosophical arguments for survival and transmi-
gration; instead he claimed to prove it in his own case by identifying his
belongings in a previous incarnation. He was thus the Wrst of a long line of
philosophers to take memory as a criterion of personal identity (Diodorus
10. 6. 2). His contemporary Alcmaeon seems to have been the Wrst to oVer a
philosophical argument in this area, claiming, by a dubious inference from
an obscure premiss, that the soul must be immortal because it is in
perpetual motion like the divine bodies of the heavens (Aristotle, de An.
1. 2. 405a29–b1).
Empedocles adopted an elaborate version of Pythagorean transmigration
as part of his cyclical conception of history. As a result of a primeval fall,
sinners such as murderers and perjurers survive as wandering spirits for
thrice ten thousand years, incarnate in many diVerent forms, exchanging
one hard life for another (DK 31 B115). Since the bodies of animals are thus
the dwelling places of punished souls, Empedocles told his followers to
abstain from eating living things. In slaughtering an animal you might
even be attacking your own son or mother (DK 31 B137). Moreover,
transmigration is possible not only into animals but also into plants, so
even vegetarians should be careful what they eat, avoiding in particular
beans and laurels (DK 31 B141). After death, if you had to be an animal, it
was best to become a lion; if a plant, best to become a laurel. Empedocles
himself claimed to have experienced transmigration not only as a human
but also in the vegetable and animal realm.
I was once in the past a boy, once a girl, once a tree,
Once too a bird, and a silent Wsh in the sea.
(DK 31 B117)
231
SOUL AND MIND

In this early period, inquiry into the nature of the soul in the present life
seems to have been subsequent to speculation on its location in an afterlife.
All the earliest thinkers seem to have taken a materialist view: the soul
consisted either in air (Anaximenes and Anaximander) or Wre (Parmenides
and Heraclitus). It took some time, however, for the problem to be
addressed: how does a material element, however Wne and Xuid, perform
the soul’s characteristic functions of feeling and thought?
Heraclitus oVers only a splendid simile:
As a spider in the middle of its web notices as soon as a Xy damages any of its
threads, and rushes thither as though grieving for the breaking of the thread, so a
person’s soul, if any part of the body is hurt, hurries quickly thither as if unable to
bear the hurt of the body to which it is tightly and harmoniously joined. (DK 22
B67a)
This paragraph is the ancestor of many philosophical attempts to explain
the capacities and behaviour of humans as the activities of a tiny animal
within—though later philosophers were more inclined to view the soul as
an internal homunculus than as an internal arthropod.
Perception and Thought
Empedocles was the Wrst philosopher to oVer a detailed account of
how perception takes place. Like his predecessors he was a materialist.
The soul, like everything else in the universe, was a compound of earth, air,
Wre, and water. Sensation takes place by a matching of each of these
elements, as they occur in the objects of perception, with their counter-
parts in our sense-organs. Strife and Love, the forces that in Empedocles’
system operate upon the elements, also have their part in this matching
procedure, which is governed by the principle that like is perceived
by like.
We see the earth by earth, by water water see,
The air of the sky by air, by Wre the Wre in Xame,
Love we perceive by love, strife by sad strife, the same.
(DK 31 B109)
The process seems to take place like this. Objects in the world give oV an
eZuence that reaches the pores of our eyes; sound is an eZuence that
232
SOUL AND MIND

penetrates our ears. If perception is to take place, the pores and the
eZuences have to match each other (DK 31 A86). This matching must,
of course, take place at the level of the elements, the fundamental
principles of explanation in Empedocles’ system. In some cases this is
simple: sound is carried by air, which is echoed by the air in the inner
ear. In the case of sight it is more complicated, and must be a matter of the
proportions of each of the elements, as suggested in the fragment above.
The most complex mixture of all the elements is blood, and as the blood
churns round the heart this produces thought. The reWned nature of the
blood’s constitution is what explains the wide-ranging nature of thought
(DK 31 B105, 107).
The crude nature of Empedocles’ materialism made him easy game for
later philosophers of mind. Aristotle complained that he had not distin-
guished between perception and thought. Others pointed out that other
things besides eyes and ears had pores: why then were sponges and
pumices not capable of perception? The atomist Democritus oVered an
answer to this question. The visual image was the product of an
interaction between eZuences from the seen object and eZuences
from the person seeing: this image or impression was formed in the
intervening air, and then entered the pupil of the eye (KRS 589). But
Democritus, like Empedocles, was unable to oVer any remotely convin-
cing account of thought, and so, like him, fell foul of Aristotle’s
criticism.
The Presocratic whom later Greeks revered as a philosopher of mind was
Anaxagoras. Anaxagoras believed that the universe began as a tiny complex
unit which expanded and evolved into the world we know, but that at
every stage of evolution every single thing contains a portion of everything
else. This development is presided over by Mind (nous), which is itself
outside the evolutionary process.
Other things have a portion of everything, but Mind is unlimited and independent
and is unmixed with any kind of stuV, but stands all alone by itself. For if it was not
by itself, but was mixed with anything else, it would have a share in every kind of
stuV, since as I said earlier in everything there is a portion of everything. The
things mixed with it would prevent it from controlling everything in the way it
does now when it is alone by itself. For it is the Wnest and purest of all things, and it
has all knowledge of and all power over everything. All things that have souls, the
greater and the lesser, are governed by Mind. (KRS 476)
233
SOUL AND MIND

Anaxagoras distinguishes between souls, which are part of the material
world, and a godlike Mind, which is immaterial, or at least is made of a
unique, ethereal, kind of matter. Whereas for Empedocles like was known
by like, Anaxagoras’ Mind can know everything only because it is unlike
anything. There is not only the one grand cosmic Mind: some other things
(presumably humans) have a share in mind, so that there are lesser minds
as well as greater (KRS 476, 482).
Immortality in Plato’s Phaedo
Among those inXuenced by Anaxagoras was Socrates; but it is diYcult to be
sure what the historic Socrates truly thought about the soul and the mind.
Socrates in Plato’s Apology appears to be agnostic about the possibility of an
afterlife. Is death, he wonders, a dreamless sleep or is it a journey to another
world to meet the glorious dead? ‘We go our ways, I to die and you to live:
which is better, only God knows’ (40c–42a). The Platonic Socrates in the
Phaedo, however, is a most articulate protagonist of the thesis that the soul
not only survives death, but is better oV after death (63e).
The starting point of his discussion is the conception of a human being
as a soul imprisoned in a body. True philosophers care little for bodily
pleasures such as food and drink and sex, and they Wnd the body a
hindrance rather than a help in philosophic pursuits (64c–65c). ‘Thought
is best when the mind is gathered into itself, and none of these things
trouble it—neither sounds nor sights nor pain, nor again any pleasure—
when it takes leave of the body and has as little as possible to do with it’
(65c). So philosophers in pursuit of truth keep their souls detached from
their bodies. But death is the separation of soul from body: hence a true
philosopher has throughout his life in eVect been craving for death (67e).
Socrates’ interlocutors, Simmias and Cebes, Wnd his words edifying: but
Cebes feels obliged to point out that most people will reject the idea that
the soul can survive the body. They believe that at death the soul ceases to
exist, vanishing into nothingness like a puV of smoke (70a). Socrates agrees
that he needs to oVer proofs that after a man’s death his soul still exists.
First he oVers an argument from opposites. If two things are opposites,
each of them comes from the other. If you go to sleep, you must have been
awake; if you wake up, you must have been asleep. If A becomes larger than
234
SOUL AND MIND

B, A must have been smaller than B; if A becomes better than B, A must
have been worse than B. So opposites like larger and smaller, better and worse,
come into being from each other. But death and life are opposites, and the
same holds here. If death comes from life, must not life in turn come from
death? Since life after death is not visible, it must be in another world
(70c–72e).
Socrates’ next argument sets out to prove the existence of a non-
embodied soul not after, but before, its life in the body. He argues Wrst
that knowledge is recollection, and then that recollection involves pre-
existence. We often see things, he says, that are more or less equal in size;
but we never see any two things in the world absolutely equal to each
other. Our idea of equality, therefore, cannot be derived from experience.
The approximately equal things we see are simply reminders of an absolute
The death of Socrates has been the subject of many paintings. This one in the Uffizi is
by Claude Dufresnoy (1611–68).
235
SOUL AND MIND

equality we have encountered earlier. But this encounter did not take place
in our present life, nor by means of the senses: it must have taken place in a
previous life and by the operation of pure intellect. What goes for the Idea
of absolute equality must work also for other similar Ideas, like absolute
goodness and absolute beauty (73a–77d).
Thirdly, Socrates argues from the concepts of dissolubility and indissolu-
bility. Whatever can disintegrate, as the body does at death, must
be composite and changeable. But the Ideas with which the soul is
concerned are unchangeable, unlike the visible and fading beauties we
see with our eyes. Within the visible world of Xux, the soul staggers like
a drunkard; it is only when it returns within itself that it passes into the
world of purity, eternity, and immortality in which it is at home. If even
bodies, when mummiWed in Egypt, can survive for many years, it is hardly
credible that the soul dissolves at the moment of death. Instead, provided it
is a soul puriWed by philosophy, it will depart to an invisible world of bliss
(78b–81a).
In response to these arguments, Simmias oVers a diVerent conception of
the soul. Consider, he says, a lyre made out of wood and strings, which is
tuned by the tension of the strings. A living human body may be compared
to a lyre in tune, and a dead body to a lyre out of tune. It would be absurd
to argue that because attunement is not a material thing like wood and
strings, it could survive the smashing of the lyre. When the strings of the
body lose their tone through injury or disease, the soul must perish like the
tunefulness of a broken lyre (84c–86e).
Cebes, too, has an objection to make. He agrees that the soul is tougher
than the body and need not come to an end when the body does; in the
normal course of life, the body suVers frequent wear and tear and needs
constant repair by the soul. But a soul might be immortal, in the sense that
it can survive death, without being imperishable, in the sense that it will
live for ever. Even if it transmigrates from body to body, perhaps one day it
will pass away, just as a weaver, who has made and worn out many coats in
his lifetime, one day meets his death and leaves a coat behind (86e–88b).
Socrates produces several reasons for rejecting Simmias’ analogy. Being
in tune admits of degrees; but no soul can be more or less a soul than
another. It is the tension of the strings that causes the lyre to be in tune,
but in the human case the relationship goes in the other direction: it is the
soul that keeps the body in order (92a–95e).
236
SOUL AND MIND

In response to Cebes, Socrates introduces a distinction between what
later philosophers would call the necessary and contingent properties of
things. Human beings may or may not be tall: tallness is a contingent
property of humans. The number three, however, cannot but be odd, and
snow cannot but be cold: these properties are necessary to them and not
just contingent. Coldness cannot turn into heat, and consequently snow,
which is necessarily cold, must either retire or perish at the approach of
heat (103a–105c).
We can generalize: not only will opposites not receive opposites, but
nothing that necessarily brings with it an opposite will admit the opposite
of what it brings. Now the soul brings life, just as snow brings cold. But
death is the opposite of life, so that the soul can no more admit death than
snow can admit heat. But what cannot admit death is immortal, and so the
soul is immortal. Unlike the snow, it does not perish, but retires to another
world (105c–107a).
Socrates’ arguments convince Simmias and Cebes in the dialogue, but
surely they should not have done so. Is it true that opposites always come
from opposites? And even when opposites do come from opposites, must
the cycle continue for ever? Even if sleeping has to follow waking, may not
one last waking be followed (as the Socrates of the Apology surmised) by
everlasting sleep? And however true it may be that the soul cannot abide
death, why must it retire elsewhere when the body dies, rather than perish
like the melted snow?
The Anatomy of the Soul
In the Phaedo the soul is treated as a single, uniWed entity. Elsewhere, Plato
oVers us accounts of the soul in which it has diVerent parts with diVerent
functions. In the Phaedrus, having oVered a brief proof, reminiscent of
Alcmaeon, that soul must be immortal because it is self-moving, Plato
turns to describing its structure. Think of it, he says, as a triad: a charioteer
with a pair of horses, one good and one bad, driving towards a heavenly
banquet (246b). The good horse strives upwards, while the bad horse
constantly pulls the chariot downwards. The horses are clearly meant to
represent two diVerent parts of the soul, but their exact functions are never
made clear. Plato applies his analogy mainly in the course of setting out the
237
SOUL AND MIND

lineaments of his ideal philosophical type of homoerotic love. When we
reach the point where we have a man and a boy and four horses all in bed
together, the metaphor has obviously got quite out of hand (256a).
The anatomy of the soul is more soberly described in the Republic. In
book 4 Socrates suggests that the soul contains three elements, just as his
imaginary state contains three classes. ‘Do we learn things with one part,’
he asks, ‘feel anger with another, and with yet a third desire the pleasures
of food and sex and the like? Or when we have such impulses are we
operating with our whole soul?’ (436a–b). He Wnds his answer by attending
to the phenomena of mental conXict. A man maybe thirsty and yet
unwilling to drink (perhaps because of doctor’s orders): this shows that
there is one part of the soul that reXects and a diVerent one that feels bodily
desires. The Wrst can be called reason (to logistikon) and the second appetite (to
epithymetikon; 439d). Now anger cannot be attributed to either of these
elements: not to appetite, for we may feel disgust at our own perverted
desires; not to reason, because children have tantrums before they reach
Plato’s vision of the soul as charioteer, as illustrated by Donatello in a medallion on a
portrait bust
238
SOUL AND MIND

the age of discretion. Since anger can conXict with reason and appetite, we
have to attribute it to a third element in the soul, which we can call temper
(to thymoeides; 441b). Justice in the soul is the harmony of these three
elements.
We meet the tripartite soul again in book 9 of the Republic. The lowest
element in it can be called the avaricious element, since money is the
principal means of satisfying the desires of appetite. Temper seeks power,
victory, and repute, and so may be called the honour-loving or ambitious
part of the soul. Reason pursues knowledge of truth: its love is learning. In
each man’s soul one or other of these elements may be dominant: he can
be classed accordingly as avaricious, ambitious, or academic. Each type of
person will claim their own life is the best life: the avaricious man will
praise the life of business, the ambitious man will praise a political career,
and the academic man will praise knowledge and understanding and the
life of learning. Naturally, Plato awards the palm to the philosopher: he has
the broadest experience and the soundest judgement, and the objects to
which he devotes his life are much more real than the illusory pleasures
pursued by his competitors (587a).
There are diVerences, it will be seen, between the accounts of the soul in
book 4 and in book 9. In the meantime Plato has introduced the Theory of
Ideas and has set out his plan of education for philosopher kings. Reason’s
task is no longer just to take care of the body: it is exercised in the
ascending scale of mental states and activities described in the Line: im-
agination, belief, and knowledge. At the end of book 9 we bid farewell to
the tripartite soul with a vivid picture. Appetite is a many-headed beast,
constantly sprouting heads of tame and wild animals; temper is like a lion,
and reason like a man. The beast is larger than the other two, and all three
are stowed away within a human being. We have come a long way from the
humble spider of Heraclitus.
The tripartite soul is not Plato’s last word in the Republic. In book 10 he
makes a contrast between diVerent elements in the reasoning part: one that
is confused by optical illusions, and another that measures, counts, and
weighs. Whereas in the earlier books the parts of the soul were distin-
guished by their desires, we now have a diVerence of cognitive power
presented as a basis for distinguishing parts.
In the same book Socrates oVers a new proof of immortality. Each thing
is destroyed by its characteristic disease: eyes by ophthalmia, and iron by
239
SOUL AND MIND

rust. Vice is the characteristic disease of the soul: but it does not destroy the
soul. If the soul’s own disease cannot kill it, then it cannot be killed by
bodily disease and must be immortal (609d). But what is immortal cannot
be an uneasily composite entity like the threefold soul. Such a soul is like a
statue in the sea covered with barnacles. The element of the soul that loves
wisdom and has a passion for the divine must be stripped of extraneous
elements if we are to see it in all its loveliness. Whether the soul seen in its
true nature would prove manifold or simple is left an open question
(611b V., 612a3).
In the Timaeus, however, the tripartite soul reappears, and its parts are
given corporeal locations. Reason sits in the head, the other two parts are
placed in the body, with the neck as an isthmus to keep the divine and the
mortal elements of the soul apart from each other. Temper is located
around the heart, and appetite in the belly, with the midriV separating the
two like the partition between the men’s and women’s quarters in a house.
The heart is the guardroom from which commands can be transmitted
around the body, via the circulating blood, when reason for some purpose
or other orders combat stations. The lowest part of the soul is kept under
control by the liver, which is particularly susceptible to the inXuence of
mind. The coiling of the bowels has the function of preventing appetites
from becoming insatiable (69c–73b).
Plato on Sense-Perception
While the Timaeus, like the earlier books of the Republic, anatomizes the soul
on the basis of desire rather than cognition, the dialogue does deal at some
length with the mechanisms of perception. The status of sense-perception
also attracted Plato’s attention in the Theaetetus in the course of the discus-
sion of Protagoras’ thesis that whatever seems to a particular person is true
for that person. Behind Protagoras Plato detects Heraclitus’ doctrine of
universal Xux.
If everything in the world is in constant change, then the colours we see
and the qualities we detect with our other senses cannot be stable, objective
realities. Rather, each of them is a meeting between one of our senses
and some appropriate transitory item in the universal maelstrom.
When the eye, for instance, comes into contact with a suitable visible
240
SOUL AND MIND

counterpart, the eye begins to see whiteness, and the object begins to look
white. The whiteness itself is generated by the intercourse between these
two parents, the eye and the object. The eye and its object are themselves
subject to perpetual change, but their motion is slow by comparison with
the speed with which the sense-impressions come and go. The eye’s seeing
of the white object, and the whiteness of the object itself, are two twins
which are born and can die together (156a–157b).
A similar tale can be told of other senses: but it is not clear how seriously
Plato means us to take this account of sensation. It occurs, after all, in the
course of a reductio ad absurdum argument against the Heraclitean thesis that
everything is always changing both in quality and in place. If something
stayed put, Socrates argues, we could describe how it looked, and if we had
a patch of constant colour, we could describe how it moved from place to
place. But if both kinds of change are taking place simultaneously, we are
reduced to speechlessness: we cannot say what is moving, or what is changing
colour. Each episode of seeing will turn instantly into an episode of non-
seeing, and perception becomes impossible (182b–e).
Nonetheless, the principle that seeing is an encounter between eye and
object is stated by Plato on his own account in the Timaeus and an explan-
ation is there oVered of the mechanism of vision. Within our heads there is
a gentle Wre, akin to daylight: this Wre Xows through our eyes and makes a
uniform column with the surrounding light: when this strikes an object,
shivers are sent back along the column, through the eyes, and into the
body to produce the sensation we call sight (45d). Colours are a kind of
Xame that streams oV bodies and is composed of particles so proportioned
to our sight as to yield sensation. These Xames travel towards the eye using
the original light column as a kind of carrier wave. Individual colours are
the product of diVerent mixtures of particles of four basic kinds: black,
white, red, and bright (67b–68d).
Aristotle’s Philosophical Psychology
Plato’s philosophy of mind has to be pieced together from fragments of
various dialogues, largely concerned with ethical and metaphysical issues.
The case is very diVerent when we come to Aristotle’s philosophical
psychology. Here, in addition to material from ethical writings, we have
241
SOUL AND MIND

a systematic treatise on the nature of the soul (de Anima) and a number of
minor monographs on topics such as sense-perception, memory, sleep, and
dreams. Aristotle took over and developed some of Plato’s ideas, such as the
division of the soul into parts and faculties and the philosophical analysis of
sensation as encounter, but his fundamental approach diVers by being
rooted in the study of biology. The way in which he structured the soul
and its faculties inXuenced not only philosophy but science for nearly two
millennia.
For Aristotle the biologist the soul is not, as in the Phaedo, an exile from a
better world ill-housed in a base body. The soul’s very essence is deWned by
its relationship to an organic structure. Not only humans, but beasts and
plants have souls—not second-hand souls, transmigrants paying the pen-
alty of earlier misdeeds, but intrinsic principles of animal and vegetable life.
A soul, Aristotle says, is ‘the actuality of a body that has life’, where life
means the capacity for self-sustenance, growth, and decay. If we regard a
living substance as a composite of matter and form, then the soul is the
form of a natural, or as Aristotle sometimes says, organic, body (de An. 2.1.
412a20,b5–6).
Aristotle gives several deWnitions of ‘soul’ which have seemed to some
scholars inconsistent with each other.1 But the diVerences between the
deWnitions arise not from an incoherent notion of soul, but from an
ambiguity in Aristotle’s use of the Greek word for ‘body’. Sometimes the
word means the living compound substance: in that sense, the soul is
the form of a body that is alive, a self-moving body (2.1. 412b17). Sometimes
the word means the appropriate kind of matter to be informed by a soul: in
that sense, the soul is the form of a body that potentially has life (2. 1. 412a22;
2. 2. 414a15–29). The soul is the form of an organic body, a body that has
organs, that is to say parts which have speciWc functions, such as the
mouths of mammals and the roots of trees.
The Greek word ‘organon’ means a tool, and Aristotle illustrates his
notion of soul by comparison both with inanimate tools and with bodily
organs. If an axe were a living body, its power to cut would be its soul; if an
eye were a whole animal, its power to see would be its soul. A soul is an
actuality, Aristotle tells us, but he makes a distinction between Wrst and
1 On this see J. Barnes, ‘Aristotle’s Concept of Mind’ (Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (1972),
101–14); J. L. Ackrill, ‘Aristotle’s DeWnitions of Psyche’ (Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (1973), 119.
242
SOUL AND MIND

second actuality. When the axe is actually cutting, and the eye is actually
seeing, that is second actuality. But an axe in a sheath, and the eye of a
sleeper, retain a power that they are not actually exercising: that active
power is a Wrst actuality. It is that kind of actuality that the soul is: the Wrst
actuality of a living body. The exercise of this actuality is the totality of the
vital operations of the organism (2. 1. 412b11–413a3).
The soul is not only the form, or formal cause, of the living body: it is
also the origin of change and motion in the body, and above all it is also the
Wnal cause that gives the body its teleological orientation. Reproduction is
one of the most fundamental vital operations. Each living thing strives ‘to
reproduce its kind, an animal producing an animal, and a plant a plant, in
order that they may have a share in the everlasting and the divine so far as
they can’ (2. 4. 415a26–9, b16–20).
The souls of living beings can be ordered in a hierarchy. Plants have a
vegetative or nutritive soul, which consists of the powers of growth,
nutrition, and reproduction (2. 4. 415a23–6). Animals have in addition the
powers of perception, and locomotion: they possess a sensitive soul, and
every animal has at least one sense-faculty, touch being the most universal.
Whatever can feel at all can feel pleasure: and hence animals, who have
senses, also have desires. Humans in addition have the power of reason and
thought (logismos kai dianoia), which we may call a rational soul.
Aristotle’s theoretical concept of soul diVers from that of Plato before
him and Descartes after him. A soul, for him, is not an interior, immaterial
agent acting on a body. ‘We should not ask whether body and soul are one
thing, any more than we should ask that question about the wax and the
seal imprinted on it, or about the matter of anything and that of which it is
the matter’ (2. 1. 412b6–7). A soul need not have parts in the way that a
body does: perhaps they are no more distinct than concave and convex in
the circumference of a circle (NE 1. 13. 1102a30–2). When we talk of parts of
the soul we are talking of faculties: and these are distinguished from each
other by their operations and their objects. The power of growth is distinct
from the power of sensation because growing and feeling are two diVerent
activities; and the sense of sight diVers from the sense of hearing not
because eyes are diVerent from ears, but because colours are diVerent
from sounds (de An. 2. 4. 415a14–24).
The objects of sense come in two kinds: those that are proper to
particular senses, such as colour, sound, taste, and smell, and those that
243
SOUL AND MIND

are perceptible by more than one sense, such as motion, number, shape,
and size. You can tell, for instance, if something is moving either by
watching it or by feeling it, and so motion is a ‘common sensible’ (2. 6.
418a7–20). We do not have a special organ for detecting common sensibles,
but Aristotle says that we do have a faculty which he calls koine aisthesis,
literally ‘common sense’, but better translated, because of English idiom,
‘general sense’ (3.1. 425a27). When we encounter a horse, we may see, hear,
feel, and smell it: it is the general sense that uniWes these as perceptions of a
single object (though the knowledge that this object is a horse is, for
Aristotle, a function of intellect rather than sense). The general sense is
given by Aristotle several other functions: for instance, it is by the general
sense that we perceive that we are using the particular senses (3. 1.
425b13 V.), and it is by the general sense that we tell the diVerence between
sense objects proper to diVerent senses (e.g. between white and sweet) (3. 4.
429b16–19). This last move seems ill-judged: telling the diVerence between
white and sweet is surely not an act of sensory discrimination like telling
the diVerence between red and pink. What would it be like to mistake
white for sweet?
Aristotle’s most interesting thesis about the operation of the individual
senses is that a sense-faculty in operation is identical with a sense-object in
action: the actuality of the sense-object is one and the same as the actuality
of the sense-faculty (3. 2. 425b26–7, 426a16). Aristotle explains his thesis by
using sound and hearing as an example; because of diVerences between
Greek and English idiom I will try to explain what he means in the case of
the sense of taste.2 The sweetness of a cup of tea is a sense-object, something
that can be tasted. My ability to taste is a sense-faculty. The operation of the
sense of taste upon the object of taste is the same thing as the action of
the object upon my sense. That is to say, the tea’s tasting sweet to me is one
and the same event as my tasting the sweetness of the tea.
Aristotle is applying to the case of sensation his scheme of layers of
potentiality and actuality (2. 5. 417a22–30, b28–418a6). The tea is actually
sweet, whereas before the sugar was put in, it was only potentially sweet.
The sweetness of the tea in the cup is a Wrst actuality: the tea’s actually
tasting sweet to me is a second actuality. Sweetness is nothing other than
2 Aristotle complains that Greek lacks a word for what an object does to us when we taste it
(3. 2. 426a17). English does not, but it does lack a single word corresponding to the Greek word
for what a sound does to us when it makes us hear it.
244
SOUL AND MIND

the power to taste sweet to suitable tasters; and the faculty of taste is
nothing other than the power to taste such things as the sweetness of sweet
objects. Thus we can agree that the sensible property in operation is the
same thing as the faculty in operation, though of course the power to taste
and the power to be tasted are two diVerent things, one in an animal and
the other in a substance.
This seems a sound and important philosophical analysis of the concept of
sensation: it enables one to dispense with the notion, which has misled many
philosophers, that sensation involves a transaction between the mind and
some representation of what is sensed. Aristotle’s detailed explanations of the
chemical vehicles of sensory properties and the mechanism of the organs of
sensation are very diVerent matters, speculative theories long since super-
annuated. Though Aristotle is very critical of his predecessors in this area,
such as Democritus and the Plato of the Timaeus, his own accounts are no less
distant than theirs from the truth as discovered by the progress of science.
Besides the Wve senses and the general sense, Aristotle recognizes other
faculties which later came to be grouped together as the ‘inner senses’:
notably imagination (phantasia) (de An. 3. 3. 427b28–429a9), and memory, to
which he devoted an entire opuscule (de Memoria). Corresponding to the
senses at the cognitive level, there is an aVective part of the soul, the locus of
spontaneous felt emotion. This is introduced in the Nicomachean Ethics as part
of the soul that is basically irrational but which is, unlike the vegetative
soul, capable of being controlled by the reason. It is the part of the soul for
desire and passion, corresponding to appetite and temper in the Platonic
tripartite soul. When brought under the sway of reason it is the home of the
moral virtues such as courage and temperance (1. 13. 1102a26–1103a3).
For Aristotle as for Plato the highest part of the soul is occupied by mind
or reason, the locus of thought and understanding. Thought diVers from
sense-perception, and is restricted—on earth at least—to human beings (de
An. 3. 3. 427a18–b8). Thought, like sensation, is a matter of making judge-
ments; but sensation concerns particulars, while intellectual knowledge is
of universals (2. 5. 417b23). Aristotle makes a distinction between practical
reasoning and theoretical reasoning, and makes a corresponding division of
faculties within the mind. There is a deliberative part of the rational soul
(logistikon) which is concerned with human aVairs, and there is a scientiWc
part (epistemonikon) that is concerned with eternal truths (NE 6. 1. 1139a16; 12.
1144a2–3). This distinction is easy enough to understand; but in a famous
245
SOUL AND MIND

passage of the de Anima Aristotle introduces a diVerent distinction between
two kinds of mind (nous) which is very diYcult to grasp. Everywhere in
nature, he says, we Wnd a material element, which is potentially anything
and everything, and there is also a creative element that works upon the
matter. So it is too with mind.
There is a mind of such a kind as to become everything, and another for making
all things, a positive state like light—for in a certain manner light makes potential
colours into actual colours. This mind is separable, impassible, and unmixed, being
in essence actuality; for the agent is always superior to the patient, and the
principle to the matter. Knowledge in actuality is the very same thing as the
object of knowledge. (de An. 3. 5. 430a14–21)
In antiquity and the Middle Ages this passage was the subject of sharply
diVerent interpretations. Some—particularly among Arabic commenta-
The foremost Arabic interpeter of Aristotle, Averroes, is here represented by a
sixteenth-century illuminator of his commentary as receiving instruction from the
Philosopher
246
SOUL AND MIND

tors—identiWed the separable, active agent, the light of the mind, with God
or with some other superhuman intelligence. Others—particularly among
Latin commentators—took Aristotle to be identifying two diVerent facul-
ties within the human mind: an active intellect, which formed concepts,
and a passive intellect, which was a storehouse of ideas and beliefs.
The theorem of the identity in actuality of knowledge and its object—
parallel to the corresponding thesis about sense-perception—was under-
stood, on the second interpretation, in the following manner. The objects
we encounter in experience are only potentially, not actually, thinkable,
just as colours in the dark are only potentially, not actually, visible. The
active intellect creates concepts—actually thinkable objects—by abstract-
ing universal forms from particular experience. These matterless forms
exist only in the mind: their actuality is simply to be thought. Thinking
itself consists of nothing else but being busy about such universals. Thus
the actualization of the object of thought, and the operation of the thinker
of the thought, are one and the same.
If the second interpretation is correct, then Aristotle is here recognizing
a part of the human soul that is separable from the body and immortal. In
a similar vein, in the Generation of Animals (2. 3. 736b27) Aristotle says that
reason enters the body ‘from out of doors’, being the sole divine element in
the soul and being unconnected with any bodily activity. These passages
remind us that in addition to the oYcial, biological notion of the soul that
we have been studying, there is detectable from time to time in Aristotle a
Platonic residue of thought according to which the intellect is a distinct
entity separable from the body.
This line of thought is nowhere more prominent than in the Wnal book
of the Nicomachean Ethics. Whereas in the Eudemian Ethics and in the books that
are common to the two treatises, the theoretical intellect is clearly a faculty
of the soul, and there is no suggestion that it is transcendent or immortal, in
book 10 of the Nicomachean Ethics the life of intellect is described as super-
human and is contrasted with that of the syntheton, or body–soul compound.
The moral virtues and practical wisdom are virtues of the compound, but
the excellence of intellect is capable of separate existence (10. 7. 1177a14,
b26–9; 1178a14–20). It is in this activity of the separable intellect that, for the
Nicomachean Ethics, human happiness supremely consists.
It is diYcult to reconcile the biological and the transcendent strains
in Aristotle’s thought. No theory of chronological development has
247
SOUL AND MIND

succeeded in doing so. The de Anima itself, as we have seen, contains a
passage that strongly suggests an immortal element in the human soul;
and in the very section of the work that sets out most clearly the theory of
the soul as the form of an organic body, Aristotle tells us that it is an open
question whether the soul is in the body as a sailor in a ship (2. 1. 413a9). But
that is a classic formulation of the dualist conception of the relation of soul
to body.
Hellenistic Philosophy of Mind
No ancient author between Aristotle and Augustine formulated a com-
parably rich philosophy of mind. The philosophical psychology of Epi-
curus shows little advance on that of Democritus. For him the soul, like
everything else, consists of atoms, which diVer from other atoms only in
being smaller and subtler, more Wnely structured even than those that
constitute the winds. It is nonsense to say that the soul is incorporeal:
whatever is not body is merely empty void. The soul has the major
responsibility for sensation, but only through its position in the body–-
soul compound. At death its atoms are dispersed and cease to be capable
of sensation because they no longer occupy their appropriate place in a
body (LS 14b).
The third book of Lucretius’ great poem On the Nature of Things is devoted
to psychology. He distinguishes initially between animus and anima (34–5).
The animus, or mind, is a part of the body just like a hand or foot; this is
shown by the fact that a body becomes inert once it has breathed its last
breath. The mind is a part of the anima, or soul; it is the dominant part,
located in the heart. The rest of soul is spread throughout the body and
moves at the behest of mind. Mind, soul, and body are closely interwoven,
as we see when fear causes the body to tremble and bodily wounds cause
the mind to grieve. Mind and soul must be corporeal or they could not
move the body—to move it they must touch it, and how could they touch
it unless they were themselves bodily (160–7)? Mind is very light and Wne
textured, like the bouquet of wine—a dead body, after all, weighs little less
than a live one. It is composed of Wre, air, wind, and a fourth nameless
element. Mind is more important than soul; once mind goes, soul follows
soon after, but mind can survive great damage to soul (402–5).
248
SOUL AND MIND

Some say that the body does not perceive or sense anything, but only
the soul, conceived as an inner homunculus. Lucretius argues ingeniously
against this primitive view. If the eyes are not doing any seeing, but are
merely doors through which the mind sees, then we ought to be able to see
more clearly if our eyes have been torn out, because a man in a house can
see out much better if doors and doorposts are removed (367–9).
The goal of Lucretius’ discussion of mind and soul is to prove that they
are both mortal, and thus to take away the grounds on which people fear
death. Water Xows out of a smashed vessel: how much faster must soul’s
tenuous Xuid leak away once the body is broken! The mind develops with
the body and will decay with the body. The mind suVers when the body is
sick, and is cured by physical medicine. These are all clear marks of
mortality.
What has this bugbear, death, to frighten man,
If souls can die, as well as bodies can?
For, as before our birth we felt no pain,
When Punic arms infested land and main,
When heaven and earth were in confusion hurled,
For the debated empire of the world,
Which awed with dreadful expectation lay,
Sure to be slaves, uncertain who should sway:
So, when our mortal frame shall be disjoined,
The lifeless lump uncoupled from the mind,
From sense of grief and pain we shall be free;
We shall not feel, because we shall not be.
(830–40, trans. Dryden)
We are only we, Lucretius says in conclusion, while souls and bodies in one
frame agree.
The Epicureans gave an atomistic account of sense-perception, in particu-
lar of vision. Bodies in the world throw oV thin Wlms of the atoms of which
they are made, which retain their original shape and thus serve as images
(eidola). These Xy around the world with astonishing speed, and perception
occurs when they make contact with atoms in the soul. When we see mental
images, this is the result of even more tenuous Wlaments joining together in
the air, like spider’s web or gold leaf. Thus, the image of a centaur is the result
of the interweaving of a human image and a horse image; it can enter the
mind during sleep as well as when awake. We are always surrounded by
249
SOUL AND MIND

countless such Wne images, but we are only aware of those on which the
mind turns the beam of its attention (Lucretius 4. 722–85).
The Stoics, like the Epicureans, had a materialist concept of soul. We live
to the extent that we breathe, Chrysippus argued; soul is what makes us
live, and breath is what makes us breathe, so soul and breath are identical
(LS 53g). The heart is the seat of the soul: there resides the soul par excellence,
the master-faculty (hegemonikon) which sends out the senses to bring back
reports on the environment for it to evaluate. Sense-perception itself takes
place exclusively within the master-faculty (LS 53m). The master-faculty is
material like the rest of the soul, but it is capable of surviving, at least
temporarily, separation from the body at death (LS 53w). There is not,
however, any real personal immortality for the Stoics: at best, the souls of
the wise after death can be absorbed into the divine World Soul that
permeates and governs the universe.
Some Stoics compared the human soul to an octopus: eight tentacles
sprouted out from the master-faculty into the body, Wve of them being the
senses, one being a motor agent to eVect the movement of the limbs, one
controlling the organs of speech, and the Wnal one a tube to carry semen to
the generative organs. Each of these tentacles was made out of breath (LS
53h, l).
It will be noted that of the eight tentacles Wve are aVerent, and three
eVerent. This reXects an important clariWcation the Stoics introduced into
philosophical psychology. Plato and Aristotle had been principally inter-
ested in dividing faculties of the soul hierarchically, on the basis of the
cognitive or ethical value of the objects of the faculty: thus intellect came
above sensation, and rational choice above animal desire. The Stoics were
well aware of the diVerence between the capacities of rational language
users and dumb animals (LS 53t) but they regarded as equally important a
division of faculties that is vertical rather than horizontal. The distinction is
thus stated by Cicero, quoting Panaetius:
Minds’ movements are of two kinds: some belong to thought, and some to
appetition. Thought is principally concerned with the investigation of truth and
appetition is a drive to action. (OV 1. 132).
The distinction between cognitive and appetitive faculties cuts across the
distinction between sensory and intellectual faculties. In later antiquity and
in the Middle Ages philosophers came to accept the following scheme:
250
SOUL AND MIND

Intellect
Will
Sensation
Desire
This combines the Aristotelian distinction between the rational and the
animal level, with the Stoic distinction between the cognitive and appeti-
tive dimension.
Will, Mind, and Soul in Late Antiquity
Itisoftensaidthatinclassicalphilosophythereisnoconceptofthewill.Some
havegonesofarastosaythatinAristotle’spsychologythewilldoesnotoccur
at all, and the concept was invented only after eleven further centuries of
philosophical reXection. Certainly, it is undeniable that there is no Aristotel-
ian expression that exactly correspondstothe English expression ‘freedom of
the will’, and scholars have concluded that he had no real grasp of the issue.
This criticism of Aristotle depends on a certain view of the nature of the
will. In modern times philosophers have often thought of the will as a
phenomenon of introspective consciousness. Acts of the will, or volitions,
are mental events that precede and cause certain human actions; their
presence or absence make the diVerence between voluntary and involun-
tary actions. The freedom of the will is to be located in the indeterminacy
of these introspectible volitions.
It is not clear how far the Epicureans and Stoics shared this conception
of the causation of human action, but it is certain that this concept of the
will is not to be found in Aristotle. But this is to his credit, for the concept is
radically Xawed and has been discredited in recent times. A satisfactory
philosophical account of the will must relate human action to ability,
desire, and belief. It must contain a treatment of voluntariness, a treatment
of intentionality, and a treatment of rationality. Aristotle’s treatises contain
ample material relevant to the study of the will thus understood, even
though his concepts do not exactly coincide with those that it would
nowadays be natural to employ.
Aristotle deWned voluntariness as follows: something was voluntary if it
was originated by an agent free from compulsion or error (NE 3. 1.
1110a1 V.). In his moral system an important role was also played by the
concept of prohairesis, or purposive choice: the choice of an action as part of
251
SOUL AND MIND

an overall plan of life (NE 3. 2. 1111b4 V.). His concept of the voluntary was
too clumsily deWned, and his concept of prohairesis too narrowly deWned, to
demarcate the everyday moral choices that make up our lives. The fact that
there is no English word corresponding to ‘prohairesis’ is itself a mark of
the awkwardness of the concept: most of Aristotle’s moral terminology has
been naturalized into all European languages.
Though he has a rich and perceptive account of practical reasoning,
Aristotle has no technical concept corresponding to our concept of inten-
tion: that is to say, of doing A in order to bring about B, of choosing means to
ends as well as pursuing ends for their own sake. Voluntariness is a broader
concept than intention: it includes whatever we bring about knowingly but
unintentionally, as an undesired consequence of action. Prohairesis is a
narrower concept: it restricts the goal of the intention to the enactment
of a grand pattern of life.
These defects in Aristotle’s treatment of the appetitive side of human life
are the truth behind the exaggerated claim that he had no concept of the
will. It was, indeed, the reXection of Latin philosophers which led to the
full development of the concept, and this reXection can be seen in copious
form in the writings of Augustine.
In the second and third centuries further developments called for
modiWcation of Aristotelian philosophy of mind. The physician Galen
(129–99) discovered that for the operation of the muscles nerves arising
from the brain and spinal cord have to be active. Thus the brain, rather
than the heart, should be regarded as the principal seat of the soul. But like
the Stoics, Galen distinguished between a sensory soul and a motor soul,
the former associated with aVerent nerves travelling to the brain, the latter
with motor nerves originating in the spinal cord.3
The peripatetic commentator Alexander of Aphrodisias, who Xourished
in the Wrst decades of the third century, identiWed the Active Intellect of
the de Anima with the unmoved mover of Metaphysics K. Alexander thus
began a long tradition of interpretation which Xourished, in diVerent
forms, among later commentators, especially in the Arab world.
A human being at birth, he maintained, had only a material or physical
intellect; true intelligence is acquired only under the inXuence of the
3 M. R. Bennett, and P. M. S. Hacker, Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience (Oxford: Blackwell,
2003), 20.
252
SOUL AND MIND

supreme divine mind. In consequence, the human soul is not immortal:
the best it can do is to think immortal thoughts by meditating on the
Motionless Mover (de An. 90. 11–91. 6).
In reaction to the mortalism of the Epicureans, Stoics, and later Peripa-
tetics, Plotinus set out, in Plato’s footsteps, to prove that the individual soul
is immortal. He sets out his case in one of his earliest writings, Ennead 4. 7
(2), On the Immortality of the Soul. If the soul is the principle of life in living
beings, it cannot itself be bodily in nature. If it is a body, it must be either
one of the four elements, earth, air, Wre, and water, or a compound of one
or more of them. But the elements are themselves lifeless. If a compound
has life, this must be due to a particular proportion of the elements in the
compound: but this must have been conferred by something else, the cause
that provides the recipe for and combines the ingredients of the mixture.
This something else is soul (4. 7. 2. 2).
Plotinus argues that none of the functions of life, from the lowliest form
of nutrition and growth to the highest forms of imagination and thought,
could be carried out by something that was merely bodily. Bodies undergo
change at every instant: how could something in such perpetual Xux
remember anything from moment to moment? Bodies are divided into
parts and spread out in space: how could such a scattered entity provide
the uniWed focus of which we are aware in perception? We can think of
abstract entities, like beauty and justice: how can what is bodily grasp what
is non-bodily? (4. 7. 5–8). The soul must belong, not to the world of
becoming, but to the world of Being (4. 8. 5).
Plotinus is aware that there are those who say that the soul, though not
a body itself, nonetheless is dependent on body for its existence. He recalls
Simmias’ contention in the Phaedo that the soul is nothing more than an
attunement of the body’s sinews. He neatly turns the tables on that
argument. When a musician plucks the strings of a lyre, he says, it is the
strings, not the melody that he acts upon; but the strings would not be
plucked unless the melody called for it (3. 6. 4. 49–80; 4. 7. 8).
Plotinus clearly maintains the personal immortality of individuals. It
would be absurd to suggest that Socrates will cease to be Socrates when he
goes from hence to a better world hereafter. Minds will survive in that
better world, because nothing that has real being ever perishes (4. 3. 5).
However, the exact signiWcance of this claim is unclear, since Plotinus also
maintains that all souls form a unity, bound together in a superior World-
253
SOUL AND MIND

Soul, from which they have originated and to which they return (3. 5. 4).
We shall learn more about this World-Soul in Chapter 9, when we come to
discuss Plotinus’ theology.
One of those who learnt most from Plotinus’ speculations was the
young Augustine. His own original contribution to philosophy of mind,
however, is to be found in his writing on freedom. In his de Libero Arbitrio,
written in the year of his conversion to Christianity, he defends a form of
libertarianism that diVers both from the compatibilism we saw in an earlier
chapter when considering Chrysippus, and from the predestinarianism for
which the later, Christian, Augustine is notorious.
In the third book the question is raised whether the soul sins by
necessity. We have to distinguish, we are told, three senses of ‘necessity’:
nature, certainty, and compulsion. Nature and compulsion are incompat-
ible with voluntariness, and only voluntary acts are blameable. If a sinner
sins by nature or by compulsion, the sin is not voluntary. But certainty is
compatible with voluntariness: it may be certain that X will sin, and yet X
will sin voluntarily and will rightly be blamed.
St Augustine in his study (Vittorio Carpaccio, S. Giorgio, Venice)
254
SOUL AND MIND

Consider Wrst the necessity of nature. The soul does not sin by
necessity in the way that a stone falls by necessity of nature: the soul’s
action in sinning is voluntary. Both the soul and the stone are agents, but
the soul is a voluntary and not a natural agent. The diVerence is this: ‘it is
not in the stone’s power to arrest its downward motion, but unless the soul
is willing it does not so act as to abandon what is higher for what is lower’
(iii. 2).
As we saw in considering Chrysippus, voluntariness can be deWned by
reference to the power to do otherwise (liberty of indiVerence) or
by reference to the power to do what one wants (liberty of spontaneity).
In the de Libero Arbitrio Augustine combines the two approaches. The soul’s
motions are voluntary, because the soul is doing what it wants. ‘I do not
know what I can call my own’, Augustine says, ‘if the will by which I want
or reject is not my own.’ But the power to want is itself a two-way power.
‘The motion by which the will turns in this or that direction would not be
praiseworthy unless it was voluntary and placed within our power.’ Nor
could the sinner be blamed when he turns the hinge (cardo) of the will
towards the nether regions (iii. 3).
Augustine oVers to prove that wanting is in our power. The exact lines
of his proof are not clear. On one interpretation it goes like this. Doing X is
in our power if we do X whenever we want. But whenever we want, we
want. Therefore wanting is in our power. This seems too easy: surely the
Wrst premiss is incomplete. It should read: Doing X is in our power if we do
X whenever we want to do X. The second premiss would then have to
read: Whenever we want to want to do X we want to do X. This would give
us Augustine’s conclusion: whatever X is, wanting X is in our power. But
one may question the second premiss. May we not have a second-order
want to want something, without having the Wrst-order want itself? When
Augustine wanted to be chaste, but not yet, was he really wanting to be
chaste, or only wanting to want to be chaste?
If it is in my power to do X, in the sense earlier outlined by Augustine,
then it must be in my power not to do X. This weakens his argument to
show that wanting is in our power. For whatever plausibility there is in the
claim that if I want to want something I want it, there is none in the claim
that if I want not to want something then I do not want it. I may very
sincerely want to give up smoking: that does not prevent my passionate
want for a cigarette at this moment.
255
SOUL AND MIND

No doubt Augustine can respond by making distinctions between diVer-
ent kinds of wanting: but in the present context it would not be proWtable
to follow further his analysis of volition. The part of the de Libero Arbitrio
most relevant to the issue of determinism and freedom is his consideration
of the foreknowledge of God. Augustine believed that at any moment God
foreknew all future events. He can then construct the following argument
against the possibility of voluntary sin.
(1) God foreknew that Adam was going to sin.
(2) If God foreknew that Adam was going to sin, necessarily Adam was
going to sin.
(3) If Adam was necessarily going to sin, then Adam sinned necessarily.
(4) If Adam sinned necessarily, Adam did not sin of his own free will.
(5) Adam did not sin of his own free will.
The line of argument here is clearly the Christian heir to the discussion of
the sea-battle in Aristotle and the Master Argument of Diodorus: in each
case, in diVerent ways, the necessity of a past state or event is used as a
starting point from which to derive the necessity of a future event. In the
Greeks the starting premiss is logical, here it is theological.
Augustine proposes to disarm the argument by the distinction between
certainty, on the one hand, and natural causation or compulsion, on the
other. I can know something without causing it (as when I know it because
I remember it). I can be certain that someone is about to do something
without in any way compelling him to do it. Accordingly, we can distin-
guish the senses of ‘necessity’ in the argument above. In the second
premiss, and the antecedent of the third premiss ‘necessarily’ must be
taken as ‘certainly’. In the fourth premiss and the consequent of the
third premiss ‘necessarily’ must be taken as ‘under compulsion’. Because
of the resulting equivocation in the third premiss, the argument fails.
Augustine’s response does not wholly convince: there is surely no exact
analogy between conjectural human knowledge of the future and omni-
temporal divine omniscience. The diYculties that his treatment leaves
unsolved were taken up by many future generations of Christian theolo-
gians; but his discussion can Wttingly be taken as representative of the Wnal
stage of reXection on determinism in antiquity.
256
SOUL AND MIND

8
How to Live:
Ethics
A
mong the sayings attributed to the earliest Greek philosophers, many
have a moral content. Thales, for instance, is credited with an early
version of ‘Do as you would be done by’: asked how we could best live, he
replied, ‘if we do not ourselves do what we blame others for doing’. In
more ambiguous vein, when asked by an adulterer if he should swear he
was innocent, he replied, ‘Well, perjury is no worse than adultery’ (D.L. 1.
37). Oracular utterances of a similar kind are to be found in Heraclitus: ‘It is
not good for men to get all they want’ (DK 22 B110); ‘a man’s character is
his destiny’ (DK 22 B117). Other philosophers took stances on particular
moral issues: thus Empedocles attacked meat-eating and animal sacriWce
(DK 31 B128, 139). But it is not until Democritus that we Wnd any sign of a
philosopher with a moral system.
Democritus the Moralist
Democritus was eloquent on ethical topics: sixty pages of his fragments, as
recorded in Diels–Kranz, are devoted to moral counsel. Much of it is of a
homespun, agony-aunt type: don’t take on tasks above your power, don’t
be envious of the rich and famous: think of all the people who are worse oV
than you are, and be contented with your lot (DK 68 B91). Do not try to
know everything, or you will end up knowing nothing (DK 68 B69). Don’t
blame bad luck when things go wrong through your own fault: you can
avoid drowning by learning to swim (DK 68 B119, 172). Accept favours only

if you plan to do greater favours in return (DK 68 B92). A remark that has
been garbled at many a wedding breakfast is fragment 272: ‘One who is
lucky in his son-in-law gains a son, one who is unlucky loses a daughter.’
Sometimes Democritus’ advice is more controversial. It is better not to
have any children: to bring them up well takes great trouble and care, and
seeing them grow up badly is the cruellest of all pains (DK 68 B275). If you
must have children, adopt them from your friends rather than beget them
yourselves. That way, you can choose the kind of child you want, whereas
in the normal way you have to put up with what you get (DK 68 B277).
From Plato onwards there have been moral philosophers who have
despised the body as a corrupter of the soul. Democritus took just the
opposite view. If a body, at the end of life, were to sue the soul for the pains
and ills it had suVered, a fair judge would Wnd for the body. If some parts of
the body have been damaged by neglect or ruined by debauchery, that is
the soul’s fault. Maybe you think that the body is no more than a tool used
by the soul: well and good, but if a tool is in a bad shape you blame not the
tool but its owner (DK 68 B159).
Democritus’ moral views have come down to us as a series of aphorisms,
but there is some evidence that he developed a systematic ethics, though it
is obscure what relation, if any, it had to his atomism. He wrote a treatise
on the purpose of life and inquired into the nature of happiness (eudaimonia):
it was to be found not in riches but in the goods of the soul, and one should
not take pleasure in mortal things (DK 68 B37, 171, 189). The hopes of the
educated, he put it, were better than the riches of the ignorant (DK 68
B285). But the goods of the soul in which happiness was to be found do not
seem to have been of any exalted mystical kind: rather, his ideal was a life of
cheerfulness and quiet contentment (DK 68 B188). For this reason he was
known to later ages as the laughing philosopher. He praised temperance,
but was not an ascetic. Thrift and fasting were good, he said, but so was
banqueting; the difWculty was judging the right time for each. A life
without feasting was like a highway without inns (DK 68 B229, 230).
In some ways Democritus set an agenda for succeeding Greek thinkers.
In placing the quest for happiness in the centre of moral philosophy he was
followed by almost every moralist of antiquity. When he said, ‘the cause of
sin is ignorance of what is better’ (DK 68 B83), he formulated an idea that
was to be central in Socratic moral thought. Again, when he said that you
are better oV being wronged than doing wrong (DK 68 B45), he uttered a
258
ETHICS

thought that was developed by Socrates into the principle that it is better to
suVer wrong than to inXict wrong—a principle incompatible with the
inXuential moral systems that encourage one to judge actions only by their
consequences and not by the identity of their agents. Others of his oVhand
remarks, if taken seriously, are sufWcient to overturn whole ethical systems.
For instance, when he says that a good person not only refrains from
wrongdoing but does not even want to do wrong (DK 68 B62), he sets
himself against the often held view that virtue is at its highest when it
triumphs over conXicting passion.
Democritus did not explore, however, the most important concept of all
for ancient ethics: that is, arete, or virtue. The Greek word does not match
precisely any single English word, and in recent scholarly writing the
traditional translation ‘virtue’ is often replaced by ‘excellence’. ‘Arete’ is
Bramante here represents Democritus as the laughing philosopher and Heraclitus as
the weeping philosopher
259
ETHICS

the abstract noun corresponding to the adjective ‘agathos’, the most
general word for ‘good’. Whatever is good of its kind has the corresponding
arete. It is archaic in English to speak of the virtue of a horse or a knife,
which is no doubt one reason for preferring the translation ‘excellence’;
and some of the aretai of human beings, such as scientiWc expertise, Wt
uncomfortably into the description ‘intellectual virtue’. But it is perhaps
equally odd to call a character trait like gentleness an ‘excellence’; so I shall
make use of the traditional translation of arete, having given fair warning
that it is far from a perfect Wt. The matter is not merely one of idiom: it
reveals a conceptual diVerence between ancient Greeks and modern West-
erners about the appropriate way to group together diVerent desirable
properties of human beings. The diVerence between the two conceptual
structures both accounts for the difWculty, and provides a great deal of the
value, of the study of ancient moral philosophy.
Socrates on Virtue
It was Socrates who initiated systematic inquiry into the nature of virtue;
he placed it in the centre of moral philosophy, and indeed of philosophy as
a whole. In the Crito his own acceptance of death is presented as a
martyrdom to justice and piety (54b). In the Socratic dialogues particular
virtues are subjected to detailed examination: piety (hosiotes) in the Euthyphro,
temperance (sophrosyne) in the Charmides, fortitude (andreia) in the Laches, and
justice in the Wrst book of the Republic (which most probably began
existence as a separate dialogue, Thrasymachus). Each of these dialogues
follows a similar pattern. Socrates seeks a deWnition of the respective virtue,
and the other characters in the dialogue oVer deWnitions in response.
Cross-examination (elenchus) forces each of the protagonists to admit that
their deWnitions are inadequate. Socrates, however, is no better able than
his opponents to oVer a satisfactory deWnition, and each dialogue ends
inconclusively.
The pattern can be illustrated from the Wrst book of the Republic, where
the virtue to be deWned is justice. The aged Cephalus proposes that justice
is telling the truth and returning what one has borrowed. Socrates refutes
this by asking whether it is just to return a borrowed weapon to a friend
who has gone mad. It is agreed that it is not just, because it cannot be just
260
ETHICS

to harm a friend (331d). The next proposal, from Cephalus’ son Polem-
archus, is that justice is doing good to one’s friends and harm to one’s
enemies. This is rejected on the grounds that it is not just to harm anyone:
justice is a virtue and it cannot be an exercise of virtue to make anyone,
friend or foe, worse rather than better (335d).
Another character in the dialogue, Thrasymachus, now questions
whether justice is a virtue at all. It cannot be a virtue, he argues, for it is
not in anyone’s interest to possess it. On the contrary, justice is simply
what is to the advantage of the powerful; law and morality are systems to
protect their interests. By complicated, and often dubious, arguments
Thrasymachus is eventually brought to concede that the just man will
have a better life than the unjust man, so that justice is in the interest of
the person who possesses it (353e). Yet the dialogue closes on an agnostic
note. ‘The upshot of the discussion in my case’, says Socrates, ‘is that I have
learned nothing. Since I don’t know what justice is, I will hardly know
whether it is a virtue or not, and whether its possessor is happy or
unhappy’ (354c).
The profession of ignorance which Plato places in Socrates’ mouth in
these dialogues does not mean that Socrates has no convictions about
moral virtue: it means rather that a very high threshold is being set for
something to count as knowledge. In these dialogues Socrates and his
interlocutors can often agree whether particular actions would or would
not count as instances of the virtue in question: what is lacking is a formula
that would cover all and only acts of the relevant virtue. Moreover,
Socrates, in the course of discussion, defends a number of substantive
theses both about virtues in particular (e.g. that it is never just to harm
anyone) and about virtue in general (e.g. that it must always be a beneWt to
its possessor).
In inquiring into the nature of a virtue, Socrates’ regular practice is to
compare it with a technical skill or craft, such as carpentry, navigation, or
medicine, or with a science such as arithmetic or geometry. Many readers,
ancient and modern, Wnd the comparison bizarre. Surely knowledge and
virtue are two totally diVerent things, one is a matter of the intellect and
another a matter of the will. In response to this two things can be said.
First, if we make a sharp distinction between the intellect and the will, that
is because we are the heirs to many generations of philosophical reXection
to which the initial impetus was given by Socrates and Plato. Secondly,
261
ETHICS

there are indeed important similarities between virtues and forms of
expertise. Both, unlike other properties and characteristics of mankind,
are acquired rather than innate. Both are valued features of human beings:
we admire people both for their skills and for their virtues. Both, Socrates
claims, are beneWcial to their possessors: we are better oV the more skills we
possess and the more virtuous we are.
But in important respects skills and virtues are unlike each other, at
least prima facie. Socrates is well aware of this, and one reason for his
constant recourse to the analogy between the two is to contrast them
as well as to compare them. He is anxious to test how signiWcant are
the diVerences. One diVerence is that arts and sciences are transmitted
through teaching by experts: but there do not seem to be any experts
who can teach virtue. There are not, at any rate, genuine experts,
though some sophists falsely hold themselves out to be such (Prt.
319a–320b; Men. 89e–91b). Another diVerence is this. Suppose someone
goes wrong: we may ask whether he did it on purpose or not, and whether,
if he did, that makes things better or worse. If the going wrong was making a
mistake in the exercise of a skill—e.g. playing a false note on the Xute, or
missing the mark in archery—then it is better if it was done on purpose:
that is to say, a deliberate mistake is not a reXection on one’s skill. But things
seem diVerent when the going wrong is a failure in virtue: it is odd to say
that someone who violates my rights on purpose is less unjust than
someone who violates them unwittingly (Hp. Mi. 373d–376b).
Socrates believes he can deal with both of these objections to assimilating
virtue to expertise. In response to the second point, he Xatly denies that
there are people who sin against virtue on purpose (Prt. 358b–c). If a man
goes wrong in this way he does so through ignorance, through lack of
knowledge of what is best for him. We all wish to do well and be happy: it is
for this reason that people want things like health, wealth, power, and
honour. But these things are only good if we know how to use them well;
in the absence of this knowledge they can do us more harm than good.
This knowledge of how best to use what one possesses is wisdom (phronesis)
and it is the only thing that is truly good (Euthd. 278e–282e). Wisdom is the
science of what is good and what is bad, and it is identical with virtue—
with all the virtues.
The reason why there are no teachers of virtue is not that virtue is not a
science, but that it is a science impossibly difWcult to master. This is because
262
ETHICS

of the way in which the virtues intertwine and form a unity. Actions that
exhibit courage are of course diVerent actions from those that exhibit
temperance; but what they express is a single, indivisible state of soul. If
we say that courage is the science of what is good and bad in respect of
future dangers, we have to agree that such a science is only possible as part
of an overall science of good and evil (La. 199c). The individual virtues are
parts of this science, but it can only be possessed as a whole. No one, not
even Socrates, is in possession of this science.1
We are, however, given an account of what it would look like, and it is
rather a surprising account. Socrates asks Protagoras, in the dialogue
named after him, to accept the premiss that goodness is identical with
pleasure and evil is identical with pain. From this premiss he oVers to prove
his contention that no one does evil willingly. People are often said to have
done evil in the knowledge that it was evil because they yielded to
temptation and were overcome by pleasure. But if ‘pleasure’ and ‘good’
mean the same, then they must have done evil because they were over-
come by goodness. Is not that absurd (354c–5d)?
Knowledge is a powerful thing, and the knowledge that something is
evil cannot be pushed about like a slave. Given the premiss that Protagoras
has accepted, knowledge that an action is evil must be knowledge that,
taken with its consequences, the action will lead to an excess of pain over
pleasure. No one with such knowledge is going to undertake such an
action; hence the person acting wrongly must lack the knowledge. Nearby
objects seem larger to vision than distant ones, and something similar
happens in mental vision. The wrongdoer is suVering from the
illusion that the present pleasure outweighs the consequent pain. What
is needed is a science that measures the relative sizes of pleasures and pains,
present and future, ‘since our salvation in life has turned out to lie in the
correct choice of pleasure and pain’ (356d–357b). This is the science of good
and evil that is identical with each of the virtues, justice, temperance, and
courage (361b).
1 Here I am indebted to a number of articles by Terry Penner, summed up in his essay
‘Socrates and the Early Dialogues’, in R. Kraut (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Plato (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1992).
263
ETHICS

Plato on Justice and Pleasure
Scholars are not agreed whether Socrates seriously thought that the
hedonic calculus was the answer to ‘What is virtue?’ Whether Socrates did
so or not, Plato certainly did not, and in the Republic we are given a diVerent
account of justice—indeed, more than one diVerent account. The main
body of the dialogue begins in book 2 with two challenges set by Plato’s
brothers Glaucon and Adeimantus. Glaucon wants to be shown that justice
is not just a method of avoiding evils, but something worthwhile for its own
sake (358b–362c). Adeimantus wants to be shown that quite apart from any
rewards or sanctions attached to it, justice is as preferable to injustice as
sight is to blindness and health is to sickness (362d–367d).
The Socrates of the dialogue introduces his answer by setting out
the analogy between the soul and the city. In his imagined city the virtues
are allotted to the diVerent classes of the state: the city’s wisdom is the
wisdom of its rulers, its courage is the courage of its soldiers, and its
temperance is the obedience of the artisans to the ruling class. Justice is
the harmony of the three classes: it consists in each citizen, and each class,
doing that for which they are most suited. The three parts of the soul
correspond to the three classes in the state, and the virtues in the soul are
distributed like the virtues in the state (441c–442d). Courage belongs to
temper, temperance is the subservience of the lower elements, wisdom is
located in reason, which rules and looks after the whole soul. Justice is the
harmony of the psychic elements. ‘Each of us will be a just person, fulWlling
his proper function, only if the several parts of our soul fulWl theirs’ (441e).
If injustice is the hierarchical harmony of the soul’s elements, injustice
and all manner of vice occur when the inferior elements rebel against this
hierarchy (443b). Justice and injustice in the soul are like health and disease
in the body. Accordingly, it is absurd to ask whether it is more proWtable to
live justly or to do wrong. All the wealth and power in the world cannot
make life worth living when the body is ravaged by disease. Can it be any
more worth living when the soul, the principle of life, is deranged and
corrupted (445b)?
That is the Wrst account of justice and virtue given in answer to Glaucon
and Adeimantus. It diVers from the account in the Protagoras in several ways.
The thesis of the unity of virtue has been abandoned, or at least modiWed,
as a result of the tripartition of the soul. Pleasure appears not as the object
264
ETHICS

of virtue, but as the crony of the lowest part of the soul. The conclusion
that justice beneWts its possessor, however, is common ground both to the
Republic and to the earlier Socratic dialogues. Moreover, if justice is psychic
health, then everyone must really want to be just, since everyone wants to
be healthy. This rides well with the Socratic thesis that no one does wrong
on purpose, and that vice is fundamentally ignorance.
However, the conclusion drawn at the end of Republic 4 is only a
provisional one, for it makes no reference to the great Platonic innovation:
the Theory of Ideas. After the role of the Ideas has been expounded in the
middle books of the dialogue, we are given a revised account of the relation
between justice and happiness. The just man is happier than the unjust,
not only because his soul is in concord, but because it is more delightful to
Wll the soul with understanding than to feed fat the desires of appetite.
Reason is no longer the faculty that takes care of the person, it is akin to
the unchanging and immortal world of truth (585c).
Humans can be classiWed as avaricious, ambitious, or academic,
according to whether the dominant element in their soul is appetite,
temper, or reason. Men of each type will claim that their own life is best:
the avaricious man will praise the life of business, the ambitious man will
praise a political career, and the academic man will praise knowledge and
understanding. It is the academic, the philosopher, whose judgement is to
be preferred: he has the advantage over the others in experience, insight,
and reasoning (580d–583b). Moreover, the objects to which the philosopher
devotes his life are so much more real than the objects pursued by the
others that their pleasures seem illusory by comparison (583c–587a). Plato
has not altogether said goodbye to the hedonic calculus: he works out for
us that the philosopher king lives 729 times more pleasantly than his evil
opposite number (587e).
Plato returns to the topic of happiness and pleasure in the mature
dialogue Philebus. One character, Protarchus, argues that pleasure is the
greatest good; Socrates counters that wisdom is superior to pleasure and
more conducive to happiness (11a–12b). The dialogue gives an opportunity
for a wide-ranging discussion of diVerent kinds of pleasure, very diVerent
from the Protagoras treatment of pleasure as a single class of commensurable
items. At the end of the discussion Socrates wins his point against Pro-
tarchus: on a well-considered grading of goods even the best of pleasures
come out below wisdom (66b–c).
265
ETHICS

The most interesting part of the dialogue, however, is an argument to
the eVect that neither pleasure nor wisdom can be the essence of a happy
life, but that only a mixed life that has both pleasure and wisdom in it
would really be worth choosing. Someone who had every pleasure from
moment to moment, but was devoid of reason, would not be happy
because he would be able neither to remember nor to anticipate any
pleasure other than the present: he would be living not a human life but
the life of a mollusc (21a–d). But a purely intellectual life without any
pleasure would equally be intolerable (21e). Neither life would be ‘sufW-
cient, perfect, or worthy of choice’. The Wnal good consists in a harmoni-
ous proportion between pleasure and wisdom (63c–65a).
Aristotle on Eudaimonia
The criteria for a good life set out in the Philebus reappear in Aristotle’s
account of the good life. The good we are looking for, he says, at the
beginning of the Nicomachean Ethics, must be perfect by comparison with
other ends—that is, it must be something sought always for its own sake
and never for the sake of something else; and it must be self-sufWcient, that
is, it must be something which taken on its own makes life worthwhile and
lacking in nothing. These, he goes on, are the properties of happiness
(eudaimonia) (NE 1. 7. 1097a15–b21).
In all Aristotle’s ethical treatises the notion of happiness plays a central
role. This is brought out more clearly, however, in the Eudemian Ethics, and
in my exposition I will begin by following this rather than the
more familiar text of the Nicomachean Ethics. The treatise begins with the
inquiry: what is a good life and how is it to be acquired? (EE 1. 1. 1214a15).
We are oVered Wve candidate answers to the second question (by nature,
by learning, by discipline, by divine favour, and by luck) and seven
candidate answers to the Wrst (wisdom, virtue, pleasure, honour, reputa-
tion, riches, and culture) (1. 1. 1214a32, b9). Aristotle immediately eliminates
some answers to the second question: if happiness comes purely by nature
or by luck or by grace, then it will be beyond most people’s reach and they
can do nothing about it (1. 3. 1215a15). But a full answer to the second
question obviously depends on the answer to the Wrst: and Aristotle works
on that by asking the question: what makes life worth living?
266
ETHICS

There are some occurrences in life, e.g. sickness and pain, that make
people want to give up life: clearly these do not make life worth living.
There are the events of childhood: these cannot be the most choiceworthy
things in life since no one in his right mind would choose to go back to
childhood. In adult life there are things that we do only as means to an
end; clearly these cannot, in themselves, be what makes life worth living
(1. 5. 1215b15–31).
If life is to be worth living, it must surely be for something that is an end
in itself. One such end is pleasure. The pleasures of food and drink and sex
are, on their own, too brutish to be a Wtting end for human life: but if we
combine them with aesthetic and intellectual pleasures we Wnd a goal that
has been seriously pursued by people of signiWcance. Others prefer a life of
virtuous action—the life of a real politician, not like the false politicians,
who are only after money or power. Thirdly, there is the life of scientiWc
contemplation, as exempliWed by Anaxagoras, who when asked why one
should choose to be born rather than not replied, ‘In order to admire the
heavens and the order of the universe.’
Aristotle has thus reduced the possible answers to the question ‘What is
a good life?’ to a shortlist of three: wisdom, virtue, and pleasure. All, he
says, connect happiness with one or other of three forms of life, the
philosophical, the political, and the voluptuary (1. 4. 1215a27). This triad
provides the key to Aristotle’s ethical inquiry. Both the Eudemian and the
Nicomachean treatises contain detailed analyses of the concepts of virtue,
wisdom (phronesis), and pleasure. And when Aristotle comes to present his
own account of happiness, he can claim that it incorporates the attractions
of all three of the traditional forms of life.
A crucial step towards achieving this is to apply, in this ethical area, the
metaphysical analysis of potentiality and actuality. Aristotle distinguishes
between a state (hexis) and its use (chresis) or exercise (energeia).2 Virtue and
wisdom are both states, whereas happiness is an activity, and therefore
cannot be simply identiWed with either of them (EE 2. 1. 1219a39; NE 1. 1.
1098a16). The activity that constitutes happiness is, however, a use or
exercise of virtue. Wisdom and moral virtue, though diVerent hexeis, are
exercised inseparably in a single energeia, so that they are not competing but
collaborating contributors to happiness (NE 10. 8. 1178a16–18). Moreover,
2 The EE prefers the distinction in the form: virtue–use of virtue; the NE prefers it in the
form: virtue–activity in accord with virtue (energeia kat’areten).
267
ETHICS

pleasure, Aristotle claims, is identical with the unimpeded exercise of an
appropriate state: so that happiness, considered as the unimpeded exercise
of these two states, is simultaneously the life of virtue, wisdom, and
pleasure (EE 7. 15. 1249a21; NE 10. 7. 1177a23).
To reach thisconclusion takesmany pagesofanalysisandargument. First,
Aristotle must show that happiness is activity in accordance with virtue. This
derives from a consideration of the function or characteristic activity (ergon)
of human beings. Man must have a function, the Nicomachean Ethics argues,
because particular types of men (e.g. sculptors) do, and parts and organs of
human beings do. What is this function? Not growth and nourishment, for
this is shared by plants, nor the life of the senses, for this is shared by animals.
It must be a life of reason concerned with action: the activity of soul in
accordance with reason. So human good will be good human functioning,
namely, activity of soul in accordance with virtue (NE 1. 7. 1098a16). Virtue
unexercised is not happiness, because that would be compatible with a life
passed in sleep, which no one would call happy (1. 8. 1099a1).
Secondly, Aristotle must analyse the concept of virtue. Human virtues
are classiWed in accordance with the division of the parts of the soul outlined
in the previous chapter. Any virtue of the vegetative part of the soul, such as
soundness of digestion, is irrelevant to ethics, which is concerned with
speciWcally human virtue. The part of the soul concerned with desire and
passion is speciWcally human in that it is under the control of reason: it has
its own virtues, the moral virtues such as courage and temperance. The
rational part of the soul is the seat of the intellectual virtues.
This may not have been Aristotle’s idea of a happy life, but this was how it seemed to a
Wfteenth-century illuminator of his text
268
ETHICS

Aristotle on Moral and Intellectual Virtue
The moral virtues are dealt with in books 2 to 5 of the Nicomachean Ethics and
in the second and third books of the Eudemian. These virtues are not innate,
but acquired by practice and lost by disuse: thus they diVer from faculties
like intelligence or memory. They are abiding states, and thus diVer from
momentary passions like anger and pity. What makes a person good or bad,
praiseworthy or blameworthy, is neither the simple possession of faculties
or the simple occurrence of passions. It is rather a state of character which
is expressed both in purpose (prohairesis) and in action (praxis) (NE 2. 1.
1103a11–b25; 4. 1105a19–1106a13; EE 2. 2. 1220b1–20).
Virtue is expressed in good purpose, that is to say, a prescription for
action in accordance with a good plan of life. The actions which express
moral virtue will, Aristotle tells us, avoid excess and defect. A temperate
person, for instance, will avoid eating or drinking too much; but he will
also avoid eating or drinking too little. Virtue chooses the mean, or middle
ground, between excess and defect, eating and drinking the right amount.
Aristotle goes through a long list of virtues, beginning with the traditional
ones of fortitude and temperance, but including others such as liberality,
sincerity, dignity, and conviviality, and sketches out how each of them is
concerned with a mean.
The doctrine of the mean is not intended as a recipe for mediocrity or an
injunction to stay in the middle of the herd. Aristotle warns us that what
constitutes the right amount to drink, the right amount to give away, the
right amount of talking to do, may diVer from person to person, in the way
that the amount of food Wt for an Olympic champion may not suit a novice
athlete (2. 6. 1106b3–4). Each of us learns what is the right amount by
experience: by observing, and correcting, excess and defect in our conduct.
Virtue is concerned not only with action but with passion. We may have
too many fears or too few fears, and courage will enable us to fear when
fear is appropriate and be fearless when it is not. We may be excessively
concerned with sex and we may be insufWciently interested in it: the
temperate person will take the appropriate degree of interest and be
neither lustful nor frigid (NE 2. 7. 1107b1–9).
The virtues, besides being concerned with means of action and passion,
are themselves means in the sense that they occupy a middle ground
between two contrary vices. Thus courage is in the middle, Xanked on one
269
ETHICS

side by foolhardiness and on the other by cowardice; generosity treads the
narrow path between miserliness and prodigality (NE 2. 7. 1107b1–16; EE 2.
3. 1220b36–1221a12). But while there is a mean of action and passion, there is
no mean of virtue itself: there cannot be too much of a virtue in the way
that there can be too much of a particular kind of action or passion. If we
feel inclined to say that someone is too courageous, what we really mean is
that his actions cross the boundary between the virtue of courage and the
vice of foolhardiness. And if there cannot be too much of a virtue, there
cannot be too little of a vice: so that there is no mean of vice any more than
there is a mean of virtue (NE 2. 6. 1107a18–26).
While all moral virtues are means of action and passion, it is not the case
that every kind of action and passion is capable of a virtuous mean. There
are some actions of which there is no right amount, because any amount of
them is too much: Aristotle gives murder and adultery as examples. There
is no such thing as committing adultery with the right person at the right
time in the right way. Similarly, there are passions that are excluded from
the application of the mean: there is no right amount of envy or spite (NE
2. 6. 1107a8–17).
Aristotle’s account of virtue as a mean seems to many readers truistic. In
fact, it is a distinctive ethical theory that contrasts with other inXuential
systems of various kinds. Moral systems such as traditional Jewish or
Christian doctrine give the concept of a moral law (natural or revealed)
a central role. This leads to an emphasis on the prohibitive aspect of
morality, the listing of actions to be altogether avoided: most of the
commands of the Decalogue, for instance, begin with ‘Thou shalt not’.
Aristotle does believe that there are some actions that are altogether ruled
out, as we have just seen; but he stresses not the minimum necessary for
moral decency but rather the conditions of achieving moral excellence
(that is, after all, what ethike arete means). He is, we might say, writing a text
for an honours degree, rather than a pass degree, in morality.
But it is not only religious systems that contrast with Aristotle’s treat-
ment of the mean. For a utilitarian, or any kind of consequentialist, there is
no class of actions to be ruled out in advance. On a utilitarian view, since
the morality of an action is to be judged by its consequences there can, in a
particular case, be the right amount of adultery or murder. On the other
hand, some secular ascetic systems have ruled out whole classes of actions:
for a vegetarian, for instance, there can be no right amount of the eating of
270
ETHICS

meat. We might say that from Aristotle’s point of view utilitarians go to
excess in their application of the mean, whereas vegetarians are guilty of
defect in its application. Aristotelianism, naturally, hits the happy mean in
application of the doctrine.
Aristotle sums up his account of moral virtue by saying that it is a state
of character expressed in choice, lying in the appropriate mean, determined
by the prescription that a wise person would lay down. In order to
complete this account, he has to explain what wisdom is, and how the
wise person’s prescriptions are reached. This he does in a book that is
common to both ethics (NE 6; EE 5) in which he treats of the intellectual
virtue.
Wisdom is not the only intellectual virtue, as he explains at the
beginning of the book. The virtue of anything depends on its ergon, its
function or job. The job of the reason is the production of true and false
judgements, and when it is doing its job well it produces true judge-
ments (6. 2. 1139a29). The intellectual virtues are then excellences that
make reason come out with truth. There are Wve states, Aristotle says,
that have this eVect: skill (techne), science (episteme), wisdom (phronesis),
understanding (sophia), and intuition (nous). (6. 3. 1139b17). These states
contrast with other mental states such as belief or opinion (doxa) which
may be true or false. There are, then, Wve candidates for being intellectual
virtues.
Techne, however, the skill exhibited by craftsmen and experts such as
architects and doctors, is not treated by Aristotle as an intellectual virtue.
As we have seen, Socrates and Plato delighted in assimilating virtues to
skills; but Aristotle emphasizes the important diVerences between the two.
Skills have products that are distinct from their exercises—whether the
product is concrete, like the house built by an architect, or abstract, like
the health produced by the doctor (6. 4. 1140a1–23). The exercise of a skill is
evaluated by the excellence of its product, not by the motive of the
practitioner: if the doctor’s cures are successful and the architect’s houses
are splendid, we do not need to inquire into their motives for practising
their arts. Virtues are not like this: virtues are exercised in actions that need
not have any further outcome, and an action, however objectively irre-
proachable, is not virtuous unless it is done for the right motive, that is say,
chosen as part of a worthwhile way of life (NE 2. 4. 1105a26–b8). It need not
count against a person’s skill that he exercises it reluctantly; but a really
271
ETHICS

virtuous person, Aristotle maintains, must enjoy doing what is good, not
just grudgingly perform a duty (NE 2. 3. 1104b4). Finally, though the
possessor of a skill must know how it should be exercised, a particular
exercise of a skill may be a deliberate mistake—a teacher, perhaps, showing
a pupil how a particular task should not be performed. No one, by contrast,
could exercise the virtue of temperance by, say, drinking himself comatose.
It turns out that the other four intellectual virtues can be reduced to
two. Sophia, the overall understanding of eternal truths that is the goal of
the philosopher’s quest, turns out to be an amalgam of intuition (nous) and
science (episteme) (6. 7. 1141a19–20). Wisdom (phronesis) is concerned not with
unchanging and eternal matters, but with human aVairs and matters that
can be objects of deliberation (6. 7. 1141b9–13). Because of the diVerent
objects with which they are concerned, understanding and wisdom are
virtues of two diVerent parts of the rational soul. Understanding is
the virtue of the theoretical part (the epistemonikon), which is concerned
with the eternal truths; wisdom is the virtue of the practical part (the
logistikon), which deliberates about human aVairs. All other intellectual
virtues are either parts of, or can be reduced to, these two virtues of the
theoretical and the practical reason.
The intellectual virtue of practical reason is inseparably linked with the
moral virtues of the aVective part of the soul. It is impossible, Aristotle tells
us, to be really good without wisdom, or to be really wise without moral
virtue (6. 13. 1144b30–2). This follows from the nature of the kind of truth
that is the concern of practical reason.
What afWrmation and negation are in thinking, pursuit and avoidance are in desire:
so that since moral virtue is a state which Wnds expression in purpose, and purpose is
deliberative desire, therefore, both the reasoning must be true and the desire right, if
the purpose is to be good, and the desire must pursue what the thought prescribes.
This is the kind of reasoning and the kind of truth that is practical. (6. 2. 1139a21–7)
Virtuous action must be based on virtuous purpose. Purpose is reasoned
desire, so that if purpose is to be good both the reasoning and the desire
must be good. It is wisdom that makes the reasoning good, and moral
virtue that makes the desire good. Aristotle admits the possibility of correct
reasoning in the absence of moral virtue: this he calls ‘intelligence’ (deinotes).
(6. 12. 1144a23). He also admits the possibility of right desire in the absence
of correct reasoning: such are the naturally virtuous impulses of children
272
ETHICS

(6. 13. 1144b1–6). But it is only when correct reasoning and right desire
come together that we get truly virtuous action (NE 10. 8. 1178a16–18). The
wedding of the two makes intelligence into wisdom and natural virtue into
moral virtue.
Practical reasoning is conceived by Aristotle as a process starting from a
general conception of human well-being, going on to consider the circum-
stances of a particular case, and concluding with a prescription for action.3
In the deliberations of the wise person, all three of these stages will be
correct and exhibit practical truth (6. 9. 1142b34; 13. 1144b28). The Wrst,
general, premiss is one for which moral virtue is essential; without it we
shall have a perverted and deluded grasp of the ultimate grounds of action
(6. 12. 1144a9, 35).
Aristotle does not give a systematic account of practical reasoning
comparable to the syllogistic he constructed for theoretical reasoning.
Indeed, it is difWcult to Wnd in his writings a single virtuous practical
syllogism fully worked out. The clearest examples he gives all concern
reasonings that are in some way morally defective. Practical reasoning may
be followed by bad conduct (a) because of a faulty general premiss, (b)
because of a defect concerning the particular premiss or premisses,
(c) because of a failure to draw, or act upon, the conclusion. Aristotle
illustrates this by considering a case of gluttony.
We are to imagine someone presented with a delicious sweet from which
temperance (for some reason which is not made clear) commands absten-
tion. Failure to abstain will be due to a faulty general premiss if the glutton
is someone who, instead of the life-plan of temperance, adopts a regular
policy of pursuing every pleasure that oVers itself. Such a person Aristotle
calls ‘intemperate’. But someone may subscribe to a general principle of
temperance, thus possessing the appropriate general premiss, and yet fail to
abstain on this occasion through the overwhelming force of gluttonous
desire. Aristotle calls such a person not ‘intemperate’ but ‘incontinent’, and
he explains how such incontinence (akrasia) takes diVerent forms in accord-
ance with the various ways in which the later stages of the practical
reasoning break down (7. 3. 1147a24–b12).
From time to time in his discussion of the relation of wisdom and virtue
Aristotle pauses to compare and contrast his teaching with that of Socrates.
3 See A. Kenny, Aristotle’s Theory of the Will (London: Duckworth, 1979), 111–54.
273
ETHICS

Socrates was correct, he said, to regard wisdom as essential for moral virtue,
but he was wrong simply to identify virtue with wisdom (NE 6. 13.
1144b17–21). Again, Socrates had denied the possibility of doing what one
knows to be wrong, on the grounds that knowledge could not be dragged
about like a slave. He was correct about the power of knowledge, Aristotle
says, but wrong to conclude that incontinence is impossible. Incontinence
arises from deWciencies concerning the minor premisses or the conclusion
of practical reasoning, and does not prejudice the status of the universal
major premise which alone deserves the name ‘knowledge’. (NE 7. 3.
1147b13–19).
Pleasure and Happiness
The pleasures that are the domain of temperance, intemperance, and
incontinence are pleasures of a particular kind: the familiar bodily pleas-
ures of food, drink, and sex. If Aristotle is to carry out his plan of
explicating the relationship between pleasure and happiness, he has to
give a more general account of the nature of pleasure. This he does in two
passages, in NE 7 ¼ EE 6 (1152b1–54b31) and in NE 10. 1–5 (1172a16–1176a29).
The two passages diVer in style and method, but their fundamental
content is the same.4
In each treatise Aristotle oVers a Wvefold classiWcation of pleasure. First
of all, there are the pleasures of those who are sick (either in body or
soul); these are really only pseudo-pleasures (1153b33, 1173b22). Next, there
are the pleasures of food and drink and sex as enjoyed by the gourmand and
the lecher (1152b35 V., 1173b8–15). Next up the hierarchy are two classes of
aesthetic sense-pleasures: the pleasures of the inferior senses of touch and
taste, on the one hand, and on the other the pleasures of the superior
senses of sight, hearing, and smell (1153b26, 1174b14–1175a10). Finally, at the
top of the scale, are the pleasures of the mind (1153a1–20, 1173b17).
DiVerent though these pleasures are, a common account can be given of
the nature of each genuine pleasure.
Each sense has a corresponding pleasure, and so does thought and contemplation.
Each activity is pleasantest when it is most perfect, and it is most perfect when the
4 See A. Kenny, The Aristotelian Ethics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978), 233–7.
274
ETHICS

organ is in good condition and when it is directed to the most excellent of its
objects; and the pleasure perfects the activity. The pleasure does not however
perfect the activity in the same way as the object and the sense, if good, perfect it;
just as health and the physician are not in the same way the cause of someone’s
being in good health. (NE 10. 4. 1174b23–32)
The doctrine that pleasure perfects activity is presented in diVerent terms
in another passage in which pleasure is deWned as the unimpeded activity of
a disposition in accordance with nature (NE 7. 12. 1153a14).
To see what Aristotle had in mind, consider the aesthetic pleasures
of taste. You are at a tasting of mature wines; you are free from colds,
and undistracted by background music; then if you do not enjoy the wine
either you have a bad palate (‘the organ is not in good condition’) or it is a
bad wine (‘it is not directed to the most excellent of its objects’). There is no
third alternative. Pleasure ‘perfects’ activity in the sense that it causes the
activity—in this case a tasting—to be a good one of its kind. The organ and
the object—in this case the palate and the wine—are the efWcient cause of
the activity. If they are both good, they will be the efWcient cause of a good
activity, and therefore they too will ‘perfect’ activity, i.e. make it be a
good specimen of such activity. But pleasure causes activity not as efWcient
cause, but as Wnal cause: like health, not like the doctor.
After this analysis, Aristotle is in a position to consider the relation
between pleasure and goodness. The question ‘Is pleasure good or bad?’ is
too simple: it can only be answered after pleasures have been distinguished
and classiWed. Pleasure is not to be thought of as a good or bad thing in
itself: the pleasure proper to good activities is good and the pleasure proper
to bad activities is bad (NE 10. 5. 1175b27).
If certain pleasures are bad, that does not prevent the best thing from being some
pleasure—just as knowledge might be, thought certain kinds of knowledge are
bad. Perhaps it is even necessary, if each state has unimpeded activities, that the
activity (if unimpeded) of all or one of them should be happiness. This then would
be the most worthwhile thing of all; and it would be a pleasure. (NE 7. 13.
1153b7–11)
In this way, it could turn out that pleasure (of a certain kind) was the best
of all human goods. If happiness consists in the exercise of the highest form
of virtue, and if the unimpeded exercise of a virtue constitutes a pleasure,
then happiness and that pleasure are one and the same thing.
275
ETHICS

Plato, in the Philebus, proposed the question whether pleasure or phronesis
constituted the best life. Aristotle’s answer is that properly understood the
two are not in competition with each other as candidates for happiness.
The exercise of the highest form of phronesis is the very same thing as
the truest form of pleasure; each is identical with the other and with
happiness. In Plato’s usage, however, ‘phronesis’ covers the whole range of
intellectual virtue that Aristotle distinguishes into wisdom (phronesis) and
understanding (sophia). If we ask whether happiness is to be identiWed with
the pleasure of wisdom, or with the pleasure of understanding, we get
diVerent answers in Aristotle’s two ethical treatises.
The Nicomachean Ethics identiWes happiness with the pleasurable exercise of
understanding. Happiness, we were told earlier, is the activity of soul in
accordance with virtue, and if there are several virtues, in accordance with
the best and most perfect virtue. We have, in the course of the treatise,
learnt that there are both moral and intellectual virtues, and that the latter
are superior; and among the intellectual virtues, understanding, the scien-
tiWc grasp of eternal truths, is superior to wisdom, which concerns human
aVairs. Supreme happiness, therefore, is activity in accordance with under-
standing, an activity which Aristotle calls ‘contemplation’. We are told that
contemplation is related to philosophy as knowing is to seeking: in some
way, which remains obscure, it consists in the enjoyment of the fruits of
philosophical inquiry (NE 10. 7. 1177a12–b26).
In the Eudemian Ethics happiness is identiWed not with the exercise of a
single dominant virtue but with the exercise of all the virtues, including
not only understanding but also the moral virtues linked with wisdom (EE
2. 1. 1219a35–9). Activity in accordance with these virtues is pleasant, and so
the truly happy man will also have the most pleasant life (EE 7. 25.
1249a18–21). For the virtuous person, the concepts ‘good’ and ‘pleasant’
coincide in their application; if the two do not yet coincide then a person is
not virtuous but incontinent (7. 2. 1237a8–9). The bringing about of this
coincidence is the task of ethics (7. 2. 1237a3).
Though the Eudemian Ethics does not identify happiness with philosophical
contemplation it does, like the Nicomachean Ethics, give it a dominant position
in the life of the happy person. The exercise of the moral virtues, as well as
intellectual ones, is, in the Eudemian Ethics, included as part of happiness; but
the standard for their exercise is set by their relationship to contempla-
tion—which is here deWned in theological rather than philosophical terms.
276
ETHICS

Whatever choice or possession of natural goods—health and strength, wealth,
friends, and the like—will most conduce to the contemplation of God is best: this
is the Wnest criterion. But any standard of living which either through excess or
defect hinders the service and contemplation of God is bad. (EE 7. 15. 1249b15–20)
The Eudemian ideal of happiness, therefore, given the role it assigns to
contemplation, to the moral virtues, and to pleasure, can claim, as Ar-
istotle promised, to combine the features of the traditional three lives, the
life of the philosopher, the life of the politician, and the life of the pleasure-
seeker. The happy man will value contemplation above all, but part of his
happy life will be the exercise of political virtues and the enjoyment in
moderation of natural human pleasures of body as well as of soul.
The Hedonism of Epicurus
In making an identiWcation between the supreme good and the supreme
pleasure, Aristotle entitles himself to be called a hedonist: but he is a
hedonist of a very unusual kind, and stands at a great distance from the
most famous hedonist in ancient Greece, namely Epicurus. Epicurus’
treatment of pleasure is less sophisticated, but also more easily intelligible,
than Aristotle’s. He is willing to place a value on pleasure that is independ-
ent of the value of the activity enjoyed: all pleasure is, as such, good. His
ethical hedonism resembles that of Democritus or of Plato’s Protagoras rather
than that of either Aristotelian ethical treatise.
For Epicurus, pleasure is the Wnal end of life and the criterion of
goodness in choice. This is something that needs no argument: we all
feel it in our bones (LS 21a).
We maintain that pleasure is the beginning and end of a blessed life. We recognize
it as our primary and natural good. Pleasure is our starting point whenever we
choose or avoid anything and it is this we make our aim, using feeling as the
criterion by which we judge of every good thing. (D.L. 10. 128–9)
This does not mean that Epicurus, like Aristotle’s intemperate man, makes
it his policy to pursue every pleasure that oVers. If pleasure is the greatest
good, pain is the greatest evil, and it is best to pass a pleasure by if it would
lead to long-term suVering. Equally, it is worth putting up with pain if it
will bring great pleasure in the long run (D.L. 10. 129).
277
ETHICS

These qualiWcations mean that Epicurus’ hedonism is far from being an
invitation to lead the life of a voluptuary. It is not drinking and carousing,
nor tables laden with delicacies, nor promiscuous intercourse with boys
and women, that produce the pleasant life, but sobriety, honour, justice,
and wisdom. (D.L. 10. 132) A simple vegetarian diet and the company of a
few friends in a modest garden sufWce for Epicurean happiness.
What enables Epicurus to combine theoretical hedonism with practical
asceticism is his understanding of pleasure as being essentially the satis-
faction of desire. The strongest and most fundamental of our desires is
the desire for the removal of pain (D.L. 10. 127). Hence, the mere absence
of pain is itself a fundamental pleasure (LS 21a). Among our desires some
are natural and some are futile, and it is the natural desires to which the
most important pleasures correspond. We have natural desires for the
removal of the painful states of hunger, thirst, and cold, and the satisfac-
tion of these desires is naturally pleasant. But there are two kinds
of pleasure involved, for which Epicurus framed technical terms: there
is the kinetic pleasure of quenching one’s thirst, and the static pleasure
that supervenes when one’s thirst has been quenched (LS 21q). Both
kinds of pleasure are natural: but among the kinetic pleasures some are
necessary (the pleasure in eating and drinking enough to satisfy hunger
and thirst) and others are unnecessary (the pleasures of the gourmet)
(LS 21i, j).
Unnecessary natural pleasures are not greater than, but merely vari-
ations on, necessary natural pleasures: hunger is the best sauce, and eating
simple food when hungry is pleasanter than stufWng oneself with luxuries
when satiated. But of all natural pleasures, it is the static pleasures that
really count. ‘The cry of the Xesh is not to be hungry, not to be thirsty, not
to be cold. Someone who is not any of these states, and has good hope of
remaining so, could rival even Zeus in happiness’ (LS 21g).
Sexual desires are classed by Epicurus as unnecessary, on the grounds
that their non-fulWlment is not accompanied by pain. This may be surpris-
ing, since unrequited love can cause anguish. But the intensity of such
desire, Epicurus claimed, was due not to the nature of sex but to the
romantic imagination of the lover (LS 21e). Epicurus was not opposed to
the fulWlment of unnecessary natural desires, provided they did no harm—
which of course was to be measured by their capacity for producing pain
(LS 21f). Sexual pleasure, he said, could be taken in any way one wished,
278
ETHICS

provided one respected law and convention, distressed no one, and did
no damage to one’s body or one’s essential resources. However, these
qualiWcations added up to substantial constraint, and even when sex did
no harm, it did no good either (LS 21g).
Epicurus is more critical of the fulWlment of desires that are futile: these
are desires that are not natural and, like unnecessary natural desires, do not
cause pain if not fulWlled. Examples are the desire for wealth and the desire
for civic honours and acclaim (LS 21g, i). But so too are desires for the
pleasures of science and philosophy: ‘Hoist sail’, he told a favourite pupil
‘and steer clear of all culture’ (D.L. 10. 5). Aristotle had made it a point in
favour of philosophy that its pleasures, unlike the pleasures of the senses,
were unmixed with pain (cf. NE 10. 7. 1177a25); now it is made a reason for
downgrading the pleasures of philosophy that there is no pain in being a
non-philosopher. For Epicurus the mind does play an important part in
the happy life: but its function is to anticipate and recollect the pleasures of
the senses (LS 21l, t).
On the basis of the surviving texts we can judge that Epicurus’ hedon-
ism, if philistine, is far from being licentious. But from time to time he
expressed himself in terms that were, perhaps deliberately, shocking to
many. ‘For my part I have no conception of the good if I take away the
pleasures of taste and sex and music and beauty’ (D.L. 10. 6). ‘The pleasure
of the stomach is the beginning and root of all good’ (LS 21m). Expressions
such as these laid the ground for his posthumous reputation as a gour-
mand and a libertine. The legend, indeed, was started in his lifetime by a
dissident pupil, Timocrates, who loved to tell stories of his midnight orgies
and twice-daily vomitings (D.L. 10. 6–7).
More serious criticism focused on his teaching that the virtues were
merely means of securing pleasure. The Stoic Cleanthes used to ask his
pupils to imagine pleasure as a queen on a throne surrounded by the
virtues. On the Epicurean view of ethics, he said, these were handmaids
totally dedicated to her service, merely whispering warnings, from time to
time, against incautiously giving oVence or causing pain. Epicureans did
not demur: Diogenes of Oenoanda agreed with the Stoics that the virtues
were productive of happiness, but he denied that they were part of
happiness itself. Virtues were a means, not an end. ‘I afWrm now and
always, at the top of my voice, that for all, whether Greek or barbarian,
pleasure is the goal of the best way of life’ (LS 21p).
279
ETHICS

Stoic Ethics
In support of the central role they assigned to pleasure, Epicureans argued
that as soon as every animal was born it sought after pleasure and enjoyed
it as the greatest good while rejecting pain as the greatest evil. The Stoic
Chrysippus, on the contrary, argued that the Wrst impulse of an animal was
not towards pleasure, but towards self-preservation. Consciousness begins
with awareness of what the Stoics called, coining a new word, one’s own
constitution (LS 57a). An animal accepted what assisted, and rejected what
hampered, the development of this constitution: thus a baby would strive
Zeno and Epicurus (plus swine) represented on a silver cup from Boscoreale, first
century ad
280
ETHICS

to stand unsupported, even at the cost of falls and tears (Seneca, Ep. 121, 15
LS 57b). This drive towards the preservation and progress of the consti-
tution is something more primitive than the desire for pleasure, since it
occurs in plants as well as animals, and even in humans is often exercised
without consciousness (D.L. 8. 86 LS 57a). To care for one’s own consti-
tution is nature’s Wrst lesson.
Stoic ethics attaches great importance to Nature. Whereas Aristotle
spoke often of the nature of individual things and species, it is the Stoics
who were responsible for introducing the notion of ‘Nature’, with a capital
‘N’, as a single cosmic order exhibited in the structure and activities of
things of many diVerent kinds. According to Diogenes Laertius (D.L. 7. 87),
Zeno stated that the end of life was ‘to live in agreement with Nature.’
Nature teaches us to take care of ourselves through life, as our constitution
changes from babyhood through youth to age; but self-love is not Nature’s
only teaching. Just as there is a natural impulse to procreate, there is a
natural impulse to take care of one’s oVspring; just as we have a natural
inclination to learn, so we have a natural inclination to share with others
the knowledge we acquire (Cicero, Fin. 3. 65 LS 57e). These impulses to
beneWt those nearest to us should, according to the Stoics, be extended
outward to the wider world.
Each of us, according to Hierocles, a Stoic of the time of Hadrian, stands
at the centre of a series of concentric circles. The Wrst circle surrounding
my individual mind contains my body and its needs. The second contains
my immediate family, and the third and fourth contain extensions of my
family. Then come circles of neighbours, at varying distances, plus the circle
that contains all my co-nationals. The outermost and largest circle encom-
passes the whole human race. If I am virtuous I will try to draw these circles
closer together, treating cousins as if they were brothers, and constantly
transferring people from outer circles to inner ones (LS 57g).
The Stoics coined a special word for the process thus picturesquely
described: ‘oikeiosis’, literally ‘homiWcation’. A Stoic, adapting himself to
cosmic nature, is making himself at home in the world he lives in. Oikeiosis
is the converse of this: it is making other people at home with oneself,
taking them into one’s domestic circle. The universalism is impressive, but
its limitations were soon noted. It is unrealistic to think that, however
virtuous, a person can bestow the same aVection on the most distant
foreigner as one can on one’s own family. Oikeiosis begins at home, and
281
ETHICS

even within the very Wrst circle we are more troubled by the loss of an eye
than by the loss of a nail. But if the benevolence of oikeiosis is not universally
uniform, it cannot provide a foundation for the obligation of justice to
treat all human beings equally (LS 57h). Moreover, the Stoics believed that
it was praiseworthy to die for one’s country: but is not that preferring an
outer circle to an inner one?
Again, the universe of nature contains more than the human beings
who inhabit the concentric circles: what is the right attitude to those who
share the cosmos with us? Stoics, in some moods, described the universe as
a city or state shared by men with gods, and it was to this that they
appealed in order to justify the self-sacriWce of the individual for the sake of
the community. In their practical ethical teaching there is little concern
with non-human agents. Animals, certainly, have no rights against man-
kind: Chrysippus was sure that humans can make beasts serve their needs
without violating justice (Cicero, Fin. 3. 67 LS 57g).
The cosmic order does, however, provide not only the context but
the model for human ethical behaviour. ‘Living in agreement with
nature’ does not mean only ‘living in accordance with human nature’.
Chrysippus said that we should live as taught by experience of natural
events, because our individual natures were part of the nature of the
universe. Consequently, Stoic teaching about the end of life can be
summed up thus:
We are to follow nature, living our lives in accordance with our own nature and
that of the cosmos, doing no act that is forbidden by the universal law, that is to
say the right reason that pervades all things, which is none other than Zeus, who
presides over the administration of all that exists. (D.L. 7. 87)
The life of a virtuous person will run tranquilly beneath the uniform
motion of the heavens, and the moral law within will mirror the starry
skies above.
Living in agreement with nature was, for the Stoics, equivalent to living
according to virtue. Their best-known, and most frequently criticized,
moral tenet was that virtue alone was necessary and sufWcient for happi-
ness. Virtue was not only the Wnal end and the supreme good: it was also
the only real good.
Among the things there are, some are good, some are evil, and some are neither
the one nor the other. The things that are good are the virtues: wisdom, justice,
282
ETHICS

fortitude, temperance, and so on. The things that are evil are the opposites of
these: folly, injustice, and so on. The things that are neither one nor the other are
all those things that neither help nor harm: for instance, life, health, pleasure,
beauty, strength, wealth, fame, good birth, and their opposites, death, disease,
pain, ugliness, weakness, poverty, disrepute, and low birth. (D.L. 7.101 LS 58a)
The items in the long list of ‘things that neither help nor harm’ were called
by the Stoics ‘indiVerent matters’ (adiaphora). The Stoics accepted that these
were not matters of indiVerence like whether the number of hairs on one’s
head was odd or even: they were matters that aroused in people strong
desire and revulsion. But they were indiVerent in the sense that they were
irrelevant to a well-structured life: it was possible to be perfectly happy
with or without them (D.L. 7. 104–5 LS 58b–c).
Like the Stoics, Aristotle placed happiness in virtue and its exercise, and
counted fame and riches no part of the happiness of a happy person. But he
thought that it was a necessary condition for happiness to have a sufWcient
endowment of external goods (NE 1. 10. 1101a14–17; EE 1. 1. 1214b16).
Moreover, he believed that even a virtuous man could cease to be happy
if disaster overtook himself and his family, as happened to Priam (NE 1. 10.
1101a8). By contrast, the Stoics, with the sole exception of Chrysippus,
thought that happiness, once possessed, could never be lost, and even
Chrysippus thought it could be terminated only by something like mad-
ness (D.L. 7. 127).
IndiVerent matters, the Stoics conceded, were not all on the same level
as each other. Some were popular (proegmena) and others unpopular (apo-
proegmena). More importantly, some went with nature and some went
against nature: those that went with nature had value (axia) and those
that went against nature had disvalue (apaxia). Among the things that have
value are talents and skills, health, beauty, and wealth; the opposites of
these have disvalue (D.L. 7. 105–6). It seems clear that, according to the
Stoics, all things that have value are also popular; it is not so clear whether
everything that is popular also has value. Virtue itself did not come within
the class of the popular, just as a king is not a nobleman like his courtiers,
but something superior to a nobleman (LS 58e). Chrysippus was willing to
allow that it was permissible, in ordinary usage, to call ‘good’ what strictly
was only popular (LS 58h); and in matters of practical choice between
indiVerent matters, the Stoics in eVect encouraged people to opt for the
popular (LS 58c).
283
ETHICS

An action may fall short of being a virtuous action (katorthoma) and yet be
a decent action (kathekon). An action is decent or Wtting if it is appropriate to
one’s nature and state of life (LS 59b). It is decent to honour one’s parents
and one’s country, and the neglect of parents and failure to be patriotic is
something indecent. (Some things, like picking up a twig, or going into the
country, are neither decent nor indecent.) Virtuous actions are, a fortiori,
decent actions: what virtue adds to mere decency is Wrst of all purity of
motive and secondly stability in practice (LS 59g, h, i). Here Stoic doctrine
is close to Aristotle’s teaching that in order to act virtuously a person must
not only judge correctly what is to be done, but choose it for its own sake
and exhibit constancy of character (NE 2. 6. 1105a30–b1). Some actions,
according to the Stoics, are not only indecent but sinful (hamartemata) (LS
59m). The diVerence between these two kinds of badness is not made clear:
perhaps a Stoic sinner is like Aristotle’s intemperate man, while mere
indecency may be parallel to incontinence. For while the Stoics, implaus-
ibly, said that all sinful actions were equally bad, they did regard those that
arose from a hardened and incurable character as having badness of a
special kind (LS 59o).
The Stoic account of incontinence, however, diVers from Aristotle in an
important respect. They regard it not as arising from a struggle between
diVerent parts of the soul but rather as the result of intellectual error.
Incontinence is the result of passion, which is irrational and unnatural
motion of the soul. Passions come in four kinds: fears, desires, pain, and
pleasure. According to Chrysippus passions were simply mistaken judge-
ments about good and evil; according to earlier Stoics they were perturb-
ations arising from such mistaken judgements (LS 65g, k). But all agreed
that the path of moral progress lay in the correction of the mistaken beliefs
(LS 65a, k). Because the beliefs are false, the passions must be eliminated,
not just moderated as on the Aristotelian model of the mean.
Desire is rooted in a mistaken belief that something is approaching that
will do us good; fear is rooted in a mistaken belief that something is
approaching that will do us harm. These beliefs are accompanied by a
further belief in the appropriateness of an emotional response, of yearning
or shrinking as the case may be. Since according to Stoic theory, nothing
can do us good except virtue, and nothing can do us harm except vice,
beliefs of the kind exhibited in desire and fear are always unjustiWed, and
that is why the passions are to be eradicated. It is not that emotional
284
ETHICS

responses are always inappropriate: there can be legitimate joy and justiWed
apprehension. But if the responses are appropriate, then they do not count
as passions (LS 65f). Again, even the wise man is not exempt from irregular
bodily arousals of various kinds: but as long as he does not consent to
them, they are not passions (Seneca, de Ira 2. 3. 1).
When Chrysippus says that passions are beliefs, there is no need to regard
him as presenting the passions, implausibly, as calm intellectual assess-
ments: on the contrary he is pointing out that the assents to propositions
that set a high value on things are themselves tumultuous events. When
I lose a loved one, it appears to me that an irreplaceable value has left my life.
Full assent to this proposition involves violent internal upheaval. But if we
are ever to be happy, we must never allow ourselves to attach such supreme
value to anything that is outside our control.5
The weakness in the Stoic position is, in fact, its refusal to come to terms
with the fragility of happiness. We have met a parallel temptation in
classical epistemology: the refusal to come to terms with the fallibility of
judgement. The epistemological temptation is embodied in the fallacious
argument from ‘Necessarily, if I know that p, then p’ to ‘If I know that
p, then necessarily p’. The parallel temptation in ethics is to argue from
‘Necessarily, if I am happy, I have X’ to ‘If I am happy, I have X necessarily’.
This argument, if successful, leads to the denial that happiness can
be constituted by any contingent good that is capable of being lost (Cicero,
Tusc. 5. 41). Given the frail, contingent natures of human beings as we
know ourselves to be, the denial that contingent goods can constitute
happiness is tantamount to the claim that only superhuman beings can
be happy.
The Stoics in eVect accepted this conclusion, in their idealization of the
man of wisdom. Happiness lies in virtue, and there are no degrees of virtue,
so that a person is either perfectly virtuous or not virtuous at all. The most
perfect virtue is wisdom, and the wise man has all the virtues, since the
virtues are inseparable (LS 61f). Like Socrates, the Stoics thought of
the virtues as being sciences, and all of them as making up a single science
(LS 61h). One Stoic went so far as to say that to distinguish between
courage and justice was like regarding the faculty for seeing white as
diVerent from the faculty of seeing black (LS 61b). The wise man is totally
5 Here I am indebted to an unpublished paper by Martha Nussbaum.
285
ETHICS

free from passion, and is in possession of all worthwhile knowledge: his
virtue is the same as that of a god (LS 61j, 63f).
The wise man whom we seek is the happy man who can think no human
experience painful enough to cast him down nor joyful enough to raise his spirits.
For what can seem important in human aVairs to one who is familiar with all
eternity and the vastness of the entire universe? (Cicero, Tusc. 4. 37).
The wise man is rich, and owns all things, since he alone knows how to use
things well; he alone is truly handsome, since the mind’s face is more
beautiful than the body’s; he alone is free, even if he is in prison, since he is
a slave to no appetite (Cicero, Fin 3. 75). It was unsurprising, after all this,
that the Stoics admitted that a wise man was harder to Wnd than a phoenix
(LS 61n). They thus purchase the invulnerability of happiness only at the
cost of making it unattainable.
Since a wise man is not to be found, and there are no degrees of virtue,
the whole human race consists of fools. Shall we say, then, that the wise
man is a mythical ideal held up for our admiration and imitation (LS 66a)?
Hardly, because however much we progress towards this unattainable goal,
we have still come no nearer to salvation. Someone who is only two feet
from the surface is drowning as much as anyone who is 500 fathoms deep
in the ocean (LS 61t).
The Stoics’ doctrine of wisdom and happiness, then, oVers us little
encouragement to strive for virtue. However, later Stoics made a distinc-
tion between doctrine (decreta) and precepts (praecepta), the one being
general and the other particular (Seneca, Ep. 94, 1–4). While the doctrine
is austere and Olympian, the precepts, by an amiable inconsistency, are
often quite liberal and practical. Stoics were willing to give advice on the
conduct of marriage, the right time for singing, the best type of joke, and
many other details of daily life (Epictetus, discourses 4. 12. 16). The
distinction between doctrine and precepts is matched by a distinction
between choice and selection: virtue alone was good and choiceworthy
(D.L. 7. 89), but among indiVerent matters some could be selected in
preference to others. Smart clothes, for instance, were in themselves
worthless; but there could be good in the selection of smart clothes
(Seneca, Ep. 92, 12). Critics said that a selection could be good only if
what was selected was good (LS 64c). Sometimes, again, Stoics spoke as if
the end of life was not so much the actual attainment of virtue as doing
286
ETHICS

one’s best to attain virtue. At this point critics complained that the Stoics
could not make up their minds whether the end of life was the unattain-
able target itself, or simply ineVective assiduousness in target practice (LS
64f, c).
A Roman statue in the Louvre, traditionally entitled ‘The Death of Seneca’
287
ETHICS

One of the best-known and most controversial of Stoic precepts was that
suicide could sometimes be permissible. The Stoics ‘say that the wise man
may reasonably make his own exit from life, for the sake of his country or
dear ones, or if he suVer intolerable pain, handicap, or disease’ (D.L. 7. 130).
It is difWcult to see how this can be reconciled with the Stoic picture of the
wise man. No amount of pain or suVering can impair the wise man’s
happiness, we have been told; and indeed when recommending reasonable
suicide the Stoics agree that it will be the suicide of a happy man (Cicero,
Fin, 3. 60). But then what can be the motive that provides the reason for
leaving life, since virtue and happiness are supposed to be that for the sake
of which everything is to be chosen?
Given that the Stoic wise man is an idealization, it is an academic issue
whether his suicide would be a virtuous act. What is of practical import-
ance is whether, for the rest of us, suicide can be a decent act. Many in
antiquity believed that the Stoics taught this principle and some famous
Stoics seem to have acted on it. However, it is oddly difWcult to Wnd the
principle stated in our sources in a clear and unambiguous way. The most
famous Stoic suicide, that of Seneca, was not a matter of his choice, but the
execution of the death sentence of a tyrant.
288
ETHICS

9
God
I
n Homer’s poems gods and goddesses Wgure prominently among the cast
of characters. Zeus, the king of the gods, with his consort, Hera, and ten
members of their extended family, including his daughter Athena, Aphro-
dite the goddess of love, and Poseidon the sea-god, all live together in a
blissful abode on Mount Olympus. They take a keen partisan interest in the
doings of the human heroes of the Iliad and the Odyssey. These gods and
goddesses are simply human beings writ large, with all the emotions and
vices of human beings. They interact both mentally and physically with
ordinary humans, often with disastrous results. The only fundamental
diVerence between gods and men is that men die while gods are immortal.
Xenophanes’ Natural Theology
This conception of the divine was attacked by the Wrst philosopher of
religion, Xenophanes. Xenophanes savaged Homeric theology in satirical
verses of which only fragments remain. Homer’s stories, he complained,
attributed to the gods theft, adultery, deception, and everything that,
among humans, would be considered a shame and a reproach (KRS 166).
But even if Homer’s gods had behaved honourably, they would still
resemble humans too much to be credible. Men fashion gods in their
own image: Ethiopians believe in gods that are dark and snub-nosed, while
the gods worshipped by the Thracians have red hair and blue eyes (KRS
168). ‘If cows and horses or lions had hands and could draw, then horses
would draw the forms of gods like horses, cows like cows, making their
bodies similar in shape to their own’ (KRS 169).

Instead of this childish anthropomorphism, Xenophanes oVered a so-
phisticated monotheism.
He believed in
One god, lord over gods and human kind,
Like mortals neither in body nor in mind.
(DK 24 B23)
There could be only one God, because God is the most powerful of all things;
if there were more than one god, none of them could be more powerful than
the others, and none of them would be able to do whatever he wished. God
must always have existed: he could not come into being from something like
himself (for there cannot be anything equal to him), nor could he come into
being from something unlike himself(for the greater cannot be brought into
being by the lesser) (Aristotle, MXG 976b14–36). God is a living being, but not
an organic being like humans and animals: there are no parts in God, and ‘he
sees as a whole, he thinks as a whole, and he hears as a whole’ (DK 21 B24). He
has no physical contact with anything in the world, but ‘remote and
eVortless, with his mind alone he governs all there is’ (DK 21 B25).
Though he is willing to state and argue for such substantive theses about
God, Xenophanes’ theology is largely negative. He Wnds it diYcult to accept
either that God is Wnite, or that he is inWnite. Similarly, when he asks
whether God is changing or changeless, he Wnds equally balanced argu-
ments on each side. Some of our sources leave it obscure whether his God
is really transcendent or is to be identiWed in some mysterious way with the
entire Eleatic universe. ‘The clear truth about the gods no man has ever
seen nor any man will ever know’ (DK 21 B34).
Xenophanes was not, of course, the Wrst monotheist. He had been
anticipated much earlier in Egypt by Akhenaten and more recently in
Israel by the Hebrew prophets. But he presents his monotheism not as an
oracular revelation, but as the result of rational argument. In terms of a
distinction not drawn until centuries later, the prophets proclaimed a
revealed religion, while Xenophanes was a natural theologian.
Socrates and Plato on Piety
Plato, in the Republic, follows up Xenophanes’ attack on the disgusting
stories of the gods told by Homer and Hesiod. The stories must be
290
GOD

eliminated from the educational curriculum, because they are false
in themselves and encourage evil behaviour in their readers. Children
must be told no tales of battles between the gods, or of gods changing
shapes and taking human and animal form (377e–381d). God is good, and
does no harm to anyone. Only the goods things in life come from God, and
if the gods punish people that is for their own beneWt (379c–380b). Again,
God is unchanging, and does not deceive others by falsehood or disguise
(382e).
Plato’s assault on Homer and the poets often seems exaggerated to a
modern reader. It can only be understood if we recall the centrality of the
Iliad and the Odyssey in Greek education, and the importance of religion in
Greek everyday life. It is true that the Greeks were never a ‘people of the
book’, and the Homeric poems never commanded in Greek life and
religion an authority similar to that which has been exercised by the
Hebrew Bible, the Gospels, and the Koran. None the less, the stories of
Homer and Hesiod exercised an inXuence in education much more power-
ful than that of fairy stories and children’s books in our society. In that
context, Plato’s polemic is understandable. It must also have taken courage:
after all, Socrates had been put to death on a charge of teaching the young
not to believe in the gods in whom the city believes (Apol. 26b).
Socrates was also charged with introducing new divinities. This must
be a reference to his daimon, an inner divine voice which, he claimed, used
to warn him oV wrongdoing (Apol. 40b). Otherwise he seems to have
been respectful of conventional Greek religion. Of course he claimed not
to know what piety was, just as he claimed not to know what any other
virtue was. But the Socratic dialogue Euthyphro contains an interesting
discussion of a proposed deWnition of piety or holiness as ‘that which the
gods love’.
Socrates puts the question: do the gods love what is holy because it
is holy, or is it holy because the gods love it? Euthyphro responds that the
holy is not so called because the gods love it; rather, the gods love what
is holy because it is holy. Socrates then oVers ‘godly’ as an abbreviation for
‘what is loved by the gods’. Accordingly, Euthyphro’s thesis can be stated in
the following terms, substituting ‘godly’ for ‘holy’:
(A) The godly is loved by the gods because it is godly.
On the other hand, it seems clear that
291
GOD

(B) The godly is godly because it is loved by the gods
since ‘godly’ was introduced as a synonym for ‘loved by the gods’.
So Socrates claims to have reduced Euthyphro to inconsistency, and
urges him to give up the claim that holiness is what the gods love
(10a–11b).
However, there is no real inconsistency between A and B: ‘because’ is
used in two diVerent senses in the two theses. In (A) it introduces the gods’
motive; in (B) it recalls our stipulation about meaning. A parallel point can
be made in English by pointing out that it is true both that
(C) A judge judges because he is a judge
(i.e. he does it because it is his job); and also that
(D) A judge is a judge because he judges
(that is why he is called a judge).
Euthyphro, however, gives up his proposed deWnition and oVers an-
other: holiness is justice in the service of the gods. This too is shot down:
what service can we render the gods? Socrates mocks at the idea of sacriWce
as a form of trading with the gods when we have nothing worthwhile to
oVer them in exchange for the favours we ask them (14e–15a). If Plato’s
Euthyphro gives a realistic picture of Socrates’ methods of cross-examination,
we can understand why religious folk in Athens might regard him as a
purveyor of impiety and a danger to the young.
Another Socratic dialogue (this time probably not by Plato), Second
Alcibiades, contains a deXationary discussion of the practice of prayer.
When we pray for something that we want, we may be asking for some-
thing that will harm us: an answer to prayer may be a disaster. Since
we lack the knowledge of what is best for us, it is better not to ask for
anything; or, like the Spartans, simply to pray for what is good and noble,
without specifying further (148c). In terms of sacriWce and worship the
Athenians are far more religious than the Spartans, and yet the Spartans
always come oV better in battle. Is this surprising? ‘It would be a strange and
sorry thing if the gods took more account of our gifts and sacriWces than
of our souls and whether there is holiness and justice to be found in them’
(150a).
292
GOD

Plato’s Evolving Theology
Plato’s own attitude to religion evolved along with his other metaphysical
beliefs. In the central part of the Republic the summit of the universe is
occupied not by a personal God but by the Idea of the Good, which plays
the part in the ideal world of Being that is played by the sun in our
everyday world of becoming (508c–e). Everything ultimately owes its being
to this absolute goodness, which is itself beyond and superior to being
(509b). In the Symposium it is the Idea of Beauty that is supreme, and the
priestess Diotima describes to Socrates, in terms appropriate to the religious
initiation of mystery cults, the soul’s ascent to the lofty raptures of its
vision. Humans crave immortality: this craving drives them to procreate
and cherish their oVspring, to strive for exploits that will go down in
history, and to create works of art of everlasting value. But these are only
the lesser mysteries of love. To reach the greatest mysteries, the candidate
should rise above beautiful bodies, above beautiful souls, above the beauty
of sciences and institutions, to reach an eternal and unchanging absolute
beauty. The most noble life consists in the intellectual contemplation of
beauty divine, absolute, and unalloyed. These rites of love will make the
initiate as immortal as any human being can be (206b–212a).
Despite the religious context and phraseology, the Idea of Beauty in the
Symposium is no more personal than the Idea of the Good in the Republic. But
in the Sophist this very fact is given as a reason for a substantial overhaul of
the Theory of Ideas. ‘Shall we be easily persuaded’, asks the Eleatic Visitor,
‘that change and life and soul and wisdom do not belong to the most
perfect being, and that it neither lives nor thinks, but remains motionless
and stately and sacred but mindless?’ (248e).
By the time he wrote the Timaeus Plato had reached a conception of God
close to that of the major monotheistic religions. The topic of the dialogue
is the origin of the world we live in: did it always exist, or did it come into
being? Because it is visible and tangible it must have come into being; but it
is no easy task ‘to Wnd the maker and father of this universe’ (28c). Why
should such a one have brought it into being? ‘He was good, and what is
good has no particle of jealousy in it; and so, being free of jealousy,
he wanted all things to be as much like himself as possible’ (29e).1 God
1 Cf. Kretzmann, The Metaphysics of Creation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999). 101–4.
293
GOD

is not conceived by Plato as the creator of the universe out of nothing;
rather, he established the cosmos by bringing order out of chaos. ‘God,
therefore, wishing that all things should be good, and nothing any less
perfect than was necessary, Wnding the visible universe not at rest but in
discordant and disorderly motion, brought it from a state of disorder into
one of order, an order that he judged altogether better’ (30a). The dialogue
then takes us through the stages of this ordering: Wrst soul was created and
then matter, with soul incarnate in the visible body of the heavens (34e,
36e). Within the universe there are four kinds of living beings: gods, birds,
Wsh, and animals (40a). Gods, we are told, come in two kinds: visible and
invisible. The visible gods are the Wxed stars, living beings divine and
eternal; invisible gods appear to humans from time to time at their own
discretion (40b, 41a). The father of the universe delegates to these created
but immortal beings the task of making the inferior living things. In the
case of human beings, he himself made the immortal soul, leaving it to the
lesser gods to encase this in a skull and add the rest of the body below it
(69c–d). The dialogue ends by describing the visible universe as being itself
a perceptible god, the image of the God who is known only by the
mind (92c).
In the last of Plato’s dialogues, The Laws, religion is prominent, and the
whole of the tenth book is devoted to it. In the ideal city of Magnesia
atheism is prohibited under severe penalties. The Wfty-eighth of the city’s
laws instructs oYcials to bring before a court any act of impiety that is
brought to their notice. Those convicted of impiety should be sent to a
penitentiary for Wve years’ solitary conWnement; anyone who relapses after
release is to be punished by death. Aggravated impiety, which is atheism
accompanied by fraudulent claims to supernatural powers, is to be pun-
ished by life imprisonment (907e–909c).
The legislators for Magnesia believe that it is preferable to use argument
and persuasion rather than sanctions to ensure compliance with the laws,
and accordingly they preface these severe prohibitions with the following
preamble:
No one who believes in gods as directed by law ever voluntarily commits an act of
impiety or utters any lawless word. If he does so it is due to one of three possible
errors. Either he does not believe that gods exist; or he believes that they exist but
have no interest in the human race; or he believes that they can be won round by
sacriWce and prayer. (885b)
294
GOD

The lawgivers accept an obligation to cure people of these errors by oVering
proofs of the three truths that contradict them.
To prove the existence of gods it is not enough to point to the wonders
of the universe or the order of the seasons. Atheists will say that the sun
and moon and stars are only unfeeling earth and stones, and that elements
and their compounds owe their existence to nature and chance (886d,
889a). Nor can one appeal to the unanimous agreement of Greeks and
barbarians that gods exist: such beliefs, the atheists maintain, are simply the
result of indoctrination from childhood, and in any case there is no
unanimity about the nature of the gods (887c, 889e).
A refutation of atheism must take a longer way round. The fundamen-
tal error of those who think that random evolution produced the furni-
ture of the world is that they have not grasped the priority of soul over
body. Soul was created long before any bodies, and it is soul that causes the
development and transformation of physical things (892a). The priority of
soul is proved by an analysis of the diVerent possible kinds of motion. There
are ten such kinds, but the most important of them are just two: (a) one
that imparts motion to other things, itself being moved by something else;
and (b) one that imparts motion to itself as well as to other things.
Obviously, a motion of the former type could not be the origin of motion
in the world: motion in the universe must begin with self-generating
motion. But self-generating motion is equivalent to soul: for ‘that which
moves itself’ is a deWnition of ‘living thing’ (894c–896a).
Soul, then, is prior to body, and it is soul, or rather souls, that control
the heavens. If we ask how soul controls the sun, there seem to be three
possible answers: either the sun itself has a soul, which resides in its globe in
the way that our souls reside in our bodies; or there is a soul with a
diVerent body of its own, which is in contact with the sun and impels it on
its course; or the soul is entirely immaterial, and guides the sun on its path
by some spiritual force. However it does it, the soul is clearly a god of some
kind, and Thales was right that the world is full of gods (898e–899b).
It remains to be proved both that the gods care for mankind and that they
are not to be swayed by prayers or gifts. The main reason for doubting their
care is that they seem to allow scoundrels to prosper in spite of their
wickedness. But we cannot doubt that the gods that watch over the universe
possess the virtues of wisdom, temperance, and courage; they cannot be
conceived as being lazy or self-indulgent. Moreover, they know and see and
295
GOD

hear everything, and they can do whatever is in the power of mortals or
immortals. If they neglect our needs it must be either because they do not
know about them, or because they have allowed temptation to distract
them from the knowledge. But this is absurd: after all, taking care of our tiny
aVairs is child’s play compared with the creation of the universe (899d–903a).
The prosperity of the wicked is only temporary and apparent. It has its
place in the grand divine design: but no one will forever escape punishment
for misdeeds, whether he Xies to heaven or hides in hell (905a). Those who
say that punishment can be bought oV by gifts and prayers are treating the
gods as if they were sheepdogs who would yield to bribery by the wolf (906b).
Aristotle’s Unmoved Movers
Plato’s argument for the priority of soul over body was the progenitor of a
long series of arguments for the existence of God based on an analysis of
motion and change. One of the earliest and most elaborate is the argument
for the existence of a cosmic unmoved mover in the last two books of
Aristotle’s Physics, which is given a highly theological interpretation in his
Metaphysics K.
The basic principle of Aristotle’s argument is that everything that is in
motion is moved by something else. At the beginning of book 7 of the
Physics he presents a reductio ad absurdum of the idea of self-movement. A self-
moving object must (a) have parts, in order to be in motion at all; (b) be in
motion as a whole, and not just in one of its parts; and (c) originate its own
motion. But this is impossible. From (b) it follows that if any part of the
body is at rest, the whole of it is at rest. But if the whole body’s being at
rest depends upon a part’s being at rest, then the motion of the whole body
depends upon the motion of the part; and thus it does not originate its
own motion. So that which was supposed to be moved by itself is not
moved by itself (Ph. 8. 241b34–242a49).2
2 There is a problem with translating Aristotle’s writings on motion. ‘Move’ in English may
be transitive or intransitive: I may move someone out of my way, or move out of her way. The
corresponding Greek verb has only a transitive sense, and to express the intransitive sense Greek
uses the passive form of the verb. It is often therefore diYcult to tell whether a particular
sentence means ‘X is moving’ or ‘X is being moved’—an ambiguity which is obviously crucial in
a discussion of unmoved movement. To avoid the ambiguity in my discussion I use ‘X is in
motion’ for the intransitive sense, and reserve ‘X moves’ for the transitive case in which an
296
GOD

This argument contains two fallacies. The Wrst is represented in my
paraphrase by an equivocation in the expression ‘depends on’. The motion
of the whole is logically dependent on the motion of the part, but it is not
necessarily causally dependent on it.3 Moreover, there is a confusion
between necessary and suYcient conditions. The part’s being at rest is a
suYcient condition for the whole’s being at rest; but from this it follows
only that the motion of the part is a necessary condition for the motion of
the whole. The argument fails to prove that the motion of the alleged self-
mover must have something else, namely the motion of the part, as a
causally suYcient condition.
Aristotle goes on to derive from the premiss that everything in motion
must be moved by something else the conclusion that there must be a Wrst
mover. Rather than consider immediately his argument against an inWnite
regress, it is more proWtable to examine the fuller argument against self-
movement which is presented in the subsequent, and Wnal, book of the
Physics. Here Aristotle observes at the outset that it appears that some things
in the world are self-moving, namely living beings (empsycha).
It sometimes happens that when there is no motion in us, from a state of rest we
go into motion, that is to say motion originates in us from ourselves without any
external agent moving us. This never happens with inanimate beings: it is always
some other external thing that moves them; but an animal, we say, moves itself.
Therefore, if an animal is ever completely at rest, we have a case of something
motionless in which motion comes into being from the thing itself and not from
without. Now if this can occur in an animal, why should not the same thing
happen with the universe as a whole? (252b18–25)
Aristotle goes on to oVer a detailed and complicated argument to show
that it cannot.
He oVers a proof by cases that everything that is in motion is moved by
something else. Motion may be divided into motion per accidens and motion
per se. (If something is in motion because it is located in something else,
like a sleeping man in a travelling ship, then its motion is per accidens.
Another case of motion per accidens is where only a part of a thing is in
motion, as when a man waves his hands.)
object could be supplied. Similarly with ‘motion’ and ‘movement’. See my The Five Ways
(London: Routledge, 1969), 8–9.
3 See Sir David Ross, Aristotle’s Physics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1936), 669.
297
GOD

Motion per accidens, he seems to take for granted, is not self-movement
(254b7–11). Things that are in per se motion may be in motion of them-
selves, or because of other things; in the former case their motion is natural
while in the latter it may be either natural (e.g. the upward motion of Wre)
or violent (the upward movement of a stone). It is clear, Aristotle believes,
that violent motion must be derived from elsewhere than the thing itself.
We may agree right away that a stone will not rise unless somebody throws
it; but it is not obvious that once thrown it does not continue in motion of
itself. Not so, Aristotle says; a thrower imparts motion not only to a
projectile, but to the surrounding air, and in addition he imparts to the
air a quasi-magnetic power of carrying the projectile further (266b28–267a3).
It is clear, he thinks, that not only the violent but also the natural motions
of inanimate bodies cannot be caused by those bodies themselves: if a falling
stone was the cause of its own motion, it could stop itself falling (255a5–8).
There are two ways in which heavy and light bodies owe their natural
motions to a moving agent. First, they rise and fall because that is their
nature, and so they owe their motion to whatever gave them their nature;
they are moved, he says, by their ‘generator’. Thus, when Wre heats water, a
heavy substance, it turns it into steam, which is light, and being light,
naturally rises; and thus the Wre is the cause of the natural motion of the
steam and can be said to move it. The steam, however, might be prevented
from rising by an obstacle, e.g. the lid of a kettle. Someone who lifted the
lid would be a diVerent kind of mover, a removens prohibens, which we might
call a ‘liberator’ (255b31–256a2).
But what about the natural motions of an animal: are they not a case of
self-movement? All such cases seem to be explained by Aristotle as the
action of one part of the animal on another. If a whole animal moved its
whole self, this, he implies, would be as absurd as someone being both the
teacher and the learner of the same lesson, or the healer being identical
with the person healed (257b5). (But is this so absurd: may not the physician
sometimes heal himself?) ‘When a thing moves itself it is one part of it that
is the mover and another part that is moved’ (257b13–14). But in the case of
an animal, which part is the mover and which the moved? Presumably, the
soul and the body.4
4 SeeS.Waterlow,Nature,Change,andAgencyinAristotle’sPhysics(Oxford:ClarendonPress,1982),66.
298
GOD

Having established to his satisfaction that nothing is in motion without
being moved by something else, Aristotle has a number of arguments to
show that there cannot be an inWnite series of moved movers: we have to
come to a halt with a Wrst unmoved mover which is itself motionless. If it is
true that when A is in motion there must be some B that moves A, then if
B is itself in motion there must be some C moving B and so on. This series
cannot go on for ever and so we must come to some X which moves
without being in motion (7. 242a54–b54, 256a4–29).
The details of Aristotle’s long arguments are obscure and diYcult to
follow, but the most serious problem with his course of reasoning is to
discover what kind of series he has in mind. The example he most often
gives—a man using his hands to push a spade to turn a stone—suggests a
series of simultaneous movers and moved. We may agree that there must
be a Wrst term of any such series if motion is ever to take place: but it is hard
to see why this should lead us to a single cosmic unmoved mover, rather
than to a multitude of human shakers and movers.5 But Aristotle might, I
suppose, respond that a human digger is himself in motion, and therefore
must be moved by something else. But his earlier arguments did not show
that whatever is in motion is simultaneously being moved by something else:
the generators and liberators that were allowed in as causes of motion may
have long since ceased to operate, and perhaps ceased to exist, while the
motion they cause is still continuing.
Is the argument from the impossibility of inWnite regress, then, meant to
apply to a series of causes of motion stretching back through time? It is
hard to see how Aristotle, who believed that the world had no beginning,
can contest the impossibility of an inWnite series of causes of motion in an
everlasting universe perpetually changing. So whichever series we start
from, we fail to reach any unchanging, wholly simple, cosmic mover such
as Aristotle holds out as resembling the great Mind of Anaxagoras (256b28).
It is such a being that Aristotle, in Metaphysics K, describes in theological
terms. There must, he says, be an eternal motionless substance, to cause
everlasting motion. This must lack matter—it cannot come into existence
or go out of existence by turning into anything else—and it must lack
potentiality—for the mere power to cause change would not ensure the
sempiternity of motion. It must be simply actuality (energeia) (1071b3–22).
5 Aristotle himself at one point seems to agree with this objection, and to treat a human
digger as a self-mover (256a8).
299
GOD

The revolving heavens, for Aristotle, lack the possibility of substantial
change, but they possess potentiality, because each point of the heavens
has the power to move elsewhere in its diurnal round. Since they are in
motion, they need a mover; and this is a motionless mover. Such a mover
could not act as an eYcient cause, because that would involve a change in
itself; but it can act as a Wnal cause, an object of love, because being loved does
not involve any change in the beloved, and so the mover can remain without
motion. For this to be the case, of course, the heavenly bodies must have
souls capable of feeling love for the ultimate mover. ‘On such a principle’,
Aristotle says, ‘depend the heavens and the world of nature’ (1072b).
What is the nature of the motionless mover? Its life must be like the very
best in our life: and the best thing in our life is intellectual thought. The
delight which we reach in moments of sublime contemplation is a perpet-
ual state in the unmoved mover—which Aristotle is now prepared to call
‘God’ (1072b15–25). ‘Life, too, belongs to God; for the actuality of mind is
life, and God is that actuality, and his essential actuality is the best and
eternal life. We profess then that God is a living being, eternal and most
good, so that life and continuous and eternal duration belong to God. That
is what God is’ (1072b13–30). Aristotle is surprisingly insouciant about how
many divine beings there are: sometimes (as above) he talks as if there was a
single God; elsewhere he talks of gods in the plural, and often of ‘the
The concentric planetary spheres of the Aristotelian cosmos (under the influence of
the unmoved mover) as represented by Giovanni di Paolo in his illustration to Dante’s
Paradiso
300
GOD

divine’ in the neuter singular. Because of the intimate link between the
celestial motions and the motionless mover(s) postulated to explain them,
he seems to have regarded the question of the number of movers as a
matter of astronomy rather than theology, and he was prepared to
entertain the possibility of as many as forty-seven (1074a13). This is far
distant from the reasoned monotheism of Xenophanes.
Like Xenophanes, however, Aristotle was interested in the nature of the
divine mind. A famous chapter (K 9) addresses the question: what does
God think of? He must think of something, otherwise he is no better than a
sleeping human; and whatever he is thinking of, he must think of
throughout, otherwise he will be undergoing change, and contain poten-
tiality, whereas we know he is pure actuality. Either he thinks of himself, or
he thinks of something else. But the value of a thought is dictated by the
value of what is thought of ; so if God were thinking of anything else than
himself, he would be degraded to the level of what he is thinking of. So he
must be thinking of himself, the supreme being, and his thinking is a
thinking of thinking (noesis noeseos) (1074b).
This conclusion has been much debated. Some have regarded it as a
sublime truth about the divine nature; others have thought it a piece of
exquisite nonsense. Among those who have taken the latter view, some
have thought it the supreme absurdity of Aristotle’s theology, others have
thought that Aristotle himself intended it as a reductio ad absurdum of a
fallacious line of argument, preparatory to showing that the object of
divine thought was something quite diVerent.6
Is it nonsense? If every thought must be a thought of something, and God
can think only of thinking, then a thinking of a thinking would have to be a
thinking of a thinking of, and that would have to be a thinking of a thinking
of a thinking of . . . ad inWnitum. That surely leads to a regress more vicious
than any that led Aristotle to posit a motionless mover in the Wrst place. But
perhaps it is unfair to translate the Greek ‘noesis’ as ‘thinking of’; it can
equally well mean ‘thinking that’. Surely there is nothing nonsensical about
the thought ‘I am thinking’; indeed Descartes built his whole philosophy
upon it. So why should God not be thinking that he is thinking? Only, if that
is his only thought, then he seems to be nothing very grand, to use
Aristotle’s words about the hypothetical God who thinks of nothing at all.
6 See G. E. M. Anscombe, in Anscombe and P. T. Geach, Three Philosophers (Oxford: Blackwell,
1961), 59.
301
GOD

Whatever the truth about the object of thought of the motionless
mover, it seems clear that it does not include the contingent aVairs of
the likes of us. On the basis of this chapter, then, it seems that if Aristotle
had lived in Plato’s Magnesia, he would have been condemned as one of the
second class of atheists, those who believe that the gods exist but deny that
they have any care for human beings.
The Gods of Epicurus and the Stoics
Someone who certainly fell into this class was Epicurus. In the letter to
Menoecus he wrote:
Think of God as a living being, imperishable and blessed, along the main lines of
the common idea of him, but attach to him nothing that is alien to imperishability
or incompatible with blessedness. Believe about him everything that can preserve
this imperishable bliss. There are indeed gods—the knowledge of them is obvi-
ous—but they are not such as most people believe them to be, because popular
beliefs do not preserve them in bliss. The impious man is not he who denies the
gods of the many, but he who fastens on the gods the beliefs of the many. (D.L. 123
LS 23b)
The belief that endangers the gods’ imperishable bliss is precisely the belief
that they take an interest in human aVairs. To favour some human beings,
to be angry with others, would interrupt the gods’ life of happy tranquillity
(Letter to Herodotus, D.L. 10. 76; Cicero, ND 1. 45). It is folly to think that
the gods created the world for the sake of human beings. What proWt could
they take from our gratitude? What urge for novelty could tempt them to
venture on creation after aeons of happy tranquillity (Cicero, ND 1. 21–3;
Lucretius, RN 5. 165–9)? Does the world look, the Epicurean Lucretius asks,
as if it had been created for the beneWt of humans? Most parts of the world
have such inhospitable climates that they are uninhabitable, and the
habitable parts yield crops only because of human toil. Disease and death
carry oV many before their time: no wonder that a newborn babe wails on
entering this woeful world, in which wild beasts are more at home than
human beings.
Thus, like a sailor by the tempest hurled
Ashore, the babe is shipwrecked on the world.
302
GOD

Naked he lies, and ready to expire,
Helpless of all that human wants require;
Exposed upon unhospitable earth,
From the Wrst moment of his hapless birth.
Straight with foreboding cries he Wlls the room
(Too true presages of his future doom).
But Xocks and herds, and every savage beast,
By more indulgent nature are increased:
They want no rattles for their froward mood,
Nor nurse to reconcile them to their food,
With broken words; nor winter blasts they fear,
Nor change their habits with the changing year;
Nor, for their safety, citadels prepare,
Nor forge the wicked instruments of war;
Unlaboured earth her bounteous treasure grants,
And nature’s lavish hands supply their common wants.
(RN 5. 195–228, trans. Dryden)
The sorry lot of humans is made worse, not better, by popular beliefs
about the gods. Impressed by the vastness of the cosmos and the splendour
of the heavenly bodies, terriWed by thunderbolts and earthquakes, we
imagine that nature is controlled by a race of vengeful celestial beings
bent on punishing us for our misdeeds. We cower with terror, live in fear
of death, and debase ourselves by prayer, prostration, and sacriWce (RN
1194–1225).
Epicurus accepted the existence of gods because of the consensus of
the human race: a belief so widespread and so basic must be implanted
by nature and therefore be true. The substance of the consensus, he
maintained, is that the gods are blessed and immortal, and therefore free
from toil, anger, or favour. This knowledge is enough to enable human
beings to worship with piety and without superstition. However, human
curiosity wishes to go further and to Wnd out what the gods look like, what
they think, and how they live (Cicero, ND 1. 43–5).
The way in which nature imparts a conception of the gods, according to
Epicurus, is this. Human beings had dreams, and sometimes saw visions, in
which grand, handsome, and powerful beings appeared in human shape.
These were then idealized, endowed with sensation, and conceived as
immortal, blessed, and eVortless (Lucretius, RN 1161–82). But even as
idealized the gods retain human form, because that is the most beautiful
303
GOD

of all animate shapes, and the only one in which reason is possible. The
gods are not, however, beings of Xesh and blood like us; they are made of
tenuous quasi-Xesh and quasi-blood. They are not tangible or visible, but
perceptible only by the mind; and they do not live in any region of our
world. Nonetheless, there are exactly as many immortals as there are
mortals (Cicero, ND 1. 46–9; Lucretius, RN 5. 146–55).
It is not easy to harmonize all the elements of Epicurus’ theology. One
recent study attempts to do so by treating Epicurean gods as thought-
constructs, the product of streams of images that by converging on our
minds become our gods. The idealized concepts that result provide ethical
paradigms for imitation; but there are no biologically immortal beings
anywhere in the universe. On this interpretation, Epicurus would be an
ancient anticipation of nineteenth-century thinkers such as George Eliot
and Matthew Arnold, whose professed theism proves on inspection to be
an essentially moral theory.7 Ingenious and attractive though this inter-
pretation is, it is clearly not how the matter was seen by either Lucretius or
the Epicurean spokesman in Cicero’s On the Nature of the Gods, who between
them provide most of our information about his theology. These admirers
both took Epicurus’ repudiation of atheism at face value.
Undeniably, however, there were those in classical times who took the
Epicurean system as tantamount to atheism, notably the Stoics (Cicero, ND
2. 25). Stoic piety itself, however, like Epicurean piety, was at some distance
from popular polytheistic religion. From the point of view of the great
monotheistic religions Epicureans and Stoics both err in theology: Epicur-
eans by making God too distant from the real world and Stoics by making
God too close to it. For the controlling thought of Stoic theology is the
identiWcation of God with providence, that is to say, the rationality of
natural processes. This is an anticipation of Spinoza’s Deus sive Natura.
Like the Epicureans, the Stoics began by appealing to the consensus of
the human race that gods exist. The two schools also agree that one origin
of popular belief in gods is terror of the violence of nature. From that
point, however, the two theologies diverge. The Stoics, unlike the Epicur-
eans, oVered proofs of the existence of God, and sometimes the starting
points of those proofs are the same as the starting point of Epicurean
arguments against the operation of divine providence. Thus Cleanthes said
7 See LS, i. 145–9.
304
GOD

that what brought the concept of God into men’s minds was the beneWt we
gain from temperate climate and the earth’s fertility (Cicero, ND 2. 12–13).
Chrysippus, again, takes as a premiss that the fruits of the earth exist for the
sake of animals, and animals exist for the sake of humans (ND 2. 37).
The most popular argument the Stoics oVered was the one that later
became known as the Argument from Design. The heavens move with
regularity, and the sun and moon are beautiful as well as useful. Anyone
entering a house, a gymnasium, or a forum, said Cleanthes, and seeing it
functioning in good order, would know that there was someone in charge.
A fortiori, the ordered progression of bodies so many and so great must be
under the governance of some mind (ND 2. 15). The Stoics anticipated
Paley’s comparison of the world to a watch that calls for a watchmaker.
The Stoic Posidonius had recently constructed a wondrous armillary
sphere, modelling the movement of the sun and moon and the planets.
If this was brought even to primitive Britain, no one there would doubt it
was the product of reason. Surely the original thus modelled proclaims
even more loudly that it is the product of a divine mind. Anyone who
believes that the world is the result of chance might as well believe that if
you threw enough letters of the alphabet into an urn and shook them out
onto the ground you would produce a copy of the Annals of Ennius. So
spoke Cicero’s Stoic spokesman Balbus, centuries before anyone had
though of the possibility of the works of Shakespeare being produced by
battalions of typing monkeys (ND 2. 88).
Zeno, the founder of the Stoic school, was fertile in the production of
arguments for the existence of God, or at least for the rationality of the
world. ‘The rational is superior to the non-rational. But nothing is superior
to the world. Therefore the world is rational.’ ‘Nothing inanimate can
generate something that is animate. But the world generates things that
are animate; therefore the world is animate.’ If an olive tree sprouted Xutes
playing in tune, he said, you would have to attribute a knowledge of music
to the tree: why not then attribute wisdom to the universe which produces
creatures that possess wisdom? (ND 2. 22).
One of Zeno’s most original, if least convincing, arguments went like
this. ‘You may reasonably honour the gods. But you may not reasonably
honour what does not exist. Therefore gods exist.’ This recalls an argument
I once came across in a discussion of the logic of imperatives: ‘Go to
church. If God does not exist, do not go to church. Therefore, God exists.’
305
GOD

We are used to hearing prohibitions on deriving an ‘ought’ from an ‘is’. It is
less usual to Wnd philosophers seeking to derive an ‘is’ from an ‘ought’.
However, throughout the ages philosophers have been eager to derive an
‘is not’ from an ‘ought not’: those who have propounded the problem of
evil have been in eVect arguing that the world ought not to be as it is, and
therefore there is no God.
This problem was of particular interest to the Stoics. On the one hand,
the doctrine of divine providence played an important part in their system,
and providence may seem incompatible with the existence of evil. On the
other hand, since for the Stoics vice is the only real evil, the problem seems
more restricted in scope for them than it does for theists of other schools.
But even so limited, it calls for a solution, and this Chrysippus found by
appealing to a principle that contraries can exist only in coexistence with
each other: justice with injustice, courage with cowardice, temperance
with intemperance, and wisdom with folly (LS 54q). The principle (adapted
from one of Plato’s arguments for immortality in the Phaedo) seems faulty:
no doubt the concept of an individual virtue may be inseparable from the
concept of the corresponding vice, but that does not show that both of the
concepts must be instantiated.
The Stoics oVered other less metaphysical responses to the problem of
evil. Because they were determinists, the Stoics could not oVer the freewill
defence which has been a mainstay of Christian treatments of the topic.
Instead, they oVered two principal lines of defence: either the alleged evils
were not really evil (even from a non-Stoic point of view) or they were
unintended but unavoidable consequences of beneWcent providential
action. Along the Wrst line, Chrysippus pointed out that bedbugs were
useful for making us rise promptly, and mice are helpful in encouraging us
to be tidy. Along the second he argued (borrowing once again from
Plato) that in order to be a Wt receptacle for reason, the human skull had
to be very thin, which had the inevitable consequence that it would also be
fragile (LS 54o, q). Sometimes Chrysippus falls back on the argument
that even in the best-regulated households a certain amount of dirt
accumulates (LS 54s).
Whatever pains and inconveniences we suVer, Chrysippus maintained,
the world exists for the sake of human beings. The gods made us for our own
and each other’s sakes, and animals for our sakes. Horses help us in war, and
dogs in hunting, while bears and lions give us opportunities for courage.
306
GOD

Other animals are there to feed us: the purpose of the pig is to produce pork.
Some creatures exist simply so that we can admire their beauty: the peacock,
for instance, was created for the sake of his tail (LS 54o, p).
Divine providence was extolled by Cleanthes in his majestic hymn to
Zeus.
O King of Kings
Through ceaseless ages, God, whose purpose brings
To birth, whate’er on land or in the sea
Is wrought, or in high heaven’s immensity;
Save what the sinner works infatuate.
Nay, but thou knowest to make the crooked straight:
Chaos to thee is order: in thine eyes
The unloved is lovely, who didst harmonise
Things evil with things good, that there should be
One Word through all things everlastingly.
(LS 54i, trans. James Adam)
Cleanthes addresses Zeus in terms that would be appropriate enough for
a devout Jew or Christian praying to the Lord God. But the underlying
Stoic conception of God is very diVerent from that of the monotheistic
religions. God, according to the Stoics, is material, himself a constituent of
the cosmos, fuelling it and ordering it from within as a ‘designing Wre’.
God’s life is identical with the history of the universe, as it evolves and
develops.
The doctrine of Chrysippus is thus described by Cicero:
He says that divine power resides in reason, and in the soul and mind of the whole
of nature. He calls the world itself god, and the all-pervasive World-Soul, or the
dominant part of that soul that is located in mind and reason. He also calls god the
universal, all-embracing, common nature of things, and also the power of fate and
the necessity of future events. (ND 1. 39)
God can be identiWed with the elements of earth, water, air, and Wre, and in
these forms he can be called by the names of the traditional gods of
Olympus. As earth, he is Demeter; as water and air, Poseidon; as Wre or
ether, he is Zeus, who is also identiWed with the everlasting law that is the
guide of our life and the governess of our duties (ND 1. 40). As described by
Cicero, Chrysippus’ religion is neither monotheism nor polytheism: it is
polymorphous pantheism.
307
GOD

On Divination and Astrology
One doctrine of the Stoics that Cicero vigorously contested was their belief
in divination. His dialogue On Divination takes the form of a conversation
between his brother and himself, with Quintus Cicero defending divination
and claiming that religion stands or falls with the belief in it, while Marcus
Cicero denies the equivalence and denounces divination as puerile super-
stition. Quintus draws some of his material from Chrysippus, who wrote
two books on divination, and collected lists of veridical oracles and dreams
(D 1. 6), while Marcus is indebted for many of his arguments to the
Academic sceptic Carneades.
Divination—the attempt to predict future events which on the face of
them are fortuitous—was practised in Rome in many ways: by the study of
the stars, the observation of the Xight of birds, by the inspection of the
Marcus Tullius Cicero as a diligent schoolboy, in a fresco by V. Foppa
308
GOD

entrails of sacriWced animals, by the interpretation of dreams, and by the
consultation of oracles. Not all of these modes of divination are fashionable
in the modern world, but Cicero’s consideration of astrology is still, sadly,
relevant.
Quintus heaps up anecdotes of remarkable predictions by augurs, sooth-
sayers, and the like, and argues that in principle they are acting no
diVerently from the rest of us when we predict the weather from the
behaviour of birds and frogs or the copiousness of berries on bushes. In
both cases we do not know the reason that links sign and signiWed, but we
do know that there is one, just as when someone throws double sixes a
hundred times in succession we know it is not pure chance. Not all
soothsayers’ predictions come true: but then doctors too make mistakes
from time to time. We may not understand how they make their predic-
tions, but then we don’t understand the operation of the magnet either
(D 1. 86).
Quintus conWrms his empirical evidence with an a priori argument
drawn from the Stoics. If the gods know the future, and do not tell it to
us, then they do not love us, or they think such knowledge will be useless,
or they are powerless to communicate with us. But each of these alterna-
tives is absurd. They must know the future, since the future is what they
themselves decree. So they must communicate the future to us, and they
must give us the power to understand the communication: and that power
is the art of divination (D 1. 82–3). Belief in divination is not superstitious
but scientiWc, because it goes hand in hand with the acceptance of a single
united series of interconnected causes. It is that series that the Stoics call
Fate (D 1. 125–6).
Marcus Cicero begins his reply in a down-to-earth manner. If you want
to know what colour a thing is, you had better ask somebody sighted
rather than a blind seer like Tiresias. If you a sick, call a doctor, not a
soothsayer. If you want cosmology, you should go to a physicist, and if you
want moral advice, seek a philosopher, not a diviner. If you want a weather
forecast trust a pilot rather than a prophet.
If an event is a genuine matter of chance, then it cannot be foretold,
for in chance cases there is no equivalent of the causal series that
enables astronomers to predict eclipses (D 2. 15). On the other hand, if
future events are fated, then foreknowledge of a future disaster will not
enable one to avoid it, and the gods are kinder to keep such knowledge
309
GOD

from us. Julius Caesar would not have enjoyed a preview of his own
body stabbed and untended at the foot of Pompey’s statue. The predictions
that divines oVer us contradict each other: as Cato said, it is a wonder
that when one soothsayer meets another they can keep a straight face
(D 2. 52).
To match Quintus’ list of prophecies, Marcus compiles a dossier of cases
where the advice of divines was falsiWed or disastrous: both Pompey and
Caesar, for instance, had happy deaths foretold to them. Cicero treats
portents rather as Humeans were later to treat miracles. ‘It can be argued
against all portents that whatever was impossible to happen never in fact
happened; and if what happened was something possible, it is no cause for
wonder’ (D 2. 49). Mere rarity does not make a portent: a wise man is
harder to Wnd than a mule in foal.
The best astronomers, Cicero says, avoid astrological prediction. The
belief that men’s careers are predictable from the position of stars at their
birth is worse than folly: it is unbelievable madness. Twins often diVer in
career and fortune. The observations on which predictions are based are
quite erratic: astrologers have no real idea of the distances between heav-
enly bodies. The rising and setting of stars is something that is relative to an
observer: so how can it aVect alike all those born at the same time?
A person’s ancestry is a better predictor of character than anything in
the stars. If astrology was sound, why did not all the people born at the
same moment as Homer write an Iliad? Did all the Romans who fell in
battle at Cannae have the same horoscope (D 2. 94, 97)?
Finally, Cicero ridicules the idea that dreams may foretell the future. We
sleep every night and almost every night we dream: is it any wonder that
dreams sometimes come true? It would be foolish of the gods to send
messages by dreams, even if they had time to Xit about our beds. Most
dreams turn out false, and so sensible people pay no attention to them.
Since we possess no key to interpret dreams, for the gods to speak to us
through them would be like an ambassador addressing the Senate in an
African dialect.
With surprisingly little embarrassment, Cicero admits that he himself
has acted as an augur—but only, he says, ‘out of respect for the opinion of
the masses and in the course of service to the state’. He would have
sympathized with the atheist bishops of Enlightenment France. But he
concludes by insisting that he is not himself an atheist: it is not only respect
310
GOD

for tradition, but the order of the heavens and the beauty of the universe
that makes him confess that there is a sublime eternal being that humans
must look up to and admire. But true religion is best served by rooting out
superstition (D 2. 149).
The Trinity of Plotinus
Philosophical theology in the ancient world culminates in the system of
Plotinus. It is thus summed up by Bertrand Russell: ‘The metaphysics
of Plotinus begins with a Holy Trinity: The One, Spirit and Soul. These
three are not equal, like the Persons of the Christian Trinity; the One is
supreme, Spirit comes next, and Soul last.’8 The comparison with the
Christian Trinity is inescapable; and indeed Plotinus, who died before the
church councils of Nicaea and Constantinople gave a deWnitive statement
of the relationships between the three divine persons, undoubtedly had an
inXuence on the thought of some of the Church fathers. But for the
understanding of his own thought it is more rewarding to look backwards.
With some qualiWcation it can be said that the One is a Platonic God,
Intellect (a more appropriate translation for nous than ‘spirit’) is an Aristo-
telian God, and Soul is a Stoic God.
The One is a descendant of the One of the Parmenides and the Idea of
Good in the Republic. The paradoxes of the Parmenides are taken as adumbra-
tions of an ultimately ineVable reality, which is, like the Idea of the Good,
‘beyond being in power and dignity’. ‘The One’, it should be stressed, is not,
for Plato and Plotinus, a name for the Wrst of the natural number series:
rather, it means that which is utterly simple and undivided, all of a piece,
and utterly unique (Ennead 6, 9. 1 and 6). In saying that the One and the
Good (Plotinus uses both names, e.g. 6. 9. 3) is beyond being he does not
mean that it does not exist: on the contrary it is the most real thing there
is. He means that no predicates can be applied to it: we cannot say that it is
this, or it is that. The reason for this is that if any predicate was true of it,
then there would have to be a distinction within it corresponding to the
distinction between the subject and the predicate of the true sentence. But
that would derogate from the One’s sublime simplicity (5. 3. 13).
8 A History of Western Philosophy (London: Allen & Unwin, 1961), 292.
311
GOD

Being has a kind of shape of being, but the One has no shape, not even intelligible
shape. For since its nature is generative of all things, the One is none of them. It is
not of any kind, has no size or quality, is not intellect or soul. It is neither moving
nor stationary, and it is in neither place nor time; in Plato’s words it is ‘by itself
alone and uniform’—or rather formless and prior to form as it is prior to motion
and rest. For all these are properties of being, making it manifold. (6. 9. 3. 38–45)
If no predicates can be asserted of the One, it is not surprising if we enmesh
ourselves in contradiction when we try to do so. Being, for a Platonist, is
the realm of what we can truly know—as against Becoming, which is the
object of mere belief. But if the One is beyond being, it is also beyond
knowledge. ‘Our awareness of it is not through science or understanding,
as with other intelligible objects, but by way of a presence superior to
knowledge.’ Such awareness is a mystical vision like the rapture of a lover
in the presence of his beloved (6. 9. 4. 3 V.).
Because the One is unknowable, it is also ineVable. How then can we
talk about it, and what is Plotinus doing writing about it? Plotinus puts
the question to himself in Ennead 5, 3. 14, and gives a rather puzzling
answer.
We have no knowledge or concept of it, and we do not say it, but we say
something about it. How then do we speak about it, if we do not grasp it. Does
our having no knowledge of it mean that we do not grasp it at all? We do grasp it,
but not in such a way as to say it, only to speak about it.
The distinction between saying and speaking about is puzzling. Could what
Plotinus says here about the One be said about some perfectly ordinary
thing like a cabbage? I cannot say or utter a cabbage; I can only talk about it.
What is meant here by ‘say’, I think, is something like ‘call by a name’ or
‘attribute predicates to’. This I can do with a cabbage, but not with the One.
And the Greek word whose standard translation is ‘about’ can also mean
‘around’. Plotinus elsewhere says that we cannot even call the One ‘it’ or
say that it ‘is’; we have to circle around it from outside (6. 3. 9. 55).
Any statement about the One is really a statement about its creatures.
We are well aware of our own frailty: our lack of self-suYciency and our
shortfall from perfection (6. 9. 6. 15–35). In knowing this we can grasp the
One in the way that one can tell the shape of a missing piece in a jigsaw
puzzle by knowing the shape of the surrounding pieces. Or, to use a
metaphor closer to Plotinus’ own, when we in thought circle around the
312
GOD

One we grasp it as an invisible centre of gravity. Most picturesquely,
Plotinus says:
It is like a choral dance. The choir circles round the conductor, sometimes facing
him and sometimes looking the other way; it is when they are facing him that they
sing most beautifully. So too, we are always around him—if we were not we
would completely vanish and no longer exist—but we are not always facing him.
When we do look to him in our divine dance around him, then we reach our goal
and take our rest and sing in perfect tune. (6. 9. 38–45)
We turn from the One to the second element of the Plotinian trinity,
Intellect (nous). Like Aristotle’s God, Intellect is pure activity, and cannot
think of anything outside itself, since this would involve potentiality. But
its activity is not a mere thinking of thinking—whether or not that was
Aristotle’s doctrine—it is a thinking of all the Platonic Ideas (5. 9. 6). These
are not external entities: as Aristotle himself had laid down as a universal
rule, the actuality of intellect and the actuality of intellect’s object is one
and the same. So the life of the Ideas is none other than the activity of
Intellect. Intellect is the intelligible universe, containing forms not only of
universals but also of individuals (5. 9. 9; 5. 7).
Despite the identity of the thinker and the thought, the multiplicity of
the Ideas means that Intellect does not possess the total simplicity which
belongs to the One. Indeed, it is this complexity of Intellect that convinced
Plotinus that there must be something else prior to it and superior to it.
For, he believed, every form of complexity must ultimately depend on
something totally simple.9
The intellectual cosmos is, indeed, boundlessly rich.
In that world there is no stinting nor poverty, but everything is full of life, boiling
over with life. Everything Xows from a single fount, not some special kind of
breath or warmth, but rather a single quality containing unspoilt all qualities,
sweetness of taste and smell, wine on the palate and the essence of every aroma,
visions of colours and every tangible feeling, and every melody and every rhythm
that hearing can absorb. (6. 7. 12. 22–30)
This is the world of Being, Thought, and Life; and though it is the world of
Intellect, it also contains desire as an essential element. Thinking is indeed
itself desire, as looking is a desire of seeing (5. 6. 5. 8–10). Knowledge too is
9 Dominic O’Meara, to whose Plotinus: An Introduction to the Enneads (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1993) I am much indebted, calls this the Principle of Prior Simplicity (p. 45).
313
GOD

desire, but satisWed desire, the consummation of a quest (5. 3. 10. 49–50). In
the Intellect desire is ‘always desiring and always attaining its desire’ (3. 8.
11. 23–4).
How does Intellect originate? Undoubtedly Intellect derives its being
from the One: the One neither is too jealous to procreate, nor loses
anything by what it gives away. But beyond that Plotinus’ text suggests
two rather diVerent accounts. In some places he says that Intellect eman-
ates from the One in the way that sweet odours are given oV by perfume,
or that light emanates from the sun. This will remind Christian readers of
the Nicene Creed’s proclamation that the Son of God is light from light
(4. 8. 6. 10). But elsewhere Plotinus speaks of Intellect as ‘daring to
apostatize from the One’ (6. 9. 5. 30). This makes Intellect seem less like
the Word of the Christian Trinity, and more like Milton’s Lucifer.
From Intellect proceeds the third element, Soul. Here too Plotinus talks
of a revolt or falling away, an arrogant desire for independence, which took
the form of a craving for metabolism (5. 1. 1. 3–5). Soul’s original sin is well
described thus by A. H. Armstrong:
It is a desire for a life diVerent from that of Intellect. The life of Intellect is a life at
rest in eternity, a life of thought in eternal, immediate, and simultaneous posses-
sion of all possible objects. So the only way of being diVerent which is left for Soul
is to pass from eternal life to a life in which, instead of all things being present at
once, one thing comes after another, and there is a succession, a continuous series,
of thoughts and actions.10
This continuous, restless, succession is time: time is the life of the soul in its
transitory passage from one episode of living to the next (3. 7. 11. 43–5).
Soul is the immanent, controlling element in the universe of nature,
just as God was in the Stoic system, but unlike the Stoic God Soul is
incorporeal. Intellect was the maker of the universe, like the Demiurge of
the Timaeus, but Soul is intellect’s agent in managing its development. Soul
links the intelligible world with the world of the senses, having an inner
element that looks upwards to Intellect and an external element that looks
downwards to Nature (3. 8. 3). Nature is the immanent principle of
development in the material world: Soul, looking at it, sees there its own
10 A. H. Armstrong (ed.), The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970), 251.
314
GOD

reXection. The physical world that Nature weaves is a thing of wonder and
beauty even though its substance is such as dreams are made of (3. 8. 4).
Plotinus’ theological system is undoubtedly impressive: but we may
wonder whatever kind of argument he can oVer to persuade us to accept
it. To understand this, we have to explore the system from the bottom up,
instead of looking from the top down: we must start not with the One, but
with matter, the outermost limit of reality. Plotinus takes his start from
widely accepted Platonic and Aristotelian principles. He understands Aris-
totle as having argued that the ultimate substratum of change must be
something which possesses none of the properties of the changeable bodies
we see and handle. But a matter which possesses no material properties,
Plotinus argued, is inconceivable.
If we dispense with Aristotelian matter, we are left with Aristotelian
forms. The most important such forms were souls, and it is natural to
think that there are as many souls as there are individual people. But here
Plotinus appeals to another Aristotelian thesis: the principle that forms are
individuated by matter. If we have given up matter, we have to conclude
that there is only a single soul.
To prove that this soul is prior to and independent of body, Plotinus uses
very much the same arguments as Plato used in the Phaedo. He neatly
reverses the argument of those who claim that soul is dependent on body
because it is nothing more than an attunement of the body’s sinews. When
a musician plucks the strings of a lyre, he says, it is the strings, not the
melody, that he acts on: but the strings would not be plucked unless
the melody called for it.
How can an incorruptible World-Soul be in any way present to individ-
ual corruptible bodies? Plotinus, who liked marine metaphors, explained
this in two diVerent ways. The World-Soul he once compared to a man
standing up in the sea, with half his body in the water and half in the air.
But he thought that we should really ask not how soul is in body, but how
body is in soul. Body Xoats in soul, as a net Xoats in the sea (4. 3. 9. 36–42).
Without metaphor, we can say that body is in soul by depending upon it
for its organization and continued existence.
Soul governs the world wisely and well, but the wisdom that it exercises
in the governance of the world is not native to it, but must come from
outside. It cannot come from the material world, since that is what it
shapes; it must come from something that is by nature linked to the Ideas
315
GOD

that are the models or patterns for intelligent activity. This can only be a
world-mind or Intellect.
We have already encountered the arguments whereby Plotinus shows
that Intellect cannot be the ultimate reality because of the duality of
subject and object and because of the multiplicity of the Ideas. Thus, at
the end of our journey, we reach the one and only One.
Plotinus’ theology continued to be taught, with modiWcations, until
Western pagan philosophy came to an end with the closure of the school of
Athens. But his inXuence lived on, and lives on, unacknowledged, through
the ideas that were absorbed and transmitted by his Wrst Christian readers.
Most important of these was Augustine, who read him as a young man in
the translation of Marius Victorinus. The reading set him on the course
which led to his conversion to Christianity, and his Confessions and On the
Trinity contain echoes of Plotinus on many a page. In the last days of his life,
we are told, when the Vandals were besieging Hippo, he consoled himself
with a quotation from the Enneads: ‘How can a man be taken seriously if
he attaches importance to the collapse of wood and stones, or to the
death—God help us—of mortal creatures?’ (1. 4. 7. 24–5).
GOD
316

CHRONOLOGY
585 BC
Thales predicts an eclipse
547
Anaximander dies
530
Pythagoras migrates to Italy
525
Anaximenes dies
500
Heraclitus in mid-life
470
Xenophanes dies
Democritus born
469
Socrates born
450
Parmenides and Zeno visit Athens
Empedocles in mid-life
444
Protagoras writes a constitution
427
Plato born
399
Socrates executed
387
Plato’s Academy founded
384
Aristotle born
347
Plato dies
336
Alexander king of Macedon
322
Aristotle dies
313
Zeno of Citium comes to Athens
306
Epicurus founds the Garden
273
Arcesilaus becomes head of the Academy
263
Cleanthes becomes head of the Stoa
232
Chrysippus succeeds as head of the Stoa
155
Carneades heads the Academy and visits Rome
106
Cicero born
55
Lucretius’ De Rerum Natura
44
Julius Caesar assassinated
30
Augustus becomes Emperor
52AD
St Paul preaches in Athens
65
Suicide of Seneca

161
Marcus Aurelius becomes Emperor
205
Plotinus born
387
St Augustine baptized
Many of these dates, particularly in earlier centuries, are conjectural and
approximate.
CHRONOLOGY
318

ABBREVIATIONS AND CONVENTIONS
CHHP
K. Algra, J. Barnes, J. Mansfeld, and M. SchoWeld (eds.), The
Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1999)
CHLGP
A. H. Armstrong (ed.), The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early
Medieval Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967)
DK
H. Diels and W. Kranz (eds.), Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 6th
edn., 3 vols. (Berlin: Wiedmann, 1951); cited as DK, followed by
the chapter, letter, and the number of the fragment (e.g. DK 8
B115). Each chapter of this work is divided into two sections, A
(which contains references in ancient authors) and B (which
contains fragments that have been handed down verbatim)
D.L.
Diogenes Laertius, Lives of the Philosophers, trans. R. D. Hicks, Loeb
Classical Library, 2 vols. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1972); cited by book and paragraph (e.g. 8. 8)
Ep.
Epistle
fr.
fragment
KRS
G. S. Kirk, J. E. Raven, and M. SchoWeld (eds.), The Presocratic
Philosophers, 2nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1983); cited as KRS, followed by the number of the fragment in
the single series that runs through the edition (e.g. KRS 433)
LS
A. A. Long and D. N. Sedley (eds.), The Hellenistic Philosophers, 2
vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987); cited as LS,
followed by the number of the chapter and the letter corres-
ponding to the individual text (e.g. LS 30f)
S.E.
Sextus Empiricus

Alexander of Aphrodisias
de An.
de Anima
Fat.
On Fate
Aristotle
The standard form of reference is to the book and chapter of the individual
work, followed by page, column, and line of the classic 1831 edition of
Bekker (e.g. Physics 3. 1. 200b32)
APo.
Posterior Analytics
APr.
Prior Analytics
Barnes
The Complete Works of Aristotle, ed. J. Barnes, Oxford Translation
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984)
Cael.
On the Heavens
Cat.
Categories
de An.
On the Soul
EE
Eudemian Ethics
GA
On the Generation of Animals
GC
On Generation and Corruption
HA
History of Animals
Int.
de Interpretatione
Metaph.
Metaphysics
Mete.
Meteorologica
MM
Magna Moralia
MXG
de Melisso, Xenophane, et Gorgia
NE
Nicomachean Ethics
PA
On the Parts of Animals
Ph.
Physics
Po.
Poetics
Pol.
Politics
Rh.
Rhetorica
SE
Sophistical Refutations
Top.
Topics
Cicero
Acad.
Academica
D.
On Divination
ABBREVIATIONS AND CONVENTIONS
320

Fat.
On Fate
Fin.
de Finibus
ND
On the Nature of the Gods
OV.
On Duties (de OYciis)
Tusc.
Tusculan Disputations
Epictetus
Disc.
Discourses
Lucretius
RN
On the Nature of Things
Plato
It is the universal custom to refer to the works of Plato by the name of the
work followed by the page, section, and line of the Stephanus edition of
1578 (e.g. Phaedo 64a5). This numeration is preserved in all editions and most
translations of Plato.
Apol.
Apologia Socratis
Cra.
Cratylus
Euthd.
Euthydemus
Euthphr.
Euthyphro
Grg.
Gorgias
Hp. Ma.
Hippias Major
Hp. Mi.
Hippias Minor
La.
Laches
Men.
Meno
Phd.
Phaedo
Phdr.
Phaedrus
Phlb.
Philebus
Prm.
Parmenides
Prt.
Protagoras
Rep.
Republic
Smp.
Symposium
Sph.
Sophist
Tht.
Theaetetus
Ti.
Timaeus
ABBREVIATIONS AND CONVENTIONS
321

Plotinus
Plotinus is standardly cited according to the schema of his pupil Porphyry,
who divided his works into Enneads, or groups of nine. The number of the
Ennead is given, followed by the number of the work, chapter, and line
(e.g. Ennead 6, 1. 5. 27; or simply 6. 1. 5. 27)
Sextus Empiricus (S.E.)
Sextus Empiricus is cited as S.E., followed by an abbreviation for the work
(e.g. S.E., M.)
M.
Against the Professors
P.
Outlines of Pyrrhonism
Xenophon
Mem.
Memorabilia
ABBREVIATIONS AND CONVENTIONS
322

BIBLIOGRAPHY
This bibliography does not contain all the works cited in footnotes, nor all the
works referred to in the course of writing the text. It is a selection of works that I
believe readers will Wnd particularly helpful in pursuing their interests in ancient
philosophers and in the philosophical topics they discussed. The selection is
limited mainly to works in English of an accessible kind; many such works
themselves contain much fuller bibliographies.
General Works
Brunschwig, J., and Lloyd, G. E. R., Greek Thought: A Guide to Classical Knowledge
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2000).
Frede, M., Essays in Ancient Philosophy (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987).
Gottlieb, A., The Dream of Reason: A History of Western Philosophy from the Greeks to the
Renaissance (London: Allen Lane, 2000).
Irwin, T., Classical Philosophy, Oxford Readers (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1999).
Owen, G. E. L., Logic, Science, and Dialectic: Collected Papers in Greek Philosophy, ed.
M. Nussbaum (London: Duckworth, 1986).
Routledge History of Philosophy, i: From the Beginning to Plato, ed. C. C. W. Taylor; ii: From
Aristotle to Augustine, ed. D. Furley (London: Routledge, 1997, 1999).
Presocratic Philosophers (Chapter 1)
The standard collection of the original texts of the surviving fragments of the
philosophers prior to Socrates is that of H. Diels and W. Kranz, Die Fragmente der
Vorsokratiker, 6th edn., 3 vols. (Berlin: Wiedmann, 1951). Our main source for the
biographies of the Presocratics, and many other ancient philosophers, is the Lives of
the Philosophers by Diogenes Laertius, trans. R. D. Hicks, Loeb Classical Library, 2 vols.
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1972).
There is a helpful, though less complete, collection which contains English
translations in addition to the original texts: G. S. Kirk, J. E. Raven, and
M. SchoWeld (eds.), The Presocratic Philosophers, 2nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1983).
An excellent collection of texts in translation alone is J. Barnes, Early Greek
Philosophy (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1987). A more recent translation is R. Water-
Weld, The First Philosophers: The Presocratics and the Sophists, World’s Classics (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2000).

Barnes, J., The Presocratic Philosophers, rev. edn. (London: Routledge, 1982).
Cornford, F. M., Plato and Parmenides (London: Kegan Paul, 1939).
de Romilly, Jacqueline, The Great Sophists in Periclean Athens (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1992).
Dodds, E. R. (ed.), Plato: Gorgias, text with introd. and comm. (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1959).
Guthrie, W. K. C., A History of Greek Philosophy, vols. i–iii (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1962–9).
Inwood, B., The Poem of Empedocles (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1992).
Kahn, C. H., The Verb ‘Be’ in Ancient Greek (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1973).
—— The Art and Thought of Heraclitus (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979).
—— Anaximander and the Origins of Greek Cosmology, repr. of 1960 edn. (Indianapolis:
Hackett, 1994).
Kerferd, G. B., The Sophistic Movement (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1981).
Mourelatos, A. P. D., The Route of Parmenides (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1970).
O’Brien, D., Empedocles’ Cosmic Cycle (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969).
Osborne, C., Rethinking Early Greek Philosophy: Hippolytus and the Pre-Socratics (London:
Duckworth, 1987).
Schofield, M., An Essay on Anaxagoras (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1980).
Taylor, C. C. W. (ed.), Plato: Protagoras, trans. with notes, rev. edn. (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1991).
Socrates and Plato (Chapter 1)
All the works of Plato in the original Greek are contained in Wve volumes of the
series of Oxford Classical Texts (Oxford University Press) and, with an English
translation on facing pages, in twelve volumes of the Loeb Classical Library
(Harvard University Press). There is a convenient English single-volume edition
of Plato’s complete works edited by J. M. Cooper and D. S. Hutchinson (Indian-
apolis: Hackett, 1997).
The Clarendon Plato series (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973– ) contains transla-
tions with notes of the major Platonic dialogues, notably Theaetetus (ed.
J. McDowell, 1973), Philebus (ed. J. C. B. Gosling, 1975), and Phaedo (ed. D. Gallop,
1975). Many dialogues are translated in volumes of the Penguin Classics and of the
Oxford World’s Classics series.
The Socratic works of Xenophon appear in two volumes of the Loeb Classical
Library: Memorabilia (trans. E. C. Marchant, London, 1923) and Symposium and Apology
(trans. O. J. Todd, London, 1961). A good English translation is Xenophon,
324
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Conversations of Socrates, ed. H. Tredennick and R. WaterWeld (Harmondsworth:
Penguin, 1990).
Adam, J. (ed.), The Republic of Plato, 2 vols. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1902).
Allen, R. E., Plato’s Euthyphro and the Earlier Theory of Forms (London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul, 1970).
—— (ed.), Studies in Plato’s Metaphysics (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1965).
Annas, J., An Introduction to Plato’s Republic (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981).
Blondell, R., The Play of Character in Plato’s Dialogues (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2002).
Brandwood, L., The Chronology of Plato’s Dialogues (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1990).
Brickhouse, T. C., and Smith, N. D., Socrates on Trial (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1989).
—— —— Plato’s Socrates (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994).
Dover, K. (ed.), Plato: Symposium (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980).
Gosling, J. C. B., Plato (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973).
Hackforth, Plato’s Examination of Pleasure (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1945).
Irwin, T., Plato’s Moral Theory: The Early and Middle Dialogues (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1977).
Kahn, C. H., Plato and the Socratic Dialogue (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1996).
Kraut, R. (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Plato (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1992).
Ledger, G., Re-counting Plato: A Computer Analysis of Plato’s Style (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1989).
Meinwald, C. C., Plato’s Parmenides (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991).
Morrow, Glenn R., Plato’s Epistles, a trans. with critical essays and notes, 2nd edn.
(Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merill, 1962).
Robinson, R., Plato’s Earlier Dialectic (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1953).
Rowe, C. J. (ed.), Plato: Phaedrus (Warminster: Aris & Phillips, 1986).
Ryle, G., Plato’s Progress (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1966).
Saunders, T. J., Plato’s Penal Code (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991).
Sayre, Kenneth M., Plato’s Late Ontology: A Riddle Resolved (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1983).
Stone, I. F., The Trial of Socrates (Boston: Little, Brown, 1988).
Taylor, C. C. W., Socrates: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1998).
Vlastos, G., Platonic Studies, 2nd edn. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981).
325
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Vlastos, G., Socrates, Ironist and Moral Philosopher (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1991).
White, N. I., A Companion to Plato’s Republic (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1979).
Aristotle (Chapter 2)
Most of Aristotle’s works appear in the original in volumes of the Oxford Classical
Texts series, and many of them appear with a translation in volumes of the Loeb
Classical Library. All of the surviving works are to be found in English in the two-
volume Oxford Translation, edited by J. Barnes (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1984).
The Clarendon Aristotle series (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963– ) contains
translations of selected Aristotelian texts, with detailed philosophical notes. The
series includes Categories and de Interpretatione (ed. J. L. Ackrill, 1963), de Anima II and III
(ed. D. W. Hamlyn, 1968), de Generatione et Corruptione (ed. C. J. F. Williams, 1971), de
Partibus Animalium (ed. D. M. Balme, 1972), Eudemian Ethics I, II, VIII (ed. M. Woods),
Metaphysics C, D and E (ed. C. Kirwan, 1971, 1993), Metaphysics F and G (ed. D.
Bostock, 1994), Metaphysics L and M (ed. J. Annas, 1976), Physics I and II (ed. W.
Charlton, 1970), Physics III and IV (ed. E. Hussey, 1983), Posterior Analytics (ed. J. Barnes,
1975, 1993), Topics 1 and 8 (ed. R. Smith, 1994).
Many of Aristotle’s works are available in translation in Penguin Classics or in
Oxford World’s Classics.
Ackrill, J. L., Aristotle the Philosopher (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981).
Anscombe, G. E. M., and Geach, P. T., Three Philosophers (Oxford: Blackwell, 1961).
Bambrough, R. (ed.), New Essays on Plato and Aristotle (London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1965).
Barnes, J. (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1995).
—— Aristotle: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).
—— Schofield, M., and Sorabji, R. (eds.), Articles on Aristotle, i: Science; ii: Ethics and
Politics; iii: Metaphysics; iv: Psychology and Aesthetics (London: Duckworth, 1975).
Broadie, S., and Rowe, C., Aristotle: Nicomachean Ethics, trans., introd., and comm.
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002).
Irwin, T. H., Aristotle’s First Principles (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988).
Jaeger, W., Aristotle: Fundamentals of the History of his Development, trans. R. Robinson,
2nd edn. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1948).
Kenny, A., The Aristotelian Ethics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978).
—— Aristotle on the Perfect Life (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992).
Kraut, R., Aristotle:Political Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002).
Lear, J., Aristotle and Logical Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980).
Lloyd, G. E. R., Aristotle: The Growth and Structure of his Thought (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1968).
326
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Meikle, S., Aristotle’s Economic Thought (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1995).
Ross, W. D., Aristotle’s Metaphysics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1924).
—— Aristotle’s Physics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1936).
Sorabji, R., Time, Creation and the Continuum (London: Duckworth, 1983).
—— Matter, Place and Motion: Theories in Antiquity and their Sequel (London: Duckworth,
1988).
Waterlow, S., Passage and Possibility: A Study of Aristotle’s Modal Concepts (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1982).
Hellenistic Philosophy (Chapter 2)
Much of our information about these philosophers derives from later writers such
as Cicero, Lucretius, and Sextus Empiricus, whose works have been published as
Oxford Classical Texts or in the Loeb Classical Library.
The most helpful collection of the extant fragments and of references in ancient
authors is The Hellenistic Philosophers by A. A. Long and D. N. Sedley, 2 vols.
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987). One volume of this work gives
translations of the principal sources, and another gives an annotated edition of the
Greek and Latin texts.
The classic edition of surviving Stoic texts was for long J. von Arnim, Stoicorum
Veterum Fragmenta, 3 vols. (Leipzig, 1903–5) (SVF). It has been superseded by K. Hulser,
Die Fragmente zur Dialektik der Stoiker (Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1987). For
Epicureanism the fundamental collection is H. Usener, Epicurea (Leipzig, 1887).
Algra, K., Barnes, J., Mansfeld, J., and Schofield, M., The Cambridge History of
Hellenistic Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999).
Annas, J. E., and Barnes, J., The Modes of Scepticism: Ancient Texts and Modern
Interpretations (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985).
Asmis, E., Epicurus’ ScientiWc Method (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1984).
Barnes, J., Brunschwig, J., Burnyeat, M., and Schofield, M., Science and
Speculation: Studies in Hellenistic Theory and Practice (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1982).
Burnyeat, M., The Sceptical Tradition (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983).
Furley, D. J., Two Studies in the Greek Atomists (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1967).
Long, A. A., Hellenistic Philosophy, 2nd edn. (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1986).
Rist, J. M., Stoic Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1969).
—— Epicurus: An Introduction (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972).
Sharples, R. W., Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics (London: Routledge, 1994).
327
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Roman and Imperial Philosophy
The works of Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, and Plotinus have appeared in the Loeb
Classical Library, and those of Plotinus as an Oxford Classical Text edited by
P. Henry and H.-R. Schyzer, which has become the standard edition (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1964–82).
O’Donnell, J. J., Augustine: Confessions, 3 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992).
There are many translations of Confessions, notably H. Chadwick in the World’s
Classics series (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991).
Armstrong, A. H. (ed.), The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970).
Bailey, C., Titi Lucreti Cari de Rerum Natura Libri Sex, 3 vols. (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1947).
Barnes, J., and Griffin, M., Philosophia Togata, vols. i and ii (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1989, 1997).
Clark, G., and Rajak, T., Philosophy and Power in the Graeco-Roman World (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2002).
Dillon, J., The Middle Platonists (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1977).
Dodds, E. R., Proclus: The Elements of Theology, ed., trans., and comm., 2nd edn.
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992).
Griffin, M. T., Seneca, a Philosopher in Politics (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976).
Lloyd, A. C., The Antomy of NeoPlatonism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990).
O’Brien, D., Plotinus on the Origin of Matter (Naples: Bibliopolis, 1991).
O’Meara, D. J., Plotinus: An Introduction to the Enneads (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993).
Rist, J., Plotinus: The Road to Reality (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1967).
Sedley, D., Lucretius and the Transformation of Greek Wisdom (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998).
Stump, E., and Kretzmann, N., The Cambridge Companion to Augustine (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2001).
Logic (Chapter 3)
Kneale, W. C., and Kneale, M., The Development of Logic (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1962).
Łukasiewicz, J., Aristotle’s Syllogistic from the Standpoint of Modern Formal Logic, 2nd edn.
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1957).
Mates, B., Stoic Logic, 2nd edn. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1961).
Nuchelmans, G., Theories of the Proposition (Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1973).
Patzig, Aristotle’s Theory of the Syllogism (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1968).
Prior, A. N., Time and Modality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1957).
328
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Epistemology (Chapter 4)
Bostock, D., Plato’s Theaetetus (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988).
Hankinson, R. J., The Sceptics (London: Routledge, 1994).
McKirahan, R. D., Principles and Proofs: Aristotle’s Theory of Demonstrative Science (Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1992).
Schofield, M., Burnyeat, M., and Barnes, J., Doubt and Dogmatism: Studies in
Hellenistic Epistemology (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980).
White, N. P., Plato on Knowledge and Reality (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1976).
Philosophy of Physics (Chapter 5)
Bobzien, S., Determinism and Freedom in Stoic Philosophy (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998).
Hankinson, R. J., Cause and Explanation in Ancient Greek Thought (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1998).
Hoenen, P., Cosmologia (Rome: PontiWcal Gregorian University, 1949).
Sorabji, R., Necessity, Cause, and Blame (London: Duckworth, 1980).
—— Time, Creation and the Continuum (London: Duckworth, 1983).
Waterlow, S., Nature, Change, and Agency in Aristotle’s Physics (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1982).
Metaphysics (Chapter 6)
Barnes, J., and Mignucci, M. (eds.), Matter and Metaphysics (Naples: Bibliopolis,
1988).
Fine, Gail, On Ideas: Aristotle’s Cricitism of Plato’s Theory of Forms (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1993).
Graham, D. W., Aristotle’s Two Systems (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987).
Malcolm, J., Plato on the Self-Predication of Forms (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991).
Scaltsas, T., Substances and Universals in Aristotle’s Metaphysics (Ithaca: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 1994).
Philosophy of Mind (Chapter 7)
Annas, J. E., Hellenistic Philosophy of Mind (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1992).
Brunschwig, J., and Nussbaum, M. (eds.), Passions and Perceptions: Studies in Hellenistic
Philosophy of Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
Hicks, R. D. (ed.), Aristotle: De Anima, with trans., introd., and comm. (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1907).
Nussbaum, M. C. (ed.), Aristotle: De Motu Animalium, with trans., introd., and essays
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978).
—— and Rorty, A. O. (eds.), Essays on Aristotle’s Philosophy of Mind (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1992).
329
BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ethics (Chapter 8)
Annas, J., Platonic Ethics Old and New (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1999).
Broadie, S., Ethics with Aristotle (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991).
Gosling, J. C. B., and Taylor, C. C. W., The Greeks on Pleasure (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1982).
Inwood, B., Ethics and Human Action in Early Stoicism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985).
Nussbaum, M. C., The Fragility of Goodness (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1986).
Price, A., Love and Friendship in Plato and Aristotle (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989).
Schofield, M., and Striker, G., The Norms of Nature: Studies in Hellenistic Ethics
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986).
Philosophy of Religion (Chapter 9)
Festugiere, A. J., Epicurus and his Gods (Oxford: Blackwell, 1955).
Kenny, A., The Five Ways (London: Routledge, 1969).
Kretzmann, Norman, The Metaphysics of Theism (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1999).
330
BIBLIOGRAPHY

ILLUSTRATIONS
Page
6
Anaximander with his sundial, in a Roman mosaic
Rheinisches Landesmuseum Trier
10
Pythagoras commending vegetarianism, as imagined by Rubens
The Royal Collection  2003, Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II
38
Socrates and Plato as portrayed by Matthew Paris in the thirteenth
century
The Bodleian Library, University of Oxford/Ms Ashmole 304 fol 31v
47
A herm of Socrates, bearing a quotation from Plato’s Crito
 Soprintendenza Archeologica, Naples
59
Crates and Hipparchia, in a fourth-century-bc fresco
Archivi Alinari
66
The location of the philosophical schools of Athens
Candace H Smith
70
The frontispiece of a fifteenth-century manuscript translation of Aris-
totle’s History of Animals
 Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana (Vat.Lat.2094)
83
Aristotle ridden by his wife, Phyllis
Bibliothe`que nationale de France
92
A Venetian representation of King Ptolemy and his library at Alex-
andria
 Biblioteca Nazionale Marciana, Venice (cod.Gr.Z.388 c. VI)
97
Alexander standing in Diogenes’ light (Rome, Villa Albani)
Archivi Alinari
110
The campaigns of Marcus Aurelius, depicted on his column in Rome
Fototeca Unione, American Academy in Rome

122
Aristotle, attributed to Lysippus (fourth century bc)
Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna
137
Chrysippus, in a statue in the Louvre (third century ad)
Giraudon/Bridgeman Art Library
149
Socrates in a wall-painting from Ephesus
Sonia Halliday Photographs
158
Plato’s cave (Flemish school, sixteenth century)
Giraudon/Bridgeman Art Library
167
The opening of a book of Lucretius’ De Rerum Natura in an illuminated
manuscript
British Library (Add ms 11912 f 2)
182
Alexander the Great and Aristotle
British Library ( (Royal ms 20Bxx f 77v)
201
Parmenides and Heraclitus
Archivi Alinari
206
Plato (Museo Vaticano)
Archivi Alinari
216
Plato trodden by Aquinas (Caraffa Chapel, S. Maria sopra Minerva,
Rome)
Archivi Alinari
230
Pythagoras calculating the height of Hercules (from a fifteenth-
century manuscript of Aulus Gellius)
 Biblioteca Ambrosiana, Milan (cod.S/P 10/28, 90v)
235
The death of Socrates, as depicted by Claude Dufresnoy
Archivi Alinari/Giraudon
238
Plato’s vision of the soul as charioteer, as illustrated by Donatello
Archivi Alinari/Giraudon
246
Aristotle teaching Averroes, represented by a sixteenth-century illu-
minator
The Pierpont Morgan Library, New York: PML 21194
332
ILLUSTRATIONS

254
St Augustine in his study (Vittorio Carpaccio, S. Giorgio, Venice)
Archivi Alinari, Florence
259
Democritus and Heraclitus, as imagined by Bramante
Archivi Alinari
268
Detail of illumination from Petrus de Abano, Conciliator differentiarum
philosophorum et medicorum (Venice: Herbort, 1483), attributed to the
Master of the Seven Virtues
Koninklijke Bibliotheek, The Hague (169 D 3, f, a2r)
280
Zeno and Epicurus (plus swine) represented on a silver cup from
Boscoreale, first century ad
Lauros/Giraudon/Bridgeman Art Library
287
A Roman statue in the Louvre, traditionally entitled ‘The Death of
Seneca’
Giraudon/Bridgeman Art Library
300
Aristotle’s cosmology, as represented by Giovanni di Paolo in his
illustration to Dante’s Paradiso
British Library (Yates-Thompson ms 36 f 169r canto XXII)
308
Marcus Tullius Cicero as a schoolboy, in a fresco by V. Foppa
Trustees of the Wallace Collection, London
333
ILLUSTRATIONS

This page intentionally left blank 

INDEX
Academy 66–9, 100–101, 173–5
accidents 220
Achilles 19
active intellect 246
actuality 88, 186, 226–7, 244
Adeimantus 48, 57
adiaphora 283
adultery 257, 270
Aenesidemus 176
affirmative propositions 117
akrasia 273
Alcibiades 35
Alexander of Aphrodisias xi, 112, 194, 252
Alexander the Great 73, 86, 89, 96, 182
alteration 191
Ambrose, St 114
anachronism xxiii
analysis 155
anatomy 71
Anaxagoras 24–6, 34, 233
Anaximander 5–7
Anaximenes 8
Andronicus of Rhodes 93
anger 76, 106
anthropomorphism 290
Anytus 34
apeiron 7
appearance vs reality 145, 170
appetite 238
Aquinas, St Thomas xviii, 216
Arcesilaus 94, 100, 172–3
arete 164, 259–77
argument from design 305
Aristophanes 34–5
Aristotle xi, xv, 1–4, 23, 65–91, 112,
116–36, 161–6, 178–92, 216–28,
296–302
Categories 116, 124–7
Constitution of Athens 82
De Anima 241–7
De Interpretatione 116, 123–4
Eudemian Ethics 79–81, 266–77
Eudemus 66
Generation and Corruption 179–80
History of Animals 69, 70
Magna Moralia 79, 81
Metaphyiscs 69, 161, 217–23, 299–301
Nicomachean Ethics 69, 79–81, 164–6,
247–8, 266–77
Organon 68
Parts of Animals 69
Physics 88, 178–92, 296–299
Poetics 75–8
Politics 82–7
Posterior Analytics 116
Prior Analytics 67, 116–121
Problems 88–9
Protrepticus 67
Rhetoric 73, 75
Sophistical Refutations 67, 116
Topics 67, 116
Arnold, Matthew 24, 304
art xvi–xix
asceticism 278
Aspasius 80, 112
aspect 186
assent 197
Assos 69
astrology 30811
atheism 294–6
Athens 33, 66, 89, 94
atomism 27, 63, 95, 168, 179–80
attunement 236, 253
augury 310
Augustine, St xxiii, 103, 113–5, 198, 254–6,
316

Augustus 104
auxiliaries 57–8
axioma 140
beauty 156
Being 75, 199–228
Being qua being 227–8
biology 69–73
Bolt, Robert 16
Bruno, Giordano 25
Caesar, Julius 103–4
Callicles 32
Callisthenes 87
canon xviii
canonic 166
Cantor, Georg 20
Carneades 100, 104, 173–5, 196–7, 308
Case, Thomas 80
categories 124–7, 191
Cato the Censor 100
causes 1, 87, 189–96
cave 158
Celsus 111
Chalcidius 64
change 226
character 78
charioteer 237–8
choir 313
Christianity, 109
Chrysippus 98–100, 137, 194–6, 254–5,
282, 306–8
Cicero xii, 100–104, 286, 303, 308–1
circle 50
classes 54, 213
Cleanthes 98, 105, 279, 307
Clement of Alexandria 110
Cleopatra 93
clocks 187
cognition 170
cognitive appearance 171
Coleridge, S.T. 90
commerce 86
common sensibles 244
commonality, principle of 51–2, 208
communism 58, 98
compass, points of 56
compatibilism 254
compulsion 254
concepts 168, 170
concrete universals 55
concrete vs abstract 221, 225
conjectures 169
consequentialism 270
constitution 280
contemplation 81, 276
contingency 130–4
continuum 178–81
contradictories 123
contraries 123
conversion 121
cosmology 62, 87–9
crafts 44, 261–3
Crates 59, 96
creation 294
Critias 48
Dante 91, 300
Darwin, Charles 23
death 94, 107, 249
definite description 156
definition 50, 222
deliberation 133
Delphic oracle 42
Demetrius of Phaleron 93
demiurge 37, 63
democracy 34, 59, 82, 84
Democritus 26–8, 95, 257–9
Demosthenes 68
Descartes, R. 301
determinism 196–8, 306
diagrams 26
dialectic 159–60, 210–11
Diodorus Cronos 97, 136–8
Diogenes Laertius 48, 82, 91, 94, 140
Diogenes of Oenoanda 279
Diogenes of Synope 96–7
Dion 48
Dionysius II 48
disciplines 74, 91
INDEX
336

divination 308–11
doctrine vs precepts 286
doxa 154–7
drama 77, 79
dreams 153, 310
Dryden, John 101
Eco, Umberto 76
education 58, 61
effects 190
efficient cause 1–2
eidola 249
elements 21, 63, 87
elenchus 37, 43
emotions 76
Empedocles, 20–4, 231–3
energeiai 185
envy 62
Epictetus xii, 107–8
Epicurus 94–6, 101–3, 166–9, 196, 277–9,
302–4
episteme 164–6
epistemological fallacy 177
ergon 164, 268
essence 218–25
Etruscan torture 67
Euclid 166
eudaimonia 81, 258, 266–77
Eudemus 80
events 190
evidence 169
evil, problem of 306
evolution 22
existence 199, 223–6
expansion of universe 25
experience 163
falsehood 214–5
family 83
Fate 309
fate 31 195
fiction 79, 226
figures of syllogism 119
final cause 1–3
fire, 14–16, 22
first philosophy 75
fish 72
flux 14, 205
formal cause 1–2
forms (Aristotelian) 222–3
Forms (Platonic) 50, 213–6, 243–4
fortune 31
fossils 11
Frede, Michael xxi
free will xx
Frege, Gottlob xxi, 128, 166
Galen 109
garden roller 194, 197
garlic 89
Geminus 173
general sense 244
Genesis 3, 63
genus 224
Giovanni di Paolo 300
Glaucon 48, 57
gnome 157
God 36, 99, 289–316
gods, Homeric 64, 289–90
Good, Idea of 53
Gorgias 30
grammar 29
guardians 57–8
happiness 81, 258
harmony 14
hedonic calculus 263–5
hedonism 277–9
Hegel xv, 13
Helen of Troy 30
Heraclitus 11–17, 201, 204–5, 215, 232
heresy 62
Hermias 69
Hippias 29
history 79
holidays 26
Homer 13, 58, 76, 289–90
homonymy 127
homosexuality 62
horme 175
INDEX
337

hunting 61
hypotheses 158–60
Ideas (Platonic) 2, 46–56, 68–9, 156–60,
205–16, 313–4
identity of indiscernibles 173
illusion 161–3, 176–8
imitation 51
immortality 234–7, 253–4
impulse 175
inclusive ‘‘or’’ 142
incontinence 273, 284
individuation 221
induction 44
infallibility of senses 162–3, 166–8
inference 143
infinite 179–81
infinite series 299
innate ideas xvii
instants 188
intellect 246–7, 313–4
intellectual virtue 271–4
intelligence, 272
intemperance 273
Jaeger, Werner 80
jealousy 293
Jerome, St 102
Jesus 104–5
jigsaw 312
Justin Martyr 109
Kant, Immanuel 121
katalepsis 170
katharsis 77
katorthoma 284
kinetic pleasures 278
Kneale, Martha 135
knowledge 145–177
law, divine 16
lazy argument 195
lekton 139, 192
Leucippus 26
lexicography 30
lexis 139
liberty of indifference xx, 197
liberty of spontaneity xx, 197
libraries 90–2
Lippi, Filippino 216
logic 67, 116–44
logos 14, 139, 154–5
love 22, 31
Lucifer 314
Lucretius xii, 94, 101–2, 166–8, 196, 248–9,
302–3
Lyceum 66, 73
Macedonia 65, 68
madness 171
Magnesia 60
magnitudes 178–81
major term 118
Manicheism 114
Marcus Aurelius 107–110
marriage 5, 61, 98
Master Argument 136, 256
material cause 1–2
material implication 138
mathematics xviii, 2, 157–8
matter 191–2, 221
means 269–71
Melissus 19
memory 163, 231
metaphysics 75, 119–228
metempsychosis 10, 23, 229–31
Michelangelo 181
microscope 73
middle term 118
Mind 25–6, 229–256
minor term 118
modal syllogistic 135
modality 130–3
monarchy 59, 82–6
monotheism 290
moods of inference 144
moods of syllogism 120
moral virtue 269–71
More, Thomas 16
Morning Star 19
INDEX
338

motion 19, 182–6
music 2, 9
myth 8, 58
Mytilene 69
names 123, 128
natural motion 87
natural place 183
nature 88, 99, 281
necessity 130–4
negative propositions 117
Neleus of Skepsis 93
Newton, I. 183
Nicomachus 65
Nocturnal Council 61
noesis noeseos 301
nothing 203
nouns 215
now 188
objects of senses 161–2
Oedipus 78
oikeiosis 281–2
oligarchy 59, 82
One, the 209–10, 311–3
ontological argument 224
ontology 199
opinion 154
opposites 7, 15, 235
Orestes 168
organism 242
Origen 111
pain 19
Pantheia 23
pantheism 307
paradigms 55
Parmenides xix, 17–19, 199–204,
214
participation 51, 213
particular propositions 118
passions 284–5
passive intellect 247
Paul St, 13, 98, 105
Peloponnesian War 33
per se vs per accidens 212, 219
Pericles 24, 33
Peripatetics 73
peripeteia 78
Philip II 68
Philo of Alexandria 105, 111
Philo of Megara 97, 138–9, 142
philosopher kings 60
phronesis 164, 262
piety 289–90
place 182–4
plasma physics 22
Plato xii, xix, 2, 35–66, 205–216, 234–41,
260–1, 276
Apology 42
Crito 47
Euthyphro 49, 290–2
Gorgias 45
Hippias Minor 45
Ion 43
Laches 43
Laws 60–2, 294–6
Meno 45
Parmenides 53, 66, 207–212
Phaedo 26, 45–9, 66, 234–7
Phaedrus 237–8
Philebus 265, 276
Protagoras 45
Republic 43–4, 56–60, 76–7, 83, 156–60,
207, 237–9, 260–1, 290–6
Second Alcibiades 292
Seventh Letter 49
Sophist 32, 205, 213–6, 293
Symposium 205
Theaetetus 152–7
Timaeus 62, 293
pleasure 95–6, 263–8, 274–9
plot 77–8
Plotinus xiii, 111–3, 311–6
plurality of worlds 25, 28
Plutarch 111
pneuma 99
political philosophy 16
Posidonius 103, 172, 305
potentiality 88, 226–7, 244
INDEX
339

powers 157
practical reasoning 273–4
praxis 164
precepts vs doctrines 107
predicate calculus 144
predication 51, 54, 118, 125 133
premisses 117
prime matter 7, 63, 192
prime mover 88
private property 61, 84
Prodicus 30
progress in philosophy xvi–xx
prohairesis 252
projectiles 298
prolepsis 168, 170
proper sensibles 243
proposition 117
propositional calculus 141
Protagoras 28–30, 152–3
providence 99, 306
Ptolemy II 92–3
purity, principle of 52, 211
pyramids 4
Pyrrho of Elis 100, 175
Pythagoras 2–3, 9–11, 229–231
quality 126
quantity 126, 178
quiddity 218–25
quintessence 88
rainbow 12
Raphael 17
reason 238
recollection 160, 235
reincarnation 23
relations 209
religion 101–2
representation 245
rhetoric 30
Rubens 10
rules of syllogism 120
Russell, Bertrand 20
Ryle, Gilbert 90
sawdust 180
scepticism 172–6
Schopenhauer 224
science xvi–xix, 73, 91
sciences: productive, practical,
theoretical 75
scope 142
sea-battle 133–4
self-predication, 52, 55, 208, 210
self-preservation 280
Seneca 105–7, 192, 228, 287
sense-data 161–2
sense-impression 168
sense-perception 143–5, 152–3, 161–4,
166–9, 232–4, 249–51
senses 95, 243–5
sensitive soul 243
separation of powers 85
separation, principle of 52, 208
sex 37, 58, 61–2, 89, 102, 278–9
Sextus Empiricus xiii, 139, 142
Shylock 86
Sicily 48
singular propositions 124
skills 261–3
slavery 85–6
sleep 89
Socrates 13, 26, 32–45, 260–3, 290–2
Socratic fallacy 151
solstices 4
sophia 165, 272
Sophists 28–32
soul 16
soundness 144
Speusippus 69
sphere 204
spider 232
square of opposition 124
standard metre 55
state 57–8, 82–6, 264
static pleasures 278
Stoa Poikile 66, 96
Stoics 96–100, 136–44, 169–73, 192–6, 228,
280–8, 304–8
INDEX
340

Strife 22
sublimity, principle of 52–3, 208
substance 125, 217–25
substance, first vs second 126
suicide 288
sun 12, 13, 26, 34
sundial 5
superstition 303
swerve of atoms 95
syllogism 117–21
synonymy 127
tarradiddle 216
taste 275
techne 44, 164, 271
teeth 72
teleology 23, 26
temper 238
tenses 130, 185
terms 118, 128
testicles 71
Thales, 2–5, 257
theology xviii, 289–316
Theophrastus 90–3, 135
Theory of Ideas 2
therapy xix
Third Man 69, 209, 213
Thompson, D’Arcy 72
thought 154, 202, 245, 301
Thrasymachus 32, 159
time 179, 186–9
Timon 100
tragedy 77
transmigration of souls 10, 229–31
trinity 311–16
tripartite soul 160, 237–40
truth-conditions 143
truth-functions 141
truth-values 129
twins 173
two-way possibilities 135
tyranny 84–5
Unbeing 200–3, 215
understanding 81, 157, 272
uniqueness, principle of 52–3, 208
unity of virtues 263, 285
universal propositions 117
unmoved movers 296–9
usury 86
utilitarianism 270
vacuum 19, 27, 183
validity 143
vegetarianism 10, 270–1, 282
vegetative soul 243
verbs 123, 128, 215
virtue 44, 58–9, 81, 164–6, 259–77,
282–8
voluntariness 251–2
will 251–6
wisdom 81, 164, 271
Wittgenstein, Ludwig xvi, xxiii, 151
women 58–9, 61, 78, 83–4, 89, 98
Wordsworth, W. 199
world-soul 63, 314–5
worship 30
Xanthippe 35
Xenophanes 11–12, 17, 289–90
Xenophon xiii, 35–7
Zeno of Citium 96–8, 172, 193, 280,
305
Zeno of Elea 19
Zeus 15
zoology 71
INDEX
341

