
 Sex/Gender 
 Th is book provides a clearly written explanation of the biological and 
cultural underpinnings of sex/gender. Anne Fausto-Sterling provides an 
introduction to the biochemistry, neurobiology, and social construction 
of sex/gender with expertise and humor in a style accessible to a wide 
variety of readers. In addition to the basics,  Sex/Gender ponders the 
moral, ethical, social, and political side to this inescapable subject. 
 Anne Fausto-Sterling , the Nancy Duke Lewis Professor of Biology 
and Gender Studies at Brown University, is a leading expert on the 
development of gender identity as well as the biology of gender. Her 
latest research analyzes the emergence of behavioral diff erences between 
the sexes in early childhood. She is the author of two earlier books: 
 Myths of Gender: Biological Th eories about Women and Men  (Basic, 1993) 
and  Sexing the Body: Gender Politics and the Construction of Sexuality 
(Basic, 2000). 

 Th e Routledge Series Integrating Science and Culture 
 Editor : Lennard J. Davis, University of Illinois at Chicago 
 Th e Routledge Series Integrating Science and Culture aims to reunite the major discourses 
of science and the humanities which parted ways about 150 years ago. Each book picks 
an important topic that can best be understood by a synthesis of the best science and the 
best social and cultural analysis. In an age when more and more major political and life 
decisions involve complex understandings of science, medicine, and technology, we need 
to have a bioculturally sophisticated citizenry who can weigh in on these important issues. 
To that end these books aim to reach a wide swathe of people, presenting the information 
in readable, illustrated, succinct editions that are designed for classroom and scholarly use 
as well as for public consumption. 
 Available 
 Autism by Stuart Murray 
 Depression by Bradley Lewis 
 Forthcoming 
 Culture by Nicole Anderson 
 Brain, Self, and Society by Victoria Pitts-Taylor 

 Sex/Gender 
 Biology in a Social World 
 Anne Fausto-Sterling 

 Th is edition published 2012 
 by Routledge 
 711 Th ird Avenue, New York, NY 10017 
 Simultaneously published in the UK 
 by Routledge 
 2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
 Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business 
 © 2012 Taylor & Francis 
 Th e right of Anne Fausto-Sterling to be identifi ed as author of this work 
has been asserted by her in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. 
 All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, 
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, 
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers. 
 Trademark notice : Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identifi cation and explanation 
without intent to infringe. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
  Fausto-Sterling, Anne, 1944– 
  Sex/gender: biology in a social world / Anne Fausto-Sterling. 
   p. cm. — (Th e Routledge Series integrating science and culture) 
  1. Sex diff erences. 2. Gender identity. 3. Sex diff erentiation. 4. Intersexuality. 
 5. Sex (Biology). 6. Sex role. I. Title. 
  HQ1075.F387 2012 
  305.3—dc23 
 2011040011 
 ISBN: 978–0–415–88145–6 (hbk) 
 ISBN: 978–0–415–88146–3 (pbk) 
 ISBN: 978–0–203–12797–1 (ebk) 
 Typeset in Adobe Caslon Pro 
by Refi neCatch Limited, Bungay, Suff olk, UK 
Please visit the book's companion website at
www.routledge.com/cw/fausto-sterling

 Th is book is dedicated to Samuel Philip and 
Rebecca Claire Graves and to Carl Luke Vogel. Th ey 
are the ones who will reshape the future of gender-in-the-world.  


 CONTENTS 
 S eries F oreword  
ix 
 P reface  
xi 
 C hapter 1 A G enderless F uture ? 
1 
 C hapter 2 O f S pirals and L ayers  
3 
 C hapter 3 O f M olecules and S ex  
12 
 C hapter 4 O f H ormones and B rains  
27 
 C hapter 5 A m I  a B oy or  a G irl ?—T he E mergence 
of G ender I dentity  
43 
 C hapter 6 T hinking a bout H omosexuality  
70 
 C hapter 7 T hinking a bout G roups ; T hinking A bout 
I ndividuals 
99 
 C hapter 8 P ink and B lue F orever  
109 
VII

VIII 
CONTENTS
 C hapter 9 T he D evelopmental D ynamics of P ink 
and B lue  
112 
 C hapter 10 E pilogue : T he F uture of G ender 
( and S ex ) 
119 
 N otes  
124 
 R eferences  
126 
 A cknowledgments  
136 
 I ndex 
138  

 SERIES FOREWORD 
 Th e Routledge Series Integrating Science and Culture aims to restore 
connections between the sciences and the humanities, connections that 
were severed over 150 years ago. Th is mutual exclusion was done in the 
name of expertise on the part of science and defended in the name of 
preserving values and morality in the world of humanism. In some 
sense, each side was seen as the societal enemy of the other. From the 
humanists’ perspective, scientists threatened to make the world a colder, 
more effi  cient place lacking in feelings and values. From the scientists’ 
viewpoint, humanists were interfering with progress by injecting 
bleeding hearts and unreasonable fears into an essentially rational 
process. 
 But the reality is that now, in the 21st century it is getting harder and 
harder for humanists to comment on civic and social matters without 
knowing something about science, medicine, and technology. Suddenly 
there is the need to understand stem cells, brain scans, DNA technolo-
gies, organ transplants, ecological outcomes, and the like in order to be 
a knowledgeable citizen, legislator, or scholar. Likewise, scientists 
routinely include the ethical, social, cultural, and legal in their research 
protocols and scientifi c articles. Th e divide between the “two cultures” 
described by C. P. Snow in the 1950s is less and less possible in the 21st 
century. On the ground, humanists and scientists are again in need of 
each other. 
IX

X 
SERIES FOREWORD
 To that end, the books in this series will focus on the cultural side of 
science and the scientifi c side of culture. David Morris and I have coined 
the term “biocultural” to indicate this new realm of study and critique. 
In that spirit, Anne Fausto-Sterling’s book helps us think about the 
topics of gender and sexuality in ways that make it impossible to ever 
consider these subjects as independent from a social-cultural matrix. 
Yet, Fausto-Sterling also makes it impossible to think of the very same 
subject as independent from a biological endowment, as well. Th e genius 
of this book is that it exploits the author’s expertise as both a biologist 
and a social-cultural analyst. Given her knowledge of cell biology and 
gender studies, Fausto-Sterling brings to the series a layered, nuanced, 
and complex view of something that many people consider simple. But 
while you may be able to sex a puppy rather easily, the complex role of 
gender in human culture, biology, and psychology needs more investiga-
tion than just a casual glance. Th is book—to the point, humorous, and 
wise—provides the best introduction to the fi eld that I can imagine. 
   Lennard J. Davis 
   Series Editor  

 PREFACE 
 One reason I rarely attend large parties with many strangers is that I 
hate it when people ask me what I do. As soon as I say I’m a biologist, 
my interlocutor winces, falls silent, or murmurs something about having 
done badly in high school biology. I get these responses from highly 
accomplished academics in the humanities and social sciences. As I said, 
I hate this. My conversation partner may think all biology is irrelevant to 
the great philosophical issues of the world—equality, suff ering, hunger, 
etc. Or he or she may feel that biology is an urgent subject, but one he or 
she feels too inadequate to discuss. I, on the other hand, feel that biology 
holds one (not the only—by a long shot) approach to understanding 
critical world issues  and  that anyone interested enough to pay attention 
can learn to read and interpret biology with a suitably critical eye. 
 What do I mean by a suitably critical eye? We encounter many 
misuses of biology—oversimplifi cations of research fi ndings about the 
origins of human sexuality or claims that biological diff erence explains 
diff erences in achievement or other large inequalities. Th is makes it all 
the more important that students of the humanities and the social 
sciences learn a form of biology that provides them with tools to analyze 
these aspects of the world. And so, when Lennard Davis, the general 
editor of the series in which this book appears, wrote me with a proposal 
to write a  short  book on sex and gender for  Th e Routledge Series Integrating 
Science and Culture  I jumped at the chance. 
XI

XII 
PREFACE
 As I understood my task, I was to write a brief treatment about 
biology, sex, and gender; the book was to place our current biological 
knowledge in an historical and cultural framework. Th e aim was to 
provide interested readers with a way to understand and think critically 
about at least some of what they hear in the popular press and in casual 
conversation about sex and gender. Lennard Davis also asked that I 
analyze the state of our knowledge. What do we know? What do we 
think we know? What might we be able to fi nd out in the future? What 
questions might be impossible to answer? And I confess to having a 
secret goal—to convey my own enthusiasm for the study of the biolog-
ical world—the worms and fl ies as well as the humans. 
 Th is book should fi nd a place as a companion text in general science 
courses, introductory biology and psychology courses, gender studies 
courses, and a variety of introductory and more specialized courses in 
psychology, sociology, anthropology, and the humanities. Instructors in 
such courses face certain types of problems. Issues arise that are outside 
of the instructor’s realm of expertise. Or, the standard texts that address 
biology and gender are insuffi  ciently critical or fail to integrate informa-
tion into a broader social and historical context. Or, they talk down to 
the learners (in this case instructor and student alike), using what femi-
nist scholar Donna Haraway calls the God-Trick—speaking from every-
where and nowhere at the same time. Th is book might provide concise 
approaches that would help the instructor and students join together to 
investigate biological aspects of the question of gender together. 
 In the case of the “straight” science courses the comprehensive required 
text is dry, weighs a lot more than the modern laptop, and overwhelms 
students with its presentation of fact after fact. Usually such facts remain 
unattached to what students fi nd important in daily life. Perhaps a short, 
focused book about a topic of great interest to youthful students (sex!!), 
written with a little humor, and a gloss on certain details might help. Th e 
biologists and psychologists will have to be patient with the fact that I 
sometimes use popular language rather than precise scientifi c termi-
nology. Th is is the privilege of the popular science writer. Of course, 
sociologists will want more sociology in this book, anthropologists more 
anthropology, and psychologists more psychology. Th at’s what the 

 
PREFACE 
XIII
Further Reading section at the end of each chapter is for. And, of course, 
diff erent instructors and lay readers are likely to bring some of their own 
strengths to the reading experience. Th ey can fi ll in bits that I left out. 
 In  Sex/Gender: Biology in a Social World I try to build a method of 
analysis that readers can use now and in the future as they consider 
questions of biology. Th e most important tenet is “don’t get stuck trying 
to divide nature from nurture.” Instead, think developmentally. 
Remember that living bodies are dynamic systems that develop and 
change in response to their social and historical contexts. Th is is as true 
for rodents as it is for humans. And appreciate biological diversity. Just 
because rats do gender one way, doesn’t mean that prairie voles or 
Japanese macaques or humans do it the same way. To me, one of the 
wonders of the natural world is its biological diversity. 
 I have striven for a lively read. For this reason some of my chapters are 
very short, making a single interesting point. Others are longer but some-
times with short sections. I emphasize biology, but I tie matters to socio-
logical and cultural processes (although these latter are not the main 
focus of the book). Finally, the chapter sequence is organized roughly, as 
a developmental sequence, based on sex/gender as it unfolds from fertil-
ization through early childhood. At the very end, I turn more topical 
with chapters on human sexuality and on childhood sex diff erences. 
 To access color versions of selected fi gures in this text, readers of the 
electronic version of this book can make use of hyperlinks embedded in 
the URLs in the captions, where indicated. Readers of the traditional, 
print-based version can access the same web pages by referring to the 
URLs and directions given. 
 Last, but not least, I want to acknowledge the generous and prompt 
help from Lennard Davis, series editor, the Routledge editors Steven 
Rutter and Leah Babb-Rosenfeld, and those who reviewed the book: 
Judith Howard at the University of Washington, Sally Raskoff  at Los 
Angeles Valley College, and Marianna Litovich at Wesleyen College. 
Most importantly, my wife Paula A. Vogel enthusiastically read the 
entire manuscript as I produced it and helped me to feel that I was on 
the right track. As with most things in life, I couldn’t do these projects 
without her love and support.  


1
 1 
 A GENDERLESS FUTURE?  
 What were they thinking! In March, 2010 the New South Wales 
(Australia) Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages sent Scottish-
born Norrie May-Welby an immigration certifi cate listing her as 
“sex not specifi ed.” Th e bureaucratic decision to allow May-Welby to 
immigrate without specifying his/her sex or gender came after an 
extended legal battle. As it turned out, May-Welby’s offi  cial genderless-
ness was a way station in a struggle that continues as of this writing. 
Following intense publicity, the Registry backtracked, claiming it did 
not have legal authority to produce a gender neutral certifi cate. 
May-Welby is suing. Moreover, May-Welby is not the only person on 
earth who wishes to live gender free. Reporters Barbara Kantrowitz 
and Pat Wingert suggest that a growing number of people consider 
themselves gender neutral (Kantrowitz & Wingert, 2010). 
 Confusion about gender categories (Male? Female? Neither? Both?) 
seems to be perennially newsworthy. Take the case of the South African 
runner Caster Semenya. During the summer of 2009, she beat the 
women’s 800-meter running record by several seconds. Although her 
achievement remained a good 18 seconds off  the men’s record, her 
breakthrough prompted complaints that Ms. Semenya was really a man. 
An international scandal erupted when the International Association of 

2 
A GENDERLESS FUTURE?
Athletics Federations (IAAF), track and fi eld’s governing body, barred 
her from competition until she completed a gender test. 
 A what? What on earth is a gender test? You might think it is simple 
to tell who is male and who is female. Indeed, sometimes it  is  simple. 
But not always. More than a year into this story the IAAF decided to 
allow Semenya to resume competition. In August of 2010 she won 
handily in women’s races in Berlin, Germany and in June 2011 she came 
in third in competition in Oslo, Norway (“Bolt Blitz in Oslo; Athletics,” 
2011). But the IAAF did  not release the gender test results, rightly 
maintaining that these contain Caster Semenya’s personal and very 
private health information. So we remain in the dark about what a 
gender test actually is and how, in this case, it gave the IAAF the infor-
mation it needed to allow Semenya to resume competition (Caster 
Semenya, 2010). 
 Genderless Australian immigrants. Record breaking runners who 
may not really be women. What then, are we to think about the future 
of gender? Is it really disappearing (I doubt it); should there be more 
than two legal gender categories (possibly); do we know enough about 
sex and gender to deal intelligently with the idea of a genderless future 
(no)? After all, don’t chromosomes that join together at fertilization fi x 
sex and gender for a lifetime (no)? Don’t societies all think (more or 
less) the same way about sex and gender (no)? Have they always thought 
the same way about sex and gender (and no again)? Perhaps there are 
things about sex and gender that we can never know. And if so why can’t 
we know them? Th ese are among the questions this book addresses. 
Perhaps you thought you already knew what sex was, what gender was, 
and all of the essentials about human sexuality. And perhaps so. But in 
this book I start at the beginning with developing embryos and explore 
what we know about sex and gender and how well we know it. Th en, 
based on the knowledge gained, maybe we can look at the future of 
gender, if not defi nitively, perhaps and at least, intelligently.  

3
 2 
 OF SPIRALS AND LAYERS  
 Where Do We Start? 
 Th ere is no right place. Do we begin with the story of boy meets girl (or 
girl buys sperm at a sperm bank?), the development of eggs and sperms, 
or the more traditional moment of fertilization (sperm fuses with egg)? 
No matter what point we choose, we start in the middle of the story of 
sex and gender; from there we can race forward, and end up looping 
back ( Figure 2.1 ). For now, let’s start with a traditional framework, fi ll 
in some of the things we currently know about the biology of sex devel-
opment, and then loop back to off er some interesting tidbits that 
complicate the basic story just a bit. 
 In the 1950s psychologist John Money and his colleagues at Johns 
Hopkins University pioneered the study of sexually ambiguous patients. 
As he worked with children and some adults born into the world with 
unusual combinations of sex markers (testes and a vagina, ovaries and a 
penis, two X chromosomes and a scrotum, and more) Money developed 
a layered model of sex and gender ( Figure 2.2 ). He started with fertil-
ization. Human males produce two kinds of sperm—one with an X 
chromosome plus one each of so-called autosomes, and the other with 
a Y chromosome and one each of the so-called autosomes. Later 
( Chapter 3 ), I will discuss what we know about how the X, the Y, and 

4 
OF SPIRALS AND LAYERS
the autosomes contribute to the development of sex. But for now, let’s 
stay focused on the bigger framework. At the same time that the male 
produces X- or Y-bearing sperm, females, having two X chromosomes, 
produce only one kind of egg—X-bearing with a full set of autosomes. 
Egg and sperm join forces. Th e result is a double set of autosomes plus 
an X and a Y or a double set of autosomes plus two Xs. Voilà! We have 
what Money called  chromosomal sex -layer 1 in the multilayered phyllo 
dough (or for those of Germanic extraction—strüdel) pastry we call 
sex-gender. 
 Usually, about 8 weeks after conception, embryos with a Y chromo-
some develop an embryonic testis and by 12 weeks, those with two Xs 
form embryonic ovaries. Once a developing fetus has gonads (the 
general term for testes or ovaries) it has, by defi nition acquired  fetal 
gonadal sex . Th e fetal gonads quickly get down to business and start 
making hormones important to the embryo’s progress. Again, I will 
circle back with details in the next chapter. But for now, all we need to 
know is that once the fetal gonadal hormones appear we can say that the 
 Figure 2.1   Sex spiral. 

 
OF SPIRALS AND LAYERS 
5
fetus has acquired a  fetal hormonal sex . Fetal hormonal sex contributes 
to the formation of the  internal reproductive sex (the uterus, cervix, 
and Fallopian tubes in females and the vas deferens, prostate, and 
epididymis in males). As the fetus nears the end of its fourth month 
of development, fetal hormones complete their job of shaping the 
external genitalia ( genital sex )—penis and scrotum in males, vagina 
and clitoris in females. By birth, then, baby has fi ve layers of sex. And, 
as we shall see, these layers do not always agree with one another 
(Gilbert, 2010). 
 Figure 2.2   Layers of sex. 

6 
OF SPIRALS AND LAYERS
 But we have only begun to layer. At birth, Money and his colleagues 
pointed out, the adults surrounding the newborn identifi ed sex based on 
their perception of external genital anatomy (genital dimorphism); 
this identifi cation initiated a social response that began the  gender 
socialization of the newborn. Note the hand off  from sex to gender. 
Money and others use gender to designate an individual identity or self 
presentation (Green, 2010; Money & Ehrhardt, 1972). Th ese are always 
structured to be specifi c to a particular culture. For example, in the 
United States a masculine or male-presenting woman would wear pants, 
have short hair, and refrain from using make-up. In contrast to most 
psychologists, many sociologists use gender to refer to social structures 
that diff erentiate men from women (Lorber, 1994). Th ese might 
seem to be relatively innocuous, for example, separate public bath-
rooms, or a requirement that we designate our sex on offi  cial docu-
ments such as passports or driver’s licenses. Or they might really 
restrict one’s freedom, as, for example, laws that forbid women to drive 
or vote. 
 Table 2.1   Lorber’s subdivision of gender 
 As a social institution,  gender is composed of:  
 For an individual,  gender is composed of:  
 Gender statuses: socially recognized 
genders and expectations for their 
enactment behaviorally, gesturally, 
linguistically, emotionally, and 
physically 
 Sex category: individual assigned prenatally, at 
birth, or following reconstructive surgery 
 Gendered division of labor 
 Gender identity: the individual’s sense of 
gendered self as a worker and family 
member 
 Gendered kinship:  the family rights and 
responsibilities for each gender status 
 Gendered marital and procreative status:  
fulﬁ llment or nonfulﬁ llment of allowed or 
disallowed mating, impregnation, childbearing, 
and/or kinship roles 

 
OF SPIRALS AND LAYERS 
7
 Gendered sexual scripts: the normative 
patterns of sexual desire and sexual 
behavior as prescribed for different gender 
statuses 
 Gendered sexual orientation:  socially and 
individually patterned sexual desires, feelings, 
practices, and identiﬁ cations 
 Gendered personalities:  combinations of traits 
patterned by gendered behavioral norms for 
different gender statuses 
 Gendered personality:  internalized patterns of 
socially normative emotions as organized by 
family structure and parenting 
 Gendered social control:  the formal 
and informal approval and reward of 
conforming behavior and stigmatization 
and medicalization of nonconforming 
behavior 
 Gendered processes: “doing gender”—the 
social practices of learning and enacting 
gender-appropriate behaviors, i.e. of 
developing a gender identity 
 Gender ideology: the justiﬁ cation of gender 
statuses, often by invoking arguments about 
natural (biological) difference 
 Gender beliefs: incorporation of, or resistance 
to, gender ideology 
 Gender imagery: the cultural representations of 
gender in symbolic language and artistic 
productions 
 Gender display: presentation of self as a kind 
of gendered person through dress, cosmetics, 
adornments, and permanent and reversible 
body markers 
 Source: Adapted from Lorber (1994: 30–31) 
 I will use “gender” in both senses, but whenever I refer to the body 
and/or individual behaviors, I will use the term “sex.” An individual, 
therefore, has a sex (male, female, not designated, other); but they engage 
with the world via a variety of social, gender conventions. Each indi-
vidual, thus, manufactures a gender presentation that can feed back on 
the individual’s sex, and is interpreted by others using the specifi c gender 
frameworks of an individual’s culture. Gender, then, is defi nitely in the 
eye of the beholder. Sex  and gender presentation are in the body  and 
mind of the presenter. 
 But back to newborns. Th e social response to the genital sex of the 
newborn is intense. Consider two markers—clothing and toys. Artist 

8 
OF SPIRALS AND LAYERS
JeongMee Yoon has engaged in a several year project rendering images 
of children’s pink and blue things. In  Figure 2.3  Yoon presents us with 
Lauren and Carolyn’s pink things and Ethan’s blue things (Yoon, 2006). 
Well, to be honest, if you are holding a print version of this book in your 
hands, the images are in black and white. But if you go to the book’s 
website at  www.routledge.com/cw/fausto-sterling  you can see the full 
color eff ect of these works of art. Th e images hold a lot of information. 
Not only is the intensity of the color scheme striking; noteworthy as 
well is the preponderance of clothing, dolls, and stuff ed animals 
 Figure 2.3     (a) Lauren and Carolyn and Their Pink Things 2006, by JeongMee Yoon ( http://www.
jeongmeeyoon.com/aw_pinkblue.htm ) .
 For color versions of these ﬁ gures please go to  www.routledge.com/cw/fausto-sterling 

 
OF SPIRALS AND LAYERS 
9
among Lauren and Carolyn’s things. Th is contrasts with the tools, sports 
equipment, and trucks in Ethan’s possession. 
 What options do parents have when they start buying or accepting 
gifts for their newborns? Consider the Babies ’r Us website  1  , which cate-
gorizes infant clothing as baby girl, baby boy, or neutral. Whereas the 
main theme of gender neutrality seems to be yellow baby ducks, newborn 
outfi ts for boys sport blue, brown, green, white, or black clothing with a 
monkey or sports themes. Newborn girl outfi ts sport purple, pink or 
pink trimmed, pastel light greens, or white colors with fl ower logos. Th e 
rare neutral infant suit was white with a giraff e logo. 
 Figure 2.3   (b) Ethan and His Blue Things 2006, by JeongMee Yoon (http://www.jeongmeeyoon.com/
aw_pinkblue.htm) .

10 
OF SPIRALS AND LAYERS
 Th e toys section had more overlap in items said to be for either a boy 
or a girl. But the diff erentiation remains clear. Although there are no 
designated gender neutral toys, both boy and girl toy categories featured 
the same Baby Einstein products. But the boys’ page also featured a 
large variety of trucks, and the  New York Yankees ABC My First Alphabet 
Book (2009). To be fair, the girls also had some trucks, albeit in neutral, 
yellow, or “girl-colored,” i.e. pink, vehicles. Other girlie off ers included 
a  Leap Frog Cook and  Play Potsy Toy and a Fischer Price  Little 
People Nativity Playset . Money dryly refers to all this pinkish, bluish 
hullabaloo as “other’s response” but I think it merits a better name: 
 gender fortifi cation . 
 Infants are born to explore the world. Th ey start by assimilating infor-
mation from the senses. Th ey sense touch, warmth, light, and sound. 
Th ey experience hunger and feeding. Th ey hear their own crying and 
experience a caregiver’s response. Th ey respond to the discomfort of a 
wet, full diaper, and experience sensations as an adult cleans, dries, and 
powders their genitals, perineum, and anal area. From these simple 
beginnings infants develop a sense of their own body, a sensory body 
image. Th e anatomy of the external genitalia aff ects this developing 
body image, and this is yet another level of sexual formation— the sex of 
the body image (see  Figure 2.2 ). 
 But wait! Th ere’s more! Money links one more layer of sex to  fetal 
gonadal sex , something he calls brain dimorphism, and I am calling  brain 
sex . I will say at the outset that there is a great deal of argument about 
what brain sex is, whether it is real, if so when it develops, and what it 
might mean for the development of males and females (Fausto-Sterling, 
2000; Fine, 2010; Jordan-Young, 2010), and again I will return to this in 
 Chapter 4 . But Money’s paradigm of brain sex dominates the thinking 
of most scientists who study gender diff erences, and so I put it on the 
table from the beginning. 
 To recap: a newborn is a multilayered sexual creature, the result of 
having a chromosomal sex, a fetal gonadal sex, fetal hormonal sex, a fetal 
internal reproductive sex, a brain sex (of which more later), an external 
genital sex, and, starting from the moment the child leaves the womb, a 
developing body image and social gender fortifi cation. Money and his 

 
OF SPIRALS AND LAYERS 
11
colleagues suggest that this entire list of “sexes” combine to produce a 
youngster’s sense of self as male or female, something they call  juvenile 
gender identity . Finally, at puberty, the gonads which diff erentiated 
during fetal development become active, creating yet another layer—
 pubertal hormonal sex . Th ese “raging hormones” of the pre-teen and teen 
years infl uence the development of erotic sensations and desires ( pubertal 
erotic sex ) and adult sex-diff erentiated anatomy—what Money called 
 pubertal morphological sex . All of these diff erent sexes and identities in 
turn converge to produce  adult gender identity , the sense of self as an 
adult male or an adult female. 
 It’s a neat scheme; a little complicated, to be sure, but still containing 
nice neat lines. All a person has to do is navigate these developmental 
paths and the end result is clear—either a person who is self-evidently 
male, or one who is self-evidently female develops. Nice, until we realize 
that each of the layers can, potentially, develop independently of one 
another. Th is doesn’t happen very often, but when it does, a child can be 
born who is a genuine mixture (sometimes called an intersex)—XX 
with a penis and scrotum, XY with well developed breasts, and other 
examples (Blackless, Charuvastra, Derryck, Fausto-Sterling, Lauzanne, 
& Lee, 2000). What happens to the developing gender identity of 
such people is not totally predictable, a topic to which we return in 
 Chapter 4 . But fi rst, a little more of the basic biology. 
 Further Reading 
 Dreger ,  A. D.  ( 1998 ).   Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex .  Cambridge, MA : 
 Harvard University Press . 
 Epstein ,  Brad M.  ( 2009 ).   New York Yankees ABC My First Alphabet Book. Aliso Viejo, CA: . 
 Michaelson Entertainment . 
 Karkazis ,  K. ( 2008 ).   Fixing Sex: Intersex, Medical Authority and Lived Experience .  Durham, 
NC :  Duke University Press . 
 Kessler ,  S. ( 1998 ).  Lessons from the Intersexed .  New Brunswick, NJ :  Rutgers University Press . 
 Kessler ,  S. J.  , &   McKenna ,  W.  ( 1978 ).   Gender: An Ethnomethodological Approach .  New York : 
 John Wiley & Sons . 
 Lorber ,  J.  ( 1994 ).  Paradoxes of Gender .  New Haven, CT :  Yale University Press . 
 Preves ,  S. E.  ( 2003 ).   Intersex and Identity: the Contested Self .  New Brunswick, NJ :  Rutgers 
University Press . 
 Stoller ,  R. ( 1992 ).  Presentations of Gender .  New Haven, CT :  Yale University Press . 

 3 
 OF MOLECULES AND SEX 
   Variety is the Spice of Life 
 Scholars have written tomes on the subject of variation in animal 
approaches to sex/reproduction (see, for example, Bagemihl, 1999; 
Bell, 2008). Th ere are lizards (and lots of insects) that don’t use 
males at all (Crews & Fitzgerald, 1980). Instead females kick-start 
embryonic development without fertilization, using a process called 
parthenogenesis (literally “virgin birth”). Th ere are insects that have 
three sexes,  1  and there are fi sh that have four diff erent types of sexual 
beings. 
 Take, for example, the bluegill sunfi sh, a common resident of northern 
freshwater lakes and ponds. In the spring males build shallow, circular 
nests and circle repeatedly around the nest rim in order to attract a 
female. When she is enticed, both circle the nest at right angles to one 
another before resting and each depositing his (sperm) or her (eggs) 
contribution to the next generation of bluegills. Fertilization is 
external—females lay eggs in a watery nest and males swim over the 
eggs, layer sperm on top and hope for the best. In the afterglow, the 
females swim off  while the males stay to aerate the nests with their tails, 
guard the eggs and fry, and possibly attract other females. Or at least 
that is the Mother Goose version of the story. 
12

 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX 
13
 In the grown up version there are three types of males: so-called 
parental or bourgeois males that mature late in the game (after age 
7 years), are relatively large, and have display colors. Th ese parental 
males build nests, encourage passing females to lay eggs in the nests, 
fertilize the eggs, and then take care of the resulting off spring. A second 
type—bluegill sneaker males—develop young. Th ey are the smallest 
males, and manage to fertilize eggs by darting in when the bourgeois 
males and females are going at it. All they need do is mix in some of 
their own sperm and, since there are lots of eggs, they manage to gain 
some fertilizations. Finally, satellite males mimic females in order to join 
spawning pairs. When sneaker males grow they can turn into satellite 
males using a developmental pathway that diff ers from that of the large 
bourgeois male (Godwin, 2010; Gross & Charnov, 1980). 
 While some fi sh species have several types of males, others can 
change completely from male to female or vice versa. In itself, this fact 
is astonishing, but even more amazingly, the fi shes’ social context 
controls the transformation. Consider the brightly colored reef fi sh 
called a cleaner wrasse. Th ese smaller fi sh hang out in designated spots 
on coral reefs forming little cleaning stations. Larger fi sh stop by and 
the wrasses clean off  and eat the parasites hanging onto the big fi sh. A 
commensal time is had by all. Th e wrasse groups consist of one or a 
small number of males with a dominance hierarchy and a large group of 
females of diff erent sizes. If the dominant male dies or a mad scientist 
removes it from the group, the largest female senses the change in 
context and in a matter of days it transforms into a reproductively active 
male. Th is fi shy ability to change sex extends to 7 taxonomic families, 27 
orders, and many more species (Godwin, 2010). 
 Although scientists have studied socially determined sex change in 
fi sh since the early 1970s, there is still a lot we don’t know about how it 
works. We  do know that brain signals infl uence the hypothalamus and 
the pituitary gland which in turn notify the gonads that they should 
shift gears. When female wrasses sense the loss of the male their ovaries 
stop functioning, and as the future eggs degenerate, the gonad begins 
making testosterone and other hormones needed to produce a testis, 
and ultimately sperm. But what we don’t know is pretty essential: how 

14 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX
do events in the social sphere become events taking place in an indi-
vidual body? Are the social clues that reorient the nervous system visual, 
auditory, mechanical, or something we haven’t yet conceptualized? Th ese 
questions can certainly be investigated experimentally, and answers will 
provide clues as to how information crosses that border from the outside 
to the inside of an organism. 
 Social interactions determine sex in certain fi sh; O.K. that probably 
seems strange. But in many reptiles it is the temperature at which 
fertilized eggs incubate that selects for either male or female develop-
ment. Just as surprising is how this story diff ers from one species 
to the next. For example, grow the eggs of a red-eared slider turtle 
at 26°C and all the resultant hatchlings are male; grow the eggs at 
31°C and they all come out female. In order to obtain an all female 
clutch of American alligators, (very carefully) obtain eggs and grow 
them either at 30° or at 35°C. Or—still being very careful—grab a 
handful and grow them at 32.5° to 33°C and voilà—you will get all 
males. Finally, consider the leopard gecko. For these lizards, males 
develop at the higher temperatures (31–33°C) and females at the lower 
temperatures (23–28°C). 
 Th e “dazzling array” (Shoemaker & Crews, 2009: 294) of approaches 
to sexual reproduction found in vertebrates is called  primary sex determi-
nation . Many vertebrates—including humans—use chromosomal 
(sometimes called genotypic) sex determination: a heritable genetic 
element attached to a chromosome usually directs development down 
one of two pathways. In humans and many mammals this special element 
is a gene found on the Y chromosome and it pushes the embryo to 
develop in a male direction. Somewhat mistakenly, as we shall shortly 
see, the mammalian Y chromosome is often said to be the sex deter-
mining chromosome, as if it determined  both  maleness and femaleness. 
More accurately, we can say that in most mammals the Y chromosome 
directs male development. In contrast, in birds, which also use a chromo-
somal rather than environmental mode of primary sex determination, 
females are the ones with the “diff erent” chromosome, and female birds 
are said to be ZW while males are ZZ. Here too there is a male sex 
determining factor—this time on the Z chromosome. But fl ipping the 

 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX 
15
switch to activate male development requires two doses of the Z factor 
thus ensuring that ZZ embryos become males and ZW embryos become 
females (Gilbert, 2010). 
 So far then, we have learned that a change in the social structure of a 
group of fi shes or incubation temperature in reptiles can induce a sex 
change or produce extreme skewing of the ratio of males to females (the 
sex ratio). Th e fact that in these organisms the signal to diff erentiate one 
sex or the other does not emanate primarily from sex chromosomes 
does not contradict the idea that chromosomal make-up determines 
sex. Here the signals are physiological and to the extent that chromo-
somes are involved, signals might come from any chromosome, not just 
ones that carry specifi c genes for sexual development. But the environ-
ment of the mother or father can also sometimes change the ratio of 
male to female births in animals (e.g. birds and mammals) with chro-
mosomal sex determination. Remember that both parents produce 
gametes (either a sperm or an egg) which carry autosomes plus a single 
sex chromosome. When sperm and egg fuse, two chromosomes (either 
both the same, or one of each diff erent one) combine and the future is 
predictable. In theory the chances of producing either a male or a female 
is 50–50. In practice, “stuff  happens.” 
 If the truth be told, the number of males vs the number of females 
often deviates from 1:1. In rodents, some of the events leading to such 
deviations have been studied, but there is still a great deal of uncertainty 
about whether the results apply to humans (Cramer & Lumey, 2010; 
Kiely, Xu, McGeehin, Jackson, & Sinks, 1999; Rosenfeld & Roberts, 
2004). For example, mice raised on rich diets produce litters with more 
males than females; fed on a poor diet, the sex ratio drops dramatically, 
with litters so skewed that there were three female pups for every one 
male born (Rivers & Crawford, 1974). In large mammals dominant 
females produce more males, and general stress before or during preg-
nancy leads to a decrease in sons (Rosenfeld & Roberts, 2004). Diet, 
dominance, and stress may all have similar downstream physiological 
eff ects on conception and pregnancy, so what may be at stake is a 
network that rebalances itself depending on environmental input thus 
skewing the sex ratio in one direction or the other. 

16 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX
 While we do not know the specifi c mechanisms by which a mother 
produces more daughters or fewer sons, there are a number of logical 
possibilities:
 1.  post ejaculation the mother’s physiological state could aff ect the 
motility and transport of X-bearing vs Y-bearing sperm, as they 
make their way towards the unfertilized egg. Or, there may be 
nutritional eff ects in the male that harm Y-bearing sperm develop-
ment before ejaculation;  
 2.  oocyte development might vary depending on the mother’s physio-
logical state, leading to the ovulation of an egg that fuses more 
easily with an X-bearing than a Y-bearing sperm;  
 3.  an equal number of XX and XY embryos may start out in the uterus, 
but one type may grow better than the other. In the case of a low 
ratio of males to females, perhaps more of the XY embryos die very 
early in development.  
 No doubt there are other possible variations on the above themes. We 
are not close to understanding the mechanisms leading to a skewed sex 
ratio in animals with chromosomal sex determination. A couple of 
decades of dedicated research in this area would certainly bring greater 
clarity. 
  From Chromosomal Sex to Fetal Gonadal Sex 
 Words matter. Th e phrase “sex determination” suggests that one is talking 
about both male development  and  female development. But often in the 
scientifi c literature the term presages a discussion of male development 
only. For example, in many research papers the genetic factor on the 
mammalian Y chromosome is called the “sex determining factor” rather 
than the “male determining factor.” When this elision occurs, the writer 
may say something to the eff ect that female development happens in the 
absence of a male-determining factor or may fail altogether to mention 
female development. Femaleness then becomes an absence, something 
that happens by default, something that does not merit the same level of 
scientifi c investigation as the more active male process. 

 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX 
17
 Th ere is a history here. Aristotle wrote “Th e female is a female by 
virtue of a lack of certain qualities” (Fausto-Sterling, 2000: 347). Much 
more recently, descriptions of the Oedipal drama (à la Freud) consider 
how the female psyche must accommodate to the absence of a penis, 
while the male must adjust to the fear of its loss and a return to some 
basal, default, female state. Given our rich past of conceptualizing the 
female as a lack or absence, it is probably more than an accident, although 
less than a conspiracy, that, when writing about sex determination, 
scientists slip without noticing into linguistic muddiness. 
 Th e cumulative result of this slippage has been a comparative lack of 
research on female development (Fausto-Sterling, 2000). Knowledge of 
ovarian development lags behind our understanding of the testis, a situa-
tion one group of scientists has called “amazing.” Indeed, as have feminist 
critics since the 1980s (Fausto-Sterling, 1989), today’s researchers 
acknowledge that one reason we still know comparatively little about the 
ovary is that “the prevailing view that ovarian development is the ‘default’ 
state [has] commonly led to an incorrect assumption that no active 
genetic steps need to be taken to specify or create an ovary,” a view that is 
logically untenable given what we know about how genes act during 
development (Wilhelm, Palmer, & Koopman, 2007: 20). Slowly, but still 
very unevenly, scientists have begun to remedy this imbalance in knowl-
edge about male vs female development and at the same time show that 
development and maintenance of the ovary does not rely on a passive 
molecular pathway (Veitia, 2010). A great example can be found in the 
work of Shoemaker and Crews (2009).  Figure 3.1  is a simplifi ed version 
of a diagram found on page 296 of their article. 
 Christina Shoemaker and David Crews, biologists at the University 
of Texas, Austin, divide vertebrate gonad development into two phases 
(Shoemaker & Crews, 2009). Initially, construction proceeds identically 
in chromosomally male and female embryos; the result is a pre-gonadal 
structure sometimes referred to as “equipotential” because it can develop 
in either a male or a female direction. In the older literature this undif-
ferentiated gonad is called the “indiff erent gonad.” 
 In  Figure 3.1  this point in the pathway comprises the base of the Y. 
A number of genetic factors act during this period, presumably as part 

 Figure 3.1   Mammalian gonad formation: tissue development and underlying genetic activities. 
 Note : Genetic events that underlie development of the gonad in mammals. Genes known to act at speciﬁ c developmental time points are listed. Solid lines indicate direct regulation 
of events. Dashed lines represent indirect or not yet completely deﬁ ned relationships. The initials Wt1, SRY, GATA4, Fog2, KTS, IR, Sf1, Fgf9, PDG2, Mis, Sox9, Dhh, Pdgfa, Dax1, Dmrt1, 
Rspo1, Wnt4, Bcatenin, Fst, FoxL2, BMP2, ERb, ERa, each represent speciﬁ c genes acting at the indicated location. Some of these are further explained in the text. 
 For a color version of this ﬁ gure please go to  www.routledge.com/cw/fausto-sterling 

 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX 
19
of equipotential gonad formation. And these factors act both in chro-
mosomal male and chromosomal female embryos. (For linguistic 
simplicity I am writing as if everything always proceeds in the described 
manner. But of course any number of unexpected developments, such as 
a failure of one or more genes to act, or a genetic variant of some sort 
that acts in an unexpected manner, can alter the most frequent develop-
mental pathways.) 
 Once the indiff erent gonadal tissue forms, the gonad begins to 
develop in either a male or a female direction. For years scientists 
searched for the master gene that controls male development (some-
times erroneously called the master gene for sex determination). In 
mammals, the gene fi nally identifi ed after a number of false starts is a 
male-determining factor on the Y chromosome called Sry ( S ex  R eversal 
on the  Y  chromosome). Th e product of the Sry gene binds to a 
control segment of a gene called Sox9 (  S ry-related HMG b ox ), which 
is located on the long arm of chromosome 17 (an autosome). Male 
development requires the actions of both Sry and Sox9 in the correct 
sequence and in the absence of either gene, potential males develop 
instead as females—with one exception: these women have no ovaries 
(Harley, Clarkson, & Argentaro, 2003). Th is points to the fact that a 
critical aspect of female sex determination—the steps that actively lead 
to ovary formation—is still poorly understood. As indicated in the 
diagram, several other genes participate in a reticulated pattern of gene 
activity directed at the formation of a normal testis. Th is is the process 
that sends  fetal gonadal sex in a male direction. And it turns out the 
process runs more like a parliament than an autocratic director. It is 
time for new metaphors. 
 Th e indiff erent gonad develops in a female direction under the infl u-
ence of two genes (with, I suspect, more still to be discovered, since 
research here has lagged behind  2  ). Both the gene  F orkhead b ox protein 
 L2 (FoxL2) and Wnt4 ( W i n gless  t ype MMTV integration site family) 
control the activities of other genes in the ovarian diff erentiation gene 
network. FoxL2 resides on chromosome 3 and Wnt4 is on the 1st auto-
some. In mice missing FoxL2 and Wnt4 chromosomal females develop 
into males. In 2006 a new gene called  R-spo ndin 1 (Rspo1 found 

20 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX
on autosome 1) emerged as a key player in female development. Both 
XX mice and XX humans lacking R-spondin1 activity develop testes 
and internal and external male genitalia even though they lack  Sry , the 
so-called “master gene for male development” (Parma, Radi, Vidal, 
Chaboissier, Dellambra, Valentini, et al., 2006; Tomizuka, Horikoshi, 
Kitada, Sugawara, Iba, Kojima, et al., 2008). 
 Discovering the role of R-spondin1 in ovary development was a 
breakthrough in understanding the relationship between the developing 
male and female gonads. One current hypothesis is that Rspo1 and 
Wnt4 join forces to inhibit Sox9 activity and thus all of the testis diff er-
entiation factors that work downstream of Sox9. It now seems possible 
that Sry activity inhibits Rspo1, thus stopping female development. 
Cell biologists Leo DiNapoli and Blanche Capel note how the discovery 
of the role of R-spondin in ovary determination has changed how 
we frame our understanding of sex determination. Moving from the 
older representation of male development as active and female develop-
ment as passive these scientists write, it seems that “the bipotential 
gonad is the battleground between two active and opposing signaling 
pathways . . .” (DiNapoli & Capel, 2008: 4). 
 So, with the help of these networks of clever molecules that signal 
cells to develop one way or the other, by the 12th week of human devel-
opment human embryos have either actively developing testes or actively 
developing ovaries.  Fetal gonadal sex (a.k.a. primary sex determination) 
is good to go. So good, in fact, that (at least the testes) take on develop-
mental responsibilities by producing fetal gonadal sex hormones.  Fetal 
hormonal sex , in turn, plays a critical role in the development of secondary 
sex determination—the diff erentiation of male or female internal organs 
and, in due time, the diff erentiation of the external genitalia.  
  From Fetal Hormonal Sex to Genital Sex 
 Th e theme of indiff erence, or bipotentiality, courses through the story of 
sexual development. Not only does the gonad itself begin as a bipoten-
tial structure, so too do the accessory ducts, needed to transport sperm 
or eggs, to sustain fetal development, and, generally, to carry out 
the nitty gritty of sexual reproduction. Hormones produced by the 

 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX 
21
developing testes or ovaries select which set of ducts survive early devel-
opment, and infl uence their proper diff erentiation. 
 In both XX and XY embryos, the bipotential gonad develops cheek 
by jowl with a structure called the mesonephros (literally, the middle 
kidney). In early mammalian development, the mesonephros functions 
as an embryonic kidney, but as development proceeds the emergence of 
the more familiar, bean-shaped kidneys (the metanephros) found at 
(and before) birth supplants the mesonephros’ waste-elimination role. 
Th e middle kidneys connect via long ducts to a temporary embryonic 
structure called the cloaca.  3  While each XX and XY embryo has a pair 
of mesonephric kidneys and ducts to match the pair of gonads, the 
cloaca is a single centrally located structure (see  Figure 3.2 ). But (as the 
overexcited TV ad man would yell) wait! Th ere’s more! Each XX and 
XY embryo, at this bipotential stage, sports another set of ducts that sit 
parallel to the mesonephric ducts, and like them, connect centrally to 
the cloaca. Because these lie right next to the mesonephric ducts, anato-
mists call them the paramesonephric ducts (also called the Müllerian 
ducts, after the anatomist who fi rst found them). 
 From Fetal Gonadal Sex to Fetal Hormonal Sex and Th ence (at last) 
to Genital Sex 
 Once the fetal gonads start to function, the double set of ducts begin to 
change. In humans, by about eight weeks, the fetal testis produces two 
critical hormones. Th e fi rst, Anti-Müllerian Factor (AMF), eliminates 
the female developmental option by causing the paramesonephric ducts 
to degenerate. Th e second, fetal testosterone, repurposes the meso-
nephric ducts, infl uencing them to develop into the vas deferens, epidid-
ymis, and seminal vesicle. Th is early expression of  fetal hormonal sex thus 
inhibits female development and encourages male diff erentiation. In 
XX embryos the fetal ovaries start to diff erentiate between eight and 
twelve weeks. Estrogen produced fi rst by the mother and then by the 
fetal ovaries encourages the paramesonephric ducts to develop into the 
oviducts (Fallopian tubes), and where the tubes fuse along the anatom-
ical midline, the uterus, cervix, and upper portion of the vagina form. As 
this female potential develops under the infl uence of  fetal hormonal sex , 

22 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX
 Figure 3.2   Development of male and female internal genital ducts. 
 For a color version of this ﬁ gure please go to  www.routledge.com/cw/fausto-sterling 

 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX 
23
the mesonephric ducts degenerate, possibly due to the absence of 
testosterone. 
 As the embryo establishes  internal reproductive sex (all the aforemen-
tioned ducts and tubes), it starts, in an overlapping time dimension, to 
build  genital sex . Here too, fetal hormonal sex plays a critical role. And 
here too, the fetus starts out indiff erent, or bipotential, with regard to 
the external bits—penis, clitoris, scrotum, and vaginal folds (see  Figure 
3.3 ). In the moment of indiff erence both XX and XY infants have the 
identical phallus. Th e phallus, however, responds to fetal hormonal sex. 
Under the infl uence of androgens such as testosterone or dihydrotestos-
terone, it grows, diff erentiating into a penis. Under the infl uence of 
estrogen the phallus becomes a clitoris. 
 In analogous fashion, the labioscrotal swellings, identical at the bipo-
tential stage, under the infl uence of androgen, fuse along the central 
midline to become the scrotum or they remain open to become the outer 
lips of the vagina. Th e urogenital folds either (when infl uenced by andro-
gens) fuse along the midline, enclosing the urethra and becoming the 
shaft of the penis or remain open and become the inner lips of the 
vagina.  4  It should be noted that knowledge about the molecular details of 
external genital diff erentiation, including the precise role(s) of estrogen, 
remains underdeveloped. Here again, we know less about female than 
male development, and here as well, if researchers choose to investigate 
the details more thoroughly we will learn a great deal more than we 
currently understand. Nonetheless, at the end of this period during which 
external genital sex bifurcates from a bipotential anatomy to either male 
or female, we can say that the fetus has developed  genital sex . 
 With all this bipotentiality going around, the fog surrounding the 
birth of infants with mixed sex may have begun to lift. All that needs to 
happen is that something out of the ordinary switches or derails the 
process of sexual development at one of the levels from chromosomal to 
genital sex. For example, rarely an XY child is conceived who carries a 
genetic mutation that prevents the body’s cells from “seeing” or binding 
testosterone. Even though the fetal gonad produces androgens, the cells 
cannot capture the androgen molecules and thus cannot use them to 
move development in a male direction. Such androgen insensitive XY 

24 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX
 Figure 3.3   The development of the external genitalia from the indifferent (fetal) stage to full 
formation at birth. 

 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX 
25
 Table 3.1   Some common types of intersexuality 
 Name 
 Cause 
 Basic clinical features 
 Congenital 
Adrenal 
Hyperplasia 
(CAH) 
 Genetically inherited 
malfunction of one or 
more of six enzymes 
involved in making 
steroid hormones 
 In XX children, can cause mild to severe 
masculinization of genitalia at birth or later; if 
untreated, can cause masculinization at puberty and 
early puberty. Some forms drastically disrupt salt 
metabolism and are life-threatening if not treated 
with cortisone. 
 Androgen 
Insensitivity 
Syndrome (AIS) 
 Genetically inherited 
change in the cell 
surface receptor for 
testosterone 
 XY children born with highly feminized genitalia. The 
body is “blind” to the presence of testosterone, since 
cells cannot capture it and use it to move 
development in a male direction. At puberty these 
children develop breasts and a feminine body shape. 
 Gonadal 
Dysgenesis 
 Various causes, not all 
genetic; a catch-all 
category 
 Refers to individuals (mostly XY) whose gonads do 
not develop properly. Clinical features are 
heterogeneous. 
 Hypospadias 
 Various causes, 
including alterations 
in testosterone 
metabolism   
 The urethra does not run to the tip of the penis. In 
mild forms, the opening is just shy of the tip; in 
moderate forms, it is along the shaft; and in severe 
forms, it may open at the base of the penis. 
 Turner Syndrome  Females lacking a 
second X chromosome 
(XO) 
 A form of gonadal dysgenesis in females. Ovaries do 
not develop; stature is short; lack of secondary sex 
characteristics; treatment includes estrogen and 
growth hormone. 
 Klinefelter 
Syndrome 
 Males with an extra X 
chromosome (XXY) 
 A form of gonadal dysgenesis causing infertility; after 
puberty there is often breast enlargement; treatments 
include testosterone therapy. 
 
babies are born with highly feminized genitalia and are often identifi ed 
as girls at birth, even though they are chromosomally and gonadally 
male. At puberty, still unable to respond to testosterone, they develop 
breasts and a feminine body shape by responding to the estrogen made 
by their testes. Th ere are many other examples of intersexual develop-
ment (now also called Disorders of Sexual Development, or DSDs), 
some of which I have listed in  Table 3.1 . 
 Finally, then, we have layered the more obvious bits and pieces of sex 
into a proper order of development and into their proper place. But we 
have yet to consider behavior and the brain—that astonishing organ 

26 
OF MOLECULES AND SEX
that underpins our fears, our desires, our interests in particular types 
of partners, our emotions, our styles of courtship, etcetera, etcetera, 
etcetera. Does sex reach into the heart of our brains? Do brains have a 
sex? Read on.  
 Further Reading 
 Bagemihl ,  B.  ( 1999 ).   Biological Exuberance: Animal Homosexuality and Natural Diversity .  New 
York :  St. Martin’s Press . 
 Capel ,  B.  ( 2006 ).  R-spondin1 tips the balance in sex determination .   Nature Genetics ,  38 ( 11 ), 
 1233 – 1234 . 
 Crews ,  David ( 1994 ).  Animal sexuality .   Scientifi c American ,  270 ,  108 – 114 . 
 Gilbert ,  S. F.  , &   Epel ,  D.  ( 2008 ).   Ecological Developmental Biology .  Sunderland, MA :  Sinauer 
Associates . 
 Judson ,  Olivia  ( 2003 ).   Dr. Tatiana’s Sex Advice to All Creation: Th e Defi nitive Guide to the 
Evolutionary Biology of Sex .  New York :  Holt Paperbacks . 
 Mason ,  R. T.  , &   Crews ,  D.  ( 1985 ).  Female mimicry in garter snakes .   Nature ,  316 ( 6023 ), 
 59 – 60 .    

27
 4 
 OF HORMONES AND BRAINS 
 Do Brains Have a Sex? 
 Brain sex? John Money and Anke Ehrhardt proposed the idea decades 
ago. Th ey drew the phrase from studies done on rats, birds, and the 
occasional primate. And the concept has had great staying power. 
Critics, myself included, have launched assaults on its edifi ce, but these 
have been repelled time after time. Today, if you let a computer search 
engine loose on the phrase, link after link turns up. Th ere are books 
titled  Brain Sex . Th ere are self help guides to using knowledge about 
brain sex to advance one’s career. Th ere are theories of primary and 
secondary education based on the premise that boys and girls have 
diff erent brains. And more—YouTube videos by the title, critiques of 
the idea, BBC nature fi lms on the topic. You name it! You can probably 
fi nd it. 
 Th e idea of brain sex has acquired a cultural valence and resonance 
that goes far beyond the scientifi c evidence that supports it. It is, in 
short, a meme,  1  which may explain why mere evidence cannot dislodge 
it from its secure castle. Ben Franklin is alleged to have said that: “One 
of the greatest tragedies in life is the murder of a beautiful theory by a 
gang of brutal facts.” In the pages which follow we will explore the more 
scientifi c accounts of brain sex, evaluating what we do and do not know 
about the topic. Beware. You may witness a gang of brutal facts in action.  

28 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS
 Brain Story I—Th e Genes (in Mice) 
 During the summer of 2010, in an article in the  New York Times , science 
writer Nicholas Wade highlighted recent fi ndings on gene activity in 
the (mouse) brain (Wade, 2010). At fi rst blush, the story does not appear 
even to address the development of brain sex. Th at is, if what we mean 
by brain sex is the development of anatomical and functional brain 
diff erences in male and female fetuses, leading to sex-related diff erences 
in behavior after birth. But following the twists and turns of this complex 
story not only reveals some pretty interesting new science, it also 
demonstrates the memish nature of the idea of brain sex. 
 Th e story starts with Mom and Dad. During the process of producing 
either eggs or sperm, certain genes in each parent are temporarily modi-
fi ed. Modifi ed genes are said to be  imprinted by a chemical addition to 
the control element of the gene. Th is addition inactivates the gene 
during embryonic development. Th e process is called  epigenetic modifi ca-
tion . It is  epi  (over or above the gene) rather than actually genetic; i.e. it 
does not involve a genetic mutation, which would permanently alter the 
gene’s structure. Sometimes imprinting suppresses the activity of a 
particular gene contributed by the mother but not the father. When this 
happens, the embryo must receive a good copy of the gene from the 
father in order to survive.  2  For other genes, the paternal contribution is 
suppressed and maternal gene expression predominates in the embryo 
(see  Figure 4.1 ). 
 When this form of diff erential contribution from egg and sperm was 
fi rst discovered, scientists thought that it applied to only a small number 
of genes. More recent fi ndings in mice, however, show parentally biased 
gene expression for over 1,300 genes. For 347 of these genes, either the 
mother’s or the father’s copy was more actively expressed in particular 
regions of the developing brain (Gregg, Zhang, Butler, Haig, & Dulac, 
2010). Even more intriguing is the fi nding that in the embryonic mouse 
brain, maternally contributed gene expression predominates, but in 
adult mice paternally contributed genes are preferentially active. 
Furthermore—and here the story gets a little dicey in terms of evidence, 
but also fascinating in terms of potential for future research revela-
tions—the parental imprinting eff ects may work diff erently in the brains 

   
Figure 4.1   Mechanics of imprinting. 
 For a color version of this ﬁ gure please go to  www.routledge.com/cw/fausto-sterling 

30 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS
of sons and daughters (Gregg, Zhang, Weissbourd, Luo, Schroth, Haig, 
et al., 2010). 
 Th e popular press presents these complex molecular events as a “tug of 
war” between parental genes. Th e  New York Times  quotes study’s authors: 
“in your brain, your mom and your dad keep telling you what to do . . .” 
(Wade, 2010). While popularizers suggest that parents struggle to gain 
greater infl uence over their off spring, they also imply that in the end the 
confl ict somehow produces diff erent brains in male and female off spring. 
Here the chain of logic gets truly brittle. It is simply unclear how 
diff erential  parental  expression in all fetuses leads to diff erent brain 
function in male vs female  fetal brains and, in turn, to diff erent patterns 
of male and female behavior. Nonetheless, this new work on parental 
imprinting and gene expression in the brain does something pretty 
important: it complicates a simpler, deeply entrenched story that fetal 
hormonal sex produces or causes brain sex diff erentiation.  
  Brain Story II—Hormones (Birds) 
 What  is brain sex? Scientists use the term in three basic ways—
measurable anatomy, brain physiology, and behavioral diff erences attrib-
uted to brain function. None of these are mutually exclusive. Th e most 
obvious is anatomy. For example, in humans, at the level of average 
diff erences between populations males have slightly larger brains than 
females. Such diff erences are not absolute: many men have smaller 
brains than many women, and vice versa. So while size is an example of 
a population-level sex diff erence, it can hardly count as brain sex—if we 
defi ne the latter as something that diff ers between most men and most 
women. If overall size can’t count as brain sex, what about diff erences in 
brain substructure? First, all males and all females have the same basic 
brain parts. However, some may be larger in males than in females, or 
vice versa. 
 Consider the canary. When not busy serving as an early warning 
system for coal miners, the male canary sings his heart out, using a song 
that female canaries don’t sing at all. In a now classic study, behavioral 
biologists Fernando Nottebohm and Arthur Arnold (Nottebohm & 
Arnold, 1976) showed that the specifi c region of the canary brain 

 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS 
31
responsible for the male song was strikingly larger in males than females. 
Furthermore, when they injected females with testosterone, their song 
specifi c region grew and the girls started to sing a version of the missing 
song. Here, then, is direct evidence of something we can call brain sex: 
usually male and female canaries have a large anatomical (size/neuron 
number) diff erence in a specifi c region of the brain; the diff erence 
can be linked to a specifi c function and high concentrations of a sex-
diff erentiated hormone. Furthermore, when the sex that lacks the 
hormone receives it via injection, the cells in the specifi c location 
increase in number under the infl uence of a hormone, and a specifi c 
sex-diff erentiated function appears. 
 But life, and especially natural diversity, is rarely consistent or simple. 
For canaries and a number of other songbirds, more brain “hardware” 
correlates with more singing. Structure precedes function. But the same 
cannot be said for all birds. For example, African forest weaver birds 
have clear male–female anatomical diff erences in specifi c “song control” 
regions of the brain. Yet, males and females sing almost identical 
songs, usually in loving unison. Th is brain sex story is far from a simple 
equation between structure and function. 
 Male and female forest weaver mates sing in unison. Given the earlier 
work on canaries, scientists predicted that their brain anatomy in the 
crucial areas responsible for song production would be identical. But, 
when they looked (remember that gang of facts, assaulting the beautiful 
theory), they found that for both volume and number of neurons, males 
had more than 1.5 times larger structures than females. However, when 
they examined the levels of gene expression for several genes known 
for their specialized activity in vocalization areas of the brain, they 
found what amounts to an inverse image of the anatomical diff erences: 
while the male brain regions for singing were larger and had more cells, 
song-crucial gene activity in the female was much greater than in the 
male. In eff ect the gene action advantage canceled out the size advan-
tage leading to equal song production abilities (Gahr, Metzdorf, 
Schmidl, & Wickler, 2008; Gahr, Sonnenschein, & Wickler, 1998). 
 Th is seems pretty messy. Why not just have equally sized brain struc-
tures for equally performed functions? We don’t know for sure, but 

32 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS
researchers have suggested some hypotheses that depend on the forest 
weavers’ evolutionary history. What if, for example, the forest weavers 
descended from ancestors that were more like canaries in terms of song 
patterns? Th at is, the males sang and the females didn’t. In these ances-
tors, a canary-style pattern of brain structure existed. Perhaps due to 
small natural variations in testosterone production, female singing 
started to evolve and duet-facilitated pairing slowly resulted; if there 
were strong reproductive advantages to couples in which both sexes 
sang together (birds that sing together swing together?), how might 
females ramp up their singing capacity? Natural selection for ever-
increasing testosterone levels probably wouldn’t have worked. First, in 
canaries long periods of high testosterone actually start to inhibit vocal 
development. Second, long periods of elevated testosterone would prob-
ably interfere with female reproductive abilities. So how else could 
selection for increased female singing act? Plausibly, by favoring 
increased activity levels for critical genes involved in song production. 
Th is would involve increased frequencies of subtle mutations in the 
population, or epigenetic changes at the gene regulatory sites governing 
the critically acting genes. In short, there is more than one way to get a 
bird to sing. Future research will certainly test this and other hypoth-
eses, so stay tuned. 
 Brain Story III—Th e Rodents 
 As with humans, when the bipotential gonad transforms into a testis in 
XY rodents, it starts to pump out testosterone. In rodents we know that 
this hormone makes its way to the brain, and that in some parts of the 
brain, enzymes convert it to estrogen. Th e estrogen, in turn, has proven 
developmental eff ects on two regions of the brain—small centers within 
the hypothalamus, and the preoptic area (see  Figure 4.2 ). Th ese two regions 
are critical sites for regulation of physiological functions related specifi cally 
to reproduction—i.e. regulation of the patterns of testis function vs ovarian 
development and cyclical ovulation, and of hormonal regulation of preg-
nancy, delivery, and lactation. So far so good, and not too surprising. 
 In the late 1950s a germinal paper appeared that expanded the concept 
that fetal hormones aff ected the development of reproductive physiology, 

 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS 
33
to the more general idea that fetal hormones “organized” brain develop-
ment in ways that might aff ect a wide variety of sex- diff erentiated 
behaviors (Fausto-Sterling, 2000; McCarthy & Konkle, 2005). Th e 
specifi c studies, performed on guinea pigs (I know, they are not 
technically rodents, but get thrown into the rodent basket to simplify 
discussion), examined mounting behavior (in males) and receptive back-
arching (lordosis) in females; thus this most conclusive evidence of 
prenatal brain organization extended still to only very specifi c behaviors 
related to reproduction. Since 1959 a very large number of studies have 
invoked the idea that prenatal hormones organize the fetal brain (i.e. 
produce  brain sex ) and that such fetal “organization” forms the basis for a 
wide variety of diff erent behaviors and abilities. Th is includes claims that 
human (and rodent) males and females have diff erent mental abilities 
because they were exposed to diff erent hormonal cocktails  in utero . 
 While in the ensuing 50 odd years we have learned an enormous 
amount about the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which 
hormones aff ect nervous tissue development (Morris, Jordan, & 
Breedlove, 2004; Simerly, 2002), evidence that these hormones produce 
specifi c brain changes related to non-reproductive behaviors, even in 
 Figure 4.2   Classic model of the organizational and activational effects of steroids on development: 
reproduction parameters .

34 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS
rodents, remains weak (Fine, 2010; Jordan-Young, 2010; McCarthy & 
Konkle, 2005; Morris et al., 2004). Two University of Maryland-based 
neuroscientists, M. M. McCarthy, and A. T. Konkle (2005) argue force-
fully that “there has been an increasing tendency to equate ‘sex diff er-
ences’ with ‘sex dimorphisms’.” By “dimorphism,” they mean large 
diff erences that have little overlap (e.g. the diff erence in the song region 
of the brain in male and female canaries), be they behavioral or anatom-
ical. Th e more commonly used phrase “sex diff erence,” however, refers to 
small average diff erences between two groups, with considerable overlap 
(e.g. the diff erences found between males and females on language 
ability performances on college test scores). (As an illustration, we can 
think of a dimorphism as being analogous to the diff erence in size 
between a chihuahua and a Saint Bernard (see  Figure 4.3 ). Not much 
 Figure 4.3   (a) Comparing chihuahuas to Saint Bernards. (b)  Comparing huskies to German 
shepherds .
 Source: Alyce Santoro for the author .

 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS 
35
overlap in size there. On the other hand, German shepherds are on 
average somewhat larger than huskies, but there is quite a bit of size 
overlap.) While there are well established examples in rodents and birds 
of brain sex dimorphisms, the strong cases all have something to do 
with reproduction—the one place where we might expect it. But still, if 
not rodents, then maybe primates show brain sex that governs a wide 
variety of non-reproductive behaviors. 
 Some “older work,” that is work that is well known and has been in 
the literature for a good 20 years, illustrates certain of the conceptual 
problems we face in trying to pinpoint sex diff erences in neural tissue 
that function in the cognitive or sensory parts of the brain rather than 
being primary in reproductive function. Th ere are lots of studies of sex 
diff erences in the brains of lab rats. In most cases the rats are raised to 
be general issue. After they are weaned they are isolated in wire cages 
and all fed and watered alike. Th ere is not much to do in those cages. 
But what happens if they are raised in an enriched environment? (Th ink 
how diff erent the experience of a wild rat must be.) 
 In the 1980s experimental psychologist Janice Juraska started 
comparing the brains of rats raised in the standard isolated way 
(IC=Isolated Condition) with those raised in an enriched environment 
(EC=Environmentally Complex). Once weaned, these latter rats got to 
live in a group home with about a dozen rats of the same sex. Not only 
that, every day Juraska removed the previous day’s toys and put in 
diff erent ones. Th en she compared anatomical diff erences in the nerve 
cells of males and females raised under either the IC or EC conditions. 
She specifi cally looked at non-reproductive areas of the brain—the 
cerebral cortex, and the corpus callosum. Since the general take home 
message—environment aff ects sex diff erences—was the same for each 
brain region we only need to see her results for the hippocampus to get 
the big lesson (Juraska, 1991). 
 Th e hippocampus plays an important role in spatial navigation and 
long term memory and has been invoked to explain alleged diff erences 
in spatial ability in rodents and in humans. (I say “alleged” because there 
is disagreement about the existence or at least the origins of such diff er-
ences.) Juraska took rats at weaning and housed them in either EC or 

36 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS
IC environments for a month, until they reached puberty. She then 
measured the degree of branching of individual hippocampal neurons. 
Th e degree of branching provided a measure of how well connected 
each neuron was with other neurons. In the IC conditions there was a 
clear sex diff erence: neurons from males were more highly branched 
than ones from females. Th e diff erences were of the husky–German 
shepherd size, 1.1 to 1.2 times as much branching in the (IC) male 
compared to the (IC) female brains. 
 When Juraska compared the hippocampus of EC rats there was a 
similar sized sex diff erence, but with a surprising twist. Th is time the 
females had more highly branched neurons than the males! Will the 
real sex diff erence please stand up? Well, of course, both sex diff erences 
are real, but they only apply to the environment in which the rats grew 
up. Th e lesson, then, for these studies of sex diff erences in the anatomy 
of non-reproductive brain regions is twofold. First, the size of the diff er-
ences is considerably smaller than diff erences found in brain regions 
governing reproduction. Second, the direction of diff erence changes 
dramatically depending on the rearing environment. 
 Juraska also wondered whether and how hormones might be involved 
in producing the sex diff erences. She found that for the males, testos-
terone probably suppresses the ability of their hippocampal neurons to 
respond to the enriched environment. Th e possible role of estrogen in 
the neuronal branching is less clear and she concludes that we are still 
far from understanding the role of hormones in the sexual diff erentia-
tion of this and other regions of the brain.  
 Brain Story IV—Humans 
 Sex-related development in the rodent nervous system depends on 
particular mixes of hormone, age, strain and species, maternal attention, 
and rearing environment. Is this also true for humans? In rodents, no 
matter how complex the story is, scientists conduct controlled experi-
ments. Th ey manipulate variables, removing gonads, adding in hormones; 
they raise animals in impoverished or enriched environments and cross 
foster pups between anxious or calm mothers. Because we have high 
ethical standards for the conduct of research on human subjects, 

 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS 
37
however, none of this can we willfully do in humans. Instead we resort 
to so-called “quasi-experiments.” In a true experiment investigating the 
eff ects of prenatal hormones on human brain development, scientists 
would randomly assign subjects to receive particular hormone exposures 
and would follow their development over a lifetime. Since this would be 
unethical, scientists instead rely on less robust evidence. Th ey stitch 
together information from developmental accidents—hormonal expo-
sures due to medicines ingested during pregnancy and the like. 
 In a quasi-experiment much is unknown. Usually we do not know the 
dose of hormone exposure, nor its exact timing and duration. In humans, 
genital and reproductive structures develop fairly quickly and early in 
fetal development. Th e human brain, however, develops slowly but 
continuously throughout fetal development. Th e baby arrives with some 
basic shelving—the parts of the brain (cerebrum, cerebellum, etc.) are 
fl eshed out and there are many nerve cells (neurons). But the nerve cells 
still need a lot of refi nement. For one thing—relative to a 5 year old—
they are poorly connected. After birth, and for the next fi ve years the 
human brain triples or quadruples in size, mostly because those cells 
already present at birth become more and more complex and 
interconnected. 
 Here’s one example: nerve cells (neurons) use specialized structures 
called synapses to transmit signals to one another. Th e more synapses 
in a given space, the more information can pass back and forth and 
the more complex the transmission networks. In human newborns 
many parts of the brain start off  with a small density of synapses. 
By 3 months synapse density doubles, and by 3.3 years it peaks 
at three times the starting density ( Figure 4.4 ). Another way to look 
at the development of cells in the brain is to measure how bushy 
individual neurons get. Th is bushiness develops as individual cells 
branch to form more and more cell connections (via those aforemen-
tioned synapses). Again, the more prolifi c the branching, the greater the 
complexity of the nervous system and the more complex an infant’s 
possible behaviors. In newborns individual nerve cells are pretty straight. 
By adulthood there is an exuberance of branches—as much as 800 times 
more than at birth. 

   
Figure 4.4     Drawings of the nerve cells and their connections in the fusiform gyrus of the cerebral cortex at birth, 3, 6, and 15 months. This region of the brain 
is involved in processing color information, face and body recognition, word recognition, and within-category identiﬁ cation. 
 (a) Neonate fusiform gyrus, (b) Three-month fusiform gyrus, (c) Six-month fusiform gyrus, (d) Fifteen-month fusiform gyrus  

 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS 
39
 With increased synapsing and branching comes enormous possibility. 
Consider the improvement in vision, the development of motor skills 
(walking, holding a fork and eating, threading a needle), language, and 
all sorts of independent behaviors that emerge as an infant grows from 
total dependency into self suffi  ciency, and then imagine the elaboration 
of behavioral masculinity and femininity in this same developmental 
context  . 
 What, then, can a quasi-experiment tell us about prenatal hormones 
and possible sex diff erences in brain structure or function? Consider the 
many studies of girls born with a genetic anomaly called Cortical 
Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH). Due to an enzyme malfunction, the adre-
nals of CAH girls make unusually large amounts of androgen, starting 
midway through fetal development. Even though these girls have 
ovaries, the adrenal androgens masculinize their genitals, sometimes to 
such a degree that these XX infants with fully female internal plumbing 
can be mistaken for boys at birth. Th e adrenal malfunction, however, 
leads to an acute medical crisis, and in the ensuing medical response 
even the highly male-appearing XX babies are identifi ed as girls. Once 
so labeled, they receive hormone treatment that reduces the high 
androgen levels. Usually they also undergo genital surgery to make their 
genitals appear more female-like (Fausto-Sterling, 2000). 
 Here is the quasi-experiment. Most likely, adrenal testosterone trav-
eled through the fetal circulatory system, thus exposing the developing 
fetal brain to unusually high levels of testosterone, although we don’t 
know exactly how high the exposure was or when it began and even if it 
was continuous once it started. We also know that due to medical inter-
vention high testosterone exposure stopped shortly after birth, that at 
fi rst there was some confusion about the sex of the infant, and that there 
was considerable medical attention including ongoing hormonal medi-
cation and usually genital surgery all in the fi rst 1–2 years of life. Th e 
question: does the early exposure to high levels of androgen aff ect the 
play behavior of these children, and can we attribute any diff erences to 
the eff ects of prenatal testosterone on the brain? 
 And the answer (drum roll please, wait while I open the envelope . . .) 
is—sort of, maybe, possibly? Play, of course, involves several behaviors 

40 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS
including general energy expenditure, and the types of toys or games as 
well as the playmates a child chooses. A perusal of 18 studies of play 
behavior in CAH girls at fi rst looks very impressive. Fourteen of them 
report more masculine behavior in the CAH girls compared to controls. 
(Controls are often unaff ected sisters.) However, the results become 
more confusing when divided up by domain. For example, CAH girls 
do not particularly prefer playing with boys (compared to controls) 
(Berenbaum & Snyder, 1995; Jordan-Young, 2010). Researchers have 
also come up empty-handed when looking for activity diff erences 
between CAH and normal girls. For example, when psychologist 
Melissa Hines and her co-workers observed sex diff erences in what is 
commonly call rough and tumble play (school-age boys do more of it 
than girls), they found no diff erences between CAH girls and unaf-
fected controls (Hines & Kaufman, 1994). Finally, despite some early 
reports, there do not seem to be any reliable diff erences in dominance, 
high energy play, and assertiveness between CAH girls and unaff ected 
controls (Dittman, Kappes, Kappes, Börger, Willig, & Wallis, 1990). 
Th e one consistent fi nding has been that CAH girls prefer more mascu-
line toys (trucks and blocks) than controls and are a bit less likely to play 
with feminine toys such as dolls or cooking implements (Hines, 2009; 
Jordan-Young, 2010). 
 So, of all the play behaviors examined, toy choice correlates with 
CAH in girls. Is this good evidence that androgen overproduction  in 
utero is the cause? Again, let’s return to the nature of the quasi-experi-
ment. If these were rats, experimenters could “sacrifi ce” them at the end 
of the experiments and examine their brains. But these are children, 
beloved of their parents, with all of the human rights society aff ords. So 
no peeking at the brain. Instead, researchers try to imagine the possible 
causes of the correlation and then argue for or against each possibility. 
Th e last cause standing, as it were, is designated as the real cause. Th is is 
where all the arguing starts. And not only will it not end, it can’t end, 
unless in the future we fi nd a clear, non-invasive way to study the fi ne 
details of brain anatomy and physiology on living humans. 
 But let’s get a fl avor of the possibilities, as so beautifully proposed and 
elaborated by Rebecca Jordan-Young (2010).

 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS 
41
 Attitude 1 : Prenatal hormones produce sex diff erences in the brain. 
Many scientists fi nd this to be the most economical explanation. 
Th ere are several counter arguments, however. For example, since 
other hormones (e.g. cortisone) are also disrupted in fetuses with 
CAH, perhaps it is not testosterone per se but some other aspect of 
the disease that contributes to the altered toy preference. Or, maybe 
the hormone eff ects are indirect, i.e. they don’t change the brain but 
some other aspect of development such as motor skills or 
temperament.  
 Attitude 2 : Th e correlation of toy preference and CAH results from 
social responses to the developmental disorder. Proponents of the 
prenatal hormone explanation have tried to assess whether parents 
behave diff erently to CAH girls than to unaff ected sisters. Th e 
measures used in such assessments either involve retrospective 
questionnaires or direct observations in which the observers know 
which children are CAH and which are not. Each of these 
approaches is fl awed, either by relying on memory of events in 
which the parents have a heavy emotional investment, or by making 
observations without a blind or double blind experimental struc-
ture. Some proponents of Attitude 2 suggest that the fact that CAH 
girls have been under intense medical treatment and have possibly 
had early genital surgery has in some way aff ected the development 
of toy preference (Kessler, 1998). To assess this possibility other 
types of control comparisons would need to be made.  
 Attitude 3 : Prenatal hormones infl uence the development of certain 
traits, but they are far from the sole or direct cause. One study (not 
a quasi-experiment, but a correlational experiment studying normal 
role variability) reported a correlation between more masculine 
gender role development in girls and maternal testosterone 
measured during pregnancy. But the correlation accounted for only 
2 percent of the variability in gender role behaviors for the girls they 
studied. Although the authors emphasize the importance of the 
relationship, they also point out both that it is small, and not neces-
sarily causal or due to a direct eff ect on brain development (Hines, 
Golombok, Rust, Johnston, & Golding, 2002).  

42 
OF HORMONES AND BRAINS
 Th e point is that quasi-experiments (and there are many more; the 
CAH example is just one example) provide informative data. Th ey are 
worth doing because they represent one of only a few sources of infor-
mation specifi cally derived from human development. But by their very 
nature, the interpretation of results from quasi-experiments remains 
open to ongoing debate (Fine, 2010). One recent scientifi c review 
summed up the diffi  culty: “Th e complexity of human behavior, which is 
powerfully shaped by social infl uences, makes it diffi  cult to answer ” the 
question of whether prenatal testosterone accounts for behavioral diff er-
ences between men and women (Morris et al., 2004: 1038). But we do 
know that at birth the surrounding adults use external genital sex to 
identify new babies as boys or girls. And, according to John Money’s 
developmental story, it is this knowledge (possibly combined with 
eff ects of prenatal hormones) that leads to the next step—the develop-
ment of gender identity. 
 Further Reading 
 Hines,  M. ( 2005 ).  Brain Gender .  Oxford:   Oxford University Press . 
 Jordan-Young,   R. M.  ( 2010 ).   Brainstorm: Th e Flaws in the Science of Sex Diff erences .  Cambridge, 
MA :  Harvard University Press . 
 Schulkin,  J.  ( 2004 ).  Bodily Sensibility: Intelligent Action .  Oxford:  Oxford University Press.  
To watch a great set of videos on the normal development of the human brain, you can access 
and explore the following website:  http://changingbrains.org.  

43
 5 
 AM I A BOY OR A GIRL?—THE 
EMERGENCE OF GENDER 
IDENTITY  
 Learning from Quasi-Experiments 
 In their early work, Money and colleagues treated gender identity as if 
it formed without biological infl uence. By 1972, in their classic book 
 Man and Woman, Boy and Girl , Money and his colleague Anke Ehrhardt 
were less certain of the idea of total plasticity, but still emphasized the 
high degree of malleability in gender identity formation in the fi rst two 
years of life (Money & Ehrhardt, 1972). Regardless of what combina-
tion of biological and social forces contributed to gender identity forma-
tion, Money and Ehrhardt believed that gender identity became fi xed at 
some point around 2 years of age. Th eir concept of early identity fi xation 
became the underpinning for the view that “corrective” surgery for chil-
dren born with ambiguous genitalia needed to be done swiftly. In more 
recent years, many have criticized the practice of early surgery (Dreger, 
1998a, 1998b; Fausto-Sterling, 2000; Kessler, 1998). 
 Money’s beliefs about the social infl uences on gender identity forma-
tion held remarkable sway for several decades. One scientist who consis-
tently challenged his point of view was Milton Diamond. He emphasized 
the idea that fetal gonadal hormones infl uenced the fetal brain to produce 
“brain sex”; for Diamond (and others) fetal hormonal sex not only led to 
diff erent interests in boys and girls (see discussion in  Chapter 4 ), even 
more profoundly, fetal hormones preconditioned the brain so that under 

44 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL?
most circumstances gender identity itself formed consistently with all of 
the previous events of sexual development (Diamond, 1965). Th e most 
extreme statement of this point of view eliminates altogether the role of 
gender reinforcement from surrounding adults or of forming body image. 
Some scientists believe that the correct brain sex alone, formed before 
birth, leads to proper gender identity formation. As development 
proceeds into the postnatal period, the child starts to manifest his or her 
gender identity. 
 For decades Diamond could not obtain a wide hearing for his ideas, 
but all that changed when (due to Diamond’s eff orts) it became clear 
that Money had cooked the books on one of his key pieces of evidence—
the claim that a normally formed XY boy had been successfully trans-
formed into a girl with a female gender identity following reconstructive 
surgery and careful instructions to the parents to rear “him” as a girl. 
(Th is unlikely process was necessitated by a botched circumcision 
that destroyed the infant boy’s penis (Colapinto, 2001; Diamond & 
Sigmundson, 1997; Fausto-Sterling, 2000).) Th is is, of course, the 
famous Joan/John case, fi lled with personal tragedy and high drama and 
sensationalized in popular books (Colapinto, 2001). 
 John Money’s downfall ushered in an almost complete swing of the 
nature–nurture pendulum. Claims of biological determination of gender 
identity formation ascended while the idea that socialization contrib-
uted importantly to gender identity formation became subject to ridi-
cule. How, then, does the evidence stack up today? In their prescient 
1978 book, Kessler and McKenna developed a table to assess the rela-
tionship between often-accepted biological factors and the develop-
ment of gender. Here I acknowledge their infl uence as I redraw the 
table to focus on gender identity and incorporate more recent biological 
and medical fi ndings ( Table 5.1 ). 
 First, Money was right that chromosomal sex, gonadal sex, internal 
reproductive organs, external genitalia, and pubertal hormones are not 
direct determinants of gender identity. Th e extensive study of individ-
uals for whom gender identity and one or more of these biological 
formations is discordant makes this quite clear. Th us, most XY indi-
viduals (who also have testes) who are completely insensitive to their 

 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL? 
45
own androgens develop a female gender identity (androgen insensi-
tivity, in  Table 5.1 ). Similarly, in extreme cases of congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (androgen overproduction  in utero ) XX individuals may 
develop a male gender identity despite having ovaries and a uterus. Th e 
idea that prenatal hormones aff ect brain development in some manner 
that infl uences gender identity formation remains a favorite hypothesis 
despite a lack of direct evidence or the elucidation of a specifi c develop-
mental pathway to support it. 
 In the absence of direct evidence the prenatal hormone hypothesis 
takes the following form: the fetal gonad produces hormones that aff ect 
brain development in some unspecifi ed manner. Th e assumption is that 
the brain produces gender identity. In the most extreme version, there 
are no social infl uences on brain identity development. On other render-
ings, the hormones are understood to “predispose” the brain to develop 
a particular gender identity, although what the nature of such a 
 Table 5.1   Biological factors and gender identity development: what do we know? 
 Biologists’ criteria for gender 
I.D. determination 
 Relationship 
 Evidence from quasi-experiments 
 Chromosomes 
 No 
 Androgen insensitivity syndrome 
 Gonads 
 No 
 Turner syndrome 
 Internal reproductive organs 
 No 
 Turner syndrome 
 Prenatal hormones 
 Possible 
 No direct evidence 
 External genitalia 
 No 
 Transsexuals 
 Pubertal hormones 
 No 
 CAH assigned as male at birth 
 Other 
 Under debate 
 Cloacal exstrophy 
 Childhood gender identity disorder 
 Adult transsexual narratives 
 Brain studies of adult transsexuals 
 Finger length ratios 

46 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL?
predisposition might be is unclear. Th ose who believe strongly in a 
hormone-brain-identity nexus have quasi-experiments to support their 
case. Here we examine two of these—the study of gender assignment 
and acceptance in children born with various disorders of sexual devel-
opment and the study of childhood gender dysphoria. 
 Psychologist Melissa Hines and her colleagues studied the gender 
identity of adult women and men with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
Unaff ected male or female relatives served as controls. Th e study subjects 
fi lled out questionnaires that asked them to remember what kinds of 
toys they played with during childhood, what their adult love lives and 
fantasies consisted of, and how satisfi ed they were living as males or 
females. We will focus on the last of these questions. In psychology you 
are what you measure. Professor Hines and her colleagues measured 
core gender identity by asking the questions listed in  Table 5.2 . Th ere 
are three distinct aspects of their query: do their subjects enjoy being a 
person of his or her own sex, do they wish they were the other sex, and 
do they psychologically believe they  are the other sex? (Hines, Brook, & 
Conway, 2004). 
 Table 5.2   Questionnaire on core gender identity 
 Answer “always, almost always, most of the time, about half, only some, almost never, never” to 
indicate the degree to which you agree or disagree with the following statements: 
 1.  During the  past 12 months , my behavior has been what most people in this country consider 
appropriate for my sex; 
 2.  During my  lifetime , my behavior has been what most people in this country consider 
appropriate for my sex; 
 3.  During the  past 12 months , I have enjoyed being a person of my sex; 
 4.  During my  lifetime , I have enjoyed being a person of my sex; 
 5.  During the  past 12 months , I have wished I were a person of the opposite sex; 
 6.  During my  lifetime , I have wished I were a person of the opposite sex; 
 7.  During the  past 12 months , I have thought I was psychologically a person of the 
opposite sex; 
 8.  During my  lifetime , I have thought I was psychologically a person of the opposite sex. 

 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL? 
47
 During the year preceding the administration of the questionnaire, 
CAH women scored signifi cantly higher (i.e. less satisfi ed) on the three 
types of gender identity questions than did the control women. Two 
things about this. First, the diff erence was large but overlapped by about 
57 percent. Second, to measure Gender Identity Disorder (GID) they 
lumped together diff erent types of questions, even though the questions 
are not all equally about gender identity. Th e last question is the most 
focused on actual identity, i.e. believing oneself to be a male. Th e fi rst 
might be understood to focus on happiness with gender roles (as 
opposed to identity) and the second could be a response to perceived 
advantages of being male rather than female. Taken together, Hines and 
colleagues conclude that “women with CAH reported weaker identifi -
cation as females.” (Hines et al., 2004: 78). Since, however, we don’t 
know the results of each of the separate questions, it remains unclear 
whether this means that early androgen exposure masculinized gender 
identity—the sense of oneself as female—or merely increased dissatis-
faction with a more feminine role. Th e results of this quasi-experiment 
are suggestive, but not conclusive. Does fetal androgen exposure “set” 
later gender identity? Probably not defi nitively, or all the CAH women 
would believe themselves to be men. Does early testosterone exposure 
infl uence later gender identity formation? Possibly, via pathways that 
are likely to be indirect. 
 In addition to the study of CAH women, three rare conditions, 
cloacal exstrophy of the bladder, penile agenesis (failure of the penis to 
develop), and traumatic loss of the penis at a very young age (Meyer-
Bahlburg, 2005) provide us with information about the development 
of gender identity. Cloacal exstrophy is a rare birth defect in which 
infants are born without external genitalia and with other malforma-
tions of the bladder and surrounding tissue. Th is used to be a lethal 
condition, but in recent years surgeons have successfully reconstructed 
such children, usually shaping them as females. For 46 XY patients 
this has meant surgical feminization, removal of the testes, and assigning 
the infants as females. So here is the quasi-experiment. How successful 
have these female reassignments of XY infants who  probably  developed 

48 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL?
with male prenatal hormonal sex been? Th e assumption is that these 
XY children were exposed to androgens prenatally but since we 
don’t know what caused the cloacal exstrophy, we can’t be sure that 
this assumption is correct. Still, the logic for this quasi-experiment is: 
if fetal hormonal exposure determines gender identity, then assigning 
these XY infants to be raised as girls should not work. If other factors 
(social and/or biological) contribute importantly to gender identity 
formation, then such children can succeed in developing a female gender 
identity. 
 Meyer-Bahlburg reviewed the cases of XY children with cloacal 
exstrophy who had been assigned and raised as either girls or boys. Of 
51 patients with early female gender assignment, 33 were still living as 
females, 11 were living as males, and seven had expressed wishes to 
become male. Male-assigned and raised patients (279 to date) all were 
still living as males at the time of publication. One was starting to 
express a desire to become female. Many of these patients are still young, 
and their choices may well change as they progress through adulthood 
(Meyer-Bahlburg, 2005). 
 An update by Dr. William Reiner, the researcher whose work Meyer-
Bahlburg cites, contains the following information: in his series of 60 
people (two of whom died at aged 16): 60 percent have transitioned to 
male and 40 percent remain female (Reiner, 2010: personal communi-
cation). Th ree remain homebound with their parents due to health 
issues and one of these transitioned to male spontaneously at age 18, 
one tried to transition at age 9 but was rebuff ed by her parents, and 
one who was told her medical history at age 12 years, now about 20, 
remains female. Only four of the other remaining females know 
anything about their genetics or birth history. Some of the reasons the 
adults gave for transitioning was that it made sense to them (#1), that 
they fi t in better by transitioning (#2), and that it was easier to approach 
girls (women) as a male, which they identifi ed with anyway—and that 
apparently turned out to be true (the ease of approaching, that is). 
 One result from Reiner’s studies is especially worth noting. In all of 
his cases of XY children born with cloacal dystrophy—those who 
remained as women as well as those who chose to become males—none 

 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL? 
49
have expressed sexual attraction to other males. We don’t know 
enough about the possible  in utero causes of cloacal dystrophy to off er 
serious hypotheses about why this might be so. But for this group of 
60 people, being chromosomally male seems strongly linked to a later 
expression of male heterosexual desire. As the future study of gender 
identity and sexual orientation unfolds, this factoid is worth keeping 
in mind. 
 Th e sample sizes for cases with penile agenesis or traumatic loss are 
small. But when Meyer-Bahlburg adds these results to the cloacal 
exstrophy studies, the following picture emerges: 69 percent of the 
female-assigned XY children of childhood age (including 7 percent 
who expressed desires to change sex) lived as females; 91 percent of the 
adolescent aged children (including 23 percent who wished to change 
sex) lived as females; in adulthood fewer—65 percent (including 18 
percent who wished to transition to male) lived as women. By contrast 
all XY patients, in all age groups, who were assigned and raised as males, 
chose to remain male. Meyer-Bahlburg concludes that the data do not 
indicate full biological determination of gender identity, either by 
prenatal hormones or genetic or other factors. He concludes that “gender 
assignment and the concomitant social factors have a major infl uence 
on gender outcome” (Meyer-Bahlburg, 2005: 432).  
  Learning from Developmental Psychology 
 If Meyer-Bahlburg is right, then looking at postnatal development can 
teach us a lot about gender identity formation. Our fi rst clues come 
from a simple timeline, constructed by developmental psychologists 
over years of careful study and clever experimentation. Consider the 
information presented in  Figures 5.1  and  5.2 .  Figure 5.1a  emphasizes 
both the overlapping diff erences observed in boys and girls at birth and 
the fact that in these fi rst postnatal months, development depends on 
the primary caregiver—most often the mother. Th e unit of interest 
is the mother–infant dyad rather than the individual. And we see that 
mothers often communicate more with girls in face to face interactions 
and intersect more physically with boys. Th e dyad guides the develop-
ment of the infant, so that by 6 months some report that girls look 

   
Figure 5.1   Developmental timelines.   (a) Sex/gender from birth to 6 months. 
 For a color version of this ﬁ gure please go to www.routledge.com/cw/fausto-sterling 

   
Figure 5.1   (b) Gender knowledge and skills from 6 to 14 months. 
 For a color version of this ﬁ gure please go to www.routledge.com/cw/fausto-sterling 

 Figure 5.2   Gender skills and knowledge from 18 months to 3 years. 
 For a color version of this ﬁ gure please go to  www.routledge.com/cw/fausto-sterling 

 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL? 
53
more at objects and faces than boys (Fausto-Sterling, García Coll, & 
Lamarre, 2011a, 2011b). 
 As we consider this gender timeline I need to emphasize its limita-
tions. Th e most important of these is that the information we have 
comes overwhelmingly from studies done in the United States and 
Western Europe. While cultural variability, of course, exists in this 
setting, it may be small compared to many other cultures worldwide. 
For this reason, the timeline and discussion I develop here ought not to 
be taken as universal, i.e. applying timelessly and without geographical 
restriction to all humans. Indeed, one of the virtues of developing a 
dynamic and developmental approach to understanding human devel-
opment is that we can devise general principles of study that still require 
historical and cultural specifi city. 
 It doesn’t take long for babies to discern gender in their environment. 
By as early as 3–4 months infants can tell the diff erence between male 
and female voices, and seem to recognize the diff erence between male 
and female faces as well (Quinn, Yahr, Kuhn, Slater, & Pascalils, 2002). 
How do we know this? Since such young infants can’t tell us what they 
see, we infer it by carefully watching how their eyes fi x on a subject. First 
experimenters showed infants slides of diff erent women in diff erent 
clothing and with diff erent hairstyles. After a while the infant does not 
fi xate for long on a new female slide. However, when slides of men are 
added in, the infants recognize that there is something new in the mix 
and stare longer at them. 
 Infants start their journey into gender knowledge by learning to 
distinguish between adult male and adult female voices and to recog-
nize that men and women look diff erent. In the second half of year one 
these skills become a bit more sophisticated. In addition to habituating 
to female faces, they can habituate to male faces and can associate female 
faces with female voices. Th is latter skill is what psychologists call 
“intermodal” association, that is the infant can combine and interpret 
the hearing mode and the visual mode together to produce richer infor-
mation about gender (Poulin-Dubois, Serbin, & Derbyshire, 1998). Th e 
gender-related skill of associating male voices and faces seems to develop 
a bit later, by about 1 year of age (Martin, Ruble, & Szkrybalo, 2002; 

54 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL?
Ruble, Martin, & Berenbaum, 2006). Finally, by 10 months infants have 
begun to acquire some of the cognitive skills needed to create gender 
categories. For example, in an artifi cial testing situation 10 month olds 
can associate pictures of males and females with male and female voices 
(Poulin-Dubois, Serbin, Kenyon, & Derbyshire, 1994). Th ey can also 
create categories in which they associate pictures of males with items 
such as hammers and footballs, and pictures of females with items such 
as a scarf or a frying pan (Levy & Haaf, 1994). Th is means that even 
before the age of one, infants have assimilated the gendered connections 
that surround them. 
 As children enter their second year ( Figure 5.2 ) they add complex 
skills such as metaphorically linking neutral items with one or the other 
sex. For example, in one study 18 month to 2 year olds identifi ed fi re 
hats, hammers, fi r trees, and bears with males (Eichstedt, Serbin, 
Poulin-Dubois, & Sen, 2002). In this same time period boys preferred 
to look at trucks and girls at dolls, a fascinating contrast to results from 
12 month olds, where both boys and girls preferred to look at dolls. 
Despite these visual preferences, even at 2 years of age neither boys nor 
girls associated gender-stereotyped toys with photos of faces of children 
of a specifi c sex (Serbin, Poulin-Dubois, Colburne, Sen, & Eichstedt, 
2001). 
 As they enter their third year children’s knowledge of culturally 
specifi c gender picks up steam, and kids start to express self awareness 
of themselves as boys or girls. In other words, gender identity emerges. 
It does not suddenly pop out; rather it inches into the open—one step 
at a time. First, infants develop receptive labeling: he or she can correctly 
answer the question, “Are you a boy or a girl?” (Martin et al., 2002). Th is 
is called receptive labeling. Th en they become aware of “gender appro-
priate” activities and can imitate them using toys such as dolls or toy 
vacuum cleaners (Poulin-Dubois, Serbin, Eichstedt, Sen, & Beissel, 
2002). For example, they stare longer if shown a picture of a man putting 
on lipstick or a woman with a hammer (Serbin, Poulin-Dubois, & 
Eichstedt, 2002). Generally, girls seem to learn these stereotyped activi-
ties a few months before boys, but by 3 years both sexes are pretty 
conversant with culturally specifi c gender stereotypes and they can 

 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL? 
55
actively label themselves as either a boy or a girl (Weinraub, Clemens, 
Sockloff , Ethridge, Gracely, & Myers, 1984). 
 To sum up: children fi rst develop sex and gender knowledge including 
the sensory and cognitive skills to make culturally “correct” associations 
between adult activities and males and females. Th ey also develop 
culturally “correct” play preferences, and as they master these skills they 
place themselves in the gender picture, learning fi rst to accept a label of 
male or female and then to self-label. But surprisingly, and often amus-
ingly, at fi rst kids do not think of gender as a permanent state of being. 
Th ey lack what psychologists call “gender constancy” (Ruble et al., 
2006). A funny example: I asked my two and a half year old great niece, 
who madly loved the color pink at the time, what she wanted to be 
when she grew up. Loudly and proudly, she announced, “A pony!” 
“Why,” I asked, “do you want to be a pony?” “Because I really like 
ponies,” she logically explained. In the United States, children aged 
3–5 years learn that one’s sex remains stable over time. But they may 
not understand that being male or female (leaving aside for the moment 
the question of transgendered children) is a fi xed property until they are 
as old as seven. 
 Th ere are many details still to be worked out, but this is the general 
lesson, gleaned from studies done for the most part in the United States 
and Western Europe: the development of gender identity proceeds over 
several years. In the beginning, infants process visual, tactile, and audi-
tory information. We presume that these varied sensory stimuli aff ect 
brain development, as intermodal connections form. With time and 
familiarity, infants and toddlers observe culturally frequent tropes and 
record them in their rapidly developing brains. Men don’t wear lipstick. 
Women don’t use hammers. With time, what begin as relatively simple 
sensory skills transform into more complex capabilities; as a sense of 
self, independent from parents, emerges, toddlers associate their newly 
emerging independent selves with the culturally specifi c gender knowl-
edge they are acquiring at more or less the same time. (Remember that 
the “terrible twos” are all about self-assertion and the establishment of 
independent identity.) Even more sophisticated concepts such as body 
constancy are the last to appear. 

56 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL?
 Gender roles don’t develop in a vacuum. For instance, family struc-
ture matters. Th ree year old boys with older brothers or girls with older 
sisters have been found to be more boy boys or more girl girls (i.e. more 
sex-typed) compared to only children of the same sex. Th ere are two 
ways to become more sex-typed—either do more of the same sex behav-
iors or less of the other sex behaviors. In other words, a little girl can 
become girlier by playing even more with dolls, or by holding the doll-
play steady but playing less often with trucks. It turns out that having an 
older brother linked to both more masculine  and less feminine behavior 
in both boys and girls. But boys with older sisters kept the same level of 
male-typed play while also playing more often in female-typical ways. 
Girls with older sisters did not play more with dolls, but they did play 
less often with trucks (Rust, Golombok, Hines, Johnston, & Golding, 
2000). (See  Table 5.3 .) 
 Parental characteristics also correlate with sex-typed behaviors. One 
study found, for example, that more educated mothers or parents who 
adhered less strictly to traditional sex roles had children who were 
themselves less sex-typed. Maternal tobacco or alcohol use correlated 
with more masculine-typical behaviors while more timid mothers 
linked to less male-typical behavior (Hines, Johnston, Golombok, Rust, 
Stevens, & Golding, 2002). Studies such as these, which correlate 
aspects of the family with gender role development, suggest that quite a 
 Table 5.3   Sibling effects 
 Older brother 
 Older sister 
 No sibling 
 Girl 
 Less sex typed: more 
masculine and less 
feminine 
 More sex typed: less 
masculine but not more 
feminine 
 Intermediate: > than girls 
with other sex siblings but less 
than girls with same sex 
siblings 
 Boy 
 More sex typed: more 
masculine and less 
feminine 
 Less sex typed: more 
feminine but not less 
masculine 
 Intermediate: > than boys 
with other sex siblings but 
less than boys with same sex 
siblings 

 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL? 
57
number of environmental and cultural variations contribute to small 
individual diff erences in gender development. Th ey probably also 
contribute to the population level diff erences in gender roles and inter-
ests. To date, however, what we have are correlations, not causal chains. 
In the future it will probably be possible to demonstrate some causal 
relationships. But the hard truth is that there are probably so many 
contributing streams, and they probably interact in so many diff erent 
ways, that we will never have a single story to tell about gender develop-
ment. Even within the same culture, the future of gender will consist of 
individual case studies that illuminate our questions. But I predict no 
specifi c universal story. 
 Th ere is one important aspect of this tale about which we know virtu-
ally nothing. John Money emphasized that at birth the surrounding 
adults recognized the infant’s genitalia and used that information to 
treat the child as either a boy or a girl. He also suggested that children 
themselves develop masculine or feminine body images depending on 
their external genitalia. Body image certainly develops and depends on 
self exploration and the recognition of sensations of self touch and 
touch by others—to begin with probably adult touch involved with 
cleaning and diapering—and eventually visual feedback from self exam-
ination and by comparison to other children’s and to adult genitalia. Th e 
sensory feedback signals the brain and establishes actual neural connec-
tions. Th ese connections between periphery (the body) and center 
(the brain) become a neural map of body parts, including the genitals. 
(It is this map which accounts for phenomena such as phantom limb 
sensations—pain and other sensations experienced by amputees as if 
belonging to the missing limb.) Which specifi c events contribute to the 
development of a child’s body image and then later at puberty to an 
adult self image are virtually unknown. Nor, given the taboo against 
studying genital touch in children, is this something we are ever likely 
to study in a scientifi cally systematic way. Yet, given our wish to 
understand what happens when chromosomal, gonadal, hormonal, and 
genital sex disagree with body image and gender identity (childhood 
transgender identity), we would do well to understand more than we do 
at the moment. 

58 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL?
  What about Gender Variant Children? 
 By the age of 2–3 years children learn to correctly identify the sex of 
others (Martin et al., 2002; Martin, Ruble, & Szkrybalo, 2004) but even 
before then—as early as 18 months—they begin to develop an aware-
ness of gender appropriate roles (Serbin et al., 2002). While some scien-
tists believe that gender identity formation results from the eff ects of 
prenatal hormones on the brain, many cognitive and social psycholo-
gists understand gender identity formation to result from a process of 
learning, cognitive development, and social reinforcement (Bandura & 
Bussey, 2004; Martin et al., 2002). Individuals with clinically defi ned 
gender identity disorders have been the subject of much study, which, in 
turn, provides fodder for arguments concerning the role of biology in 
gender identity formation. A rich literature exists concerning adults 
with gender identity variance—sometimes called transsexual, some-
times transgender (Meyerowitz, 2002; Stryker & Whittle, 2006); the 
transgender movements (Feinberg, 1996, 1998) and various positive 
presentations of the self as gender outlaws (Bornstein, 1994) are 
complex. In keeping with this book’s theme of understanding through 
the study of developmental process, I mostly focus on the emergence of 
gender identity variability in very young children. 
 Th e popular press and many adult transsexuals often defi ne a trans-
sexual as a genetically and developmentally normal (in the anatomical 
sense) person who believes him or herself to be trapped in the “wrong” 
body. Th us by defi nition the phenomenon involves a sense of self (iden-
tity) that is invisible and seems to have no origins in anatomical measures 
of intersexuality. Th e commonly sought treatment is to “correct” the 
anatomy to conform to the identity. Hormone treatments to bring the 
body’s biochemistry into line accompany surgical transformations of 
the genitals and alterations in secondary sex characteristics. Th e latter 
include mastectomy in Female to Male (FtM) transformations, and 
surgery on the Adam’s apple and body hair removal in Male to Female 
(MtF) transformations. 
 Because of the strength of their desire to bring anatomy and identity 
into synch, and because often they recall wanting since childhood to  be 
the other sex, many adult transsexuals believe their condition to have a 

 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL? 
59
biological origin. Many suspect that there is something unusual about 
their own brain development. Indeed, a few post-mortem studies of 
brains of MtF transsexuals claim to prove that a region of the hypo-
thalamus in the brain is “female-like” in Mtfs, a fi nding which they take 
as evidence of a biological cause for this unusual gender identity 
(Kruijver, Zhou, Pool, Hofman, Gooren, & Swaab, 2000; Zhou, Hofman, 
Gooren, & Swaab, 1995). Others, however, provide evidence that the 
cross hormone therapy undergone by the MtFs in these earlier studies 
produced the brain diff erences found (cited in Lawrence, 2007). At this 
time, then there is little substantial evidence to support the idea that 
adult MtFs have feminized brains which caused their desire to change 
their anatomy to fi t their identity (Lawrence, 2007). (For further 
information on defi nitions of and research on adult transsexuals, see 
Lawrence, 2008.) 
 New brain studies, however, continue to appear and each one improves 
a bit on the methodology.  Table 5.4  samples a few recent publications 
and identifi es some of the diffi  culties such studies face. It also illustrates 
something fundamental—and at times problematic—about how we 
conduct scientifi c research. Pretty much all researchers have a model, or 
a theory, or a point of view, which they use to structure their research 
questions and methods. In the case of transgender brain studies, 
the underlying model is that gender identity is part of brain sex, and 
quite possibly shaped by prenatal hormone exposures. Th e counter 
hypothesis in the eyes of many would be that social interactions during 
infancy or childhood cause gender identity discomfort. Th ese alterna-
tives shape the thinking of the studies cited in  Table 5.4 . Th e logic seems 
clear to these scientists: if there are anatomical diff erences in the 
brains of MtF or FtM people that mirror diff erences found in non-
transgendered men and women,  and if the diff erences are not the result 
of unusual hormone changes caused by disease or by the treatments 
used on transitioning from one sex to the other, then they reason that 
the only possible explanation is that gender identity is inborn (Kruijver 
et al., 2000; Rametti, Carrillo, Gómez-Gil, Junque, Segovia, Gomez, 
et al., 2011a; Rametti, Carrillo, Gómez-Gil, Junque, Zubiarre-Elorza, 
Segovia, et al., 2011b). 

    
Table 5.4   What we know about brain differences in adult transsexuals (selected examples) 
 Type 
 Study method and 
reference 
 Brain region 
 Finding 
 Possible interpretations 
 Author’s conclusions 
 Male to 
Female 
 Post-mortem; (Kruijver, 
Zhou, Pool, Hofman, 
Gooren, & Swaab, 2000) 
 Bed nucleus of the 
stria terminalis (BSTc) 
 Men have 2X more 
somatostatin neurons than 
women; MtF individuals 
more like female number 
 •  Results inﬂ uenced 
by medical history 
which led to death 
 •  Results inﬂ uenced by 
hormone treatments for sex 
change procedure 
 •  Results due to neuronal 
plasticity resulting from 
experience of living 
as women and girls 
 •  Neurobiological differences 
that parallel normal sex 
differences cause gender 
identity disorder 
 “The present ﬁ ndings of 
somatostatin neuronal sex 
differences in the BSTc and 
its sex reversal in the 
transsexual brain clearly 
support the paradigm that in 
transsexuals sexual 
differentiation of the brain 
and genitals may go into 
opposite directions and point 
to a neurobiological basis of 
gender identity disorder” (p. 
2034) 

 Male to 
Female 
 DTI imaging on living 
subjects who had  not 
received hormone 
treatments (Rametti, 
Carrillo, Gómez-Gil, 
Junque, Zubiarre-Elorza, 
Segovia, 
et al., 2011b) 
 Microstructure of 
white matter in 
speciﬁ c regions of the 
brain 
 There are sex differences in 
adults for the observed 
regions; MtF fall halfway 
between male and female 
patterns 
 •  Results due to neuronal 
plasticity resulting from 
experience of living 
as women and girls 
 •  Neurobiological differences 
that parallel normal sex 
differences cause gender 
identity disorder 
 •  Cannot rule out prior black 
market self hormone 
treatment 
 Some of the white matter 
tracts don’t ﬁ nish 
masculinization before the 
individual seeks treatment 
(Continued Overleaf )

 Type 
 Study method and 
reference 
 Brain region 
 Finding 
 Possible interpretations 
 Author’s conclusions 
 Female to 
Male 
 DTI imaging on living 
subjects who had  not 
received hormone 
treatments (Rametti, 
Carrillo, Gómez-Gil, 
Junque, Segovia, Gomez, 
et al., 2011a) 
 Microstructure of 
white matter in 
speciﬁ c regions of the 
brain 
 There are sex differences in 
adults for the observed 
regions; FtM resemble the 
male patterns 
 •  Results due to neuronal 
plasticity resulting from 
experience of living as men 
and boys 
 •  Neurobiological differences 
that parallel normal sex 
differences cause gender 
identity disorder 
 •  Cannot rule out prior black 
market self hormone 
treatment 
 “There are a priori structural 
brain differences suggesting 
masculinization of untreated 
FtM transsexuals” (p. 203) 
 Table 5.4   Continued 

 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL? 
63
 But what about more dynamic models (Fausto-Sterling et al., 2011a, 
2011b)? For several decades neuroscientists have documented the whys 
and wherefores of neural plasticity. Existing neurons change their 
connections; new neurons are born, and all this happens as a result of 
how the body interacts day to day in the physical world. If a dynamic 
nervous system that is shaped by the environment is the starting frame-
work, then essential questions about transgender embodiment have yet 
to be asked, crucial studies have yet to be conducted. Consider the 
diff erences in white matter tracks found in FtM transsexuals. One 
region, called the superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF) is part of a 
brain network important for spatial awareness. As the authors of this 
report on FtMs note, these white matter tracts develop continuously 
until the late twenties. Another region of diff erence, the corticospinal 
tract, requires motor experience to develop properly (Rametti et al., 
2011a). But because neuroplasticity is not an essential part of their 
model, these facts do not take on the level of meaning that would lead 
to studies designed to examine the development or emergence of 
anatomical diff erences in the brains of men or women. In short, the 
science you do depends on the model of the body you start with. 
 If studies of adult transsexuals have yet to off er convincing evidence of 
a biological origin of the phenomenon, then maybe reports of gender 
variant children, some barely more than 2 years old, do. Th e general argu-
ment is that only biology could explain such an early origin of gender 
variance. Th e American Psychiatric Association fi rst listed a mental illness 
called Gender Identity Disorder of Childhood (GIDC) in its Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual (DSM) in 1980 (Martin, 2008). Since then the 
diagnostic criteria have undergone a variety of modifi cations. DSM-IV 
states that GIDC children display a constellation of behaviors:
 (1) a strong and persistent cross-gender identifi cation . . . 
(2) persistent discomfort with his or her sex . . . (3) disturbance not 
concurrent with a physical intersex condition and (4) disturbance 
causes clinically signifi cant distress or impairment in social, occu-
pational or other important areas of functioning. 
 (cited in Zucker & Cohen-Kettenis, 2008: 384)  

64 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL?
 Th e actual prevalence of children with the above constellation of behav-
iors is diffi  cult to assess, especially because of the range of variability in 
gender non-conforming behaviors in children who, in the end, do not 
have identity issues. Nevertheless, some estimate that between 0.9 and 
1.7 percent of boys and girls in a general North American population 
wish to be a member of the opposite sex (Zucker & Cohen-Kettenis, 
2008). 
 In the health care system gender non-conformance rises to the level 
of mental illness when children are referred to mental health clinics for 
treatment. Parents seek clinical help for several reasons. Sometimes the 
child is anxious and distressed, occasionally to the extent that he or she 
tries to harm him or herself. And the parents are also in distress about 
their child’s gender variance, sometimes because they fear their child 
will grow up to become homosexual, and usually about other life stresses. 
But not all kids are distressed to the same degree. And some parents 
value and admire their gender variant children. More than anything 
these latter adults seek support and advice as they help their kids navi-
gate some very diffi  cult terrain (Hill, Menvielle, Sica, & Johnson, 2010; 
Menvielle & Hill, 2011). About fi ve times as many boys as girls are 
referred to one well-known Canadian clinic while the ratio is about 3:1 
boys:girls in a prominent Dutch clinic. At these clinics, gender non-
conforming children are referred between the ages of 3 and 6 years 
(Zucker & Cohen-Kettenis, 2008). 
 Note that we often slip, especially in casual conversations, between 
the idea of gender non-conformity (girls who like boys’ toys, boys who 
like girls’ toys) and gender identity disorder, as defi ned by psychiatrists 
and clinical psychologists. Worse yet, shrinks and counselors disagree 
about whether there is any mental disorder at all, or whether boys who 
want to be girls (and vice versa) are merely one end on a spectrum of 
totally normal gender variability. 
 In one recent case, publicized on US television, the child in question 
began exhibiting gender non-conforming behavior by his or her second 
year of age (Goldberg, 2007; Winfrey, 2004). Experts and lay people 
alike disagree about the proper course to follow with such children—
intervene to make them more comfortable with their natal sex, work 

 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL? 
65
with family and school systems to accommodate the gender non-
conformity, and/or provide online and in person support groups (Langer 
& Martin, 2004; Martin, 2008; Menvielle & Hill, 2011; Menvielle & 
Tuerk, 2002; Menvielle, Tuerk, & Perrin, 2005; Spiegel, 2008a, 2008b; 
Zucker & Cohen-Kettenis, 2008). But regardless of which path is 
followed, is there something to be learned about the biology of gender 
from gender identity variance in very young children? 
 Th e fact that childhood gender identity variability can appear as early 
as the third year of life is not itself evidence that the cause is biological, 
and certainly not that it comes from a malfunction of fetal hormonal 
sex. Indeed, given what we have just discussed about the dynamics of 
gender knowledge acquisition we know that the assimilation of gender 
skills starts before the appearance of gender identity variation, and thus, 
at least logically, the learning and assimilation process itself could be 
one of the seats on which GID sits. We should also remember that the 
labeled outcome—gender identity disorder—could have diff erent 
origins in diff erent children. Although right now we approach GID as 
if it were a single entity, the single endpoint will probably turn out to 
have a number of diff erent paths leading up to it. 
 Indeed a recent assessment of 53 adolescents—both natal boys and 
natal girls who sought treatment at the Gender Identity Clinic in 
Amsterdam, the Netherlands, between the ages of 7 and 10, turned up 
two equally frequent sub-groups which they called “persisters” and 
“desisters.” Th e labels are pretty much self explanatory. Persisters 
continued throughout adolescence to have gender dysphoria. Th e physio-
logical maturation of their bodies caused them great distress, and 
although they had managed pretty well in childhood to be accepted by 
their peers, during adolescence they became more and more isolated. In 
contrast, the desisters gradually became more comfortable with their 
natal bodies and more interested in gender conforming activities. If 
their peers did not know about their earlier non-conforming history, 
they assimilated surprisingly well into their new social milieu as gender 
conforming teens (Steensma, Biemond, Boer, & Cohen-Kettenis, 2011). 
 Th e Dutch Gender Identity Clinic researchers interviewed persisters 
and desisters at some length and found that although their childhood 

66 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL?
cross-gender behaviors were indistinguishable, diff erences existed 
between the two groups. In the beginning, i.e. around the age of 5, 
neither persisters nor desisters gave their gender identity much thought. 
But by age 6 or 7 both groups started to identify with their non-natal 
sex and feel uncomfortable with their birth sex. Here is where the diff er-
ence appears. Persisters actually believed themselves to  be the other sex. 
Th e desisters thought of themselves as girlish boys or boyish girls who 
only  wished they were the other sex. Th is diff erence carried over as the 
children grew older to their feelings about their bodies. Persisters indi-
cated great discomfort because their bodies did not match their feelings 
of which sex they felt they were. Desisters, on the other hand, accepted 
the bodies they were born into. 
 Th us it seems likely that there are at least two—and I will predict the 
uncovering of several more—paths leading to gender variant feelings 
and behaviors in children. What might some of the elements guiding 
the development of these paths be? Newborn genital sex (male or 
female) precedes the appearance and subsequent elaboration of either 
masculine or feminine gender expression. Humans code such expres-
sions culturally, that is what counts as masculine or feminine diff ers in 
diff erent cultures. Furthermore, the diff erences are graded rather than 
absolute. Whereas usually the genitals are clearly dimorphic, mascu-
linity and femininity form intermixing, non-exclusive gradients. A 
toddler may primarily like trucks and male playmates, but may have a 
favorite girlfriend and be totally attached to a stuff ed bear that  he  cannot 
sleep without. Or,  she  may really love to play with her doll house, but 
also race around shooting imaginary laser guns. Cultural standards of 
femininity and masculinity change over time. In my youth (which was 
several light years ago) it would have been very  un -feminine for a girl to 
be a sports fanatic and compete aggressively and physically in sports 
such as basketball or soccer. Today female athletes can be successful, 
glamorous,  and loud and aggressive during competition. 
 At any rate, genitalia precede masculine or feminine gender 
expression, which in turn precedes gender identity formation. Th e 
latter begins to appear in the third year and solidifi es and clarifi es over 
several subsequent years. Most commonly male genitalia, masculine 

 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL? 
67
gender expression, and male gender identity seem to follow the one 
from the other. Th e same too for female genitalia, gender expression, 
and gender identity. Less frequently, a boy (identifi ed by his genitalia) 
develops a gender expression that is graded more toward the feminine 
end of the expression spectrum, or a girl more toward the masculine 
end. Most of the time, such children still develop an internal gender 
identity that matches their genitalia. But for GID kids genitalia and 
chromosomes seem, as it were, to be the “odd man out.” Gender expres-
sion and gender identity match one another but are at variance with the 
child’s chromosomes and genitalia. 
 Why? To be clear, we really don’t know. I speculate that individual 
variations in neurosensory development might combine with particular 
family psychodynamics, and that such a combination somehow disrupts 
the usual developmental patterns for gender identity formation (Fausto-
Sterling, 2012). Martin (2008) reviews several competing psychody-
namic explanations of early childhood gender variance but neither 
these, nor the competing idea that families of gender variant kids are 
reasonably healthy, have been supported with data “hard” enough to 
convince research psychologists that one of them is correct (Menvielle 
et al., 2005). 
 More to the point, however, is that to structure the debate in terms of 
biology  versus psychology misses some essential features of child devel-
opment. In recent years dynamic systems theorists have off ered compel-
ling accounts of human development that emphasize how behavior 
becomes embodied (Fausto-Sterling, 2000; Hayles, 1993; Th elen, 1995, 
2000; Th elen & Smith, 1994). In the case of gender variant children, it 
is signifi cant that the variation becomes visible through a developmental 
window that also features the establishment of gender identity and a 
sense of gender permanence (Fagot & Leinbach, 1989, 1993; Fagot, 
Leinbach, & Hagan, 1986; Fagot, Leinbach, & O’Boyle, 1992; Martin 
et al., 2002; Ruble & Martin, 1998). 
 Alterations in developmental timing of gender role knowledge and 
identity formation, chance fi xations that happen to be gender specifi c 
(one child I knew went through a phase at aged 1.5 to 2 when he carried 
a paint brush with him at all times—he outgrew this obsession) and get 

68 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL?
fi xed or fi xated upon rather than outgrown—any of these general devel-
opmental possibilities, in a sense accidents of chance or timing, could 
start small but with repetition, quite literally become embodied, that is 
become a persistent feature of an individual’s identity and personality. 
At the level of neurophysiology, we presume that these features function 
via neural networks within the brain. Individual variation in neural 
development could infl uence initial fi xations that become associated 
with developing knowledge of a gendered world. Developing more 
dynamic hypotheses and new experimental paradigms, ones in which 
neural development (and thus behaviors, identities, and preferences) 
 result from  initial behavioral exploration should be on the agenda of the 
next generation of researchers. 
 Much of the controversy over early treatment of GIDC children 
concerns the possibility that gender variant children will become homo-
sexual adults (Bem, 2008; Corbett, 1993, 1996; Green, 2008; Martin, 
2008; Zucker, 2008). Th e idea that early emerging gender non-
conforming behaviors must be “biological” is used to support the notion 
that adult homosexuality has a biological cause. Th ere is one important 
bit of slippage in this argument; GIDC is an example of extreme gender 
variance. Gender non-conforming behaviors, however, are quite 
common, and while many adult homosexuals retrospectively associate 
them with a later emergence of homosexual desire, they are a less striking 
form of behavior than GIDC. Nevertheless it does appear that many of 
the gender variant kids who adopt the gender identity of their natal sex 
become homosexual or bisexual. In Steensma’s study, the children who 
persisted in their gender variance also had same natal sex attractions in 
adolescence. But since they thought of themselves as “the other” sex, 
they defi ned these attractions as heterosexual ones. Clearly, there is more 
to be understood about the relationship between gender roles, gender 
identity, and sexual preference (Steensma et al., 2011). 
 Th e relationships between gender, anatomical sex, and sexuality are 
complex. Th eo Sandfort attributes the origin in American psychology of 
the idea that homosexual men are feminine and lesbians masculine to 
the 1936 work of Lewis M. Terman and Catherine C. Miles (Sandfort, 
2005). Although Terman and Miles identifi ed homosexual men who 

 
AM I A BOY OR A GIRL? 
69
did not fi t these patterns of opposites, they failed to theorize about 
masculine gay men. Subsequent citations of their work also ignored this 
theoretical complication, giving birth to the unquestioned link between 
male homosexuality and femininity. Practicing psychoanalyst Ken 
Corbett writes that “Calling gay men feminine neither suffi  ciently 
problematizes their experience of gender nor adequately captures the 
vicissitudes of gender.” He argues that “male homosexuality is a diff er-
ently structured masculinity, not a simulated femininity” (Corbett, 1993: 
345). Despite these complexities, arguments about the biological basis 
of homosexuality lean heavily on the relationship between GIDC and 
later homosexuality, and in recent years biological theories have come to 
rest as well on somewhat more direct evidence, which we address in the 
next chapter.  
 Further Reading 
 Consortium on the Management of Disorders of Sex Development . ( 2006 ).   Clinical 
Guidelines for the Management of Disorders of Sex Development in Childhood . Copyright © 
2006 Intersex Society of North America.  http://www.dsdguidelines.org/htdocs/
clinical/index.html 
 Consortium on the Management of Disorders of Sex Development . ( 2006 ).   Handbook for 
Parents . Retrieved from:  http://www.dsdguidelines.org/htdocs/parents/index.html , 
accessed  December 8,  2011 . 
 Dreger,   A.  ( 2009 ).  Gender Identity Disorder in childhood: Inconclusive advice to parents . 
 Hastings Center Report , 39(1), 26–29. 
 Dreger,   A.  ( 2010 ). “ Pink Boys with Puppy Dog Tails. ” Monday,  December 6,  http://
sexresearchhoneypot.blogspot.com/2010/12/pink-boys-with-puppy-dog-tails.html  
 Ehrensaft,  D. ( 2011 ).  “I’m a Prius”: a child case of a gender/ethnic hybrid .   Journal of Gay and 
Lesbian Mental Health ,  15 ,  46 – 57 . 
 Fausto-Sterling,   A. ( 2012 ).  Th e dynamic development of gender variability .   Journal of 
Homosexuality , in press. 
 Karkazis,   K. ( 2008 )   Fixing Sex: Intersex, Medical Authority, and Lived Experience .  Durham, 
NC :  Duke University Press . 
  Kessler,  S. J. , &   McKenna,   W.  ( 1978 ).   Gender: An Ethnomethodological Approach .  New York : 
 John Wiley & Sons . 
 Reis,  E.  ( 2009 ).   Bodies in Doubt: An American History of Intersex .  Baltimore, MD :  Johns 
Hopkins University Press . 
 Stiles,  Joan  ( 2008 ).   Th e Fundamentals of Brain Development: Integrating Nature and Nurture . 
 Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press . 
 Stryker,  S. , &  Whittle,  S.  ( 2006 ).  Th e Transgender Studies Reader .   New York:  Routledge  . 
 Valentine,   D. ( 2007 ).   Imagining Transgender: An Ethnography of a Category .  Durham, NC : 
 Duke University Press . 
 Zucker,   K. J. , &   Bradley,   S. J.  ( 1995 ).   Gender Identity Disorder and Psychosexual Problems in 
Children and Adolescents  .  New York :  Guilford Press . 

70
 6 
 THINKING ABOUT 
HOMOSEXUALITY  1  
 Sexuality Has a History 
 “Th e Gay” (as TV newscaster Rachel Maddow ironically calls it) is 
newsworthy. Gay marriage. Don’t ask don’t tell. Th e Gay Agenda. We 
can’t escape it. It seems as if we know so much about the topic. But do 
we? Is it one thing? Many things? Is it the same in men as in women? 
What does it have to do with sex and gender? How does it develop? 
Who knows more about human desire—biologists or poets? 
 Not all cultures—either contemporary or historically—structure 
gender and sexuality the way we do (see  Figure 6.1 ). Many historians 
mark the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries as periods of great 
change in our concepts of sex and sexuality. During this time a notion of 
legal equality replaced the feudal exercise of arbitrary power given by 
divine right. As the historian Michel Foucault saw it, society still required 
some form of discipline. A growing capitalism needed new methods to 
control the “insertion of bodies into the machinery of production and 
the adjustment of the phenomena of population to economic processes” 
(Foucault, 1978: 141 cited in Fausto-Sterling, 2000). 
 Foucault argued that “a biopolitics of the population” emerged during 
the early nineteenth century as pioneer social scientists began to develop 
the survey and statistical methods needed to supervise and manage 
births and mortality, life expectancy and longevity. Foucault gave 

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
71
 Figure 6.1   Constructing sex and gender: a political, religious, and scientiﬁ c history .
“discipline” a double meaning. On the one hand, it implied a form of 
control or punishment; on the other, it referred to an academic body of 
knowledge—the discipline of history or biology. Th e disciplinary 
knowledge developed in the fi elds of embryology, endocrinology, 
surgery, psychology, and biochemistry has encouraged physicians to 
Source: Diane DiMassa for the author.

72 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
attempt to control the very gender of the body by making categories—
little cubbies we can put people in based on, for example, their patterns 
of sexual expression. If the groupings are stable and easily measured, 
then the various medical and psychological disciplines can study them. 
 Consider, for instance, a television news magazine segment about 
married women who “discovered,” often in their forties, that they were 
lesbian. Th e show framed the discussion around the idea that a woman 
who has sex with men must be heterosexual, while a woman who falls in 
love with another woman must be lesbian. On this show there seemed 
to be only these two cubbyholes. Even though the women interviewed 
had had active and satisfying sex lives with their husbands and produced 
and raised families, they knew that they must “be” lesbian the minute 
they found themselves attracted to a woman. Furthermore, they felt it 
likely that they must always have been lesbian without knowing it 
(Strock, 1998). 
 Th e show portrayed sexual identity as a fundamental reality: a woman 
is either inherently heterosexual or inherently lesbian. And the act of 
coming out as a lesbian negated an entire lifetime of heterosexual 
activity! Put this way, the depiction of sexuality sounds absurdly over-
simplifi ed. Yet, it refl ects deeply held beliefs—so deeply held, in fact, 
that a great deal of scientifi c research (on animals as well as humans) is, 
as we shall see momentarily, designed around this dichotomous 
formulation. 
 Th e social organization and expression of human sexuality are neither 
timeless nor universal. Historians struggle with how to understand what 
people of an earlier era really felt or understood without pushing them 
into categories of contemporary making but irrelevant for a life lived a 
century ago. For example, the historian of science Barbara Duden 
describes coming upon an eight-volume medical text. Written in the 
eighteenth century by a practicing physician, the books describe over 
1,800 cases involving diseases of women. Duden found herself unable to 
use twentieth-century medical terms to reconstruct what illnesses these 
women had. Instead she noticed “bits and pieces of medical theories that 
would have been circulating, combined with elements from popular 
culture; self-evident bodily perceptions appear alongside things that 

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
73
struck [her] as utterly improbable” (1991: v). Duden describes her 
intellectual anguish as she became more and more determined to 
understand these eighteenth-century German female bodies on their 
own terms:
 To gain access to the inner, invisible bodily existence of these ailing 
women, I had to venture across the boundary that separates . . . the 
inner body beneath the skin, from the world around it . . . the body 
and its environment have been consigned to opposing realms: on 
the one side are the body, nature, and biology, stable and unchanging 
phenomena; on the other side are the social environment and 
history, realms of constant change. With the drawing of this 
boundary the body was expelled from history. 
 (Duden, 1991: v, vi) 
 Many historians believe that our modern concepts of sex and desire 
fi rst made their appearance in the nineteenth century. Some point to the 
year 1869, when a German legal reformer seeking to change antisodomy 
laws fi rst publicly used the word “homosexuality” (Katz, 1995). Coining 
a new term did not magically create twentieth-century categories of 
sexuality, but the moment seems to mark the beginning of their gradual 
emergence. It was during those years that physicians began to publish 
case reports of homosexuality—the fi rst in 1869 in a German publica-
tion specializing in psychiatric and nervous illness (Hansen, 1989, 
1992). As the scientifi c literature grew, specialists emerged to collect 
and systematize the narratives. Th e now-classic works of Kraff t-Ebing 
and Havelock Ellis completed the transfer of homosexual behaviors 
from publicly accessible activities to ones managed at least in part by 
medicine (Ellis, 1913; Kraff t-Ebing, 1892). 
 Th e emerging defi nitions of homo- and heterosexuality were built on 
a two-sex model of masculinity and femininity. Th e Victorians, for 
example, contrasted the sexually aggressive male with the sexually indif-
ferent female. But this created a mystery. If only men felt active desire, 
how could two women develop a mutual sexual interest? Th e answer: 
one of the women had to be an invert, someone with markedly 

74 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
masculine attributes. Th is same logic applied to male homosexuals, who 
were seen as more eff eminate than heterosexual men. Th ese concepts 
linger in late-twentieth-century studies of homosexual behaviors in 
rodents. A lesbian rat is she who mounts; a gay male rat is he who 
responds to being mounted. 
 Th is forming identity contributed to its own medical rendering. Men 
(and later women) who identifi ed themselves as homosexual sought 
medical help and understanding. And as medical reports proliferated, 
homosexuals used them to paint their own self-descriptions. “By helping 
to give large numbers of people an identity and a name, medicine also 
helped to shape these people’s experience and change their behavior, 
creating not just a new disease, but a new species of person, ‘the modern 
homosexual’ ” (Hansen, 1992: 125). In 1892, heterosexuality crossed the 
ocean to America, where a consensus developed among medical men 
that “heterosexual referred to a normal ‘other-sex’ Eros. [Th e doctors] 
proclaimed a new heterosexual separatism—an erotic apartheid that 
forcefully segregated the sex normals from the sex perverts” (Katz, 1995: 
16). Th rough the 1930s the concept of heterosexuality fought its way 
into the public consciousness, and, by World War II, heterosexuality 
seemed a permanent feature of the sexual landscape. 
 Th e above historians emphasize discontinuity between historical 
periods. Th ey believe that looking “for general laws about sexuality and 
its historical evolution will be defeated by the sheer variety of past 
thought and behavior” (Nye, 1998: 4). But some disagree. Th e historian 
John Boswell, for instance, applied Kinsey’s classifi cation scheme to 
ancient Greece. For him, the existence of categories such as the malle 
(feminine man) or the tribade (masculine woman) shows that homo-
sexual bodies or essences have existed across the centuries. Boswell 
acknowledged that humans organized and interpreted sexual behaviors 
diff erently in diff erent historical eras. But he suggested that a similar 
range of bodies predisposed to particular sexual activities existed then 
and now. “Constructions and context shape the articulation of sexu-
ality,” he insists, “but they do not eff ace recognition of erotic preference 
as a potential category” (Boswell, 1990: 22, 26). Boswell implied that we 
are quite possibly born with particular sexual inclinations wired into our 

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
75
bodies. Th e acquisition of culture shows us how to express our inborn 
desires, he argued, but did not create them. 
 Th e debate about history continues. What we conclude about people’s 
past experiences depends to a large extent on how much we believe that 
our analytical categories transcend time and place. Suppose for a minute 
that we had a few time-traveling clones—genetically identical humans 
living in ancient Greece, in seventeenth-century Europe, and in the 
contemporary United States. Boswell would say that if a particular clone 
was homosexual in ancient Greece, he would also be homosexual in the 
seventeenth century or today ( Figure 6.2 , Model A). Th e fact that 
gender structures diff er in diff erent times and places might shape the 
invert’s defi ance, but would not create it. Halperin, however, would 
argue that there is no guarantee that the modern clone of an ancient 
Greek heterosexual would also be heterosexual. Despite surface simi-
larities, we cannot know whether yesterday’s tribade is today’s butch 
or whether the middle-aged Greek male lover is today’s pedophile 
( Figure 6.2 , Model B). 
 If not History, What about Anthropology? 
 While historians have looked to the past to fi nd out if human sexuality 
is inborn or socially determined, anthropologists have pursued the same 
questions in their studies of sexual behaviors, roles, and expressions in 
contemporary cultures. Th ere seem to be two general patterns. Some 
cultures, like our own, defi ne a permanent role for those who engage 
in same sex coupling—“institutionalized homosexuality,” in Mary 
McIntosh’s terminology (McIntosh, 1968). 
 In contrast are societies in which all adolescent boys, as part of an 
expected growth process, engage in genital acts with older men. Th ese 
associations may be brief and highly ritualized or last for several years. 
Here oral-genital contact between two males does not signify a perma-
nent condition. Rather age and status defi ne sexual expression (Vance, 
1991). Anthropologists study vastly diff ering peoples and cultures with 
two goals in mind. First, they want to understand human variation—the 
diverse ways in which human beings organize society in order to eat and 
reproduce. Second, many anthropologists look for human universals. 

76 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
 Figure 6.2    Model A: Reading essentialism from the historical record. A person with inborn homo-
sexual tendencies would be homosexual, no matter what historical era. Model B: Reading 
constructionism from the historical record. A person of a particular genetic make-up 
might or might not become homosexual, depending on the cultural and historical period 
in which he or she was raised  .
 Source: Alyce Santoro for the author .

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
77
Like historians, anthropologists are divided about how much informa-
tion drawn from any one culture can tell us about another, or whether 
underlying diff erences in the expression of sexuality matter more or less 
than apparent commonalities. Despite such disagreements, anthropo-
logical data are, nevertheless, often deployed in arguments about the 
nature of human sexuality (Davis & Whitten, 1987; Weinrich, 1987; 
Weston, 1993). 
 Some fi nd cross-cultural similarities. For instance, the anthropologist 
Gil Herdt catalogs four primary cultural approaches to the organization 
of human sexuality.  Age-structured homosexuality , such as that found in 
ancient Greece, also appears in some modern cultures in which adoles-
cent boys go through a developmental period in which they are isolated 
with older males and perform fellatio on a regular basis. Such acts are 
understood to be part of the normal process of becoming an adult 
heterosexual. In  gender-reversed homosexuality , “same-sex activity 
involves a reversal of normative sex-role comportment: males dress and 
act as females, and females dress and behave as males” (Herdt, 1990: 
222). Herdt fi nds  role-specialized homosexuality in cultures that sanction 
same-sex activity only for people who play a particular social role, such 
as a shaman. Role-specialized homosexuality contrasts sharply with our 
own cultural creation:  the modern gay movement . To declare oneself “gay” 
in the United States is to adopt an identity and to join a social and 
sometimes political movement. 
 Anthropologists also face theoretical diffi  culties when they turn their 
attention to the relationships between gender and systems of social 
power. During the 1970s European and North American feminist 
activists hoped that anthropologists could provide empirical data to 
support their political arguments for gender equality. If, somewhere in 
the world, egalitarian societies existed, wouldn’t that imply that our own 
social structures were not inevitable? Alternatively, what if women in 
every culture known to humankind had a subordinate status? Didn’t 
such cross-cultural similarity mean, as more than one writer suggested, 
that women’s secondary standing must be biologically ordained? 
 When feminist anthropologists searched for cultures sporting the 
banner of equity, they did not return with happy tidings. Most thought, 

78 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
as the feminist anthropologist Sherry Ortner writes, “that men were in 
some way or other ‘the fi rst sex’ ” (Ortner, 1996: 146). But critiques of 
these early cross-cultural analyses mounted, and in the 1990s some 
prominent feminist anthropologists reassessed the issue. Ortner thinks 
that argument about the universality of sexual inequality has continued 
for more than two decades because anthropologists assumed that each 
society would be internally consistent, an expectation she now believes 
to be unreasonable: “no society or culture is totally consistent. Every 
society/culture has some axes of male prestige and some of female, some 
of gender equality, and some (sometimes many) axes of prestige that 
have nothing to do with gender.”  Th e problem in the past has been that 
all of us were trying to pigeonhole each case. Now she argues instead 
that “the most interesting thing about any given case is precisely the 
multiplicity of logics operating, of discourses being spoken, of practices 
of prestige and power in play” (ibid.: 146). If one attends to the dynamics, 
the contradictions, and minor themes, Ortner believes, one can see both 
the currently dominant system and the potential for minor themes to 
become major ones. 
 Feminists also have incorrigible propositions, and a central one has 
been that all cultures, as the Nigerian anthropologist Oyeronke 
Oyewumi writes, “organize their social world through a perception of 
human bodies as male or female” (Oyewumi, 1998: 1053). In taking 
European and North American feminists to task over this proposition, 
Oyewumi shows how the imposition of a system of gender—in this 
case, through colonialism followed by scholarly imperialism—can alter 
our understandings of ethnic and racial diff erence. In her own detailed 
analysis of Yoruba culture, Oyewumi fi nds that relative age is a far more 
signifi cant social organizer. Yoruba pronouns, for example, do not indi-
cate sex, but rather who is older or younger than the speaker. 
 If Yoruba intellectuals had constructed the original scholarship on 
Yorubaland, Oyewumi thinks that “seniority would have been privileged 
over gender” (ibid.: 1061). Seeing Yoruba society through the lens of 
seniority rather than gender would have two important eff ects. First, if 
Euro-American scholars learned about Nigeria from Yoruba anthro-
pologists, our own belief systems about the universality of gender might 

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
79
change. Second, the articulation of a seniority-based vision of social 
organization among the Yoruba would, presumably, reinforce such social 
structures. 
 Th us historians and anthropologists disagree about how to interpret 
human sexuality across cultures and history. Philosophers even dispute 
the validity of the words “homosexual” and “heterosexual”—the very 
terms of the argument (Stein, 1998). But wherever they fall along 
the social constructionist spectrum, most argue from the assumption 
that there is a fundamental split between nature and culture, between 
“real bodies” and their cultural interpretations. Th is split, however, 
may not be a good way to look at the problem. Bodily experiences 
are brought into being by our development in particular cultures and 
historical periods. As we grow and develop, we literally, not just 
“discursively” (that is, through language and cultural practices), 
construct our bodies, incorporating experience into our very fl esh. If 
this is correct, the distinctions between the physical and the social 
body start to erode, something we illustrate with examples throughout 
this book. 
  O.K., O.K. but What about Biology? 
 At a recent scientifi c meeting on the biology of sex diff erences a top 
scientist in the fi eld averred to an audience of several hundred rapt 
listeners that, with regard to sex and sexual desire, men are really very 
simple. Th ey are either heterosexual and thus masculine in interests and 
desires or homosexual and thus feminized in interests and desires. 
Hardly any men, he said, are intermediate in desire. Women, the speaker 
agreed, were probably not so simple and so he focused more on what we 
think we know about men. 
 But what, exactly  are masculine and feminine men? One need only 
look at images of seventeenth-century men, dressed in frills and 
wigs, with rouge reddening their cheeks, to know that our ideas about 
masculinity and femininity have changed over the years. More recently 
(from roughly 1967 to the present) scientists who study sexuality 
have also gradually changed their conceptualization of masculine and 
feminine sexuality. 

80 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
 Figure 6.3   Seventeenth-century masculine attire. 

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
81
 In the late 1960s scientists viewed sexual intercourse (penile-vaginal 
penetration) as the unique spot where masculine and feminine met (as 
seen in  Figure 6.4 , reprinted from Jordan-Young, 2010). In theory, 
masculine men desired only women and their only goal for sex was the 
sex act itself. Feminine women were understood to desire only men, but 
their goals for the sex act were love and motherhood. Beyond that, a 
person with masculine sexuality masturbated, actively pursued sexual 
contact, had a high libido, had erotic dreams, had multiple sex partners, 
and was aroused by visual imagery. Th eoretically, a person with feminine 
sexuality did not masturbate, focused on their loved one, was monoga-
mous, romantic, had no erotic dreams, and was aroused only by direct 
touch. Th is understanding of masculine and feminine sexuality shaped 
research on both hetero and homosexuality during the 1960s and 1970s 
in very specifi c ways—of which more in a moment. 
 Figure 6.4     How brain organization researchers divided activities and desires into masculine and 
feminine in their early studies, roughly 1967 through 1980  .
 *Penile-vaginal intercourse should be understood as a “meeting-point” for masculine and feminine sexuality in 
this model, not an overlapping element .

82 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
 Around 1980 things changed. It is possible that the sexual revolution 
brought about by widespread availability of birth control, increases in 
the divorce rate, and other large social changes account for the changes 
in the structure of sexual science. But regardless of cause, scientists 
began to see feminine sexuality as more active and diverse than they had 
in earlier decades. Whereas previously masculinity and femininity only 
overlapped in the desire for sexual intercourse, since the early 1980s 
they have evolved many similarities ( Figure 6.5 , reprinted from Jordan-
Young, 2010). For researchers, human (rather than male or female) 
sexuality began to take center stage. While acknowledging diff erences 
of degree, researchers began to consider that both men and women have 
multiple partners, erotic dreams, frequent sexual activity, and mastur-
bate (Jordan-Young, 2010). 
 How do current ideas about masculine and feminine desire map onto 
our thinking about homosexuality? Social anthropologist Rebecca 
Jordan-Young focuses on several interconnected issues ( Table 6.1 ). 
Studies diff er in their defi nitional choices, and the choice of defi nition 
has consequences. It is the old apples and oranges problem. Not all 
studies on homosexuality and its origins can be compared, making it 
 Figure 6.5   Masculine and feminine sexuality in later studies, from about 1980 .

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
83
hard to accumulate consistent evidence on the possible origins of human 
sexual orientation. In fact it even makes it diffi  cult to agree on what 
might seem to be an elementary question: how frequent, in the human 
population, are the diff erent forms of sexual orientation? 
 What  is Sexual Orientation? 
 In the 1940s sex research pioneer Alfred Kinsey published a book 
reporting on his survey of sexual practices in a large sample of American 
men. He followed up, in 1953, with a similar volume on American 
women (Kinsey, Pomeroy, & Martin, 1948; Kinsey, Pomeroy, Martin, 
& Gebhard, 1953). Th ese two volumes shocked many because they 
revealed widespread experimentation and variability in sexual practices. 
For better or for worse, Kinsey captured individual behaviors and 
thoughts and found that they often did not fi t a neat picture of gay, 
straight, or bisexual. Kinsey wanted to assess the hetero-homosexual 
balance within each individual and so asked them about their 
activities and thoughts. (See  Table 6.2  for Kinsey’s Scale.) He did not 
intend to measure a person’s underlying identity, but this has not 
prevented contemporary researchers from using the Kinsey Scale to 
label individuals as gay or straight; scholars, however, disagree about 
the utility and accuracy of defi ning homosexuality on the basis of the 
Kinsey Scale. 
 Table 6.1  Research issues in the study of homosexuality 
 What IS sexual orientation? 
 • Sex of actual partner 
 • Self description 
 • Sex of people one falls in love with 
 • Degree of desire (preference) for same or other sex partners 
 Is orientation toward: 
 • men versus women? 
 • one’s own sex or the other sex? 
 Quantifying desire 
 •  What are the cutpoints,  i.e. how much interest in same sex sex disqualiﬁ es one from being 
scored as homosexual and vice versa? 

84 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
 Th e scale tells us how a researcher has rated an individual, but 
not which questions they asked to arrive at the rating. Indeed, 
diff erent researchers are interested in diff erent aspects of sexual expres-
sion. Some focus on actual behavior, some on personal identifi cation 
as gay, straight, or bi, some on sexual fantasies, and others use composite 
assessments that include all of the above (Jordan-Young, 2010). All 
of which is to say that studies that use the Kinsey Scale don’t all 
measure the same features of human behavior and desire. Apples and 
oranges . . . 
 When it fi rst appeared, Kinsey’s work shocked Americans; eventually 
the negative feedback led to a loss of funding for such studies. Th us 
there are long gaps during which little large scale research on sexuality 
occurred. But in the 1990s sociologist E. O. Laumann at the University 
of Chicago published two important volumes that detailed large, 
modern surveys of people’s desires, behaviors, and identities. Some of 
his results can be found in  Figures 6.6a  and  6.6b . What is really inter-
esting about Laumann’s results is that only a small percentage of the 
men and women they surveyed were “consistent” in their sexuality—
that is only a small number self-identifi ed as gay, had same sex sexual 
encounters,  and  reported same sex desires. Some had same sex desire 
and behaviors but did not self-identify as gay. Others had same sex 
sexual encounters but reported neither same sex attraction or identity. A 
close study of the results represented in  Figures 6.6a  and  6.6b show that 
“homosexuality is a multidimensional phenomenon that has manifold 
 Table 6.2   The Kinsey Scale 
 0 Exclusively heterosexual 
 1 Predominantly heterosexual, only incidentally homosexual 
 2 Predominantly heterosexual, but more than incidentally homosexual 
 3 Equally heterosexual and homosexual 
 4 Predominantly homosexual, but more than incidentally heterosexual 
 5 Predominantly homosexual, only incidentally heterosexual 
 6 Exclusively homosexual 
 X Asexual, non-sexual 

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
85
 Figure 6.6   (a) Among women, the relationships among same-sex desire, sexual behaviour with 
same-sex partners, and lesbian or bisexual identity.  (b)  Among men, the relationships 
among same-sex desire, sexual behaviour with same-sex partners, and gay or bisexual 
identity .

86 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
meanings and interpretations, depending on context and purpose” 
(Laumann, Gagnon, Michael, & Michaels, 1994: 301). 
 Framing Sexuality 
 We have just seen some of the ways in which human sexuality may be 
defi ned and measured. But what, conceptually, might the relationships 
be between masculinity, femininity, heterosexuality, and homosexuality? 
Scholars generally think about this in one of two possible ways (see 
Jordan-Young, 2010 for this and the discussion that follows next):
 1.  Perhaps people are either attracted to men (androphilic) or to 
women (gynephilic). If this is true, then heterosexual women  and 
gay men are both androphilic. Maybe getting at the underlying 
origins of androphilia could help explain heterosexual desire in 
women and homosexual desire in men. In this framework, the XY 
people with cloacal dystrophy discussed in the previous chapter have 
all turned out to be gynephilic, regardless of their gender identity.  
 2.  Or, maybe homosexuality is just what the word means—attraction 
to one’s own sex—women to women or men to other men. (I am 
leaving out bisexuality here to simplify the discussion.) 
 In scientifi c research, frameworks matter. If, as many biologists 
believe, there is a center in the brain that controls desire, then it might 
make sense to think of the center as developing in a masculine (prefers 
females) or a feminine (prefers males) way, possibly depending on fetal 
hormonal sex. Neuroscientist Simon LeVay espoused this point of view 
when he measured the size of a specifi c brain region in gay and straight 
men and in straight women. He argued that his fi ndings demonstrated 
that in some brain regions gay men and straight women’s brains are 
more alike (LeVay, 1991). Although attempts to confi rm critical aspects 
of LeVay’s fi ndings have produced mixed results, the important point 
here is to understand his framework, because many scientists conduct 
research on homosexuality using this basic point of view (Byne, 1997; 
Byne, Lasco, Kemether, Shinwari, Edgar, Morgello, et al., 2000; Byne, 
Tobet, Mattiace, Lasco, Kemether, Edgar, et al., 2001). 

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
87
 Many, but not all. If a scientist uses the same-sex attraction frame-
work for homosexuality  and considers that gay men and women have 
diff erently organized brains than straight men and women, then they 
have to postulate two diff erent models, one for men and one for women. 
In this example, high androgen exposure during female development is 
postulated to lead to homosexuality in women but a lack of androgen 
exposure causes homosexuality in men. Sometimes the researchers 
themselves do not recognize the distinction between these diff erent 
frameworks. Th e result is a complex literature which is diffi  cult to 
summarize or consistently interpret. Th us, despite extensive research 
into the biological causes of sexual desire, we know less about the topic 
than scientists sometimes claim. 
 It’s All in What You Measure 
 To put it crassly: if you identify yourself as a straight man, how much 
canoodling on the side (with men) do you have to do before you get 
counted as gay (even if you deny being gay)? Or if you don’t canoodle, 
what about fantasizing or having erotic dreams about men? Th ese ques-
tions analogize to both men and women, gay and straight identifi ed. 
Most often, these questions return us to Kinsey’s Scale. Researchers ask 
all sorts of questions about behaviors, fantasies, and identity and rate 
them on Kinsey’s Scale of 0–6. But then they have to decide about 
where to make their cuts. Are Kinsey 0s straight and Kinsey 6s gay and 
everyone else gets dropped from the study? Or maybe 0s and 1s get 
lumped together on one end of the scale and 5s and 6s on the other. 
 Socio-medical scientist Rebecca Jordan-Young was astounded at the 
variety of defi nitions used by researchers. In  Figure 6.7  I reproduce her 
table showing nine studies each using diff erent Kinsey-based defi nitions 
of homosexuality. Th is may turn out to be my favorite table of all time 
because it illustrates so sublimely the diffi  culty faced by students of 
nature. Some philosophers of science think that diff erences in the natural 
world are continuous or graded. Th is would mean that scientist-created 
categories are always somewhat arbitrary. Do we make the cut at 2 and 
at 5? Do we cut right down the middle? Others believe that there are 
natural categories that scientists merely identify, or, to use an oft cited 

88 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
metaphor, scientifi c categories carve nature at her joints. (Th ink of that 
holiday turkey. Do you carefully identify where two separate bones are 
joined by cartilage and carve through the connective tissue? Or do you 
take a pair of big, old poultry shears and chop through bone wherever it 
is to make chunks of a size that can fi t neatly on a serving platter?) 
 Jordan-Young believes that researchers who identify their research 
subjects by prenatal hormone status—for example, people who study 
variations in sexual development such as Congenital Adrenal 
Hyperplasia often adopt the continuum approach. In contrast, those 
who study a general population and group their subjects by sexual orien-
tation are more likely to use strong categories. Each approach is designed 
to “catch” as much diff erence as possible. Th ere is nothing wrong with 
 Figure 6.7     Variety in scientists’ use of Kinsey Scores. Note that in Meyer-Bahlberg et al. (1995) and 
Gastaud et al. (2007), the labels are implicit rather than explicit (for example, “subjects 
with homosexual inclinations” rather than “homosexuals”)  .

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
89
this. Scientists design studies with an eye towards maximizing chances 
of fi nding something measurable and hopefully of theoretical signifi -
cance. Th e problem comes when those same scientists forget that their 
defi nitions are conveniences that only partially refl ect what exists in the 
world. Sometimes, for example, researchers may drop a proportion of 
their subjects because, while they seemed homosexual in some ways, 
their answers to questionnaires were “inconsistent.” In such a case, the 
act of excluding the sort of multidimensionality seen in Edward 
Laumann’s studies, defi nes homosexuality as a two-dimensional, abso-
lute state. You either are or you’re not. 
 Scientists who think that biological variation causes or strongly 
contributes to human homosexuality go for the strong categories. 
Recent work frames partner choice as one of the most pronounced sex 
diff erences we know of. And this is certainly one way to look at it: most 
men prefer women as partners and most women prefer men (Bocklandt 
& Vilain, 2007; Ngun, Ghahramani, Sanchez, Bocklandt, & Vilain, 
2010). In searching for possible genetic, hormonal, or neurological 
underpinnings of partner preference, researchers have found samples 
that at least for men show a bimodal pattern of sexual orientation 
(Hamer, Hu, Magnuson, Hu, & Pattatucci, 1993), a fi nding quite 
diff erent from studies such as Laumann’s ( Figure 6.6 ). Th e big diff er-
ence between the approaches of geneticists and those of sociologists 
such as Laumann is how they fi nd their samples. Dean Hamer and his 
colleagues targeted a specifi c population by recruiting research subjects 
at AIDS clinics. Others have found subjects at gay rights parades or gay 
bars. Laumann and his colleagues fi nd their subjects using more of a 
dragnet approach. Th ey randomly sample the entire population in a city 
or neighborhood. 
 And this is the dilemma. If a geneticist is to have any hope of identi-
fying a gene involved with any kind of trait, he or she has to look for the 
strongest version of that trait. Also the cost, time, and technical exper-
tise needed to survey an entire population is great; and, when a funder 
gives money for a genetics study, the donor does not want the fi rst three 
or four years spent acquiring a giant population sample. Th ey want 
genes to be isolated and correlations to be found, or not. But by going 

90 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
for samples of convenience, emphasizing the extreme cases, the muddled 
middle disappears (at least for men). 
 Let’s for the moment grant biologists their bimodal distributions for 
sexual preference in men. Given their fi ndings for the samples they 
selected, what have they found out about genes, hormones, the brain, 
and sexual preference? On the matter of prenatal hormones and sexual 
orientation, experts hedge their bets. In one recent article the authors 
fi nd that “there is no convincing evidence linking diff erences in sexual 
orientation to variations in prenatal androgen” (Bocklandt & Vilain, 
2007: 256), while a second expert supports “a prenatal role for androgen 
in promoting male-typical sexual orientation” but hastens to add that 
hormones in the prenatal environment are “not the only factor deter-
mining” sexual orientation (Hines, 2009: 1886). Note that the phrase 
“male-typical sexual orientation” implicitly embraces an androphilic/
gynophilic model of sexual orientation. 
 With regard to possible structural diff erences in the brains of homo-
sexual vs heterosexual men there are no undisputed positive fi ndings. 
And even if there were, we would not have information about causation, 
since when we study adult brains, we can’t tell whether the brain devel-
oped in response to prior experience or whether the brain anatomy led 
to particular behavioral patterns. It is the chicken or egg problem all 
over again.  
 What a Diff erence a Sample Makes! 
 But if not hormones or brains, what about genes? One way to fi nd out 
if genes infl uence a particular behavior is to study twin pairs in which 
either both identify as gay (concordant) or one member identifi es as gay 
and the other doesn’t (discordant). Investigators seek out identical twins, 
because they share 100 percent of their genes, and compare them to 
so-called fraternal twins, who share half of their genes, just like any 
regular pair of siblings. If identical twins are both homosexual more 
often than are fraternal twins, researchers usually conclude that they 
have measured a genetic contribution to the development of homosexu-
ality. Th is assumes, of course, that identical twins are treated as diff er-
ently in the family and in other social networks as are fraternal twins, or 

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
91
that similar treatment ought not to infl uence this particular behavior. 
Since we have no idea what “treatments” might aff ect sexual preference, 
this is a diffi  cult assumption to test. Even so, the better twin studies 
make an honest eff ort to test factors that they can identify and know 
how to measure. 
 In the 1990s a number of twin studies appeared that seemed to point 
toward a strong genetic component to homosexuality. For example, 
researchers who published in 1991 concluded that “male sexual orienta-
tion is substantially genetic.” Th ey found that “fi fty-two percent of the 
identical twin brothers were gay, as against 22 percent of non-identical 
twins and 11 percent of the adoptive, genetically unrelated brothers” 
(Bailey & Pillard, 1991a, 1991b). Signifi cant criticism of this study 
stems from the small sample size and the related fact that the subjects 
were people who answered ads in magazines and newspapers that 
catered to a gay audience. Could bias based on the method of fi nding 
study subjects seriously aff ect the results? Th is question bothered the 
scientists who conducted the study enough that when they had a chance 
to ask the same questions again with a more neutrally obtained study 
sample they did so—and the results were quite diff erent. 
 Th is time, psychologist J. Michael Bailey and his colleagues obtained 
their study group from an Australian registry that lists 25,000 twin pairs 
of all sexualities. Th is enabled the researchers to whittle down their 
sample to include both identical and fraternal brothers, sisters, and 
mixed fraternal twin pairs. Even though there was some self selection 
(some of the twins failed to participate for unknown reasons) they 
ended up with a pretty big sample size obtained in a more random 
fashion than the earlier studies. And it turns out how you fi nd your 
subjects really matters (Bailey, Dunne, & Martin, 2000). 
 Previous studies by Bailey and colleagues had found that if one 
member of an identical twin pair was gay, then about 47–48 percent of 
the time the second pair member was also gay. But the new report, 
which had larger samples and avoided ascertainment bias, found that 
the concordance for twin pairs was only 20 percent for male pairs and 
24 percent for female pairs. Th is suggested, they wrote, “that concor-
dances from prior studies were infl ated because of concordance-

92 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
dependent ascertainment bias” (ibid.: 533). Because Bailey identifi ed a 
strong link between early childhood gender non-conformity (those 
boys who loved dolls and those girls who were passionate about rugby) 
and homosexuality, they examined possible links between gender non-
conformity, gender identity, and homosexuality, looking for evidence of 
both genetic infl uence and family environmental factors, both of which 
are considered to be familial traits. Importantly, the word “familial” does 
not distinguish between family genes and family environment. Th e 
results: homosexuality in their sample had strong familial infl uences, 
but “it was more diffi  cult to resolve the relative importance of additive 
genetic and shared environmental factors” (ibid.: 531). Which is to say, 
they could not provide signifi cant support for the importance of genes 
to the development of homosexuality. In contrast, they did fi nd evidence 
of a partial genetic contribution to childhood gender non-conformity. 
Th e fact that this genetic contribution is far from absolute and appears 
to be stronger in males than in females suggests that there is still a lot to 
be explained by examining the developmental dynamics of desire.  
 What about DNA? 
 Let’s make this brief. Several molecular biology labs have looked for 
segments of DNA common to men and women whom they have iden-
tifi ed as gay. Th e results have been mixed—reports that cannot be 
confi rmed, studies that don’t reveal much because the sample size is too 
small, possible problems with ascertainment bias, etc. Beyond any 
specifi c study, however, there are several problems inherent to the 
approach that make it unlikely the search for a DNA sequence or 
sequences linked to homosexuality will ever pan out.
 1.  We already know that if there are genes involved, there must be a 
number of them, each of which has a small eff ect. Th is makes it 
diffi  cult to identify them without using very large population 
samples, something hard to do, as we have already seen.  
 2.  We already know that environmental factors play an important role 
in the development of sexual preference. If genes and environment 
interact, then the eff ect of a gene might be great in one environment 

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
93
and small or non-existent in another. So hunting for genes would 
be best done by comparing people in diff erent environments. But 
this is hard to do because we really don’t know what the relevant 
environments are.  
 3.  Studying the genetics of behavior is always diffi  cult because some 
combinations of genes might not be enough for a measurable 
behavior to emerge (Mustanski, Chivers, & Bailey, 2002).  
 Th ere is another way.  
 Framing the Study of Desire 
 So far I have done nothing but complain about how hard it is to study 
human sexuality. And it  is  hard. But if scientists were to openly 
articulate our measurement and framing issues, and our diff ering 
theoretical stances, perhaps we could develop a few parallel research 
programs that, while diff ering in their points of view, could fruitfully 
acknowledge one another and, dare I say, rationally cross check 
fi ndings and regularly rethink theories and frames with subtlety and 
respect. 
 Here are the premises  I would use to frame research on human 
sexuality:
 1.  Sexual desire has a neurophysiological component that individuals 
come to interpret as pleasure and attraction. In other words what we 
think of as emotions have an underlying physiology.  
 2.  Th e underlying physiology develops over time as much in response 
to specifi c experiences as it is a driver of specifi c experiences. In 
other words, sexuality is dynamic  and “in the body.” 
 3.  To study the development of adult sexuality and desire, we need to 
start by understanding the physiology and embodiment of pleasure 
from infancy (Freud—are you still there?), through childhood, 
adolescence, young adulthood, into middle and old age. Th at is, 
embodied sexuality and desire at physio-emotional levels has a life 
cycle. Expression at any stage of the cycle is conditioned in part by 
what has gone before. How we have trained our bodies in our 

94 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
pre-teens, teens, and twenties aff ects how our bodies respond in our 
thirties and forties.  
 4.  Finally, I would accept the complexity and contextual nature of 
desire. Th is is really where a lot of the argument lies. Many scholars 
(I will call them fundamentalists) treat sexual preference or orienta-
tion as a fi xed thing—a characteristic, a permanent phenotype; true, 
an individual might deviate from his or her phenotype for some 
temporary reason. But the deviation would not alter the funda-
mental phenotype. Sailors at sea for long periods of time, for 
example, might have sexual experiences with one another, but only 
because women were absent. Once on shore leave, those who were 
fundamentally heterosexual would immediately seek out women for 
company, those who were homosexual would seek out other men.  
 Many researchers, especially those interested in the biological aspects 
of sexuality, fully accept this framework, which is why they have no 
problem studying only the strong categories. In contrast, sociologists 
such as Laumann, and some psychologists and anthropologists, think 
that throwing out the inconsistent or intermediate groups leaves you 
with watery gruel rather than a rich human porridge. In her book  Sexual 
Fluidity , psychologist Lisa Diamond reviews these points of view in a 
very helpful fashion (Diamond, 2008) (I will call the latter contextual-
ists, or alternatively developmentalists). Let’s explore the problem with 
an historical example. 
 Alexander Berkman (1870–1936) was a Russian- (today it would be 
Lithuanian-) born anarchist who emigrated to the United States where 
he and his more famous lover and political compatriot Emma Goldman 
(1869–1940) engaged in a form of political activism that included what 
they called “propaganda of the deed.” One such deed was his attempt to 
assassinate the American industrialist and steel baron, Henry Clay Frick 
(1849–1919). Th is act landed Berkman in jail, where he served 
14 years of a 22 year sentence. Which brings us to his  Prison Memoirs of 
an Anarchist , which contains some amazingly explicit (for the time) 
passages about love, emotions, and sex in the prison (Berkman, 1912). It 
is these I want to examine. 

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
95
 On the one hand, Berkman’s heterosexual passions were strong. He 
pined for Goldman and other lovers and wrote movingly of his young 
love and passion. On the other, there is no doubt that in prison he fell 
in love, it seems at least twice, with other men. Th is happened in a 
context of great loneliness (he was in solitary for long periods of time), 
but the passion was real. Consider the following passage describing his 
interchanges with another prisoner called Johnny:
 we converse . . . talking in a frank, confi dential manner. With a 
glow of pleasure, I become aware of the note of tenderness in his 
voice . . . the springs of aff ection well up within me, as I lie huddled 
on the stone fl oor . . . With closed eyes, I picture the boy before me, 
with his delicate face, and sensitive girlish lips . . . [In a later conver-
sation, Berkman reports the following exchange] Johnny says “if 
you were here with me I would like to kiss you.” [Berkman writes] 
An unaccountable sense of joy glows in my heart . . . [I reply] I feel 
just as you do . . . 
 (ibid.: 322–323) 
 Th is passage is an easy one for the fundamentalists. Th ey readily 
acknowledge that a heterosexual man can fall in love in an extreme 
setting such as prison. But because they “revert” to their heterosexuality 
(as Berkman did) when they return to mixed company, a fundamentalist 
would say that heterosexuality remains the essential phenotype of a man 
such as Berkman. Rather than focus on an enduring essence, however, a 
contextualist would emphasize the diverse capacities of sexual desire 
and expression found within any one individual. For a contextualist, 
what is most interesting is the developmental dynamic that allows a set 
of feelings and desires to stabilize under a certain set of conditions. 
Equally interesting for these scholars are the conditions that destabilize 
one form of sexual desire and allow new forms to emerge and stabilize. 
 Perhaps even more telling for the contextualist is a story Berkman 
tells late in the book about a conversation with a fellow prisoner 
called George. In this frank conversation they discuss everything from 
masturbation to pederasty, but what fi nally emerges is George’s gradual 

96 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
transformation from a married, heterosexual man who held strong 
prejudices against homosexuals, to a man who, in prison, fell deeply in 
love with another prisoner and did not “revert back” to heterosexual 
engagements. “It came very gradually,” he wrote of his falling in love. 
“For two years I loved him without the least taint of sex desire . . . But 
by degrees the psychic state began to manifest all the expressions of love 
between the opposite sexes . . . Perhaps you will smile at this Aleck but 
it was real, true love . . .” (ibid.: 438–439). 
 If the above passage had been written by a woman rather than a man 
most modern-day sexologists would not even blink. Th ere is a growing 
consensus that men and women diff er rather dramatically in how their 
sexual orientation and desire manifests itself over the life cycle. Th is is 
why the speaker at the meeting on sex and gender whom I quoted earlier 
(men straightforward, women complex) said what he said. When 
pushed, even the fundamentalists, who will argue fi ercely that men are 
either gay or straight and pretty much begin life that way and remain so 
until death, will agree that their theories don’t really work for women. 
Some fundamentalists argue, in fact, that in contrast to men, women 
don’t “have” a sexual orientation, if by the latter one means a permanent, 
usually unchangeable preference for sexual and love partners of the 
same sex. 
 Psychologist Lisa Diamond has supplied strong evidence for this 
point of view. Recently, she reported on the fi rst ten years of a life cycle 
study of sexual preference in women who initially identifi ed themselves 
as having a same sex orientation. Diamond recruited her sample of 
about 100 women when they were young—average age of 20—and has 
interviewed them every two years since then. Each time she assessed 
their place on a Kinsey Scale, and also asked directly how their sexuality 
has changed (or not) and how they conceptualize their own identity 
compared to their previous interview. Since this is an ongoing study, we 
can expect more to emerge as “her women” move from their teens and 
twenties into middle age and beyond. Her early fi ndings are tantalizing 
(Diamond, 2008). 
 To start with her sample consisted of 43 percent self-identifi ed 
lesbians, 30 percent self-identifi ed bisexuals and 27 percent who, while 

 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY 
97
considering themselves to be “non-heterosexual” did not otherwise label 
themselves. Diamond was surprised to discover that a mere two years 
after her fi rst interview about one third of the women had changed their 
identities. And the types of switching did not fi t current theories. Some 
changed from un-labeled to lesbian or bisexual; others switched from 
lesbian or bisexual to un-labeled; and a third group switched from lesbian 
to heterosexual. Well, Diamond reasoned, these women are all young; 
perhaps their sexual identity development is still in fl ux; surely they will 
have settled down by the time of the next couple of interviews.  Not!  
 Over the course of ten years the women continued to switch catego-
ries “typically in a way that broadened, rather than narrowed their poten-
tial range of attractions and relationships” (ibid.: 67). Astoundingly, in 
ten years two thirds of the women had changed their sexual identity 
labels at least once (Diamond, 2007). As a result of her fi ndings, Diamond 
identifi es four important aspects of female sexuality. First, she concludes 
that women  do have a general sexual orientation, most commonly to 
men, but also to both sexes and, less frequently, mainly to other women. 
Second, Diamond suggests that in addition to a general sexual orienta-
tion women are sensitive to situations and relationships that might 
mediate erotic feelings. She calls this “sexual fl uidity” and off ers as exam-
ples intense emotional relationships or greater positive exposure to 
same-sex relationships. Th ird, fl uidity can trigger sexual attractions that 
may be short or long-lived. Fourth, just as women have diff erent orienta-
tions, not all women are equally fl uid. Th is means that the same “trigger 
experiences” might trigger fl uidity in one person but not another. 
 How diff erent is Diamond’s picture of female sexuality from what we 
know about male sexuality and why? First, the diff erences may be 
matters of degree rather than kind. Alexander Berkman’s sexual fl uidity 
appeared under circumstances of extreme deprivation, but it does seem 
fair to describe the incidents in his prison memoir as fl uidity. Perhaps 
men also have the trait of sexual fl uidity, but it is less easily evoked than 
for women. If so, why might that be? Here we return to the frustration 
of inadequate theory. We simply do not understand either the biological 
or the psychological, sociological, and cultural processes by which 
human sexual desire develops. It is not surprising that the 

98 
THINKING ABOUT HOMOSEXUALITY
developmental pathways seem to diff er in men and women. Th e sexes 
diff er with regard to physiological and reproductive development. But 
so too do they diff er with regard to psychological, sociological, and 
cultural development, so sorting out the one from the other is pretty 
diffi  cult. 
 Indeed, the future understandings of human sexuality lie in our ability 
to design dynamic, multidimensional approaches that can follow the 
development of sexual desire, orientation, and fl uidity throughout the 
life cycle. Diamond has already begun to place her fi rst decade of fi nd-
ings on women in a new theoretical context. For example, she docu-
ments non-linear discontinuities rather than linear and continuous 
changes in female sexual expression. She notes that, for women, new 
forms of sexual expression seem to self organize and emerge rather 
suddenly in new contexts, but that each new state can remain stable over 
relatively long periods of time. Th ese are the hallmarks of a dynamic 
system and they may well apply to men, although the time scale of 
change, the strength of stable states, and the extremity of altered contexts 
which lead to change will very likely be found to diff er.  
 Further Reading 
 Ansermet ,  F. ,   Magistretti ,  P. , &   Fairfi eld ,  S.  ( 2007 ).   Biology of Freedom: Neural Plasticity, 
Experience and the Unconscious .  New York :  Other Press . 
 Bailey ,  J. M.  , &   Zucker ,  K. ( 1995 ).  Childhood sex-typed behavior and sexual orientation: A 
conceptual analysis and quantitative review .   Developmental Psychology ,  31 ( 1 ),  43 – 55 . 
 D’Emilio ,  J.  , &   Freedman ,  E. B.  ( 1988 ).   Intimate Matters: A History of Sexuality in America . 
 New York :  Harper and Row . 
 Ellis ,  H. ( 1913 ).  Studies in the Psychology of Sex .  Philadelphia, PA :  P.A. Davis . 
 Harris ,  A. ( 2005 ).  Gender as Soft Assembly .  Hillsdale, NJ :  Th e Analytic Press . 
 Katz ,  J. N.  ( 1995 ).  Th e Invention of Heterosexuality .  New York :  Dutton . 
 Kraff t-Ebing ,  R. V.  ( 1892 ).   Psychopathia Sexualis, with Especial Reference to Contrary Sexual 
Instinct: A Medico-Legal Study .  Philadelphia, PA :  F.A. Davis . 
 Nye ,  R. A. (Ed.) ( 1998 ).  Sexuality .  Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Stein ,  E. ( 1999 ).  Th e Mismeasure of Desire: Th e Science, Th eory and Ethics of Sexual Orientation . 
 Oxford :  Oxford University Press .    

99
 7 
 THINKING ABOUT GROUPS; 
THINKING ABOUT INDIVIDUALS  
 Diff erence in Context 
 Boys and girls have a lot in common but they also diff er. Th ey begin 
their developmental journeys with diff erent chromosomes, but at fi rst 
have identical gonads, and internal and external genitals. Hormone 
levels that orchestrate portions of sexual development diff er as well. As 
development proceeds these “bits and pieces” diverge. In societies in 
which food is varied and plentiful and pregnant women well fed, we 
fi nd a number of average diff erences between boys and girls at birth. 
How do we best interpret these diff erences? Does gender necessarily 
predict the future of each individual as he or she appears on earth? At 
one level this question might seem simple—the answer is  yes . Gender 
matters. (To follow up on this point check out the fi eld of feminist 
geography (Seager, 2003).) At other levels, however, the answer is not so 
obvious, a claim we explore in the next few pages. 
 Let’s start with brain or head size, where head circumference is 
usually seen as a valid stand in for brain size. A summary of studies of 
head size in developing fetuses and in neonates reveals a couple of note-
worthy results ( Table 7.1 ). First, most studies have been done on infants 
born in relatively wealthy, industrialized countries. Th e importance of 
this fact will become clear in a moment. Second, the size of the diff er-
ences have been measured using a special statistic called Cohen’s d. 

100 
THINKING ABOUT GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS
 Table 7.1   Sex differences in biparietal diameter and head circumference 
 Study 
 Sample 
 N 
 Measures 
 Girls’ mean  Boys’ mean  Cohen’s d 
 (Bromley, 
Frigoletto, 
Harlow, 
Evans, & 
Benacerraf, 
1993) 
 Healthy 
fetuses at 
18 g.w. 
 Healthy 
fetuses at 
19 g.w. 
 Healthy 
fetuses at 
20 g.w. 
 Healthy 
fetuses at 
21 g.w. 
 1247 
 2089 
 1635 
  694 
 Biparietal 
diameter 
 42.1 mm 
 44.8 mm 
 47.8 mm 
 50.6 mm 
 42.8 mm 
 .30 
 .37 
 .37 
 .27 
 45.7 mm 
 48.7 mm 
 51.3 mm 
 (Crawford, 
Doyle, & 
Meadows, 
1987) 
 Healthy 
neonates 
in London 
  99 
 Head 
circumference 
 33.8 cm 
 34.6 cm 
 .39 
Scientists calculate Cohen’s d by subtracting the diff erence between 
the means of two populations and then dividing by a statistic called 
the standard deviation. Th is number measures how variable each 
population is. In one study in  Table 7.1  for example, the mean for girls’ 
head circumference was 33.8 cm and for boys’ was 34.6 cm (Crawford, 
Doyle, & Meadows, 1987). Th e Cohen’s d was 0.39, which means 
that 73 percent of boys and girls overlap for brain size at birth 
( Figure 7.1 ). 
 In a diff erent study of brain diameter at 21 weeks of gestation, a 
smaller diff erence was found. In this case the Cohen’s d was 0.27, an 
overlap of about 80 percent (Bromley, Frigoletto, Harlow, Evans, & 
Benacerraf, 1993). Most psychologists consider these to be small diff er-
ences (compared to, say, the diff erence between chihuahuas and Saint 
Bernards in  Figure 4.3 ). A sex diff erence in brain size is also seen in 

 
THINKING ABOUT GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS 
101
older children and adults but there is a gap in information about size 
diff erences between birth and 4 years of age (Giedd, Castellanos, 
Rajapakse, Vaituzis, & Rapoport, 1997). Since the fi rst four years involve 
enormous changes in brain size and complexity, we can’t understand 
later size diff erences without studying this period of great growth. 
A lot could be going on. Th e initial size diff erences could increase or 
disappear. New diff erences could take shape. And these might depend 
on diff erent types and quantities of neural stimulation, or diff erent 
maternal diets all of which could induce diff erent genetic activities 
 Figure 7.1    Cohen’s d for (a) prenatal and (b) neonatal brain size differences between males and 
females. 
 For a color version of this ﬁ gure please go to  www.routledge.com/cw/fausto-sterling 

102 
THINKING ABOUT GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS
during gestation. Furthermore, the fact that the diff erences involved are 
so small means that the brain size of most boys and girls are not diff erent 
at all ( Figure 7.1 ). In other words, even though there is an average or 
mean diff erence between the group we call boys and the group we call 
girls (that would be an average group diff erence), we cannot infer the 
brain size of any individual based on knowing merely that they are a boy 
or a girl. 
 Before considering why any of this might matter later in life, let’s 
look at a second example and tuck one more important concept—the 
norm of reaction—under our belt. At birth (in countries with good 
maternal nutrition) boys outweigh girls by almost half a pound (eff ect 
sizes of 0.15 to 0.40, i.e. 73 to 89 percent overlap in male and female 
birth populations) (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 2000; 
Crawford et al., 1987; Davis, Cutter, Goldenberg, Hoff man, Cliver, & 
Brumfi eld, 1993; CDC growth charts 2000), although the weight 
diff erences disappear by ages 2–3 years. 
 Now let’s make this story a little more complicated. How, for example, 
do relative birthweights vary when nutrition is better or worse, or 
mothers are more likely to be ill? An analysis from the World Health 
Organization of a large body of published studies found that the male–
female diff erence in birth weight in developed countries was about three 
tenths of a pound. However, the sex diff erence in developing nations 
was only two tenths of a pound (Kramer, 1987). What does this compar-
ison between developed and developing countries tell us? First off , we 
know that birth weight increases with better nutrition and health and 
that overall birth weight has increased a great deal in developed coun-
tries over the past few decades. But when birth weight is low or when it 
is high, are boys and girls equally aff ected? Do XX and XY embryos 
respond to the same degree to low and to high nutrition, to certain types 
of illness, or to maternal smoking or other known factors aff ecting birth 
weight? It turns out that such information is hard to fi nd. 
 In the language of geneticists what I am really asking is: do XX and 
XY embryos have the same  norm of reaction for each of a number of 
environmental situations? A norm of reaction? What is  that ? Well for 
one thing, it is a concept that most people who do huge population 

 
THINKING ABOUT GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS 
103
studies of birth weight seem unaware of. As an example, consider the 
insect eye, or more specifi cally the beady-eyed little fruit fl y. Th e beads 
in that beady little eye are individual light receiving organs called 
ommatidia, and the overall size of the eye depends on the number of 
ommatidia. Th is number depends, in turn, on many things including the 
temperature at which the fl y developed and the genetic make-up of 
each fl y. We can see this clearly in  Figure 7.2  which shows the norm of 
reaction for fl y eye development under diff erent growth temperatures. 
Particularly interesting are the two mutants, which have opposite 
responses to temperature. At lower temperatures they look identical and 
at higher temperatures they diff er vastly. Norms of reaction can be 
measured for any environmental trait of interest. In the case of the plant 
genus  Ranunculus , leaf shape depends on whether the plant grows 
underwater, at the water–air interface, or in  plein air . One important 
point—there is no way to intuit a norm of reaction. It must be measured, 
rather than imagined or taken for granted. 
 Now consider a report from a Canadian epidemiologist that between 
1981 and 2003 the mean birth weight for Canadian girls has increased 
at a faster rate than for boys. Th is means that the sex diff erence in birth 
weights has gotten smaller. Th is contrasts with a comparison between 
developing and developed countries, since boys have gotten relatively 
larger in wealthier nations. Th e intriguing question is why (van Vliet, 
Liu, & Kramer, 2009). Th e report’s authors hypothesize that the 
decreasing diff erence is abnormal and might be due to pollution from 
substances that disrupt androgen function. Although evidence is scarce, 
they could be right. Th e future of gender may well be aff ected by these 
endocrine disrupting pollutants. But there is a less ominous possibility 
as well, just waiting to be carefully tested. 
 Suppose that XX and XY fetuses diff er in their norms of reaction for 
improved nutrition, decreased maternal smoking, or other factors that 
increase fetal growth and birth weight. Canada is, after all, a nation 
which has taken great strides in optimizing health. Maybe, at the very 
high end of the gestational health spectrum, XX and XY fetuses just 
aren’t that diff erent. What we could be witnessing, then, is the disap-
pearance of a well established biological sex diff erence. Th e reason might 

   
Figure 7.2   (a) Wild type (non-mutant) ﬂ ies develop fewer ommatidia when raised at higher temperatures. This is also true for a mutant of eye development 
called ultrabar. The opposite, however, is true for the mutant infrabar. Thus infrabar and ultrabar ﬂ ies are identical when raised at 15°C but look 
very different when raised at 30°C.   (b) The leaves of the water plant of the genus  Ranunculus  look remarkably different depending on the environ-
ment in which they develop. 

 
THINKING ABOUT GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS 
105
be nefarious (anti-androgen pollution) but it might be the end result of 
a culture that has vastly improved maternal health and nutrition. I have 
scoured the literature on birth weight to see if I could fi nd evidence for 
the latter explanation and aside from the 1987 WHO study already 
cited, there is nothing to be found. Indeed the concept of a norm of 
reaction does not seem to be in use among scientists who study sex 
diff erences in birth weight, so on this point, the future of gender is still 
to be written. 
 Does Any of  Th is Matter for Adults? 
 O.K. We have these diff erences at birth. Th ey are small; they don’t tell 
us much about any particular individual. And they may be a moving 
target as the environmental conditions for fetal growth and develop-
ment change. Do they really matter at all? We can visit this question by 
jumping ahead and asking (1) what do we know about sex diff erences in 
adults? and (2) if there are any, where they might have come from? 
 If there  are any? But of course there are. We know that men are from 
Mars and women are from Venus. We read about it all the time in the 
media. Well, “not so fast” says psychologist Janet Hyde. In 2005 Hyde 
published her Gender Similarities Hypothesis. She started by surveying 
all the studies of sex diff erences in adolescents and adults that she 
could fi nd. She pooled and analyzed the data from these many reports 
( Table 7.2 ) in order to estimate just how large these diff erences were. 
On the whole, the size of each published diff erence was small (using 
Cohen’s d as a measure). Th e exceptions were throwing velocity, physical 
aggression, and attitudes about casual sex. Th e other diff erences were 
small and possibly continuing to decrease in size (Hyde, 2005, 2007; 
Hyde, Lindberg, Linn, Ellis, & Williams, 2008). 
 When possible, Hyde broke down her fi ndings by age. For example, 
studies of the ability to solve complex math problems showed no sex-
related diff erences from ages 5 to 10, tiny diff erences in the early teens, 
and growing diff erences in the late teens and early twenties. Th e largest 
eff ect size was 0.32 (or 76 percent overlap). Diff erences do not always 
increase with age however. Hyde reported that sex-related diff erences in 
self esteem increased through late adolescence but then decreased to 

106 
THINKING ABOUT GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS
 Table 7.2      A sample of effect sizes extracted from 46 meta-analyses of research on psychological 
gender differences 
 Variable 
 No. of reports 
 Effect size ( d ) 
 Cognitive variables 
 Mathematics problem solving 
  48 
 +0.08 
 Mathematics 
  6* 
 +0.16 
 Reading comprehension 
  5* 
 −0.09 
 Mental rotation 
  78 
 +0.56 
 Communication 
 Self-disclosure 
 205 
 −0.18 
 Smiling 
 418 
 −0.40 
 Social and personality variables 
 Physical aggression 
 111 
 +0.33 to +0.84 
 Verbal aggression 
  68 
 +0.09 to +0.55 
 Helping behavior 
  99 
 +0.13 
 Leadership effectiveness 
  76 
 −0.02 
 Self-esteem 
 216 
 +0.21 
 Depression symptoms 
  49 
 −0.16 
 Attitudes about casual sex 
  10 
 +0.81 
 Miscellaneous 
 Throwing velocity 
  12 
 +2.18 
 Moral reasoning: justice orientation 
  95 
 +.019 
 Source: Hyde (2005) 
 * Data were from major, national samples 
virtually zero in adults. Once again, the important point is develop-
mental. Th e math diff erence did not exist in young children, began to 
grow during the teen years and became larger in young adulthood. 
Knowing the developmental dynamics of a trait allows researchers to 
look at the emergence or disappearance of diff erence, asking what 
components of each individual’s being and experience contribute to its 
growth and maintenance. 
 Not only do many sex-related diff erences that exist in adulthood 
develop over the course of individual development, but the aggregate 
trends can change over time. Th is latter fact also gives us insight into the 

 
THINKING ABOUT GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS 
107
stream of experience contributing to specifi c skill development and 
again suggests that diff erence is not usually static. Rather it is a steady 
state supported by a particular developmental history, time, and place. 
For example, data from the 1970s and 1980s showed a 25 percent defi cit 
in complex problem solving for girls compared to boys, starting in high 
school. Measurements made from standardized tests in the last decade, 
however, suggest that these diff erences have almost evaporated. Why? 
Hyde points to one important factor: before the year 2000 girls took 
fewer advanced high school math and science courses than boys. Today, 
they study high school calculus at the same rate as boys and earn 48 
percent of the undergraduate mathematics degrees (Hyde et al., 2008). 
 Hyde reported on still other studies in which the size and even the 
direction of sex-related diff erences varied with context. For example 
experimenters tested college students with similar math training. In one 
condition they told students that men had in the past done better than 
women on the test. In another they said the test was “gender fair.” In the 
fi rst case women did more poorly than men, while in the second condi-
tion there were no sex diff erences. “Th e conclusion,” Hyde writes, “is 
clear.” Th e size and “even the direction of gender diff erences depends on 
the context” (2005: 589). Hyde argues that this fact, the fact that diff er-
ences develop rather than appear full blown, and that most diff erences 
are small argues against a “men are from Mars, women are from Venus” 
diff erences model, with its idea that psychological sex-related diff er-
ences are large and stable (Hyde, 2005). 
 Not everyone accepts Hyde’s ideas. Psychologist Richard Lippa has 
several objections. He points, for example, to a report of large diff er-
ences in women’s and men’s occupational preferences as well as noting 
childhood diff erences in toy preferences and play styles. Still, Lippa’s 
“the gender reality hypothesis” actually sounds quite similar to Hyde’s 
“sex similarities.” Lippa holds that many diff erences are small, some are 
intermediate, and a few are large (Lippa, 2006). Both Lippa and Hyde 
agree on one central idea, however: the task that still confronts scientists 
is to understand more about the mechanisms which produce both simi-
larities and diff erences. Why do they appear and disappear? Why are 
some stable and others highly context dependent? We have no clear 

108 
THINKING ABOUT GROUPS AND INDIVIDUALS
answers to these questions, but in the next chapter we off er some new 
ways to analyze the problem.  
 Further Reading 
 Center for Disease Control  ( 2000 ).  2000 CDC growth charts :  United States . Retrieved 
from:  http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts , accessed December 13, 2011.  
 Gilbert ,  S. F.  , &   Epel ,  D.  ( 2008 ).   Ecological Developmental Biology .  Sunderland, MA :  Sinauer 
Associates. 
 Krimsky ,  Sheldon  ( 2002 ).   Hormonal Chaos: Th e Scientifi c and Social Origins of the Environmental 
Endocrine Hypothesis .  Baltimore, MD :  Johns Hopkins University Press.  
 Lewontin ,  R. ( 1982 ).  Human Diversity .  New York :  Scientifi c American Books . 
 Schlichting ,  C. D.  , &   Pigliucci ,  M. ( 1998 ).   Phenotypic Evolution: A Reaction Norm Perspective . 
 Sunderland, MA :  Sinauer Associates . 
 Seager ,  J.  ( 2003 ).  Th e Penguin Atlas of Women in the World .  London :  Myriad Editions . 
 Steele ,  Claude  ( 2010 ).   Whistling Vivaldi: And Other Clues to how Stereotypes Aff ect Us . 
 New York :  W.W. Norton . 

109
 8 
 PINK AND BLUE FOREVER 
 Interlude 
 Let’s think about baby blankets and infant clothing. Start by looking 
at websites that sell baby clothes, for example,  http://www.carters.com . 
First, note the sex segregation. If you go to the girls’ side (listed in a pink 
font) you can buy that special newborn baby girl a pink monkey or 
a pink butterfl y sleep and play outfi t. Or maybe you would like to get 
her a pink puppy, long sleeved tee shirt, or a tee with a silver horse on a 
bright pink background. You get the idea. But if you click on the blue 
font list for boys you get other choices: a blue car, cotton sleep outfi t, a 
rough and tough, orange thermal tee shirt, a grey and blue goal kicker 
tee, or a sporty handsome cotton sleep and play that looks like a baby 
version of a professional baseball outfi t. Th ere is no mistaking which 
baby is the boy and which the girl, right? Just look at the blanket color 
or what they are wearing. And why not? From time immemorial haven’t 
adults dressed their little boys and little girls diff erently? Haven’t adults 
always wanted to be able to tell at a glance whether the infant before 
them is a boy or a girl? Well, it turns out, not so much. 
 Our current obsession with baby sex seems to have started in about 
1920. At the same time that we developed the need to know at a glance 
whether an infant was a boy or a girl, we also did a 180 on the pink and 
blue thing. Consider an article written in 1914 in a US newspaper called 

110 
PINK AND BLUE FOREVER
the  Sunday Sentinel . “If you like the color note on the little one’s 
garments,” the report advised mothers, “use pink for the boy and blue 
for the girl.” A 1918 piece in the  Ladies Home Journal  opined that pink 
was for boys and blue for girls because pink is “a more decided and 
stronger color . . . more suitable for the boy, while blue . . . is more deli-
cate and dainty . . . prettier for the girl” (cited in Frassanito & Pettorini, 
2008: 881). As recently as 1940 red and pink symbolized strength and 
courage and blue faith and constancy. Catholic traditions in Europe 
associated blue with the Virgin Mary; but by the 1930s Nazi Germany, 
especially via the pink triangle used to stigmatize homosexual men, 
anchored a new association of pink with femininity (Frassanito & 
Pettorini, 2008). After World War II the reversal seemed complete. 
Military uniforms were made out of blue cloth and the association with 
masculinity in the United States and Western Europe was fi xed, but 
recently enough that the generation of adults currently in their fi fties 
was the fi rst to be brought up with strict pink=female, blue=male color 
coding (Paoletti, 1997). 
 Th e color switch was part of a bigger transformation in children’s 
clothing style. In the late 1880s all infants were dressed in long white 
dresses until they started to walk. As toddlers both boys and girls wore 
short, loose-fi tting dresses, and from 3 to about 5 years all kids wore 
dresses or suits with short skirts. Boys and girls wore slightly diff erent 
outfi ts, but basically their dress most nearly resembled women’s clothing. 
In this period adults seemed more preoccupied with dress that distin-
guished between children and adults than boys from girls. Why this 
began to change is uncertain. One can, however, speculate that as adult 
women entered the public sphere, as they attained civil rights such as 
the vote and the right to own property, that clarifying gender bound-
aries for babies and children grew more important (Paoletti, 1987). 
Whatever the reason, at the end of the 1890s by age 2 or 3 little boys 
stopped wearing dresses. Th is change met with some resistance, espe-
cially from feminists. In 1910 feminist Charlotte Perkins Gilman wrote 
of the “conspicuous evil” of a “premature and unnatural diff erentiation 
in sex in the dress of little children” (cited in Paoletti, 1987: 142). But 
the tide of early gender diff erentiation did not turn back. 

 
PINK AND BLUE FOREVER 
111
 I have walked us through this interlude for two reasons. First, some-
times things that seem obvious, universal, and unchangeable really aren’t. 
Strong as it is, the specifi c shape of so-called feminine and masculine 
color coding is peculiar to our (historical) period. Pink and blue provide 
a colorful example of socially produced gender coding. Second, despite 
the code being socially produced, it probably  has  changed how our bodies 
work. Th is leads me to the last section of the book—understanding sex 
and gender as a developmental dynamic in which the social, the cultural, 
and the body are so intertwined that if we try to disentangle them we 
end up losing the forest amidst the trees. To explain this, let’s further 
explore pink and blue and toys for boys (and girls).  

 9 
 THE DEVELOPMENTAL 
DYNAMICS OF PINK AND BLUE  
 Developing Color Preferences 
 Korean artist JeongMee Yoon is obsessed with pink and blue. Or rather 
her young daughter was obsessed with pink, which led Yoon to produce 
photos such as “Lauren and Carolyn and Th eir Pink Th ings” and “Ethan 
and His Blue Th ings” which depict infants surrounded by a sea of blue or 
a sea of pink objects. Yoon’s daughter is far from the only little girl in love 
with the color pink ( Figure 2.3 ). Parenting blogs provide anecdotal 
evidence that children over the age of 1 year sometimes develop strong 
color preferences. One parent asks if it is normal for her 16 month old 
son to be obsessed with the color light green. Another parent replied that 
his or her daughter had been obsessed since about the same age with hot 
pink, while a nephew in the same age range had progressed from loving 
green to a new favorite at age 3.5 of yellow. Others on this blog chimed 
in: a toddler son who loved orange and then “graduated to black, silver 
and brown”; a daughter who preferred purple and yellow and whose 
mother felt she had trained her in the preference by furnishing her from 
birth with lilac and yellow blankets, clothes, and stuff ed animals.  1  
 Th ere are few systematic studies of color preference in children under 
the age of 2. But a study of kids aged 4–11 revealed that more boys than 
girls liked the colors black, blue, brown, green, and white, while more 
girls than boys went for pink and purple. Preference, however, was not 
112

 
THE DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS OF PINK AND BLUE 113
symmetrical. Boys in this study very rarely chose pink over blue, while 
girls, although preferring pink on average, chose blue with some 
frequency. Indeed this is typical of many sex-stereotyped characteristics: 
boys cling more rigidly to the stereotype than do girls (Chiu, Gervan, 
Fairbrother, Johnson, Owen-Anderson, Bradley, et al., 2006). 
 How do such preferences develop? Th e old way of looking at the 
question is to ask is it nature or is it nurture? Do girls love pink because 
of something inborn about their visual system? Indeed, is pink-loving 
an expression of brain sex (Alexander, 2003)? Or, maybe boys choose 
blue because these days we associate blue with masculinity; maybe 
adults and peers off er negative feedback to boys who go for pink? I 
think that this way of approaching the problem is fl at out wrong. To use 
an analogy taken from a recent book on the topic written by historian 
and philosopher of science Evelyn Fox Keller, imagine the trait “I love 
pink” as a 100 gallon bucket of water. Suppose two people (oh call one 
Mr. Nature and the other Ms. Nurture) are fi lling up that bucket with 
separate hoses. If Mr. Nature added 70 gallons and Ms. Nurture 30, 
then we could say that the 100 gallons is due 70 percent to nature and 
30 percent to nurture. But suppose instead that Mr. Nature supplies the 
hose, while Ms. Nurture brings the bucket. Th en what percentage is due 
to nature and what to nurture? Th e truth is, the question doesn’t make 
any sense (Keller, 2010). 
 Th ere are better ways to look at this problem. Th ey have diff erent 
names—dynamic systems, developmental dynamics, developmental 
systems. But they share a few important features. First, they are devel-
opmental; that is to say they examine how a trait comes into being over 
time. How does a trait  develop ? Second, they ground themselves in the 
body—not a fi xed body—but one that changes over time. Th is means 
that to study a trait one always looks at a set of processes over time. 
Traits may be fairly stable. But if a trait changes—for example, little 
girls’ pink preferences often change into preferences for purple or red—
it doesn’t start from scratch. Rather new traits build on what is already 
there. Th ere are other principles to this dynamic approach which the 
reader may want to look at in more depth, but for now, let’s use these 
ideas to think more deeply about pink and blue. 

114 THE DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS OF PINK AND BLUE
 Training the Nervous System to See 
 To prefer a color, one must be able to see it. Newborns cannot see all 
that well. Since the retina of the eye requires light to make all the right 
nervous connections to the brain, thus insuring mature vision, light 
exposure after making it down the birth canal is critical for complete 
development of the nervous system. Neuroscientists say that the region 
of the brain that translates electrical signals from the retina of the eye 
into images that we can interpret cannot complete development without 
extrinsic input (that is light from the environment). Th ought about 
more generally, when light travels through the eyes of newborns, it 
changes the brain’s wiring diagram (Stiles, 2008). 
 If light matters for the development of vision, maybe newborns that 
spend a lot of time in a pink environment develop better pink detecting 
eye-to-brain wiring than children surrounded by blue.  If this were the 
case, it would be a great example of a cultural conceit that literally shapes 
little infant bodies in gender specifi c ways. Maybe. But to see if this 
might be the case, we need to examine the development of color vision. 
 Cone cells in the retina—specialized nerve cells which come in three 
varieties—facilitate color vision. L cones respond best to long wave-
length light (on the yellowish side of green); M cones respond best to 
medium light (on the bluish side of green); while S cones respond best 
to short wavelength or bluish light. When light hits the retina it initi-
ates biochemical changes in the cone cells which are ultimately trans-
lated into an electrical signal that travels through the optic nerve and 
from there to visual centers in the brain. Th e full spectral range of color 
vision requires fi ne tuning and interpretation by a variety of cells within 
the brain itself. 
 Scientists remain uncertain about how color vision develops. Aspects 
of the ability to detect color are probably fi xed before birth; but at least 
some degree of visual experience is needed to tune the nervous system 
so that it can perceive a full range of colors (Dobkins, Bosworth, & 
McCleery, 2009). Amazingly, this “trainability” persists in adulthood, 
especially for the L-M (red-green) color system. So at least in theory it 
is possible that exposure to lots of pink or lots of blue could improve 
perception of one or the other of these color groups (Neitz, Carroll, 

 
THE DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS OF PINK AND BLUE 115
Yamauchi, Neitz, & Williams, 2002; Sugita, 2004), although current 
facts seem to mitigate against this hypothesis. Newborns can distin-
guish green, yellow, and red from a white background, but the saturation 
levels of these colors have to be very high—much higher than for adults. 
Th e yellow/blue detection systems may take a little longer (a couple of 
months) to develop than the red/green systems. Researchers speculate 
that poor color detection in newborns results from an overall immatu-
rity of the eye, cone reception, and brain color interpretation systems 
(Adams & Courage, 1998; Crognale, Kelly, Weiss, & Teller, 1998; 
Franklin & Davies, 2004; Teller, 1998) 
 If early exposure to lots of pink or lots of blue conditions the infant 
visual system to the point where a physiological preference develops, 
then the eff ect is much delayed. Neither 4, 6, or 9 month old boys or 
girls particularly care for pink; rather, both like blue and red (Franklin, 
Bevis, Ling, & Hurlbert, 2010; Franklin & Davies, 2004). One and two 
year old boys and girls both prefer red to pink or strong blue to pale blue 
(Jadva, Hines, & Golombok, 2010). Still—and despite a perceptual 
bias  against  pink—by the time they start to talk and make active 
choices, many girls go for the pink (Chiu et al., 2006). In sum, whatever 
happens to produce strong preferences takes shape between the second 
and third year of development, a period when gender self knowledge 
and an understanding of social expectations are already under active 
construction.  
 A Pleasure Principle? 
 For some children the preference is strong, almost to the point of obses-
sion. And based on current evidence, it doesn’t seem to come, develop-
mentally, from the visual nervous system. How, then, does it develop? 
And just what is a preference anyway? At this point we have to move 
into the realm of speculation. If truth be told, scientists who study sex 
diff erences in color or toy preference have simply not debated what 
preference might be at the neurobiological level. So here’s a thought. 
Take it. Leave it. Dispute it, or run some experiments designed to test 
it. But start by talking with and observing some 3 or 4 year old girls. 
Listen to the delight and pleasure in their voices, watch the excitement 

116 THE DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS OF PINK AND BLUE
in their actions, as they discuss the color pink. Observe the love; soak in 
the pleasure. 
 Pleasure? If something pleases us once, we seek it out again. We come 
to prefer it. Biologists know quite a lot about how the brain develops 
circuits that cause repeated seeking of the same pleasure. Th ese circuits 
can help us repeatedly search out things that are good for us; they can 
also cause addictions to things that ultimately are terribly bad for us. 
Now love of the color pink never hurt anyone, but the same molecule 
that leads some adults to become addicted to harmful drugs, might just 
be involved in causing some girls to seek out all things pink. Yes, dear 
readers, we are talking about dopamine, a chemical made in the human 
midbrain by nerve cells with a reputation for strongly responding to 
rewards. Under some circumstances dopamine neurons may also incite 
aversive responses to non-rewarding situations (Bromberg-Martin, 
Matsumoto, & Hikosaka, 2010). 
 A psychological reward reinforces a behavior and repeated rewards 
intensify the behavior. Fundamental reward systems include food, phys-
ical comfort, sex, and emotional well-being. Secondary systems can 
include money, beauty, music, and—dare I suggest for some female 
toddlers—surrounding oneself with lots of pink things. We don’t know 
why pink becomes a stimulus for the brain’s reward system, why it 
becomes linked physiologically to pleasurable feelings. But we can 
imagine some plausible hypotheses. 
 First, familiarity may not breed contempt. On the contrary it can 
off er security and comfort. A toddler who has grown from infancy 
surrounded primarily by one color may fi nd that he or she takes pleasure 
in the continued predictability of the environment. Th en too, there is 
the excitement and emotional reward given by adults as they off er toys 
or admire clothing. Just picture taking a little girl for a stroll dressed in 
something pink and frilly. Mother may admire her as she is dressing her, 
but so too will complete strangers stop to ooh and aah. Th ey may also 
comment on how adorable her little pink doll or stuff ed animal is. Each 
of these positive responses might stimulate the child’s dopamine system, 
causing her to continue to seek out pink things. A preference for pink is 
not born. It develops. 

 
THE DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS OF PINK AND BLUE 117
 But what about the boys? Most boys avoid pink but like blue, green, 
and other darker colors, although not usually with the same passion girls 
have for pink. To explain this lack of symmetry, I suggest that a second 
function of the dopamine system comes into play—so-called aversive 
conditioning (Bromberg-Martin et al., 2010). It is not so much that 
little boys develop a pleasure in and a passion for blue as it is that they 
try to avoid pink. Color preference develops during the second or third 
year, a period when a lot of gender-related development also locks into 
place. Well before the age of 3, little boys and little girls can identify 
some gender-typical activities (men carry hammers, women put on 
make-up). And they have begun the several year process of clarifying 
their own gender identity. By 3 years, for example, they can correctly 
respond to the question, “Are you a boy or a girl?” and their gender iden-
tity becomes more sophisticated in the following year. So it is not hard 
to imagine that both praise and criticism related to the propriety of 
clothing and toy color might be especially salient in this time period. 
Children develop pride and pleasure in their own competence, including 
becoming competent at being a “strong little boy” or a “pretty little girl.” 
As with many aspects of gender, it takes larger transgressions for girls to 
receive negative feedback than it does for boys. Girls, after all, wear jeans 
and overalls—even blue ones—as well as frilly dresses. Boys, however, 
have no such latitude. It does not take long for the negativity, the aver-
sive training to come the way of a toddler boy wearing a pink frilly dress. 
 If I am correct that the dopamine reward and punishment systems lie 
at the heart of toddler color preference, one question pretty quickly 
comes to mind. Why doesn’t the system work for all children? What 
accounts for all of the individual variability—from some little boys who 
prefer pink and frilly (at one end of the spectrum) to little girls who 
prefer reds or blues, to children who really don’t have strong color 
preferences? Here again we look to developmental systems. To address 
the problem of individual variability we need more information— 
information about variations in physical environment, in gender devel-
opment, in caregiver and peer interactions and attitudes, and in each 
individual’s physiology (Kegel, Bus, & van Ijzendoorn, 2011). To gather 
this missing information we have to do studies that follow individual 

118 THE DEVELOPMENTAL DYNAMICS OF PINK AND BLUE
children over extended periods of time, charting the several systems we 
hypothesize contribute to color preference and identifying stable pref-
erence outcomes. Everything from the color of the nursery wallpaper, 
the rods and cones in the retina, color processing in the brain, the behav-
iors of parents and others, the timing of gender knowledge and identity 
development, and individual diff erences in the molecules important in 
the dopamine systems contribute to a little girl’s delight in or a little 
boy’s aversion to the color pink.  
 Further Reading 
 Camazine ,  S.  ,   Deneuborg ,  J.-L. ,   Franks ,  N. R.  ,   Sneyd ,  J. ,   Th eraulaz ,  G. , &   Bonabeau ,  E. 
( 2001 ).   Self-Organization in Biological Systems .  Princeton, NJ :  Princeton University 
Press . 
 Gottlieb ,  G. ( 1997 ).   Synthesizing Nature-Nurture: Prenatal Roots of Instinctive Behavior . 
 Mahwah, NJ :  Lawrence Erlbaum . 
 Harris ,  A. ( 2005 ).  Gender as Soft Assembly .  Hillsdale, NJ :  Th e Analytic Press . 
 Oyama ,  S. ( 2000 ).   Th e Ontogeny of Information: Developmental Systems and Evolution .  Durham, 
NC :  Duke University Press . 
 Th elen ,  E. , &   Smith ,  L. B.  ( 1994 ).   A Dynamic Systems Approach to the Development of Cognition 
and Action .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press . 
 Th elen ,  E. , &   Ulrich ,  B. D.  ( 1991 ).  Hidden skills: a dynamic systems analysis of treadmill 
stepping during the fi rst year .   Monographs in Social Research in Child Development ,  56 ( 1 ), 
 1 – 98 ; discussion  99 – 104 . 

119
 10 
 EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE OF 
GENDER (AND SEX)  
 Genes, Chromosomes, and Reproductive Systems Change 
on an Evolutionary Timescale 
 Th e development of sex and gender in humans is layered. And so 
too must be any answer about the future. Take all those sexes—
chromosomal, fetal hormonal, anatomical—that develop  in utero . While 
it is possible that the human method for developing these sexes could 
change on an evolutionary time scale (i.e. very slowly), for our purposes, 
the future will be pretty much the same as the present. 
 With some exceptions, however. Consider the case of pollutants 
called endocrine disruptors, or xenoestrogens, a large group of chemi-
cals that mimic one or more hormones, blocking binding sites and 
disrupting normal endocrine function. Th ese chemicals come from plas-
tics, pesticides, and other products used in manufacturing and in daily 
life. In the past few years there has been great concern about plastic 
liners in water bottles because they contain a substance called Bisphenol 
A (BPA). Th e fear that exposure to BPA, especially from plastic baby 
bottles, could aff ect reproduction in future generations has been a boon 
for metal water bottle manufacturers. But questions about the actual 
danger of endocrine disruptors remain. Has the body burden of 
xenoestrogens caused a drop in sperm count, increased the frequency of 

120 
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE OF GENDER (AND SEX)
genital and gonadal malformations, impaired immune functions, caused 
cancers, and more? 
 Th ere are no clear answers. But we do know that in the laboratory, 
endocrine disruptors change cellular metabolism, and can cause tissue 
culture cells to grow abnormally. We also know that in the wild endo-
crine disruptor pollution from accidental chemical spills or from indus-
trial byproducts has caused sex reversal or hermaphroditic gonad and 
genital development in frogs, fi sh, and alligators. Endocrine disruptors 
are everywhere; they are in our bodies already, but we could do more to 
reduce their presence around the world (Colburn, Dumanoski, & 
Meyers, 1997; Krimsky, 2002). For now we can say that they remain as 
a potential actor in the future of sex and gender. 
  Brains Can Change within a Single Generation 
 If the future of chromosomal, fetal hormonal, and genital sex seems 
pretty stable, brain sex may be less so. Brain anatomy changes with 
experiential input. Th eoretically, then, changing physiological, physical, 
emotional, and cultural experiences could change brain sex. Some diff er-
ences in men’s and women’s brain might lessen; new diff erences might 
appear. Consider the epithet hurled at a young boy that he “throws like 
a girl.” Phenomenologist and neurologist Erwin Straus (1891–1975) 
described it this way: “Th e girl of fi ve does not make any use of lateral 
space . . . All she does in preparation for throwing is to lift her right arm 
forward to the horizontal and to bend the forearm backward . . . Th e ball 
is released without force, speed or accurate aim . . . A boy of the same 
age . . . stretches his right arm sideward and backward; supinates the 
forearm; twists, turns and bends his trunk . . . Th e ball leaves the hand 
with considerable acceleration; it moves toward its goal in a long, fl at 
curve” (cited in Young, 1990: 137). 
 By the time they are grown many American men have a smooth and 
forceful overhand throw. It “comes naturally.” Th at is, they just do it 
without thinking through all the motions and positioning Straus 
described. Th ey have developed connections between their central 
nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) and their motor system—
not only the arm but the entire body—which positions itself as it 

 
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE OF GENDER (AND SEX) 
121
executes a throw. If you scanned the brains of American men and 
women as they imagined throwing a ball, most likely you would fi nd 
that for each sex diff erent brain regions became activated. We associate 
the overhand throw with baseball, a national pastime, but not always an 
international one. So perhaps it is not surprising that anthropologist 
Greg Downey, who studies motorically skilled masters of the acrobatic 
dance form  capoeira , in Brazil, noticed something quite interesting: most 
of his Brazilian male colleagues—talented athletes though they were—
threw like girls (Downey, 2009). 
 As we learn motor activities our brains change. Th e fi rst change that 
takes place during actual learning sessions is that nerve cell communica-
tion via synapses becomes more effi  cient. Continued practice leads to 
actual changes in the brain—specifi cally in that part of the cerebrum 
called the motor cortex (Rosenkranz, Kacar, & Rothwell, 2007). Th is is 
how we learn motor skills: our brain and motor system change anatomi-
cally in response to practice. So for girls and Brazilian men and other 
people who “throw like a girl” is this what’s going on? It seems likely 
that even toddlers (in America) get training in how to throw. Th e 
training is hands on in many cases but also comes from observation. 
Watching baseball on TV or watching older siblings contribute to skill 
development. But for most boys it is probably just plain old play that 
does it. “Th e decisive ingredient seems to be the hundreds of idle hours 
spent throwing balls, sticks, rocks and so on in the playground or back 
yard” (Fallows, 1996). 
  Changes in Cultural Responses to Infant Gender Can Take 
Several Generations 
 Once a baby is visible (either at birth or via prenatal ultrasound) it 
becomes a social actor. Adults prepare its visual and tactile environment 
by buying toys, clothes, and room decorations. Especially during the 
fi rst six months the primary caregiver and the infant form a single 
developmental unit and infant emotional systems develop within the 
dynamic of face-to-face interactions with the primary caregiver (Schore, 
1994). Th is dynamical system relies especially on visual and auditory 
processing as the infant gazes at the mother’s face. Information patterns 

122 
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE OF GENDER (AND SEX)
in the mother’s face trigger metabolic energy shifts in the infant. Th ese 
changes in processes such as heart rate and respiration ultimately aff ect 
the growth and neural connectivity of specifi c brain regions. Schore 
believes these energy shifts form the basic features of embodied emotion 
(Schore, 2000). 
 In support of this idea, Wexler notes how basic parenting activities 
(holding and calming the baby, rocking the baby, speaking in repetitive 
tones) regulate and train infant physiology. Parental training of infant 
physiology includes calming, establishment of sleep cycles (Harkness, 
Super, Moscardino, Rha, Blom, Huitrón, et al., 2007), eating, and elimi-
native, as well as exploratory behaviors. As Wexler writes: “the infl uence 
of adults . . . must shape neuronal circuitry in the developing brain of 
the infant and child” (Wexler, 2006: 103). 
 We have already seen that over a period of several decades the asso-
ciation of blue with girls and pink with boys switched. Today the world 
presented to an infant girl (especially in the United States—again this 
is not a universal phenomenon) is usually pretty pink, soft to the touch 
and fi lled with positive adult emotional feedback about girlish things. 
But as ideas about girlhood and boyhood change, and as adult gender 
roles change, it seems likely gendered, parent-driven aspects of parent–
infant interactions will also alter. Th ese may, in turn, shift gendered 
interests and certain skills in children and in the adults they become. 
Embedded cultural ideas change unevenly and take more than one 
generation. So while such change has happened in the past and will 
undoubtedly continue in the future, mapping their eff ects is likely to fall 
more to historians than to psychologists or anthropologists.  
 Changes in the Social and Legal Structures of Gender Can Happen 
in One Generation, or Th ey Can Take Longer 
 Do sex and gender have a future, or, as some fear, will gender disappear 
(Kantrowitz & Wingert, 2010)? A quick Google of the phrase “gender 
free” brings up links to gender-free writing, raising a child gender free, 
gender-free contra dancing, and with a perverse switch of word order, free 
baby gender predictor. Clearly there is interest in eliminating gender 
distinctions from at least some parts of our culture, yet I doubt that we 

 
EPILOGUE: THE FUTURE OF GENDER (AND SEX) 
123
face a genderless future. Interest in sex and reproduction remains strong, 
and unless we achieve one of the feminist utopias in which reproduction 
becomes a neutral technology, partnering and having babies will 
continue to anchor some forms of sex and gender diff erentiation 
(Firestone, 1970; Piercy, 1985). But I do believe that individual gender 
variation will become better recognized and more acceptable. Gay 
marriage will become the law of the land, and many degrees of trans-
gender will become socially unremarkable. Th e day may come when we 
don’t have to designate “male” or “female” on our driver’s licenses or pass-
ports, allowing people with gender presentations that don’t match their 
natal sex the possibility of a freer existence. And, if much of this comes to 
pass, it is certain to feed back onto the development of gender in infants 
and children. 
 Of all of the points emphasized in this book, the one that needs most 
urgently to seep into people’s ways of thought is that bodies are not 
bounded. To understand sex and gender we have to study how sensory, 
emotional, and motor experience becomes embodied. We will learn a lot 
about the science of sex and gender in the years to come. But to the extent 
that our social settings and thus experiences change, at least some of the 
subtleties of sex and gender will remain a moving target. Th is should keep 
life interesting and keep scientists employed if not out of trouble.  
 Further Reading 
 Patterson ,  Charlotte J.  ( 2006 ).  Children of lesbian and gay parents .   Current Directions in 
Psychological Science ,  15 ( 5 ),  241 – 244 . 
 Penn State . ( 2009 ).  Male Sex Chromosome Losing Genes By Rapid Evolution, Study 
Reveals .   ScienceDaily  17 July . Retrieved from:  http://www.sciencedaily.com/
releases/2009/07/090716201127.htm , accessed  December 9 ,  2011 . 
 Th e International Gender Bill of Rights  ( 1995 ). Retrieved from:  http://my.execpc.
com/~dmmunson/billrights.htm , accessed  December 9 ,  2011 . 
 Th ought Question 
 What laws exist that govern gender in America? Are any of them 
changing? (Hint: Google the phrase “Gender and the law” and follow 
some threads.) Can you think of any currently contested legal cases that 
might, over a few generations, change gender roles and even the biology 
of gender?  

 NOTES  
  2 Of Spirals and Layers 
  1.    I clicked on “baby,” then “baby clothes,” then either “baby boy” ( http://www.toysrus.
com/search/index.jsp?categoryId=4021193&f=Taxonomy%2FTRUS%2F2255957&
f=Taxonomy%2FTRUS%2F2255985&f=PAD%2FBoy+Girl%2FBoys&fbc=1&fbn=
Boy+Girl%7CBoys&fbx=1 ), “baby girl” ( http://www.toysrus.com/search/index.jsp?ca
tegoryId=4021193&f=Taxonomy%2FTRUS%2F2255957&f=Taxonomy%2FTRUS
%2F2255985&f=Taxonomy%2FTRUS%2F3243842&fbc=1&fbn=Taxonomy%7CBa
by+Girl+Clothes&fbx=1 ), or “neutral” ( http://www.toysrus.com/search/index.jsp?cate
goryId=4021193&f=Taxonomy%2FTRUS%2F2255957&f=Taxonomy%2FTRUS%2
F2255985&f=Taxonomy%2FTRUS%2F3244773&fbc=1&fbn=Taxonomy%7CNeutr
al&fbx=1 ). On the date of access (December 7, 2011) there were 265 baby boy items, 
440 baby girl items, and 70 neutral items.   
 3 Of Molecules and Sex 
  1.   Aphids, for example, have winged females that migrate to new plants and wingless 
females that reproduce without input from a male. Some of the winged females pro-
duce a male in the fall and the males mate with the females which then produce an 
egg that winters over. Th e eggs only hatch out wingless females in the spring ( http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aphid#Reproduction).  
  2.   Shoemaker and Crews write (2009: 300) “Th e pathway underlying mammalian 
testicular determination and diff erentiation has been elucidated more clearly and 
quickly than that underlying ovarian development . . .” 
  3.  Temporary in mammals, but the cloaca remains into adulthood in many other 
vertebrates.  
  4.   Social convention even aff ects scientifi c illustration. It is rarely noted that the 
embryonic phallus represented in  Figure 3.3  is circumcised! Supposedly this represen-
tation makes it easier to see what the parts underneath the foreskin look like (or hood 
of the clitoris), but this can’t be what the embryo itself really looks like.  
124

 
NOTES 
125
 4 Of Hormones and Brains 
  1.   A  meme is an idea, behavior, or style that spreads from person to person within a 
culture. While  genes  transmit biological information, memes are said to transmit ideas 
and belief information. A meme acts as a unit for carrying cultural ideas, symbols, 
or practices, which can be transmitted from one mind to another through writing, 
speech, gestures, rituals, or other imitable phenomena. Supporters of the concept 
regard memes as cultural analogues to genes in that they self-replicate, mutate, and 
respond to selective pressures. Retrieved from:  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meme , 
accessed December 8, 2011.  
  2.   Th is is the reason that parthenogenesis in mammals has a poor outcome. If there are 
two maternal chromosomes, then there are two copies of any imprinted genes, and thus 
no gene function for these loci. Th e result is fatal. 
 6 Th inking about Homosexuality 
  1.    Portions of Chapter 6 are derived, with permission, from my book  Sexing the Body: 
Gender Politics and the Construction of Sexuality  (2000). 
 9 Th e Developmental Dynamics of Pink and Blue 
  1.   Retrieved from:  http://answers.yahoo.com/question/index?qid=20100604203056AAd
Zkpt , accessed December 9, 2011.  

 REFERENCES  
 Aaronson ,  I. A.  ,   Cakmak ,  M. A.  , &   Key ,  L. L.  ( 1997 ).  Defects of the testosterone biosynthetic 
pathway in boys with hypospadias .   Journal of Urology ,  157 ( May ),  1884 – 1888 . 
 Adams ,  R. J.  , &   Courage ,  M. L.  ( 1998 ).  Human newborn color vision: measurement with 
chromatic stimuli varying in excitation purity .   Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 
 68 ( 1 ),  22 – 34 . 
 Alexander ,  G. M.  ( 2003 ).  An evolutionary perspective of sex-typed toy preferences: pink, 
blue, and the brain .   Archives of Sexual Behavior ,  32 ( 1 ),  7 – 14 . 
 Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, N.P.S.U.  ( 2000 ).   Australia’s Mothers and Babies 
(p.  76 ).  Canberra :  Australian Institute of Health and Welfare . 
 Bagemihl ,  B.  ( 1999 ).   Biological Exuberance: Animal Homosexuality and Natural Diversity . 
 New York :  St. Martin’s Press . 
 Bailey ,  J. M.  ,   Dunne ,  M. P.  , &   Martin ,  N. G.  ( 2000 ).  Genetic and environmental infl uences 
on sexual orientation and its correlates in an Australian twin sample .   Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology ,  78 ( 3 ),  524 – 536 . 
 Bailey ,  J. M.  , &   Pillard ,  R. C.  ( 1991 a).  Are some people born gay?    Th e New York Times , 
 December 17 , p. A  21 . 
 Bailey ,  J. M.  , &   Pillard ,  R. C.  ( 1991 b).  A genetic study of male sexual orientation .   Archives of 
General Psychiatry ,  48 ( 12 ),  1089 – 1096 . 
 Bailey ,  J. M.  ,   Willerman ,  L. , &   Parks ,  C. ( 1991 ).  A test of the maternal stress theory of 
human male homosexuality .   Archives of Sexual Behavior ,  20 ( 3 ),  277 – 293 . 
 Bandura ,  A. , &   Bussey ,  K. ( 2004 ).  On broadening the cognitive, motivational, and socio-
structural scope of theorizing about gender development and functioning: comment on 
Martin, Ruble, and Szkrybalo ( 2002 ).  Psychological Bulletin ,  130 ( 5 ),  691 – 701 . 
 Bell ,  G. ( 2008 ).   Sex and Death in Protozoa: Th e History of Obsession .  Cambridge :  Cambridge 
University Press . 
 Bem ,  D. J.  ( 2008 ).  Is there a causal link between childhood gender nonconformity and adult 
homosexuality?   Journal of Gay and Lesbian Mental Health ,  12 ( 1/2 ),  61 – 80 . 
 Berenbaum ,  S. A.  , &   Snyder ,  E. ( 1995 ).  Early hormonal infl uences on childhood sex-typed 
activity and playmate preferences: implications for the development of sexual orienta-
tion .   Developmental Psychology ,  31 ( 1 ),  31 – 42. 
 Berkman ,  A. ( 1912 ).   Prison Memoirs of an Anarchist .  New York :  Mother Earth Publishing 
Association . 
126

 
REFERENCES 
127
 Blackless ,  M. ,   Charuvastra ,  A. ,   Derryck ,  A. ,   Fausto-Sterling ,  A. ,   Lauzanne ,  K. , &   Lee ,  E. 
( 2000 ).  How sexually dimorphic are we? A review article .  American Journal of Human 
Biology ,  12 ( 2 ), 151 – 166 . 
 Bocklandt ,  S. , &   Vilain ,  E. ( 2007 ).  Sex diff erences in brain and behavior: hormones versus 
genes .   Advances in Genetics ,  59 ,  245 – 266 . 
 Bolt Blitz in Oslo; Athletics ( 2011 ).  Th e Age ,  June 11 , p.  25 .  Melbourne . 
 Boman ,  U. W.  ,   Möller ,  A. , &  Albertsson-Wikland ,  K. ( 1998 ).  Psychological aspects of Turner 
Syndrome .   Journal of Psychosomatic Obstetrics and Gynaecology  ,  19 ( 1 ),  1 – 18 . 
 Bornstein ,  K. ( 1994 ).   Gender Outlaw: On Men, Women and the Rest of Us .  London :  Routledge . 
 Boswell ,  J.  ( 1990 ).  Sexual and ethical categories in premodern Europe . In   D. P.   McWhirter , 
 S. A.   Sanders , &   J. M.  Reinisch  (Eds.),   Homosexuality/Heterosexuality: Concepts of Sexual 
Orientation (pp.  15 – 31 ).  New York, NY :  Oxford University Press . 
 Bromberg-Martin ,  E. S.  ,   Matsumoto ,  M. , &   Hikosaka ,  O. ( 2010 ).  Dopamine in motivational 
control: rewarding, aversive, and alerting .   Neuron ,  68 ( 5 ),  815 – 834 . 
 Bromley ,  B. ,   Frigoletto ,  F. D. , Jr.,  Harlow ,  B. L.  ,   Evans ,  J. K. , &   Benacerraf ,  B. R.  ( 1993 ). 
 Biometric measurements in fetuses of diff erent race and gender .   Ultrasound in Obstetrics 
and Gynecology ,  3 ,  395 – 402 . 
 Byne ,  W.  ( 1997 ).  Why we cannot conclude that sexual orientation is primarily a biological 
phenomenon .   Journal of Homosexuality ,  34 ( 1 ),  73 – 80 . 
 Byne ,  W. ,   Lasco ,  M. S.  ,   Kemether ,  E. ,   Shinwari ,   A. ,  Edgar, M. A.  ,   Morgello ,  S. ,  et al.  ( 2000 ). 
 Th e interstitial nuclei of the human anterior hypothalamus: an investigation of sexual 
variation in volume and cell size, number and density .   Brain Research ,  856 ( 1–2 ), 
 254 – 258 . 
 Byne ,  W. ,   Tobet ,  S.  ,   Mattiace ,  L. A.  ,   Lasco ,  M. S.  ,   Kemether ,  E. ,   Edgar ,  M. A.  ,  et al.  ( 2001 ). 
 Th e interstitial nuclei of the human anterior hypothalamus: an investigation of variation 
with sex, sexual orientation and HIV status .   Hormones and Behavior ,  40 ( 2 ),  86 – 92 . 
 Caster Semenya  ( 2010 ). Retrieved from: http:// www.wikipedia.org , accessed  December 10 , 
 2011 . 
 Center for Disease Control  ( 2000 ). 2000 CDC growth charts: United States. Retrieved 
from:  http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts , accessed  December 13 ,  2011 . 
 Chiu ,  S. W.  ,   Gervan ,  S. ,   Fairbrother ,  C. ,   Johnson ,  L. L.  ,   Owen-Anderson ,  A. F. H.  ,   Bradley ,  S. , 
 et al.  ( 2006 ).  Sex-dimorphic color preference in children with Gender Identity Disorder: 
a comparison to clinical and community controls .  Sex Roles ,  55 ,  385 – 395 .  
  Colapinto ,  J.  ( 2001 ).   As Nature Made Him: Th e Boy Who Was Raised as a Girl .  New York : 
 Harper . 
 Colburn ,  T. ,   Dumanoski ,  D.  , &   Meyers ,  J. P. ( 1997 ).   Our Stolen Future: Are We Th reatening 
Our Fertility, Intelligence, and Survival?—A Scientifi c Detective Story .  New York :  Plume . 
 Conte ,  F. A.  , &   Grumbach ,  M. A.  ( 1989 ).  Pathogenesis, classifi cation, diagnosis, and treat-
ment of anomalies of sex . In  L.  De Groot  (Ed.),  Endocrinology  (pp.  1810 – 1847 ). 
 Philadelphia, PA: Saunders . 
 Cook ,  C.D.K.  ( 1968 )  Phenotypic plasticity with particular reference to three amphibious 
plant species . In   V.  Heywood  (Ed.),   Modern Methods in Plant Taxonomy  (pp.  97 – 111 ). 
 London:  Academic Press  . 
 Corbett ,  K.  ( 1993 ).  Th e mystery of homosexuality .  Psychoanalytic Psychology ,  10 ( 3 ),  345 – 357 .  
 Corbett ,  K. ( 1996 ).  Homosexual boyhood: notes on girlyboys .   Gender and Psychoanalysis ,  1 , 
 429 – 461 . 
 Cramer ,  J. S.  , &   Lumey ,  L. H.  ( 2010 ).  Maternal preconception diet and the sex ratio .   Human 
Biology ,  82 ( 1 ),  103 – 107 . 
 Crawford ,  M. ,   Doyle ,  W.  , &   Meadows ,  N. ( 1987 ).  Gender diff erences at birth and diff erences 
in fetal growth .   Human Reproduction ,  2 ( 6 ),  517 – 520 . 

128 
REFERENCES
 Crews ,  D. , &   Fitzgerald ,  K. T.  ( 1980 ).  “Sexual” behavior in parthenogenetic lizards .  Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences US ,  77 ( 1 ),  499 – 502 . 
 Crognale ,  M. A.  ,   Kelly ,  J. P.  ,   Weiss ,  A. H.  , &   Teller ,  D. Y.  ( 1998 ).  Development of the spatio-
chromatic visual evoked potential (VEP): a longitudinal study .   Vision Research ,  38 ( 21 ), 
 3283 – 3292 . 
 Davis ,  D. L.  , &   Whitten ,  R. G.  ( 1987 ).  Th e cross-cultural study of human sexuality .   Annual 
Review of Anthropology ,  16 ,  69 – 98 . 
 Davis ,  R. ,   Cutter ,  G. ,   Goldenberg ,  R. ,   Hoff man ,  H. ,   Cliver ,  S. , &   Brumfi eld ,  C. ( 1993 ).  Fetal 
biparietal diameter, head circumference, abdominal circumference and femur length. A 
comparison by race and sex .   Journal of Reproductive Medicine ,  38 ( 3 ),  201 – 206 . 
 Diamond ,  L. M.  ( 2007 ).  A dynamical systems approach to the development and expression 
of female same-sex sexuality .   Perspectives in Psychological Science ,  2 ( 2 ),  142 – 161 . 
 Diamond ,  L. M.  ( 2008 ).   Sexual Fluidity: Understanding Women’s Love and Desire .  Cambridge, 
MA :  Harvard University Press . 
 Diamond ,  M.  ( 1965 ).  A critical evaluation of the ontogeny of human sexual behavior . 
 Quarterly Review of Biology ,  40 ,  147 – 175 . 
 Diamond ,  M. , &   Sigmundson ,  K. ( 1997 ).  Sex reassignment at birth: long-term review and 
clinical implications .   Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine ,  151 ( March ), 
 298 – 304 . 
  DiNapoli ,  L. , &   Capel ,  B. ( 2008 ).  SRY and the standoff  in sex determination .   Molecular 
Endocrinology ,  22 ( 1 ),  1 – 9 . 
 Dittman ,  R. W.  ,   Kappes ,  M. H.  ,   Kappes ,  M. E.  ,   Börger ,  D.  ,   Willig ,  R. H.  , &   Wallis ,  H. 
( 1990 ).  Congenital adrenal hyperplasia I: gender-related behavior and attitudes in 
female patients and sisters .   Psychoneuroendocrinology ,  15 ( 5 & 6 ),  401 – 420 . 
 Dobkins ,  K. R.  ,   Bosworth ,  R. G.  , &   McCleery ,  J. P.  ( 2009 ).  Eff ects of gestational length, 
gender, postnatal age, and birth order on visual contrast sensitivity in infants .  Journal of 
Vision ,  9 ( 10 ),  19 ,  1 – 21 . 
  Dörner ,  G. ,   Schenk ,  B.  ,   Schmiedel ,  B. , &   Ahrens ,  L. ( 1983 ).  Stressful events in prenatal life 
of bi- and homosexual men .  Experimental and Clinical Endocrinology ,  81 ( 1 ),  83 – 87 . 
 Downey ,  G. ( 2009 ,  February 1 ). Th rowing like a girl’s brain. Retrieved from:  http://neuroan-
thropology.net/2009/02/01/throwing-like-a-girls-brain , accessed  December 10 ,  2011 . 
 Dreger ,  A. D.  ( 1998 a).  “Ambiguous sex”—or ambivalent medicine? Ethical issues in the 
treatment of intersexuality .   Hastings Center Report ( May – June ),  24 – 35 . 
 Dreger ,  A. D.  ( 1998 b).   Hermaphrodites and the Medical Invention of Sex .  Cambridge, MA : 
 Harvard University Press . 
 Duden ,  B.  ( 1991 ).  Th e Woman Beneath the Skin .  Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press . 
 Eichstedt ,  J. A.  ,   Serbin ,  L. A.  ,   Poulin-Dubois ,  D.  , &   Sen ,  M. G.  ( 2002 ).  Of bears and men: 
infants’ knowledge of conventional and metaphorical gender stereotypes .   Infant Behavior 
and Development ,  25 ( 3 ),  296 – 310 . 
 Ellis ,  H. ( 1913 ).  Studies in the Psychology of Sex .  Philadelphia, PA :  F.A. Davis . 
 Epstein ,  Brad M.  ( 2009 ).   New York Yankees ABC My First Alphabet Book .  Aliso Viejo, CA :. 
 Michaelson Entertainment . 
 Fagot ,  B. I.  , &   Leinbach ,  M. D.  ( 1989 ).  Th e young child’s gender schema: environmental 
input, internal organization .   Child Development ,  60 ,  663 – 672 . 
 Fagot ,  B. I.  , &   Leinbach ,  M. D.  ( 1993 ).  Gender-role development in young children: from 
discrimination to labeling .   Developmental Review ,  13 ,  205 – 224 . 
 Fagot ,  B. I.  ,   Leinbach ,  M. D.  , &   Hagan ,  R. ( 1986 ).  Gender labeling and the adoption of sex-
typed behaviors .  Developmental Psychology ,  22 ( 4 ),  440 – 443 . 
 Fagot ,  B. I.  ,   Leinbach ,  M. D.  , &   O’Boyle ,  C. ( 1992 ).  Gender labeling, gender stereotyping, 
and parenting behaviors .   Developmental Psychology ,  28 ( 2 ),  225 – 230 . 

 
REFERENCES 
129
 Fallows ,  J.  ( 1996 ).  Th rowing like a girl .   Th e Atlantic Monthly . Retrieved from:  http://
www.theatlantic.com/past/docs/issues/96aug/throw/throw.htm , accessed  December 12 , 
 2011 . 
 Fausto-Sterling ,  A. ( 1989 ).  Life in the XY corral .   Women’s Studies International Forum ,  12 ( 3 ), 
 319 – 331 . 
 Fausto-Sterling ,  A. ( 2000 ).   Sexing the Body: Gender Politics and the Construction of Sexuality . 
 New York :  Basic Books . 
 Fausto-Sterling ,  A. ( 2012 ).  Th e dynamic development of gender variability .   Journal of 
Homosexuality , in press. 
 Fausto-Sterling ,  A. ,   García Coll ,  C. , &   Lamarre ,  M. ( 2011 a).  Sexing the baby: Part 1 What 
do we really know about sex diff erentiation in the fi rst year of life?    Social Science and 
Medicine , doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2011.05.051.  
 Fausto-Sterling ,  A. ,   García Coll ,  C. , &   Lamarre ,  M. ( 2011 b).  Sexing the baby: 
Part 2 Applying Dynamic Systems Th eory to the emergences of sex-related 
diff erences in infants and toddlers .   Social Science and Medicine , doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.
2011.06.027. 
 Feinberg ,  L. ( 1996 ).  Transgender Warriors .  Boston :  Beacon Press . 
 Feinberg ,  L. ( 1998 ).  Trans Liberation: Beyond Pink or Blue .  Boston :  Beacon Press . 
 Fine ,  C. ( 2010 ).  Delusions of Gender .  New York :  W.W. Norton and Company . 
 Firestone ,  S. ( 1970 ).   Th e Dialectic of Sex: Th e Case for Feminist Revolution .  New York :  Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux . 
 Foucault ,  M. ( 1978 ).  Th e History of Sexuality .  New York :  Pantheon . 
 Franklin ,  A. ,   Bevis ,  L. ,   Ling ,  Y. , &  Hurlbert ,  A. ( 2010 ).  Biological components of colour 
preference in infancy .   Developmental Science ,  13 ( 2 ),  346 – 354 . 
 Franklin ,  A. , &   Davies ,  I. R. L.  ( 2004 ).  New evidence for infant colour categories .   British 
Journal of Developmental Psychology ,  22 ,  349 n.377. 
 Frassanito ,  P. , &   Pettorini ,  B. ( 2008 ).  Pink and blue: the color of gender .   Child’s Nervous 
System ,  24 ( 8 ),  881 – 882 . 
 Gahr ,  M. ,   Metzdorf ,  R. ,   Schmidl ,  D.  , &   Wickler ,  W.  ( 2008 ).  Bi-directional sexual dimor-
phisms of the song control nucleus HVC in a songbird with unison song .   Public Library 
of Science One ,  3 ( 8 ), e3073. 
 Gahr ,  M. ,   Sonnenschein ,  E. , &  Wickler ,  W. ( 1998 ).  Sex diff erence in the size of the neural 
song control regions in a dueting songbird with similar song repertoire size of males and 
females .   Journal of Neuroscience ,  18 ( 3 ),  1124 – 1131 . 
 Gastaud ,  F. ,   Bouvattier ,  C. ,   Duranteau ,  L. ,   Brauner ,  R. ,   Th ibaud ,  E. ,   Kutten ,  F. ,  et al.  
( 2007 ).  Impaired sexual and reproductive outcomes in women with classical forms 
of congenital adrenal hyperplasia .   Journal of Clinical Endocrinology Metabolism ,  92 ( 4 ), 
 1391 – 1396 . 
 Giedd ,  J. N.  ,   Castellanos ,  F. X.  ,   Rajapakse ,  J. C.  ,   Vaituzis ,  A. C.  , &   Rapoport ,  J. L.  ( 1997 ). 
 Sexual dimorphism of the developing human brain .   Progress in Neuropsychopharmacology 
and Biological Psychiatry ,  21 ( 8 ),  1185 – 1201 . 
 Gilbert ,  S. ( 2010 ).  Developmental Biology .  Sunderland, MA :  Sinauer Associates . 
 Gladue ,  B. A.  ,   Beatty ,  W. W.  ,   Larson ,  J. , &   Staton ,  R. D.  ( 1990 ).  Sexual orientation and 
spatial ability in men and women .   Psychobiology ,  18 ( 1 ),  101 – 108 . 
 Godwin ,  J.  ( 2010 ).  Neuroendocrinology of sexual plasticity in teleost fi shes .   Frontiers in 
Neuroendocrinology ,  31 ( 2 ),  203 – 216 . 
 Goldberg ,  A. B.  ( 2007 ).  Born with the wrong body: transgender 10-year-old girl and her 
family talk to Barbara Walters. ABC News: 20/20 .  USA .  April 25 . 
  Green ,  R. ( 2008 ).  Childhood cross-gender behavior and adult homosexuality: why the link?  
 Journal of Gay and Lesbian Mental Health ,  12 ( 1/2 ),  17 – 28 . 

130 
REFERENCES
 Green ,  R. ( 2010 ).  Robert Stoller’s sex and gender: 40 years on .  Archives of Sexual Behavior , 
 39 ( 6 ),  1457 – 1465 . 
 Gregg ,  C. ,   Zhang ,  J.  ,   Butler ,  J. E.  ,   Haig ,  D.  , &   Dulac ,  C. ( 2010 ).  Sex-specifi c parent-of-origin 
allelic expression in the mouse brain .   Science ,  329 ( 5992 ),  682 – 685 . 
 Gregg ,  C. ,   Zhang ,  J.  ,   Weissbourd ,  B. ,   Luo ,  S.  ,   Schroth ,  G. P.  ,   Haig ,  D.  ,  et al.  ( 2010 ).  High-
resolution analysis of parent-of-origin allelic expression in the mouse brain .   Science , 
 329 ( 5992 ),  643 – 648 . 
 Gross ,  M. R.  , &   Charnov ,  E. L.  ( 1980 ).  Alternative male life histories in bluegill sunfi sh . 
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, US ,  77 ( 11 ),  6937 – 6940 . 
 Hall ,  J. A. Y.  , &   Kimura ,  D.  ( 1995 ).  Sexual orientation and perfomrance on sexually dimor-
phic motor tasks .  Archives of Sexual Behavior ,  24 ( 4 ),  395 – 407 . 
 Hamer ,  D. ,   Hu ,  S.  ,   Magnuson ,  V. L.  ,   Hu ,  N. , &   Pattatucci ,  A. M. L.  ( 1993 ).  Linkage between 
DNA markers on the X chromosome and male sexual orientation .   Science ,  261 , 
 321 – 325 . 
 Hansen ,  B.  ( 1989 ).  American physicians’ earliest writings about homosexuals, 1880–1900 . 
 Th e Milbank Quarterly ,  67 ( Supplement 1 ),  92 – 108 . 
 Hansen ,  B.  ( 1992 ).  American physicians’ “discovery” of homosexuals, 1880–1900: a new 
diagnosis in a changing society . In   C.  Rosenberg &   J.  Golden (Eds.),   Framing Disease 
(pp.  104 – 133 ).  New Brunswick, NJ :  Rutgers University Press . 
 Harkness ,  S. ,   Super ,  C. M.  ,   Moscardino ,  U.  ,   Rha ,  J.-H. ,   Blom ,  M. ,   Huitrón ,  B. ,  et al.  ( 2007 ). 
 Cultural models and developmental agendas: implications for arousal and self-
regulation in early infancy .   Journal of Developmental Processes ,  2 ( 1 ),  5 – 39 . 
 Harley ,  V. R.  ,   Clarkson ,  M. J.  , &   Argentaro ,  A. ( 2003 ).  Th e molecular action and regulation 
of the testis-determining factors, SRY (sex-determining region on the Y chromosome) 
and SOX9 [SRY-related high-mobility group (HMG) box 9] .   Endocrine Reviews ,  24 ( 4 ), 
 466 – 487 . 
 Hayles ,  N. K. ( 1993 ).  Th e materiality of informatics .   Confi gurations ,  1 ( 1 ),  147 – 170 . 
 Hendricks ,  S. E.  ,   Graber ,  B.  , &   Rodriguez-Sierra ,  J. F.  ( 1989 ).  Neuroendocrine responses to 
exogenous estrogen: no diff erences between heterosexual and homosexual men . 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology ,  14 ( 3 ),  177 – 185 . 
 Herdt ,  G. ( 1990 ).  Developmental discontinuities and sexual orientation across cultures . In 
 D. P.   McWhirter ,   S.   Sanders ,   A. & J. M.   Reinisch  (Eds.),   Homosexuality/Heterosexuality . 
 New York :  Oxford University Press . 
 Hill ,  D. B.  ,   Menvielle ,  E. ,   Sica ,  K. M.  , &   Johnson ,  A. ( 2010 ).  An affi  rmative intervention for 
families with gender variant children: parental ratings of child mental health and gender . 
 Journal of Sex and Marital Th erapy ,  36 ( 1 ),  6 – 23 . 
 Hines ,  M. ( 2009 ).  Gonadal hormones and sexual diff erentiation of human brain and behavior . 
In   D. W.   Pfaff  ,   A. P.   Arnold  ,   A. M.   Etgen  ,   S. E.   Fahrbach , &   R. T.   Rubin (Eds.), 
 Hormones, Brain and Behavior ,  2nd ed. (pp.  1869 – 1909 ).  San Diego, CA :  Academic 
Press . 
 Hines ,  M. ,   Brook ,  C. , &   Conway ,  G. S.  ( 2004 ).  Androgen and psychosexual development: 
core gender identity, sexual orientation and recalled childhood gender role behavior in 
women and men with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) .   Journal of Sex Research , 
 41 ( 1 ),  75 – 81 . 
 Hines ,  M. ,   Golombok ,  S.  ,   Rust ,  J. ,   Johnston ,  K. J.  , &   Golding ,  J.  ( 2002 ).  Testosterone during 
pregnancy and gender role behavior of preschool children: a longitudinal, population 
study .   Child Development ,  73 ( 6 ),  1678 – 1687 . 
 Hines ,  M. ,   Johnston ,  K. J.  ,   Golombok ,  S.  ,   Rust ,  J. ,   Stevens ,  M. , &   Golding ,  J.  ( 2002 ).  Prenatal 
stress and gender role behavior in girls and boys: a longitudinal, population study . 
 Hormones and Behavior ,  42 ( 2 ),  126 – 134 . 

 
REFERENCES 
131
 Hines ,  M. , &   Kaufman ,  F. R.  ( 1994 ).  Androgen and the development of human sex-typical 
behavior: rough-and-tumble play and sex of preferred playmates in children with 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) .   Child Development ,  65 ( 4 ),  1042 – 1053 . 
 Hyde ,  J. S.  ( 2005 ).  Th e gender similarities hypothesis .   American Psychologist ,  60 ( 6 ),  581 – 592 . 
 Hyde ,  J. S.  ( 2007 ).  New directions in the study of gender similarities and diff erences .   Current 
Directions in Psychological Science ,  16 ,  259 – 263 . 
 Hyde ,  J. S.  ,   Lindberg ,  S. M.  ,   Linn ,  M. C.  ,   Ellis ,  A. B.  , &   Williams ,  C. C.  ( 2008 ).  Diversity. 
Gender similarities characterize math performance .  Science ,  321 ( 5888 ),  494 – 495 . 
  Jacobs ,  P.  ,   Dalton ,  P. ,   James ,  R. ,   Mosse ,  K. ,   Power ,  M. ,   Robinson ,  D.  ,  et al.  ( 1997 ).  Turner 
Syndrome: a cytogenetic and molecular study .   Annals of Human Genetics ,  61 ,  471 – 483 . 
 Jadva ,  V. ,   Hines ,  M. , &   Golombok ,  S.  ( 2010 ).  Infants’ preferences for toys, colors, and shapes: 
sex diff erences and similarities .   Archives of Sexual Behavior ,  39 ( 6 ),  1261 – 1273 . 
 Jordan-Young ,  R. M.  ( 2010 ).   Brain Storm: Th e Flaws in the Science of Sex Diff erences . 
 Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press . 
 Juraska ,  J. M.  ( 1991 ).  Sex diff erences in “cognitive” regions of the rat brain . 
 Psychoneuroendocrinology  ,  16 ( 1–3 ),  105 – 109 .  
 Kantrowitz ,  B. , &   Wingert ,  P. ( 2010 ).  Are we facing a genderless future?    Newsweek , 
 August 16 . Retrieved from:  http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2010/08/16/life-
without-gender.print.html , acccessed  December 11 ,  2011 . 
 Katz ,  J. N. ( 1995 ).  Th e Invention of Heterosexuality .  New York :  Dutton . 
 Kegel ,  C. A. T.  ,  Bus ,  A. G. , &   van Ijzendoorn ,  M. H.  ( 2011 ).  Diff erential susceptibility in 
early literacy instruction through computer games: the role of the Dopamine D4 
Receptor gene (DRD4) .   Mind, Brain and Education ,  5 ( 2 ),  71 – 78 . 
 Keller ,  E. F.  ( 2010 ).   Th e Mirage of a Space between Nature and Nurture .  Durham, NC :  Duke 
University Press . 
  Kessler ,  S. ( 1998 ).  Lessons from the Intersexed .  New Brunswick, NJ :  Rutgers University Press . 
 Kessler,  S. J. , &   McKenna,   W.  ( 1978 ).   Gender: An Ethnomethodological Approach .  New York : 
 John Wiley & Sons . 
 Kiely ,  M. M.  ,   Xu ,  F.  ,   McGeehin ,  M. ,   Jackson ,  R. , &   Sinks ,  T. ( 1999 ).  Changing sex ratio in 
the United States, 1969–1995 .   Fertility and Sterility ,  71 ( 5 ),  969 – 971 . 
 Kinsey ,  A. C.  ,   Pomeroy ,  W. B.  , &   Martin ,  C. E.  ( 1948 ).   Sexual Behavior in the Human Male . 
 Philadelphia, PA :  W.B. Saunders Co . 
 Kinsey ,  A. C.  ,   Pomeroy ,  W. B.  ,   Martin ,  C. E.  , &   Gebhard ,  P. H.  ( 1953 ).   Sexual Behavior in the 
Human Female .  Philadelphia, PA :  W.B. Saunders Co . 
 Kraff t-Ebing ,  R. v.  ( 1892 ).   Psychopathia Sexualis, with Especial Reference to Contrary Sexual 
Instinct: A Medico-Legal Study .  Philadelphia, PA :  F.A. Davis . 
 Kramer ,  M. S.  ( 1987 ).  Determinants of low birth weight: methodological assessment and 
meta-analysis .   Bulletin of the World Health Organization ,  65 ( 5 ),  663 – 737 . 
 Krimsky ,  S. ( 2002 ).   Hormonal Chaos: Th e Scientifi c and Social Origins of the Environmental 
Endocrine Hypothesis .  Baltimore, MD :  Johns Hopkins University Press . 
 Kruijver ,  F. P.  ,   Zhou ,  J. N.  ,   Pool ,  C. W.  ,   Hofman ,  M. A.  ,   Gooren ,  L. J.  , &   Swaab ,  D. F.  ( 2000 ). 
 Male-to-female transsexuals have female neuron numbers in a limbic nucleus .   Journal of 
Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism ,  85 ( 5 ),  2034 – 2041 . 
 Langer ,  S. J.  , &   Martin ,  J. I.  ( 2004 ).  How dresses can make you mentally ill: examining 
Gender Identity Disorder in children .   Child and Adolescent Social Work Journal , 
 21 ,  5 – 23 . 
 Laumann ,  E. O.  ,   Gagnon ,  J. H.  ,   Michael ,  R. T.  , &   Michaels ,  S. ( 1994 ).   Th e Social Organization 
of Sexuality: Sexual Practices in the United States .  Chicago :  University of Chicago Press . 
 Lawrence ,  A. ( 2007 ).  A critique of the brain-sex theory of transsexualism . Retrieved from: 
 http://www.annelawrence.com/twr/brain-sex_critique.html , accessed  December 10 ,  2011 . 

132 
REFERENCES
 Lawrence ,  A.  ( 2008 ).  Gender Identity Disorders in adults: diagnosis and treatment . In   D. L.  
 Rowland  &  L.   Incrocci (Eds.),   Handbook of Sexual and Gender Identity (pp.  423 – 456 ). 
 New York :  John Wiley and Sons . 
 LeVay ,  S. ( 1991 ).  A diff erence in hypothalamic structure between heterosexual and homo-
sexual men .   Science ,  253 ,  1034 – 1037 . 
 Levy ,  G. D. , &   Haaf ,  R. A. ( 1994 ).  Detection of gender-related categories by 10-month-old 
infants .   Infant Behavior & Development ,  17 ,  457 – 459 . 
 Lippa ,  R. A. ( 2006 ).  Th e Gender Reality Hypothesis .   American Psychologist ,  61 ( 6 ),  639 . 
 Lorber ,  J.  ( 1994 ).  Paradoxes of Gender  .  New Haven, CT :  Yale University Press . 
 Martin ,  C. L.  ,   Ruble ,  D. N.  , &   Szkrybalo ,  J. ( 2002 ).  Cognitive theories of early gender devel-
opment .   Psychological Bulletin ,  128 ( 6 ),  903 – 933 . 
 Martin ,  C. L.  ,   Ruble ,  D. N.  , &   Szkrybalo ,  J. ( 2004 ).  Recognizing the centrality of gender 
identity and stereotype knowledge in gender development and moving toward theoret-
ical integration: reply to Bandura and Bussey .  Psychological Bulletin ,  130 ( 5 ),  702 – 710 .  
 Martin ,  J. I.  ( 2008 ).  Nosology, etiology, and course of Gender Identity Disorder .   Journal of 
Gay and Lesbian Mental Health ,  12 ( 1/2 ),  81 – 94 . 
 McCarthy ,  M. M.  , &   Konkle ,  A. T.  ( 2005 ).  When is a sex diff erence not a sex diff erence?  
  Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology ,  26 ( 2 ),  85 – 102 . 
 McCormick ,  C. M.  , &   Witelson ,  S. F.  ( 1991 ).  A cognitive profi le of homosexual men 
compared to heterosexual men and women .   Psychoneuroendocrinology ,  16 ( 6 ),  459 – 473 . 
 McIntosh ,  M. ( 1968 ).  Th e homosexual role .   Social Problems ,  16 ,  182 – 192 . 
 Menvielle ,  E. , &  Hill ,  D. B.  ( 2011 ).  An affi  rmative intervention for families with gender-variant 
children: a process evaluation .   Journal of Gay and Lesbian Mental Health ,  15 ,  94 – 123 .  
 Menvielle ,  E. , &   Tuerk ,  C. ( 2002 ).  A support group for parents of gender-nonconforming 
boys .   Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry ,  41 ( 8 ), 
 1010 – 1013 . 
 Menvielle ,  E. J.  ,  Tuerk ,  C. , &   Perrin ,  E. C. ( 2005 ,  February 1 ).  To the beat of a diff erent 
drummer: the gender variant child . Retrieved from:  http://www.imatyfa.org/permanent_
fi les/to-the-beat-of-a-diff erent-drummer-6-2007.pdf , accessed  December 11 ,  2011 .  
 Meyer-Bahlburg ,  H. F.  ( 2005 ).  Gender identity outcome in female-raised 46, XY persons 
with penile agenesis, cloacal exstrophy of the bladder, or penile ablation .   Archives of 
Sexual Behavior ,  34 ( 4 ),  423 – 438 . 
 Meyer-Bahlburg ,  H. ,   Ehrhardt ,  A. A.  ,   Rosen ,  L. R.  ,   Gruen ,  R. S.  ,   Veridiano ,  N. P.  ,   Vann , 
 F. H.  ,  et al.  ( 1995 ).  Prenatal estrogens and the development of homosexual orientation . 
 Developmental Psychology ,  31 ( 1 ),  12 – 21  
 Meyerowitz ,  J.  ( 2002 ).   How Sex Changed: A History of Transsexuality in the United States . 
 Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press . 
 Money ,  J.  , &   Ehrhardt ,  A. A.  ( 1972 ).   Man and Woman, Boy and Girl .  Baltimore, MD :  Johns 
Hopkins University Press . 
 Morris ,  J. A.  ,   Jordan ,  C. L.  , &   Breedlove ,  S. M.  ( 2004 ).  Sexual diff erentiation of the vertebrate 
nervous system .  Nature Neuroscience ,  7 ( 10 ),  1034 – 1039 . 
 Mustanski ,  B. S.  ,   Chivers ,  M. L.  , &   Bailey ,  J. M.  ( 2002 ).  A critical review of recent biological 
research on human sexual orientation .   Annual Review of Sex Research ,  13 ,  89 – 140 . 
 Neitz ,  J.  ,   Carroll ,  J.  ,   Yamauchi ,  Y. ,   Neitz ,  M. , &   Williams ,  D. R.  ( 2002 ).  Color perception is 
mediated by a plastic neural mechanism that is adjustable in adults .   Neuron ,  35 ( 4 ), 
 783 – 792 . 
 Ngun ,  T. C.  ,   Ghahramani ,  N. ,   Sanchez ,  F. J.  ,   Bocklandt ,  S.  , &   Vilain ,  E. ( 2010 ).  Th e genetics 
of sex diff erences in brain and behavior .   Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology ,  2 ( 2 ),  227 – 246 . 
 Nottebohm ,  F. , &   Arnold ,  A. P. ( 1976 ).  Sexual dimorphism in vocal control areas of the 
songbird brain .   Science ,  194 ( 4261 ),  211 – 213 . 

 
REFERENCES 
133
 Nye ,  R. A.  ( 1998 ).  Introduction . In   R. A.   Nye (Ed.),   Oxford Readers: Sexuality (pp.  3 – 15 ). 
 Oxford :  Oxford University Press . 
 Ortner ,  S. B.  ( 1996 ).   Making Gender: Th e Politics and Erotics of Culture .  Boston :  Beacon Press . 
 Oyewumi ,  O. ( 1998 ).  De-confounding gender: feminist theorizing and western culture, a 
comment on Hawkesworth’s “Confounding gender.”   Signs ,  23 ( 4 ),  1049 – 1062 . 
 Paoletti ,  J. B.  ( 1987 ).  Clothing and gender in America: children’s fashions 1890–1920 .   Signs , 
 13 ( 1 ),  136 – 143 . 
 Paoletti ,  J. B.  ( 1997 ).  Th e gendering of infants’ and toddlers’ clothing in America . In 
 K.  Martinez  &   K. L.   Amers  (Eds.),   Th e Material Culture of Gender; Th e Gender of 
Material Culture (pp.  27 – 35 ).  Hanover, NH :  University Press of New England . 
 Parma ,  P. ,   Radi ,  O. ,   Vidal ,  V. ,   Chaboissier ,  M. C.  ,   Dellambra ,  E. ,   Valentini ,  S. ,  et al.  ( 2006 ). 
 R-spondin1 is essential in sex determination, skin diff erentiation and malignancy . 
 Nature Genetics ,  38 ( 11 ),  1304 – 1309 . 
 Piercy ,  M. ( 1985 ).  Woman on the Edge of Time .  New York :  Fawcett . 
 Poulin-Dubois ,  D. ,   Serbin ,  L. A.  , &   Derbyshire ,  A. ( 1998 ).  Toddlers’ intermodal and verbal 
knowledge about gender .   Merrill Palmer Quarterly ,  44 ( 3 ),  338 – 354 . 
 Poulin-Dubois ,  D. ,   Serbin ,  L. A.  ,   Eichstedt ,  J. A.  ,   Sen ,  M. G.  , &   Beissel ,  C. F.  ( 2002 ).  Men 
don’t put on make-up: toddlers’ knowledge of the gender stereotyping of household 
activities .   Social Development ,  11 ( 2 ),  166 – 181 . 
 Poulin-Dubois ,  D. ,   Serbin ,  L. A.  ,   Kenyon ,  B.  , &   Derbyshire ,  A. ( 1994 ).  Infants’ intermodal 
knowledge about gender .   Developmental Psychology ,  30 ( 3 ),  436 – 442 . 
 Quinn ,  P. C.  ,   Yahr ,  J. ,   Kuhn ,  A.  ,   Slater ,  A. M.  , &   Pascalils ,  O. ( 2002 ).  Representation of the 
gender of human faces by infants: a preference for female .   Perception ,  31 ( 9 ),  1109 – 1121 . 
 Rametti ,  G. ,   Carrillo ,  B. ,   Gómez-Gil ,  E. ,   Junque ,  C. ,   Segovia ,  S. ,   Gomez ,  Á. ,  et al.  ( 2011a ). 
 White matter microstructure in female to male transsexuals before cross-sex hormonal 
treatment. A diff usion tensor imaging study .   Journal of Psychiatric Research ,  45 ( 2 ), 
 199 – 204 . 
 Rametti ,  G. ,   Carrillo ,  B.  ,   Gómez-Gil ,  E. ,   Junque ,  C. ,   Zubiarre-Elorza ,  L. ,   Segovia ,  S. ,  et al.  
( 2011b ).  Th e microstructure of white matter in male to female transsexuals before cross-
sex hormonal treatment. A DTI study .   Journal of Psychiatric Research ,  45 ( 7 ),  949 – 954 . 
 Rivers ,  J. , &   Crawford ,  M. ( 1974 ).  Maternal nutrition and the sex ratio at birth .   Nature ,  252 , 
 297 – 298 . 
 Rosenfeld ,  C. S.  , &   Roberts ,  R. M.  ( 2004 ).  Maternal diet and other factors aff ecting off spring 
sex ratio: a review .   Biology of Reproduction ,  71 ( 4 ),  1063 – 1070 . 
 Rosenkranz ,  K. ,   Kacar ,  A. , &   Rothwell ,  J. C.  ( 2007 ).  Diff erential modulation of motor 
cortical plasticity and excitability in early and late phases of human motor learning . 
 Journal of Neuroscience ,  27 ( 44 ),  12058 – 12066 . 
 Rosenstein ,  L. D.  , &   Bigler ,  E. D.  ( 1987 ).  No relationship between handedness and sexual 
preference .   Psychological Reports ,  60 ( 3 Pt 1 ),  704 – 706 . 
 Ruble ,  D. , &   Martin ,  C. L.  ( 1998 ).  Gender development . In   N.  Eisenberg (Ed.),   Social, 
Emotional and Personality Development (pp.  933 – 1016 ).  New York :  Wiley . 
 Ruble ,  D. N.  ,   Martin ,  C. L.  , &   Berenbaum ,  S. A.  (Eds.) ( 2006 ).   Gender Development . 
 Hoboken, NJ :  John Wiley and Sons . 
 Rust ,  J.  ,   Golombok ,  S.  ,  Hines ,  M. ,  Johnston ,  K. , &   Golding ,  J.  ( 2000 ).  Th e role of brothers 
and sisters in the gender development of preschool children .   Journal of Experimental 
Child Psychology ,  77 ( 4 ),  292 – 303 . 
 Sandfort ,  T. G. M.  ( 2005 ).  Sexual orientation and gender: stereotypes and beyond .   Archives of 
Sexual Behavior ,  34 ( 6 ),  595 – 611 . 
 Schore ,  A. N.  ( 1994 ).   Aff ect Regulation and the Origin of the Self: Th e Neurobiology of Emotional 
Development .  Hillsdale, NJ :  L. Erlbaum Associates . 

134 
REFERENCES
 Schore ,  A. N.  ( 2000 ).  Th e self organization of the right brain and the neurobiology of 
emotional development . In   M. D.   Lewis &   I.  Granic  (Eds.),   Emotional Development and 
Self Organization: Dynamic Systems Approach to Emotional Development .  Cambridge : 
 Cambridge University Press . 
 Seager ,  J.  ( 2003 ).  Th e Penguin Atlas of Women in the World .  London :  Myriad Editions . 
 Serbin ,  L. A.  ,   Poulin-Dubois ,  D.  ,   Colburne ,  K. A.  ,   Sen ,  M. G.  , &   Eichstedt ,  J. A.  ( 2001 ). 
 Gender stereotyping in infancy: visual preferences for and knowledge of gender-
stereotyped toys in the second year .   International Journal of Behavioral Development , 
 25 ( 1 ),  7 – 15 . 
 Serbin ,  L. A.  ,   Poulin-Dubois ,  D.  , &   Eichstedt ,  J. A.  ( 2002 ).  Infants’ response to gender-
inconsistent events .   Infancy ,  3 ( 4 ),  531 – 542 . 
 Shoemaker ,  C. M.  , &   Crews ,  D.  ( 2009 ).  Analyzing the coordinated gene network underlying 
temperature-dependent sex determination in reptiles .   Seminars in Cell and Developmental 
Biology ,  20 ( 3 ),  293 – 303 . 
 Simerly ,  R. B.  ( 2002 ).  Wired for reproduction: organization and development of sexually 
dimorphic circuits in the mammalian forebrain .   Annual Review of Neuroscience ,  25 , 
 507 – 536 . 
 Spiegel ,  A.  ( 2008 a).  Parents consider treatment to delay son’s puberty: new therapy 
would buy time to resolve gender crisis .  All Th ings Considered ,  May 7 .  National Public 
Radio ,  USA . 
 Spiegel ,  A.  ( 2008 b).  Two families grapple with sons’ gender preferences: psychologists take 
radically diff erent approaches in therapy .  All Th ings Considered ,  May 8 .  National Public 
Radio ,  USA . 
 Steensma ,  T. D.  ,   Biemond ,  R. ,   Boer ,  F. D.  , &   Cohen-Kettenis ,  P. T.  ( 2011 ).  Desisting and 
persisting gender dysphoria after childhood: a qualitative follow-up study .   Clinical Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry ,  16 ( 4 ),  499 – 516 . 
 Stein ,  E.  ( 1998 ).  Review of Queer Science: the use and abuse of research on homosexuality . 
 Journal of Homosexuality ,  35 ( 2 ),  107 – 117 . 
 Stiles ,  J.  ( 2008 ).  Th e Fundamentals of Brain Development: Integrating Nature and Nurture . 
 Cambridge, MA :  Harvard University Press . 
 Strock ,  C. ( 1998 ).  Married Women Who Love Women .  New York :  Doubleday . 
 Stryker ,  S.  , &   Whittle ,  S.  (Eds.) ( 2006 ).   Th e Transgender Studies Reader .  New York :  Routledge . 
 Sugita ,  Y. ( 2004 ).  Experience in early infancy is indispensable for color perception .   Current 
Biology ,  14 ( 14 ),  1267 – 1271 . 
 Teller ,  D. Y.  ( 1998 ).  Spatial and temporal aspects of infant color vision .   Vision Research , 
 38 ( 21 ),  3275 – 3282 . 
 Th elen ,  E. ( 1995 ).  Motor development: a new synthesis .   American Psychologist ,  50 ( 2 ),  79 – 95 . 
 Th elen ,  E.  ( 2000 ).  Grounded in the world: developmental origins of the embodied mind . 
 Infancy ,  1 ( 1 ),  3 – 28 . 
 Th elen ,  E. , &   Smith ,  L. B.  ( 1994 ).   A Dynamic Systems Approach to the Development of Cognition 
and Action .  Cambridge, MA :  MIT Press . 
 Tomizuka ,  K. ,   Horikoshi ,  K. ,   Kitada ,  R. ,   Sugawara ,  Y. ,   Iba ,  Y. ,   Kojima ,  A. ,  et al.  ( 2008 ). 
 R-spondin1 plays an essential role in ovarian development through positively regulating 
Wnt-4 signaling .  Human Molecular Genetics ,  17 ( 9 ),  1278 – 1291 . 
 van Vliet ,  G. ,   Liu ,  S.  , &   Kramer ,  M. ( 2009 ).  Decreasing sex diff erence in birth weight . 
 Epidemiology ,  20 ( 4 ),  622 . 
 Vance ,  C. S.  ( 1991 ).  Anthropology rediscovers sexuality: a theoretical comment .  Social Science 
and Medicine ,  33 ( 8 ),  875 – 884 . 
 Veitia ,  R. A.  ( 2010 ).  FOXL2 versus SOX9: a lifelong “battle of the sexes.”    Bioessays ,  32 ( 5 ), 
 375 – 380 . 

 
REFERENCES 
135
 Wade ,  N.  ( 2010 ).  Tug of war pits genes of parents in the fetus .   New York Times ,  September 
13 ,   p.  5 .  New York . 
 Weinraub ,  M. ,   Clemens ,  L. P.  ,   Sockloff  ,  A. ,   Ethridge ,  T.  ,   Gracely ,  E. , &   Myers ,  B. ( 1984 ).  Th e 
development of sex role stereotypes in the third year: relationships to gender labeling, 
gender identity, sex-typed toy preference, and family characteristics .   Child Development , 
 55 ( 4 ),  1493 – 1503 . 
 Weinrich ,  J. D.  ( 1987 ).   Sexual Landscapes: Why We Are What We Are; Why We Love Whom We 
Love .  New York :  Charles Scribner’s Sons . 
 Weston ,  K. ( 1993 ).  Lesbian and gay studies in the house of anthropology .   Annual Review of 
Anthropology ,  22 , 339 – 367 . 
 Wexler ,  B. E.  ( 2006 ).   Brain and Culture: Neurobiology, Ideology and Social Change .  Cambridge, 
MA :  MIT Press . 
 Wilhelm ,  D. ,   Palmer ,  S.  , &   Koopman ,  P. ( 2007 ).  Sex determination and gonadal develop-
ment in mammals .   Physiological Reviews ,  87 ( 1 ),  1 – 28 . 
 Winfrey ,  O. (August 24, 2004).  Th e 11-year-old who wants a sex change .  Th e Oprah Winfrey 
Show .  USA . 
 Yoon ,  J.  ( 2006 ).  Th e Pink and Blue Project . Retrieved from:  http://www.jeongmeeyoon.com/
aw_pinkblue.htm , accessed  February  2012 . 
 Young ,  I. M.  ( 1990 ).   Th rowing Like a Girl and Other Essays in Feminist Philosophy and Social 
Th eory .  Bloomington :  Indiana University Press . 
 Zhou ,  J. N.  ,   Hofman ,  M. A.  ,   Gooren ,  L. J.  , &   Swaab ,  D. F.  ( 1995 ).  A sex diff erence in the 
human brain and its relation to transsexuality .   Nature ,  378 ( 6552 ),  68 – 70 . 
 Zucker ,  K. J.  ( 2008 ).  Refl ections of the relation between sex-typed behavior in childhood and 
sexual orientation in adulthood .   Journal of Gay and Lesbian Mental Health ,  12 ( 1/2 ), 
 29 – 59 . 
 Zucker ,  K. J.  , &   Cohen-Kettenis ,  P. T.  ( 2008 ).  Gender Identity Disorder in children and 
adolescents . In   D. L.   Rowland  &   L.  Incrocci (Eds.),   Handbook of Sexual and Gender 
Identity Disorders (pp.  376 – 422 ).  New York :  John Wiley and Sons . 

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 Figures 2.1, 4.3, 6.1, 6.2, Tables 2.1, 3.1 From Anne Fausto-Sterling,  Sexing the Body: 
Gender Politics and the Construction of Sexuality . Copyright © 2000 by Anne Fausto-Sterling. 
Reprinted with the permission of Basic Books, Inc., a member of Perseus Books Group. 
 Figure 2.2 Adapted from J. Money and A. A. Ehrhardt,  Man and Woman, Boy and Girl 
(Baltimore: Th e Johns Hopkins University Press, 1972), p. 3. Copyright © 1972. Adapted 
with permission. 
 Figure 2.3 From JeongMee Yoon, “Th e Pink and Blue Project” (2006). Reprinted with 
permission of the artist. 
 Figure 3.1 Adapted from C. M. Shoemaker and D. Crews, “Analyzing the coordinated gene 
network underlying temperature-dependent sex determination in reptiles” from  Seminars 
in Cell and Developmental Biology , 20(3): 296, Figure 1. Reprinted with the permission of 
Elsevier Science Limited. 
 Figure 3.2  From S. Gilbert,  Developmental Biology , Figure 3.2. Copyright © 2010. Reprinted 
with the permission of Sinauer Associates, Inc., Publishers. 
 Figure 3.3  From Keith L. Moore and T. V. N. Persaud,  Th e Developing Human: 
Clinically Oriented Embryology, Eighth Edition , page 272, Figure 12.37. Copyright © 2008 
by Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier, Inc. Reprinted with the permission of Elsevier Science 
Limited. 
 Figure 4.1  From N. Wade, “Tug of War Pits Genes of Parents in the Fetus” from  Th e New 
York Times  (September 13, 2010): Section D, p. 5. Copyright © 2010 by Th e New York Times 
Company. All rights reserved. Used by permission. Th e printing, copying, redistribution, or 
retransmission of the Material without express written permission is prohibited. 
 Figure 4.2  From M. M. McCarthy and A. T. Konkle, “When is a sex diff erence not a sex 
diff erence?” from  Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology , 26(2): 87, Figure 1. Copyright © 2005 by 
Elsevier. Reprinted with permission. 
136

 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
137
 Figure 4.4 
 (a) Neonate fusiform gyrus: 
 From J. LeRoy Conel,  Th e Postnatal Development of the Human Cerebral Cortex (Harvard 
University Press, 1939). Figure 135. 
 (b) Th ree-month fusiform gyrus: 
 From J. LeRoy Conel,  Th e Postnatal Development of the Human Cerebral Cortex (Harvard 
University Press, 1947). Figure 147. 
 (c) Six-month fusiform gyrus: 
 From J. LeRoy Conel,  Th e Postnatal Development of the Human Cerebral Cortex (Harvard 
University Press, 1951). Figure 147. 
 (d) Fifteen-month fusiform gyrus: 
 From J. LeRoy Conel,  Th e Postnatal Development of the Human Cerebral Cortex (Harvard 
University Press, 1955). Figure 147. 
 Table 5.2  From M. Hines, S. F. Ahmed, and I. A. Hughes, “Psychological Outcomes 
and Gender-Related Development in Complete Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome” from 
 Archives of Sexual Behavior , 32(2): 99–100, Appendix A. Copyright © 2003 by Springer 
Netherlands. Reprinted with the permission of Springer. 
 Table 5.3  After Rust, J., Golombok, S., Hines, M., Johnston, K., & Golding, J. (2000). Th e 
role of brothers and sisters in the gender development of preschool children.  Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology , 77(4), 292–303. 
 Figure 6.3 Geoff rey Warren, excerpt from  Fashion Accessories since 1500 . Copyright © 1987 
by Geoff rey Warren. Reprinted with the permission of HarperCollins Publishers, Ltd. 
 Figures 6.4, 6.5, 6.7 Reprinted by permission of the publisher from  Brain Storm: 
Th e Flaws in the Science of Sex Diff erences  by Rebecca M. Jordan-Young, pp. 130, 141, 168, 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Copyright © 2010 by the President and Fellows 
of Harvard College. 
 Figure 6.6 From E. O. Laumann, J. H. Gagnon, R. T. Michael and S. Michaels,  Th e 
Social Organization of Sexuality: Sexual Practices in the United States . Copyright © 1994 
by Edward O. Laumann, Robert T. Michael, CSG Enterprises, Inc., and Stuart Michaels. 
Reprinted with the permission of Th e University of Chicago Press. 
 Figure 7.1 Anne Fausto-Sterling with the aid of http://www.bolderstats.com/jmsl/doc/
CohenD.htm 
 Table 7.2  From J. S. Hyde, “New Directions in the Study of Gender Similarities and 
Diff erences” from  Current Directions in Psychological Science , 16 (2007): 260, Table 1. 
Copyright © 2007 by the Association for Psychological Science. Reprinted with the 
permission of Sage Publications, Inc. 
 Figure 7.2a  From R. Lewontin,  Human Diversity , p. 21. Copyright © 1982. Reprinted with 
the permission of W. H. Freeman and Company. 
 Figure 7.2b  From C. D. Schlichting and M. Pigliucci,  Phenotypic Evolution: A Reaction Norm 
Perspective , p. 56, Figure 3–5. Copyright © 1998. Reprinted with the permission of Sinauer 
Associates, Inc., Publishers. 

 INDEX  
 adult gender identity 11 
 American Psychiatric Association, 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
(DSM) 63 
 Androgen Insensitivity Syndrome (AIS) 
 25 , 45 
 androgens 23–24; over-production of 39, 
40, 45, 47–48, 87; and sexual orientation 
90;  see also  testosterone 
 androphilia 86, 90 
 anthropological study of sexuality 
75–79 
 Anti-Müllerian Factor (AMF) 21 
 Aristotle 17 
 Arnold, Arthur 30–31 
 autosomes 3, 4, 15 
 aversive conditioning 117 
 Bailey, J. Michael 91–92 
 behavior: gender-appropriate  7 , 54; 
non-conforming  7 , 64–65, 68, 92;  see also 
play behaviors 
 beliefs, gender  7 
 Berkman, Alexander 94–96 
 biological diff erence  7 
 bipotentiality 20–21, 23 
 birds 14–15; brain anatomy and physiology 
30–32; song 30–32 
 birthweight 102–103, 105 
 bisexuality 68 
 Bisphenol A (BPA) 119 
 bluegill sunfi sh 12–13 
 body image 10, 57 
 Boswell, John 74–75 
 brain: anatomy and physiology 30–42, 
120–121 (newborns 37; and sexual 
orientation 86, 90; transsexuals 59, 
 60–62 , 63); fetal 30, 33, 39, 43; hormones 
and development of 30–34, 39–42, 45; 
size 99–102 
 brain sex 10, 27–42, 43, 44, 120 
 brain sex dimorphisms 35 
 Capel, Blanche 20 
 cerebral cortex 35 
 cervix 5, 21 
 children: color preferences 112–113, 
115–118; gender identity 65, 117; 
Gender Identity Disorder 63, 64, 65–66, 
68, 69; gender knowledge 53–55; gender 
non-conformity 64–65, 68, 92; gender 
variant 63–68 
 chromosomal sex determination 14–16 
 chromosomal sex-layer 4, 10, 44 
 chromosome 17 19 
 cleaner wrasse fi sh 13 
 clitoris 5, 23 
 cloaca 21 
138
 Note: Page numbers in  bold  are for fi gures, those in  italics  are for tables. 

 
INDEX 
139
 cloacal dystrophy 48–49, 86 
 cloacal exstrophy 47–48 
 clothing 7–10, 109–111 
 Cohen’s d 99–100 
 Colapinto, J. 44 
 colonialism 78 
 color coding 8–9, 10, 109–111 
 color preferences 112–113, 115–118 
 color vision 114–115 
 conditioning, aversive 117 
 conforming behavior  7 
 Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) 
 25 , 39–42, 45, 46–47 
 Corbett, Ken 69 
 corpus callosum 35 
 corticospinal tract 63 
 Crews, David 17 
 cultural representations  7 
 culture: and gender presentation 7; and 
sexuality 75–79 
 developmental psychology 49–57 
 developmental timelines  50–51 
 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) 63 
 Diamond, Lisa 94, 96–98 
 Diamond, Milton 43–44 
 diet 15 
 dihydrotestosterone 23 
 DiNapoli, Leo 20 
 discipline, social 70–71 
 Disorders of Sexual Development (DSDs) 
11,  25 ;  see also  Androgen Insensitivity 
Syndrome (AIS); Congenital Adrenal 
Hyperplasia (CAH) 
 DNA 93–94 
 dominance 15 
 dopamine systems 116–117, 118 
 Downey, Greg 121 
 Duden, Barbara 72–73 
 dynamic systems theory 67, 113 
 early identity fi xation 43 
 eggs: fertilization 4, 15; incubation 
temperature, in reptiles 14, 15 
 Ehrhardt, Anke 27, 43 
 Eichstedt, J. A. 54 
 Ellis, Havelock 73 
 embryos 4 
 endocrine disruptors 19–20 
 environmental factors: and homosexuality 
92–93; and sex diff erences 35–36 
 epididymis 5, 21 
 epigenetic modifi cation 28 
 equality, gender 77–78 
 equipotential gonad formation 17, 19 
 erotic sensations 11 
 estrogen 21, 23, 32, 36 
 ethnic diff erence 78 
 external genital sex 5, 10, 23 
 Fallopian tubes 5, 21 
 family: and gender development 56–57; and 
homosexuality 92 
 female development 16, 17, 19–20 
 femaleness, as lack or absence 16–17 
 feminine sexuality 79, 81, 82 
 femininity 73, 79, 82, 86; cultural standards 
of 66; and homosexuality 69 
 feminism 77–78 
 fertilization 3–4 
 fetal gonadal hormones 4–5, 20, 43 
 fetal gonadal sex 4, 10, 19, 20 
 fetal hormonal sex 5, 10, 20, 21–26, 
43–44 
 fetal internal reproductive sex 5, 10 
 fetal testosterone 21, 23, 39, 40, 42, 47 
 fi sh 12–14 
 forest weaver birds 31–32 
 Forkhead box protein L2 (FoxL2) 19 
 Foucault, Michel 70–71 
 Franklin, Benjamin 27 
 gay marriage 123 
 gay movement 77 
 gender beliefs  7 
 gender constancy 55 
 gender display  7 
 gender equality/inequality 77–78 
 gender expression 66–67 
 gender fortifi cation 10 
 gender identity 6,  7 , 43–69, 92; adult 11; 
biological determination of 44–45; brain 
development and 45–46; childhood 65, 
117; early identity fi xation 43; family 
structure and 56–57; fetal hormones 
and 43–44, 45–46, 47–48; juvenile 11; 
social infl uences on 43, 44; variance 
58–69 
 Gender Identity Disorder (GID) 47, 58 

140 
INDEX
 Gender Identity Disorder of Childhood 
(GIDC) 63, 64, 65–66, 68, 69 
 gender ideology  7 
 gender neutrality 1, 9 
 gender non-conformity  7 , 64–65, 68, 92 
 gender roles 56–57 
 Gender Similarities Hypothesis (Hyde) 105 
 gender socialization 6, 7–10 
 gender statuses  6 
 gender stereotypes 54–55, 113 
 gender testing 2 
 gender timeline  52 , 53–55 
 gendered division of labor  6 
 genderlessness 1–2, 122–123 
 gene expression: and male/female bird song 
31; parentally biased 28,  29 , 30 
 genes 14, 15, 17, 19–20 
 genetics 89–90, 90–93 
 genital dimorphism 6 
 genital sex 23 
 genitalia: external 5, 6, 10, 20, 23,  24 , 44, 
57, 66–67; internal 4, 5, 17, 20, 21,  22 , 
23, 44 
 genotypic (chromosomal) sex determination 
14–16 
 Gilman, Charlotte Perkins 110 
 Goldman, Emma 94 
 Gonadal Dysgenesis  25 
 gonads 4, 17–20; fetal 4, 10, 19, 20, 21–6, 
45; indiff erent 17, 19;  see also  genitalia 
 Greece, ancient 74, 75, 77 
 gynephilia 86 
 Hamer, Dean 89 
 Hansen, B. 74 
 head size 99–102 
 Herdt, Gil 77 
 heterosexuality 73, 74, 75,  76 , 79, 81, 86, 95 
 Hines, Melissa 40, 41, 46 
 hippocampus 35–36 
 homosexuality 72, 81–82, 83, 86–87; 
age-structured 77; anthropological 
perspectives 75, 77, 79; cultural 
perspectives 75, 77, 79; defi nitions and 
measures of 83, 84, 86, 87, 88, 89; and 
femininity 69; gender-reversed 77; 
genetic contribution to 90–93; historical 
perspective 73–74, 75,  76 ; 
institutionalized 75; and masculinity/
femininity 68–69, 73–74; medicalization 
of 73, 74; role-specialized 77; same-sex 
attraction framework 86, 87 
 hormones: and brain development 30–34, 
39–42, 45; fetal gonadal 4–5, 20, 43; 
prenatal 4–5, 20, 21, 23–26, 88 (and brain 
development 33–34, 39–42, 45; and 
gender identity 43–44, 45–46; and 
sex-diff erentiated behaviors 32–34, 
39–42; and sexual orientation 90); 
pubertal 44;  see also  androgens; estrogen; 
testosterone 
 Hyde, Janet 105–107 
 hypothalamus 13, 32, 59 
 identity  see gender identity 
 ideology, gender  7 
 imagery, gender  7 
 imprinting, parental 28,  29 , 30 
 indiff erent gonad 17, 19 
 inequality, sexual 78 
 infants: gender knowledge 53–54; social/
cultural responses to gender of 7–8, 
121–123;  see also  newborns 
 intermodal association 53 
 internal reproductive sex 5, 23 
 International Association of Athletics 
Federations (IAAF) 2 
 intersex/intersexuality 11;  see also Disorders 
of Sexual Development (DSDs) 
 JeongMee Yoon 8, 112 
 Joan/John case 44 
 Jordan-Young, Rebecca 40, 82, 86, 87, 88 
 Juraska, Janice 35–36 
 juvenile gender identity 11 
 Kantrowitz, Barbara 1 
 Kessler, S. J. 44 
 Kinsey, Alfred 83 
 Kinsey Scale 74, 83, 84, 87 
 kinship, gendered  6 
 Klinefelter Syndrome  25 
 Konkle, A. T. M. 34 
 Kraff t-Ebing, R. 73 
 Kruijver, F. P.  60 
 labor, gendered division of  6 
 Laumann, Edward 84, 89 
 layered model of sex and gender 3–6, 10–11 
 legal structures 122–123 

 
INDEX 
141
 LeVay, Simon 86 
 Lippa, Richard 107 
 Lorber, J. 6–7 
 McIntosh, Mary 75 
 McKenna, W. 44 
 male development 16, 17, 19, 20 
 marital status  6 
 marriage, gay 123 
 Martin, J. I. 6 
 masculine sexuality 79, 81, 82 
 masculinity 73, 79, 82, 86; cultural 
standards of 66 
 masturbation 81, 82 
 maths problem-solving, sex diff erences in 
105–107 
 May-Welby, Norrie 1 
 McCarthy, M. M. 34 
 medicalization: of non-conformity  7 ; of 
sexuality 71–72, 73, 74 
 mesonephros 21, 23 
 metanephros 21 
 Meyer-Bahlburg, H. 47, 48, 49 
 mice  see rodents 
 Miles, Catherine C. 68–69 
 Money, John 3, 6, 10–11, 21, 42, 43, 
44, 57 
 Morris, J. A. 42 
 mother–infant dyad 49, 53, 121–122 
 motor cortex 121 
 motor skills 120–121 
 natural (biological) diff erence  7 
 nerve cells (neurons) 37,  38 , 39 
 neural plasticity 63 
 New York Times 28 
 newborns: brain development 37; color 
vision 114–115; gender socialization 
of 6, 7–10; genital sex 66;  see also 
infants 
 non-conformity, gender  7 , 64–65, 68, 92 
 norms of reaction 102, 103–105 
 Nottebohm, Fernando 30–31 
 Nye, R. A. 74 
 oocyte development 16 
 Ortner, Sherry 78 
 ovaries 4, 17, 20; fetal 21 
 oviducts  see Fallopian tubes 
 Oyewumi, Oyeronke 78 
 paramesonephric ducts 21 
 parent–infant interaction 49, 53, 
121–122 
 parental characteristics, and gender role 
development 56 
 parental imprinting 28,  29 , 30 
 parthenogenesis 12 
 partner preferences 89 
 penile agenesis 47, 49 
 penis 5, 23; absence of 17; traumatic loss of 
47, 49 
 personality, gendered  7 
 phallus  see penis 
 Pillard, R. C. 91 
 pituitary gland 13 
 play behaviors 54, 55, 56; in CAH girls 
39–40 
 pleasure 116, 117 
 population, supervision of 70 
 Poulin-Dubois, D. 54 
 power, social 77–78 
 primary sex determination 14–16, 20; 
 see also fetal gonadal sex 
 prostate 5 
 pubertal erotic sex 11 
 pubertal hormonal sex 11, 44 
 pubertal morphological sex 11 
 puberty 11 
 quasi-experiments 37, 39, 42, 43–49 
 R-spondin1 (Rspo1) 19–20 
 racial diff erence 78 
 Rametti, G.  61 
 rats  see rodents 
 receptive labeling 54 
 Reiner, William 48–49 
 reptiles 14, 15 
 reward systems 116, 117 
 rodents 15, 28; brain structure and 
physiology 32–33, 35–36 
 Sandfort, Th eo 68 
 Schore, A. N. 121, 122 
 scrotum 5, 23 
 secondary sex determination 20 
 self presentation 6,  7 
 Semenya, Caster 1–2 
 seminal vesicle 21 
 Serbin, L. A. 54 

142 
INDEX
 sex change, socially determined, in fi sh 
13–14 
 sex determination  see primary sex 
determination; secondary sex 
determination 
 sex diff erences 34, 105–108; in complex 
problem-solving 105–107; environment 
and 35–36 
 sex dimorphisms 34–35 
 sex hormones  see androgens; estrogen; 
testosterone 
 sex ratio 15, 16 
 sexual ambiguity 3 
 sexual desire  7 , 73–74, 79, 81–82, 93–98 
 sexual equality/inequality 77–78 
 sexual fl uidity 97–98 
 sexual intercourse 81, 82 
 sexual orientation 49, 83–86; androphilic/
gynophilic model of 86, 90; gendered  7 
 sexuality: anthropological perspectives 
75–79; biological perspectives 79, 81–83, 
86, 87, 89–93; framing research on 
93–94; historical perspective 70–75,  76 ; 
measures and defi nitions of 83–84, 
87–90; medicalization of 71–72, 73, 74; 
social organization of 70–74 
 Shoemaker, Christina 17 17 
 sibling eff ects 56 
 social control 70–71; gendered  7 
 social power systems 77–78 
 social structures 122–123 
 socialization, gender 6, 7–10, 44 
 socially determined sex change, in fi sh 
13–14 
 Sox9 19, 20 
 sperm 3, 4, 15 
 Sry gene 19, 20 
 status, gender  6 
 stereotypes, gender 54–55, 113 
 stigmatization, of non-conformity  7 
 Straus, Erwin 120 
 stress 15 
 superior longitudinal fasiculus (SLF) 63 
 synapses 37, 39 
 Terman, Lewis M. 68–69 
 testes 4, 17, 20, 21 
 testosterone 31, 32, 36; fetal 21, 23, 39, 40, 
42, 47 
 toys/toy preferences 7–10; in CAH girls 41 
 transsexuals 58–63, 123; brain studies 59, 
 60–62 , 63; Female to Male (FtM) 58, 59, 
 62 , 63; Male to Female (MtF) 58, 59, 
 60–61 
 Turner Syndrome  25 
 twin studies 90–93 
 urethra 23 
 uterus 5, 21 
 vagina 5, 21, 23 
 vas deferens 5, 21 
 vision, color 114–115 
 Wade, Nicholas 28 
 Wexler, B. E. 122 
 Wingert, Pat 1 
 Wnt4 (Wingless type MMTV integration 
family) 19, 20 
 women: sexual desire 73–74; sexual fl uidity 
of 97; and sexuality 72, 96–98; social 
status 77–78 
 World Health Organization 102 
 xenoestrogens 119–120 
 Y chromosome 3–4, 14, 16, 19 
 Yoruba culture 78–79 
 Z chromosome 14 



Social Issues 
COLLECTION
Customizing course material for innovative and excellent teaching 
in sociology has never been easier or more effective!
Choose from a collection of more than 300 readings from Routledge, 
Taylor & Francis, and other publishers to make a custom anthology 
that suits the needs of your social problems/ social inequality, and  
social issues courses. 
All readings have been aptly chosen by academic editors and our  
authors and organized by topic and author.
Online tool makes it easy for busy instructors:
1. Simply select your favorite Routledge and Taylor & Francis readings, and add 
    any other required course material, including your own.
2. Choose the order of the readings, pick a binding, and customize a cover.
3. One click will post your materials for students to buy. They can purchase print
    or digital packs, and we ship direct to their door within two weeks of ordering! 
Contact information: Call your Routledge sales rep, or
Becky Smith at University Readers, 800-200-3908 ext. 18, bsmith@universityreaders.com
Steve Rutter at Routledge, 207-434-2102, Steve.Rutter@taylorandfrancis.com.
Introducing the 
A Routledge/University Readers Custom Library for Teaching
More information at www.socialissuescollection.com


