
Aphasia and Other Acquired 
Neurogenic Language Disorders
A Guide for Clinical Excellence


Aphasia and Other Acquired 
Neurogenic Language Disorders
A Guide for Clinical Excellence
Brooke Hallowell 
PhD, CCC-SLP

5521 Ruffin Road
San Diego, CA 92123
e-mail:  info@pluralpublishing.com
Website:  http://www.pluralpublishing.com
Copyright © 2017 by Plural Publishing, Inc.
Typeset in 10.5/13 Palatino by Flanagan’s Publishing Services, Inc.
Printed in the United States of America by McNaughton & Gunn, Inc.
All rights, including that of translation, reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, recording, or otherwise, including photocopying, recording, 
taping, Web distribution, or information storage and retrieval systems without the 
prior written consent of the publisher.
For permission to use material from this text, contact us by
Telephone:  (866) 758-7251
Fax:  (888) 758-7255
e-mail:  permissions@pluralpublishing.com
Every attempt has been made to contact the copyright holders for material originally printed 
in another source. If any have been inadvertently overlooked, the publishers will gladly make 
the necessary arrangements at the first opportunity.
Names: Hallowell, Brooke, author.
Title: Aphasia and other acquired neurogenic language disorders : a guide for
  clinical excellence / Brooke Hallowell.
Description: San Diego, CA : Plural Publishing, [2017] | Includes
  bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2015037113| ISBN 9781597564779 (alk. paper) | ISBN
  159756477X (alk. paper)
Subjects: | MESH: Language Disorders — physiopathology. | Language
  Disorders — therapy. | Language Disorders — diagnosis.
Classification: LCC RC424.7 | NLM WL 340.5 | DDC 616.85/5--dc23
LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015037113

v
Contents
What Is Special About this Book	
vii
Acknowledgments	
xiii
About the Author	
xv
Section I.	
Welcome and Introduction	
1
Chapter 1.	
Welcome to the Fantastic World of Research and Clinical	
3 
Practice in Acquired Neurogenic Cognitive-Linguistic  
Disorders!
Chapter 2.	
Becoming the Ultimate Excellent Clinician	
15
Chapter 3.	
Writing and Talking About People With Disabilities	
33
Section II.	
Foundations for Considering Acquired	
41 
Neurogenic Language Disorders
Chapter 4.	
Defining and Conceptualizing Aphasia	
43
Chapter 5.	
The WHO ICF and Its Relevance to Acquired Neurogenic	
59 
Communication Disorders
Chapter 6.	
Etiologies of Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders	
67
Chapter 7.	
Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies Associated With	
87 
Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Chapter 8.	
Neuroimaging and Other Instrumentation	
117
Chapter 9.	
Language in the Context of Aging	
133
Section III.	
The Nature of Neurogenic Disorders of Cognition	
151 
and Language
Chapter 10.	
Syndromes and Hallmark Characteristics of Aphasia	
153
Chapter 11.	
Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With	
171 
Traumatic Brain Injury
Chapter 12.	
Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With	
181 
Right Hemisphere Syndrome
Chapter 13.	
Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With	
193 
Dementia and Other Neurodegenerative Conditions
Section IV.	
Delivering Excellent Services	
209
Chapter 14.	
Contexts for Providing Excellent Services	
211

vi   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Chapter 15.	
Engaging Proactively in Advocacy and Legal and	
235 
Ethical Concerns
Chapter 16.	
Global Aspects of Clinical Aphasiology	
249
Section V.	
Assessment	
257
Chapter 17.	
Best Practices in Assessment	
259
Chapter 18.	
Psychometric Aspects of Assessment and Assessment	
279 
Processes
Chapter 19.	
Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and	
299 
Confounding Factors
Chapter 20.	
Tests, Scales, and Screening Instruments	
327
Chapter 21.	
Discourse Sampling and Conversational Analysis	
373
Chapter 22.	
Documenting Assessment Results and Considering Prognosis	
391
Section VI.	
Theories and Best Practices in Intervention	
405
Chapter 23.	
Best Practices in Intervention	
407
Chapter 24.	
Theories of Intervention	
423
Section VII.	 General Treatment Approaches	
437
Chapter 25.	
General Approaches for Enhancing Cognitive-Linguistic	
439 
Abilities
Chapter 26.	
Facilitating Communication in People With Dementia	
459
Chapter 27.	
Counseling and Life Coaching	
471
Chapter 28.	
Complementary and Integrative Approaches	
491
Section VIII.	 Specific Treatment Approaches	
505
Chapter 29.	
Promoting Compensatory Strategies in Conversation	
507
Chapter 30.	
Enhancing Overall Expressive Language	
519
Chapter 31.	
Improving Word Finding and Lexical Processing	
535
Chapter 32.	
Improving Syntax	
551
Chapter 33.	
Improving Reading and Writing	
561
Glossary	
571
References	
595
Index	
673

vii
What Is Special About this Book
Most books about acquired neurogenic 
disorders of language and cognition are 
full of important information about neu-
rological aspects and theoretical accounts 
of normal and disordered language pro-
cessing. Almost all of them offer content 
on assessment and treatment methods, 
with varying degrees of detail and explicit 
practical guidance for clinicians. More 
and more have focused on vital aspects of 
supported communication, World Health 
Organization models of body structure and 
function and life participation, quality- 
of-life concerns, multicultural issues, legal 
and ethical issues, and evidence-based 
practice. The aim of this book is to do all 
of this, with additional special emphases.
A Focus on What It Takes to Become 
a Truly Exceptional Clinician 
for People With Neurogenic 
Cognitive-Linguistic Challenges
What does it take to become a truly 
exceptional clinician? What can we do 
to become that person? What makes one 
clinician so great and another not so? It 
isn’t just knowledge and skill, although 
these are certainly crucial components 
of clinical excellence; it’s also a host of 
other qualities. What are those qualities? 
How does one develop them? The intent 
is to motivate you, foster your learning, 
encourage you, lead you, and support you 
to gain not just all-important knowledge 
but to practice skills and challenge atti-
tudes and values on your path to becom-
ing the ultimate excellent clinical aphasi-
ologist. Sometimes for efficiency, I will be 
directive. Do this. Don’t do that. I offer an 
insider view of what many experienced 
experts in this area think you need to 
know, what you should be able to do, and 
what you ought to appreciate and con-
sider. In the end, though, each reader is 
the one best suited to define and become 
the ultimate best clinician.
An Emphasis on Person-Centered, 
Empowering Approaches
Throughout our work in assessment, treat-
ment, advocacy, counseling, education, and 
research, clinical aphasiologists have ample 
opportunities — and a moral imperative ​— ​
to foster empowering, affirmative means 
of considering and coping with chronic 
aspects of communication challenges. In 
many of the clinical contexts in which we 
work, there is a greater focus on deficits 
than strengths. Many adults with neuro-
genic disorders struggle to be recognized 
as fully human and competent. Readers are 
encouraged to commit to strength-based, 
affirming approaches that heighten the 
self-efficacy of the people we serve.
Appreciation for and Integration of 
Diverse Frameworks and Theoretical 
Perspectives Related to Neurogenic 
Disorders of Language and Cognition
The excellent clinician probably does 
not adhere to one theoretical framework 

viii   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
alone and stick to that at all costs. Rather, 
he or she learns a great deal about mul-
tiple approaches based on multiple frame-
works, integrates multiple theories in 
making treatment decisions, constantly 
reflects on the results of published treat-
ment studies with the results observed 
in an ongoing way with each and every 
individual with a language disorder with 
whom he or she works, and is open to 
revising his or her theoretical perspec-
tives based on new information. To that 
end, the reader is challenged to grasp and 
integrate multiple perspectives at once 
and to think critically about his or her 
own preferences, biases, and needs for 
further learning.
Global Perspectives for a 
Global Readership
The content in this book is intended to be 
relevant globally. Worldwide resources 
are provided, for example, in terms of 
related professional associations and re- 
sources to support people with neuro-
genic communication disorders and the 
people who care about them. Where 
content is specific to particular regions, 
such as in sections addressing health-
care trends and cultural factors that affect 
clinical practice, this is noted, along with 
observations regarding general trends 
and regional variations. Although con-
tent and resources are geared toward an 
English-speaking readership, numerous 
references point to further opportunities 
for clinical and research work and advo-
cacy anywhere in the world. Global and 
multicultural perspectives are infused 
throughout.
An Evidence-Based  
How-To Clinical Guide
Many of us who teach and/or supervise 
students and beginning clinicians are 
especially familiar with the disconnect 
between what clinical students learn in 
their academic programs and what they 
feel prepared to do when working as clini-
cal professionals. Clear guidelines, along 
with references to theoretical principles 
and research-based suggestions, are pro-
vided for how to carry out over 50 different 
general and specific treatment approaches. 
The book’s direct style and practical ori-
entation will be useful to clinical students 
and professionals alike and will continue 
to be helpful to students long after they 
graduate from clinical programs.
Addressing What Instructors 
and Students Requested
A great deal of research on textbook needs 
was done before launching the writing 
of this book. Student interns in the mas-
ter’s program in Business Administra-
tion joined forces with students from the 
Neurolinguistics Laboratory at Ohio Uni-
versity to engage in a multifaceted needs 
assessment. They polled over 200 stu-
dents in clinical speech-language pathol-
ogy (SLP) programs, instructors at over 50 
different programs who teach in related 
areas, plus leaders of clinical programs 
serving adults with traumatic brain injury 
(TBI), dementia, and aphasia. They stud-
ied curricular requirements of over 200 
academic programs in SLP to see what 
topic groupings most commonly were 
taught and in what combination. They 

What Is Special About this Book   ix
reviewed existing textbooks and made 
their own lists of desired and undesired 
features from students’ perspectives.
Some existing texts address specific 
clinical syndromes, focusing exclusively, 
for example, on communication and aging, 
aphasia, right hemisphere syndrome, or 
TBI. The majority of us who teach in this 
area must combine multiple topics within 
single courses or course sequences. Stu-
dents and professors alike expressed 
greater interest in a text that combines 
multiple areas within one book on adult 
neurogenic disorders of language and cog-
nition. A benefit is that what has been done 
to advance work within each specialty 
areas can be shared across other areas.
Examples abound. Great work on 
supported communication for people 
with aphasia can be embodied in our 
work on right hemisphere syndrome 
(RHS), TBI, dementia, and so on. Much 
work in interprofessional practice, indi-
vidualized approaches, coaching models, 
and environmental systems models in TBI 
can be further extended to people with 
aphasia. Wonderful progress in focusing 
on reminiscence strategies, functional 
memory enhancement, identity support, 
and recognition of strengths in people 
with dementia can be applied to all peo-
ple with all other types of neurogenic 
disorders. Principles of critical thinking 
applied to assessment and diagnostic 
problem solving in people with RHS can 
be transferred to clinical challenges when 
working with people with any type of 
neurological disorder.
Here are additional requests from stu-
dents and instructors that were taken into 
account in the development of this text:
• A useful clinical resource for years 
to come, not just for a course
• Inclusion of multicultural and 
multinational content as well as 
content on counseling, ethics, 
and legal aspects of working 
with people with neurogenic 
communication disorders
• Recognition of the importance 
of interdisciplinary and 
interprofessional education, 
research, and clinical practice
• Coverage of the broad spectrum of  
the science and art of clinical practice
• Thorough coverage of diagnostic 
processes, including extensive 
resources on assessment tools
• A process analysis approach 
for analyzing communicative 
performance and strategically 
interpreting results of ongoing 
assessments infused throughout 
intervention
• An evidence-based how-to guide 
to treatment with clear guidelines 
on how to carry out treatment 
approaches
• Strong theoretical foundations
• A friendly and personal but 
academically rigorous style
• Functional and practical approaches
• Key terms bolded within the 
chapter and listed in a glossary
• Diagrams, charts, illustrations, 
summary tables, and a detailed 
index
• Substantial up-to-date references
• Use of gender-attuned and person-
first language, embracing and 
inclusive of readers, colleagues, 
and the people we serve clinically 
regardless of race, ethnicity, gender, 
age, or sexual orientation
• Clear and concise clinical examples 
to ensure relevance of information 
based on realistic scenarios

x   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Complementary online materials 
with links to videos and other 
teaching/learning resources
• Size and weight such that the book 
is not cumbersome to carry or 
impossible to fit in a backpack
• Affordability
That’s a tall order! We invite you to pro-
vide feedback on how we may do better in 
terms of any of these goals in future edi-
tions of this text.
Incorporation of Adult Learning 
Theory and Evidence-Based Pedagogy
Pedagogic approaches embraced in the 
design of this book consist of two broad 
categories: those directly implemented 
in the structure and content of the book 
and those recommended through learn-
ing activities, online resources, and sug-
gestions to instructors. The book content 
incorporates means of guiding read-
ers though levels of learning akin to 
the components of Bloom’s Taxonomy 
(Bloom, 1956): conceptual development, 
synthesis, analysis, and application to 
content already mastered and fostering 
of broader understanding with perspec-
tives on new applications. However, the 
levels of learning are treated as interde-
pendent, not linear and hierarchical, as if 
one must pass from one level to the next. 
A focus on the reader’s own development 
as a clinician (“personal characteristics” 
within the adult learning framework; see 
Cross, 1981) is intertwined with potential 
“situational characteristics” for his or her 
learning (e.g., independent study, online 
or in-person coursework, studies to com-
plement clinical practicum).
Query-Based Approach and 
Enlivening of Learning Objectives
Any of us who study the complex rela-
tionships between cognitive-linguistic 
abilities and the brain, and between 
cognitive-linguistic challenges and qual-
ity of life, are aware that the more we 
learn, the more questions we generate 
for ourselves and others. There are few 
definitive or concrete answers to clinical 
questions in the world of aphasiology. 
Still, it is vitally important that we con-
tinue to ask questions and do our best 
to probe for answers. In this light, this 
book is organized around queries ​— prob-
ing questions that have varied levels of 
superficiality and profundity, of simplic-
ity or complexity, and of definitiveness or 
open-endedness to a vast array of possible 
answers. I hope that you will find it use-
ful to pose these queries to yourself as an 
upcoming or established clinician. I hope 
you will find queries that tempt you fur-
ther into an even deeper dive into this fas-
cinating world.
Queries tend to make us contemplate 
and make associations related to our pos-
sible responses before we actually start 
to answer them; they foster reflection. 
“It is in the interstices between the ques-
tions and the answer that minds turn,” 
observes Weimer (2014, p. 1). Any query 
ideally leads to new reader-generated 
queries, encouraging self-directed study 
so vital to adult learning and critical think-
ing (Brookfield, 2012; Knowles, 1984). 
A secondary benefit of the query struc-
ture is that it clarifies the learning objec-
tives related to each content area. Readers 
may use the queries as opportunities for 
self-assessment as they study, reflect, and 
answer the queries in their own words. 

What Is Special About this Book   xi
And for instructors who tailor assess-
ments to the contents, this structure may 
help address the age-old question from 
students, “What will be on the test?”
Engaged Learning
Many of the exercises in the Activities 
for Learning and Reflection sections are 
offered in a learn-by-doing rather than 
just a learn-by-reading mode. Although 
students certainly can learn through lec-
tures and readings, means of ensuring 
active engagement with what they are 
learning helps to ensure better retention 
and likelihood of application (Fink, 2003; 
Kember, Ho, & Hong, 2008). As readers 
attach personal relevance to what they 
are learning, they are more likely to take 
ownership of the corresponding content.
Cycling Approach
It is important to have redundancy of 
information, not presented the same 
way over and over again, but one aspect 
of coverage of a topic complementing 
another. For example, we explore life par-
ticipation approaches to aphasia as one 
of the frameworks for conceptualizing 
aphasia and then revisit it throughout the 
book. We consider it as a model to use in 
contextualizing specific approaches to 
intervention (such as neuropsychologi-
cal or psycholinguistic approaches). We 
also consider its relevance to advocacy 
and to education of people with language 
disorders and the people who care about  
them.
Adaptability for Multiple Pedagogic 
Methods for Classroom-Based 
Courses, Independent Study, 
and Online Coursework
The book is organized to be adaptable for 
varied teaching and learning methods. 
A flipped classroom approach (see Keen-
gwe, Onchwari, & Oigara, 2014) may be 
ideal for content that students need to 
study primarily on their own, such as 
terminology, basics of neurophysiology, 
and the blood supply to the brain, prior 
to integrating the related to knowledge 
into in-class activities and discussions. It 
can also be optimal when students study 
about assessment and treatment methods 
before related hands-on activities and dis-
cussion. Using the learning activities sec-
tions in each chapter to prepare ahead of 
class sessions can also be effective in this 
regard and can be combined with collab-
orative learning methods.
Team-based and collaborative learn-
ing (Abdelkhalek, Hussein, Gibbs, & 
Hamdy, 2010; Barkley, Major, & Cross, 
2014; Johnson & Johnson, 2009; John-
Steiner, 2006; Michaelsen, Sweet, & Par-
melee, 2008; Millis & Cottell, 1998; Strijbos 
& Fischer, 2007), case-based learning (Cha-
bon & Cohn, 2011), and problem-based 
learning (Jin & Bridges, 2014; Lawlor, 
Kreuter, Sebert-Kuhlmann, & McBride, 
2015; Prosser & Sze, 2014) are all directly 
amenable to teaching and learning related 
to the contents of this book. Service- 
learning approaches (Corless et al., 2009; 
Kosky & Schlisselberg, 2013; Sabo et al., 
2015; Stevens, 2009) are ideal for much of 
the practical content in this book. Exam-
ples of related projects include provid-
ing in-services at a health-care agency, 
assisting with a caregiver support group, 

xii   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
developing reminiscence projects for 
residents of a long-term care facility, or 
developing a respite volunteer program 
for adults with neurological disorders in 
your local community. Such activities are 
also amenable to study-abroad global-
health projects, if carefully designed with 
clear ethical principles in mind (Hallow-
ell, 2012b).
Additionally, students engaged in 
interprofessional learning opportuni-
ties (Interprofessional Education Collab-
orative Expert Panel, 2011; World Health 
Organization, 2010; Zraick, Harten, & 
Hagstrom, 2014) may make use of several 
aspects of this book. For example, basic 
content will ideally lead to an apprecia-
tion for the types of interdisciplinary and 
interprofessional teams and collabora-
tions through which much work in apha-
siology is accomplished. Additionally, 
suggestions for outreach, advocacy, coun-
seling, and global health experiences may 
be carried forth in planning interprofes-
sional activities among students, aca-
demic and clinical faculty members, and 
community groups or agencies.
Online Materials
Supplemental materials include Power-
Points to guide discussions pertaining to 
content in each chapter, additional discus-
sion points and learning activities, links 
to video examples and helpful online 
resources, and a test bank that includes 
multiple-choice, fill-in-the blank, match-
ing, true/false, short-answer, and essay 
items, all cross-referenced to the content 
areas addressed. Visit the companion 
website and explore: http://www.plural​
publishing.com/publication/aoanld
If you have ideas you would like to 
share for the website for the next edition 
of this book, please be in touch.
About the Book Cover
The phoenix rising from a changed brain 
represents the human spirit moving 
onward and upward from neurological 
challenges. It is a symbol of honor and 
affirmation for people with neurogenic 
communication disorders and the people 
who care about them — all of whom ide-
ally continuously heal and re-create them-
selves with the strengths they still have, 
even discovering new strengths along  
the way.
Cover design by Taylor Reeves.

xiii
Acknowledgments
Profound motivation for this book has 
come from numerous people who have 
shared with me deeply about their own 
experiences as phoenixes rising from 
challenges of changed brains; in this 
light I especially thank Seth Teicher, Jane 
Hamlin, and Deb Dakin. I acknowledge 
the initial inspiration for this book from 
my precious friend Sadanand Singh, who 
convinced me that it had an essential pur-
pose and that I would be the right vehicle 
for it. I thank, too, my longtime buddy 
and partner in global shenanigans, Angie 
Singh, for love and encouragement and 
for not letting that inspiration diminish.
While writing this book, I lost my 
beloved father; also, as if I needed to 
experience the content firsthand, I per-
sonally experienced a mild traumatic 
brain injury and became a rehabilitation 
patient myself. I thank my treasured 
friends who gave me fortitude in coping 
and also helped me see how I could use 
those experiences to enrich my voice as 
a writer and teacher. Many thanks espe-
cially to Manon Floquet, Mary Nossek, 
Geoff Baker, Molly Morris, Tim Lavelle, 
Karen Sol, Kartini Ahmad, John Burns, 
Patty Mitchell, Dianne Bouvier, Xia Jing, 
Pete Norloff, Dixon Cleveland, the Ath-
ens Friends Meeting community, the 
Llewellyn Beach community, and the Lost 
in Lodi Arm-wrestling clan, all of whom 
helped me stay grounded and maintain 
my inner joy.
I extend warm thanks to the amaz-
ing students who have helped with a 
great deal of background work, most 
especially Laura Chapman and Chey-
enne Weaver, and the gifted artist behind 
most of the illustrations in this book, Tay-
lor Reeves. Special appreciation goes to 
Nicole Byram and Seth Breitenstein for 
their extensive needs analysis that helped 
determine what it is that students and 
instructors most wanted in such a book.  
I also thank additional students and grad-
uates who helped with editing, literature 
updates, feedback, and development of 
companion website materials, including 
Javad Anjum, Sarah Cappelletty, Paige 
Crombie, Colleen Curts, An Dinh, Ellen 
Frescoln, Mohammad Haghighi, Sabine 
Heuer, Holly Hinshelwood, Kelly Holm-
berg, Maria Ivanova, Courtney Kaylor, 
Maria Modayil, Thea Nihiser, Kacy Over-
man, Kelsey Richards, and Lindsey Rich-
ards. I am indebted, too, to all of the stu-
dents in my courses over the past several 
years who have been fundamental in 
considering how to prioritize content, 
enhance readers’ active engagement, and 
keep our focus on empowering people to 
communicate.
I have been honored by thoughtful 
suggestions, feedback, and support from 
numerous colleagues, especially Bar-
bara Shadden, Terry Wertz, Pam Smith, 
Michelle Bourgeois, Darlene Williamson, 
HyangHeeKim, Hughlet Morris, Lynn 
Maher, Craig Linebaugh, Travis Threats, 
N. Shivashankar, Zhuoming Chen, Sonal 
Chitris, Roberta Elman, Melinda Corwin, 
Kathryn Atkinson, Janet Hawley, and my 
adept anonymous reviewers. I appreciate, 
too, the staff at Plural Publishing, espe-
cially to Scott Barbour and my diligent 
editor, Kalie Koscielak, production man-
ager, Megan Carter, production assistant, 
Alya Hameed, and other essential experts, 

xiv   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
including Valerie Johns, Nicole Bowman, 
and Kristin Banach.
Throughout the experience of devel-
oping this book, I continued to draw inspi-
ration from colleagues dedicated to mak-
ing life better for people with acquired 
neurogenic cognitive-linguistic disorders 
through the Clinical Aphasiology Con-
ference, Aphasia United, the National 
Aphasia Association, and Aphasia Access. 
Finally, I am extremely grateful to mem-
bers of my family who’ve supported and 
tolerated me all along, especially Rick 
Linn, Nicholas Hallowell Linn, Elizabeth 
Hallowell Linn, Nikki Byram, Max Rego, 
Kirk Hallowell, Vickie Kracke, Todd Hal-
lowell, Harold Smith, Julia Linn, Jean 
Comfort Hallowell, Becka Bonnell, Anne 
Marble, Becka Dresser, Peggy Marble, 
Willie Hallowell Linn, and all of the rest 
of our sweet eclectic network of kin.

xv
About the Author
Brooke Hallowell, PhD, CCC-SLP, brings 
to this book over 25 years of clinical, 
research, teaching, and advocacy expe-
rience to support adults with acquired 
neurogenic communication challenges. 
Dr. Hallowell is active in research and 
advocacy related to aphasia and other 
neurogenic language disorders as well as 
aging and end-of-life care. She serves on 
boards and task forces of several national 
and international organizations, includ-
ing the Aphasia and Stroke Society of 
India, Aphasia United, and the National 
Aphasia Association. She serves as edi-
torial board member and reviewer for 
many scholarly journals and reviewer 
for several granting agencies, including 
the National Institutes of Health (NIH). 
Dr. Hallowell has garnered over U.S.$14 
million in funded grants, with extramu-
ral support from such agencies the NIH, 
National Science Foundation, Health 
Resources Service Administration, and 
the Ohio Department of Aging. A former 
President of the Council of Academic 
Programs in Communication Sciences 
and Disorders (CAPCSD), she chaired the 
first-ever Global Summit on Higher Edu-
cation in Communication Sciences and 
Disorders in 2012 and is deeply engaged 
in developing new academic and clini-
cal programs, especially in underserved 
regions of the world. A Fellow of the 
American Speech-Language-Hearing 
Association (ASHA), Dr. Hallowell is also 
the recipient of the 2015 Asia Pacific Soci-
ety in Speech-Language-Hearing Asso-
ciation Outstanding Contribution Award, 
the 2014 CAPCSD Honors of the Council, 
and the 2013 ASHA Certificate of Recog-
nition for Outstanding Contributions in 
International Achievement, and is a for-
mer Fulbright Fellow, and U.S. national 
Finalist for the Thomas Ehrlich Award for 
Service Learning.
Dr. Hallowell holds a BA from Brown 
University, an MS from Lamar University, 
a certificate of Etudes Supérieures from 
the Conservatoire National de France, and 
a PhD from the University of Iowa. She 
serves as Executive Director of the Col-
laborative on Aging, Professor and Coor-
dinator of PhD Programs in Communica-
tion Sciences and Disorders, Director of 
the Neurolinguistics Laboratory, Adjunct 
Professor of Family Medicine, Adjunct 
Professor of Biomedical Engineering, Pro-
fessor of Southeast Asia Studies, Profes-
sor of International Development Studies, 
and Supervisor of the Aging and Geronto-
logical Education Society and the Respite 
Volunteer Program at Ohio University. 

xvi   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
She previously served as Associate Dean 
for Research and Sponsored Programs in 
College of Health and Human Services; 
Director of the School of Hearing, Speech 
and Language Sciences; founding Co-
Director of the Global Health Initiative; 
founding Coordinator of the Diabetes 
Research Initiative; and Co-Director of 
the Appalachian Rural Health Institute at 
Ohio University.
Having had selective mutism as a 
child and having been an extremely shy 
person into young adulthood, she entered 
the realm of clinical aphasiology with a 
personal connection to those who have 
important things to say but are not able to 
express them fully. Being the mother of a 
child with a severe traumatic brain injury 
who is now a thriving and extremely com-
petent adult, she has firsthand knowledge 
about what it is that people need and 
want during the course of rehabilitation. 
According to Dr. Hallowell, these experi-
ences are a large part of what drives her 
passion to help clinicians and clinicians-
in-training focus not only on gaining 
clinical knowledge and skill but also on 
wisdom, compassion, and other charac-
teristics that will propel them toward ulti-
mate excellent clinical competence.

To my marvelous family, with zealous gratitude for so much love.


Section I
Welcome and Introduction

2   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
In this section, we affirm the intriguing 
nature of neurogenic communication dis-
orders and set the stage for key points 
and concepts to be affirmed in later sec-
tions of the book. In Chapter 1, we review 
basic content about the nature of neuro-
genic language disorders and consider 
the fascinating interdisciplinary nature of 
clinical aphasiology and the many asso-
ciated career opportunities. In Chapter 2,  
we delve into the topic of what makes 
a clinician in this arena truly excellent, 
consider how we might best strategize to 
become such a person, and review some 
key resources that will be useful along 
the way. In Chapter 3, we review basic 
but very important considerations related 
to the way we talk and write about peo-
ple with disabilities, the people who care 
about them, and the professionals who 
work with them.

3
Chapter
1
Welcome to the Fantastic 
World of Research and Clinical 
Practice in Acquired Neurogenic 
Cognitive-Linguistic Disorders!
I could not imagine any academic or pro-
fessional pursuit more rewarding than 
diving into the amazing world of adult 
neurogenic disorders of cognition and 
language. I took my first dive just over 30 
years ago as an undergraduate student. 
Whether you are a certified speech-lan-
guage pathologist (SLP), a neuroscientist 
with clinical interests, a student, or an 
otherwise engaged reader, and whether 
you are immersing yourself or just get-
ting your toes wet in this clinical arena, I 
hope that you find your experience with 
this book and with this topic informative, 
inspiring, and challenging.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What are acquired neurogenic cognitive- 
linguistic disorders?
	 2.	 Which neurogenic communication 
disorders are not acquired cognitive-
linguistic disorders?
	 3.	 What is clinical aphasiology?
	 4.	 What is so fantastic about the world of 
neurogenic communication disorders?
	 5.	 What disciplines are relevant to 
aphasiology?
	 6.	 What is known about the incidence 
and prevalence of acquired neuro-
genic language disorders?
	 7.	 Where do aphasiologists work?
	 8.	 What is the career outlook for clinical 
aphasiologists?
What Are Acquired  
Cognitive-Linguistic Disorders?
When we talk about “aphasia and related 
disorders,” we are typically referring 
to acquired neurogenic language disorders 
and acquired cognitive-linguistic disorders. 
These are any of a wide array of disor-
ders of language formulation, compre-
hension, and cognitive processing caused 
by problems in the brain of a person who 
had previously acquired language. They 
are part of a larger category of acquired  

4   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
neurogenic communication disorders, which  
also includes neurogenic speech disorders, 
most commonly referred to as motor speech 
disorders.
The definitions, etiologies, and de- 
scriptions of specific types of acquired 
neurogenic language disorders are dis-
cussed in detail in subsequent chapters. 
As a means of introduction here, let us 
briefly consider which types of disorders 
constitute acquired neurogenic language 
and cognitive-linguistic disorders versus 
other types of communication disorders.
Aphasia is by definition an acquired 
language disorder. Ever since the term 
aphasia was first coined by in 1864 by 
Armand Trousseau (Tesak & Code, 2008), 
it has been defined in many ways. Apha-
sia has also been examined from a multi-
tude of perspectives or frameworks, each 
of which may lead people studying apha-
sia to focus on specific aspects of how it 
is defined. The wide array of perspectives 
from which we might consider, study, 
and theorize about aphasia need not dis-
tract us from clarity in defining just what 
it is and is not. If you plan to work with 
people who have aphasia in any context, 
it is vitally important that you be able to 
clearly and succinctly define what apha-
sia is. A simple way to do this is make sure 
that, however you define it, you include 
four elements in your definition:
	 1.	 It is acquired.
	 2.	 It has a neurological cause.
	 3.	 It affects reception and expression of 
language across modalities.
	 4.	 It is not a sensory, psychiatric, or intel-
lectual disorder.
We will consider each of these elements 
in more detail in Chapter 4. We will also 
explore how, as individual scholars and 
clinicians, we might choose different 
words to define aphasia based on our pre-
ferred theoretical perspectives regarding 
aphasia.
Dyslexia is a reading disorder that 
may or may not be an actual language 
disorder per se. Deep dyslexia is a lan-
guage disorder. This form of dyslexia and 
its varied manifestations entail problems 
of actual linguistic processing of written 
material, as opposed to more superficial 
visual processing of the physical charac-
teristics of graphemes (any written rep-
resentation, such as letters, words, and 
punctuation marks, and characters in 
non-Western scripts).
Dysgraphia is a writing disorder. 
Like dyslexia, it has deep and superficial 
forms; the deeper forms, which entail con-
verting semantic content to graphemes, 
are those that qualify as true language 
disorders. Both dyslexia and dysgraphia 
may be congenital (present from birth 
or at the earliest stages when associated 
abilities are typically manifested during 
development) or acquired. Dyslexia and 
dysgraphia occur as symptoms of apha-
sia but may also occur as distinct acquired 
neurogenic language disorders in people 
without aphasia.
We will consider the notion of literal 
and conventional uses of the a- and dys- 
prefixes further in Chapter 3. For now, 
note that although the term aphasia is most 
often used instead of dysphasia, the term 
dyslexia tends to be used instead of alexia 
(the latter literally meaning the complete 
loss of reading ability).
Several other types of acquired 
cognitive-linguistic problems result from 
injuries to the brain that affect behavior, 
information processing, emotional regu-
lation, perception, and other important 
aspects of everyday functioning in our 

Welcome to the Fantastic World of Research and Clinical Practice in Acquired Disorders   5
information-rich and social world. Cases 
in which a language problem is second-
ary to a cognitive problem are broadly cat-
egorized as cognitive-linguistic disorders, 
not simply language disorders. Some cat-
egories of neurogenic cognitive-linguistic 
disorders are referred to according to 
symptom constellations; they have labels 
that are based on one or more impair-
ments (e.g., dyslexia, dysgraphia). Others 
are referred to according to the associated 
cause. For example, one might refer to 
cognitive-linguistic disorders associated 
with traumatic brain injury (TBI) to cap-
ture any of a constellation of symptoms 
related to language and information pro-
cessing that may occur due to TBI. Some 
have labels associated with an underly-
ing cause, even though the etiology is not 
incorporated into the label. For example, a 
favored term for language problems result-
ing from dementia is language of general-
ized intellectual impairment. A favored  
term for language problems associated 
with transient confusional states is lan-
guage of confusion. Still other categories 
of neurogenic cognitive-linguistic disorders 
are referred to according to the location of 
the injury to the brain that caused the loss 
(e.g., right hemisphere syndrome [RHS], 
also called right brain syndrome [RBS]).
Which Neurogenic Communication 
Disorders Are Not Acquired 
Language Disorders?
Once you are clear about what acquired 
neurogenic cognitive-linguistic disorders 
are, you can distinguish them from other 
disorders that do not fit into this category. 
By general convention, any problem that 
a person is born with is not an acquired 
disorder. Neurological syndromes pres-
ent from birth, including developmental 
language disorders associated with cog-
nitive and learning disabilities or delays, 
are not acquired. Thus, we do not con-
sider them within the scope of this book. 
This distinction is important. The result 
of losing a previously acquired cognitive 
or linguistic ability is very different from 
not having ever developed such an abil-
ity in the first place. The result is differ-
ent in terms of actual brain structure and 
function. It is also different in terms of the 
ways that people (and their caregivers and 
others who are important to them) cope 
with their disabilities, the specific types 
of intervention that may be helpful, and 
the ways in which diagnostic and treat-
ment services might be made available. Of 
course, people who have congenital disor-
ders may also at some point have a stroke 
or TBI and may develop dementia.
In light of the crucial differences 
between congenital and acquired dis-
orders, most experts agree that the term 
child aphasia, as used previously to capture 
the notion of a congenital language disor-
der, is a misnomer. Aphasia, by definition, 
is acquired. The preferred term for a con-
dition characterized by language deficits 
in the face of relatively age-appropriate 
cognitive abilities in children is specific 
language impairment. Certainly, a child 
may experience a stroke or traumatic 
brain injury resulting in a true aphasia; 
in such cases, it is appropriate to classify 
the condition as an acquired language 
disorder. Still, the course of recovery and 
the means of intervention are likely to be 
different in significant ways compared to 
acquired aphasia in adults.
The most common acquired neuro-
genic motor speech disorders are apraxia of 
speech (a problem of motor programming  

6   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
for speech articulation) and dysarthria 
(a problem of innervation of the speech 
mechanism for articulation). Although 
many people with neurogenic language 
disorders also have motor speech disor-
ders, knowing how to distinguish these 
general categories of disorders is vital to 
clinical excellence. Although motor speech 
disorders are addressed in this book in 
terms of clinical problem solving and dif-
ferential diagnosis in people who also 
have language disorders, they are not a 
primary focus of this book.
What Is Clinical Aphasiology?
Because of the overlapping areas of sci-
entific and clinical knowledge and skill 
involved, and because of the contexts in 
which we tend to work, many profes-
sionals who specialize in research and/
or clinical practice in aphasia (aphasiolo-
gists in the literal sense) are also expert 
in related neurogenic cognitive-linguistic,  
speech, and swallowing disorders in 
adults. When we use the term aphasiol-
ogy, we tend to incorporate topics related 
to the vast clinical and scientific aspects 
of these varied areas, even though the lit-
eral sense of term is more restricted. For 
example, if you were to attend the Clinical 
Aphasiology Conference or a conference 
of the Academy of Aphasia (annual inter-
national meetings for research aphasiolo-
gists) or read the journal Aphasiology, you 
would be exposed to numerous topics 
reaching beyond the specific syndrome of 
aphasia per se. Keep this in mind as you 
continue to read this book, as the term 
aphasiologist (erring on the side of being 
too specialized) is sometimes used inter-
changeably with the term SLP (erring on 
the side of being too general, as not all 
SLPs are truly expert in working with 
people who have neurogenic cognitive-
linguistic disorders).
What Is So Fantastic About 
the World of Neurogenic 
Communication Disorders?
There are many enticing aspects of work-
ing and studying in the realm of clinical 
aphasiology. I will describe a few of my 
favorite here in this list of things that we 
clinical aphasiologists get to do.
We Work With Wonderful People and 
Become Part of Their Rich Life Stories
People with acquired neurogenic cognitive- 
linguistic disorders and the people who 
care about them are diverse in every 
aspect: age, ethnicity, race, language, edu-
cation, sexual orientation, life experience, 
personality, preferences . . . you name it. 
As we discuss in more detail later in this 
book, when a person acquires aphasia 
or a related disorder, all aspects of his or 
her life may be affected, not just his or 
her cognitive-linguistic abilities. Thus, 
all aspects of his or her life are relevant 
to our work. Clinical aphasiologists don’t 
simply learn about a medical diagnosis, 
treat it in some prescriptive way, and then 
discharge a person from treatment. We get 
to learn about people’s assorted interests 
and hobbies and how language use is rel-
evant to them. We often become part of 
the fabric of life change and adjustment, 
helping consider alternatives and possi-
bilities, listening to life stories, and nur-
turing fresh perspectives. We get to assist 
in their career and educational consider-
ations and help inform family members, 

Welcome to the Fantastic World of Research and Clinical Practice in Acquired Disorders   7
friends, and professionals about how to 
best support them.
We Are Catalysts for Positive Change
A problem with communication affects 
every aspect of our lives and the lives of 
those around us. Given that people with 
aphasia maintain their intellectual abilities, 
it is rewarding to help them find creative 
ways to improve their communication abil-
ities. The fact that there is much that can 
be done to make a difference in people’s 
everyday activities and interactions makes 
it especially gratifying to work in this arena.
We Enjoy Empowerment of Others 
Through Advocacy and Leadership
Beyond our direct clinical work, we also 
work to raise awareness of the importance 
of communication as a basic human right 
and of the need to protect that right for 
people with communication disabilities. 
Many of us become leaders in our profes-
sional contexts as well as in local, national, 
and international professional organiza-
tions. Our roles as leaders can help us 
become powerful catalysts not only for 
awareness but also for social reform and 
policy changes.
We Enjoy a Great Deal of 
Humor and Fascination
The types and variety of errors associ-
ated with linguistic structure and social 
language use in people with aphasia are 
vast. Some of the linguistic errors and 
communicative mishaps we observe are 
not only fascinating; they can also be 
charming, quirky, and downright funny. 
In some clinical situations, there is a 
fine line between enjoying humor about 
something a person has said or done and 
respecting his or her dignity as a per-
son with a serious disability. In general, 
though, enjoyment of fun and laughter 
throughout rehabilitation and recovery is 
shared among all involved, especially peo-
ple with language disorders themselves. 
One of the delightful aspects of working 
with a primarily adult population is that 
there is much more tolerance for humor 
at a metalinguistic level than there can be 
when working with children. People with 
aphasia, for example, often have a won-
derful sense of humor about their own 
unintended utterances — and about con-
sequences of unintended aspects of com-
munication — in their daily lives.
We Enjoy Fantastic Local and 
Worldwide Professional Networks
In light of the vastness of life consequences 
associated with acquired neurogenic com-
munication disorders and the interdisci-
plinary nature of the work of aphasiolo-
gists, we depend on teamwork with a host 
of professionals in our local clinical and 
research work environments. Additionally, 
there are wonderful local, state/regional, 
national, and international organizations 
and networks that bring together and fos-
ter continuing education of aphasiologists. 
Information about some key professional 
organizations and how to get involved are 
given later in this chapter.
Our Work Is Multicultural 
and Multilingual
If you love working across languages and 
cultures, there are ample opportunities  

8   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
to work in the area of neurogenic com-
munication disorders throughout the 
world. There is a dire need for aphasiolo-
gists who are multicultural and bilingual 
to assist in furthering the development 
of assessment and intervention materials 
across languages and cultures. In many 
countries, the field of aphasiology is just 
now developing; there is a need for cul-
turally and linguistically sensitive con-
sultants and volunteers to assist in build-
ing new academic and clinical programs. 
Opportunities of cross-cultural learning 
and travel adventures abound.
We Are Lifelong Learners
Given the vast scope of our work and the 
fact that our expertise crosses many dis-
ciplinary boundaries daily (as we discuss 
further in this chapter), there is no way for 
us to really master all that would be ideal 
for us to master as excellent aphasiolo-
gists. If you enjoy studying, reading, and 
learning on the job, you can find intrigu-
ing challenges to do this without end in 
your everyday life as an aphasiologist.
We Tap Into Our Most Scientific 
and Our Most Creative 
Selves at the Same Time
In our work to help foster recovery, we 
must be strong scientists. For example, 
we must be knowledgeable about neuro-
physiology and theories behind fostering 
brain changes as well as about neuroim-
aging, statistics, information processing, 
and psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic 
modeling. At the same time, we must be 
passionate artists in ways that sometimes 
surpasses scientific description and logical 
explanation. Our investment in fostering 
rehabilitation reflects seeking of beauty, 
creative listening, and incorporation of 
aesthetics, art, and music in our work.
We Have Rich Career Opportunities
There are ample career opportunities for 
clinical aphasiologists in terms of the 
availability of professional positions, as 
well as the number and diversity of em- 
ployment contexts in which they may 
work. We will explore these in an intro-
ductory way later in this chapter and then 
delve further into varied aspects of clini-
cal practice settings in Section IV.
What Disciplines Are Relevant to 
Aphasia and Related Disorders?
There is no single field of study that 
“owns” aphasiology. The expertise of 
clinical aphasiologists depends on the 
integration of content across numerous 
disciplines. Examples of relevant fields 
are listed in Box 1–1. It is important that 
we respect the scope of practice of the 
professional disciplines in which we hold 
academic degrees, certification, and/or 
licensure. Still, recognizing the relevance 
of a multitude of disciplines to what any 
one aphasiologist has to offer is vital to 
our career-long development of expertise.
What Is Known About the Incidence 
and Prevalence of Acquired 
Neurogenic Language Disorders?
In the chapters addressing specific cate-
gories of neurogenic language disorders, 
introductory information is provided 
about the incidence (the likely number of 

Welcome to the Fantastic World of Research and Clinical Practice in Acquired Disorders   9
newly diagnosed cases per specified unit 
of time) and prevalence (the proportion of 
specified populations that had or have the 
disorder at a particular time). Many such 
statistics are biased in terms of represent-
ing the United States and other Western 
countries and regions. This is because 
such statistics pertaining to much of the 
world’s population are lacking; for some 
regions, no data are available, and for oth-
ers, the validity of the data is questionable.
Overall, the validity of reported 
data about the worldwide incidence and 
prevalence of disabilities in general and 
of communication disorders specifically 
is suspect. There are five primary reasons 
for this:
• Health survey sampling methods 
as practiced in much of the world 
are often substandard, most 
commonly due to transportation 
challenges, a lack of thorough staff 
training, a mismatch in languages 
and culture between surveyors and 
people surveyed, and inconsistent 
sampling methods across regions.
• What people report on health 
surveys is not necessarily accurate, 
often due to the stigma associated 
with disabilities, sociocultural 
taboos about asking health-related 
questions, and privacy concerns.
• Perceptions about what constitutes 
disability vary across individuals, 
Examples of Disciplinary Areas Relevant to  
Acquired Neurogenic Cognitive-Linguistic Disorders
• Actuarial sciences
• Anthropology
• Audiology 
• Bilingualism and 
multilingualism
• Biology 
• Biomechanics
• Biomedical engineering
• Business
• Cognitive science 
• Communication 
• Computer science
• Counseling
• Education
• Electrophysiology 
• Engineering 
• Foreign languages
• Gerontology
• Global health
• Health care administration
• Hospice and palliative 
care
• Linguistics
• Mathematics
• Multiculturalism
• Music therapy
• Neurology
• Neuroscience 
• Occupational therapy
• Otolaryngology
• Pharmacology
• Philosophy
• Physiatry
• Physical therapy
• Physics 
• Political science
• Psychology 
• Rehabilitation
• Social work 
• Sociology
• Software development
• Speech-language 
pathology
• Statistics
Box
1–1

10   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
families, and communities 
(Munyi, 2012; National Center 
for Dissemination of Disability 
Research, 1999; Shogren, 2011; 
Smart & Smart, 1997). The very 
same symptom constellation may 
constitute a disability to some but 
not to others.
• Communication disabilities 
in particular are commonly 
underestimated (Wylie, McAllister, 
Davidson, & Marshall, 2013) 
because of a lack of education and 
awareness of what they are.
• Survey instruments used to track 
health data rarely include items 
specific to communication. Those 
that do typically combine speech, 
language, and hearing disabilities 
such that it is not possible to know 
the specific types of communication 
disabilities people have; they 
also do not typically offer any 
breakdown according to etiology.
As expertise in communication disor-
ders throughout the world expands, and 
as the need for treatment of disabilities 
and the fostering of communication abili-
ties as basic human rights is increasingly 
recognized, much more will be known 
about the distribution of neurogenic lan-
guage disorders throughout the world.
Where Do Aphasiologists Work?
SLPs specializing in acquired neuro-
genic cognitive-linguistic disorders are 
employed in a wide range of settings. 
One of the great advantages of a career in 
this area is that, once one has the required 
clinical credentials, he or she has count-
less options for career environments and 
the opportunity to change career settings 
multiple times if desired without having 
to change careers per se. The most com-
mon professional contexts include hospi-
tals, rehabilitation centers, skilled nurs-
ing facilities, long-term care facilities, 
continuing care retirement communities, 
home health agencies, private practice 
clinics, not-for-profit communication dis-
orders clinics, and aphasia centers. We 
explore the nature of clinical aphasiology 
as practiced in these diverse settings in 
Chapter 10.
Aphasiologists employed by col-
leges and universities typically engage in 
research, teaching, and service as lectur-
ers, instructors, readers, clinical super-
visors, or professors. Some universities 
require academic staff members to engage 
in direct clinical services and in clinical 
supervision of student clinicians on their 
path to becoming SLPs. Others hire sepa-
rate clinical supervisory professionals and 
promote dedication of greater proportions 
of academic instructors’ time to teaching 
and research.
A small proportion of researchers 
specializing in aphasiology are employed 
by research centers or institutes. Far from 
an exhaustive list, illustrative examples 
are shown in Table 1–1. These are but a 
few of many thriving research-focused 
institutes around the world. All have 
affiliations with universities and clinical 
centers. There are also plentiful related 
research centers and institutes that are 
housed primarily in college and univer-
sity contexts globally.
What Is the Career Outlook 
for Clinical Aphasiologists?
Employment for clinicians, educators, 
and researchers in clinical aphasiol-
ogy has been strong for the past three 

Welcome to the Fantastic World of Research and Clinical Practice in Acquired Disorders   11
decades. This is in line with trends for 
SLP employment overall. In projections 
for 2004 to 2014, SLP was listed as one 
of the “top 20 large-growth occupations 
that often require a master’s, doctoral, or 
first professional degree” (U.S. Bureau of 
Labor Statistics, 2006, p. 20). According to 
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2014), 
overall demand for SLPs is likely to con-
tinue to grow “faster than average for all 
occupations.” U.S. News and World Report 
(“The 100 Best Jobs,” 2014) listed SLP as 
one of the best 100 jobs in 2014. Accord-
ing to a national study of career opportu-
nities in India, “There is an acute short-
age of qualified speech therapists and as 
awareness spreads. . . . Speech therapists 
will be in high demand and have tremen-
dous scope for professional growth in the 
future” (India Today, 2014). Reports from 
Table 1–1.  Examples of Research Centers and Institutes That Employ Clinical 
Aphasiologists
Agency
URL
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 
Centre de Neuroscience Cognitive, Bron, France
http://cnc.isc.cnrs.fr 
Laboratoire de Psychologie et Neurocognition, 
Grenoble, France
http://www.upmf-grenoble.fr/lpnc
China Rehabilitation Research Center, Beijing, China
http://www.crrc.com.cn
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain 
Activity Institute, Leipzig, Germany
http://www.cbs.mpg.de
Max Planck Institute in Nijmegen, The Netherlands 
(Institute for Psycholinguistics) 
http://www.mpi.nl
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States 
http://www.mayo.edu/mshs/
careers/speech-pathology
National Institute for Health Research, London, 
England 
http://www.nihr.ac.uk/research/
National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro 
Sciences in Bangalore, India 
http://www.nimhans.kar.nic.in/
National Institutes of Health Clinical Research 
Center (e.g., for intramural projects supported by 
the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Center on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders, National Institute on 
Aging, Bethesda, Maryland, United States)
http://www.cc.nih.gov/rmd/slp/
spchlangpathclinresearch.html
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago (Brain Injury 
Research Program,  the Center for Aphasia Research 
and Treatment, and the Center for Rehabilitation 
Outcomes Research at the Rehabilitation Institute 
of Chicago), Chicago, Illinois, United States
http://www.ric.org/about/

12   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
South America indicate similar short-
ages of SLPs (Fernandes, de Andrade, 
Befi-Lopes, Wertzner, & Limongi, 2010), 
although some of the countries in which 
needs are great do not yet have public 
health policies that support the hiring of 
desperately needed SLPs.
For those seeking clinical, research, and  
teaching career options related to acquired 
neurogenic communication disorders, the 
future looks even brighter in light of an 
aging baby-boomer population (the fastest 
growing segment of the United States and 
many other national populations), global 
increases in life expectancy, and greater 
likelihood of survival from stroke and 
brain injury, all resulting in greater needs 
for rehabilitative services. The propor-
tion of clinical SLPs employed in health-
care contexts (in contrast to schools) has 
been rising steadily over the past sev-
eral years (American Speech-Language- 
Hearing Association, 2014). Salaries for 
those working in health care contexts tend 
to be superior to those of clinicians work-
ing in schools (Marquardt, 2015).
The expanding population of older 
people, along with public awareness cam-
paigns, has contributed to greater recogni-
tion of the need for research in aphasia 
and related disorders, as well as exposure 
of young prospective scholars to study 
in this area. The demand for PhD-level 
teaching staff members in communica-
tion sciences and disorders has been 
great for the past two decades in virtu-
ally every country where the profession 
of SLP is established. As more seasoned 
faculty members retire, there have been 
serious challenges in meeting teaching 
demands within academic programs in 
communication sciences and disorders 
(CAPCSD Research Doctoral Student 
Survey Committee, 2009; Joint Ad Hoc 
Committee on PhD Shortages in Com-
munication Sciences and Disorders, 2002, 
2008; Royal College of Physicians, 2014). 
PhD-level candidates with specialization 
in adult neurogenic communication dis-
orders continue to be highly sought after 
internationally (Lucks Mendel, Mendel, & 
Battle, 2004).
In many countries, the field of SLP 
does not yet exist or is currently under 
development. In most developing (major-
ity) regions where health-related services 
are a focus of humanitarian efforts, the 
primary focus tends to be on the needs of 
children. There is a dire need for cultural 
insiders within those regions to become 
clinical and educational leaders, helping 
to shape the future of service for adults 
with acquired neurological conditions, 
and services in general to meet the needs 
of older people, in their own countries. 
There is also a need — and thus terrific 
opportunities — for passionate, multicul-
turally competent aphasiologists around 
the world to help foster the career devel-
opment and work of such leaders (Fer-
nandes et al., 2010; Hallowell, 2014).
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 Make a list of bolded terms used in 
this chapter. Practice defining them in 
your own words.
	 2.	 What are the four key elements of a 
definition of aphasia?
	 3.	 List and define several acquired neu-
rogenic language disorders.
	 4.	 List and define several acquired neu-
rogenic speech disorders.
	 5.	 Why is it important to make a distinc-
tion between congenital and acquired 
language disorders?
	 6.	 Explain why is it important to charac-
terize a language disorder more spe-

Welcome to the Fantastic World of Research and Clinical Practice in Acquired Disorders   13
cifically than simply by using a gen-
eral etiological term (e.g., “language 
of generalized intellectual impair-
ment” instead of “dementia” or “lan-
guage disorder associated with TBI” 
instead of “TBI”).
	 7.	 Imagine you are talking with the 
partner of a stroke survivor with 
aphasia but no accompanying motor 
speech disorder. What would you say 
to explain to the partner the distinc-
tion between language and speech as 
affected by the stroke?
	 8.	 Summarize the five primary reasons 
why reported data pertaining to the 
incidence and prevalence of acquired 
neurogenic language disorders are 
questionable.
	 9.	 What could be done to improve the 
validity of data pertaining to the inci-
dence and prevalence of neurogenic 
language disorders throughout the 
world?
10.	 Of all the places where aphasiologists 
might work, which are the ones that 
would suit you best?
See the companion website for additional 
learning and teaching materials.

Figure 2–1.  Students being vehicles. Photo credit: Stephanie Luczkowski.
Figure 4–1.  A person with aphasia displaying an NAA bumper sticker with a vital message. 
Photo credit: Stephanie Luczkowski.

A
B
Figure 6–3.  Direct and translational blows to the head. The green arrow represents the 
direction of the force of an object hitting the head. A. Represents a direct blow to the head. 
The red highlighted portion on the left side of the brain indicates the site of a coup injury, 
while the highlighted portion on the right shows the site of a contrecoup injury. B. Represents 
a rotational blow to the head. The orange arrow represents the twisting motion of the head 
and neck in response to the angular force against the head. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.
A
B
Figure 6–1.  Schematic illustration of embolism, thrombus, and ruptured aneurysm. Each 
image set shows the progression from top to bottom. A. Represents the development of a 
thrombus. As atherosclerotic plaque builds up over time until there is a complete blockage. 
B. Represents an embolus; a particle of atherosclerotic plaque or a blood clot travels from 
elsewhere in the bloodstream and lodges in an artery, blocking the flow of blood from that 
point onward. C. Represents an aneurysm leading to a hemorrhage; the external wall of the 
artery progressively balloons outward until it bursts. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.
C

Figure 7–1.  Examples of functional areas of the brain and Brodmann’s areas vital to clini-
cal aphasiology, according to classical models. Highlighted regions represent examples of 
major functional areas and corresponding Brodmann’s areas visible on a left lateral view of 
the brain. A = Broca’s area; B = Primary auditory area; C = Wernicke’s area and surrounding 
auditory association area; D = Primary motor area; E = Primary sensory area; F = Primary 
visual area. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.

anterior communicating 
artery
opthalmic artery
posterior communicating 
artery
superior cerebellar artery
anterior inferior cerebellar 
artery
anterior cerebral artery
middle cerebral artery
anterior choroidal artery
posterior cerebral artery
pontine arteries
basilar artery
vertebral artery
internal carotid artery
Figure 7–2.  Schematic diagram of the circle of Willis. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.
Figure 7–3.  Schematic illus-
tration of the cerebral arterial 
blood supply to the left lateral 
cortex. Dark blue represents the 
anterior cerebral artery supply. 
Red represents middle cerebral 
artery supply. Light blue-green 
represents posterior artery  
supply. Image credit: Taylor 
Reeves.

Figure 7–4.  Components of the eye. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.
Figure 7–5.  Schematic overview of the visual system. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.

Figure 7–6.  Stylized illustration of a binocular field of view. 
Image credit: Taylor Reeves.
Figure 7–7.  Stylized illustration of the field of view for each 
independent eye. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.

Figure 8–1.  CT scanner. Source: “US Navy 030819-N-9593R-125 Hospital Corps-
man 2nd Class Roy Puerto, right, of Olangapo City, Philippines, demonstrates the 
operation of the CT Scan machine” by CWO Seth Rossman, courtesy of the U.S. 
Navy, licensed under CC BY 3.0.
Figure 8–3.  MRI scanner. Image courtesy of Philips Healthcare.

Figure 8–5.  Diffusion tensor image showing a left lateral view of the brain. Tractography 
shows color-coded anterior-posterior, left-right, and superior-inferior nerve fiber bundles. 
Source: “Webs’r’us” by jgmarcelino, licensed under CC BY 3.0.

Figure 8–6.  PET imaging example of functional changes. Left and right are 
reversed in the images. This series of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET images 
shows reduced metabolism (shown by arrows pointing toward areas of reduced 
activation in the left superior temporal, inferior parietal, and lateral thalamic 
regions) in a person with primary progressive aphasia whose MRI was reported 
to be normal. Image courtesy of Dr. Sultan Tarlaci, Sifa University, Turkey.
Figure 8–7.  PET images associated with neurodegenerative changes. A. Nor-
mal FDG-PET activity. B. Metabolic changes in mild cognitive impairment. C. The  
brain of a person with Alzheimer’s disease. Image courtesy of Drs. Susan M. 
Landau and William J. Jagust, University of California Berkeley.

Figure 8–8.  PET images associated with speech and language tasks. Each image of the 
left lateral view of the brain shows a typical activation pattern during a linguistic task. The 
image on the upper left is associated with reading, the upper right with listening to words,  
the lower left with thinking about words, and the lower right with saying words. Image cour-
tesy of Dr. Marcus E. Raichle, Washington University School of Medicine.

Figure 8–10.  Example of scalp electrode set-up for EEG. Source: 
“EEG recording” by Petter Kallioinen, licensed under CC BY 3.0.
Figure 8–11.  Illustration of electrocorticography. M = motor; S = sen-
sory. Numbers correspond to standardized sites for electrode place-
ment. Source: “Intracranial electrode grid for electrocorticography” by 
Blausen.com staff, licensed under CC BY 3.0.

Figure 10–1.  Normalized magnetic resonance images for people categorized as having fluent versus nonfluent aphasia based on test scores. 
Lesion maps shown are superimposed on a common lateral brain template across people with aphasia. The top panel corresponds to brains 
of people described as having “fluent” aphasia, whereas the bottom panel represents people with “nonfluent” aphasia. The distinction between 
fluent and nonfluent in this case was based on standardized testing (Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination; Goodglass, Kaplan, Barresi, 
Weintraub, & Segal, 2001).The initials correspond to names of research participants. See Speer and Wilshire (2013) for details about a study 
pertaining to the same participants. Image courtesy of Dr. Carolyn Wilshire, Victoria University of Wellington.

A
Figure 17–1.  Varied perspectives 
on social circles. In images A 
through C, the individual highlighed 
in red is the person whose primary 
everyday relationships are being 
considered. Blue circles represent 
important people or groups in that 
person’s life. Closer circles repre-
sent people seen more often. The 
size of the circle represents the 
degree of personal importance of 
that person as indicated by the 
person assessed. A. Represents 
the most important personal rela-
tionships in everyday life from the 
viewpoint of a person with aphasia. 
B. Shows the same set of relation-
ships, highlighting the perspective 
on the person with aphasia on the 
partner. C. Illustrates how the fre-
quency of contact and importance 
of relationships may be perceived 
differently by the partner. Source: 
Adapted from Shadden, 2004.
C
B

Figure 19–5.  Illustration of right-sided visual neglect during a reading task. Blue highlights 
indicate portions of text neglected for an individual with a left hemisphere lesion reading 
the letter aloud.

Figure 19–8.  Process analysis for a multiple-choice auditory comprehension task.

A
B
Figure 28–1.  Positioning for unilateral forced nostril breathing. A. Shows a traditional place-
ment nostril occlusion while a simplified version (requiring less instruction for people with 
linguistic challenges) is shown in B. Photos courtesy of Dr. Rebecca Marshall, a pioneer in 
studying this approach in people with aphasia.


15
Chapter
2
Becoming the Ultimate 
Excellent Clinician
In this chapter, we consider what makes cli-
nicians in general, and those who work in 
the realm of acquired cognitive-linguistic  
disorders, in particular, truly excellent. 
Then we consider what it is that we might 
do to achieve the aspects of clinical excel-
lence as we might define it ourselves and 
as seasoned experts, as well as the types of 
people we ultimately serve have defined 
it. We also review the kind of academic 
and clinical content that aphasiologists 
(broadly defined to include experts in 
acquired neurogenic communication dis-
orders) are expected to master, introduce 
varied types of required and optional 
academic and clinical credentials, and 
consider how individuals might strive 
for balance between clinical generaliza-
tion and specialization. Specific means of 
career development and related profes-
sional organizations are reviewed.
The study of aphasia and related neu-
rogenic language disorders is complex. 
There are myriad causes that may under-
lie any particular individual’s difficul-
ties with language and communication. 
The relationships between communica-
tion abilities and the underlying neuro-
logical pathologies associated with them 
are multifaceted. The potential impact 
of neurological conditions on a person’s 
sense of self — his or her very identity — let 
alone the ability to interface with others 
in medical, professional, social, familial, 
and other contexts is profound. So where 
do we start if we want to become the best 
person we can be to help improve the 
abilities and lives of people with aphasia 
and related neurogenic language disor-
ders? If you are reading this, you prob-
ably have already started. You have prob-
ably already thought about being a person 
who could help bring about meaningful 
changes in a person’s life by enhancing 
his or her abilities to use language and to 
cope with the loss of vital abilities. For-
tunately, research and viewpoints about 
this topic have been offered by hundreds 
of other experts.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What can you do to become an excel-
lent clinical aphasiologist?
	 2.	 What makes a clinician truly excellent?
	 3.	 How do consumers of our clinical 
services characterize what they most 
want?
Chapter
2

16   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 4.	 What are some traits of people who 
are perceived as unhelpful clinicians?
	 5.	 What content is important to master?
	 6.	 What credentials are required for a 
career as an aphasiologist?
	 7.	 What credentials may aphasiologists 
earn beyond their basic academic and 
clinical credentials?
	 8.	 Is it best to specialize or generalize?
	 9.	 What strategies help boost career 
development in acquired cognitive-
linguistic disorders?
10.	 What organizations support profes-
sional information sharing and net-
working among clinical aphasiologists?
What Makes a Clinician 
Truly Excellent?
What an excellent clinician is and does is 
difficult to capture. Thankfully, we have 
many decades of research on clinical 
intervention in aphasiology that com-
prise a wonderful set of best practices for 
assessment, treatment, and counseling. 
There are myriad criteria for what con-
stitutes best practice. Likewise, there are 
numerous strategies for achieving excel-
lent clinical treatment results. We delve 
wholeheartedly into best-practice criteria 
and strategies to achieve excellent clini-
cal intervention throughout this book. 
We can learn what those best practices 
are, and we can keep honing our skills in 
implementing them, continually improv-
ing how we practice.
What an excellent clinician knows is 
a lot about everything related to what he 
or she should do in terms of best practice, 
plus much about the associated science, 
art, theory, and history. We may not all 
agree on what the most important knowl-
edge is, which is why there are so many 
varied foci among existing text books 
in aphasiology. We probably all agree, 
though, that there is a lot one must know 
in order to be a truly excellent clinician.
Imagine that the person you love 
most in the world has had a car acci-
dent and has just emerged from a 3-week 
comatose state during which time you did 
not know if he or she would live or die, 
let alone be able to think, communicate, 
or do any of the amazing things most of 
us do in our everyday lives. You have 
been through the wringer. Your life as you 
knew it has come to an abrupt and terri-
fying stop. You would do anything and 
everything to help this person you love 
to regain every ability possible, wouldn’t 
you? Imagine that you are in charge of this 
person’s care and now it is time to choose 
a speech-language pathologist (SLP). You 
want to find the very best one, don’t you? 
How will you know who that is? Is it just 
based on what he or she knows? What 
else will you consider?
Imagine that you are choosing be- 
tween two clinical aphasiologists, both 
highly recommended to you. Both have 
the same academic and clinical back-
ground and earned the same SLP degrees 
from the same academic programs. They 
tied for the top-rated spots in their SLP 
program’s graduating class. Both have 
the same amount of clinical experience 
and have had the same savvy and skilled 
clinical mentors at the same well-reputed 
clinical agencies. How will you choose 
one over the other? What are the qualities 
of the excellent clinician that cannot be so 
easily described in terms of what he or 
she knows or can do? Your own answers 
to these questions will likely guide how 
you proceed on the path toward clinical 
excellence.

Becoming the Ultimate Excellent Clinician   17
Possible Characteristics of the  
Excellent Clinical Aphasiologist
They:
• Meet relevant certification and licensure requirements
• Have been mentored and seasoned by excellent clinicians
• Have excellent oral and written communication skills
• Skillfully interpret nonverbal communication
• Exhibit strong leadership qualities
• Have a profound sense of curiosity and inquiry
• Protect confidentiality and privacy of others
• Have a rich and warm sense of humor
• Exhibit follow-through with recommendations and 
promises
• Dress in appropriate professional ways
• Advocate for people with neurogenic communication 
disorders and the people who care about them
• Serve as role models in terms of healthy living, including 
fitness, stress management, work-life balance, and 
practices to prevent stroke and brain injury
• Acknowledge their weaknesses and failures
• Make sound judgments
• Love their role as a clinical aphasiologist
They are:
• Knowledgeable, up to date, and well educated
• Committed to evidence-based practice, lifelong learning
• Ethical, honest, and trustworthy
• Person centered
• Reflective, self-aware, and self-evaluative
• Enthusiastic, passionate inspiring, motivating, and 
empowering
• Effective, efficient, helpful, and useful
What Can You Do to Become an 
Excellent Clinical Aphasiologist?
Given that there are no absolute definitive 
answers to what constitutes the ultimate 
best clinical aphasiologist, there is clearly 
not just one path for becoming such a 
person. The qualities that constitute excel-
lence vary according to who defines it and 
in what context it is defined. Character-
istics of excellent clinical aphasiologists 
as derived from scholars in the field are 
summarized in Box 2–1.
Box
2–1

18   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Compassionate, empathetic, warm, thoughtful, and 
considerate
• Sincerely interested in others
• Nonthreatening
• Reassuring
• Good listeners
• Flexible
• Polite, patient, kind, tolerant, and sensitive
• Practical
• Committed to the real-life relevance of their work
• Bilingual or multilingual
• Fair and equitable
• Creative and imaginative
• Multiculturally competent
• Confident
• Humble
• Aware of their own biases and prejudices
• Committed to addressing their biases and prejudices
• Well organized
• Responsible
• Self-directed and autonomous
• Collaborative, cooperative
• Open to others’ views, willing to change
• Timely
• Healthy
They are able to:
• Reason scientifically
• Balance and blend art and science
• Integrate technical, intellectual, and interpersonal 
competence
• Integrate content from numerous disciplines
• Complement knowledge and skills with insight
• Express complex ideas simply
• Build trust
Source:  Bendapudi, Berry, Frey, Parish, & Rayburn, 2006; Carvalho 
et al., 2011; Comité Permanent de Liaison des Orthophonistes-
Logope˙des de L’union Européenne, 2007; Ebert & Kohnert, 2010; 
Fourie, 2009; Hallowell & Chapey, 2008a; Leahy et al., 2010; NetQues 
Project Management Team, 2014; O’Sullivan, Chao, Russell, Levine, 
& Fabiny, 2008; Threats, 2010b.

Becoming the Ultimate Excellent Clinician   19
Although some clinical supervisors 
comment that some people are “born  
clinicians” or have native clinical talents, 
many of the features on the list can be 
learned and developed with conscien-
tious practice, education, solid clinical 
mentoring, and good role modeling (see 
Wagner, Lentz, & Heslop, 2002; Zraick, 
Allen, & Johnson, 2003). Here we review 
some key strategies to keep in mind.
Commit to Lifelong Learning
Aphasia and related disorders in and of 
themselves are complex and cannot be 
fully understood even through a lifetime 
of study. We also cannot possibly mas-
ter all of the ways we may help people 
through counseling and other clinical 
skills. Nor can we ever fully grasp all of 
the ever-changing social and political 
forces that influence our work. The field of 
clinical aphasiology and all of its myriad 
associated disciplines continue to evolve. 
No matter how much we read, how many 
degrees we earn, and how many confer-
ences and workshops we attend, there 
is always much more to learn. It’s best 
that we accept this fact and commit to 
readily learning more throughout our  
careers.
Engage in Best Practices for 
Assessment and Intervention
In the chapters on assessment and inter-
vention, we explore many aspects of well-
documented best practices, including 
evidence-based practice, in clinical apha-
siology. It is vital to know what those are 
and to make sure that you work in a way 
that is consistent with them.
Participate Actively in 
Interprofessional  
Collaborative Practice
Interprofessional collaborative practice 
is when health care professionals from 
different professions work together with 
patients, families, caregivers, and com-
munities to provide optimal care (World 
Health Organization, 2010).
Collaboration across professions is 
essential to excellent clinical practice. 
According to an expert panel representing 
several health professional associations 
(Interprofessional Education Collabora-
tive Expert Panel, 2011),
Interprofessional education . . . requires 
moving beyond . . . profession-specific 
educational efforts to engage students 
of different professions in interactive 
learning with each other. Being able to 
work effectively as members of clinical 
teams while students is a fundamental 
part of that learning. (p. 3)
The panel developed a consensus on 
what are the most important principles 
of interprofessional collaborative compe-
tence, shown in Box 2–2. These are ideally 
principles embraced by clinical educa-
tors, committed to helping foster the best 
growth in students. Still, it is important 
that clinical students, too, take an active 
role in seeking out opportunities to pur-
sue learning activities that embody these 
principles.
Four domains of interprofessional 
collaborative competence are values and 
ethics, roles and responsibilities, inter-
professional education, and teams and 
teamwork. Examples of each as suggested 
by the expert panel are summarized in 
Table 2–1.

20   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Be a Vehicle
When we are worried or stressed about 
our clinical performance, perhaps because 
we think we may not know enough or 
may not live up to others’ expectations in 
some way, we may get so distracted by our 
own ego and desire to succeed that our 
attention is taken away from what matters 
most: actually being the ultimate excellent 
clinician, in action. This tends to be highly 
problematic, especially in students and 
beginning clinicians. Imagine again being 
that family member at the bedside of a 
loved one with a head injury. Imagine a 
clinician coming in and seeming unsure 
of himself or herself. Perhaps this is made 
apparent when he or she looks at notes, 
acts shy, speaks unassuredly, or is not 
clear about a plan for a diagnostic or treat-
ment session. This is not what you want 
to see as a family member. You want that 
clinician to be the best. You want to know 
that the clinician knows what he or she 
is doing. It’s lovely if you are a humble 
person, but if your humility is such that 
you are not a strong clinical presence, then 
be sure to do something overtly to convey 
the presence of an excellent clinician.
How can you do this? A key sug-
gestion is this: Be a vehicle. Don’t let any 
contact with a person with whom you are 
working professionally be about you. It’s 
not about you. It’s about the people you 
are serving. You are a conduit for empow-
ering, effective work. Great knowledge 
and skills must be conveyed through you, 
regardless of how you feel, what you wish 
to prove to the world about yourself, and 
what you may perceive about your lack of 
Principles Constituting  
Interprofessional Collaborative Competencies
• Person/family centered
• Community/population oriented
• Relationship focused
• Process oriented
• Linked to learning activities, educational strategies, 
and behavioral assessments that are developmentally 
appropriate for the learner
• Able to be integrated across the learning continuum
• Sensitive to the systems context/applicable across practice 
settings
• Applicable across professions
• Stated in language common and meaningful across the 
professions
• Outcome driven 
Source:  Interprofessional Education Collaborative Expert Panel, 2011.
Box
2–2

21
Table 2–1.  Examples of Interprofessional Collaborative Competencies
Interprofessional 
Collaborative 
Competence Domains
Examples of Specific Competencies
Values and ethics
• Place the interests and needs of the people they are 
serving at the center of care
• Maintain confidentiality in team-based care
• Respect people’s dignity and privacy
• Develop trusting relationships with individuals, families, 
and other team members
• Respect the expertise, roles, culture, and values of other 
team members
• Manage ethical dilemmas adeptly 
• Cooperate with others involved in prevention and health 
services
Roles and 
responsibilities
• Recognize limitation in skills and knowledge
• Communicate clearly about scope of practice and related 
roles and responsibilities to patients, significant others, 
and team members
• Work collaboratively to ensure “safe, timely, efficient, 
effective, and equitable” care
• Engage in continuing education to enhance 
interprofessional teamwork
Interprofessional 
education
• Optimize use of communication tools and techniques to 
enhance team effectiveness
• Communicate in an effective, understandable way, 
avoiding specialized professional jargon
• Engage in active listening with other team members
• Encourage expression of ideas and opinions from other 
team members
• Use respectful language in challenging discussions and 
conflict resolution
Teams and teamwork
• Develop a consensus among team members about roles 
and best practices in collaboration
• Manage disagreements constructively
• Evaluate, reflect on, and continuously improve overall 
team performance and the collaborative performance of 
individuals on the team
• Support collaborative work with evidence-based practice
• Share accountability with people served, other 
professionals, and others in the community or 
environment for prevention and health care outcomes

22   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
ability. In Figure 2–1, showing a thriving 
crew of up-and-coming aphasiologists, 
you will see that you are in good company 
in espousing the goal of being a vehicle.
Of course, if you truly do not have 
the knowledge and skills to do something 
specific in your clinical role, you should 
not do it. That basic tenet is a key point 
in the codes of ethics of professional bod-
ies overseeing any clinical practice area, 
including those related to communication 
sciences and disorders. However, if you 
have the knowledge and skills to be in a 
clinical situation in the first place, then 
you must be considered competent to be 
there. Let that competence be part of your 
clinical presence. Be the vehicle through 
which that competence flows. Don’t be 
an obstruction to your expression of your 
true competence. If you don’t let your 
competence flow, you help no one.
This notion of being a vehicle may 
seem obvious in the abstract as you con-
sider it while reading this chapter. Imag-
ine, though, a typical situation of the busy 
clinician preparing for an assessment ses-
sion. He or she may feel pressured pre-
paring assessment materials, which often 
include a plentiful mix of real objects and 
pictures that must be carefully organized. 
He or she may also require a review of scor-
ing procedures and must have the proper 
forms in place. He or she may wonder if 
the chosen assessment materials are even 
appropriate for the situation, if he or she 
is competent enough in the given disorder 
area to provide a high-quality assessment, 
if he or she may appear too young, if he or 
Figure 2–1.  Students being vehicles. Photo credit: Stephanie Luczkowski. A full-color ver-
sion of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

Becoming the Ultimate Excellent Clinician   23
she will pronounce and explain complex 
terms correctly, whether there is enough 
time to complete an evaluation, and so on. 
It’s great to be humble. Still, the degree 
of self-doubt that some clinicians feel as 
they enter into a clinical encounter, espe-
cially early in their careers, often exceeds 
the degree of humility and self-effacement 
that characterizes the excellent clinician.
How Do Consumers of Our 
Clinical Services Characterize 
What They Most Want?
What people with neurogenic communi-
cation disorders want in a clinician likely 
mirrors the sorts of things we discussed in 
the previous section and the description 
you would create for yourself in terms 
of how you wish to be as a clinician. See 
Box 2–3 for suggestions to clinicians gen-
erated by adults with aphasia and related 
disorders.
Caregivers and supportive friends 
also note what is most important to see in 
a clinician; the features they most report 
closely complement those of professional 
clinicians as well as people with neuro-
genic language disorders. A close friend 
of a man with aphasia captured this in 
this wonderful description he wrote to an 
aphasiologist he especially admired after 
inconspicuously standing outside the 
man’s room during a treatment session:
My gift is to recognize Genius. That’s 
what I saw. You have taken science, 
neurons, transmitters, billions of path-
ways, and have made it your art. The 
science part is the three primary col-
ors. Your part is as Vincent van Gogh. 
Just hearing you outside his room 
I could feel the art. Each question and 
statement was a brushstroke on what 
minutes before was a blank canvas. 
You had the colors mixed, the subject 
picked, the end results mapped. The 
hard part was already done. The only 
thing you couldn’t do was speed up 
time. Impressive. A musician was once 
complemented. He said, “Thank you, 
I play all the notes and play them well. 
But Mozart . . . he didn’t play notes. He 
played music.”
As an excellent clinician, you are 
an artist. You are a musician. You are a 
scientist.
What Are Some Traits of People Who 
Are Perceived as Unhelpful Clinicians?
In a book dedicated to positive, pro-
active approaches to fostering recovery 
and self-empowerment, perhaps it is 
ironic to examine what it might be like 
when we fail at being helpful. Still, in the 
interest of deepening our thinking about 
this, let’s take a brief detour to consider 
what does not constitute clinical excel-
lence. Note Taylor’s (2006) description of 
a student clinician taking a medical his-
tory the day after the author’s stroke:
This young girl was an energy vam-
pire. She wanted to take something 
from me despite my fragile condition, 
and she had nothing to give me in 
return. . . . In her haste, she was rough 
in the way she handled me and I felt 
like a detail that had fallen through 
someone’s crack. . . . She might have 
gotten more from me had she come to 
me gently with patience and kindness, 
but because she insisted that I come 
to her in her time and at her pace, it 
was not satisfying for either of us. Her 

24   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
demands were annoying and I felt 
weary from the encounter. (p. 81)
Of course, the opposite of any of the 
abilities and qualities listed in Table 2–1 
would be considered undesirable. Addi-
tional unhelpful traits commonly men-
tioned by people with aphasia and related 
disorders include failure to attend to the 
most practical aspects of supported com-
munication, a tendency to engage in treat-
ment activities that do not lead to real-life 
gains in communication abilities, and a 
lack of attention to information needed, 
presented in a way that the individual 
can understand (see Parr, Byng, Gilpin, & 
Ireland, 1997).
What Content Is  
Important to Master?
Neurogenic communication challenges 
are complex; so are the lives and life con-
texts of the people who have them; so are 
Suggestions to Clinicians From  
Adults With Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Treat me as if I will recover.
• Don’t sap my hope.
• Believe in my brain’s plasticity and in my ability to help it 
learn and change.
• Help protect me from noise and too much stimulation.
• Help me get rest.
• Don’t talk for me as if you know what I want to say.
• Accept that I may not be the same as I was and let that be 
okay. 
• Don’t talk about me to others as if I’m not there. Talk to me.
• Help others see that the person I am becoming now is just 
as loveable as the person I was. Maybe I’m even better.
• Don’t talk down to me. Respect me. 
• Don’t raise your voice if I don’t understand you. 
• Value me as someone with important contributions to make.
• Encourage me to have things to look forward to.
• Focus on my strengths, not just on what I can’t do.
• Celebrate my successes.
• Be patient with me and take your time.
• Help me accept help from others.
Source:  Parr, Byng, Gilpin, & Ireland, 1997; Taylor, 2006; personal 
communication from research participants in the Ohio University 
Neurolinguistic Laboratory, members of the Stroke Comeback Cen-
ter, and aphasia and brain injury support group members from the 
Cleveland Hearing and Speech Center.
Box
2–3

Becoming the Ultimate Excellent Clinician   25
clinicians and clinical scholars; so are the 
service delivery environments in which 
we work. This is why there is virtually 
no area of study that is not somehow rel-
evant to developing excellence in clinical 
aphasiology. Reviewing the table of con-
tents of this book, you can see what areas 
of knowledge many in our field think are 
important for you to know. However, 
it certainly does not end there. Review 
Box 1–1 in Chapter 1 and consider again 
the relevance of the disciplines mentioned 
in relation to the aspects you have listed 
in your own description of the ultimate 
excellent clinical aphasiologist. Appreci-
ate that no matter how much you learn as 
a student or clinical fellow, you will still 
have much more to learn.
In countries where SLPs are certified 
by a professional body, specific areas of 
knowledge and skill are typically dictated 
by the organization that administers cer-
tification. The designated areas are based 
on the scope of practice and, ideally, on 
validation studies regarding expert clini-
cians’ perceptions of required knowledge 
and skills. For example, in the United 
States, the American Speech-Language-
Hearing Association (ASHA) requires 
evidence that applicants for certification 
have completed “academic course work 
and supervised clinical experience suffi-
cient in depth and breadth to achieve the 
specified knowledge and skills outcomes” 
(Council for Clinical Certification in Audi-
ology and Speech-Language Pathology of 
the American Speech-Language-Hearing 
Association, 2013) in specific designated 
areas. Speech Pathology Australia (SPA) 
has a well-developed set of competency-
based standards and an internationally 
esteemed model for assessing clinical 
competence (McAllister, Lincoln, Fergu-
son, & McAllister, 2006) that has been put 
to use in several other countries.
In Europe, a set of standards for 
speech-language therapists (SLTs) and 
logopedists has been collaboratively de- 
veloped through a multinational network 
of 65 experts representing 27 European 
Union (EU) countries, plus Iceland and 
Turkey (EU candidate countries), and 
Norway and Lichtenstein (NetQues Proj-
ect Management Team, 2014). It includes 
a set of subject-specific and generic bench-
marks representing targeted competen-
cies, now embraced by the EU’s Comité 
Permanent de Liaison des Orthophon-
istes–Logopèdes de L’union Européenne. 
Most countries that have a national cer-
tification for SLPs also have a national 
examination that individuals must pass 
to demonstrate their knowledge in des-
ignated content areas. Additionally, most 
countries require evidence of continuing 
education to ensure that those certified to 
practice continue to expand their knowl-
edge bases.
What Credentials Are Required 
for a Career as an Aphasiologist?
If you wish to become a practicing clinical 
SLP, logopede, logopedist, orthophonist, 
clinical linguist, or neuropsychologist, the 
type of degree you will likely pursue is 
governed primarily by the accreditation 
and/or certification requirements in the 
country and region where you intend to 
practice. In some countries (e.g., Argen-
tina, Brazil, India, Malaysia, Israel), the 
SLP qualifications are blended with quali-
fications in audiology, and clinicians are 
expected to be competent in both profes-
sional areas.
In the United States, certification is 
administered through ASHA. The mini-
mum degree requirement for U.S. SLPs 

26   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
is a master’s degree, typically requir-
ing about 2 years of full-time study in 
an ASHA-accredited SLP program, after 
completion of a bachelor’s (undergradu-
ate) degree (during which time certain 
prerequisite courses are taken). Certifica-
tion also requires passing of the national 
Praxis examination (Educational Test-
ing Service, 2014) and completion of a 
9-month supervised clinical fellowship. 
Most states within the United States have 
separate processes required for clinical 
licensure, as do most provinces in Canada 
and some states in Australia.
In the United Kingdom, SLPs are 
qualified to practice through the Royal 
College of Speech and Language Thera-
pists (RCSLT). After graduation from a 
program accredited by the Health Profes-
sions Council, they must complete 1 year 
of supervised clinical practice before 
being recognized as fully independent 
and certified clinicians or researchers. 
Similar requirements are in place in Can-
ada through Speech-Language and Audi-
ology Canada (SAC), in Australia through 
Speech Pathology Australia (SPA), and in 
New Zealand through the New Zealand 
Speech-Language Therapists’ Association 
(NZSTA). There is a Mutual Recognition 
Agreement (MRA) for certified SLPs in 
Australia, Canada, the United States, the 
United Kingdom, Ireland, and New Zea-
land that helps to facilitate consideration 
of applicants from one of these countries 
wishing to practice in another. To date, the 
agreement includes only English-speaking  
countries, although this is may change 
as interest in the international transport-
ability of credentials increases and as the 
required components for consideration as 
a member of the MRA are developed in 
additional countries.
In most countries other than the 
United States, an undergraduate degree 
is currently the entry-level degree for 
clinical practice in SLP and psychol-
ogy; a move to graduate degree require-
ments is under consideration in many 
countries. Information about the current 
requirements for education and clinical 
certification, licensure, or work permits 
in the country where you wish to work 
is typically available on the websites of 
the national professional association that 
oversees clinical practice regulations in 
that country. In some countries, the field 
of communication sciences and disorders 
is just beginning, and there is not yet an 
agreed-upon set of standards for special-
ists or generalists in the field.
If you choose to practice in clini-
cal aphasiology as a medical doctor, you 
would most likely pursue specialization in 
neurology, neuropsychiatry, or physiatry. 
Most medical schools across the globe, 
though, do not provide substantial edu-
cation and training in clinical aphasiology 
per se through curricula, internships, and 
residencies. For this reason, some choose 
to pursue both an SLP entry-level degree 
and a medical degree, although this typi-
cally entails a substantial extension of the 
time invested in education. Certification 
in psychology and neuropsychology in 
the United States requires the minimum 
of a clinical doctorate.
If you choose to become a clinical 
aphasiologist as a person with a degree 
in a related nonclinical field, you may do 
so by completing an additional degree in 
one of the areas mentioned above. Some 
academic programs offer opportunities 
for combining master’s and PhD course-
work, either as two separate programs in 
which you might enroll sequentially or as 
blended, overlapping programs.
One alternative for those without 
any clinical education or certification is to 
engage in a career as a research aphasi-
ologist. This is sometimes a path chosen 
by individuals with advanced degrees in 

Becoming the Ultimate Excellent Clinician   27
fields such as experimental psychology, 
linguistics, or neuroscience. There are 
examples of wonderful scholars in aphasi-
ology who have taken this route; still, the 
route has inherent challenges. One is that 
employment opportunities are reduced 
because many college or university pro-
grams that hire clinical aphasiologists 
require their faculty members to hold 
clinical credentials. A second is that there 
may be concerns about ethics as well as 
relevance if aphasiologists without clini-
cal training or experience are hired into 
positions in which they will be teaching 
future clinicians about clinical content.
A third challenge is that without 
ample exposure to people with neuro-
genic language disorders and experi-
ence working with them and the people 
who care about them, it is more difficult 
to develop important counseling, criti-
cal thinking, and interpersonal skills that 
are typically fostered through supervised 
clinical mentorship and ongoing practice 
experience. A fourth is that, whether war-
ranted or not, clinical aphasiologists with-
out clinical credentials may be accorded 
less credibility as clinical scholars among 
clinically qualified colleagues, clinical stu-
dents, and consumers of their research.
What Credentials May Aphasiologists 
Earn Beyond Their Basic Academic 
and Clinical Credentials?
A credential that some choose to pursue 
is board certification in adult neurogenic 
communication disorders and sciences 
(BC-ANCDS) through the Academy of 
Neurologic Communication Disorders 
and Sciences. Board certification was 
developed in recognition of the fact “that 
meeting minimum requirements for prac-
tice . . . is not an indicator of specialized 
expertise or excellence” (Duffy, 2014, 
p. 2). It is a means of externally validating 
one’s professional knowledge, especially 
by other colleagues who hold the creden-
tial. It does not typically have an effect 
on salary potential or job opportunities, 
although some hiring professionals value 
board certification as a credential when 
comparing job applicants.
Procedures for obtaining the BC-
ANCDS credential include evidence of 
meeting eligibility requirements and a 
review team’s approval of two case stud-
ies, which first must be submitted and 
approved in writing and then must be 
reviewed and approved through an oral 
presentation and discussion (Academy 
of Neurologic Communication Disorders 
and Sciences, n.d.). Given that the eligibil-
ity to apply for the BC-ANCDS credential 
requires certification from ASHA or state 
licensure, almost all ANCDS board-certi-
fied members are from the United States, 
although U.S. residence or citizenship is 
not a requirement.
For those wishing to pursue a 
research and advanced teaching career 
in clinical aphasiology, a PhD in SLP or a 
closely related area is typically considered 
an optimal degree. For those wishing to 
teach primarily clinical courses and men-
tor student clinicians, a clinical doctorate 
may be a better fit than a PhD. Possibili-
ties for ensuring quality and standards 
through expanded clinical doctoral oppor-
tunities have been explored over the past 
several years (ASHA Academic Affairs 
Board, 2012; ASHA Ad Hoc Committee on 
the Feasibility of Standards for the Clinical 
Doctorate in Speech-Language Pathology, 
2013). A new set of guidelines for clini-
cal doctorates in SLP has recently been 
published (ASHA Ad Hoc Committee 
on Guidelines for the Clinical Doctorate  
in Speech-Language Pathology, 2015). 
The importance and relevance of clinical 

28   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
doctoral programs to clinical aphasiology 
have been highlighted through the Acad-
emy of Neurologic Communication Sci-
ences and Disorders (2014). The number 
of clinical doctoral programs with a spe-
cial focus on neurogenic communication 
disorders is on the rise.
Other types of credentials that might 
boost the career development of clinical 
aphasiologists, depending on geographic 
context, expertise, and market demands, 
include certificate programs and gradu-
ate degrees in related areas, such as ger-
ontology, global health, health policy, epi-
demiology, linguistics, and international 
development.
Is It Best to Specialize or Generalize?
SLPs who work primarily in medical and 
rehabilitation contexts sometimes spe-
cialize in certain areas based on type of 
disorder(s). For example, hospital-based 
SLPs may specialize in acquired neuro-
genic language disorders, acquired motor 
speech disorders, swallowing disorders, 
voice disorders, or communication chal-
lenges of people with tracheostomy and 
of people who are ventilator dependent. 
Alternatively, they may specialize in 
diverse disorders associated with certain 
neurological etiologies, such as traumatic 
brain injury (TBI), stroke, or neurodegen-
erative diseases. Of course, they may also 
specialize in a host of areas of particular 
interest to children in medical contexts 
(see Johnson & Jacobson, 2007); these are 
not within the scope of this book. Due to 
the extensive knowledge needed to work 
in each clinical area, specialization can be 
highly beneficial. At the same time, many 
medical settings do not have sufficient 
caseloads to justify hiring separate spe-
cialists in each area, thus requiring clini-
cians to be well prepared to practice in 
multiple areas.
Many SLPs choose to specialize in 
terms of general age groups served rather 
than disorder types. Many hospitals and 
larger clinical practices have SLPs who 
are especially well versed in services for 
adults or some even more specifically 
geared to work with older adults. SLPs 
working in smaller private practices or 
community agencies often do not have 
the opportunity to specialize and must be 
competent to work with people of diverse 
ages, disorder types, and etiologies.
In most countries, requirements for 
clinical certification and/or licensure 
include demonstration of knowledge and 
skills in areas across a wide range of the 
SLP scope of practice. In the United States, 
for example, a 2-year master’s degree 
required for clinical certification entails 
course work and supervised clinical prac-
tice experiences across all areas of clinical 
practice, leaving little room for special-
ized course work. Still, students may take 
advantage of special opportunities for 
specialized career growth, for example, by
• enrolling in specialized elective 
courses and independent studies;
• getting involved in research on 
neurogenic language disorders 
(carrying out a master’s thesis or 
working in a research laboratory);
• volunteering in local student 
groups or community agencies 
that serve adults with neurogenic 
disorders;
• selecting clinical practicum 
and externship sites that avail 
specialized exposure and training;
• observing assessment and 
treatment sessions run by master 
clinicians; and
• applying for research and/or training 
grants, scholarships, and awards.

Becoming the Ultimate Excellent Clinician   29
Pursuing advanced graduate work toward 
a clinical or research doctorate is an opti-
mal way to specialize further following 
undergraduate or master’s-level clinical 
education (Academy of Neurologic Com-
munication Sciences and Disorders, 2014).
Among aphasiologists whose work is 
dedicated primarily to research and teach-
ing, greater specialization is helpful in 
terms of being able to stay abreast of the 
constantly proliferating research base in 
any given area and in terms of developing 
a professional reputation for expertise in 
a specific area. However, some academic 
positions require teaching in content areas 
outside of one’s area of primary expertise, 
and some instructors prefer to teach in 
diverse areas.
In sum, if one wishes to be a true 
expert in clinical aphasiology, specializa-
tion in medical or rehabilitation SLP, work 
with older populations, or in specific 
related diagnostic or etiologic categories 
is a great idea. At the same time, let’s rec-
ognize that many excellent clinicians are 
competent in multiple areas of practice.  
A combination of personal preference, indi-
vidual strengths, influences for mentors, 
and educational and professional oppor-
tunities will likely guide one’s decision 
about how specialized to become on the 
path of excellence in clinical aphasiology.
What Strategies Help Boost 
Career Development in Acquired 
Cognitive-Linguistic Disorders?
Many expert clinicians and academic 
mentors have provided excellent advice 
to those wishing to build their careers 
as aphasiologists. As Threats (2010b) so 
aptly states, “Simply having aspirations 
is not sufficient to achieve them. Concrete 
actions and tools are needed to reach 
lofty goals” (p. 88). See Box 2–4 for a list 
of doable strategies. No matter what your 
current context, consider that there are 
serious time constraints within universi-
ties and clinical contexts. Don’t wait for 
your next practicum assignment, your 
new clinical fellowship, your next job, 
your next course or workshop, and so on 
to learn new content and skills.
What Organizations Support 
Professional Information 
Sharing and Networking Among 
Clinical Aphasiologists?
Numerous professional organizations 
throughout the world help to enhance 
lifelong learning and collaboration among 
clinical aphasiologists. See Table 2–2 for 
examples across the globe. Information 
about additional organizations that pro-
vide help and support to people with 
neurogenic communication disorders and 
people who care about them is provided 
in Chapter 27.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 Develop your own list your own qual-
ities for what represents the ultimate 
excellent clinical aphasiologist. Com-
pare and contrast your list with those 
of a partner.
	 2.	 Discuss specific strategies that will 
help you to become an excellent clini-
cal aphasiologist.
	 3.	 Make a collage representing what you 
think constitutes an excellent clinical 
aphasiologist. If this is a goal for you, 
consider posting it as a conglomer-
ate affirmation where you will see it 
regularly.

30   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 4.	 What do you think might be some bar-
riers to truly interprofessional collab-
orative practice in clinical contexts?
	 5.	 Consider the affirmation, “I am a vehi-
cle.” As a clinician, for what would 
you personally like most to serve as a 
vehicle?
	 6.	 How might what a person with a lan-
guage disorder differ from his or her 
life partner in determining what con-
stitutes the best SLP? How might both 
of their opinions about what matters 
most about clinical competence differ 
Strategies for Boosting Career  
Development in Aphasiology
• Delve into your studies wholeheartedly; engage in deep 
learning.
• Do not study just to pass tests and get good grades; 
consider the relevance of everything you learn. 
• Continuously reflect on how you will integrate new 
learning into your professional work.
• Don’t cut corners when carrying out academic projects.
• Master related medical terminology, not just to be able 
to understand terms but to use them correctly yourself. 
Know how to spell and pronounce terms correctly. When 
you mispronounce and misspell terms, this reflects poorly 
not only on your own professional competence but on the 
respectability of SLPs in general.
• Gain experience in learning and working with 
interprofessional teams.
• Pursue interdisciplinary studies.
• Take advantage of learning opportunities outside of 
coursework, continuing education, and clinical practica; 
take initiative to pursue such opportunities if they don’t 
simply present themselves.
• Be a constant advocate for your area of expertise and your 
profession.
• Serve as an admirable example for others on your 
academic and clinical teams.
• Be a role model for future clinicians and researchers.
from what an employer of an aphasi-
ologist might want?
	 7.	 What clinical credentials do you hope to 
seek, if any? What specific steps will you 
need to take to earn those credentials?
	 8.	 Check out the websites of several 
professional organizations related to 
acquired neurogenic communication 
disorders. Which most intrigue you 
personally and professionally? Why?
See the companion website for additional 
learning and teaching materials.
Box
2–4

31
Table 2–2.  Professional Organizations Supporting Professionals in Aphasiology
Organization
Organization Website
Academy of Aphasia
http://www2.academyofaphasia.org
Academy of Neurologic Communication 
Disorders and Sciences 
http://www.ancds.org
American Speech-Language-Hearing 
Association
http://www.asha.org
Aphasia Access
http://www.aphasiaaccess.org
Association Internationale Aphasie
http://www.aphasia-international.com
Australian Aphasia Association
http://www.aphasia.org.au
Brain Injury Association
http://www.biausa.org
British Aphasiology Society
http://www.britishaphasiologysociety.org.uk
Clinical Aphasiology Conference
http://www.clinicalaphasiology.org
Cognitive Neuroscience Society
http://www.cogneurosociety.org
European Brain Injury Society
http://www.ebissociety.org/infos-eng.html
International Association of Logopedics 
and Phoniatrics
http://www.ialp.info
International Behavioral Neuroscience 
Society
http://www.ibnsconnect.org
International Clinical Phonetics and 
Linguistics Association
http://www.icpla.org
International Cognitive Linguistics 
Association
http://www.cognitivelinguistics.org
International Neuropsychological 
Society
http://www.the-ins.org
National Aphasia Association
http://www.aphasia.org
Neuroscience at NIH
neuroscience.nih.gov
Science of Aphasia
http:www.soa-online.com
UK Stroke Forum
http://www.ukstrokeforum.org/about
World Stroke Association 
http://www.world-stroke.org
Note.  A listing of additional organizations and corresponding websites supporting people with neu-
rogenic communication disorders is given in Chapter 27.


33
Chapter
3
Writing and Talking About 
People With Disabilities
The words we use, especially in describing 
people, matter tremendously. Our choices 
of terms and construction of phrases as we 
label, categorize, and characterize others 
have tremendous implications in terms of 
how the things we say will be perceived. 
Of course, how our communication is 
perceived is vastly important in advanc-
ing our missions as excellent clinicians. In 
this chapter, we review principles related 
to various categories of terms used in 
acquired neurogenic cognitive-linguistic 
disorders and the importance of attending 
to them. After reading and reflecting on 
the content in this chapter, you will ide-
ally be able to answer, in your own words, 
the following queries:
	 1.	 What is important to consider in 
writing and talking about people 
with neurogenic cognitive-linguistic 
disorders?
	 2.	 What is the difference between the 
terms therapy and treatment?
	 3.	 What might be a better term than ther-
apist in referring to a speech-language 
pathologist (SLP)?
	 4.	 What are the preferred terms when 
referring to the experts who work 
with people who have neurogenic 
language disabilities?
	 5.	 What is important to keep in mind 
regarding inclusive and welcoming 
language?
	 6.	 Why are there such inconsistencies in 
the prefixes used in terms for charac-
terizing neurogenic symptoms?
What Is Important to  
Consider in Writing and Talking 
About People With Neurogenic 
Cognitive-Linguistic Disorders?
Wonderful progress is afoot worldwide 
in the promotion of human rights and 
equality for all people. Although often 
dismissed as a mere matter of political 
correctness or trivial issue of semantics, 
the words we use in our personal and pro-
fessional communications matter greatly 
(Hallowell, 2012c). In light of our roles of 
enhancing empowerment of the people 
we serve, every attempt to reduce dis-
crimination and bias matters. At the same 
time, there are few definitive rules for ter-
minology usage that all agree on, and dif-
ferences in terminology across countries 
and regions abound. Also, usage prefer-
ences continuously evolve even among 
sophisticated users of terms characterizing  

34   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
groups of people. In this light, let’s con-
sider important principles of terminology 
use for referring to people in the realm 
of our clinical and scholarly work in 
aphasiology.
Person-First Language
When referring to people with aphasia and 
related disorders, it is vital that we keep 
in mind two basic suggestions: (1) use 
person-first language and (2) never use  
a disability label as a noun. This is consis-
tent with worldwide growing conscious-
ness to affirm the humanity of people with 
disabilities over their disability-associated 
challenges. For example, the expression a 
person with aphasia is preferable to an apha-
sic person, and there is no context in which 
it is appropriate to say an aphasic. Refer to 
a person with traumatic brain injury, not a 
TBI. This follows for people who have 
other disabilities. Refer to a person with 
quadriplegia, not a quadriplegic. Refer to a 
person with apraxia of speech, not an apraxic.
Alternatives to the Word Patient
The terms we use to refer to our cus-
tomers or the consumers of our services 
depend largely on the context in which 
we work. In medical contexts, such as 
hospitals and rehabilitation centers, we 
may refer to patients. In private practices 
or free-standing clinics, we may call them 
clients. Some proponents of more sensitive 
language use recommend that we refrain 
from referring to people with neurogenic 
communication disorders as patients. The 
primary reason for this is that one only lit-
erally qualifies as a patient while enrolled 
in medically related services. Most people 
with aphasia and related disorders have 
lifelong challenges, not just conditions for 
which they are treated and discharged 
from medical or rehabilitation facilities.
Once someone is discharged from 
medical or rehabilitative care, even if he 
or she had been considered a patient while 
enrolled in a treatment program, consider 
using the term person instead of patient. 
The former term is more humanizing 
and reduces the connotation of a person 
whose decisions and life circumstances 
are being managed by a medical expert 
as opposed to the person himself or her-
self and those that he or she cares about. 
For people who live long term in skilled 
nursing facilities, those facilities are their 
homes; it is often more appropriate to call 
them residents than patients.
Another reason we might refrain from 
calling a person a patient is that many of 
the contexts in which people with aphasia 
and related disorders engage in activities 
to enhance communication skills and life 
participation are not medical facilities. 
They may be group treatment or social 
centers in which participants are consid-
ered members or participants. They may be 
organizations or private practices that do 
not offer medical services or accept medi-
cal insurance in which beneficiaries are 
considered clients.
People With Disabilities
The term disability is used widely and is 
preferred by most over the term handicap 
because it is less focused on pathology and 
more on a perspective of life impacts. Still, 
the word disability itself does not meet 
with the approval of some people who 
have impaired abilities in any particular 
dimension — or of some of the people who 
care about them. Some prefer the term 
differently abled. At least appreciating that 

Writing and Talking About People With Disabilities   35
there is no one clear term that pleases all 
helps us be sensitive in our word choice 
in any given context. No matter what, 
use of a label such as the disabled is simply 
not acceptable in terms of a person-first 
viewpoint.
Research Participants
In the research context, several organi-
zations and style convention authori-
ties (such as the American Psychological 
Association) recommend that we refer to 
research participants and not subjects; the 
latter connotes an uneven power relation-
ship in which experimenters have author-
ity or control over the people participating 
in research. In fact, fundamental to ethical 
research practice are the rights of partici-
pants, who must give informed consent 
before an experiment begins (knowing 
specifically what the study involves and 
what its risks and benefits are) and who 
have the right to choose not to participate 
altogether or stop participation at any time.
Older People
Given that the older we get, the greater 
are our chances of having an acquired 
neurogenic language disorder, it is impor-
tant for us to be sensitive to the appropri-
ateness of terminology in the context of 
aging, especially when we are referring 
to older adults. Many times professionals 
working with older adults inadvertently 
perpetuate ageism. Following suit with 
suggestions above, it is advisable to use 
person-first language, refraining from 
calling people by labels such as the aged 
or the aging.
Although more commonly accepted 
in some circles, the term elderly is discour-
aged by many because of its ageist con-
notations. Some people readily accept the 
terms senior citizen or senior. Others dis-
courage their use because these terms so 
readily evoke stereotypic associations, for 
example, about coffee shop discounts and 
television advertisements for dentures 
and adult diapers. “After all,” write Dah-
men and Cozma (2009), “we don’t refer to 
people under age 50 as ‘junior citizens.’ 
Instead say ‘man’ and ‘woman,’ and 
give their age, if relevant” (p. 36). Those 
authors report that people under 55, on 
average, are not bothered by the terms 
elderly, retiree, and senior citizen; however, 
those over 55 are.
Some older people are not bothered 
by euphemistic terms such as golden ager, 
golden years, or age of maturity. Others 
are. To avoid being perceived as conde-
scending, it is best simply not to use such 
terms. It is also important that profession-
als working with older adults refrain from 
other terms that perpetuate ageist stereo-
types, such as cute, spry, miserly, doughty, 
and cranky. It is also important to avoid 
patronizing language. Examples include 
referring to someone as 95 years young, a 
grandfatherly type, or a sweet little old lady.
Healthy Adults
The term healthy suggests that an individ-
ual is not in an active state of disease or ill-
ness. In this sense, people with neurogenic 
language disorders tend to be healthy; if 
they are not, their health problem is not 
due to their neurogenic language disor-
der per se but to a concomitant illness. In 
the research context, some authors inap-
propriately refer to control participants 
(those who do not have neurological dis-
orders) as healthy in contrast to groups of 
participants with neurological disorders. 

36   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Consistent with efforts to empower adults 
with neurological disorders to maximize 
their participation in meaningful every-
day social engagement and life activities 
(often not possible for people who are sick 
or unhealthy), it is best to avoid the term 
healthy to differentiate control participants 
from stroke and brain injury survivors or 
people with dementia.
Qualifying the term control participant 
with the feature that contrasts participants 
with and without neurological disorders 
is preferable. For example, in a study on 
aphasia, one might refer to participants 
with aphasia and participants without apha-
sia; in a study on cognitive aspects of TBI, 
one might refer to participants without any 
history of neurological disorder and people 
with language disorders subsequent to TBI.
What Is the Difference Between the 
Terms Therapy and Treatment?
Although the terms therapy and treatment 
are used interchangeably by many people, 
it is important to consider the difference 
and reflect on which term to use when. 
The term therapy has a narrow connotation 
of working directly with an individual 
patient or group of patients; for most, it 
conjures up the image of a clinician and a 
patient engaged together in a room within 
a hospital, rehabilitation center, or clinic. 
The people we serve, colleagues from 
other professions, and laypeople in gen-
eral often hold the stereotype that therapy 
is the main thing that SLPs do. The terms 
treatment and intervention, in the SLP’s 
realm, convey the notion of any aspect 
of helping to improve communication, 
compensate for communication deficits, 
or cope with communication challenges. 
They include all of the elements of therapy 
but also such diverse activities as ongo-
ing assessment, research on options for 
intervention, analyses of communication 
environments in workplaces and homes, 
counseling, coordination of support 
groups, discharge planning, and training 
of staff, family, and caregivers.
Unless one is referring to the nar-
rower construct of therapy, then it may 
be best to use the term treatment or inter-
vention. This helps to reinforce the notion 
that SLPs carry out their work in diverse 
ways and settings to help improve lives 
through improved communication, and 
the notion that far more is involved in 
clinical practice than sitting in a therapy 
room providing therapy. This is a small but 
important way to advocate for our profes-
sion, through heightened appreciation and 
respect for what it is that SLPs do.
What Might Be a Better Term Than 
Therapist in Referring to an SLP?
The narrow connotation of the word ther-
apy discussed above carries over to the 
word therapist. Many prefer more com-
prehensive terms, such as SLP or clinician, 
again to capture the broader connotation 
of the scope of what we do. In many coun-
tries, such as the United Kingdom, New 
Zealand, and Australia, the terms speech 
therapist (ST) or speech-language therapist 
(SLT) are typically used by convention 
rather than SLP. Although some clini-
cians in those countries would prefer to 
change that convention, such a change 
does not come easily. The notion of pathol-
ogy and pathologist implicated in the term 
SLP, common in the United States, is also 
not appreciated wholeheartedly by all. 
Pathologies connote deficits, illness, and 
things that are wrong; certainly as excel-

Writing and Talking About People With Disabilities   37
lent clinicians, we do more than focus on 
those! In much of Europe and Canada, 
SLPs are sometimes referred to as ortho-
phonists, phoniatrists, logopedists, and 
logopedes (or their translated equivalents 
according to one’s language), with dis-
tinctions in scope of practice and require-
ments associated with such titles varying 
by region.
What Are the Preferred Terms 
When Referring to the Experts 
Who Work With People Who Have 
Neurogenic Language Disabilities?
As mentioned in Chapter 1, aphasiol-
ogy is a term that has come to be much 
more comprehensive in scope than just 
the study of aphasia. Many clinical apha-
siologists specialize not only in aphasia 
but also in other neurogenic communica-
tion and even swallowing disorders. In 
this book, the term clinical aphasiologist is 
often used interchangeably, if imperfectly, 
with SLP, given the context of discussing 
research and clinical work with adults 
who have neurogenic language disorders. 
Of course, many SLPs are not considered 
aphasiologists because many do not have 
specialized expertise in neurogenic com-
munication disorders or training in this 
area beyond what is required for clinical 
certification and licensure in SLP. Also, 
many aphasiologists study aphasia from 
theoretical and experimental perspectives 
and are not clinically certified or educated 
as SLPs. Again, it generally seems to work 
out fine if we use such terms that, by defi-
nition, may not literally or precisely cap-
ture what we might mean — as long as 
there is a clear understanding of what is 
meant among all taking part in a given 
communicative situation.
What Is Important to Keep 
in Mind Regarding Inclusive 
and Welcoming Language?
When writing and talking about people 
in general — whether it be patients, cli-
ents, caregivers, significant others, fami-
lies, spouses, colleagues, and so on — it is 
important to avoid terms that may make 
people feel excluded, judged, or unwel-
come based on their race, ethnicity, reli-
gious and political beliefs, gender iden-
tity, and sexual orientation. Health care 
settings are especially rife with use of 
terms and expressions that blatantly dis-
regard differences among people in terms 
of sexual orientation, gender identity, and 
gender expression.
Even those who are welcoming and 
accepting of people whose orientations 
differ from their own sometimes unknow-
ingly perpetuate heterosexist language or 
convey stereotypical assumptions about 
gender identity and the nature of family 
structures and living arrangements. For 
example, case history forms that include 
questions about marital status or clinical 
interviews in which there are assump-
tions conveyed about the interviewee 
having a “wife” or “husband” may be 
perceived as alienating. People who iden-
tify as being lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans-
gendered, queer, questioning, or asexual ​
— or who may be perceived to be different 
from what others consider to be normal 
or socially conforming — often experi-
ence discrimination and sometimes even 
harassment, abuse, and refusal of services. 
This makes it all the more vital for clini-
cians to strive to use inclusive and sup-
portive language that embraces people’s 
values and acknowledges that people 
want the same opportunities as anyone 
else to seek and receive excellent services 

38   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
and participate in caring for the people 
they love (see GLADD, 2014a, 2014b, for 
excellent tutorial materials on this topic).
What Other Terms Might 
Unintentionally Convey 
Negative Connotations?
Sometimes we use words we have heard 
or read without giving a lot of thought 
to how they might be perceived by oth-
ers. Keep in mind that the fact that cer-
tain terms are used commonly, even by 
experts we respect, does not make their 
usage well conceived or appropriate. Let’s 
consider some common examples.
A term frequently used to refer to the 
time prior to the onset of a neurological 
disorder (or any state of disease or disabil-
ity) is premorbid, literally meaning before 
disease. The word morbid has connotations 
for many, though, not only of disease and 
unhealthiness but also death and ghoul-
ishness. To better convey an appreciation 
that people with neurological disorders 
are not necessarily unhealthy or macabre, 
we might instead use such terms as prein-
jury, preonset, or prestroke (depending on 
the context). We might also use descrip-
tive terms (e.g., before she showed signs 
of memory loss, before he had his head 
injury).
The terms suffer (e.g., he suffered a brain 
injury) and victim (e.g., she is a stroke 
victim) are words not to use in general 
because of their disempowering conno-
tations. By simply using person-first lan-
guage, we can avoid conveying the idea 
that people with disabilities are in miser-
able or helpless states.
Consider, too, the commonly used 
term brain damage. Many of us don’t think 
to challenge the word damage as we say it 
in this context. Let’s reflect, though, on the 
potential negative connotation associated 
with damaged goods or products. A prefer-
able term might be brain injury or a more  
specialized medical term if it applies in 
a given health care context (e.g., infarct  
or lesion).
Why Are There Such 
Inconsistencies in the Prefixes 
Used in Terms for Characterizing 
Neurogenic Symptoms?
As noted in Chapter 1, the prefix dys- 
before a term indicates a problem, deficit, 
or weakness in function. For example, a 
person with dyslexia has difficulty read-
ing. A person with dysgraphia has diffi-
culty writing. The prefix a-, meaning with-
out, indicates that a person is without that 
function. Despite these literal meanings, 
these prefixes are often used interchange-
ably when referring to symptoms in the 
realm of neurogenic communication dis-
orders. For example, according to the lit-
eral definition of the terms, a person with 
alexia is unable to read and a person with 
agraphia is unable to write. However, 
when talking or writing about a literate 
person who has completely lost the abil-
ity to read, one clinician may say she has 
dyslexia while another may say she has 
alexia. For the most part, we simply accept 
that actual usage does not always reflect 
the literal meaning of these prefixes.
A case in point is our use of the term 
aphasia (literally without language) almost 
exclusively over the term dysphasia, even 
though almost everyone with aphasia has 
some intact language abilities. Many of 
us overtly discourage the use of the word 

Writing and Talking About People With Disabilities   39
dysphasia because it can be so easily mis-
understood due to its similarity to the 
word dysphagia.
The term anomia (literally with-
out words or names for things) is often 
used even when describing the symp-
toms of people who may produce lots of 
words but have frequent difficulty com-
ing up with specific words they want 
to say (dysnomia). In sum, the choice of 
prefixes in actual usage is more a matter 
of stylistic convention than of the literal 
interpretation.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List alternatives for the word patient. 
For each, describe in what type of 
context each word would or would 
not be appropriate.
	 2.	 How might you revise the following 
statements to demonstrate sensitivity 
and inclusiveness?
• Ms. DeRose is a spry 90-year-old 
apraxic.
• I have three TBIs on my caseload.
• It is unclear if the grandmotherly 
demented woman was 
withdrawing socially because 
of her general crotchetiness or 
because of clinical depression.
• Subjects in this research were 30 
elderly aphasic patients from the 
community.
• He already had brain damage 
from a prior accident and then he 
suffered a stroke.
• Dr. Liu is a stroke victim.
	 3.	 Imagine you are giving an in-service 
to health care professionals on sen-
sitivity in the use of terms referring 
to people with disabilities and older 
people. Create a set of examples of 
inappropriate use of language to have 
them correct and discuss.
	 4.	 What are some good and bad strate-
gies for helping other health care and 
research professionals to improve 
their use of appropriate terms in clini-
cal contexts?
See the companion website for additional 
learning and teaching materials.


Section II
Foundations for Considering 
Acquired Neurogenic 
Language Disorders

42   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
In this section, we lay out a foundation 
for understanding the basic aspects of 
acquired language disorders. First, in 
Chapter 4, we consider how it is that one 
may define and conceptualize aphasia. 
This content lays important groundwork 
for considering the entire category of 
acquired neurogenic language disorders. 
Then, in Chapter 5, we engage in a concise 
tutorial about the World Health Organi-
zation’s International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability, and Health and 
its relevance to people who have neuro-
genic communication disorders as well as 
the people who care about them. Next, in 
Chapter 6, we examine the basic nature 
of conditions that tend to cause acquired 
neurogenic language disorders in adults. 
Then, in Chapter 7, we review basic 
aspects of neurophysiology and anatomy 
most pertinent to clinical aphasiology, 
including basic principles and neurologi-
cal landmarks and systems. In Chapter 8, 
we address neurodiagnostic methods. 
Finally, in Chapter 9, we address key 
content related to aging as it may affect 
cognitive-linguistic abilities and commu-
nication in general. To be clear, aging is 
not addressed as a pathological or causal 
factor behind a set of neurogenic language 
disorders but rather as a multifaceted 
construct that is important for speech-
language pathologists to know about  
and take into account in many aspects of 
their work.

43
Chapter
4
Defining and  
Conceptualizing Aphasia
A great way to delve into the study of 
acquired neurogenic language disorders 
is to first consider aphasia in detail. From 
there, once you master certain factual 
knowledge while also considering ways 
of embracing multiple theoretical perspec-
tives regarding aphasia, you will have a 
strong foundation on which to base more 
learning and reflection on other types of 
acquired neurogenic language disorders. 
This is why we begin this section by defin-
ing and conceptualizing aphasia.
Aphasia itself has tremendous vari-
ability in terms of how it affects people. 
Still, describing aphasia and its various 
manifestations may be at least less com-
plex than describing some of the other 
neurogenic language disorders, espe-
cially those that tend to result from more 
diffuse areas of injury to the brain. Also, 
the fact that aphasia has been studied for 
over 150 years, in contrast to most other 
neurogenic language disorders, makes it 
a good starting topic for broader study of 
neurogenic cognitive-linguistic disorders.
In this chapter, we consider what 
aphasia is and how to define it. We review 
various ways of thinking about it, study-
ing it, and assessing it, from a variety of 
perspectives or frameworks. We also con-
sider how frameworks for conceptualiz-
ing aphasia are relevant to other acquired 
neurogenic language disorders. After 
reading and reflecting on the content in 
this chapter, you will ideally be able to 
answer, in your own words, the follow-
ing queries:
	 1.	 What is a good way to define aphasia?
	 2.	 How have established aphasiologists 
defined aphasia?
	 3.	 What are the primary frameworks for 
conceptualizing aphasia?
	 4.	 How does one choose a preferred frame-
work for conceptualizing aphasia?
	 5.	 How are the frameworks for concep-
tualizing aphasia relevant to other 
neurogenic language disorders?
What Is a Good Way to 
Define Aphasia?
In Chapter 1, we considered that a good 
way to define aphasia is to make sure we 
include four elements in our definition:
	 1.	 It is acquired.
	 2.	 It has a neurological cause.
	 3.	 It affects reception and production of 
language across modalities.

44   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 4.	 It is not a sensory, motor, psychiatric, 
or intellectual disorder.
Incorporating these four elements yields a 
definition of aphasia that meets Darley’s 
(1982) criteria of clarifying features suffi-
ciently to make the disorder recognizable 
while differentiating it from other disor-
ders. Let’s consider each of those elements 
in more detail.
Aphasia Is Acquired
It is a loss of a degree of language abil-
ity. That is, it occurs in people who have 
already learned language. As we noted 
in Chapter 1, although aphasia tends to 
occur most commonly in adults, children 
also can acquire aphasia, inasmuch as a 
child who has developed competence in 
one or more languages may then lose lan-
guage abilities. However, aphasia is not 
a congenital language disorder. A person 
must already have acquired language to 
be able to lose aspects of it.
The word loss in this context must be 
qualified. People with aphasia typically 
demonstrate problems of access to stored 
linguistic representations, not necessar-
ily the stored representations themselves. 
This fact is at the heart of:
• Functional linguistic gains that 
many people with aphasia continue 
to make over years postonset
• Treatment approaches that have 
been shown to enhance access 
to intact abilities in people with 
aphasia
• Research demonstrating that 
the degree of interference with 
actual intact linguistic abilities can 
be manipulated by varying the 
modality, complexity, and difficulty 
of tasks and stimuli
• Fluctuations in linguistic abilities 
typically demonstrated by people 
with aphasia from moment to 
moment and day to day
• Theoretical models focusing on 
competence (one’s true underlying 
knowledge and abilities) versus 
performance (one’s ability to 
demonstrate knowledge and 
abilities in some overt way)
Aphasia Has a Neurological Cause
It is most commonly caused by stroke. It 
can also be caused by a traumatic brain 
injury, neoplasm (tumor) affecting the 
brain, surgical ablation of brain tissue, 
infections, and metabolic problems. This 
element of the definition relates to the 
acquired nature of aphasia in that there 
is a loss of language due to some type of 
neurological event or condition that leads 
to a loss of language ability. The onset of 
aphasia is most frequently abrupt because 
most of its underlying neurological causes 
tend to occur suddenly.
Aphasia Affects Reception 
and Production of Language 
Across Modalities
Aphasia affects all modalities of language. 
Reception is affected in terms of auditory 
comprehension, reading comprehension, 
and understanding of sign language (in 
those who have already acquired sign 
language). Production is affected in terms 
of the ability to formulate spoken, written, 
or signed language. Some people with 
aphasia have more difficulty expressing 

Defining and Conceptualizing Aphasia   45
themselves than understanding others. 
Some have more difficulty understand-
ing than expressing. The terms expressive 
and receptive aphasia are sometimes used 
to capture the notion that there are pre-
dominant problems with production or 
understanding, respectively. Still, it is vital 
to recognize that aphasia affects all areas 
of language, both expressive and recep-
tive. People with expressive aphasia, for 
example, have problems that affect their 
comprehension. Even people with mild 
expressive forms of aphasia tend to have 
more difficulty processing complex gram-
matical structures than people without 
aphasia. Also, most people with receptive 
aphasia produce speech and writing that 
is not typical of their language abilities 
before aphasia onset.
Aphasia Is Not a Speech, Intellectual, 
Sensory, or Psychiatric Disorder
Aphasia is a language disorder. Given how 
commonly language problems may be 
confused with other problems, it is impor-
tant that we use exclusionary criteria in de- 
fining aphasia. The exclusionary elements 
most commonly confused or misunder-
stood in everyday use of the term aphasia 
are the speech and intellectual aspects, so 
let’s consider those further.
Some laypeople inappropriately refer 
to aphasia as a “speech” disorder because 
the content of the speech of people with 
aphasia tends to be atypical. The abnor-
mal content in aphasia, though, is not 
caused by a motor problem affecting the 
speech mechanism but rather a problem 
in the formulation of linguistic messages. 
Motor speech disorders (such as apraxia 
of speech and dysarthria) often occur con-
comitantly in people with aphasia.
Some may mistakenly consider apha-
sia to be an intellectual problem because 
it may sometimes seem, given the interac-
tion abilities of people with aphasia, that 
their intelligence is reduced. This is sim-
ply not so. Educating people in general 
about this point is an important aspect 
of advocacy on behalf of people with 
aphasia. The National Aphasia Associa-
tion (NAA) and other groups promote 
such advocacy through buttons, bumper 
stickers, magnets, and other products 
emblazoned with the slogan, “Aphasia is 
a loss of language, not intellect.” See an 
example in Figure 4–1. Like motor speech 
disorders, disorders of cognition (such as 
nonlinguistic problem-solving abilities) 
may co-occur with aphasia, but they are 
not part what defines aphasia.
Given the complex combinations 
of symptoms a person with any type of 
injury to the brain may experience, it is 
important to identify to the extent pos-
sible which deficits co-occur with aphasia 
versus which are parts of the aphasia syn-
drome itself. The reason one might say “to 
the extent possible” is that it is very dif-
ficult to discern nonlinguistic aspects of 
cognition, such as certain aspects of mem-
ory and attention, from language abilities. 
There are two reasons for this:
• Using language expressively and 
receptively requires essential 
memory and attention functions; 
as such, we cannot assess language 
abilities without tapping into 
memory and attention, too.
• Most of the stimuli and tasks used to  
study memory and attention require 
understanding and processing 
of verbal (or at least symbolic) 
material and often require verbal 
responses; if verbal abilities are 

46   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
impaired, poor responses may 
be inappropriately attributed to 
memory and attention problems.
We will talk more about this as we 
further consider ways of conceptualizing 
aphasia. For now, since we are still talk-
ing about defining aphasia, our focus is on 
keeping the definition simple yet compre-
hensive and not especially imbued with 
theoretical principles that are important to 
consider but not essential to the definition. 
Note that our present query is, “What is a 
good way to define aphasia,” not “What 
is the best of definition of aphasia.” The 
principles underlying the definition are 
more important than the specific wording 
we choose.
How Have Established 
Aphasiologists Defined Aphasia?
The ways that aphasiologists define apha-
sia may be categorized as general neu-
rolinguistic definitions, definitions that 
include nonlinguistic cognitive symp-
toms (e.g., working memory and atten-
tion) as inherent components of aphasia 
and broader definitions of aphasia as a 
challenge to social interaction and the 
impact of that challenge on quality of life. 
Examples of each are shown in Box 4–1. 
Note that these are given for illustrative 
purposes; several of these definitions 
of aphasia do not meet the definitional 
requirements given above.
Figure 4–1.  A person with aphasia displaying an NAA bumper sticker with a vital message. 
Photo credit: Stephanie Luczkowski. A full-color version of this figure can be found in the 
Color Insert.

Defining and Conceptualizing Aphasia   47
Examples of Definitions of Aphasia
General neurolinguistic definitions
“An acquired communication disorder caused by brain dam-
age, characterized by an impairment of linguistic expression 
and/or reception; it is not the result of a sensory deficit, a gen-
eral intellectual deficit, or a psychiatric disorder” (Hallowell 
& Chapey, 2008a, p. 3).
“A family of clinically diverse disorders that affect the ability 
to communicate by oral or written language, or both, follow-
ing brain damage” (Goodglass, 1993, p. 2).
“The disturbance of any or all of the skills, associations and 
habits of spoken and written language produced by injury to 
certain brain areas that are specialized for these functions” 
(Goodglass & Kaplan, 2001, p. 5).
“An impairment, due to acquired and recent damage of the 
central nervous system, of the ability to comprehend and for-
mulate language. It is a multimodality disorder represented 
by a variety of impairments in auditory comprehension, read-
ing, oral-expressive language, and writing. The disrupted 
language may be influenced by physiological inefficiency or 
impaired cognition, but it cannot be explained by dementia, 
sensory loss or motor dysfunction” (Rosenbek, LaPointe, & 
Wertz, 1989, p. 53).
Definitions that include cognitive symptoms as inherent 
components of aphasia
“Impairment, as a result of brain damage, of the capacity for 
interpretation and formulation of language symbols; multimo-
dality loss or reduction in efficiency of the ability to decode 
and encode conventional meaningful linguistic elements 
(morphemes and larger syntactic units); disproportionate to 
impairment of other intellective functions; not attributable 
to dementia, confusion, sensory loss, or motor dysfunction; 
and manifested in reduced availability of vocabulary, reduced 
efficiency in application of syntactic rules, reduced auditory 
retention span, and impaired efficiency in input and output 
channel selection” (Darley, 1982, p. 42).
Box
4–1

48   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Once you have a clear idea of what 
aphasia is and is not, it is important to 
practice defining aphasia until you are 
able to do it accurately and succinctly 
without any notes, in writing and speak-
ing. No matter what the work setting, 
speech-language pathologists (SLPs) are 
often defining and explaining the nature 
of aphasia. We must be able to do this 
clearly and adeptly at varied levels of 
sophistication depending on the back-
ground of people with aphasia and their 
family members, friends and caregivers, 
and health professionals and laypeople  
in general.
In research contexts, it is important 
that the definition of aphasia used to qual-
ify participants with aphasia for a given 
study be clearly stated. This is essential to 
enabling researchers to interpret the find-
ings and evaluate conclusions based on 
the assumptions that underlie the way the 
study’s authors define aphasia (McNeil & 
Pratt, 2001; Roberts, Code, & McNeil, 2003).
What Are the Primary Frameworks 
for Conceptualizing Aphasia?
Some of the differences in how aphasiolo-
gists define aphasia are the result of dif-
ferences in their theoretical perspectives 
on aphasia, not necessarily because they 
cannot agree on a definition. From the 
earliest days of aphasiology to the pres-
ent, trends and developments in research 
and practice have led to a wide array of 
options for thinking about and discussing 
aphasia in clinical practice, research con-
texts, and everyday life.
The way many aphasiologists con-
ceptualize aphasia reveals something 
about their own academic roots, that is, 
the way they were taught to think about 
it. Others have changed the way they 
consider aphasia because of personal and 
professional experiences they have had 
with people who have aphasia. Still oth-
ers are influenced by emerging research, 
education, and advocacy campaigns that 
challenge them to consider differently 
what the “best” framework for conceptu-
alizing aphasia is.
No matter what our personal view-
points, it is important that we know about 
the varied ways that the construct of 
aphasia might be considered. This helps 
us appreciate differences among diag-
nostic and treatment approaches, aphasia 
research programs and projects, aphasia 
textbook contents and emphases, and the 
orientations of individual clinicians and 
scholars. Being able to grasp and appre-
ciate the validity of multiple viewpoints 
at the same time is a fundamental qual-
Broader definitions of aphasia as a challenge to social 
interaction and the impact of that challenge on quality of life
“An acquired selective impairment of language modalities and 
functions resulting from a focal brain lesion in the language-
dominant hemisphere that affects the person’s communicative 
and social functioning, quality of life, and the quality of life of 
his or her relatives and caregivers” (Papathanasiou, Coppens, 
& Potagas, 2011, p. xx).

Defining and Conceptualizing Aphasia   49
ity of the excellent clinical aphasiologist. 
Note that many of the frameworks are not 
mutually exclusive, although some are.
Unidimensional Frameworks
In a unidimensional framework, all of lan-
guage is seen as one inseparable whole. 
Every level of language, from phonology 
to morphology to syntax to semantics to 
pragmatics, is included in one cohesive 
ability or set of abilities. Likewise, pro-
duction and comprehension are not seen 
as separable components of language but 
rather as interwoven. An injury to the 
brain that results in language deficits in 
any given aspect of language ability may 
affect all aspects of language ability. Hil-
dred Scheull is known as the major historic 
proponent of this framework (Schuell & 
Jenkins, 1959; Schuell, Jenkins, & Jimenez-
Pabon, 1964). The Minnesota Test for Dif-
ferential Diagnosis of Aphasia (MTDDA; 
Schuell, 1973), the aphasia language assess-
ment tool that she developed (no longer in 
press), is based on this framework.
Although to this day there are pro-
ponents of this framework, it is generally 
considered outmoded in light of evidence 
for a more multidimensional framework 
of aphasia that might better capture vari-
ations among differing manifestations of 
aphasia. Still, it has the strength of recog-
nizing the interdependence of all aspects 
of language, receptive and expressive, 
from phonology to pragmatics. Also, it 
fits with evidence for a great deal of func-
tional interconnectivity among structures 
thought to be specialized for language ​
— not just a set of discreet specialized 
structures. Finally, it is a framework that 
helps us to consider each individual with 
aphasia as having a unique set of chal-
lenges requiring individualized assess-
ment that leads to the design of an indi-
vidually tailored treatment program.
Multidimensional Frameworks
Multidimensional frameworks are char-
acterized by the view that there are var-
ied forms or syndromes of aphasia, each 
syndrome corresponding to a site of the 
lesion. Any syndrome of aphasia may be 
characterized by a set of hallmark fea-
tures. The way the syndromes are clas-
sified has varied over the decades. Still, 
there are common aspects across many 
classification schemes. Classifications of  
fluent versus nonfluent and anterior ver-
sus posterior forms of aphasia fit this 
framework. So do the “classical” classifi-
cation systems suggesting specific apha-
sia syndromes (e.g., Wernicke’s, Broca’s, 
transcortical sensory, transcortical motor, 
mixed transcortical, and conduction apha-
sia, all of which are discussed in detail in 
Chapter 10). A strength of this approach 
is that it recognizes well-established pat-
terns of brain-behavior relationships, 
which may help us predict particular dif-
ficulties with language as well as concom-
itant problems that may affect a person’s 
communication abilities. Considering 
patterns of performance may increase the 
efficiency with which we develop optimal 
treatment programs. Likewise, consider-
ing the corresponding structural changes 
in the brain may help us to think critically 
about why a person is having a particular 
linguistic problem.
Two people who have poor auditory 
comprehension, for example, may have 
starkly different lesion locations; know-
ing the location of their lesions may help 
us differentiate the nature of their com-
prehension deficits. Weaknesses of this 
approach are that it is not a panacea for 

50   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
understanding the nature of any individ-
ual’s manifestations of aphasia, let alone 
for knowing how we might best support a 
person’s meaningful real-life communica-
tion and life participation. Given the com-
monality of multidimensional views in 
clinical and research practices, we explore 
multidimensional classification schemes 
in much greater detail in Chapter 10.
Medical Frameworks
Medical frameworks typically incorporate 
multidimensional views and thus may be 
considered a subset of that category of 
viewpoints. In medical contexts, aphasia 
is considered primarily at the impairment 
level, that is, at the level of specific lin-
guistic deficits. There is a focus on ana-
lyzing the cause in terms of a disease state 
(e.g., stroke) or change in body structure 
(e.g., trauma or neoplasm). Assessment 
entails identifying deficits, and treat-
ment plans are designed to address those 
deficits. Operating from this perspective 
may be consistent with the viewpoints of 
other rehabilitation team members, espe-
cially those focused on physical impair-
ments, and thus help an SLP feel more 
easily understood when communicating 
with others about assessment and plans 
of care. Being able to document the medi-
cal nature of language deficits may also 
be essential to being reimbursed finan-
cially for SLP services. Serious draw-
backs, though, are that there tends to be 
a focus on weaknesses, not strengths, and 
on attempting to “fix” problems at the 
expense of helping people compensate 
for and cope with challenges they will 
likely continue to have long after they are 
discharged from the medical contexts in 
which we work with them.
Cognitive Neuropsychological, 
Psycholinguistic, and 
Neurolinguistic Frameworks
A cognitive neuropsychological frame-
work is based on models of mental 
representation and types and stages of 
information processing. Psycholinguistic  
frameworks, which are focused on pro-
cessing of linguistic information in par-
ticular, are a subset of this framework. 
Components of information processing (or 
modules) are often conceptualized within 
boxes in flowcharts, with arrows showing 
the order of processing stages and inter-
connections among components. Assump-
tions are typically made about the degree 
of functional modularity of any given 
component (i.e., its independence from or 
interdependence with other components). 
Although some who ascribe to this type of 
framework attempt to associate anatomi-
cal structures or networks of structures to 
specific components, the notion of mod-
ules rather than brain structures helps 
to circumvent the challenges of relating 
language and cognitive deficits to specific 
anatomical lesion sites and vice versa.
Kay, Lesser, and Coltheart’s (1997) 
PALPA is an aphasia assessment battery 
that is well known for its grounding in psy-
cholinguistic theory. A schematic diagram 
based on their psycholinguistic model for 
comprehension and production, ampli-
fied to include additional components 
and influences, is shown in Figure 4–2. 
Auditory lexical perception is shown as 
beginning with the acoustic input from a 
speech signal, which first goes through an 
auditory phonological analysis process, 
then passes through a phonological input 
buffer, to a phonological input lexicon, to 
the semantic system. Orally naming an 

Defining and Conceptualizing Aphasia   51
object begins with seeing the object, pro-
cessing the visual stimulus through the 
visual object recognition system to the 
semantic system, then formulating the as- 
sociated word through the phonological 
output lexicon and phonological output 
buffer, finally leading to speech. In a rep-
etition task, since the listener need not 
process the auditory stimulus in terms of 
its semantic properties in order to repeat 
it, he or she can simply bypass the pro-
cesses associated with the phonological 
input buffer, the phonological input lexi-
con, and the sematic system and simply 
engage in acoustic-to-phonologic conver-
sion and the phonological output buffer to 
Figure 4–2.  Psycholinguistic model of language processing. Image credit: Mohammad 
Haghighi.

52   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
engage in the speech process. Many apha-
siologists whose work is characterized by 
a psycholinguistic framework focus on 
specific areas of processing, such as lexi-
cal perception, sentence comprehension, 
or naming.
Within a cognitive neuropsychologi-
cal framework, aphasia may be seen as a 
disruption in the processing required for 
any given linguistic task or set of tasks. 
A proponent of this view is likely to see 
a primary goal of assessment as deter-
mining at what level in the system there 
is a problem. Some cognitive neuropsy-
chological models proposed, especially 
early ones from the 1970s and 1980s, are 
serial models, suggesting that informa-
tion passes from one stage and then to 
the next. As theories of language process-
ing have evolved, there has been greater 
recognition of the interdependence and 
simultaneous engagement of multiple 
processes even for a relatively simple task, 
such as understanding a spoken word. 
Greater degrees of complex, interactive, 
and overlapping processes are involved 
in more complex tasks, such a sentence 
and discourse comprehension. Computa-
tional models have been developed to cap-
ture some of this complexity, focusing on 
what the arrows rather than just the boxes 
might represent in cognitive neuropsycho-
logical models (e.g., Dell & O’Seaghdha, 
1992). Some computational models have 
been further developed to capture neural 
correlates of theoretical stages of language 
processing (e.g., Dell, Schwartz, Nozari, 
Faseyitan, & Branch Coslett, 2013; Mir-
man, Yee, Blumstein, & Magnuson, 2011; 
Nozari & Dell, 2013; Ruml, Caramazza, 
Shelton, & Chialant, 2000).
It is important for the clinical apha-
siologist to have a grasp of theories of 
language processing in people without 
neurological problems and how process-
ing may go awry when a person’s brain is 
injured. Neurolinguistic frameworks may 
be considered a subset of the cognitive 
neuropsychological frameworks. A distinc-
tion is that they incorporate connectionist 
models, models of neuroanatomical struc-
tures and functions, or neural networks, 
distributed through cortical and subcorti-
cal structures that are associated with vari-
ous information-processing components.
A strength of cognitive neuropsycho-
logical frameworks is that they help cli-
nicians think critically about the underly-
ing nature of overt symptoms observed. 
Similar symptoms noted in two different 
individuals with aphasia may result from 
different types of disruptions. For exam-
ple, difficulty naming an object may result 
from any of the following:
• A superficial visual disturbance
• Difficulty processing the visual 
stimulus through the visual object 
recognition system
• A deficit in processing the 
recognized object through the 
semantic system
• Difficulty assembling phonological 
units (at a level known as the 
phonological output lexicon)
• A deficit in the short-term storage 
of phonological units (at a level 
known as the phonological output 
buffer)
• Impaired neuromotor innervation 
or motor control precluding a 
correct spoken response
Thus, there are several possible levels of 
disruption that could lead to object nam-
ing problems. Determining the level or 
levels of an individual’s naming problem 
helps guide treatment planning by focus-

Defining and Conceptualizing Aphasia   53
ing on the deficient processes. Several 
impairment-focused approaches to treat-
ment have grounding in neuropsycho-
logical theory.
A limitation of cognitive neuropsy-
chological frameworks is that the compo-
nents said to be responsible for any partic-
ular processing stage cannot capture the 
complexity of what must really happen in 
the brain to achieve whatever processing 
is intended to be captured at that stage. 
For example, what processes must hap-
pen within the “semantic system” to be 
able to comprehend a complex sentence? 
What about to name an object? These 
questions require further models of their 
own with more finely grained details per-
taining to those specific functions. Some 
critics mention a lack of focus on environ-
mental factors, supported communica-
tion, and life participation as a limitation 
of neuropsychological frameworks. Some 
mention a focus on weaknesses and defi-
cits at the expense of a focus on commu-
nicative strengths. Thankfully, as we will 
continue to discuss, we have the won-
derful prerogative to be able to combine 
approaches rather than choose any one 
exclusively. Thus, we are free to mix neu-
ropsychological methods with social and 
supported communication approaches, 
always thinking critically about what is 
most appropriate when working with a 
particular person.
Details about cognitive neuropsycho-
logical theories of language processing are 
explored later in this book as they pertain 
to specific clinical aspects of assessment 
and treatment associated with varied dis-
orders and symptoms. Readers interested 
in learning more about these fascinating 
aspects of research and clinical practice 
are encouraged to explore the numerous 
resources cited.
Biopsychosocial Frameworks
A biopsychosocial framework is one 
that highlights attention to the complex 
interaction of multiple factors that con-
stitute “disabilities” and affect health. 
For example, proponents of this frame-
work suggest that it is important to con-
sider the complex relationship among 
genetics and other risk factors, etiologies, 
impaired structures and functions, envi-
ronmental factors, social support, and a 
person’s desire for active engagement in 
varied life contexts. A system that fits this 
framework has been developed through 
the World Health Organization (WHO) 
to help foster holistic perspectives on dis-
abilities and the people who have them.
The WHO International Classifi-
cation of Functioning, Disability, and 
Health (ICF) is a system for classify-
ing disabilities that takes into consider-
ation not just medical or organic aspects 
of health-related challenges but also the 
complex consequences of having those 
challenges. Its primary influence on the 
way we conceptualize aphasia is by hav-
ing us consider aphasia in terms of the 
following:
• Body structure and the associated 
functions that are affected (i.e., an 
individual’s brain and its ability 
to process cognitive and linguistic 
information)
• Activities and participation (i.e., the 
ability to speak, listen, read, and 
write and the way a person uses 
those abilities to engage in social, 
professional, and other daily life 
activities)
Any given individual’s aphasia must 
be characterized in ways that extend 

54   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
beyond the level of damaged physical 
structures and the basic cognitive-linguistic  
functions that are affected. Whether we 
are engaging in assessment, treatment, 
research, education, or advocacy work, 
we ideally take into account the impact of 
aphasia on the life context and everyday 
experiences of the actual individuals who 
have it. We also ideally take into account 
how it affects other people within that 
person’s social spheres. We explore this 
notion in greater detail in Chapter 5 and 
revisit it in subsequent chapters because 
it is relevant to virtually every aspect 
of our work as aphasiologists (Burke, 
2013; Byrne & Orange, 2005; Hallowell & 
Chapey, 2008a, 2008b; Parr et al., 1997).
Social Frameworks
Another set of frameworks for consider-
ing the nature of aphasia is more focused 
on interpersonal contexts of communica-
tion. Aphasia is seen in this set of frame-
works as a social condition. A problem 
with communication is considered a prob-
lem because the person with aphasia and/
or people in his or her social environment 
consider it to be a problem. Some social 
frameworks may be considered a subset 
of biopsychosocial frameworks because 
of their focus on the real-life social use of 
language, an essential component of life 
participation in the WHO ICF. However, 
some social frameworks do not address 
the underlying causes of aphasia in a 
direct way.
Many adherents to social frameworks 
consider the biomedical aspects of apha-
sia and specific sorts of deficits that might 
be explained through a neuropsychologi-
cal approach as far less relevant than the 
impact aphasia has on a person’s ability 
to engage in meaningful interactions in 
everyday life. Aphasia is seen as a life-
affecting condition, contextualized in 
everyday life experiences. People with 
aphasia benefit from compensatory and 
adaptive resources and services plus 
adaptations to their physical and social 
contexts to boost their full life participa-
tion (Hallowell & Chapey, 2008a). The Life 
Participation Approach to Aphasia (LPPA; 
LPAA Project Group, 2000) is an example 
of a social model. This and several others 
are highlighted in later chapters on assess-
ment and intervention.
A strength of social frameworks is 
the heightened awareness they bring to 
the reason we do the work that we do: 
to improve people’s lives in meaningful 
ways through improved communication 
and socialization in ways that they think 
are important. The severity of a person’s 
aphasia is seen not in terms of cognitive-
linguistic deficits that may be quantified 
and qualified through isolated tasks in a 
clinical environment; rather, the severity 
of aphasia has to do with the severity of its 
impact on a person’s well-being. Potential 
direct consequences of aphasia include 
loss of self-esteem, social isolation and 
loneliness, depression, reduced participa-
tion in important activities, and changed 
relationships. These consequences are 
seen as fundamental to the very nature of 
aphasia, not just concomitant challenges 
(Parr, 2007; Shadden, 2005; Simmons-
Mackie, 2013a).
Another strength of social approaches 
is that they take into account the ongo-
ing, usually lifelong, consequences of 
aphasia. The clinical aphasiologist might 
only see a particular client for 1 to 12 ses-
sions, for example, but the person with 
aphasia must continue to cope with the 
condition for years to come. Thus, adher-
ents to this approach are mindful of the 
need to prioritize attention to long-term 

Defining and Conceptualizing Aphasia   55
supports for improved communication to 
be relied upon long after discharge from 
formal services. A limitation is that social 
approaches to assessment and treatment 
are not easily encapsulated or described. 
Perhaps this is not so much a limitation in 
the approach itself as it is a challenge to 
the excellent clinician to think and work 
expansively and creatively in light of each 
individual’s desires and needs for social 
connection.
Other Historically  
Relevant Frameworks
Other types of frameworks have been pro-
posed by scholars studying aphasia in the 
past. Their frameworks have relevance to 
aphasiology in terms of the appreciating 
the evolution of our understanding about 
aphasia, even if there are few people who 
would ascribe to these frameworks in 
particular today. The following four, high-
lighted by Hallowell and Chapey (2008b), 
are good examples.
Concrete-Abstract Framework
Goldstein (1948) suggested that apha-
sia reflects a loss of “abstract attitude,” 
the ability to express and comprehend 
thoughts that cannot be captured merely 
through sensory experience with objects 
and actions that are physically present. 
Although there is evidence that more 
physically describable and apparent 
objects and actions are easier for people 
with aphasia to talk about and under-
stand than more abstract ones, the same 
is true of people without neurogenic lan-
guage disorders. Most research-intensive 
clinical aphasiologists today would likely 
agree that indices of concrete expres-
sion and comprehension are better than 
abstract expression and comprehension 
in most people with aphasia. Still, we 
now have a greater appreciation for the 
various levels of influence on such find-
ings than is captured in the concrete  
versus abstract distinction. For example, 
the words commonly associated with  
high levels of “abstraction” are also con- 
sidered more difficult, according to 
measures of the age at which words are  
acquired, the familiarity of words to speak- 
ers of a given language, and the frequency  
with which words are used in a particular 
language.
Framework of Propositional Language
Hughling Jackson (1878) characterized 
aphasia as an inability to make proposi-
tions. Propositions are intentional, mean-
ingful expressions (written oral, or signed) 
meant to convey informational content. 
Jackson reasoned that people with apha-
sia tend to express more easily what he 
called “subpropositional” than proposi-
tional language. That is, they most easily 
express language that is more automatic 
and highly learned, such as days of the 
week, months of the year, basic social 
responses (e.g., “Fine thanks, how are 
you? ” when asked, “How are you?”), and 
words to a well-known song or nursery 
rhyme. Although there is some empirical 
support for this framework, much of it is 
without appropriate control for the influ-
ence of concomitant motor speech disor-
ders, such as apraxia of speech, on verbal 
production. Also, the theory underlying 
this framework lacks explicit evidence in 
terms of corresponding comprehension 
abilities (although it is difficult to study 
the comprehension of highly learned 
utterances, which may occur without any 
intent to convey meaning).

56   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Thought Process Framework
Wepman (1972) suggested that people 
with aphasia have impaired thought pro-
cesses (due at least in part to the unin-
tended utterances they tend to make)  
that interfere with their actual thinking. 
There is little empirical support for this 
framework, other than through findings 
regarding the literal meaning of unin-
tended utterances or paraphasias — a 
phenomenon we explore further as we 
delve into the varied types of aphasia in 
Chapter 10. In fact, suggesting that people 
with aphasia have an inherent problem 
with thinking suggests that they have an 
intellectual deficit, a suggestion highly 
inconsistent with important advocacy 
campaigns by and on behalf of people 
with aphasia.
Microgenetic Framework
Brown (1972, 1977; Brown & Raleigh, 1979)  
proposed that language abilities reflect 
the progression of evolutionary devel-
opment of the brain. Limbic structures, 
phylogenetically older components of 
the brain, are said to mediate basic and 
early stages of language processing while 
more recently evolved structures mediate 
higher cortical functions of language and 
cognition. Various manifestations of apha-
sia are said to correspond to lesions that 
affect levels of evolutionary progression, 
from basic abilities initially mediated by 
structures developed earlier in humans to 
more complex abilities mediated by struc-
tures developed later. Increasing evidence 
of subcortical structures being implicated 
in varied forms of aphasia, with and with-
out identifiable cortical lesions, makes 
this framework questionable in terms of 
its potential to explain variations in types 
of aphasia. Still, it has an important place 
in our overall appreciation of the potential 
role of subcortical structures in language 
and cognition. It also helps us consider 
the simultaneous interactivity of mul-
tiple cortical and subcortical structures 
as opposed to a system of structures that 
operate in turn through discrete stages of 
information processing.
How Does One Choose a 
Preferred Framework for 
Conceptualizing Aphasia?
Historically, many aphasiologists adopted 
the prevailing framework that they 
learned about when they first studied 
aphasia. However, in more recent years, 
our expanding clinical and research lit-
erature, plus advocacy on the part of 
social-model proponents, has led to more 
open challenging of our reflections on this 
topic. As we noted earlier, the excellent 
clinical SLP grasps and appreciates multi-
ple viewpoints at the same time. Doing so 
helps to best understand the appropriate-
ness of various assessment and treatment 
methods based on their related assump-
tions about what aphasia is. One need not 
choose one viewpoint and stick with that 
one at all costs. Flexibility of interpreta-
tion in context is vital.
For example, it is possible to work in 
a medical context and address what needs 
to be addressed in terms of medical docu-
mentation, yet not take a strong “medical” 
approach to intervention. One may com-
bine approaches. Another example is that 
one may digest and translate into clini-
cal practice the conclusions of a research 
study without necessarily agreeing on the 
exact means by which the authors of the 
study conceptualized aphasia. Being able 
to adapt our conversations about apha-

Defining and Conceptualizing Aphasia   57
sia to meet the demands of a given pro-
fessional context is important, as long as 
we do not sacrifice what we truly value  
as professionals and as long as we extend 
the very best service possible to people 
with aphasia and the people who care 
about them.
How Are the Frameworks 
for Conceptualizing Aphasia 
Relevant to Other Neurogenic 
Language Disorders?
Most of the frameworks for considering 
aphasia are applicable to other acquired 
neurogenic language disorders. A pri-
mary example is that clinicians working 
with survivors of traumatic brain injury 
and people with dementia often are 
immersed in medically focused contexts, 
so they must be culturally and linguisti-
cally adaptable to medically oriented team 
meetings and documentation. At the same 
time, they may engage in cognitive neuro-
psychological assessments and treatment 
approaches and, ideally, apply their clini-
cal work in socially oriented ways with a 
focus on life participation.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Why is it important to include exclu-
sionary criteria when we define 
aphasia?
	 3.	 Review the definitions of aphasia 
given in Box 4–1.
a.	 For each, consider whether 
it meets the criteria for the 
definition of aphasia given in this 
chapter.
b.	 Are there some definitions  
you prefer over others? If so, 
why?
c.	 Are there some definitions with 
which you do not agree or that 
you think need improvement? 
If so, how would you improve 
them?
	 4.	 Practice defining aphasia in your 
own words. Write your own defini-
tion without looking at any notes and 
then check it. Practice defining apha-
sia orally with a partner.
	 5.	 Compare your own definition of 
aphasia with those of other authors 
whose definitions were reviewed in 
this chapter. You may wish to look up 
others’ definitions as well.
a.	 How is your definition similar to 
and different from those of other 
aphasiologists?
b.	 Does making such comparisons 
make you want to change 
anything in your own written 
definition? If so, how and why 
might you revise the definition 
that you wrote?
	 6.	 With one or more partners, practice 
defining aphasia orally to each of the 
following:
a.	 A social worker working in a 
rehabilitation facility
b.	 A caregiver with an advanced 
graduate degree
c.	 A spouse with a high school 
education
d.	 A person with mild aphasia
e.	 A person with severe aphasia
	 7.	 How might the way you define apha-
sia when talking to the partner or 
spouse of a newly diagnosed person 
with aphasia differ from the way you 
would define it in a scientific paper?

58   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 8.	 Describe in your own words the 
strengths and limitations of:
a.	 Unidimensional frameworks of 
aphasia
b.	 Multidimensional frameworks of 
aphasia
c.	 Medical frameworks of aphasia
d.	 Cognitive neuropsychological 
frameworks of aphasia
e.	 Biopsychosocial frameworks 
of aphasia related to the WHO 
International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability, and 
Health (ICF)
f.	 Social frameworks of aphasia
g.	 Other historically relevant 
frameworks
	 9.	 With a partner, use the diagram in 
Figure 4–2 to talk through the stages 
of processing involved in
a.	 Reading a word and understand-
ing it
b.	 Reading a word aloud and 
understanding it
c.	 Hearing a spoken word and 
understanding it
d.	 Hearing a spoken word and 
repeating it aloud
e.	 Hearing a spoken word and 
writing it
f.	 Hearing a spoken word and 
interpreting it into sign language
g.	 Thinking of a concept and 
expressing it in writing
h.	 Thinking of a concept and 
expressing it in a spoken word
i.	 Thinking of a concept and 
expressing it as a gesture
10.	 What were shortcomings of using the 
diagram when addressing the exer-
cise in Item 9 above? What improve-
ments should be made in the diagram 
to address those shortcomings?
11.	 With a partner, use the diagram in 
Figure 4–2 to talk through the level of 
breakdown when a person has the fol-
lowing difficulties:
a.	 Reading a word aloud but not 
understanding it
b.	 Trying to read a word but not 
being able to make sense of the 
letters
c.	 Hearing a spoken word but not 
understanding it
d.	 Hearing a spoken word but not 
being able to repeat it
e.	 Seeing an object but not being able 
to think of a word to represent it
f.	 Seeing an object and thinking of a 
word to represent it but not being 
able to say the word
g.	 Thinking of a word and not being 
able to write it
12.	 Using a model or image of the brain, 
discuss the possible structures under-
lying areas of breakdown that corre-
spond to the problems listed in Item 3.
13.	 What is the role of pragmatic lan-
guage and “other cognitive skills” in 
the model depicted in Figure 4–2?
14.	 Describe how your own theoretical 
perspectives on brain and language 
and on the nature of neurogenic lan-
guage disorders influence the way 
you personally:
a.	 Define aphasia
b.	 Teach others about aphasia
c.	 Assess a person with aphasia
d.	 Develop and carry out a treatment 
plan for a person with aphasia
See more at the companion website.

59
Chapter
5
The WHO ICF and Its Relevance 
to Acquired Neurogenic 
Communication Disorders
In Chapter 4, we considered how the WHO 
ICF represents an important framework for 
considering the nature of aphasia. Given its 
relevance to virtually every area of clinical 
and research work in the realm of acquired 
neurogenic communication disorders, we 
review it in greater detail in this chapter 
and then highlight its relevance to service 
delivery, assessment, and intervention in 
later chapters. After reading and reflecting 
on the content in this chapter, you will ide-
ally be able to answer, in your own words, 
the following queries:
	 1.	 What is the WHO ICF?
	 2.	 How is the WHO ICF relevant to eth-
ics and human rights?
	 3.	 How is the WHO ICF specifically rel-
evant to intervention and research in 
rehabilitation?
	 4.	 How is the WHO ICF specifically 
relevant people with neurogenic lan-
guage disorders?
What Is the WHO ICF?
The WHO ICF is an acronym for the 
World Health Organization International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability, 
and Health. It is a conceptual framework 
and also a system for classifying health and 
health-related domains for clinical and re- 
search applications in a consistent way 
throughout the world. The ICF represents 
an important approach that followed pre-
vious attempts by the WHO to classify 
functional areas of health and disability.
An initial system published in 1980, 
the International Classification of Impair-
ment, Disabilities and Handicaps (ICIDH; 
WHO, 1980) was based on the notion that 
any health condition could be classified 
according to each of three levels: impair-
ment, disability, and handicap. Impair-
ments were defined as being “concerned 
with abnormalities of body structure 
and appearance and with organ or sys-
tem function, resulting from any cause” 
(p.  14). Disabilities were defined as “con-
sequences of impairment in terms of 
functional performance and activity by 
the individual” (p. 14). Handicaps were 
defined as “disadvantages experienced by 
the individual as a result of impairments 
and disabilities” (p. 14).
A subsequent modification was made 
in 1999 to better emphasize the impor-
tance of engagement in daily life activities  

60   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
and participation in one’s social con-
text as central to the construct of health. 
Reframed as the ICDH-2, the major com-
ponents of health and disability were 
modified to include impairments, activ-
ity limitations, and participation restric-
tions. Activity limitations were defined 
as “difficulties an individual may have 
in the performance of activities” (WHO, 
1999, p. 16). Participation restrictions were 
defined as “problems an individual may 
have in the manner or extent of involve-
ment in life situations” (WHO, 1999, p. 16).  
Following criticisms that the ICDH com-
ponents were all focused on negative con-
structs and not neutral or positive aspects 
of health, the ICF was developed in 2001. 
A summary of the varied WHO models is 
encapsulated in Box 5–1.
The stated aims of the ICF are to
• Provide a scientific basis for 
understanding and studying health 
and health-related states, outcomes 
and determinants . . . ;
• Establish a common language for 
describing health and health-related 
states . . . to improve communication 
between different users, such as 
health care workers, researchers, 
policy-makers and the public, 
including people with disabilities . . . ;
• Permit comparison of data across 
countries, health care disciplines, 
services and time; and . . .
• Provide a systematic coding scheme 
for health information systems. 
(WHO, 2001, p. 5)
Summary of WHO Models
WHO 1980 (ICIDH)
• Impairment 
• Disability 
• Handicap
WHO 1999 (ICIDH-2)
• Impairment
• Activity limitation
• Participation restriction
WHO 2001 (ICF)
• Part 1:  Functioning and disability
• Body structure and function
	
  Anatomical parts
	
  Physiological and psychological aspects
• Activity and participation
	
  Performance 
	
  Capacity
• Part 2:  Contextual factors
• Personal factors
• Environmental factors
Box
5–1

The WHO ICF and Its Relevance to Acquired Neurogenic Communication Disorders   61
According to the ICF (WHO, 2001), 
any health condition a person may have 
may be viewed according to two domains:
• Functioning and disability
• Contextual factors
Functioning (defined as “body func-
tions, activities, and participation”) and 
disability (defined as “impairment, activ-
ity limitations or participation restriction,” 
WHO, 2001, p. 1), combined, include two 
components:
• Body structures (anatomical parts) 
and functions (the physiological 
and psychological aspects of the 
body)
• Activity (execution of tasks) and 
participation (involvement in real-
life activities, events, situations, and 
relationships)
Activities and participation are each 
seen as having aspects of both perfor-
mance and capacity. Performance repre-
sents what a person actually does in his or 
her current context. Capacity represents 
what a person can do when appropriate 
supports are in place in his or her envi-
ronment. That is, one’s environment may 
be modified and supports may be put in 
place to enhance performance in a par-
ticular aspect of activity or participation.
Contextual factors, according the 
ICF, include personal and environmen-
tal factors that should be analyzed and 
addressed regarding each individual’s 
health conditions. Personal factors are 
characteristics of an individual outside of 
his or her health condition. They include, 
for example, age, race, ethnicity, sexual 
orientation, gender identity, education, 
profession, habits, beliefs, attitudes, per-
spectives, and life experience. Environ-
mental factors are those outside of an 
individual person, including the physical 
surroundings, services, social context, and 
the affect and attitudes of relevant people. 
They may be immediate or societal.
No contextual factor is a direct com-
ponent of the specific health condition 
being considered at any given point in 
time. Personal and environmental factors 
can be enhancing or limiting in the context 
of an individual’s everyday life participa-
tion. Contextual factors are highly influ-
ential upon one another and not always 
easy to tease apart in real life (Threats, 
2010b). Any given individual’s degree of 
disability is influenced by environmental 
and personal factors.
The ICF is not a model in that it pro-
vides no specific predictions about the 
nature of the interaction of the complex 
factors that comprise health or disabil-
ity (Threats, 2010b). Importantly, the ICF 
enables us to classify health conditions, 
not people (Threats, 2010a). Classifica-
tion of any individual’s condition neces-
sarily involves the individual and his or 
her caregivers and significant others, not 
just the health care professional (Threats 
& Worrall, 2004).
Applications of the ICF continue to 
evolve. “Core sets” of categories relevant 
to specific areas of real-life functioning 
according to specific health conditions 
(diseases, disorders, impairments, etc.) 
are being developed (Burke, 2013). The 
intent is to help tie the specific conditions 
to specific categories of everyday life 
functions. ICF core set categories include 
such constructs as communication, inter-
personal interactions and relationships, 
and community, social, and domestic life. 
For each, an individual may have any 
number of associated limitations in activ-
ity and barriers to optimal participation. 
In the upcoming chapters in this book, we 

62   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
further discuss how these constructs may 
be applied in clinical practice.
How Is the ICF Relevant to 
Ethics and Human Rights?
The WHO’s focus in developing the ICF 
over the years has not been only to clas-
sify limitations and abilities. It has been 
to do this within a broader moral, ethical, 
and human rights perspective (Threats, 
2010b). The WHO is the public health 
component of the United Nations, an 
international organization “committed to 
maintaining international peace and secu-
rity, developing friendly relations among 
nations and promoting social progress, 
better living standards and human rights” 
(United Nations, n.d.). The constitution  
of the WHO includes the principles that 
“health is a state of complete physical, 
mental and social well-being and not 
merely the absence of disease or infirmity” 
and that “the enjoyment of the highest 
attainable standard of health is one of the 
fundamental rights of every human being 
without distinction of race, religion, polit-
ical belief, economic or social condition” 
(WHO, 2006, p. 1). Every person’s health 
and active participation in what is impor-
tant to him or her on a daily basis are basic 
human rights.
Several authors, including those who 
created the World Report on Disability 
(WHO & the World Bank, 2011), call atten-
tion to unfortunate patterns of exclusion 
based on the type of disabling condition a 
person has. In general, disabilities related 
to cognition, communication, and behav-
ior are more marginalizing than are physi-
cal disabilities and blindness; yet in many 
health care contexts across the globe, there 
is a far greater focus on physical disabili-
ties and disorders than there is on cogni-
tive and linguistic wellness. This makes 
our work in countering the stigma expe-
rienced by people with communication-
related problems all the more challeng-
ing (Deal, 2003; Wickenden, 2013). It also 
highlights the importance of our work to 
promote communication wellness as a 
basic human right.
How Is the WHO ICF Specifically 
Relevant to Intervention and 
Research in Rehabilitation?
The ICF helps rehabilitation professionals 
and scholars to
• Focus on health, well-being, and 
quality of life
• Acknowledge that every human 
being can experience a decrement in 
health and thereby experience some 
degree of disability
• Recognize health and disability as 
universal human experiences
• Take into account the dynamic 
interaction among such life-
affecting variables as social support, 
environment, genetics, and health 
risks in all aspects of assessment, 
treatment and clinical research
• Consider disability not as an 
attribute of any given person but 
as a construct that can only be 
considered in an individual’s life 
context, especially his or her social 
environment
• Deemphasize an individual’s 
health status according to medical 
diagnostic categories, focusing 
instead on their holistic functional 

The WHO ICF and Its Relevance to Acquired Neurogenic Communication Disorders   63
concerns and what might be done 
to address them
• Address intervention through inter-
disciplinary approaches, combining 
the best areas of expertise to 
address an individual’s needs 
(Arthanat, Nochajski, & Stone, 
2004; Leach, Cornwell, Fleming, & 
Haines, 2010)
How Is the WHO ICF Specifically 
Relevant People With Neurogenic 
Language Disorders?
The WHO framework represents an 
important departure from the traditional 
classification of individuals with aphasia 
based on neuroanatomical models, which 
are focused largely on impairments fun-
damental to body structure and function. 
For example, in a typical neuroanatomical 
model, such as Darley’s (1982), one might 
consider an individual’s auditory com-
prehension or word-finding problems to 
be associated with identified lesions in 
Brodmann’s areas 44, 45, and/or 22. These 
impairment-level areas of deficit would 
be identified and their severity quanti-
fied during assessment. Treatment goals 
would be established with an emphasis 
on making improvements in those defi-
cient areas. Treatment approaches would 
be selected based on their likelihood of 
improving abilities that are typically asso-
ciated with the impaired structures and 
their associated areas of communication 
function. Treatment outcomes would be 
monitored in terms of measures of audi-
tory comprehension or word finding.
In contrast, using the ICF framework, 
we focus on aphasia as a contextualized 
life-affecting condition and we emphasize 
resources and compensatory and adaptive 
services for full life participation. We may 
work on deficits at the level of body struc-
ture and function, but we do so with an 
eye toward affecting activity limitations 
through such work. We may also work on 
activity limitations directly.
Embracing the ICF framework affects 
assessment in that we must focus on 
learning about many factors other than 
an individuals’ cognitive and communi-
cative deficits per se. It affects treatment 
in that all of our work to help improve 
communication abilities is geared toward 
greater life participation and quality of 
life. Limitations in quality of life com-
monly associated with neurogenic lan-
guage disorders include reduced qual-
ity of personal relationships, inability to 
return to work or educational pursuits, 
and loss of independence (Ross & Wertz, 
2003). Thus, these are seen as vital areas 
for clinical aphasiologists to focus on in 
assessment and treatment.
In addition to the attributes of the 
ICF in terms of its relevance to all rehabil-
itation professionals and scholars, listed 
above, the ICF helps clinical aphasiolo-
gists to
• Be mindful that our aim as 
clinicians is not simply to assess 
and treat language impairments 
but to address all aspects of 
communication that could affect an 
individual’s life
• Commit to enhancing the fullest  
life participation in the people we 
serve
• Tune into how people with 
language impairments prioritize 
their own life participation goals
• Consider the social exclusion 
related to communication disability 

64   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
as a fundamental area of need in 
intervention
• Consider social inclusion in the 
contexts in which a specific person 
with aphasia wants and needs to 
communicate as fundamental to his 
or her improvement of engagement 
in daily life activities
• Appreciate that family members 
and friends may be supportive as 
well as obstructive with regard to 
communication activities and social 
inclusion
• Consider how concomitant health 
challenges affect communication 
(Hallowell & Chapey, 2008a; Hopper,  
2007; Howe, 2008; Kagan, 2011; 
Kagan & Simmons-Mackie, 2007; 
O’Halloran & Larkins, 2008; Power, 
Anderson, & Togher, 2011; Quintas 
et al., 2012; Threats, 2010a, 2010b; 
Worrall et al., 2011)
Limitations of the ICF are the absence 
of prototypical health care contexts that 
apply to all people with neurogenic com-
munication disorders (Boles, 2004), the 
lack of an explicit and objective means 
of characterizing the subjective dimen-
sion of functioning and disability (Ueda 
& Okawa, 2003), and the complexity and 
lack of reliability in ICF coding applied to 
people with a variety of neurogenic lan-
guage disorders (Laxe et al., 2011; Power 
et al., 2011; Salter, McClure, Foley, & Tea-
sell, 2011; Worrall et al., 2011). Clinical 
aphasiologists are challenged to continue 
to assess the validity and practicality of 
the framework in their work as catalysts 
for communication enhancement in peo-
ple with acquired neurogenic language 
disorders. In the upcoming chapters, we 
continue to explore ways of taking into 
account the WHO ICF in our varied roles 
as aphasiologists.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Define the terms impairment, disabil-
ity, and handicap as they pertain to the 
ICIDH.
	 3.	 Define the terms activity limitation and 
participation restriction as they pertain 
to the ICIDH-2.
	 4.	 Explain why the terms activity limita-
tion and participation restriction were 
replaced in the ICIDH-2.
	 5.	 In your opinion, was there a loss of 
meaningfulness or clarity by making 
the shift in the major categories of dis-
ability in the ICIDH-2? Why or why 
not?
	 6.	 Define the terms now used in the ICF.
	 7.	 Why do you think the WHO changed 
its classification system from the 
ICIDH-2 to the ICF system?
	 8.	 In this chapter, you read that the ICF 
enables us to classify health condi-
tions, not people. Why is that distinc-
tion important?
	 9.	 Imagine a hypothetical case of a per-
son with aphasia due to stroke. Give 
illustrative examples of the various 
aspects of that person’s status accord-
ing to each component of the WHO 
ICF.
10.	 Why is knowledge of the WHO 
ICF especially important in clini-
cal practice with people who have 
acquired neurogenic communication 
disorders?
11.	 What is the relationship between the 
WHO and the UN?
12.	 How is the consideration of global 
human rights relevant to consider-
ation of acquired neurogenic commu-
nication disorders?

The WHO ICF and Its Relevance to Acquired Neurogenic Communication Disorders   65
13.	 How does the abstractness of commu-
nication make SLPs’ work both chal- 
lenging and important in promoting  
communication as a basic human right?
14.	 In your own mission to become an 
excellent clinician, what specific pledge 
would you be willing to make about 
integrating ICF principles into your 
clinical practice?
15.	 How should research scholars inte-
grate values associated with the ICF 
in their research?
16.	 What do you see as limitations of the 
ICF?
Please see the companion website for sup-
plemental material and activities.


67
Chapter
6
Etiologies of Acquired  
Neurogenic Language Disorders
The most common etiologies, or causes, 
of neurogenic communication disorders 
are stroke, traumatic brain injury (TBI), 
bacterial and viral infections, neoplasm 
(or tumors), toxemia, diabetes and other 
metabolic disorders, and neurodegenera-
tive diseases (including dementia). After 
reading and reflecting on the content in 
this chapter, you will ideally be able to 
answer, in your own words, the follow-
ing queries:
	 1.	 What is a stroke?
	 2.	 What causes stroke?
	 3.	 What are the physiological effects of 
stroke?
	 4.	 How crucial is timing for medical 
treatment after a stroke?
	 5.	 How is the sudden onset of stroke of 
stroke relevant to supporting patients 
and families?
	 6.	 What is a transient ischemic attack?
	 7.	 What is hypoperfusion?
	 8.	 What can be done to prevent stroke?
	 9.	 What is TBI?
10.	 What are blast injuries?
11.	 What are concussion and mild TBI?
12.	 What can be done to prevent TBI?
13.	 What are bacteria and viruses?
14.	 What other types of infections affect 
cortical function?
15.	 What is neoplasm?
16.	 What is toxemia?
17.	 What are diabetes mellitus and dia-
betic encephalopathy?
18.	 What other metabolic disorders may 
cause encephalopathy?
19.	 What is neurodegenerative disease?
20.	 What is dementia?
21.	 What is mild cognitive impairment?
22.	 What are some special challenges in 
identifying etiologies of language 
disorders?
What Is a Stroke?
Stroke is defined as a temporary or per-
manent disruption in blood supply to 
the brain. Stroke is the most common 
cause of primary neurogenic speech and 
language disorders. It is also the lead-
ing cause of death, after heart attack and 
cancer, in much of the world. The term 
cerebrovascular accident (CVA), synony-
mous with stroke, has fallen out of favor in 
recent decades. Many discourage its use 
because the word accident is suggestive 
that strokes are caused by happenstance 
rather than being associated with known 
risk factors, many of which are modifiable 

68   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
(Finger, Tyler, & Boller, 2010). The term 
brain attack is commonly used in public 
education campaigns to draw parallels 
between lifestyle risks associated with 
stroke and heart attack (National Stroke 
Association, 2014).
There are two types of stroke: occlu-
sive and hemorrhagic. Occlusive strokes 
are far more common; only about 15% to 
20% of strokes are hemorrhagic. Occlusive 
strokes entail a blockage of all or a portion 
of an artery, while hemorrhagic strokes 
entail leakage of blood from the arter-
ies. Occlusive strokes are also sometimes 
called ischemic strokes, the term ischemic 
referring to a restriction in blood supply.
There are two types of occlusive 
stroke: thrombotic and embolic. A throm-
botic stroke occurs when an arterial block-
age has accumulated in the same area of 
an artery where the blockage eventually 
occurs. The clot that blocks the artery in 
a thrombotic stroke is called a thrombus. 
The plural form of the word is thromboses. 
Most occlusive strokes are thrombotic.
An embolic stroke entails a blockage 
caused by matter (typically a blood clot 
or a piece of atherosclerotic plaque) that 
travels from elsewhere in the bloodstream 
to the point where it eventually blocks an 
artery. The arterial blockage in an embolic 
stroke is called an embolism. The plural 
form of the word is emboli.
A hemorrhagic stroke occurs when 
a blood vessel ruptures. This most com-
monly occurs when there is an aneurysm 
or an arteriovenous malformation that 
bursts. An aneurysm is a bulging out at 
a weakened spot along an arterial wall. 
When the arterial wall bulges further, it 
is increasingly stretched and weakened. 
If detected and surgically accessible, an 
aneurysm may be operated on by clipping 
the bulging part and using cauterization 
or plastic sealants to restore the integrity 
of the arterial wall. Unfortunately, aneu-
rysms tend to go unnoticed until they 
burst, causing a hemorrhagic stroke. This 
is most likely in cases of hypertension, or 
high blood pressure, due to greater force 
against the arterial walls. See Figure 6–1 
for a schematic illustration of an embo-
lism, thrombus, and ruptured aneurysm.
An arteriovenous malformation 
(AVM) is an atypically developed artery 
or vein, usually arising during embryonic 
or fetal development. If an artery is partic-
ularly twisted or tangled, blood flow may 
be restricted, making it more susceptible 
to changes in blood pressure and increas-
ing the chance of rupture. The condition is 
worsened by the fact that AVMs lack suf-
ficient capillary networks, systems of tiny 
interconnecting vessels, that otherwise 
help regulate blood flow. Such malforma-
tions may not ever cause noticeable symp-
toms. Others may remain unproblematic 
for years until a hemorrhage occurs. Dr. 
Jill Bolte Taylor, who wrote the book My 
Stroke of Insight (2006), had her stroke 
because of an AVM and has since illumi-
nated much of the world through her talks 
and writing about her own experience of 
having a stroke. AVMs are relatively rare, 
accounting for only about 2% of hemor-
rhagic strokes, but, as Taylor highlights, 
“it is the most common form of stroke that 
strikes people during their prime years of 
life (ages 25–45)” (p. 25).
If a hemorrhagic stroke occurs within 
the brain, it not only disrupts blood supply 
to the areas of the brain targeted by the rup-
tured artery but also results in leakage of 
blood into the brain. As blood accumulates, 
it creates compression against surrounding 
brain tissue, further affecting blood flow as 
well as structural alignment and dynamic 
functioning of associated functional areas. 
The accumulation of blood due to hemor-
rhage is called a hematoma.

Etiologies of Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders   69
When leakage occurs within the brain 
tissue, it is called an intracerebral hem-
orrhage, and an intracerebral hematoma 
is likely to form. When it occurs on the 
surface of the brain, between the pia and 
arachnoid mater, it is called a subarach-
noid hemorrhage and a subarachnoid 
hematoma is likely to form. A hematoma 
may also form between the arachnoid 
layer and the dura mater (the outermost 
layer of tissue surrounding the brain), 
forming a subdural hematoma; this is 
more likely to happen in cases of TBI than 
in stroke.
Intracerebral hemorrhages may have 
dramatic impacts on cortical and subcor-
tical areas at once, often resulting in loss 
of consciousness and basic nervous sys-
tem functions. Emergency surgical inter-
vention to stop the flow of blood is often 
implemented, although with a clear eye 
toward avoiding further damage to vital 
brain tissue. Decisions about pharmaco-
logical treatments to reduce edema are 
balanced with assessing possible height-
ened risks for further leakage.
What Causes Stroke?
The primary cause of stroke is atheroscle-
rosis (also called arteriosclerosis), which 
is a buildup of lipids (fatty acids and cho-
lesterol) and cellular debris within the 
arteries. Atherosclerotic plaque accumu-
lates in the arterial walls over time, lead-
ing to narrower channels through which 
blood may flow. As the plaque builds up, 
it also causes a loss of arterial elasticity, 
A
B
Figure 6–1.  Schematic illustration of embolism, thrombus, and ruptured aneurysm. Each 
image set shows the progression from top to bottom. A. Represents the development of a 
thrombus. As atherosclerotic plaque builds up over time until there is a complete blockage. 
B. Represents an embolus; a particle of atherosclerotic plaque or a blood clot travels from 
elsewhere in the bloodstream and lodges in an artery, blocking the flow of blood from that 
point onward. C. Represents an aneurysm leading to a hemorrhage; the external wall of the 
artery progressively balloons outward until it bursts. Image credit: Taylor Reeves. Full-color 
versions of these figures can be found in the Color Insert.
C

70   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
which diminishes the ability of the arterial 
walls to adapt to changes in blood pres-
sure (hence the layperson’s term “harden-
ing of the arteries”). Narrower channels 
and reduced elasticity are a horrid com-
bination, especially with surges in blood 
pressure. Atherosclerotic plaque builds up 
over long periods of time and, without con-
sistent attention to ensuring a healthy life-
style, continues to get worse as people age.
There are four primary lifestyle-
related conditions that lead to athero-
sclerosis: poor diet, lack of exercise, high 
stress, and smoking. These are addressed 
further below as we consider ways to 
prevent stroke. There are also genetically 
based predisposing factors that increase 
any given individual’s risk of stroke. 
These generally include
• Structural abnormalities in the blood 
supply, as in AVM and aneurysms
• Hematological pathologies, such 
as in hemophilia, which prevents 
the blood from coagulating, and 
sickle cell anemia, a hereditary 
abnormality in the cellular structure 
of hemoglobin
Also, having Type I diabetes (described 
later in this chapter) significantly increases 
one’s risk of stroke; this may be associated 
with concomitant high levels of triglycer-
ides and low levels of high-density lipo-
protein (the lay term for which is “good” 
cholesterol). Age, too, is a factor in that 
one’s chance of having a stroke doubles 
with each decade after age 55.
The genetically based predisposition 
to stroke is sometimes tied to racial char-
acteristics. For example, sickle cell anemia 
occurs in people of African, Mediterra-
nean, Indian, Saudi Arabian, Caribbean, 
and South and Central American ances-
try. In many cases, it is difficult to discern 
which factors causing stroke in any one 
individual are related to genetic predis-
position versus lifestyle choices. This is 
because it is not always possible to sort 
out sociocultural factors associated with 
diet, exercise, smoking, socioeconomic 
status, and access to health care from 
one’s biological predisposition to stroke. 
In addition to race, gender plays a role in 
that women have a greater predisposition 
to stroke than men. However, this might 
be associated more with lifestyle and 
pharmaceutical patterns (e.g., use of oral 
contraceptives and hormone therapies) 
than genetic ones.
What Are the Physiological 
Effects of Stroke?
Immediately following a stroke and for 
a few days to a few months afterward, 
there tends to be edema (swelling) in the 
surrounding area of the brain. This may 
increase intracranial pressure and lead 
to further complications because of its 
effects on other brain structures. Stroke 
also causes electrochemical changes in 
the brain, including neurochemical surges 
and changes in the generation and uptake 
of neurotransmitters, metabolic function 
affecting glucose and oxygen sufficiency, 
and removal of toxins through the venous 
sinus system. Additionally, due to disrup-
tions of neuronal pathways, functions 
associated with brain structures that are 
remote from the area of damage often 
become impaired. This phenomenon is 
called diaschisis. All of these temporary 
and sometimes dramatic changes make it 
difficult to tell what the long-term impacts 
of a stroke will be. Changes in communi-
cation ability, cognitive status, behavior, 
and virtually every aspect of functioning 
typically do not remain as dramatic as 
they are immediately following a stroke.

Etiologies of Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders   71
The long-term impact of reduced oxy-
gen and glucose supply to the brain is neu-
ral tissue necrosis (death). An area of dead 
tissue is called an infarct or infarction. The 
larger the area of blood supply disrupted, 
the larger the infarct. The margin neural 
tissue surrounding an infarct is called the 
ischemic penumbra. The penumbra con-
sists of living tissue but it is hypoperfused, 
meaning that its blood supply is reduced. 
It is logical that its blood supply would be 
reduced given the blood supply disruption 
and associated necrotic tissue adjacent to it. 
Thus, it is at risk of ischemic necrosis itself. 
This is one of the reasons that the earliest 
possible treatment through clot-busting 
drugs for nonhemorrhagic strokes is 
essential. Even if there is an area of infarct, 
the size of the infarct may be limited by 
pharmacologically restoring blood flow to 
the penumbra (reperfusion).
How Crucial Is Timing for Medical 
Treatment After a Stroke?
Interruption of the blood supply to the 
brain for even a few seconds (8–16) may 
result in loss of consciousness. After only 
20 to 25 seconds, electrical activity in neu-
rons typically supplied by the vessel that 
has been restricted may cease. After only 
3 to 5 minutes of restricted blood supply, 
irreversible damage may occur. If a per-
son who has an occlusive stroke can get to 
a hospital quickly, there is a great chance 
that the amount of permanent damage 
to the brain can be minimized. This is 
because a thrombolytic (“clot-busting”) 
drug can be administered to loosen the 
blockage and increase the likelihood of 
restoring blood flow to the associated 
cortical areas. The most common throm-
bolytic treatment is tissue plasminogen 
activator, or tPA.
The likelihood of tPA’s effectiveness 
at restoring blood flow lessens over time, 
as the area of blood supply loss expands, 
so it is vital that it be administered within 
a few hours after an occlusive stroke. 
Although early studies suggested that 
tPA be administered within 3 hours, more 
recent studies have suggested that it may 
still be effective within 3 to 4.5 hours. 
For a person who has had a hemorrhagic 
stroke, administering any treatment that 
thins the blood or reduces coagulation 
may actually do much more harm. Thus, 
it is essential to obtain a brain scan of the 
stroke survivor as quickly as possible to 
rule out hemorrhage prior to administer-
ing such agents.
Knowing the profound impact of 
timing in responding to the occurrence 
of a stroke, many professionals working 
in medical contexts are saddened to hear 
story after story of people who experi-
ence stroke symptoms yet ignore them, 
take a great deal of time considering how 
to respond, or wait to see if symptoms 
subside before seeking help. Imagine 
what happens when a person experiences 
symptoms such as blurry or tunnel vision, 
or weakness on one side of the body. She 
may decide to lie down and rest for a few 
hours to see if it subsides. Perhaps she 
will tell her husband that she doesn’t feel 
well and he will get her some over-the-
counter pain relievers. Perhaps she will 
call her adult son living in another state, 
and he will reassure her and tell her not to 
worry, that it will likely pass. Perhaps she 
will wait another day to see how things 
go. And all the while her brain is incur-
ring greater and greater oxygen and glu-
cose deprivation, causing greater likeli-
hood of permanent damage and a greater 
probability that the damaged area will be 
enlarged. Keep in mind that anyone who 
has had a prior stroke or transient isch-
emic attack is at greater risk (compared to 

72   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
those who have not had a stroke) of hav-
ing another. Professionals who work with 
stroke survivors thus have a higher likeli-
hood than others of being with someone 
who has a repeat stroke; it is important for 
clinicians to be aware of warning signs so 
that they may act quickly to seek appro-
priate help. Also, it is important that all 
members of a rehabilitation team educate 
stroke survivors, caregivers, and signifi-
cant others about stroke warning signs.
How Is the Sudden Onset of 
Stroke of Stroke Relevant to 
Supporting Patients and Families?
Consider how the suddenness of changes 
in the brain can lead to shocking and emo-
tionally devastating changes in abilities 
immediately after stroke. Consider, too, 
how the very word stroke has high visceral 
impact on most people. Hearing the word 
may evoke fear and sometimes images of 
worst-case scenarios among people who 
have just had a stroke and the people who 
love them. When there is a recent onset 
of stroke, it is important that clinicians be 
sensitive to the degree of shock, fear, and 
disbelief the stroke survivor may have 
and help ease that shock by providing 
much-needed information and counsel-
ing. This is one of many reasons why it is 
essential for the excellent clinical aphasi-
ologist to have strong counseling skills, a 
topic we address in Chapter 27.
What Is a Transient Ischemic Attack?
A transient ischemic attack (TIA) is a 
temporary blockage of the blood supply 
to any area of the brain. The lay term for 
a TIA is a mini-stroke. Most TIAs last less 
than 30 minutes, although they are still 
considered TIAs if they last up to 24 hours. 
A thrombus or embolus may cause sud-
den blood flow disruption but then be dis-
solved, or a change in blood pressure may 
release a point of arterial blockage. TIAs 
often occur before a full-blown stroke and 
thus are important warning signs that 
should be taken seriously so that appro-
priate preventive measures can be put 
into place, such as lifestyle changes and 
pharmacological intervention. A common 
fallacy associated with TIA is that it will 
not cause permanent damage. This is not 
necessarily the case. Many people have 
clear noticeable challenges with motor, 
sensory, cognitive, or linguistic functions 
following TIA. The warning signs for TIA 
are the same as those for stroke.
What Is Hypoperfusion?
Hypoperfusion is an insufficiency in 
blood supply to the brain. It is typically 
caused by heart problems or hemor-
rhaging elsewhere in the body, such that 
blood flow to the brain is limited. Unlike 
strokes, which tend to occur in main arter-
ies or their direct branches, hypoperfu-
sion tends to affect the watershed areas 
of the brain that are supplied by smaller 
arterial extensions. Although not a stroke 
or TIA per se, hypoperfusion in itself can 
cause brain tissue death if blood flow is 
not resumed within a critical time period.
What Can Be Done to 
Prevent Stroke?
Given that we cannot change our genetic 
factors, a focus on prevention should be 
primarily focused on lifestyle factors, with 

Etiologies of Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders   73
pharmacological and surgical interven-
tion as needed. Most strategies for reduc-
ing stroke risk are important strategies 
for healthy living in general. Note that 
almost all of the actions we may take to 
prevent stroke are the very same actions 
we should take to reduce our risk of heart 
disease, cancer, and diabetes. See Box 6–1 
for means of preventing or reducing the 
risk of stroke.
The warning signs for stroke are sum-
marized in Box 6–2. The America Stroke 
Association and the American Heart 
Association, in a public health campaign 
Means of Preventing or Reducing the Risk of Stroke
• If you smoke, stop smoking.
• If you drink alcohol, drink in moderation.
• Exercise regularly.
• Keep weight to an ideal range for your height and body 
type.
• Avoid dietary fat.
	 Especially avoid or restrict intake of animal fats (meat 
and dairy products).
• Reduce stress. 
	 Numerous books, podcasts, cell phone apps, classes, 
and therapies are available to foster techniques such as 
meditation, progressive relaxation, conflict resolution, 
anger management, and mindfulness practice. Improved 
diet and exercise also help with stress reduction.
• Control cholesterol, high blood pressure, high blood 
coagulation levels, and diabetes.
	 The steps above tend to help with all of these. 
Medications may also be prescribed. In some cases, 
surgical procedures may be recommended; a common 
one is endarterectomy, the removal of atherosclerotic 
plaque from arterial walls, most often the carotid artery. 
Another is angioplasty, which involves inserting a 
catheter into the arteries and using a balloon-like tip to 
expand the arterial walls.
	 In addition to immediate treatment to restore blood 
flow, longer-term pharmacological treatments are often 
recommended. Examples are hypertension medications 
to reduce high blood pressure, anticoagulants to reduce 
blood clotting, antiplatelets to reduce the degree of 
adhesion of blood by-products to the arterials walls, and 
vasodilators to reduce arterial constriction.
• Know the stroke warning signs and seek immediate 
medical attention when one occurs.
Box
6–1

74   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
to help raise awareness of warning signs 
for stroke, has summarized these with the 
acronym FAST:
• F:  Face drooping
• A:  Arm weakness
• S:  Speech difficulty
• T:  Time to call 9-1-1 
(American Stroke Association, n.d.)
What Is TBI?
A TBI occurs when a sudden trauma 
causes damage to the brain. In all age 
groups and worldwide, males tend to 
have about 50% greater likelihood of sus-
taining a TBI than do females, a fact that 
is related to males’ general predisposi-
tion toward dangerous and thrill-seeking 
activities. The highest incidence of TBIs 
occurs under the age of 4, between the 
ages of 14 and 25, and over the age of 
65. TBIs are generally classified as open- 
or closed-head injuries, depending on 
whether the skull is fractured as a result 
of trauma to the head. In a closed-head 
injury (CHI), the head suddenly hits an 
object or an object hits the head, with-
out breaking through the skull. CHIs are 
sometimes referred to as acceleration-
deceleration injuries. This is because the 
head is in motion and is suddenly stopped 
on contact (e.g., when a passenger’s head 
hits the windshield during a car accident) 
or the object is in motion and is suddenly 
stopped by the head (e.g., when a brick 
falls from a building and lands on a per-
son’s head).
An illustration of an acceleration-
deceleration injury is shown in Figure 6–2.  
In this case, a force hitting the head from 
behind causes the head to accelerate 
toward a brick wall, and the wall causes 
the sudden deceleration. CHIs may be 
translational or rotational. In a transla-
tional injury, also called a direct injury, 
the object-head contact is at a relatively 
perpendicular angle to one of the main 
axes of the head, causing the brain to 
bounce against the side of the skull oppo-
Stroke Warning Signs
Warning signs for stroke include sudden onset of
• Numbness
• Weakness in one side or both sides of the body
• Asymmetric muscle control
• Loss of balance, falling
• Trouble speaking
• Sudden word-finding difficulty
• Comprehension difficulty
• Slurred speech
• Dizziness
• Blurred vision
• Trouble swallowing
• Blacking out, loss of consciousness
Box
6–2

Etiologies of Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders   75
site of the site of contact. Injuries to the 
brain at the point of contact are called 
coup injuries. Injuries caused by the 
brain’s contact with the skull at the oppo-
site side of the skull are called contrecoup 
injuries. The locations of coup and contre-
coup injuries are illustrated in Figure 6–2.
In rotational injuries, also called 
angular injuries, the contact of an object 
with the head creates more of a spinning 
motion of the head, causing the brain to 
rotate in relation to the skull and often 
to hit against multiple skull areas. In 
Figure 6–3, the smaller arrows represent 
the direction of an object hitting the per-
son’s head. The curved arrow shows the 
twisting motion of the head in response 
to a rotational blow. Note the coup injury 
highlighted in the rotational blow and the 
coup and contrecoup injuries highlighted 
in the direct blow image.
An open-head injury (OHI) involves 
breakage or penetration of the skull. 
Examples are falls that lead to skull frac-
ture, gunshot wounds to the head, and lac-
erations by sharp objects, such as a knife, 
spear, or ax. Whether or not the skull is 
fractured, the consequences of TBI can be 
extremely complex because injuries are 
not only focal (confined to one or more 
specific areas of the brain) but also diffuse 
(involving multiple areas of the brain at 
once). One reason for diffuse damage is 
widespread severing or shearing of axons 
through a process called diffuse (or trau-
matic) axonal injury, common in all forms 
of acceleration-deceleration trauma to the 
head. Diffuse damage may also be due 
Figure 6–2.  Top and side view of acceleration-deceleration injury. The arrow shows the 
direction of a blow to the head. In the left-most image (A) of the top and side views, the 
arrow indicates the direction of the accelerating force. In the middle views (B), the head hits 
the wall and the brain is thrust in the direction of the accelerating force. Where the brain is  
injured at the point of contact is the coup injury. In the right-most views (C), the brain 
rebounds from the front of the skull to the back of the skull. Where the brain hits the back of 
the skull is where the contrecoup injury occurs. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.

76   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
to space-occupying and pressure-raising 
effects of edema and subdural and intra-
cerebal hematomas that result from the 
trauma. These, in turn, may lead to sec-
ondary damage comprising a combina-
tion of interrupted blood supply, neuro-
chemical changes (such as pathological 
surges of certain neurotransmitters), and 
nerve cell death. Of course, further com-
plications may arise from hemorrhages. 
Much of the diffuse damage may not be 
localizable through neuroimaging, mak-
ing diagnosis of the neuropathology 
underlying some symptoms especially 
challenging.
What Are Blast Injuries?
Blast injuries result from rapid phases of 
over- and underpressurization of air com-
pared to normal atmospheric pressure. 
They are most frequently associated with 
exposure to war-related explosives. Due 
to an increasing frequency of blast attacks 
associated with newly developed war 
technology, there are more TBIs in current 
wars than in previous wars throughout 
history (Arnold, Halpern, Tsai, & Smith-
line, 2004; Gondusky & Reiter, 2005; Hoge 
et al., 2008; Jaffee et al., 2009; Langlois, 
A
B
Figure 6–3.  Direct and translational blows to the head. The smaller arrows represent the 
direction of the force of an object hitting the head. A. Represents a direct blow to the head. 
The highlighted portion on the left side of the brain indicates the site of a coup injury, while 
the highlighted portion on the right shows the site of a contrecoup injury. B. Represents 
a rotational blow to the head. The larger arrow represents the twisting motion of the head 
and neck in response to the angular force against the head. Image credit: Taylor Reeves. 
Full-color versions of these figures can be found in the Color Insert.

Etiologies of Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders   77
Rutland-Brown, & Wald, 2006; Murray et 
al., 2005; Warden, 2006; Xydakis, Fravell, 
Nasser, & Casler, 2005). Also, there are 
increasing numbers of people surviving 
injuries that in the past would have killed 
them (Cernak & Noble-Haeusslein, 2010; 
Cifu, Cohen, Lew, Jaffee, & Sigford, 2010; 
Mernoff & Correia, 2010; Rosenfeld & 
Ford, 2010; Vasterling, Verfaellie, & Sul-
livan, 2009).
Factors affecting the extent of dam-
age due to the blast include peak pressure, 
duration, distance from the explosion, and 
whether it was in open air or in a confined 
space (Howe, 2009; Wallace, 2006). There 
are four broad categories of blast injuries: 
primary, secondary, tertiary, and quater-
nary (see BrainLine, 2015, and DePalma, 
Burris, Champion, & Hodgson, 2005, for 
overviews). Primary blast injury injuries 
result from “wave-induced changes in 
atmospheric pressure” (Wallace, 2006,  
p. 399). The brain, because it has air-fluid 
interfaces and tissues of different densi-
ties, is especially vulnerable when con-
nected components are stretched and 
sheared due to acceleration at different 
rates (Taber, Warden, & Hurley, 2006). 
Shear and stress waves may cause direct 
injury (e.g., concussion, hemoredema, dif-
fuse axonal injury), as well as gas emboli, 
leading to infarction (Rosenfeld & Ford, 
2010; Taber et al., 2006). Secondary blast 
injuries are caused by objects set into 
motion (e.g., flying debris, structural col-
lapse). Tertiary blast injuries are caused 
by an individual being set into motion 
as a result of an explosion and hitting a 
solid surface. Quaternary blast injuries are 
caused by blood loss from bodily injury 
or exposure to toxic gas associated with 
an explosion.
Most modern warfare casualties in- 
volve a combination of all four blast injury 
categories (Elder & Cristian, 2009; Gon-
dusky & Reiter, 2005; Murray et al., 2005; 
Taber et al., 2006). In humans, it is gener-
ally considered impossible to tease apart 
what part of the injury is due to these 
different blast components, although 
some clear delineations in effects have 
been obtained through animal studies 
(Belanger, Kretzmer, Yoash-Gantz, Pick-
ett, & Tupler, 2009; Courtney & Court-
ney, 2009; Howe, 2009; Rosenfeld & Ford, 
2010; Taber et al., 2006). The most com-
mon types of blast-induced (BI) TBI are 
diffuse contusions, subdural hematomas 
and hemorrhages, and axonal injuries 
(Gondusky & Reiter, 2005; Hicks, Fertig, 
Desrocher, Koroshetz, & Pancrazio, 2010; 
Murray et al., 2005).
Penetrating TBIs and fatal injuries 
to the body are increasingly prevented 
by advanced body armor technology; 
however, it may be impossible to prevent 
the effects of blast injuries on the brain 
(Galarneau, Woodruff, Dye, Mohrle, & 
Wade, 2008; Okie, 2005). A majority of 
soldiers who survive blast injuries are 
diagnosed with BI TBI (Keltner & Cooke, 
2007), and increasing numbers are surviv-
ing their injuries due to improved wound 
care in war zones. Continued exposure to 
bombs, rocket-propelled grenades, mortar 
rounds, and other types of heavy artillery 
leads to greater risk of life-affecting head 
injuries.
Estimates of the incidence of both BI 
and non-blast-induced (NBI) TBI among 
injured military service personnel are 
highly variable. For example, research on BI 
TBI incidence associated with United States 
soldiers returning from Iraq and Afghani-
stan war zones in the early 2000s ranges 
from 8% to 97%. There are three primary 
reasons for this variability. First, in war 
zones and following terror attacks, those 

78   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
with the most apparent life-threatening 
injuries are given medical assistance first.
Most people with head injuries are 
treated first for their most obvious con-
comitant physical injuries. Many with 
closed-head injuries may be unaware of 
a brain injury and may not even be exam-
ined for TBI (Belanger et al., 2009; Cherney 
et al., 2010; Langlois et al., 2006; Schnei-
derman, Braver, & Kang, 2008; Warden, 
2006). Second, many people do not real-
ize the impact of a TBI until attempting 
to return to professional, educational, or 
military service. The onset of symptoms 
may occur months or even years postin-
jury, symptom severity may fluctuate, 
and some symptoms may be triggered by 
life events occurring long after the actual 
physical trauma (Hicks et al., 2010; Quin-
lan, Guaron, Deschere, & Stephens, 2010). 
Third, stigma-associated TBI symptoms 
confound self-report data and thus esti-
mates of incidence.
What Are Concussion and Mild TBI?
A concussion is a “complex pathophysio-
logical process affecting the brain, induced 
by biomechanical forces” (McCrory et al., 
2013, pp. 250–251). The term concussion is 
often considered synonymous with mild 
TBI (or mTBI) (e.g., Department of Veter-
ans Affairs, Department of Defense, 2009), 
although some prefer to consider it as a 
syndrome on the mildest end of the mTBI 
spectrum of severity (King, Brughelli, 
Hume, & Gissane, 2014, p. 452). There is 
no widely accepted threshold for when 
a blow to the head (or a blow to another 
part of the body, which then transmits a 
force to the head) is to be labeled a con-
cussion as opposed to an mTBI (Harmon 
et al., 2013). Concussion and mTBI may 
be caused by an acceleration-deceleration 
injury, by the head or body being violently 
shaken, or by exposure to blast. A concus-
sion or mTBI may or may not be accom-
panied by loss of consciousness. There is 
often no evidence of corresponding brain 
lesions detected through brain imaging 
(Snedden, 2013).
mTBI is most commonly caused by 
sports injuries, falls, and motor vehicle 
accidents. Symptoms may include con-
fusion, disorientation, headache, blurred 
vision, tinnitus, balance problems, leth-
argy, sleeplessness, nausea, seizure activity, 
mood changes, weakness and numbness of 
the extremities, agitation, attention prob-
lems, memory problems, speech and lan-
guage deficits, and executive functioning 
problems such as poor judgment, impul-
sivity, and lack of inhibition of inappropri-
ate words or behavior (National Center for 
Injury Prevention and Control, 2003).
Although the terms concussion and 
mTBI are often considered to indicate that 
the consequences are only temporary, this 
is not always the case; a history of even 
one may cause lifelong problems with 
cognitive, linguistic, sensory, and motor 
functions (McCrory et al., 2013). By far 
the most common lingering complaints 
are memory problems. A history of con-
cussion or mTBI is also a known risk 
factor for future onset of mild cognitive 
impairment and dementia (Guskiewicz et 
al., 2005; Plassman et al., 2000), conditions 
discussed later in this chapter.
What Can Be Done to Prevent TBI?
Falls are the most common cause of TBI. In 
the United States, these tend to be great-

Etiologies of Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders   79
est in children under 4 years of age and 
in adults over age 75. A large proportion 
of falls could be prevented by ensuring 
appropriate safety monitoring and accom-
modations for those two age groups and 
by reducing high-risk behaviors across 
age groups. Motor vehicle–related TBIs 
are the second most common cause across 
age groups. Wearing of seat belts, obeying 
traffic rules, driving at moderate speeds, 
and ensuring cognitive, visual, and motor 
abilities for safe driving are all effective 
means of reducing TBI risk (Faul, Xu, 
Wald, & Coronado, 2010).
Sports-related injuries are also com-
mon worldwide. Wearing of helmets dur-
ing contact sports (e.g., rugby, football, 
soccer, boxing) and in activities with high 
fall risk has been shown to significantly 
reduce the incidence, severity, and within-
individual frequency of mild to severe 
head injuries. Helmet use has been shown 
to dramatically affect incidence and sever-
ity of TBI in motorcycle riders, bicycle 
riders, skiers, snowboarders, all-terrain 
vehicle users, and skateboarders, among 
others (Bowman, Aitken, Helmkamp, 
Maham, & Graham, 2009; Ganti et al., 
2013; Giza et al., 2013; Sulheim, Holme, 
Ekeland, & Bahr, 2006; Weiss, Agimi, & 
Steiner, 2010).
Awareness of or attention to basic 
aspects of head injury prevention is lack-
ing worldwide, especially in the arena 
of sports and motorcycling, in which the 
trade-off of risk versus a sense of thrill, 
avoidance of inconvenience, and social 
stigma associated with using proper head 
protection are often swayed in a danger-
ous direction. There is a great need world-
wide for enhanced public education, 
advocacy, and policy changes in the arena 
of head injury prevention. Of course, there 
is a great need for world peace, too. In 
addition to achieving a host of other ben-
efits to the human race, reducing war and 
violence is vital to reducing brain injuries.
What Are Bacteria and Viruses?
Bacteria and viruses are both microscopic 
organisms that may cause inflammation 
in the brain. Bacteria are single celled and 
thrive in many environments. Most bac-
teria are harmless; many, such as those 
involved in digestion, are essential to 
good health. Viruses, which are much 
smaller than bacteria, are typically harm-
ful and require a host to survive. They 
are invasive, taking over the host’s cells 
to genetically replicate themselves. Bacte-
rial and viral infections may cause neu-
rogenic communication disorders when 
they affect the brain. Infections that affect 
the cortex are called encephalopathies. 
Both types of infection may cause men-
ingitis, an inflammation of the meninges 
surrounding the brain (also called menin-
goencephalitis when it is caused by an 
infection). The space-occupying nature 
of the inflammation may obstruct blood 
flow as well as healthy connections in the 
brains’ complex circuitry. Additionally, 
infectious processes in meningitis tend to 
alter the blood-brain barrier, thus expos-
ing sensitive brain tissue to toxicity. When 
functioning properly, the blood-brain bar-
rier prevents toxic substances from enter-
ing brain tissue and provides selective 
permeability for certain substances (such 
as sugar and alcohol) to pass.
Antibiotics can be administered to 
treat some harmful bacteria but not to 
treat viruses. Some viruses (e.g., polio, 
chickenpox, some forms of hepatitis) can 
be prevented with vaccines. Antiviral  

80   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
medications are sometimes used to treat 
herpes simplex and HIV/AIDS, two 
viruses that tend to affect brain function.
What Is HIV/AIDS?
HIV/AIDS stands for human immuno-
deficiency virus/acquired immunode-
ficiency syndrome. HIV is a basic virus 
that targets the human immune system. 
By substantially invading immune cells, 
it causes AIDS. According to the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (2014), 
AIDS involves 1 of 12 opportunistic infec-
tions if there is no other detectable cause 
of cellular dysfunction in the immune 
system.
The primary reason that HIV/AIDS is 
relevant here is that neurogenic language 
disorders may arise from both primary 
and secondary infections. An example of a 
primary infection is AIDS dementia com-
plex. Examples of secondary infections 
are meningeoencephalitis or toxoplasmo-
sis. Secondary infections are also called 
opportunistic infections because viruses 
(and/or bacteria) selectively take advan-
tage of compromised immune systems. 
Infections that may not put healthy peo-
ple at risk under normal circumstances 
may be particularly hazardous for people 
with immunodeficiencies.
Neurogenic language disorders caused 
by HIV/AIDS may be associated with 
three general etiologies: neoplasm (e.g., 
due to some form of lymphoma), systemic 
disorders (e.g., metabolic and nutritional 
problems such as anemia, hypoglyce-
mia, and vitamin B12 deficiency), and 
stroke. Of course, as any etiology affect-
ing multiple interconnected neural func-
tions, patients with HIV/AIDS are likely 
to have far more complications that just 
those involving cognitive and communi-
cation abilities. Given that the array of dis-
orders that may accompany HIV/AIDS is 
wide and highly variable, it is impossible 
to predict the cognitive, linguistic, social, 
mental, and quality-of-life status of any 
individual if all one knows is that he or 
she has a diagnosis of HIV/AIDS.
What Other Types of Infections 
Affect Cortical Function?
There are numerous additional infections 
that may affect cognitive-linguistic abili-
ties. These include the family of prion dis-
orders, also called spongiform encepha-
lopathies, because they cause brain tissue 
to look spongy. Prion disorders are neu-
rodegenerative conditions characterized 
by the aggregation of deformed protein 
fibers (amyloid fibrils) outside of brain 
cells (Dalsgaard, 2002; Eikelenboom et al., 
2002). An example is Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease, a rare, rapidly progressing con-
dition that causes rapid onset of demen-
tia in addition to neuromotor and visual 
problems; people who get it typically die 
within a year of onset.
What Is Neoplasm?
Neoplasm (literally “new growth”), or 
tumors, when they occur within the brain, 
may cause neurogenic speech and lan-
guage disorders. They may do this by 
directly impinging upon functional com-
munication areas in the brain or on vital 
pathways between such areas. Symptoms 
tend to develop slowly as the brain adapts 
to the gradual increase in pressure on sur-
rounding areas. Sometimes symptoms go 

Etiologies of Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders   81
unnoticed until significant tumor growth 
has occurred. Symptoms tend to be highly 
variable, depending on the location, size, 
and type of tumor. Common symptoms 
are progressive; they may include loss of 
vision or visual field disturbances, mem-
ory and attention problems, confusion, 
nausea, and seizure activity.
Although tumors have been reported 
to cause aphasia, there is little research 
consistently documenting their effects on 
language abilities. Davie, Hutcheson, Bar-
ringer, Weinbers, and Lewin (2009) report 
that 30% to 50% of people with primary 
brain tumors have aphasia and that the 
most common associated symptom is 
anomia. Paratz (2011) reports that overall 
language deficits are highly variable and 
tend to be less severe than for poststroke 
aphasia. Duffau (2005) suggests that 
the slow growth of many brain tumors 
enables greater reorganization of brain 
functions associated with affected struc-
tures even in adults. This may be a key 
reason that long-term impacts of tumors 
on language abilities are less severe than 
those of stroke, even when similar areas of 
the brain are affected.
Tumors may be malignant (can-
cerous) or benign (noncancerous). The 
degree of malignancy is indexed on a 
scale of I (benign) to IV (high grade and 
malignant). Primary tumors in the brain 
result from uncontrolled growth of glial 
or meningeal cells. Glial cell tumors are 
called gliomas and are the most common 
form of brain tumor. One common form 
of glial tumors is astrocytoma, a benign, 
slow-growing tumor. Another is glio-
blastoma multiforme, a malignant and 
fast-growing tumor. Meningioma is a 
benign tumor that arises from the menin-
ges. If removed early enough such that it 
does not impinge on other structures, it 
may have no impact on cortical function-
ing. Secondary or metastatic tumors are 
spreading tumors that typically arise from 
elsewhere in the body and travel to the 
brain via the blood supply or lymphatic 
system, most commonly subsequent to 
breast, lung, and skin cancers.
Diagnosis of brain tumor depends on 
biopsy, the clinical examination of tissue 
removed from the body. Sometimes an 
entire tumor is removed and later biop-
sied. Given that surgical tumor removal 
may cause additional damage, needle or 
stereotactic biopsy, in which tiny amounts 
of tissue are removed via a narrow can-
nula, is often preferred. Treatment of 
intracranial tumors may involve surgi-
cal excision (either by open-skull surgery 
or gamma knife surgery, which does not 
require physical cutting of the skull), che-
motherapy, and radiation.
Clinical aphasiologists may be in- 
volved in preoperative assessments of 
people with brain tumors to establish base-
lines with which to compare postoperative 
assessments. Some SLPs participate as 
team members in intraoperative monitor-
ing, helping to ensure that awake patients’  
cognitive and linguistic abilities are care-
fully observed so that functional anatomi-
cal structures associated with communi-
cation are spared during craniotomy.
Treatment of language symptoms, de- 
pending on their nature, may be informed 
by recommended treatments for stroke-
induced aphasia as well as language defi-
cits associated with right brain injury and 
TBI. People with progressive neurologi-
cal symptoms due to cancer are increas-
ingly likely to develop communication 
challenges toward the end of life. In such 
cases, the role of the clinical aphasiologist 
is vital in terms of recommendations and 
training related to augmentative commu-
nication and assistive technology (Pol-
lens, 2004).

82   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
What Is Toxemia?
Toxemia is the poisoning, irritation, or 
inflammation of nervous system tissue 
through exposure to harmful substances. 
Toxic encephalopathy refers to brain dys-
function related to metabolism at the cel-
lular level. Exposure to substances that 
may be toxic to the nervous system is com-
mon, and myriad factors influence one’s 
ability to tolerate and get rid of such toxins.
Examples of toxins that are harmful to 
brain tissue are alcohol (especially when 
used excessively), recreational drugs such 
as methamphetamines (“ecstasy”), and 
heavy metal (e.g., lead and mercury) poi-
soning. Many argue that certain dietary 
substances, such as refined sugars, are 
neurotoxic, although there are certainly 
strong defenders that all such things in 
moderation are not harmful. Symptoms 
of toxemia are variable, from reduced 
cognitive functioning to somnolescence 
to personality changes. Treatment is typi-
cally focused on removing the source and 
purging the toxins.
What Are Diabetes Mellitus and 
Diabetic Encephalopathy?
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a chronic 
disorder of carbohydrate metabolism 
caused by abnormal insulin function or 
insulin deficiency, resulting especially in 
elevated or poorly controlled blood sugar 
(glucose) levels. The influence of diabe-
tes on human health is enormous and is 
increasing steadily worldwide, in terms 
of overall health, mortality, and economic 
impacts. This is the case across every age, 
sex, race, and education category. DM is a 
leading cause of death worldwide, rank-
ing fifth among causes of death in many 
countries; its incidence has dramatically 
increased in recent decades in lower and 
middle-income countries.
DM can refer to a spectrum of related 
pathologies, yet, specifically, the term 
almost always refers to one of the three 
main types of DM: Type 1, Type 2, and 
gestational diabetes. Type 1 diabetes 
entails decreased or absent insulin pro-
duction from the beta cells of the pancreas. 
It originates as an autoimmune attack on 
the pancreas; insufficient pancreatic insu-
lin production in turn leads to the chroni-
cally high blood glucose (hyperglycemic) 
levels in the blood.
Type 2 DM is characterized by grad-
ual insulin resistance of cellular tissue to 
the normal production of insulin. With 
time, a person with Type 2 diabetes expe-
riences a diminishing of insulin produc-
tion in the pancreas. Insulin resistance 
takes place over several years. A person 
with Type 2 diabetes may be able to con-
trol blood glucose levels to a large extent 
by controlling weight, exercising, eating 
healthfully, and, if necessary, taking pre-
scribed medication to decrease cellular 
insulin resistance and/or increase pan-
creatic insulin production.
Type 1 DM was once commonly re- 
ferred to as childhood or juvenile diabetes 
because it tends to affect people at a young 
age. Those terms have been replaced by 
the less misleading term, Type 1, as more 
and more children are affected by Type 2 
diabetes. Gestational diabetes is similar 
to Type 2 DM. It occurs due to hormonal 
changes during pregnancy. The condition 
often goes away postnatally, although a 
mother who has had it has a high disposi-
tion toward Type 2 DM later in life.
Diabetic encephalopathy is any 
type of brain disorder caused by diabetes. 
People with diabetes have significantly 

Etiologies of Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders   83
higher incidence than others of numer-
ous conditions likely to affect cogni-
tion and language, such as stroke, brain 
atrophy, atherosclerosis, peripheral and 
autonomic neuropathies, and dementia. 
Even in the absence of such conditions 
common in people with diabetes, hyper-
glycemia (high blood glucose levels) and 
hypoglycemia (low blood glucose levels) 
are related to cognitive changes resulting 
from vascular defects in the blood-brain 
barrier and from hypertension (see Hal-
lowell, Shaw, Heuer, & Schwartz, 2015). 
Numerous studies demonstrate associa-
tions between diabetes and problems of 
cognition and language. A summary of 
key cognitive-linguistic deficits that have 
been shown to occur disproportionately in 
people with DM is given in Box 6–3. Addi-
tionally, hearing loss is more common in 
people with DM, further complicating 
associated communication impairments. 
Little is known about the degree to which 
performance of adults with diabetes dif-
fers from those without diabetes when 
general variations in glucose values and 
real-time moment-by-moment glucose 
values are taken into consideration (Hal-
lowell, Shaw, Heuer, & Schwartz, 2015).
What Other Metabolic Disorders 
Cause Encephalopathy?
Thyroid disorders may also affect brain 
functioning, often resulting in cognitive 
deficits, low energy levels, and reduced 
affect. Deficiencies in vitamin B12 also 
may cause cognitive problems. Thiamine 
deficiency, often associated with chronic 
alcohol abuse, tends to lead to loss of cog-
nitive abilities in addition to motor signs, 
gait abnormalities, and ocular motor 
Areas of Cognitive-Linguistic Deficits 
Associated With Diabetes Mellitus
• Memory
• Attention
• Psychomotor skills
• Visuospatial and visuoconstructional ability
• Orientation
• Word finding, verbal fluency, and generative naming
• Problem solving
• Executive functions
Sources:  Arvanitakis, Wilson, Bienias, Evans, & Bennett, 2004; Coker 
& Shumaker, 2003; Greenwood, 2003; Hallowell, Shaw, Heuer, & 
Schwartz, 2015; Hassing et al., 2004; Kanaya, Barrett-Connor, Gild-
engorin, & Yaffe, 2004; Meneilly, Cheung, Tessier, Yakura, & Tuokko, 
1993; Perlmuter, Tun, Sizer, McGlinchey, & Nathan, 1987; Ravona-
Springer et al., 2010; Ryan, 1988; Ryan, Geckle, & Orchard, 2003; Ske-
nazy & Bigler, 1984; Toro, Schönknecht, & Schröder, 2009; Weinger & 
Jacobson, 1998.
Box
6–3

84   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
problems. This condition is sometimes 
referred to as Wernicke’s encephalopathy. 
Chronic alcohol abuse is another example 
of a toxic cause of cognitive and behav-
ioral problems.
What Is Neurodegenerative Disease?
Neurodegenerative disease is any neu-
rogenic condition that progressively gets 
worse over time. Neurodegenerative 
diseases that affect cognitive-linguistic 
abilities include any of the many types of 
dementia and some forms of mild cogni-
tive impairment. We consider these briefly 
here and then more in depth in Chapter 13 
as well as in the intervention chapters.
What Is Dementia?
The criteria for the diagnosis of dementia 
include memory impairment along with 
one or more cognitive or linguistic impair-
ments having a noticeable impact on social 
and occupational interactions and repre-
senting an observable change from previ-
ous levels of everyday functioning (Amer-
ican Psychiatric Association, 2000; Román 
et al., 1993). The most common symptoms 
that first lead to concerns about possible 
dementia are problems with memory and 
behavior. People with dementia develop 
problems with attention, executive func-
tions, critical thinking, and language.
What Is Mild  
Cognitive Impairment?
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a 
condition of cognitive decline that is not 
typical of normal aging. It often results 
from neurodegenerative disease and head 
injury, but it may also be associated with 
neoplasm, infectious processes, or meta-
bolic disorders. Terms previously used to 
characterize MCI include age-associated 
cognitive decline or memory loss and 
benign senescent memory loss or forget-
fulness. MCI is the current term of choice 
in light of international efforts to stan-
dardize terminology in related research 
and clinical practice (Winblad et al., 2004). 
Memory problems are the most common 
complaints of people with MCI, although 
there may be associated deficits in atten-
tion, visuospatial perception, language, 
and speed of processing. For most people 
with MCI, the condition does not affect 
everyday activities except for complex 
tasks (Mansbach, MacDougall, & Rosen-
zweig, 2012).
What Are Some Special Challenges 
in Identifying Etiologies of 
Language Disorders?
As we have just reviewed, a wide array of 
conditions may cause a person to acquire 
a neurogenic language disorder. The 
potential complexity and variability of 
each of these underlying conditions alone 
is great. Further complicating our under-
standing of what may underlie any given 
individual’s acquired communication 
challenges are the following facts:
• Each individual has his or her 
own unique set of cognitive-
linguistic and social strengths and 
weaknesses before acquiring a 
communication problems, making 
it hard to discern which symptoms 
have been acquired or exacerbated, 
let alone what the causes are.

Etiologies of Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders   85
• Symptoms are variable within and 
between individuals having the 
same underlying causal condition.
• Any given individual may 
experience more than one causal 
condition, complicating or even 
rendering impossible the task of 
discerning what symptomatology is 
associated with which condition.
• Countless additional factors, such 
as age, socioeconomic status, 
cultural and linguistic background, 
health status, emotional health, 
and social support, may affect the 
influence of varied etiologies as 
well as an individual’s prognosis 
for improvement.
The excellent SLP embraces these challenges.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 Make a list of bolded terms used in 
this chapter. Practice defining them in 
your own words.
	 2.	 What are the most common causes of 
acquired neurogenic language disor-
ders in adults?
	 3.	 Describe, compare, and contrast the 
primary types of stroke.
	 4.	 What predisposing factors increase a 
given individual’s risk of stroke?
	 5.	 How is the sudden onset of stroke 
and TBI related to the need for clinical 
aphasiologists to have strong counsel-
ing and life coaching skills?
	 6.	 List warning signs for stroke and TIA.
	 7.	 It is important that we consider how 
we, as clinicians, might be role mod-
els for others in terms of preventing of 
neurogenic communication disorders. 
How would you describe your cur-
rent status in terms of reducing your 
own risk of stroke?
	 8.	 Check the list of stroke prevention 
tips in Box 6–1. How are you doing 
in terms of your everyday lifestyle in 
terms of those suggestions?
	 9.	 Describe examples of causes of open- 
and closed-head injuries.
10.	 Describe why the consequences of TBI 
tend to be extremely complex.
11.	 Imagine that you are helping the part-
ner of a TBI survivor understand the 
nature of a TBI due to an acceleration-
deceleration injury. How might you 
explain the types of injuries that are 
entailed?
12.	 Describe the four broad categories of 
blast injuries.
13.	 In what way do sports-related TBI dif-
fers from blast-injury TBI?
14.	 How would you describe your cur-
rent status in terms of reducing your 
own risk of TBI?
15.	 What examples of social stigma asso-
ciated with TBI prevention have you 
observed or experienced personally?
16.	 What are some examples of good strat-
egies for addressing personal and soci-
etal resistance to improved protection 
from head injury in sports, automobile 
operation, and leisure activities?
17.	 Describe specific examples of bac-
terial and viral infections that may 
affect the brain and cause neurogenic 
communication disorders.
18.	 What might be the impact of the space-
occupying nature of the inflammation 
in the brain?
19.	 What are blood-brain barriers, and 
how they might be affected as a result 
of infectious processes?
20.	 How is HIV/AIDS relevant to the 
scope of practice of SLPs?
21.	 What are the two most common man-
ifestations of symptoms of dementia?
22.	 What is intraoperative monitoring 
and why might an aphasiologist be 
involved in it?

86   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
23.	 What are examples of varied types of 
neoplasm that might affect language 
abilities?
24.	 What are the primary types of diabe-
tes mellitus (DM)? How do they differ 
from one another?
25.	 In what ways is diabetes relevant to 
language processing in the brain?
26.	 What are the most common types 
of symptoms that first lead to con-
cerns about a possible diagnosis of 
dementia?
Check out additional learning and teach-
ing materials on the companion website.

87
Chapter
7
Neurophysiology and 
Neuropathologies Associated 
With Acquired Neurogenic 
Language Disorders
In this chapter, we review aspects of neu-
roanatomy and neurophysiology and 
related principles that are vital to clinical 
practice with people who have acquired 
neurogenic cognitive-linguistic disorders. 
At varied points throughout this book, we 
refer to neuroanatomical components and 
principles as well as the functions of the 
nervous system as they affect the people 
with whom we work. For example, in this 
chapter, we review key neurophysiologi-
cal principles, the blood supply system, 
and the visual system because these are 
so vital to clinical practice and tend not to 
be covered in tremendous detail in other 
courses that aspiring speech-language 
pathologists (SLPs) take. In Chapter 10, 
we review the key anatomical landmarks 
of the brain associated with each of the 
classic types of aphasia. Still, this book 
is not intended to provide a complete 
detailed introductory background.
It is highly recommended that you 
take a comprehensive neuroscience course 
or intensive workshop and study neuro-
science texts if you have not already done 
so. Also, there are a number of excellent 
online tutorial programs to help you 
review key aspects of neuroanatomy and 
neurophysiology pertinent to neurogenic 
communication disorders. See the Learn-
ing Resources section at the end of this 
chapter for suggestions. Be sure to follow 
up by filling in any gaps in your basic 
background knowledge in this area. Do 
not restrict your studies to just commu-
nication functions. Supplemental studies 
with clinical relevance for those without 
solid background in neuroscience, or 
needing a review, are recommended.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What should SLPs know about neu-
roanatomy and neurophysiology as- 
sociated with neurogenic cognitive-
linguistic disorders?
	 2.	 What are key neurophysiological prin-
ciples pertinent to acquired cognitive- 
linguistic disorders?

88   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 3.	 What is the most clinically pertinent 
knowledge an SLP should have about 
the blood supply to the brain?
	 4.	 What factors affect a person’s progno-
sis for recovery from a stroke or brain 
injury?
	 5.	 Why is it important for clinical apha-
siologists to know about the visual 
system?
	 6.	 What aspects of the visual system are 
most relevant to people with neuro-
genic cognitive-linguistic disorders?
	 7.	 How are visual field deficits charac-
terized?
	 8.	 What are ocular motor deficits?
	 9.	 What are visual attention deficits?
10.	 What are some higher-level visual 
deficits?
11.	 What aspects of the neurophysiology 
of hearing are most relevant to people 
with neurogenic language disorders?
What Should SLPs Know About 
Neuroanatomy and Neurophysiology 
Associated With Neurogenic 
Cognitive-Linguistic Disorders?
Competent SLPs must be able to identify 
the basic landmarks of the brain associ-
ated with neurogenic communication dis-
orders. They must also be familiar with 
landmarks associated with other types 
of problems that people with neurologi-
cal disorders due to strokes, brain injury, 
neoplasm, dementia, and metabolic dis-
turbance might have. If you are studying 
to become an SLP and you have not yet 
developed a solid background in human 
neurophysiology, especially as it relates 
to language and cognition, it is important 
that you do so.
The structural components of the 
brain that correspond to language func-
tions are clustered around the perisylvian 
region of the language-dominant hemi-
sphere. Many of the most critical areas 
important to acquired neurogenic lan-
guage disorders are visible on a lateral 
view of the language-dominant hemi-
sphere, as shown in Figure 7–1. You may 
find it helpful to use the lists of structures, 
landmarks, and concepts in Box 7–1 as a 
checklist in evaluating your basic knowl-
edge of neuroanatomy and neurophysiol-
ogy related to clinical aphasiology.
People with any neurological prob-
lem that leads to a communication disor-
der are also likely to have numerous addi-
tional problems that affect their everyday 
abilities. The more we know about how 
the brain functions and how injury to the 
brain may affect diverse areas, such as 
autonomic functions, wakefulness, vision, 
olfaction, sensation, attention, memory, 
movement, speech, hearing, personality, 
mood, eating, and swallowing, the more 
adept we are at understanding the people 
we treat and the more effective we are as 
rehabilitation team members facilitating 
the best outcomes. Of course, if you wish 
to delve even further, you could spend a 
lifetime focused on the study of the neuro-
physiology of communication. The perti-
nent literature is ever-growing, especially 
in light of advancements in neuroimag-
ing methods. Also, opportunities to get 
involved in related research and academic 
study are abundant.
What Are Key Neurophysiological 
Principles Pertinent to Acquired 
Cognitive-Linguistic Disorders?
Specialization of  
Structure and Function
Specific regions of the brain have long 
been associated with specific functional 

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   89
abilities. This is the case in general in 
terms of differences between the right and 
left hemispheres, and specifically in terms 
of differences among precise structures 
within each hemisphere. The notion that 
each side of the brain houses specialized 
abilities in most people is called hemi-
spheric specialization. Despite looking 
basically the same structurally, the two 
hemispheres house contrasting func-
tions in the adult brain. In most people, 
for example, the left hemisphere is domi-
nant for speech, language, and analytical 
functions, whereas the right hemisphere 
in most people is dominant for musi-
cal skills, emotional interpretations, and 
paralinguistic functions, such a stress, 
intonation, pitch, humor, and metaphor.
In a classic study of hemispheric spe-
cialization for speech and language, Wada 
and Rasmussen (1960) applied the Wada 
test (described below) in 140 right-handers  
and 122 left-handers to study patterns 
of left versus right cerebral dominance. 
Figure 7–1.  Examples of functional areas of the brain and Brodmann’s 
areas vital to clinical aphasiology, according to classical models. Highlighted 
regions represent examples of major functional areas and corresponding 
Brodmann’s areas visible on a left lateral view of the brain. A = Broca’s area; 
B = Primary auditory area; C = Wernicke’s area and surrounding auditory 
association area; D = Primary motor area; E = Primary sensory area; F = 
Primary visual area. Image credit: Taylor Reeves. A full-color version of this 
figure can be found in the Color Insert.

90   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Structures, Landmarks, and Concepts  
Relevant to Clinical Aphasiology
Major components of the central 
nervous system
• Cerebrum, cerebral hemispheres
• Cerebellum
• Brainstem
• Spinal cord
Views of the brain
• Lateral
• Superior
• Ventral
• Medial
• Sagittal/midsagittal
• Coronal
Hemispheric lobes
• Frontal
• Temporal
• Parietal
• Occipital
• Insula (central)
• Limbic
Major cortical landmarks, structures, 
and functional areas
• Central fissure (central sulcus or 
fissure of Rolando)
• Lateral fissure or Sylvian fissure
• Perisylvian area
• Precentral gyrus, primary motor 
area, motor strip
• Premotor area (or strip or cortex)
• Prefrontal cortex
• Postcentral gyrus, primary 
sensory area, sensory strip
• Primary sensory area (or cortex)
• Sensory association area (or cortex)
• Occipital pole
• Hippocampus
• Parahippocampal gyrus
• Broca’s area, pars triangularis 
and pars opercularis (frontal 
operculum) of the third frontal 
convolution
• Wernicke’s area
• Supramarginal gyrus
• Angular gyrus
• Superior temporal gyrus
• Superior temporal sulcus
• Inferior temporal sulcus
• Transverse temporal gyri
• Primary auditory area 
• Anterior temporal gyrus, 
Heschl’s gyrus, auditory 
association area (or cortex) 
• Orbital gyri and sulcus
• Planum temporale
• Arcuate fasciculus
• Primary visual area (or cortex)
• Visual association area
• Glial cells
• Basal ganglia
White matter
• Myelin
• Commissures
• Corpus callosum
• Association fibers
• Projection fibers
Visual system structures
• Retina
• Optic nerve
• Optic tract
• Optic chiasm
Brainstem structures
• Diencephalon
	 Thalamus
	 Hypothalamus
Box
7–1

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   91
• Midbrain
• Pons 
• Medulla oblongata
Blood supply system
• Right and left internal carotid 
arteries
• Right and left vertebral arteries
• Basilar artery
• Circle of Willis
• Right and left posterior cerebral 
arteries
• Right and left posterior 
communicating arteries
• Right and left anterior cerebral 
arteries
• Right and left middle cerebral 
arteries
• Anterior communicating artery
• Deep cerebral veins
• Superficial cerebral veins
• Internal jugular vein
Ventricular system
• Cerebrospinal fluid
• Lateral ventricles
• Third ventricle
• Fourth ventricle
• Cerebral aqueduct
• Foramina of Munro
• Choroid plexuses
The meninges
• Dura mater
• Arachnoid mater
• Pia mater
• Subdural space
• Subarachnoid space
Concepts in neurophysiology
• Synaptic transmission 
• Contralateral motor control
• Contralateral sensory perception
• Hemispheric dominance
• Motor and sensory homunculi
• Efferent and afferent systems
• Somatic nervous system
• Autonomic nervous system
	 Sympathetic nervous system
	 Parasympathetic nervous 
system
• Anastomosis
• Collateral circulation
• Blood-brain barrier
They interpreted their results to indicate 
that 96% of right-handers and 70% of left-
handers were left-hemisphere dominant 
for language. Only 15% of left-handers 
had right hemisphere language domi-
nance, and only 15% had bilateral domi-
nance; 4% of right handers were right 
hemisphere dominant, and none had 
bilateral dominance.
Geschwind and Levitsky (1968) fol-
lowed up soon after that study with an 
examination comparing the postmortem 
size of the planum temporale (the fronto-
temporo-parietal region encompassing 
the speech and language areas) of 100 left- 
and right-handers. They reported that the 
planum temporale was larger in the left 
hemisphere of 65%, in the right hemi-
sphere of 24%, and the size of the struc-
ture was equal between hemispheres in 
11%. Using functional transcranial Dop-
pler, Njemanze (2003) concluded that only 
61.5% of right-handers without neuro-
logical disorders showed left-hemisphere 
lateralization for language, with 38.5% 
showing right hemisphere lateralization 
for language. Using functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI), however, 

92   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Hund-Georgiadis, Zysset, Weih, Guthke, 
and von Cramon (2001) reported results 
more similar to those of Wada and Ras-
mussen (1960) for right-handers: 94% 
had clear left hemisphere dominance for 
language. Hund-Georgiadis et al. (2001) 
further reported that only 2% of left-
handers had right hemisphere dominance 
for language, whereas 76% had left brain 
dominance and the remainder mixed lat-
erality. Numerous additional studies have 
been completed to study structural and 
functional asymmetries in greater detail. 
Overall, there continues to be a lack of 
agreement about the relationship between 
handedness and language dominance and 
also on the actual proportion of people 
with left-, right-, and mixed-hemisphere 
language dominance. Still, two conclu-
sions are clear: Most people, regardless of 
handedness, are left brain dominant for 
language, and the methods used to test 
for language dominance influence the 
results obtained.
Intrahemispheric specialization, the 
notion that specific structures within each 
hemisphere are associated with specific 
abilities, is another key construct in this 
arena. Since the eighteenth century, it has 
been clear that injury to certain areas of 
the brain tends to result in predictable 
types of communication problems (see 
Tesak & Code, 2008, for a detailed his-
tory). Just how those areas are defined has 
been a topic of debate for over 140 years  
(see Fridriksson, Fillmore, Guo, & Rorden, 
2014; Krestel, Annoni, & Jagella, 2013; 
Paciaroni & Bogousslavsky, 2011). A basic 
example is Wernicke’s area in the left 
superior temporal lobe; a person with a 
lesion in that area is likely to display signs 
of Wernicke’s aphasia. Likewise, we when 
we observe a person with Wernicke’s 
aphasia, we might reason that there is a 
high probability that she or he has a lesion 
in that area. This is a topic into which we 
delve further as we explore varied types 
or syndromes of aphasia in Chapter 10.
Interconnectivity 
Throughout the Brain
Of course, there are important exceptions 
to patterns of structure-function corre-
lates. An individual may exhibit symp-
toms that suggest a specific area of dam-
age, but he or she may not actually have 
any damage to that area. Likewise, a per-
son may have a lesion in a specific known 
functional area but not demonstrate the 
symptoms that would typically be pre-
dicted given the lesion’s location. Another 
reason to be cautious about overgeneral-
izing structure-function relationships is 
that the brain does not act as a system of 
separate parts, each functioning indepen-
dently. Rather, interconnections among 
distributed networks of brain structures, 
all operating in a dynamic electrochemical 
environment, are vital to the brain’s func-
tioning. Fiber tracts throughout the brain 
connect the two hemispheres and also 
connect cortical with subcortical struc-
tures. Subcortical relay stations enable 
complex integration and interpretation 
of sensory and motor signals. In sum, 
although the principle of specialization of 
structure and function is important, it is 
equally important that we challenge our 
assumptions about this as we consider 
patterns of interconnectivity as well as 
any given individual’s unique condition.
The Brain’s Plasticity
Neuroplasticity is the ability of the nervous 
system to change and adapt to internal or 
external influences. The brain’s plasticity 

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   93
is at the heart of spontaneous recovery, 
or the natural pattern of improvement in 
functioning after an injury to the brain. 
The clinical literature is replete with cases 
of individuals who have lost major por-
tions of brain tissue yet who have expe-
rienced significant brain reorganization; 
that is, structures other than the damaged 
ones have taken over functions initially 
associated with the damaged area.
Plasticity is also at the heart of learn-
ing, as experience leads to improved con-
nections among networks of neurons. 
Taking advantage of plasticity is key to 
helping foster brain changes through 
behavioral intervention, which is the pri-
mary type of SLP intervention. Although 
the brain continues to lose plasticity from 
birth to old age, and although there are 
clearly critical periods in brain develop-
ment that determine whether and how 
well certain abilities will be acquired, 
even the oldest brains retain plasticity 
and continue to be influenced by learn-
ing and exposure. We discuss neuroplas-
ticity further in Sections VI through VIII 
as we explore principles of treatment and 
means of enhancing brain change through 
intervention.
What Is the Most Clinically 
Pertinent Knowledge an 
Aphasiologist Should Have About 
the Blood Supply to the Brain?
Blood supplies two nutrients that are 
essential to brain function: glucose and 
oxygen. Neurons cannot store these nutri-
ents; constant replenishing is needed. 
Areas of the brain engaged in greater 
activation at any given moment require 
more nutrients and thus a greater flow of 
blood. An additional function of blood in 
the brain is that, as it circulates, it removes 
elements that are toxic to the nervous sys-
tem, especially carbon dioxide. Toxins and 
deoxygenated blood are transported back 
to the heart and lungs for reoxygenation 
through the venous sinus system. Given 
that the problems of blood supply to the 
brain are fundamental to all types of brain 
pathology — whether the pathology arises 
from stroke, brain injury, neoplasm, met-
abolic disturbance, or neurodegenerative 
disease — it is extremely important that 
SLPs be familiar with basic aspects of the 
cortical blood supply system.
Typical medical records for people 
with stroke and brain injury include 
details about components of the blood 
supply that have been disrupted. A solid 
understanding of the major channels 
through which blood is supplied from the 
heart to the brain, and the basic aspects 
of blood flow dynamics, is important for 
understanding the nature of neurogenic 
deficits and for meaningful discussions 
with rehabilitation team members, clients, 
and clients’ significant others. Given that 
content about the basics of the blood sup-
ply to the brain — with an emphasis on its 
clinical relevance — is often lacking in oth-
erwise excellent neuroscience texts and 
courses, specific suggestions for studying 
and reviewing the blood supply system 
are given in the Learning Resources and 
Activities section of this chapter. If this is 
not a content area that you know well, be 
sure to invest time and effort in learning 
about it.
For now, let’s briefly review the most 
critical content that every SLP should 
know about the cortical blood supply. 
Four main arteries, arising from the heart, 
supply the blood that eventually reaches 
the cortex: the right and left carotid arter-
ies, as well as the right and left vertebral 
arteries. The common carotid artery stems 

94   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
from the heart. As it ascends toward the 
brain, the right and left internal carotid 
arteries and the right and left external 
carotid arteries arise from it. Of these two 
pair of arteries, focus your attention now 
on the internal carotid arteries. The blood 
supply from the internal carotid arteries 
flows into the right and left anterior cere-
bral arteries and the right and left mid-
dle cerebral arteries. These are the main 
arteries that supply blood to most of the 
functional areas of the brain involved 
in cognition and communication. Thus, 
disruptions in these arteries are directly 
related to most brain-based cognitive-
communicative disorders.
The right and left vertebral arteries 
arising from the heart join together as the 
basilar artery at the brainstem, travel up 
the ventral pons, and then directly join the  
circle of Willis. The basilar artery then 
bifurcates at the circle of Willis into the 
right and left posterior cerebral arteries. 
Given that right and left vertebral arteries 
join as the basilar artery, many of us find it 
helpful to refer to this arterial division as 
the vertebral-basilar system. Be sure that 
you can identify the juncture of the internal 
carotid arteries and the vertebral-basilar 
arteries at the circle of Willis (Figure 7–2).
The circle of Willis is an anastomosis,  
a protective feature allowing collateral 
circulation of blood in case one channel 
of blood flow becomes blocked. See Fig-
ure 7–2 for a schematic illustration. An 
occlusion in any channel within the circle 
results in blood pressure changes that 
then cause the blood to flow in a differ-
ent direction, away from the occlusion. 
The closer a blockage is to an emerging 
portion of any given cerebral artery form-
ing the circle, the more likely it is that 
effective collateral circulation will occur. 
Also, when the occlusion builds up over 
time, the system is more likely to adapt 
and allow alternative channeling of blood 
than it is if there is a sudden blockage.
This system of collateral circulation 
in the circle of Willis is a wonderful safety 
mechanism that saves lives and reduces 
long-term damage by allowing blood to 
reach critical areas in the brain even when 
their typical source is cut off. Still, it is not 
a perfect system, and collateral blood 
flow tends not to be nearly as effective as 
flow through the standard channels. Also, 
there is enormous variability in the actual 
configuration of the circle of Willis across 
individual people, and some have much 
better systems for enabling collateral cir-
culation than others.
The right and left anterior cerebral 
arteries emerge from the internal carotid 
arteries and extend to the anterior por-
tion of the cortex, the lateral surfaces of 
frontal and parietal lobes, and the medial 
surfaces between the two hemispheres. 
Given the structural-functional associa-
tions in those areas, one may predict that 
reduced blood flow in the anterior cere-
bral arteries is likely to affect function-
ing associated with the prefrontal cor-
tex. Some related functional problems 
are within the direct purview of SLPs: 
deficits in executive functions, including 
problems of decision making, planning, 
self-monitoring, and social appropriate-
ness. Other impacts of reduced blood flow 
from the anterior cerebral arteries include 
contralateral motor control and strength 
of the lower body.
The right and left middle cerebral 
arteries are the largest channels arising 
from the internal carotid arteries. From 
the circle of Willis, they extend into the 
posterior frontal lobe, major portions of 
the temporal lobes, and anterior parietal 
lobes, plus the basal ganglia and dien-
cephalon on their respective sides. Given 
the structural-functional associations in 

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   95
those areas, one may predict that reduced 
blood flow in the middle cerebral artery 
on the language-dominant side is likely to 
affect any of a wide array of speech and 
language functions, including reading 
and writing. Other impacts may include 
contralateral sensory deficits, contralat-
eral deficits in motor control and strength 
of the upper body, difficulty with spatial 
relations, and visual problems.
The right and left posterior cerebral 
arteries emerge from the circle of Willis 
and extend to the posterior, inferior parts 
of the brain, including the posterior infe-
rior temporal lobe and the occipital lobe. 
Given the structural-functional associ­
ations in those areas, one may predict 
that reduced blood flow in the posterior 
cerebral artery will lead to visual acuity  
and visual attention problems, reading 
anterior communicating 
artery
opthalmic artery
posterior communicating 
artery
superior cerebellar artery
anterior inferior cerebellar 
artery
anterior cerebral artery
middle cerebral artery
anterior choroidal artery
posterior cerebral artery
pontine arteries
basilar artery
vertebral artery
internal carotid artery
Figure 7–2.  Schematic diagram of the circle of Willis. Image credit: Taylor Reeves. A full-
color version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

96   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
problems, and deficits in sensory integra-
tion, including recognition and interpreta-
tion of visual information.
To recap, given that most people are 
left brain dominant for language, and 
given that the middle cerebral artery sup-
plies blood to the areas most involved in 
speech and language, disruptions in the 
left middle cerebral artery and its exten-
sions into the cortex are the most likely 
to be associated with neurogenic speech 
and language disorders. A schematic illus-
tration of areas of the brain supplied by 
each of the left cerebral arteries as seen on 
a lateral view of the brain is shown in Fig-
ure 7–3. It is essential that you be able to 
draw a simple sketch of patterns of each 
of the areas of blood supply, at least to the 
lateral portion of the brain. This is impor-
tant, not only to test and ensure your own 
knowledge about this, but also because 
it is often useful to do this when helping 
stroke survivors and their family mem-
bers understand the nature of a stroke.
What Factors Affect a Person’s 
Prognosis for Recovery From 
a Stroke and Brain Injury?
The factors that may affect the severity 
of an acquired language disorder due to 
stroke or brain injury are the same as those 
that influence prognosis for recovery. 
These are summarized in Box 7–2. Some 
are related to etiology (e.g., site and size of 
lesion), others to preonset characteristics  
Figure 7–3.  Schematic illustration of the cerebral arterial blood sup-
ply to the left lateral cortex. Image credit: Taylor Reeves. A full-color 
version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   97
Factors That May Influence Severity of an Acquired  
Language Disorder and Prognosis for Recovery 
in Stroke and Brain Injury Survivors
General positive influences (e.g., more 
tends to be better)
• Time postonset
• Amount of intact perilesional 
tissue
• Good health, glucose regulation, 
rest, exercise/fitness, nutrition, 
hydration
• Motivation
• Preonset intelligence
• Preonset academic skills
• Educational history
• Professional history
• Access to intervention 
through an excellent clinical 
aphasiologist
• Appropriate quality, type, 
frequency, and duration of 
speech-language intervention at 
the right time
• Access to holistic rehabilitation 
programming
• Psychosocial support
• Awareness of deficits
• Independent use of compensatory 
strategies and self-cuing
• Independence/history of 
independent living
• Stimulability for engaging in 
specific cognitive-linguistic tasks
• Willingness to engage in and 
practice compensatory strategies
• Willingness to participate in 
multimodal communication
• Organizational abilities
• Memory
• Attention
• Appropriateness of judgments
• Coping skills
• Self-esteem
• Motivation (intrinsic and extrinsic)
• Vocational and avocational goals
• Tolerance of frustration
• Anger management strategies
General negative influences (e.g., less 
tends to be better)
• Age
• Size of lesion
• Presence of bilateral lesions
• Inclusion of subcortical white 
matter in addition to cortical 
tissue
• Length of coma (if any)
• Concomitant memory and 
attention deficits
• Depression
• Psychiatric disorder
• Alcohol abuse (past and current)
• Drug and other substance abuse 
(past and current)
Other influences
• Site of lesion
• Pharmacological effects and side 
effects
• Locus of control (belief in what 
or who can influence one’s 
condition and outcome; see 
Chapter 27)
Note.  These influences are termed general because they are often associated with 
better or worse prognosis. Any given individual may defy the influence of any 
factor on the list. Note also that many of these factors are not independent from 
one another.
Box
7–2

98   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
(e.g., intelligence educational history), 
and still others to present status (e.g., 
access to excellent services, social support, 
and the nature and severity of concomi-
tant deficits). Note that many of these fac-
tors are highly interdependent. Within a 
given individual, it is often impossible to 
tease apart the influence of one factor ver-
sus another. An important example is that 
the influence of age, considered by many 
to be an important prognostic factor, may 
be confounded by other factors, such as 
health status. In and of itself, especially 
when applied to an individual and not a 
group, age is not necessarily a strong pre-
dictor of prognosis. Note, too, that some 
factors are balanced by others. The size 
of lesion is definitely an important fac-
tor, but it also matters greatly how much 
tissue surrounding an infarct is still per-
fused. Although educational history mat-
ters, one’s actual intelligence may have a 
stronger influence.
There is no clear agreement among 
experts pertaining to some of the factors 
that have been associated with progno-
sis. For example, although some have 
suggested that gender may play a role in 
prognosis, research findings on that topic 
are equivocal. Another example is that 
SLP intervention at the right time with 
the appropriate duration and frequency is 
generally accepted as a positive influence 
on recovery; there is controversy, though, 
regarding just what the right timing, fre-
quency, and duration are (a topic we con-
sider in Section VI).
For people with aphasia, aphasia 
severity is a strong predictor of recovery 
potential. Type of aphasia may also play a 
role in people with similar levels of apha-
sia severity. For example, people with 
global aphasia tend to have poorer prog-
nosis that those with other types of apha-
sia. People with Wernicke’s aphasia gen-
erally have poorer prognosis than people 
with Broca’s aphasia; however, there are 
many reasons this pattern may not hold 
true for a given individual.
As we discuss further in Chapter 22, 
the clinical aphasiologist should be well 
versed in the influence of such factors 
when making any statements about the 
likelihood of recovery for any given stroke 
or brain injury survivor. Also, he or she 
should recognize that any individual may 
defy statistical odds in terms of predic-
tions about recovery.
Why Is It Important for 
Clinical Aphasiologists to Know 
About the Visual System?
People with brain-based communication 
disorders often have one or more types of 
concomitant visual deficits. These may be 
generally categorized as visual sensory 
deficits, visual attention deficits, visual 
interpretation deficits, and ocular motor 
deficits. Visual sensory deficits include 
problems of visual acuity, problems of 
color perception (achromatopsia/dys-
chromatopsia), and visual field deficits 
(or visual field cuts). A visual sensory 
deficit entails a problem with actually see-
ing, that is, getting visual information reg-
istered in the brain. Visual sensory deficits 
can be due to a problem or combination 
of problems anywhere from the eye to the 
primary visual cortex.
Visual attention deficits are prob-
lems with being aware of information that 
is actually registered in the brain; they 
are not sensory deficits, because visual 
stimuli are physically “seen” but are not 
noticed or attended to. Visual interpre-
tation or visual integration deficits are 
problems with making sense of visual 

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   99
information that is physically seen and 
also attended to. Ocular motor deficits 
include problems of adjusting the shape 
of the lens, problems with pupillary 
dilation, problems in achieving visual 
reflexes, and problems of moving the eye 
within its socket.
A key reason that it is so important 
to know about the visual system is that 
much of our everyday use of language 
can be affected by visual problems experi-
enced by people with aphasia and related 
disorders. Consider, for example, how 
important it is to see who is in our shared 
space as we are conversing, to see others’ 
nonverbal responses as we communicate, 
to be able to see the things to which peo-
ple are referring within the conversational 
context, and to see print well enough so 
that we can read it. Without understand-
ing the visual abilities of a person we are 
serving, we may overlook highly relevant 
influences on their communication abilities.
Furthermore, with few exceptions, 
the diagnostic and treatment materials 
we use as clinicians entail visual material. 
We ask our clients to point to things they 
see in the room. We ask them to label and 
describe pictures and objects. We test their 
reading abilities. Likewise, the majority of 
experimental tasks used in research stud-
ies with people who have aphasia involve 
materials that are presented visually (Hal-
lowell, 2008).
We also must know about the visual 
system to be able to explain visual chal-
lenges to patients and their significant 
others, who might not have otherwise 
learned about them, and to be able to help 
our rehabilitation colleagues be aware of 
them and take them into account in their 
diagnostic and intervention work. In sum, 
although it is not within the scope of prac-
tice of clinical aphasiologists to diagnose 
or treat visual deficits per se, it is essen-
tial that we be aware of them, understand 
their implications for communication, 
and know when to refer for follow-up by 
a neuroophthalmologist. To this end, we 
review clinically relevant basics about the 
visual system with a focus on content that 
is most essential for clinical aphasiologists.
What Aspects of the Visual System 
Are Most Relevant to People With 
Neurogenic Language Disorders?
Anatomy and Physiology 
Associated With Visual Deficits
Visual sensory deficits include problems 
of visual acuity, problems of color percep-
tion, and visual field deficits (or visual 
field cuts). Visual acuity entails refraction 
of light rays onto the lens and cornea, the 
conversion of light to into neural impulses 
within the retina, the transmission of those 
impulses to the primary visual cortex 
within the occipital lobe, and the actual 
perception of those impulses throughout 
the primary and visual association areas. 
As you read about the visual system, refer 
to Figure 7–4 and Figure 7–5 to locate each 
of the structures mentioned.
The lens is the transparent connective 
tissue that underlies the pupil. It refracts 
light rays and focuses them on the retina. 
Refraction is simply the act of changing 
the angle of the light rays as they hit an 
area of contrasting density. The retina is 
the inside layer of the eyeball. There are 
two types of photoreceptors in the retina: 
rods (important for low-light and periph-
eral vision) and cones (functional in bright 
light and responsible for central discrimi-
native vision and color detection). Action 
potentials from the photoreceptors are 
transmitted to ganglion cells within the 

100
Figure 7–4.  Components of the eye. Image credit: Taylor Reeves. A full-
color version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.
Figure 7–5.  Schematic overview of the visual system. Image credit: Taylor 
Reeves. A full-color version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   101
retina, cells that are specialized for trans-
mitting visual neural impulses. The axons 
of these cells travel to the optic disk and 
pass in bundles through the sclera (the 
outer coating of the eyeball) to become the 
optic nerve (cranial nerve II). Optic nerve 
fibers travel through the optic chiasm 
(the x-shaped structure housing the optic 
nerve fibers at the base of the brain). Some 
of those fibers remain ipsilateral; that is, 
they continue to travel on the same side of 
the brain as the eye from which they carry 
visual information. Other fibers cross over 
to the contralateral side (i.e., the opposite 
side of the brain relative to the eye from 
which they carry visual information) 
inside the optic chiasm.
All of the optic nerve fibers continue 
to travel to the lateral geniculate body of 
the thalamus. Then, as the optic tract, they 
travel through the internal capsule. Next, 
they curve around the lateral ventricles 
and travel, through the optic radiations, 
to the primary visual cortex. The pri-
mary visual cortex (Brodmann’s area 17;  
see Figure 7–1) is located on the posterior 
portion of each occipital lobe.
The visual field refers to the entire 
space from which we take in visual infor-
mation as we look forward. If you have 
good eyesight and have both eyes open, 
you could trace with your finger the 
shape of your entire binocular field of 
view (what is seen with both eyes jointly). 
It would appear as an ellipsis, wide hori-
zontally and narrower in the vertical 
dimension, idealized in Figure 7–6. The 
primary visual cortex on each side of the 
brain receives visual information from 
one side of the visual field in each eye.
We also have a visual field for each 
eye, as shown in Figure 7–7. If you were 
Figure 7–6.  Stylized illustration of a binocular field of view. 
Image credit: Taylor Reeves. A full-color version of this fig-
ure can be found in the Color Insert.

102   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
to close your left eye while looking at the 
scene depicted, your right eye’s monocu-
lar visual field would appear in the styl-
ized shape shown on the right side of Fig-
ure 7–7.
Although visual fields are elliptical 
and not completely circular, they are typi-
cally diagramed as circles for the purpose 
of depicting the visual fields, as shown in 
Figure 7–8. Imaginary horizontal and ver-
tical lines bisecting the retina define four 
quadrants of the visual field. Each quad-
rant is defined as temporal or nasal and as 
upper or lower.
Because of the crossing over of fibers 
from each eye within the optic chiasm, 
components of the visual system from the 
optic chiasm all the way to the primary 
visual cortex contain information from 
both eyes. Thus, even if a person were 
completely blind in one eye due to a lesion 
or severing of the optic nerve of that eye, 
he or she would still have representation 
from the other eye in the primary visual 
cortex of both hemispheres. Information 
from the right side of the visual field in 
each eye is represented in the left side of 
the cortex. Information from the left side 
of the visual field in each eye is repre-
sented in the right side of the cortex.
The optic nerve fibers from the tem-
poral half (outside, toward the temples) of 
each retina are the ones that travel ipsilat-
erally through the optic chiasm and on the 
lateral geniculate body of the thalamus. 
They carry information about the nasal 
half (inside, toward the nose) of the visual 
field (coming from temporal portion of 
each retina). Fibers from the nasal half of 
each retina are the ones that decussate in 
the optic chiasm along their path to the 
thalamus. They carry information about 
the temporal half of the visual field (com-
ing from the nasal portion of each retina).
The calcarine fissure is a prominent 
sulcus seen on the medial surface of each 
Figure 7–7.  Stylized illustration of the field of view for each 
independent eye. Image credit: Taylor Reeves. A full-color 
version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   103
hemisphere of the brain. Optic radiations 
arriving above each calcarine fissure con-
vey information about the lower half of 
the visual field from both eyes. Optic 
radiations arriving below each calcarine 
fissure convey information about the 
upper visual field from both eyes. As it is 
represented in the primary visual cortex, 
the image of the object in the visual field 
is inverted and reversed from left to right. 
As we noted above, the left visual field is 
represented in the visual cortex of the right 
hemisphere, and the right visual field is 
represented in the visual cortex of the left 
hemisphere. Furthermore, the upper half 
of the visual field is represented below 
the calcarine sulcus; the lower half of the 
visual field is represented above the cal-
carine sulcus.
The visual association areas (Brod-
mann’s areas 18 and 19), which surround 
area 17, have myriad complex connections 
to other areas of the brain. For example, 
they have fiber tracts projecting to areas 
of the parietal and temporal cortex and 
to the thalamus. These projections enable 
the integration of visual information with 
cognitive operations vital to motion per-
ception, spatial representation of elements 
within the field of view, object recogni-
tion, reading, and interpretation of picto-
graphic stimuli.
In addition to the primary visual 
pathways, there are other visual pathways 
that we will not explore in detail. Some 
of them project to subcortical nuclei and 
some to various cortical regions via the 
thalamus. They are important for control 
of the visual reflexes and for the integra-
tion of visual sensation with sensorimotor 
perception and activity. One of these other 
pathways, the tectal pathway, provides 
Figure 7–8.  Diagram of visual fields. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.

104   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
input to the tectospinal pathway. Tectal 
fibers travel from the eyes to the superior 
colliculi and contribute to our ability to 
orient to visual stimuli.
How Are Visual Field 
Deficits Characterized?
Visual deficits are described in terms of 
visual field rather than in terms of the reti-
nal location disturbed. Most of the visual 
deficits associated with brain injuries are 
beyond the level of the retina. However, 
some visual deficits associated with the 
surface of the eye are increasingly likely 
to occur with advancing age, so they may 
occur concomitantly with neurogenic 
visual deficits. One example is a change in 
the shape of the lens, resulting in reduced 
near visual acuity (hypermetropia), far 
visual acuity (myopia), or both. Another is 
the occurrence of cataracts, the accumula-
tion of fibrous proteins on the lens, which 
degrades the quality of images seen.
Keeping in mind the retinotopic orga-
nization throughout the visual system, we 
can predict the effects that a lesion will 
have on the visual system, given informa-
tion about where the lesion occurs. Con-
sider these examples.
A lesion of the optic nerve (before the 
fibers reach the optic chiasm) may result 
in complete or partial blindness of one 
eye. This is represented schematically in 
the visual fields shown in Figure 7–9.
A lesion within a specific set of fibers 
within the optic nerve on one side may 
result in a scotoma, or blind area within 
the visual field only for that eye. An 
example of a scotoma is represented sty-
Figure 7–9.  Schematic depiction of monocular blindness of the left eye. 
Image credit: Taylor Reeves.

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   105
listically in the visual field for the left eye 
shown in Figure 7–10.
A lesion of the decussating fibers in 
the optic chiasm (sparing the ipsilateral 
fibers) may result in bitemporal (heter-
onymous) hemianopsia. See the visual 
field representation in Figure 7–11. It is 
called bitemporal because the temporal 
portions of both visual fields are affected. 
It is called heteronymous because it 
involves the right side of one visual field 
and the left side of the other visual field. It 
is called hemianopsia because half of the 
visual field is affected. The term hemiano-
pia is synonymous with hemianopsia.
A lesion of the optic tract (after the 
fibers have passed through the optic chi-
asm) on the left side of the brain may 
result in right homonymous hemianop-
sia (Figure 7–12). Reference to the term 
right is used because the right visual field 
is affected (due to damage on the contra-
lateral side of the brain). It is called hom-
onymous because the same side is affected 
in both visual fields.
A lesion of the optic tract fibers pro-
jecting to visual cortex below the calcarine 
fissure on the left side of the brain may 
result in bilateral upper right quadran-
topsia (Figure 7–13). Lesions that affect 
the occipital lobe are most often caused 
by disruptions in blood supply from the 
posterior cerebral artery. In some cases, 
there is enough collateral circulation of 
blood supplied by the middle cerebral 
artery for some of the affected visual area 
to be spared.
A lesion of the optic tract fibers pro-
jecting to visual cortex above the calcarine 
fissure on the left side of the brain may 
result in bilateral lower right quadrantop-
sia (Figure 7–14).
Figure 7–10.  Schematic depiction of a scotoma. Image credit: Taylor 
Reeves.

106
Figure 7–11.  Schematic depiction of bitemporal (heteronymous) 
hemianopsia. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.
Figure 7–12.  Schematic depiction of a right (homonymous) 
hemianopsia. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.

107
Figure 7–13.  Schematic depiction of a bilateral upper right 
quadrantopsia. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.
Figure 7–14.  Schematic depiction of a bilateral lower right 
quadrantopsia. Image credit: Taylor Reeves.

108   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
What Are Visual Attention Deficits?
In addition to visual field defects and def-
icits in visual acuity, many people with 
neurogenic cognitive-linguistic disorders 
also have neglect of the visual fields. Peo-
ple with visual neglect are able to “see” 
the visual world in front of them in the 
sense that neurological impulses carry-
ing visual information from the retina are 
received in the occipital lobe. However, 
they do not, or are not able to, attend to a 
portion of the visual space such that they 
do not know that they see it. Visual neglect 
is most typical in the visual field contralat-
eral to the site of lesion. Given that a per-
son with a neurogenic language disorder 
is most likely to have a left hemisphere 
lesion, if he or she has visual neglect, it is 
most likely of the right hemispace. How-
ever, reported incidence of visual neglect 
is actually higher in people with right 
compared to left hemisphere lesions.
A challenge in working with people 
who neglect part of the visual space is that 
they are typically unaware of the problem 
and thus do not adjust for it. One way 
visual neglect might be noticed is when 
a person eats only half of a meal placed 
before her on a tray, not because she is not 
interested in items on the other side but 
simply because she does not know they 
are there. Another clue might be when a 
person ignores visitors on one side of a 
room, orientating to and speaking with 
only the ones on the nonneglected side. 
Because visual neglect affects interper-
sonal communication as well as read-
ing, processing, and responding to visual 
items during assessment, it is important 
that clinicians take care to screen for it. It is 
also vital that they address visual neglect 
appropriately during intervention. Spe-
cific means of doing this are addressed in 
Chapter 18.
What Are Ocular Motor Deficits?
The neuromuscular system controlling 
movements of the eyes functions to con-
trol reflexes (e.g., changes in pupil dilation 
and curvature of the lens), rotation of the 
eyes within their sockets to allow fixation 
from point to point so that a person may 
look at things (saccadic eye movements), 
and following of moving targets with the 
eyes (pursuit movements). Peripheral 
nerve damage may affect ocular move-
ments. Eye-movement problems some-
times co-occur with cognitive-linguistic 
disorders such that it is important for the 
clinician to be aware of them and to refer 
people suspected of having them for a full 
evaluation by a neuroophthalmologist.
What Are Some Higher-
Level Visual Deficits?
Lesions in the visual association areas and 
their projections may lead to problems of 
higher-level visual processing and inte-
gration of visual information. Examples 
are the following:
• Dyslexia, an impairment in under-
standing written materials. Dyslexia 
has varied forms, including surface 
dyslexia, an impairment in visual 
decoding of graphemes (printed 
units of meaning, such as letters), 
and deep dyslexia, an impairment 
in higher-level interpretation and 
understanding of written words
• Aperceptive agnosia, the inability 
to recognize an object; may be 
tactile, olfactory, visual, auditory, 
or gustatory (often characterized 
according to the modality affected, 
e.g., visual agnosia, the inability 

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   109
to recognize an object, image, or 
written word even though one can 
see it)
• Associative agnosia, a failure to 
associate meaning to what is seen 
(e.g., an object’s relevance and 
function)
• Prosopagnosia, an impairment in 
the ability to recognize faces
• Optic aphasia, an impairment 
in naming an object presented 
visually, despite being able to 
describe the object
• Visuoconstructive deficits, 
problems with being able to 
process two- or three-dimensional 
relationships in space
Visuoconstructive deficits may be seen in 
a person’s inability to re-create a pattern, 
such as copying a drawing, or assembling 
blocks in a pattern that matches a preassem-
bled set of blocks. They may also be seen as 
topographic disorientation, the inability to 
interpret visuospatial relationships such as 
those needed for using a map, or following 
a set of driving or walking directions.
Exercises to help foster learning and 
reflection about the visual system with 
special relevance to aphasiology are given 
in the Learning Resources and Activities 
section. Take care to study any related 
content you have not already mastered 
and to consider how you may be likely 
to use and talk about that information in 
your clinical work.
What Aspects of the  
Neurophysiology of Hearing Are 
Most Relevant to People With 
Neurogenic Language Disorders?
People with brain-based cognitive-lin-
guistic disorders commonly have one or 
more types of hearing and auditory pro-
cessing deficits. Just as vision and visual 
processing abilities are key to much of the 
work that is typically done in research 
and clinical practice in aphasiology, so are 
hearing and auditory processing abilities. 
For most people, the auditory modality is 
key to socialization and everyday com-
munication and thus to quality of life. 
Fortunately, most SLPs have formal back-
ground in at least basic aspects of audi-
ology such that they tend to know more 
about the nature of hearing and auditory 
processing than they do about vision. 
Many have experience with at least rudi-
mentary aspects of the screening for hear-
ing disorders as well as experience col-
laborating with audiologists to address 
clinical and research questions relevant 
to people with neurogenic communica-
tion disorders. Thus, we engage here in 
only a brief review of important aspects 
of neurophysiology of hearing and audi-
tory processing as they tend to be affected 
in people with acquired neurogenic com-
munication disorders.
The basic anatomical components 
involved in auditory linguistic processing 
and their primary functions, along with 
deficits that might result from problems 
with each component, are summarized 
in Table 7–1. From the cochlea to the pri-
mary cortex, tonotopic organization of the 
frequency of sounds is preserved. That is, 
neurons contiguous with one another rep-
resent frequencies closest to one another; 
the further apart auditory fibers are, the 
more distant the frequencies of the acous-
tic information they convey.
Auditory problems may be gener-
ally categorized as auditory acuity defi-
cits, problems of pitch or tone percep-
tion, auditory attention deficits, deficits 
in sound localization, and higher-level 
“central” auditory processing problems. 
The latter category is fundamental to the 

110
Table 7–1.  Basic Components and Associated Functions and Potential Deficits in 
Auditory Linguistic Processing
Anatomical Component
Function
Associated Potential 
Deficits
Outer ear, tympanic 
membrane, middle ear 
(ossicles to round window)
Air and bone conduction, 
mechanical transmission 
of sound waves
Ipsilateral conductive 
hearing loss
Middle ear (cochlea, hair 
cells, spiral ganglia)
Hydraulic converted to 
electrical transmission of 
sound
Ipsilateral sensorineural 
hearing loss, loudness 
recruitment, reduced 
speech discrimination
Vestibulocochlear nerve
Transmission of 
electroacoustic signal to 
brainstem
Ipsilateral sensorineural 
hearing loss, loudness 
recruitment, reduced 
speech discrimination
Brainstem cochlear nuclei, 
superior olivary nuclei, 
lateral lemniscus, inferior 
colliculus
Relay of sound information 
to other brainstem 
structures and thalamus
Ipsilateral or bilateral 
sensorineural hearing 
loss, loudness recruitment, 
reduced speech 
discrimination, impaired 
reflexes that require 
auditory-visual integration, 
reduced auditory attention
Thalamus (medial 
geniculate body)
Relay of sound information 
to  multiple cortical and 
subcortical areas
Reduced auditory 
attention, reduced speed 
of processing, difficulty 
processing pitch and 
rhythm
Primary auditory cortex 
(Heschl’s gyri, superior 
temporal convolution)
Initial interpretation of 
speech sounds
Auditory agnosia, pure 
word deafness, auditory 
comprehension deficits
Auditory association areas
Phonemic analysis and 
interpretation
Auditory-visual 
dissociation, auditory 
comprehension deficits
Multiple cortical and 
subcortical structures
Parallel and distributed 
processes integrating 
multimodal sensory 
information with top-
down linguistic, cognitive, 
social, and environmental 
influences; elaboration, 
synthesis, and abstraction 
influenced by auditory 
information processing
Difficulty with multimodal 
integration of linguistic with 
nonlinguistic information, 
auditory comprehension 
deficits, challenges with 
abstraction and synthesis

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   111
understanding of most neurogenic lan-
guage disorders; higher-level auditory 
processing problems are often part of the 
nature of aphasia and related disorders, 
not just concomitant conditions. Although 
hearing problems are a more central com-
ponent of the scope of practice of audi-
ologists than aphasiologists, cortical-level 
addressing problems related to the lin-
guistic processing of auditory information 
is well within the scope of SLPs.
As acoustic information is processed 
at higher levels from the brainstem and 
beyond, there is greater interaction among 
components and greater contralateral 
representation of auditory input. The fact 
that there is greater contralateral than 
ipsilateral representation of sound at cor-
tical levels is the reason for what is known 
as the right ear advantage for speech 
processing. That is, listeners who are left 
brain dominant for language tend to pro-
cess linguistic stimuli with greater effi-
ciency when the information is presented 
through the right as compared to the left 
ear. This fact is not always functionally 
relevant, in that the advantage tends to be 
small and most everyday communication 
is binaural.
The auditory association area, sur-
rounding Heschl’s gyri, functions to iden-
tify and recognize sounds. From there, 
basic sound information is integrated 
with input from other cortical and sub-
cortical structures to associate sounds 
with semantic associations and interpre-
tations. The multimodal integration of 
sounds with other types of stimuli, along 
with influences of linguistic, paralinguis-
tic, and social contexts, is not easily local-
izable within specific structures. For this 
reason, many psycholinguistic and neu-
rolinguistic models of auditory language 
processing in the brain (introduced in 
Chapter 4) depend on the association of 
constructs with stages of processing that 
might not be associated to specific struc-
tures in a definitive way. We consider rel-
evant aspects of hearing as they relate to 
aging in Chapter 9. We address the varied 
types of auditory processing deficits asso-
ciated with categories of language disor-
ders in Section III. Basic means of taking 
hearing and auditory processing prob-
lems into account when thinking criti-
cally about language-specific problems 
in an assessment context are reviewed in 
Chapter 18.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 Make a list of bolded terms used in 
this chapter that are new to you or 
that you have not yet mastered. Prac-
tice defining them in your own words.
	 2.	 What are inter- and intrahemispheric 
specializations of the brain and how are 
they relevant to clinical aphasiology?
	 3.	 How does the neurophysiological prin-
ciple of “interconnectivity” through-
out the brain challenge the structure- 
function correlates?
	 4.	 Use the structures, landmarks, and con-
cepts listed Box 7–1 as a basic checklist 
for evaluating your basic knowledge 
of neuroanatomy and neurophysiol-
ogy related to clinical practice with 
people who have acquired neurogenic 
communication disorders. Rate your-
self using a rating scale of your choos-
ing (e.g., 1 to 10, 1 to 3, plus or minus).
a.	 How do you fare?
b.	 What specific content do you 
need to review or study further?
c.	 What steps will you take to fill in 
areas of knowledge about neuro-
anatomy and neurophysiology 
pertinent to clinical aphasiology?

112   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 	 Review the supplemental review con-
tents at the end of these learning and 
reflection activities. Complete any 
items that would help you in terms of 
filling in your basic knowledge in this 
area. Additional materials and helpful 
web links to support your studies are 
available on the companion website.
	 5.	 Why is it important for clinical apha-
siologists to know more about neuro-
anatomy and neurophysiology than 
just about structures and functions 
associated with language and speech?
	 6.	 Describe examples of specialization of 
structure and function in the brain.
	 7.	 Define and give examples of inter- 
and intrahemispheric specialization.
	 8.	 In what ways might a clinical aphasi-
ologist discuss the principle of inter-
connectivity in the brain when coun-
seling people who have recently had 
a stroke or brain injury?
	 9.	 How is neuroplasticity related to 
spontaneous recovery?
10.	 How is neuroplasticity related to pro-
fessional treatment dedicated to lan-
guage recovery?
11.	 How is knowing about prognostic fac-
tors related to stroke and brain injury 
vital in counseling people with neuro-
genic communication disorders?
12.	 When considering a given stroke or 
brain injury survivor’s prognosis for 
language recovery, what are the limi-
tations of interpreting findings from a 
given research study about prognostic 
factors?
Supplemental Review of 
Neuroanatomy Related 
to Aphasiology
	 1.	 What gyri and sulci demarcate each 
of the lobes of the brain? Be sure that 
you can identify these, where pos-
sible, on superior, lateral, and medial 
images of the left hemisphere.
	 2.	 Print or view online various images 
of the brain showing medial, superior, 
and ventral views.
a.	 Identify each of the structures 
in the table on the following 
page on as many of the views as 
appropriate for that structure.
b.	 Complete the empty fields in  
the table. Note that some of 
structural areas listed have 
multiple associated Brodmann’s 
area numbers.
c.	 Once you have completed the 
table, practice covering the 
content in all columns but the 
“structure” column and see if you 
can fill in the rest without looking 
at any notes or diagrams. Then 
do the same again by covering all 
but the Brodmann’s area column. 
Next, try it once more looking 
only as the associated abilities or 
functions.
	 3.	 In general, what is the relationship 
between the site of lesion and whether 
an individual will have ipsilateral 
versus contralateral deficits in motor 
control or sensation?
	 4.	 Describe in basic terms the nervous 
system’s logical organization of infor-
mation pertaining to sight (retinotopic 
organization), sound (tonotopic orga-
nization), and sensation and motor 
control (somatotopic organization).
Supplemental Review of 
Blood Supply to the Brain
	 1.	 With a partner, describe the course of 
the major arteries from the heart to 
the brainstem, cerebellum, and cortex. 

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   113
Be sure to include how blood reaches 
each of the functional areas of speech, 
language, hearing, vision, and motor 
control of the body. As you mention 
these functional areas, practice your 
use of neuroanatomical information 
in context by referring to the lobes, 
major gyri and sulci, and other rele-
vant neuroanatomical structures and 
include references to corresponding 
Brodmann’s areas. Use illustrations, 
pointing out key structures to enrich 
your explanation.
	 2.	 Now, do this again, this time drawing 
your illustrations yourself freehand to 
support your explanation.
	 3.	 What is an anastomosis? What is a 
watershed region? How do anasto-
moses and watershed regions help 
protect the brain during a stroke?
	 4.	 What is the circle of Willis?
a.	 What are its key components 
that are most relevant to the 
blood supply to the parts of the 
brain that are most essential for 
communication?
Structure or 
structural area
Classically 
associated 
Brodmann’s 
area(s)
Lobe(s) 
where the 
structure is 
located
Classically associated 
abilities or functions
Primary motor strip 
(or cortex)
Premotor strip (or 
cortex)
Primary sensory area 
(or cortex)
Sensory association 
area (or cortex)
Broca’s area 
Wernicke’s area 
Perisylvian area 
Auditory association 
area (or cortex) or 
Heschl’s gyrus
Primary visual area 
(or cortex)
Prefrontal cortex 

114   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
b.	 How is the functioning of the 
circle of Willis relevant to clinical 
practice in aphasiology?
	 5.	 Draw the circle of Willis several times 
and make sure that you are able to 
label its key components. Do this until 
you can do it correctly without look-
ing at any notes or diagrams.
	 6.	 Make a three-dimensional model of the 
circle of Willis. Get creative. Wonderful 
replicas may be made of clay, aluminum 
foil, wire, cardboard tubing, straws, 
and red licorice. Use your imagination. 
Label the key components. Work with 
a partner and describe to one another 
the key components, where blood cen-
ters (from the heart) and exits (toward 
the brain), and how anastomosis func-
tions in the circle of Willis. Share strat-
egies for remembering the layout of 
its arteries and the areas of the central 
nervous system that they supply.
	 7.	 What are common functional deficits 
that result from disruptions in the 
blood supply to the cortex from
a.	 The right and left anterior cere-
bral arteries
b.	 The right and left middle cerebral 
arteries
c.	 The right and left posterior 
cerebral arteries
	 8.	 Imagine you are counseling a person 
who has had a stroke affecting the 
left anterior cerebral artery. Explain 
to him how the stroke might be asso-
ciated with certain functional defi-
cits that he may be having. To illus-
trate your key points, draw freehand 
sketches of lateral and medial views 
of the brain and illustrate possible 
areas of blood supply disruption that 
might have occurred. Note that refer-
ring to images with motor homun-
culi overlaid on key brain structures 
might be helpful in this exercise.
a.	 Repeat this, now imagining that 
you are counseling a person who 
has had a stroke affecting the left 
middle cerebral artery. Note that 
referring to images with sensory 
homunculi overlaid on key brain 
structures might be helpful in this 
exercise.
b.	 Repeat this, now imagining that 
you are counseling a person who 
has had a stroke affecting the left 
posterior cerebral artery. In this 
case, referring to sensory or motor 
homunculi may be irrelevant.
Supplemental Review of 
the Visual System
	 1.	 List and describe four general catego-
ries of visual deficits common in peo-
ple with brain-based communication 
disorders.
	 2.	 Why is it important to explore pat-
terns of visual perception deficits and 
visual attention problems people with 
neurogenic language disorders?
	 3.	 With a partner, read aloud the subsec-
tion of this chapter under the heading 
“How are visual deficits categorized?” 
Before you move on to each subse-
quent sentence, be sure you under-
stand what you have just read. Try 
paraphrasing any content that is new 
to you to be sure that you grasp it.
	 4.	 Draw a diagram to illustrate the 
visual pathway identifying the optic 
nerve, optic chiasm, optic tract, lateral 
geniculate body, and visual cortex. 
Then use your diagram to discuss the 
visual field representation at the level 
of each of these major structures.
	 5.	 Imagine a person with bitemporal 
hemianopsia. What visual fields are 

Neurophysiology and Neuropathologies   115
affected? Where do you think her 
lesion is likely to be located?
	 6.	 A person with Wernicke’s aphasia 
may exhibit no vision in the right half 
of both visual fields.
a.	 Name this deficit.
b.	 What site of lesion is commonly 
implicated?
	 7.	 Create your own diagram of the 
visual system and the visual fields 
and illustrate
a.	 Monocular blindness
b.	 Bitemporal (heteronymous) 
hemianopsia
c.	 Nasal hemianopsia
d.	 Homonymous hemianopsia
e.	 Upper left quadrantopsia
f.	 Lower left quadrantopsia
	 8.	 List and describe examples of “higher-
level” visual processing problems.
	 9.	 What are some special challenges in 
language intervention for people with 
visual neglect?
Please see the companion website for addi- 
tional resources.
Supplemental Review of 
the Auditory System
	 1.	 List and describe five general catego-
ries of auditory deficits common in 
people with brain-based communica-
tion disorders.
	 2.	 Draw a diagram to illustrate the main 
auditory pathways and structures. On 
it, identify the outer ear, middle ear, 
inner ear, vestibulocochlear nerve, 
brainstem structures, thalamus, pri-
mary auditory cortex, and auditory 
association areas. Then use your dia-
gram to discuss the type of auditory 
problems a person might have if he or 
she had a lesion at each level.
	 3.	 In what ways might SLPs and audiol-
ogists collaborate in addressing chal-
lenges faced by adults with acquired 
cortical-level auditory linguistic pro-
cessing deficits?


117
Chapter
8
Neuroimaging and  
Other Instrumentation
In this chapter, we address basic infor-
mation about common neurodiagnostic 
techniques used in work with people 
who have neurogenic communication 
disorders. We broadly categorize these 
as neuroimaging techniques and “other” 
forms of instrumentation-based meth-
ods. Although much of what SLPs do in 
everyday practice is not necessarily based 
on the use of such instrumentation, it is 
important for the excellent clinician and 
clinical researcher to have an appropri-
ate level of sophistication for reading 
research articles and medical charts to 
support work as a savvy interprofessional 
rehabilitation team member.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What are the most relevant neuroim-
aging techniques for aphasiologists to 
know about?
	 2.	 What other neurodiagnostic methods 
are important for aphasiologists to 
know about?
What Are the Most Relevant 
Neuroimaging Techniques for 
Aphasiologists to Know About?
Neuroimaging techniques pertinent to 
aphasiology include computerized axial 
tomography, magnetic resonance imaging, 
functional magnetic resonance imaging, 
positron emission computed tomography, 
single photo emission computerized tomog-
raphy, cerebral angiography, magnetic res-
onance angiography, event-related poten-
tials, and electrocorticography. Here we 
briefly review how each of these functions 
and how each might be used to gain 
insights about acquired neurogenic lan-
guage disorders. There is ample literature 
available to support further learning of 
those with special interests in applying 
any of these and other techniques.
Computerized Axial 
Tomography (CAT or CT)
Also called X-ray computed tomography, 
computerized axial tomography (CAT or  

118   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
CT) measures energy transmission through 
tissue. Although it entails exposure to 
radiation, it is one of the most common 
imaging technologies available because 
it may be used quickly, is relatively inex-
pensive, and allows a view of gross brain 
structures. CT entails quickly rotating 
narrow X-ray beams detected by CT. An 
X-ray tube, as show in Figure 8–1, actually 
circles around the head. As the X-ray pho-
tons are transmitted through tissue, the 
tissue through which they course attenu-
ates them to some degree. The degree of 
that attenuation is measured by contrast-
ing the initial X-ray intensity with its post-
absorption strength and is expressed as a 
fraction or linear attenuation coefficient. 
By taking a series of X-rays at many angles 
at progressive locations throughout the 
brain, images of slices of brain tissue are 
reconstructed, reflecting the relative den-
sity of tissue throughout. High density is 
seen as lighter, or white, and low density 
as darker. The thickness of slices may be 
adjusted by varying the thickness of the 
X-ray beam.
CT has been used for over three 
decades to study brain-behavior relation-
ships in acquired communication disor-
ders and has been used to confirm origi-
nal multidimensional models of aphasia 
classification that were based on post-
mortem studies of people who had exhib-
ited various symptoms of aphasia and 
related disorders. CT is especially useful 
for detecting subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
necrotic infarction, trauma, edema, cysts, 
and excessive production or blocking of 
cerebrospinal fluid that compresses brain 
tissue. It is not ideal for detecting small 
Figure 8–1.  CT scanner. Source: “US Navy 030819-N-9593R-125 Hos-
pital Corpsman 2nd Class Roy Puerto, right, of Olangapo City, Philip-
pines, demonstrates the operation of the CT Scan machine” by CWO 
Seth Rossman, courtesy of the U.S. Navy, licensed under CC BY 3.0. 
A full-color version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

Neuroimaging and Other Instrumentation   119
infarcts and/or acute infarcts that are not 
hemorrhagic. In Figure 8–2, see an exam-
ple of CT images showing a glioma in the 
left parietal lobe.
Enhanced CT, incorporating radi-
opaque dye injected into the arteries to 
enhance the degree of X-ray attenuation, 
shows where there is bleeding in the 
brain. CT is important immediately fol-
lowing stroke for diagnosing whether a 
stroke is hemorrhagic or occlusive. This 
is critical because a person experiencing a 
hemorrhage should not be administered 
thrombolysis following stroke.
CT perfusion studies entail the use of 
enhanced contrast intravascular tracers to 
enable indexing of cerebral blood volume, 
cerebral blood flow, and the speed of per-
fusion. CT has great utility for studying 
changes in perfusion following stroke and 
brain injury and differences in perfusion 
associated with certain pharmacologi-
cal or behavioral interventions meant to 
reduce the degree of permanent impact of 
stroke. Although CT entails radiation and 
is not ideal for detecting acute lesions, it is 
less costly than other imaging techniques, 
such as magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI). Also, it is not as sensitive as MRI 
to motion artifacts, which is especially 
important for use with people who can-
not or will not remain still.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
MRI makes use of an applied magnetic 
field around the head and brief and 
repeated bursts of radiofrequency (RF) 
wave exposure. Spinning hydrogen pro-
tons within water-rich living tissue, each 
having positive and negative aspects, 
constantly convey magnetic signals. For 
an MRI of the brain, the person’s head is 
Figure 8–2.  Sample CT image showing a glioma. Left and right are reversed in each of 
these images, as they typically are with most neuroimaging scans. The glioma shown in 
both is in the left parietal lobe (the dark spot appearing on the right side of each scan). The 
image on the right shows enhanced contrast. Source: “Glioma of the left parietal lobe. CT 
scan with contrast enhancement” by Mikhail Kalinin, licensed under CC BY 3.0.

120   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
placed within a magnetic field. This causes 
the hydrogen protons to align rather than 
continue to spin randomly. Then an RF 
signal is emitted in repeated short pulses, 
exciting the hydrogen protons. Protons 
associated with different tissue types and 
immersed in differing chemical environ-
ments align differently. When the RF 
signal stops, the protons return to their 
previous orientation within the magnetic 
field. When they do this, they release RF 
energy, which is recorded via a receiving 
coil. Two- or three-dimensional images 
are created based on relative degrees of 
RF signal at each point in space. Given 
that bones contain little water, they pro-
duce fewer MRI signals. An example of an 
MRI scanner is shown in Figure 8–3.
MRI provides better resolution than 
CT and does not entail radiation. It is 
better than CT for imaging the effects of 
ischemic strokes. Challenges are primarily 
that it is highly sensitive to motion, which 
can be a problem with fidgety or uncoop-
erative people, and that it cannot be used 
around any type of metal, precluding use 
with people who have metallic implants. 
Sometimes placing a person in an MRI 
scanner, especially if he or she is claus-
trophobic, poses stress that is not war-
ranted by an increase in detection over CT 
(Myburgh, 2009).
Varied levels of proton relaxation are 
used in MRI. T1-weighted images, more 
sensitive to lipids, provide better gray ver-
sus white matter contrast, enabling greater 
anatomic resolution, but do not reflect 
edema and infarcts very well. T2-weighted 
images, sensitive to water molecule con-
trasts, are more sensitive to pathology, 
such as edema and ischemia. When used 
with contrastive dyes, vascular changes 
may be highlighted. Examples of T1- and 
T2-weighted images are given in Figure 8–4.
Figure 8–3.  MRI scanner. Image courtesy of Philips Healthcare. A full-
color version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

121
A
B
Figure 8–4.  Examples of T1- and T2-weighted magnetic resonance 
images. Left and right are reversed, per standard practice. Axial T1 (left ) 
and T2 (right ) images of two separate individuals. The top images (A) 
show slices of the temporal and occipital lobes of a man with chronic 
Wernicke’s aphasia due to stroke. The bottom images (B) show slices of 
the frontal and parietal lobes in a woman with chronic anomic aphasia. 
Images courtesy of Dr. Julius Fridriksson, University of South Carolina.

122   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Diffusion MRI, also called diffu-
sion tensor imaging (DTI), is the detect-
ing and mapping of the diffusion of water 
molecules within myelinated fiber tracks. 
Thus, it is sensitive to pathology in associ-
ation fibers in the brain. Fiber tracking, or 
tractography, is a DTI technique that can 
be applied to study the course and nature 
of specific nerve fiber bundles. Tracks are 
color coded to reflect whether they run in 
anterior-posterior, left-right, or superior-
inferior directions (Figure 8–5). DTI is 
likely to become increasingly vital in neu-
rolinguistic studies aimed at distinguish-
ing models of specialized brain centers 
versus distributed processes controlled by 
connections among varied brain regions.
MRI diffusion-weighted imaging 
(DWI) is a means of indexing the rate of 
water diffusion within voxels (specific 
units of magnetic resonance images). DWI 
is better than T1- and T2-weighted MRI 
at detecting areas of acute infarction soon 
after stroke onset, so is especially helpful 
in diagnosing ischemic strokes sooner. 
DWI may be used to detect an infarct 
within 15 to 20 minutes; MRIs tend not to 
detect an infarct until 4 to 6 hours post-
stroke, and CTs require 36 to 48 hours.
Perfusion weighted imaging (PWI) 
is a method of indexing microscopic levels 
of blood flow. A special contrast medium 
that is sensitive to specific differences 
among protons is used to enhance con-
trasts that enable evaluation of active or 
acute stroke processes. It can detect the 
effects of ischemia within minutes. It may 
also be used to study blood flow in and 
Figure 8–5.  Diffusion tensor image showing a left lateral view of 
the brain. Tractography shows anterior-posterior, left-right, and supe-
rior-inferior nerve fiber bundles. Source: “Webs’r’us” by jgmarcelino, 
licensed under CC BY 3.0. A full-color version of this figure can be 
found in the Color Insert.

Neuroimaging and Other Instrumentation   123
around brain tumors and to help discern 
between neoplasm and necrotic tissue due 
to radiation. Given that PWI is sensitive to 
areas of hypoperfusion contiguous with 
areas of infarction, it helps to determine 
areas with potential for improved blood 
flow in the penumbra (the area tissue 
surrounding an infarct). This is vital in 
that the volume of hypoperfused tissue 
has been shown to be a better predictor 
of language recovery than the volume of 
actual lesions (Hillis, Barker, Beauchamp, 
Gordon, & Wityk, 2000).
Functional MRI (fMRI) is a means of 
indexing dynamic changes in blood flow 
as indicated by varying levels of oxygen 
in the brain. As such, it is not a direct 
measure of neuronal activity but a means 
of quantifying hemodynamic changes 
associated with active metabolism during 
ongoing neuronal activity. The activity of 
hemoglobin is differentiated from deoxy-
hemoglobin within the magnetic field. As 
one or more specific areas of the brain are 
activated to perform particular cognitive, 
linguistic, or motor tasks, more oxygen 
is consumed in those areas, resulting in 
release of greater amounts of deoxyhe-
moglobin. Deoxyhemoglobin generates 
greater inflow of oxygenated blood to the 
activated area within about 3 to 6 seconds, 
which is indexed as the blood oxygen-
level dependent (BOLD) effect. Repeated 
sets of images are taken as participants 
rest (at baseline) and as they engage in 
specific tasks. Indices from baseline are 
contrasted with task-associated indices 
to suggest cortical areas associated with 
specific functions. fMRI enables moni-
toring of hemodynamic changes during 
stroke and brain injury recovery and of 
changes in brain tumor growth or reduc-
tion. Research aphasiologists use fMRI to 
study not only neuropathology and spon-
taneous aspects of recovery associated 
with language disorders but also basic 
aspects of normal cognitive and linguis-
tic processing (Crosson et al., 2007; Frid-
riksson, Bonilha, Baker, Moser, & Rorden, 
2010; Saur et al., 2006; Thompson & den 
Ouden, 2008).
Positron emission computed tomog-
raphy (PET). PET enables studies of 
regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF). It 
works by detecting radioisotopes (often 
radioactive oxygen) injected into the 
bloodstream as they travel through the 
brain. Given that blood flow increases 
to more active areas of the brain, greater 
absorption of oxygen in those areas is 
contrasted with areas consuming lower 
levels of oxygen. Using different types of 
radioisotopes, glucose metabolism may 
also be studied. PET images are coded 
in colors. Shades from dark to light red 
indicate the highest degree of metabo-
lism, then shades of orange, yellow, green, 
blue, and black. A strength of PET is that, 
even when there is no evidence of struc-
tural damage, changes in metabolism may 
be detected. See Figure 8–6 for an fMRI 
image showing reduced metabolism in a 
person with primary progressive apha-
sia whose MRI image was reported to be 
normal, including no evidence of atro-
phy. See Figure 8–7 for examples of how 
PET images can depict metabolic changes 
associated with the progression of neuro-
degenerative disease.
PET can also be helpful for showing 
differences in regions of the brain acti-
vated during specific types of tasks. For 
example, PET has been useful for dem-
onstrating that various areas of the brain 
other than those transitionally associated 
with specific speech and language func-
tions are involved in language process-
ing. See, for example, Figure 8–8. How-
ever, PET has been shown to have poor 
resolution and measurement accuracy in 

124
Figure 8–6.  PET imaging example of functional changes. Left and right are reversed in the 
images. This series of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET images shows reduced metabolism 
(shown by arrows pointing toward areas of reduced activation in the left superior temporal, 
inferior parietal, and lateral thalamic regions) in a person with primary progressive aphasia 
whose MRI was reported to be normal. Image courtesy of Dr. Sultan Tarlaci, Sifa University, 
Turkey. A full-color version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

125
Figure 8–7.  PET images associated with neurodegenerative changes. Left: Normal 
FDG-PET activity. Center: Metabolic changes in mild cognitive impairment. Right: The 
brain of a person with Alzheimer’s disease. Image courtesy of Drs. Susan M. Landau and 
William J. Jagust, University of California Berkeley. A full-color version of this figure can 
be found in the Color Insert.
Figure 8–8.  PET images associated with speech and language tasks. Each image of 
the left lateral view of the brain shows a typical activation pattern during a linguistic task. 
The image on the upper left is associated with reading, the upper right with listening to 
words, the lower left with thinking about words, and the lower right with saying words. 
Image courtesy of Dr. Marcus E. Raichle, Washington University School of Medicine. 
A full-color version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

126   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
people abusing drugs and taking neuro-
tropic medications. Also, interpretation in 
traumatic brain injury (TBI) survivors is 
not well standardized (Granachar, 2003).
Single Photo Emission  
Computerized Tomography (SPECT)
Like PET, single photo emission comput-
erized tomography (SPECT) makes use 
of intravenously injected radioisotopes, 
but the effects last longer. It detects dif-
fuse and focal damage and is useful for 
differentiating stroke from other types of 
brain pathology, such as neurodegenera-
tive disease. It has been shown to be more 
sensitive than CT or MRI for detecting 
lesions subsequent to TBI, including small 
lesions not seen via static neuroimaging 
and lesions at earlier acute stages (Meller, 
Sheehan, & Thurber, 2008).
Cerebral Angiography
Cerebral angiography (or arteriography) 
helps determine the extent of vascular 
problems within cerebral blood vessels. It 
allows visualization of the arterial blood 
supply to the cortex and the degree of 
collateral circulation occurring in cases 
of occlusion. While the patient is under 
local anesthesia, a catheter is placed in 
the femoral artery and extended up into 
the carotid or vertebral artery. A contrast 
medium is injected through the catheter 
and then X-rays are taken to show the 
contrast as it courses through arteries, 
then capillaries, then veins. Carotid artery 
injection allows visualization of the ante-
rior and middle cerebral arteries and their 
extensions, whereas injection into the ver-
tebral artery enables visualization of the 
posterior cerebral arteries (Figure 8–9). 
Cerebral angiography is especially impor-
tant for identifying cerebral aneurisms, 
arteriovenous malformation, and tumors 
within the vascular system. It has been 
shown not to be so effective in detecting 
shallow ulcerating lesions.
One form of angiography is sodium 
amytal infusion, also known as the Wada 
test. It entails the injection of amobarbi-
tal (an anesthetic), diluted with saline 
solution, into the carotid artery to enable 
determination of hemispheric dominance 
for language (discussed in Chapter 7). 
When it reaches brain tissue, sodium 
amytal renders whatever tissue it reaches 
nonfunctional for a brief period of up to  
10 minutes. The person under study is 
asked to extend his or her arms and fingers 
and to count backward from 10. For most 
people, injection on the left side leads to 
an almost immediate ceasing of contralat-
eral motor control of the arms and fingers 
and cessation of speech. Sodium amytal 
infusion is especially critical for planning 
surgical management of epilepsy so that 
language-dominant areas can be strategi-
cally spared.
CT angiography (CTA) is increasingly 
used to measure stenosis or occlusion of the 
carotid arteries and aneurysms. A contrast 
medium that quickly targets the arteries is 
imaged through fast dynamic CT scanning. 
Software then enables two- and three-
dimensional reconstructions of images.
Magnetic resonance angiography 
(MRA) is the use of MRI methods to image 
vascular functions in the arterial system. 
It may be used, for example, to detect arte-
rial stenosis (narrowing), aneurysms, and 
occlusions. Magnetic resonance venog-
raphy (MRV) is the use of MRI to image 
blood flow in the venous system.

Neuroimaging and Other Instrumentation   127
What Other Neurodiagnostic 
Methods Are Important for 
Aphasiologists to Know About?
Electroencephalography (EEG)
EEG is a means of studying electrical 
potential differences between two or more 
points on the scalp. It takes advantage of 
the fact that electrical activity is gener-
ated through the dynamic fluctuation of 
voltage differences between the two ends 
of cortical dendrites. EEG can be applied 
in research or diagnostic laboratories, as 
well as at bedside. Electrodes are placed 
in a prescribed pattern on the scalp over 
each of the four primary cortical lobes. 
Figure 8–9.  Cerebral angiography image featuring the 
posterior portion of the circle of Willis. Left and right 
are reversed. Before this image was taken, a contrast 
medium had been injected into the left vertebral artery 
(the large artery on the right). The fact that the con-
trast is seen not only in the left but also the contra-
lateral (right) vertebral artery demonstrates that there 
has been retrograde blood flow through the posterior 
communicating artery at the base of the circle of Willis. 
Source: “Cerebral angiography, arteria vertebralis sinis-
ter injection” by Lypothymia, licensed under CC BY 3.0.

128   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
An example is shown in Figure 8–10. The 
number of electrodes varies widely, typi-
cally from 19 to 256.
Where dendrites are more highly con-
centrated, there are greater voltages gen-
erated. Differences in electrical potential 
between any two electrodes correspond to 
cortical brain waves. EEG indexes activ-
ity summed across thousands (sometimes 
even millions) of neurons. Comparisons 
may be made between specific areas within 
either hemisphere and also between corre-
sponding functional areas in each of the 
two hemispheres. Brain wave symmetry, 
amplitude, and timing are all important 
aspects of brain wave monitoring.
EEG is most used frequently in stud-
ies of brain activity of people with epi-
lepsy and is helpful in the differential 
diagnosis of people with suspected meta-
bolic (or toxic) encephalopathy. EEG is 
key in evaluation of basic cortical func-
tioning in people who are nonresponsive, 
especially those who may be vegetative 
or comatose. Absence of brain activity is 
seen as flat lines on an EEG brain waves, 
suggesting brain death.
Although EEG has been used to 
study prognosis of language recovery in 
aphasia due to stroke (Jabbari, Maulsby, 
Holtzapple, & Marshall, 1979; Szelies, 
Mielke, Kessler, & Heiss, 2002), it is not 
commonly used for that purpose, given 
the relative merits of the more modern 
neuroimaging methods such as MRI and 
CT (e.g., greater special resolution, more 
precision, reduced setup time). Still, the 
portability and relatively low cost of EEG 
make it more accessible. Additionally, the 
fact that people under study do not have 
to hold still, that EEG use does not induce 
claustrophobia, and that EEG technology 
Figure 8–10.  Example of scalp electrode set-up for EEG. Source: 
“EEG recording” by Petter Kallioinen, licensed under CC BY 3.0. 
A full-color version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

Neuroimaging and Other Instrumentation   129
does not generate noise are all important 
additional advantages compared to other 
neuroimaging methods. EEG may be used 
in conjunction with fMRI to study the 
relationship between electrical activity (as 
indexed by EEG) and metabolic activity 
(as indexed by the BOLD effect).
Event-related potentials (ERPs, also 
called evoked potentials) entail the use of 
EEG during specific cognitive, linguistic, 
or behavioral tasks and during any type 
of somatosensory, olfactory, visual, or audi-
tory stimulation. Depending on the focus 
of the study, a sensory stimulus (often 
auditory in the realm of aphasiology) is 
presented repeatedly. The electrical re- 
sponse to each stimulus is added across the 
repeated presentations, and the measures 
are then amplified, summated, and aver-
aged. This reduces artifacts of electrical 
activity that typically co-occurs with the 
activity in response to the intentional stim-
ulation. Auditory evoked potentials can be 
used to identify problems in the auditory 
system and may also be used to determine 
approximate hearing thresholds in people 
who are nonresponsive or otherwise diffi-
cult to test. ERPs are used in experimental 
studies geared toward improved under-
standing of the timing of neural activity 
relative to specific tasks, such as lexical 
processing or real-time sentence compre-
hension. Magnetoencephalography (MEG) 
is a means of recording ERPs in the brain 
in response to specific tasks and then 
mapping those ERPs onto magnetic reso-
nance images to reflect cortical mapping 
of task-induced brain functioning.
Electrocorticography
Electrocorticography, or cortical stimula-
tion brain mapping, is the use of EEG intra-
cranially. Electrodes are placed directly on 
the surface of the brain, not on the scalp, 
as illustrated in Figure 8–11. Thus, it is a 
highly invasive procedure. Cortical map-
ping is most commonly used to avoid key 
areas of the brain vital to sensory, motor, 
cognitive, and linguistic functions dur-
ing surgical removal of brain tissue. It 
is especially important for surgeries for 
treatment of epilepsy, tumors, and arterio­
venous malformations. Electrically stimu-
lating specific areas of the brain while the 
person under study remains awake (only 
under local anesthesia) helps determine 
which specific areas are associated with 
important functions and thus should 
be avoided during surgery. It also helps 
determine the specific diseased tissue 
that is relatively safe to remove. Although 
external cortical stimulation was used as 
early as the late nineteenth century (Bhat-
nagar, 2013; Fritsch & Hitzig, 1870), exten-
sive brain mapping of sensory, speech, 
language, and motor functions deter-
mined through intraoperative cortical 
stimulation was first reported by Penfield 
and Roberts in 1959 and since has been 
reported further in relation to people with 
aphasia and related disorders (Bhatnagar 
& Andy, 1983; Bhatnagar, Mandybur, 
Buckingham, & Andy, 2000).
Additional Methods
Other instrumentation-based methods 
are used to study language processing in 
the brain in less direct ways than through 
neuroimaging. Examples are eyetracking, 
pupillometry, and sensorimotor track-
ing. Also, computerized applications for 
indexing accuracy, reaction time, and 
speed of processing on numerous types of 
cognitive-linguistic tasks are increasingly 
available and may be used in conjunction 
with neuroimaging data.

130   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 Review and define the bolded terms 
in this chapter that are new to you or 
that you have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Match each of the methods listed with 
the descriptions below.
a.	 Computerized axial tomography 
(CAT or CT)
b.	 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
c.	 Functional MRI (fMRI)
d.	 Positron emission computed 
tomography (PET)
e.	 Single photo emission computer-
ized tomography (SPECT)
f.	 Cerebral angiography
g.	 Electroencephalography (EEG)
• Brain imaging technique 
that makes use of an applied 
magnetic field around the head 
and brief and repeated bursts 
of radiofrequency (RF) wave 
exposure
• Means of indexing dynamic 
changes in blood flow as indicated 
by varying levels of oxygen in the 
brain
Figure 8–11.  Illustration of electrocorticography. M = motor; S = 
sensory. Numbers correspond to standardized sites for electrode 
placement. Source: “Intracranial electrode grid for electrocorticog-
raphy” by Blausen.com staff, licensed under CC BY 3.0. A full-color 
version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

Neuroimaging and Other Instrumentation   131
• Means of studying electrical 
potential differences between two 
or more points on the scalp
• Following injection of 
radioisotopes into the 
bloodstream, enables studies 
of regional cerebral blood flow 
(rCBF)
• Means of visualizing the arterial 
blood supply to the cortex and 
the degree of collateral circulation 
occurring in cases of occlusion
• Technique for measuring energy 
transmission through tissue, 
enabling images of “slices” of 
brain tissue recorded at various 
positions and angles via a rotating 
X-ray tube
	 3.	 Describe why EEG might be used 
instead of MRI or CT to examine neu-
ropathology, even though the latter 
methods are more precise.
	 4.	 What are the relative benefits of CT 
over MRI?
	 5.	 What are the relative benefits of MRI 
over CT?
	 6.	 What are the relative strengths and 
weaknesses of PET compared with CT 
and MRI?
	 7.	 What is functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging (fMRI)?
	 8.	 How is indexing of hemodynamic 
changes relevant to cognitive and lin-
guistic functions?
	 9.	 Describe examples of the potential 
use of tractography to study language 
comprehension and/or production.
10.	 How might an aphasiologist be in- 
volved in clinical or research studies 
involving intraoperative monitoring 
using electrocorticography?
11.	 What are some potential combinations 
of imaging and other instrumentation-
based methods that help elucidate 
language-processing abilities in the 
brain?
12.	 In what ways might information gained 
through neuroimaging be relevant to 
the ICF?
See the companion website for additional 
learning and teaching materials.


133
Chapter
9
Language in the Context of Aging
There are numerous sociocultural factors 
that influence one’s perception of “age” 
that also influence how one considers the 
cognitive and language abilities of older 
people. Deep-seeded stereotypes, plus a 
great deal of misinformation and poorly 
designed research regarding aging and 
older people, hamper approaches that 
promote aging as an important compo-
nent of development through the life 
span. In this chapter, we consider what we 
mean by the construct of “aging,” demo-
graphic patterns that make it especially 
compelling that speech-language patholo-
gists (SLPs) learn about aging, means of 
differentiating normal from pathological 
changes in the brain and in cognitive-lin-
guistic abilities, theories addressing cog-
nitive-linguistic changes with aging, and 
issues related to ageism and elderspeak. 
All of these are vital topics for the excel-
lent clinician to know about and consider 
in pursing positive and empowering ways 
to serve and advocate for older adults.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What is aging?
	 2.	 What are key theories about aging 
that are especially relevant to cogni-
tion and communication?
	 3.	 How are demographic shifts in aging 
populations relevant to SLPs?
	 4.	 What are normal changes in the brain 
as people age?
	 5.	 What are positive aspects of the aging 
brain?
	 6.	 What are normal changes in language 
as people age?
	 7.	 What theories have been proposed 
to account for cognitive-linguistic 
changes with aging?
	 8.	 What is elderspeak?
What Is Aging?
When most of us think about the term 
aging, we think of older people. In fact, 
we begin aging at the moment we are con-
ceived. Aging is an ongoing process expe-
rienced by all people at all times, no mat-
ter how old they are. These points may 
seem obvious; still, they are important in 
the context of considering the influence of 
age on people’s abilities. A common way 
of defining age is though chronological 
age: an index of how long a person has 
lived since birth. Other means of defining 
aging are functional in nature:
• Biological age, an index of the 
functioning of one’s bodily organs 
over time

134   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Cognitive age, an index of how 
one’s intelligence, memory, and 
learning abilities change over time
• Psychological age, an index of how 
one’s personality changes over time
• Social age, an index of aging 
according to one’s social roles 
and according to changes in one’s 
environment over time
What Are Key Theories About Aging 
That Are Especially Relevant to 
Cognition and Communication?
Biopsychosocial models of aging have 
gained favor in parallel to the increasing 
acceptance and integration of the World 
Health Organization (WHO) models of 
disability and health among the health 
care professions. Such models emphasize 
the complex interactions among biologi-
cal, psychological, and sociological fac-
tors that influence how people age. Our 
sense of identity according to these three 
aspects of aging is seen as central to how 
we age, and it is considered flexible in that 
the way we view and define ourselves 
evolves over time.
Many of us prefer to emphasize the 
positive aspects of later life by referring to 
“adult development” and not just “aging” 
(Overton, 2010). For many decades, formal 
models of cognitive development tended 
to focus on the period from birth through 
adolescence or early adulthood, not on 
the entire life span. Piaget’s (1936) popu-
lar stages of development, for example, 
are often still studied in current courses 
on cognitive development. The stages are 
said to occur from birth to about 6 years, 
from about 7 to about 11, and from about 
12 “to adulthood,” the latest stage encom-
passing most of a typical individual’s life.
More recently, theorists have sug-
gested frameworks and theory to sup-
port continued stages of development in 
the adult years. Where Piaget’s stages of 
development stop at the “formal opera-
tional stage” (when a person learns to 
engage in abstract thought and logical 
reasoning), others have suggested a post-
formal operational stage in which rea-
soning becomes more flexible and more 
meaningfully connected to life experience 
(Labouvie-Vief, 1984). During that stage, 
older adults are said to improve in cop-
ing with daily life challenges and changes, 
especially those with enriched life experi-
ence and engagement in higher education 
(Dunn, 2011).
The life-span model of postformal 
cognitive development (Schaie, 2005; 
Schaie & Willis, 2002) entails seven stages, 
with only the first occurring before adult-
hood. Stages are said to occur at variable 
rates and times, with observed traits emerg-
ing differently according to individual 
differences. The adult stages emphasize 
taking on of responsibilities, shifting from 
foci on the self and family to community 
and society, and from professional to non-
professional activities. The last two stages 
emphasize greater selectivity in activities 
due to increasingly limited energy and the 
creation of legacies through stories and 
passing on of possessions. This model 
may help clinicians consider changes in 
communication abilities and needs with 
age as not only due to changes in body 
structure and function but also evolving 
life priorities.
Heckhausen, Wrosch, and Schulz’s 
(2010) motivational theory of life-span 
development focuses on adults’ highly 
individualized abilities to choose, adapt 
to, and pursue life changes and opportuni-
ties. Ideally, aging involves gaining “self-
regulatory skills” that “involve antici-

Language in the Context of Aging   135
pating emergent opportunities for goal 
pursuit, activating behavioral and moti-
vational strategies of goal engagement, 
disengaging from goals that have become 
futile and/or too costly, and replacing 
them” (p. 54). Considering this theory 
may be helpful in terms of developing an 
appreciation for how older adults’ moti-
vation to address concerns about health 
and communication may evolve in a way 
that is consonant with their specific life 
circumstances. It may also be helpful in 
considering ways to support a given per-
son in compensating for challenges, rather 
than simply dismissing them as problems 
that are inherent in aging.
How Are Demographic Shifts 
in Aging Populations Relevant 
to Clinical Aphasiologists?
The aging population is rising steadily in 
most of the world. There are three primary 
reasons for this: decreasing infant mor-
tality, decreasing fertility, and improved 
longevity. As of 2012, one in nine people 
was over age 60; by 2050, one in five will 
be (United Nations [UN], 2012). In the 
United States alone, the proportion of 
people over 60 was projected to be more 
than two times as large in 2013 (72 million, 
or about 20% of the population) as it was 
in 2000 (35 million) (Federal Interagency 
Forum on Aging-Related Statistics, 2010). 
By 2025, one in five Americans is expected 
to be age 65 or older.
For “developed” countries in 2010 to 
2015, life expectancy at birth is 78 years; it 
is 68 for “developing” counties. In 2045–
2050, it is expected to be 83 in developed 
countries and 74 in developing countries. 
(The terms developed and developing are in 
quotes here because the terms and how 
one interprets them are worthy of scru-
tiny.) The pace of the expansion of the 
aging population is faster in developing 
than developed regions. By 2050, about 
80% of adults over 60 in the world will be 
living in developing countries (UN, 2008, 
2009). In Asia, the pace is greater than in 
other regions. The proportion of people 
over age 60 in Asia was 11% in 2012; it is 
expected to be 24% in 2050. In Japan, it  
is already 30%. It is important to consider, 
too, that aging issues are also women’s 
issues. For every 100 women over age 60 
worldwide, there are 61 men. Given these 
demographic trends, it is essential that 
SLPs be well prepared to work with older 
people. Many of the rich career opportuni-
ties discussed in Chapter 1 are associated 
with expanding opportunities in contexts 
in which older people are served.
What Are Normal Changes in 
the Brain as People Age?
There is a great deal of variability in struc-
tural changes in the brain over time. The 
following general patterns — all having 
effects on cognition — have been noted:
• Neuron shrinkage and reduced 
dendritic branching leading to 
decreased brain volume, beginning 
at about age 30 and continuing 
throughout life (Kramer, Fabiani, & 
Colcombe, 2006), accelerating after 
about age 70 (Christensen, Anstey, 
Leach, & Mackinnon, 2008)
• Atrophy, primarily in the frontal 
lobes and hippocampus (Kramer 
et al., 2006)
• Reduction in neurotransmitters 
(e.g., acetylcholine and dopamine) 
(Christensen et al., 2008)

136   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Decreased white matter, especially 
in the frontal lobes (Dennis & 
Cabeza, 2008)
• Reduced cerebral blood flow 
(Christensen et al., 2008)
• Accumulation of amyloid beta 
or amyloid plaques (without 
accompanying neurofibrillary 
tangles associated with Alzheimer’s 
disease)
Many adults exhibiting such physiologi-
cal changes do not exhibit problems with 
cognitive or linguistic abilities, whereas 
others do.
At a neurological level, vast differ-
ences across individuals in terms of their 
intact abilities in the face of measurable 
brain changes are likely due to differences 
in their abilities to recruit other areas 
of the brain to compensate for declin-
ing functional areas. For example, some 
older people demonstrate greater acti-
vation of bilateral brain regions while 
completing complex cognitive tasks that 
tend to involve primarily one hemi-
sphere in younger people, a phenomenon 
called hemispheric asymmetry reduc-
tion in older adults (HAROLD; Dennis 
& Cabeza, 2008). Likewise, some show 
more activation of the inferior frontal 
gyrus, the insula and frontal operculum, 
the anterior cingulate cortex, the inferior 
parietal sulcus, and medial and tempo-
ral hippocampal areas during a variety 
of working-memory, mathematical, and 
logical problem-solving tasks (Cabeza, 
2002; Fedorenko, Duncan, & Kanwisher, 
2012; Woolgar, Hampshire, Thompson, & 
Duncan, 2011).
Individual differences may also per-
tain to differences in abilities that are val-
ued and the degree of effort one wishes 
to invest in performance to demonstrate 
one’s abilities. The results of several pub-
lished studies support the notion that 
older adults maintain a reserve capacity, 
which supports the ability to perform in 
ways that are typically not tested or dem-
onstrated. When motivated to perform 
well and to improve performance through 
learning and practice, one may achieve 
test results that surpass those that might 
be captured in typical clinical and research 
contexts (Friedman & Ryff, 2012; Kemper, 
Schmalzried, Herman, & Mohankumar, 
2011; Tucker-Drob & Salthouse, 2013).
In sum, as we age, our likelihood of 
acquiring cognitive and language dis-
orders increases. That is, the longer we 
live, the greater our likelihood of stroke, 
brain injury, tumors, and diseases that 
might affect brain functioning. How-
ever, the greater statistical likelihood of 
acquired neurological problems in older 
versus younger people should not be 
interpreted to mean that cognitive and 
linguistic impairments associated with 
such acquired etiologies are a part of the 
normal aging process.
What Are Positive Aspects 
of the Aging Brain?
Typically, when we think of the aging 
brain, we think of an ongoing dissolution 
of structure and function leading to more 
and more problems over time. It is cer-
tainly true that as we live longer, we are 
prone to more challenges, some associated 
with normal aging processes and some 
merely because of our greater likelihood 
of experiencing conditions that negatively 
affect our brains. However, it is also true 
that some brain changes over time lead 
to positive aspects of aging. Consider the 
following, for example:
• The ongoing storage of semantic, 
procedural, and episodic memories, 

Language in the Context of Aging   137
as well as the ability to integrate 
and reflect on thematic elements of 
stored long-term memories, leads 
to richness of life experience; such 
experience, in turn, leads to one’s 
ability to better teach, mentor, 
guide, inspire, and even entertain 
others.
• For some people, age-related 
changes in prefrontal and limbic 
interactions, along with hormonal 
changes in the brain, may also lead 
to clearer balance of basic drives 
associated with sexual pursuits, 
career ambition, greed, and self-
centeredness, thus allowing older 
adults to shift priorities to deeper, 
more meaningful, and benevolent 
pursuits.
• Gradual gray and white matter 
necrosis and loss of synaptic 
connections through decreased 
dendritic branching and 
reduced production of some 
neurotransmitters may even be part 
of the brain’s way of increasingly 
specializing in areas of cognitive 
and linguistic strength and gaining 
what is perceived as wisdom.
What Are Normal Changes 
in Language and Cognition 
as People Age?
Changes that may be associated with aging 
are not necessarily caused by aging. Teas-
ing apart the role of age versus illness 
and disability on human functioning is 
challenging. Many aspects of dysfunc-
tion stereotypically thought to decline 
with age (cognitive, linguistic, and motor 
abilities) are actually the result of factors 
such as genetic predisposition, poor nutri-
tion, glucose fluctuation, lack of exercise, 
low levels of social engagement, environ-
mental contamination, illness, and stress. 
Let’s review some of the key literature 
that highlights cognitive-communicative 
changes that have been purported to be 
attributable to aging.
Memory
Abilities that tend to be especially robust 
in the face of normal aging are semantic 
memory, procedural memory (recall for 
how to accomplish specific tasks), and  
autobiographical memory (memory about 
important aspects of one’s past). These 
aspects are also often relatively well pre-
served in the face of other types of mem-
ory impairment, such as those of people 
with various forms of dementia. Mem-
ory challenges associated with normal 
aging include minor, if any, impairments 
in working memory, episodic memory 
(recall of personal experiences), source 
memory (memory of where and how one 
acquired knowledge or where and when 
a previous event took place), and short-
term memory (recall of recent events).
Many of the memory challenges that 
have been reported to be associated with 
normal aging in the published literature 
must be scrutinized carefully; a lack of 
careful control in terms of participant 
inclusion and exclusion criteria, stimulus 
design, and the nature of tasks and mea-
sures used to detect memory problems 
threatens the validity of many claims 
made about memory and aging. These 
same problems are important to consider 
during assessment of older adults, as we 
will discuss in further detail in Section VI.  
Further complicating efforts to study 
memory in older people is age-related 
identity threat, the implicit or explicit 
belief that one will fail because one is 
“old.” In social contexts where negative 

138   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
views of memory and aging are readily 
expressed (i.e., where jokes, insults, and 
derogatory terms about memory and 
aging are common in everyday life), such 
beliefs may be the reason that some older 
adults tend to perform worse on memory 
tests (Cuddy et al., 2009; Fiske, 2008; Nel-
son, 2008).
Word Finding
Word-finding problems are one of the few 
consistently reported linguistic challenges 
that correspond to increased age even 
when all other influences on language and 
cognition are taken into account. Overall, 
when compared with younger people, 
older people demonstrate
• More tip-of-the-tongue experiences 
(i.e., knowing that they know the 
word they want to say but not 
being able to come up with it)
• Slower response times during 
confrontational naming (i.e., when 
shown a picture or object and asked 
to name it)
• Less accuracy in confrontational 
naming
• Reduced verbal fluency, which is 
indexed by the number of words 
fitting in a particular category (e.g., 
types of animals or furniture) or 
words beginning with a specified 
letter, within a given time period
Word-finding abilities tend to decline in 
the 30s and continue to worsen across 
decades. The decline may accelerate in 
the 70s, especially in terms of naming 
response times (Spieler & Balota, 2000).
Word-finding problems in older 
adults have to do with accessing words 
when formulating language, not with rec-
ognizing words or loss of vocabulary. An 
older person who has a difficult time com-
ing up with the name of an object or per-
son is unlikely to have trouble identifying 
the correct name when given two or more 
choices. In fact, vocabulary — or knowl-
edge of words and their meanings — actu-
ally tends to improve with age, at least 
until the early 70s (Verhaeghen, 2003), and 
this is the case for individual words as 
well as words in sentence contexts (Thorn-
ton & Light, 2006). When older adults 
have trouble understanding complex 
spoken sentences, such difficulty is asso-
ciated more with challenges in perceptual 
processing of speech input and working 
memory than it is with understanding of 
the individual words (Federmeier, Van 
Petten, Schwartz, & Kutas, 2003). Chal-
lenges at the phonological level seem to 
be at the heart of word retrieval difficul-
ties (Connor, Spiro, Obler, & Albert, 2004).
Syntactic Processing
Difficulties with syntactic processing are 
most readily studied during auditory 
comprehension tasks. People of all ages 
tend to have more difficulty understand-
ing long compared to short sentences 
and grammatically complex compared to 
simple sentences. Challenges with under-
standing long and complex sentences 
tend to increase with age; this is primarily 
attributable to declines in working mem-
ory (Caplan, DeDe, Waters, Michaud, & 
Tripodis, 2011; Kemper & Sumner, 2001). 
Having to hold both semantic meaning 
and syntactic structure from the early part 
of a sentence in memory while continuing 
to process later parts of a sentence, and 
then integrate meaning and form from the 
entire sentence, is challenging. Although 
reducing background noise and other 

Language in the Context of Aging   139
distractions facilitates syntactic process-
ing in people of all ages, it leads to even 
greater improvements in older people. 
Also, sometimes slowing speech rate, 
especially as long as the speech is not per-
ceived as unnaturally slow, may facilitate 
comprehension.
In terms of syntactic production, some 
researchers report that older speakers tend 
to use fewer complex syntactic structures 
than younger people. At the same time, 
sentence length is not necessarily reduced 
with age; this appears to be due to the fact 
that an individual’s vocabulary tends to 
have more of an effect on sentence length 
than does his or her use of complex syntax 
(Kemper & Sumner, 2001).
Reported research findings indicating 
age-related declines in sentence compre-
hension should be interpreted carefully. 
Emerging research results suggest that 
experience-based knowledge, rooted in 
content with which any given individual 
has particular familiarity or expertise, has 
an important influence on sentence com-
prehension performance (DeDe, 2013). Of 
course, so do hearing loss and tinnitus, 
both of which are increasingly common 
with age but not central to language func-
tioning per se.
Reading and Writing
In terms of language competence, read-
ing and writing abilities tend to mirror 
those of listening and speaking as peo-
ple age. For example, the word-finding 
issues described above may also be seen 
during writing, and syntactic processing 
challenges may be apparent in reading as 
well as writing. Of course, reading itself 
is heavily influenced by visual acuity 
problems and visual processing deficits 
that increase with age. Likewise, writing 
by hand or through typing is influenced 
not only by visual changes but by motor 
control challenges that may increase with 
age. Changes in reading and writing abil-
ity with age are more likely to be due to 
sensory and motor deficits than to linguis-
tic factors per se, unless there are medi-
ating pathological conditions, which are 
typically not primarily due to aging.
Discourse
The use of language in interaction with 
others (discourse), spoken and written, 
and expressive and receptive, tends to 
change with age more in light of psycho-
logical and social changes related to life 
priorities and interests than in light of 
actual linguistic abilities per se. Based on a 
robust review of research literature, Shad-
den (2011) summarized factors that influ-
ence discourse performance as having to 
do with three aspects: emotional regula-
tion, personal discourse goals, and the 
nature of specific discourse tasks. Emo-
tional regulation influences discourse in 
that emotional themes tend to be increas-
ingly elaborated, and emotional topics 
may be inserted with greater frequency in 
conversations. The goals of discourse are 
said to evolve with an increasing desire 
to engage in autobiographical storytelling 
and discussion of values as one ages.
The nature of specific discourse tasks 
also influences discourse comprehension. 
Older people tend to demonstrate better 
understanding during narratives (story-
telling) than during expository speech 
(informative discourse for explaining ideas 
or processes, recounting events, or defin-
ing constructs). In terms of discourse pro-
duction, aging may have positive influ-
ences. For example, listeners tend to judge 
older adults’ discourse as clearer and more 

140   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
interesting than that of younger speakers 
(Glisky, 2007; Kemper & Kemtes, 2000).
Overall, older people tend to have 
more disfluencies (i.e., pauses, interjec-
tions, revisions, and repetitions) in their 
speech production in conversation com-
pared to younger people (Schiller, Fer-
reira, & Alario, 2007). One must be careful 
to interpret the cause of such disfluencies, 
which may be due to such diverse fac-
tors as word-finding problems, attention 
problems, working memory limitations, 
or higher level organizational demands. 
Discourse coherence, the ability to tie 
together elements of a story and maintain 
the thematic content, has been shown to 
decline with age; however, researchers 
who have demonstrated this may not 
have appropriately controlled for under-
lying cognitive abilities in the participants 
assessed.
In general, the more difficult and 
complex the form and content of discourse 
are, whether spoken or written, the more 
marked differences there are between 
older and younger people. However, 
making judgments about any given indi-
vidual’s discourse competence requires a 
great deal more consideration than sim-
ple conversational sampling, especially 
within a single session. It is essential to 
consider his or her previous discourse 
abilities, education level, vocabulary, 
interest in the subject matter, and degree 
of motivation to engage in a discourse 
task at any particular time.
Pragmatics
Pragmatic abilities, knowledge and skill 
in the social use of language, are intri-
cately intertwined with discourse abilities 
because both are carried out and observed 
in the context of written and oral interac-
tion. Examples are topic maintenance, 
turn taking, use of prosody for empha-
sis, disambiguation, use of and response 
to humor, and use and interpretation of 
facial expressions and gestures. Aging in 
and of itself does not appear to influence 
pragmatic abilities in significant ways, 
beyond the fact that priorities and inter-
ests evolve across life stages, and these, in 
turn, have important influences on prag-
matics. Of course, pathological declines 
in cognition, language, mobility, and sen-
sory functioning (especially hearing acu-
ity and higher level auditory processing 
challenges) have important influences on 
social interaction that may be observed as 
changes in pragmatics.
What Are General Guidelines 
for Differentiating Normal From 
Impaired Language in Older Adults?
Characteristics of older adults, often 
described by individuals themselves and 
by their caregivers, are given in Table 9–1, 
along with general guidelines for whether 
each characteristic is typical of normal 
aging or not according to the broad litera-
ture on aging and cognition. When refer-
ring to such guidelines, it is important to 
be cautious about relying too much on 
subjective impressions and self or care-
giver report. It is also important to keep 
in mind that there is great variability in 
what constitutes “normal” abilities versus 
deficits that may be due to an underlying 
impairment that is not directly age associ-
ated. Some authors differentiate primary 
(normal) aging from impairment-based or 
secondary aging.

141
Table 9–1.  General Guidelines for Considering Whether Cognitive-Linguistic 
Characteristics of Older Adults Are Normal
May Be Associated With Normal Aginga
Not Characteristic of Normal Aging
Distractibility, sometimes considered 
absent-mindedness 
Forgetting essential information related 
to activities of daily living
Word-finding problems, especially 
increasing tip-of-the-tongue experiences 
(knowing that one knows the word and 
perhaps knows something about the word 
but is not able to actually say the word)
Semantic confusion at the discourse 
level
Occasional trouble finding proper names
Dysnomia for important names
Occasional math errors
Acalculia or problems with basic 
mathematical functions
Normal or near-normal syntactic 
production (speaking and writing), with 
greater difficulty in distracting conditions; 
possible reduced use of complex 
grammatical forms and reduced length of 
sentences
Major changes in syntactic structures 
that were used in younger years
Normal or near-normal syntactic 
comprehension (auditory and reading); 
greater difficulty with longer and more 
complex stimuli and in dual-task and 
distracting conditions
Moderately or severely impaired 
comprehension
Normal or mildly impaired working 
memory; greater difficulty with longer and 
more complex stimuli and in dual-task and 
distracting conditions
Moderately or severely impaired working 
memory
Normal or mildly decreased speed of 
processing during cognitive and motor 
tasks; greater difficulty with longer and 
more complex stimuli and in dual-task and 
distracting conditions
Moderately or severely slowed speed of 
processing
Normal or mildly impaired episodic 
memory (recall of personal experiences)
Moderately or severely impaired 
episodic memory
Normal procedural memory (recall for how 
to accomplish specific tasks)
Impaired procedural memory
Normal or mildly impaired procedural 
learning
Impaired procedural learning
continues

142   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Table 9–1.  continued
May Be Associated With Normal Aginga
Not Characteristic of Normal Aging
Normal or mildly impaired source memory 
(memory of where and how one acquired 
knowledge or where and when a previous 
event took place)
Impaired source memory
Normal short-term memory (recall of 
recent events)
Impaired short-term memory
Normal autobiographical memory (memory 
about important aspects of one’s past)
Impaired autobiographical memory
Near or near-normal pragmatic and 
executive function abilities
Impaired pragmatic abilities and 
executive function deficits
Note.  aNote that several of the characteristics in this column may be lifelong characteristics, not 
necessarily characteristics that have developed in older age. Recall, too, that there is tremendous 
inter- and intraindividual variability in these characteristics.
Even though certain deficits of cogni-
tive and linguistic performance may seem 
obvious in some older adults, it is impor-
tant to consider whether those “deficits” 
might be due to something other than age. 
Often our stereotypes about aging are so 
pervasive that we are not aware of our 
own judgments in this regard. For exam-
ple, imagine an 18-year-old talking about 
losing her car keys. “I know I had them 
this afternoon when I came home. Usually 
I keep them on this key rack. But today I 
must have forgotten and I have no idea 
where they are now.” One might judge 
her to be distracted or disorganized but 
not pathologically impaired.
Now imagine an 85-year-old mak-
ing the same statement. “I know I had 
them this afternoon when I came home. 
Usually I keep them on this key rack. But 
today I must have forgotten and I have 
no idea where they are now.” In this case, 
one might easily conclude that the indi-
vidual speaking has an age-related mem-
ory problem. Our predisposition to think 
that aging necessarily entails significant 
memory decline may reflect our collec-
tive underlying ageism. We may easily 
rationalize that a young person simply 
has memory lapses, but we often interpret 
the very same lapses in older people to be 
indicative of impairments due to age. As 
Shadden (2011) aptly states, “If the expec-
tation is that the elderly are somewhat 
incompetent, any changes in language 
and communication appear to confirm 
that incompetence” (p. 207).
Further complicating the matter, what 
might be “normal” for one person based 
on his or her history might be considered 
problematic in a person experiencing a 
definite change in ability. Some charac-
teristics observed in a given older indi-
vidual, such as attention deficits or lapses 
in pragmatic appropriateness, might be 
typical of his or her tendencies in younger 
years. Some people in the early stages of 
dementia may have excellent abilities in 
some areas, such as short-term memory 
and speed of processing. In Section V, we 

Language in the Context of Aging   143
delve into specific methods and published 
tests that may be useful in discerning 
linguistic changes due to normal aging 
versus those that reflect impairment. 
It is vital that SLPs strive to distinguish 
normal aging from disease and injury. As 
team members, it is important that we not 
dismiss a person’s clinical symptoms as 
being due to age.
What Theories Have Been 
Proposed to Account for Cognitive-
Linguistic Changes With Aging?
Theories about why cognitive and linguis-
tic changes occur in normal aging may be 
divided into three categories: resource 
capacity, speed of processing, and inhibi-
tion theories (Shadden, 2011).
Resource Capacity Theories
Resource capacity theories (Burke & 
Shafto, 2008) attribute cognitive and lin-
guistic deficits to a reduction in over-
all cognitive capacity, not the ability to 
accomplish individual simple tasks. The 
fact that older adults tend to have greater 
difficulty with more complex tasks and 
with engaging in two tasks at the same 
time supports this theory. Resource capac-
ity theories may be further broken down 
into working memory, context processing 
deficiency, signal degradation, and trans-
mission deficit theories.
Working Memory Theories
Working memory theories that implicate 
aging are based on evidence that work-
ing memory capacity declines with age, 
especially in older age (past 70 years) 
(Caplan et al., 2011; Mella, Fagot, Lecerf, 
& Ribaupierre, 2015; Miyake, Carpen-
ter, & Just, 1994). The effects of working 
memory decline are most readily observ-
able in tasks that involve longer and more 
grammatically complex verbal stimuli. 
The increasing bilateral involvement of 
the frontal lobes with age in many people, 
described earlier, may be what accounts 
for such declines; older people who main-
tain more left hemisphere dominance dur-
ing cognitive and linguistic tasks tend not 
to demonstrate declines in working mem-
ory abilities. The hippocampus, too, vital 
for transforming and consolidating short-
term memory into long-term memory, 
appears to play a role in working mem-
ory changes associated with aging (Ystad 
et al., 2009).
Context-Processing 
Deficiency Theories
Context-processing deficiency theories 
are based on the hypothesis that as we get 
older, we have increasing difficulty judg-
ing and taking into account the context 
of a cognitive or linguistic task and thus 
adjusting to the context. This may, in turn, 
lead to less efficient allocation of resources 
to accomplish a task. Evidence to support 
this hypothesis includes challenges with 
speed and accuracy during continuous 
performance tasks in which one is requir-
ed to maintain sustained attention on a set 
of stimuli while keeping in mind a task 
to be performed (Braver & Barch, 2006; 
Paxton, Barch, Storandt, & Braver, 2006; 
Rush, Barch, & Braver, 2006). An exam-
ple might be difficulty keeping the task 
in mind during a dual-task activity that 
requires remembering of a set of images 
to be recalled later while at the same time 

144   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
listening to auditory verbal stimuli that 
one must comprehend.
Signal Degradation Theories
According to signal degradation theo-
ries, a key reason for declines in language 
comprehension and production in normal 
aging is a decline in processing of audi-
tory and visual information (Wingfield, 
Tun, & McCoy, 2005). When visual and 
auditory acuity decline — as is typical dur-
ing normal aging — this, of course, affects 
one’s ability to read and to understand 
spoken language. Additionally, problems 
with the integration and interpretation 
of visual and auditory information, also 
common in aging, affect reading and lis-
tening comprehension. The greater the 
sensory deficits are for a given person, 
the greater the degree of effort he or she 
will have to exert during language tasks. 
The limited pool of cognitive resources 
is thus more strained, resulting in poorer 
comprehension, recognition, and recall of 
information that is read or heard. Audi-
tory and visual distractions further tax an 
individual’s capacity to process informa-
tion meaningfully (Schneider, Daneman, 
& Murphy, 2005).
Transmission Deficit Theories
Transmission deficit theories suggest that 
declines are due to reduced efficiency of 
neuronal transmission (Burke, MacKay, 
& James, 2000). Weaker networks among 
neurons and among specialized functional 
areas or systems in the brain are associ-
ated with aging. Such weakening requires 
greater allocation of limited cognitive 
resources to compensate for reduced neu-
ral transmission, thus affecting speed and 
accuracy of task performance. Transmis-
sion deficits are less severe in people who 
regularly and actively engage in the types 
of tasks that typically decline with aging. 
That is, active cognitive and linguistic en- 
gagement strengthens connections among 
neurons and functional systems, leaving a 
larger pool of resources to allocate to cog-
nitive and linguistic tasks.
Speed-of-Processing Theories
Speed-of-processing theories are based 
on the general slowing hypothesis (Sal-
thouse, 1996), the notion that our cogni-
tive processing at all levels slows as we 
age. The influence of neurologically based 
slowing on performance varies according 
to the type and complexity of the task at 
hand. In terms of its influence on com-
munication, reduced speed of process-
ing is especially relevant to the process-
ing of auditory linguistic input, which is 
intricately time bound (Caplan, Waters, 
& Alpert, 2003; Hartley, 2006; Salthouse, 
2000). Thus, older adults perform well on 
linguistic tasks that involve simple gram-
matical structures and easy and familiar 
words, but overall slowing may limit 
their speed and accuracy for processing of 
more difficult syntax and vocabulary and 
longer linguistic stimuli. Memory impair-
ments during information processing may 
be attributed to slower speed of process-
ing because there is an increasing back-
log of multiple cognitive operations to be 
accomplished in a finite amount of time.
Inhibition Theories
Inhibition theories (also called inhibitory 
deficit theories) are based on the rationale 
that older people have greater challenges 
than younger people with inhibiting irrel-
evant information and focusing attention 

Language in the Context of Aging   145
to a particular task in the face of multiple 
competing stimuli or task requirements 
(Butler & Zacks, 2006; Hasher & Zacks, 
1988; Zacks & Hasher, 1993). Examples 
of irrelevant information may be distract-
ing auditory and visual stimuli in the 
immediate environment. Older people 
also appear to be more sensitive to inter-
nally generated distractions. For example, 
when trying to come up with a particu-
lar word, an older person may generate 
multiple possible words that are related to 
the target word but are not the word itself; 
attending to those nontarget words may 
consume cognitive resources that then 
become unavailable to the primary word-
finding task. Likewise, failure to inhibit 
irrelevant thoughts during conversation 
may lead to the intrusion of more tangen-
tial comments in discourse production 
(Bell, Buchner, & Mund, 2008).
A source of distraction that is often 
unrecognized clinically and in research is 
a person’s own worry and doubt about 
being able to perform well cognitively 
and linguistically. Taking on a mentality 
of not being able to perform well because 
of one’s age is a type of identity accommo-
dation associated with one’s own aware-
ness of, or even belief in, stereotypes 
about aging.
What Can Be Done to Ensure the 
Best Preservation of Language 
Abilities as People Age?
For the most part, regardless of the spe-
cific theories of language changes associ-
ated with aging, there are clearly things 
we can all do to promote brain health 
and language abilities as we grow older. 
Maintenance of overall good health is 
key. Factors promoting brain health are 
summarized in Box 9–1. Two factors that 
have been shown to be related to delayed 
onset of cognitive deficits and to slow the 
Factors That Promote Brain Health  
Through the Life Span
• Active intellectual engagement on a daily basis
• Regular active and pleasurable social engagement and 
support
• Limitation of time spent in passive activities, such as 
watching television
• Constructive and proactive management of low mood, 
stress, and anger 
• Cardiovascular fitness, including well-regulated blood 
pressure
• Maintenance of low body fat
• Sufficient rest
• A well-balanced diet with well-controlled glucose regulation
• Alcohol consumption only in moderation if at all
• When possible, avoidance of drug effects and 
pharmacological interactions that negatively affect brain 
and language functions
Box
9–1

146   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
progression of the dementia may be diffi-
cult to manipulate in older adults: higher 
education levels and average (or better) 
socioeconomic status.
Increasing numbers of apps, computer 
games, books, and online resources are 
being developed in response to growing 
public awareness of the importance of pre-
venting cognitive decline with age. It is a 
good idea for clinical aphasiologists to stay 
abreast of such developments and the qual-
ity of the evidence base supporting specific 
applications marketed to older people.
What Sensitivities Related 
to Ageism Are Important for 
Aphasiologists to Demonstrate?
In Chapter 3, we discussed the importance 
of terms we use when we talk about older 
adults. It is also important that we con-
sider the general concept of ageism and 
how experts working with older adults 
may play a role in challenging ageist ste-
reotypes. Consider the sheer amount of 
exposure that people have to ageist ste-
reotypes. According to the International 
Longevity Center–USA and Leading Age 
California (Dahmen & Cozma, 2009), peo-
ple over age 65 comprise 12.7% of the U.S. 
population but less than 2% of people seen 
in prime-time television. Twice as many 
older people portrayed on television are 
men, whereas in reality the proportion of 
women over 60 is greater than men. Ste-
reotypes perpetuated through everyday 
television programming include older 
sexually inactive, frail, dependent people 
(especially women) with poor memories, 
often acting irrationally.
In fact, the nature of aging is highly 
variable and complex; few generalizations 
can be made about an individual based 
on age alone. A majority of older people 
are physically and cognitively competent 
and, in much of the world, financially 
self-sufficient. National and local econo-
mies and child-rearing practices depend 
greatly on older people. Due to improve-
ments in health care, disease prevention, 
exercise, nutrition, sanitation, and assis-
tive technologies, life expectancy contin-
ues to rise throughout the world, and so 
does the proportion of people over age 65 
without disabilities.
With the barrage of ageism in our 
daily lives, it is no wonder that we all 
need to be reminded from time to do 
our part to counter such influences. SLPs 
working with older adults have ample 
opportunities to consider the rights of 
older people as basic human rights and to 
advocate actively for fairness. Advocacy 
in this arena may be as simple as sug-
gesting edits to wording in written medi-
cal reports about older adults, modeling 
appropriate word choice during conver-
sations with clinical colleagues, and pro-
viding professional in-services to counter 
ageism. It might entail political activity 
to change legislation in favor of older 
people, work to change ageist policies (or 
enforce anti-ageist policies) in our local 
agencies and communities, and efforts to 
help build awareness of age-related dis-
crimination and abuse.
What Is Elderspeak?
Elderspeak is the adaptation of language 
to a person because of his or her age. 
Elderspeak may be likened to speaking to 
an older adult as if he or she were a child 
and has many of the features common 
in motherese, or maternal language to 
young children. However, although many 

Language in the Context of Aging   147
aspects of motherese have been shown to 
be beneficial in interaction with children, 
elderspeak generally has greater negative 
influences on the quality of communica-
tion and often no facilitating effects on suc-
cess in conveying communicative intent.
Elderspeak conveys stereotypes of 
older people as childish, incomplete, cog-
nitively impaired, and dependent. Addi-
tionally, there is substantial evidence that 
it is perceived by older adults as demean-
ing and that it detracts from the quality 
of social and clinical interactions. Several 
authors have suggested that it may lead 
to lower self-esteem, social withdrawal, 
depression, and increased behaviors asso-
ciated with dependency (e.g., Kemper & 
Harden, 1999; Ryan, Bourhis, & Knops, 
1991; Williams, Kemper, & Hummert, 2005). 
Elderspeak has long been found to be com-
mon in nursing home settings (Caporael, 
1981). In fact, many staff members seem to 
be enculturated to use elderspeak within 
their employment settings because it is 
modeled so commonly by others.
Elderspeak includes prosody, lexical 
choice, and pragmatic aspects of conver-
sation such as role assumption. Elder-
speak may be characterized by any of the 
features listed in Box 9–2. Many laypeople  
Features That May Constitute Elderspeak
• Speaking loudly even when the older person has normal 
or near-normal hearing
• Speaking unnaturally slowly
• Exaggerating intonation
• Speaking with raised pitch (actually inhibitory to many 
older adults’ hearing, which tends to be worse at higher 
frequencies)
• Simplifying vocabulary (e.g., “thing” instead of “remote 
control”)
• Using childish terms
• Simplifying grammar
• Using multiple short sentences to convey content that 
would be more naturally conveyed using longer sentences
• Use of first person rather than second (e.g., “let’s pull up 
our pants now,” or “have we finished our dinner yet?”)
• Addressing older people with diminutive or inappropriately 
intimate terms such as “dear,” “honey,” or “sweetie”
• Assuming that an older person knows nothing about 
certain contemporary subject areas such as social 
networking, smartphone use, and popular culture
• Speaking in a bossy, threatening, or overly authoritarian 
manner (e.g., “What do you think you’re doing in here 
where you don’t belong,” “Stop your jabbering,” or  
“Take your pills or I’m not going to help you make that 
phone call”)
Box
9–2

148   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
as well as clinical professionals use elder-
speak unintentionally and may even think 
that is helpful or nurturing. This fact 
makes it all the more important that clini-
cians working with older adults pay close 
attention to their own speech directed 
at older people and model appropriate 
interactions to others. Aphasiologists 
working in residential settings may find 
it especially helpful to include training on 
avoiding elderspeak in ongoing staff in-
service programs (Williams, Kemper, & 
Hummert, 2003).
There may be particular instances 
when communication with certain older 
individuals is enhanced by modifying 
specific aspects of speech and language 
that happen to be characteristic of elder-
speak (Kemper & Harden, 1999). In such 
cases, it is best to consider those facilitative 
modifications rather than elderspeak per 
se; the very term elderspeak connotes inap-
propriate and demeaning modification of 
communication. Examples of appropriate 
modifications include reducing gram-
matical complexity and utterance length 
to a person with aphasia for whom this 
strategy has been demonstrated to facili-
tate comprehension, or speaking louder to 
a person with a hearing impairment that 
precludes hearing at a normal conversa-
tional level.
In sum, aging is not a disease. In 
itself, aging is not an etiology that causes 
neurogenic language disorders. Age is a 
vital construct in a life span perspective 
on human development. Given that peo-
ple have greater likelihood of acquiring 
neurogenic language disorders as they 
age, opportunities for clinical aphasiolo-
gists to work with and empower older 
people abound and are ever expanding 
due to the worldwide growth of the aging 
population.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Describe the life span model of post-
formal cognitive development. How 
is it relevant to consideration of age-
related changes in communication 
abilities and needs?
	 3.	 How might models of aging that pro-
mote conceptualization of aging from 
a life span perspective influence your 
role in:
a.	 Helping a family member con-
sider prognosis for recovery from 
an acquired language disorder 
due to stroke or brain injury?
b.	 Responding constructively to 
colleagues who make misguided 
statements about the influence of 
age on an older person’s language 
abilities?
c.	 Working with a social worker on 
discharge planning at a subacute 
rehabilitation facility?
	 4.	 How are demographic shifts related to 
age relevant to clinical aphasiologists?
	 5.	 Describe how individual differences 
in age-related cognitive-linguistic abil-
ities might be attributable to changes 
in the brain.
	 6.	 Why is it that physical changes that 
might be detected in the brains of 
older people do not necessarily corre-
spond to problems in their functional 
cognitive and linguistic abilities?
	 7.	 What patterns of word-finding diffi-
culties are typically associated with 
normal aging?
	 8.	 What are some challenges in attribut-
ing receptive and expressive syntactic 
processing difficulties to age?

Language in the Context of Aging   149
	 9.	 What factors influence discourse per-
formance as people age?
10.	 Describe subtypes of resource capac-
ity theories of aging. How are they 
relevant to cognitive-linguistic abili-
ties and challenges?
11.	 Consider the positive aspects of the 
aging brain summarized in this chap-
ter. Do you have experience with an 
older person that reinforces the posi-
tive aspects of age-related changes in 
cognitive-linguistic development? If 
so, share stories of such experiences, 
tying them to the content in this 
chapter.
12.	 Why is it important to scrutinize care-
fully and not necessarily accept as fact 
the results of research studies that 
demonstrate declines in cognitive and 
linguistic abilities as people age?
13.	 How will you continue to challenge 
your own stereotypes about aging 
that may negatively affect your role 
as a clinical aphasiologist?
14.	 Give examples of stereotypes about 
aging that could affect a person’s own 
potential for progress in language 
rehabilitation.
15.	 Is elderspeak helpful or is it discrimi-
natory? Support your answer.
16.	 Give examples of how elderspeak 
might include various aspects of con-
versation, including prosody, lexical 
choice, and pragmatics.
17.	 What are some positive modifications 
that can be used instead of elderspeak?
Additional learning and reflection mate-
rials and activities may be found on the 
companion website.


Section III
The Nature of Neurogenic Disorders 
of Cognition and Language

152   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
The background in Section II sets the stage 
for returning to consideration of aphasia 
in Chapter 10, this time with a focus on 
specific hallmark features and syndromes 
of aphasia as they have been character-
ized by numerous authors over the years. 
Subsequent chapters in this section, then, 
address important content related to 
major categories of acquired language 
disorders: cognitive-linguistic challenges 
associated with traumatic brain injury 
(11), right hemisphere syndrome (12), and 
dementia and other neurodegenerative 
conditions (13).

153
Chapter
10
Syndromes and Hallmark 
Characteristics of Aphasia
In this chapter, we consider varied means 
of classifying subtypes or syndromes of 
aphasia. In doing so, we review many of 
the symptoms and associated terminol-
ogy that are important to know about as 
we study aphasia in general and as we 
learn about the challenges of particular 
individuals with aphasia with whom 
we work. We also consider critically the 
strengths and weaknesses of classification 
schemes and the need for excellent clini-
cians to remain flexible in the ways they 
consider and interpret aphasia classifica-
tion systems as they work with individual 
people who have aphasia.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What is the best way to classify sub-
types of aphasia?
	 2.	 What are the classic syndromes of 
aphasia and what are the hallmark 
characteristics of each?
	 3.	 What other syndromes of aphasia are 
there and what are their character­
istics?
	 4.	 How might dyslexia and dysgraphia 
be conceptualized as symptoms ver-
sus syndromes?
	 5.	 What are limitations of classification 
systems based on relating function to 
neuroanatomic structure?
What Is the Best Way to Classify 
Subtypes of Aphasia?
Aphasia is manifested in many ways, with 
varying symptoms and severity levels. 
General patterns of communication deficits 
are often associated with certain subtypes, 
or syndromes, of aphasia. There have been 
many variations on that scheme proposed 
over the years, and aphasiologists to this 
day vary widely in terms of their means 
of classifying and describing the various 
aphasia subtypes. One reason it is impor-
tant to know about the ways aphasia sub-
types are classified is that classification 
schemes are used widely in clinical prac-
tice and in research. Many commonly used 
aphasia assessment batteries are designed 
to aid in classifying a given test taker’s con-
stellation of language symptoms according 
to one of several aphasia subtypes, also 
called syndromes of aphasia.
It is important that we understand 
what others mean when they refer to spe-
cific subtypes of aphasia, even if we do 

154   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
not agree with the particular classification 
scheme they may be using. Also, know-
ing the basic schemes used for classify-
ing aphasia syndromes helps us to think 
critically about possible alternatives and 
exceptions to those schemes. Thus, in this 
chapter, we review the most prevalent 
ways in which aphasia is classified and also 
consider exceptions and challenges to exist-
ing classification schemes. The excellent 
clinical aphasiologist is a flexible thinker, 
not getting so caught up in one theoretical 
argument over another that he or she does 
not see each individual person with apha-
sia as a special, complex individual regard-
less of how anyone might categorize his or 
her linguistic symptoms. Perhaps a better 
query to start this chapter is: “Is there a best 
way to classify subtypes of aphasia?”
What Are the Classic Syndromes 
of Aphasia and What Are the 
Hallmark Characteristics of Each?
Expressive/Receptive,  
Nonfluent/Fluent, and  
Anterior/Posterior Dichotomies
A very general way of considering apha-
sia subtypes is in a simple dichotomy of 
fluent or nonfluent, anterior or posterior, 
and expressive or receptive aphasias. Flu-
ent aphasias (or fluent types of aphasia) 
are those in which people can speak read-
ily and have few hesitations or struggles 
when generating language, even though 
the words that are spoken or written may 
not be real words or may not accurately 
convey the intended meaning. People 
with fluent aphasia tend to have more 
difficulty understanding language as 
opposed to formulating language; for this 
reason, fluent aphasias are also sometimes 
called receptive aphasias. Consider how 
the term fluent is based on the intact abili-
ties manifested, while — in contrast — the 
term receptive is based on the primary 
area of deficit. Fluent aphasias tend to be 
caused by temporal lobe lesions and thus 
are also sometimes called posterior types 
of aphasia.
Nonfluent aphasias (or nonfluent 
types of aphasia) are those in which peo-
ple generate few words, content units (ele-
ments of meaning), or utterances per unit 
of time. Given that people with nonfluent 
aphasia tend to understand language bet-
ter than they produce language, nonflu-
ent aphasias are also sometimes called 
expressive aphasias. Nonfluent aphasias 
tend to be caused by frontal lobe lesions 
and thus are sometimes called anterior 
types of aphasia.
Despite their common usage, the 
terms fluent and nonfluent to describe 
aphasia syndromes are not generally very 
helpful or informative. They are catchall 
terms that gloss over important differ-
ences among people who fit into each of 
the two categories. For example, consider 
two individuals, each with a frontal lobe 
lesion that led to Broca’s aphasia. One 
may have only mild aphasia (mild lan-
guage formulation deficits consisting pri-
marily of difficulty generating complex 
syntactic forms); still, he may speak halt-
ingly, struggling to initiate words because 
of a concomitant apraxia of speech. The 
other may not have a concomitant motor 
speech disorder but, due to a moderate-
to-severe aphasia, may have many pauses 
as he struggles to formulate words into 
sentences to express his ideas. Both could 
be considered nonfluent, and both may 
even produce the same number of words, 
content units, or utterances per unit of 
time. However, their actual speech out-
put would be noticeably dissimilar, and 
the underlying cause of their disfluency 
would be different.

Syndromes and Hallmark Characteristics of Aphasia   155
Here is another example. Consider 
two people with conduction aphasia due 
to a similar type of lesion in the arcuate 
fasciculus. One may not be able to repeat 
what is said to him, so his linguistic out-
put during a repetition task would cer-
tainly be disfluent. Yet in spontaneous 
conversation, it may seem that his flu-
ency is near normal. The other may also 
have milder repetition problems but more 
severe anomia, including more naming 
errors and self-corrections of nontarget 
words. His speech would thus be noted as 
disfluent, but for a different reason than 
the first, despite having a similar lesion 
and the same classic aphasia subtype. In 
sum, knowing that a person is disfluent 
does not help us to understand very much 
about the nature of his or her communica-
tion problems.
An additional challenge with the flu-
ent versus nonfluent distinction is that just 
how fluent or disfluent a person is consid-
ered to be has a great deal to do with how 
fluency is indexed. A person who speaks 
a great deal but with no meaning may be 
considered fluent in terms of words per 
minute but disfluent in terms of content 
units. A person who speaks slowly and 
with great effort may express more actual 
content per unit of time.
People who are categorized as having 
nonfluent aphasia are generally thought 
to correspond to people with anterior 
lesions, whereas people with fluent apha-
sia are generally thought to correspond 
to those with posterior lesions. However, 
when a fluent versus nonfluent distinc-
tion is based on language testing, and then 
lesion sites are compared, the lesion sites 
often have overlapping components. An 
example is shown in Figure 10–1, depict-
ing lesion mapping for people with “flu-
ent” versus “nonfluent” aphasia based on 
standardized language testing. Note that 
when brain lesions are superimposed on 
a common lateral brain template, some 
people classified as being nonfluent have 
areas of involvement that correspond to 
“anterior” lesions (e.g., see BY in Figure 
10–1). Likewise, some people classified 
as being fluent have areas of involvement 
that correspond to “posterior” lesions 
(e.g., see SW in Figure 10–1). Still, many 
have overlapping areas of involvement.
Classic Aphasia Subtypes
For the purpose of establishing a basic 
understanding of commonly referenced 
forms of aphasia, we review those sum-
marized in Table 10–1. These are based 
largely on what is often referred to as 
the Boston Group Classification (Benson, 
1979). Note that such tables are readily 
available in textbooks, aphasia batter-
ies, and online formats. Note also that 
the specific details indicated across such 
tables are often inconsistent. Such incon-
sistencies are due to varied theoretical 
views, not to mention inconsistent clinical 
observations such as those about the flu-
ent versus nonfluent distinction described  
above.
Of course there is also a great deal 
of information about aphasia, especially 
in online formats without peer review, 
which is simply incorrect. Additionally, 
when condensing complex information 
into tables or brief summaries, vital infor-
mation about possible exceptions and 
important nuances is lost. As always, it is 
incumbent upon the reader to weigh care-
fully and critically the veracity of informa-
tion found in print. Also, no matter how 
clear the ideal description of each apha-
sia subtype may be, individual people 
with aphasia often do not fit neatly into 
the set of features that characterize any 
particular subtype. Even when they do, 
their symptoms may change over time. 

156
Figure 10–1.  Normalized magnetic resonance images for people categorized as having fluent versus nonfluent aphasia based on test scores. 
Lesion maps shown are superimposed on a common lateral brain template across people with aphasia. The top panel corresponds to brains 
of people described as having “fluent” aphasia, whereas the bottom panel represents people with “nonfluent” aphasia. The distinction between 
fluent and nonfluent in this case was based on standardized testing (Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination; Goodglass, Kaplan, Barresi, 
Weintraub, & Segal, 2001).The initials correspond to names of research participants. See Speer and Wilshire (2013) for details about a study 
pertaining to the same participants. Image courtesy of Dr. Carolyn Wilshire, Victoria University of Wellington. A full-color version of this figure 
can be found in the Color Insert.

157
Table 10–1.  Subtypes of Aphasia, Associated Lesions, and Hallmark Features
Aphasia 
Syndrome
General 
Type
Classically 
Associated  
Lesion Site
Auditory and Reading 
Comprehension 
Impairment
Oral and Written 
Expression 
Impairment
Other Features
Classic Aphasia Syndromes
Wernicke’s 
aphasia
R/F/P
Posterior portion of 
the superior temporal 
gyrus, Brodmann’s 
area 22
Moderate to severe
Moderate to severe; 
anomia; semantic and 
literal paraphasias, 
jargon, neologisms, 
circumlocutions, press 
of speech, logorrhea 
Poor self-monitoring, 
lack of awareness of 
deficits
Broca’s 
aphasia
E/N/A
Inferior frontal lobe, 
Brodmann’s areas 44 
and 45 (third frontal 
convolution; frontal 
operculum)
Mild to moderate, 
difficulty with passives 
and complex grammar
Mild to severe; 
agrammatism/ 
telegraphic speech, 
anomia, literal 
paraphasias more 
common than semantic; 
circumlocutions 
Typically aware of 
deficits, sometimes with 
catastrophic reaction 
and emotional lability; 
often concomitant 
apraxia of speech, 
dysarthria, contralateral 
hemiparesis
Conduction 
aphasia
Either 
(depends on 
severity)
Arcuate fasciculus, 
supramarginal gyrus 
(Brodmann’s area 40)
Mild to moderate
Mild to moderate, 
especially with repetition 
impairment; phonemic 
paraphasias,  conduit 
d’approche
continues

158
Aphasia 
Syndrome
General 
Type
Classically 
Associated  
Lesion Site
Auditory and Reading 
Comprehension 
Impairment
Oral and Written 
Expression 
Impairment
Other Features
Global 
aphasia
E/N/A
Large perisylvian 
lesion, including frontal 
and temporal lobe and 
often parietal lobes
Severe
Severe; may be 
nonverbal; may have 
jargon and stereotypy
Transcortical 
sensory 
aphasia
R/F/P
Temporal lobe 
watershed regions; 
angular gyrus 
(Brodmann’s area 
39), posterior middle 
temporal gyrus 
(Brodmann’s area 37)
Moderate to severe
Moderate to severe, 
especially with 
paraphasias, logorrhea, 
poor self-monitoring; 
intact repetition; 
paraphasias and 
neologisms
Transcortical 
motor 
aphasia
E/N/A
Frontal lobe watershed 
regions; Brodmann’s 
areas 6, 8, 9, 10, and 
46
Mild to moderate, 
difficulty with passives 
and complex grammar
Mild to moderate, 
telegraphic; intact 
repetition;   literal and 
semantic paraphasias
Mixed 
transcortical 
aphasia
E/N/A
Inferior frontal lobe
Mild to moderate, 
difficulty with passives 
and complex grammar
Mild to moderate, 
telegraphic
Table 10–1.  continued

159
Aphasia 
Syndrome
General 
Type
Classically 
Associated  
Lesion Site
Auditory and Reading 
Comprehension 
Impairment
Oral and Written 
Expression 
Impairment
Other Features
Other types of aphasia
Anomic 
aphasia
Either 
(depends 
on severity)
Variable, often angular 
gurus
Mild
Mild to severe, word-
finding difficulty; 
paraphasias, 
circumlocutions, fillers; 
use of generic terms
Primary 
progressive 
aphasia
Either
Depends on subtype
Mild to severe, 
progressive
Mild to severe, 
progressive
Unlike other forms 
of aphasia, worsens 
over time; individuals 
eventually develop 
dementia
Crossed 
aphasia
Either 
(depends 
on type and 
severity)
Right hemisphere in a 
right-handed person
See corresponding 
type of aphasia above
See corresponding type 
of aphasia above
Concomitant 
impairments more 
typically associated 
with right hemisphere 
syndrome are likely
Subcortical 
aphasia
Either
Thalamus, basal 
ganglia, cerebellum, 
connecting white 
matter 
Depends upon 
subtype; variable 
across individuals
Depends upon subtype; 
variable across 
individuals
Note.  The “classically associated lesion sites” are important to consider in the context of the complexity of structure-function relationships in aphasia and 
related disorders, as reviewed in this chapter. E/N/A = expressive/nonfluent/anterior; R/F/P = receptive/fluent/posterior.
Sources:  Damasio, 2008; Goodglass, Kaplan, & Baressi, 2001; Goodglass, Quadfasel, & Timberlake, 1964; Goodglass & Wingfield, 1961; Hallowell & 
Chapey, 2008a.

160   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Again, it is important to know the details 
behind classification schemes, and once 
we are sophisticated about those details, 
it is important to not get so hung up in 
them that it keeps us from tuning into the 
most essential strengths and needs of each 
individual person with aphasia so that we 
may offer the best intervention.
Hallmark characteristics of the vari-
ous syndromes of aphasia are, by defini-
tion, characteristics of language abilities. 
Given that changes in brain tissue affect 
many other aspects of a person’s abilities, 
and given that most people with aphasia 
have concomitant nonlinguistic deficits, 
it is also helpful to consider associated 
concomitant deficits that are likely to 
arise in a person with a given syndrome 
of aphasia. Such concomitant deficits are 
often predictable given the location of the 
lesion(s) causing any particular subtype 
of aphasia.
The fact that some aspects of lan-
guage are affected differently than oth-
ers for any given syndrome has led some 
authors to refer to aphasia as dissociation 
syndrome. The term dissociation in this 
context refers to the fact that some abili-
ties remain relatively intact while others 
are relatively impaired.
Wernicke’s Aphasia
Wernicke’s aphasia is classically associ-
ated with a lesion in Wernicke’s area, in 
the superior temporal lobe, which cor-
responds to Brodmann’s area 22. Recent 
research, though, has shown that actual 
associated areas of the brain affected in 
people with Wernicke’s aphasia include 
not only Wernicke’s area but other parts 
of the left temporal lobe (e.g., anterior 
portions of the temporal lobe, the poste-
rior middle temporal gyrus, the posterior 
superior temporal sulcus), plus parts of 
the inferior frontal gyrus, including Bro-
ca’s area, and the middle frontal gyrus 
and the dorsal premotor cortex (Dronkers, 
Wilkins, Van Valin, Redfern, & Jaeger, 
2004; Mesulam, Thompson, Weintraub, & 
Rogalski, 2015; Turken & Dronkers, 2011).
People with this aphasia syndrome 
typically have language output that sounds 
fluent even though a great deal of con-
tent may not be conveyed by what they 
say or write. Wernicke’s aphasia is some-
times called jargon aphasia because of 
the tendency to produce nonwords, or 
neologisms (literally, “new words”). An 
example is saying, “Bring me a trunket,” 
instead of, “Bring me a drink.”
Another hallmark feature is the pro-
duction of paraphasias, or words substi-
tuted for target words. Paraphasias may 
be semantic or literal. Semantic parapha-
sias (also called verbal or global para-
phasias) entail the substitution of a real 
word for the target word. Examples are 
saying the word ear instead of nose (in this 
instance sharing the same semantic cat-
egory) and saying the word car instead of 
ladder (where the paraphasia has less of a 
clear semantic relationship with the target 
word). Phonemic paraphasias (also called 
literal paraphasias) entail the substitution 
of one or more sounds in the target word. 
Examples are saying “tegetable” instead 
of “vegetable” and “bady” for “baby.” 
When a neologism is substituted for a real 
word, it is sometimes called a neologistic 
paraphasia.
People with Wernicke’s aphasia tend 
to have relatively intact syntactic produc-
tion compared to those with more anterior 
types of aphasia. They may have logor-
rhea, or spoken language that is overly flu-
ent. They tend to exhibit press of speech, 
continuing to speak even when what they 
are saying makes no sense to the listener, 

Syndromes and Hallmark Characteristics of Aphasia   161
and often without attending to social con-
ventions about turn taking in conversa-
tion. They also tend to lack awareness 
of their deficits and seem unconcerned 
about the fact that what they are saying 
does not make sense to the person with 
whom they are speaking.
Recurrent perseveration is one of 
three forms of perseveration that are com-
mon in people with a variety of acquired 
neurogenic disorders. It is “the recurrence 
of a previous response to a subsequent 
stimulus within the context of an estab-
lished set” (Albert, 1989, p. 427). The other 
forms are continuous perseveration (con-
tinuation of a behavior when it is no lon-
ger appropriate) and stuck-in-set perse-
veration (the inappropriate persistence in 
continuing a task or activity) (Sandson & 
Albert, 1984). Recurrent preservation is the 
most common in people with aphasia and 
tends to occur in all forms of aphasia; it  
is most common in Wernicke’s aphasia. 
Examples of each type (semantic, lexical, 
and phonemic) are shown in Box 10–1.
Verbal perseveration is sometimes 
used synonymously with the term lexi-
cal preservation. It is the tendency to say 
a word or sounds within a word spoken 
previously but not the word intended at 
the moment; it is common in most types 
of aphasia. It is especially prevalent in 
people with Wernicke’s aphasia. This is 
typically exacerbated when asking a per-
son to name objects or pictures. For exam-
ple, after having said the word fork when 
shown a fork, a person may continue to 
say the word fork when a pencil, book, or 
chair is shown.
Although hallmark features of lan-
guage production described above are the 
key factors that lead clinicians to suspect 
Examples of Three Forms of  
Recurrent Perseveration
• Semantic perseveration:  When asked to name body parts, 
a person correctly names arm, nose, and knee but then 
repeats the word nose when the clinician points to an ear. 
The actual response is semantically related to the intended 
response.
• Lexical perseveration:  The individual names the following 
items, colors, and letters correctly: feather, glove, yellow, 
brown, P, T, but then says “brown” when shown the letter 
H. The actual response is a word that was spoken previously 
and is not semantically related to the intended response.
• Phonemic perseveration:  When asked to name body 
parts, a person correctly names arm, and nose, but then, 
instead of naming “ear” when the clinician points to an 
ear, he says “near”; when the clinician points to an ankle, 
he may say “nearkle” or “nackle.” The actual response 
has phonemic features in common with a previous word 
spoken and is not semantically related to the intended 
response.
Box
10–1

162   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
that a person has Wernicke’s aphasia, peo-
ple in this clinical group also tend to have 
impaired receptive (auditory and reading) 
abilities as well. Many people who have 
Wernicke’s aphasia immediately after a 
stroke, but whose language abilities con-
tinue to improve, eventually have what 
would be classified as anomic rather than 
Wernicke’s aphasia.
Broca’s Aphasia
Broca’s aphasia is classically associated 
with a lesion in Broca’s area, in the infe-
rior, posterior portion of the frontal lobe. 
Broca’s area is often said to correspond to 
Brodmann’s areas 44 and 45, also called 
the frontal operculum, although there is 
ample variation in how various research-
ers describe the nature of lesions that lead 
to Broca’s aphasia. Even the brains of the 
very first two patients identified as hav-
ing this form of aphasia by Pierre Paul 
Broca himself in 1861, when reinspected 
over 140 years later via high-resolution 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), were 
found to have more extensive lesions that 
also affected the superior longitudinal fas-
ciculus, a fiber tract connecting language 
regions of the frontal and temporal lobes 
(Dronkers, Plaisant, Iba-Zizen, & Cabanis, 
2007). Associated areas affected also may 
involve the white matter underlying the 
frontal operculum, plus the basal ganglia 
and precentral gyrus, as well as portions 
of the temporal and parietal lobes (Dama-
sio, 2008; Flinker et al., 2015; Fridriksson 
et al., 2014).
The primary hallmark feature of 
Broca’s aphasia is agrammatism, a defi-
cit in formulating and processing syntax. 
Auditory comprehension is impaired 
especially for more complex types of 
grammatical constructs. One example of 
a grammatical construct that people with 
Broca’s aphasia tend to have trouble with 
is reversible passives. For example, it 
may be hard to tell who did the kissing 
and who got kissed when trying to pro-
cess the sentence, “Yangfan was kissed 
by Jacques”; this is because it would 
make logical sense for either the subject 
(Jacques in this case) or the object (Yang-
fan in this case) to do the kissing. In con-
trast, a passive sentence such as, “The ball 
was kicked by Wanda,” is not reversible 
(in that a ball cannot kick a person) and 
would be relatively easy for a person with 
Broca’s aphasia to understand. Studies in 
which people with agrammatism have 
been asked to make grammaticality judg-
ments (decisions about whether sentence 
constructions are correct or incorrect) 
have generated evidence that their knowl-
edge of grammatical rules tends not to be 
lost; rather, it seems that their access to 
and implementation of grammatical rules 
is what is impaired.
Several theories about the underly-
ing nature of agrammatism have been 
proposed. Earlier notions that agramma-
tism is a central deficit in the linguistic 
ability to process syntactic information 
have been discounted at least partially 
by the fact that there tend to be dissocia-
tions between expressive and productive 
modalities. A more recent account is based 
on the speaker’s adaptation to limited 
working memory and speed of processing 
capacity. Reduced capacity leads to chal-
lenges in handling incoming information 
at the rate that it must be processed to be 
understood and a simplification of gram-
matical production (Kean, 1985; Kolk, 
1995; Kolk & Heeschen, 1990; Kolk, Van 
Grunsven, & Keyser, 1985) in relation to 
the speaker’s capacity overload.
Another set of theoretical perspec-
tives is characterized as primarily linguis-

Syndromes and Hallmark Characteristics of Aphasia   163
tic in nature. The “tree pruning hypoth-
esis” is based on the notion of generative 
grammar. Imagining a sentence mapped 
as a syntactic tree, one may conceive of 
people with aphasia having difficulty 
reaching up to the highest nodes of the 
tree (Friedmann, 1994, 2001; Friedmann & 
Grodzinsky, 1997). The mapping hypoth-
esis suggests that agrammatism results 
from difficulty mapping thematic roles 
(meaning) onto grammatical constituents 
(structure) of sentences (Schwartz, Saf-
fran, & Marin, 1980). Other perspectives 
emphasize phonological (e.g., Kean, 1977) 
or lexical (e.g., Bradley, Garret, & Zurif, 
1980) bases.
A third set of perspectives includes 
hypotheses related to the effort entailed 
in grammatical production. The stress-
saliency hypothesis (Goodglass, 1962, 
1968) emphasizes that formulating speech 
requires effort and that different parts 
of speech vary in terms of the degree of 
effort required to express them. Similarly, 
the economy-of-effort hypothesis (Lenne-
berg, 1967, 1973; Pick, 1931) suggests that 
people with agrammatism adapt by using 
the most meaningful words to reduce 
their overall production effort, leaving 
some words out. Additional variations of 
these perspectives have been proposed 
and tested and are an interesting area for 
further exploration. The results of ongo-
ing research suggest that not all manifes-
tations of agrammatism are similar across 
people with aphasia and that perhaps 
there are varying causes underlying syn-
tactic challenges across individuals.
People with Broca’s aphasia tend to 
produce short and simple phrases and 
tend not to produce complex grammati-
cal constructions. Language production is 
typically telegraphic, a term that harkens 
back to the day when people communicat-
ing by telegraph had to pay by the word 
and thus were careful to use only the most 
necessary, meaningful words to say what 
they wanted to say. The words that are 
missing tend to be function words, such 
as prepositions, pronouns, determiners, 
conjunctions, and auxiliary verbs. These 
are also referred to as closed-class words 
because there is a relatively small set of 
these in a language compared to open-class 
words, and there are rarely new words in 
this category added to a language.
The words that are spoken or writ-
ten tend to be content words, primarily 
nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs. 
These are also referred to as open-class 
words because words in this class con-
tinue to be added to languages and the 
way such words are used and combined 
with others continues to evolve in a lan-
guage. Verbs in English are often used 
without inflection by people with Broca’s 
aphasia; that is, just the verb stems may 
be used (e.g., “I go” instead of “I went” 
or “Melanie study . . . ” instead of “Mela-
nie studies . . . ”). Just how and why dif-
ferent classes of words may be relatively 
spared while others are retained, and 
how these patterns differ across different 
types of languages, is an intriguing area 
of research.
People with Broca’s aphasia typically 
have dysnomia (problems with word 
finding). Often, they use circumlocutions, 
or words other than the intended words, 
to get around the words they are striv-
ing to say and yet still communicate their 
intended meaning. An example might be 
saying, “Hand me the cutters,” rather than 
“Hand me the scissors.” Literal parapha-
sias are more frequent than semantic par-
aphasias in people with Broca’s aphasia. 
Their speech tends to be disfluent in that 
fewer words and less meaningful content 
are conveyed per unit of time compared to 
people without aphasia and also to most 

164   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
people with Wernicke’s aphasia. Their 
speech tends to be effortful and they tend 
to be aware of their errors, especially in 
contrast to people with aphasia who have 
more posterior (temporal lobe) lesions. 
Some have extreme frustration when 
struggling to communicate, referred to by 
some authors as catastrophic reaction.
Additionally, although most stroke 
and brain injury survivors tend to experi-
ence depression (due to direct neurophys-
iologic changes as well as life impacts), 
people with Broca’s aphasia tend to have 
higher rates and severity of depression 
than those with more posterior forms of 
aphasia. Some also experience emotional 
lability, the tendency to cry, swear, and 
otherwise openly emote, in a way that is 
uncharacteristic of how the person typi-
cally responded prior to a stroke or brain 
injury.
Consider this speech sample from a 
person with Broca’s aphasia:
Many many years back, uh, stroke. 
Speech, uh. No. No speech. But uh 
work work work. Hospital. Work work 
work. Rehab. Work work work. Home. 
Work work work. This one and that 
one. And now . . . speech pretty good. 
Not speak like you. No speak like old 
me. But speak way way better.
Keep in mind that Broca’s aphasia 
is a language disorder. The reason this is 
important to emphasize is that many peo-
ple tend to get distracted by concomitant 
motor speech deficits that so many people 
with Broca’s aphasia have. The proximity 
of areas or structures essential to speech 
production may be the reason that there 
is such a high incidence of a Broca’s type 
of aphasia in patients who have apraxia of 
speech (and vice versa).
Based on a seminal study by 
Dronkers (1996), the insula, located just 
beneath Broca’s area in the frontal oper-
culum, has been implicated in motor 
speech disorders and has been thought by 
many to be a center for motor program-
ming for speech. However, more recently, 
this has been contested, and other areas 
have been implicated (see Basilakos, Ror-
den, Bonilha, Moser, & Fridriksson, 2015; 
Fedorenko, Fillmore, Smith, Bonilha, & 
Fridriksson, 2015; and Richardson, Fill-
more, Rorden, LaPointe, & Fridriksson, 
2012, for intriguing arguments about 
this). Still, whatever regions are specifi-
cally responsible for motor speech versus 
language, discerning which aspects of a 
person’s disfluency and struggle to com-
municate are due to language deficits ver-
sus apraxia of speech, when he or she has 
both of these, is an important challenge 
for clinicians. We will consider this care-
fully in Section V.
Many people with Broca’s aphasia 
also have additional concomitant chal-
lenges. For example, in light of the prox-
imity of Broca’s area to the motor strip 
in the frontal lobe, they commonly have 
paresis in the face and body on the contra-
lateral (usually right) side. They are also 
likely to have dysarthria.
Global Aphasia
Global aphasia is classically associated 
with multiple areas of the frontal, pari-
etal, and temporal areas of the brain that 
receive their blood supply from branches 
of the middle cerebral artery in the  
language-dominant hemisphere. That is,  
large lesions throughout the planum tem-
porale tend to be affected. Global aphasia 
entails a combination of expressive and 

Syndromes and Hallmark Characteristics of Aphasia   165
receptive language deficits in all modali-
ties. Some people with global aphasia 
are not able to speak at all, especially 
soon after stroke. Some speak only via 
stereotypy, the production of the same 
few words or nonwords regardless of the 
meaning intended. For example, a per-
son may say only “hello,” “wonderful,” 
or “kippish” in any verbal context and no 
other words. Communication is carried 
out largely through gesture, tone of voice, 
and facial expression.
Conduction Aphasia
The classic lesion site associated with con-
duction aphasia is the arcuate fasciculus, 
within the supramarginal gyrus (Brod-
mann’s area 40), although other fiber 
tracts in pathways between Wernicke’s 
and Broca’s areas have been implicated 
(Anderson et al., 1991; Buchsbaum et al., 
2011). The hallmark symptom is impaired 
repetition relative to good comprehen-
sion and spontaneous production of spo-
ken and written language. The longer and 
more complex the words, phrases, and 
sentences people with conduction aphasia 
are asked to repeat, the more difficulty they 
have with the task. Awareness of errors is 
typically good, and they may engage in 
conduit d’approche, or repeated attempts 
to articulate a verbal stimulus that they are 
trying to repeat. In spontaneous speech, 
the most common error types are phone-
mic paraphasias.
Transcortical Sensory Aphasia
The classic lesion site associated with 
transcortical sensory aphasia is the area 
surrounding Wernicke’s area, excluding 
Wernicke’s area itself, namely the angular 
gyrus (Brodmann’s area 39) and the poste-
rior portion of the middle temporal gyrus 
(Brodmann’s area 37). These are known 
as the temporal lobe watershed regions, 
or areas of overlapping peripheral blood 
flow near Wernicke’s area. According to 
Damasio (2008), associated lesions may 
project into the lateral portions of the 
occipital lobe or anterior portions of the 
middle temporal gyrus (Brodmann’s 
areas 18, 19, and 21). The hallmark symp-
toms are similar to Wernicke’s aphasia, 
with the exception that repetition is intact 
in transcortical sensory aphasia. People 
with this type of aphasia also sometimes 
echo others’ words as they are listening to 
others speak.
Transcortical Motor Aphasia
The classic site of lesion for transcortical 
motor aphasia is in the anterior water-
shed area of the left frontal lobe, extend-
ing to the prefrontal areas. Damasio (2008) 
reports that lesions may be in Brodmann’s 
areas 6, 8, 9, 10, and 46. The hallmark 
symptoms are similar to Broca’s aphasia, 
with the exception that repetition is intact 
in transcortical motor aphasia.
Note that the terms sensory and motor 
in the labels for transcortical aphasia are 
misnomers in that, by definition, no form 
of aphasia is a motor or sensory disorder. 
These misnomers are persistent artifacts 
remaining from years of use in the clini-
cal and research literature, dating back 
at least as far as Wernicke’s classic text, 
Der aphasische symptomencomplex, in 1874. 
Their persistence may have been exacer-
bated by the fact that not all languages 
include terms that clearly distinguish 
speech from language.

166   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Mixed Transcortical Aphasia
There is no clear agreement about a classic 
associated site of lesion for mixed trans-
cortial aphasia, although it may be asso-
ciated with combined multifocal lesions 
in the frontal and temporal watershed re-
gions. It is similar to global aphasia, with 
the exception of intact repetition ability.
What Other Syndromes of 
Aphasia Are There and What 
Are Their Characteristics?
Anomic Aphasia
A lesion site commonly associated with 
anomic aphasia is the angular gyrus; 
although other associated lesion sites 
have been reported, associated lesions 
still tend to be in the same region, around 
the intersection of the superior temporal 
and inferior parietal lobes. As its name 
implies, the hallmark feature of anomic 
aphasia is word-finding difficulty. What 
differentiates this from other syndromes 
of aphasia in which anomia is common 
is that comprehension and syntactic pro-
duction in anomic aphasia are relatively 
spared. Typical symptoms are circum-
locutions, the use of generic terms (e.g., 
“thing” instead of an intended noun or 
“girl” instead of a specific girl’s name), 
and production of fillers such as “uh,” 
“you know,” and “like.”
Primary Progressive Aphasia
Primary progressive aphasia (PPA) is 
the ongoing loss of language abilities in 
the face of relatively preserved cogni-
tive abilities, caused by neurodegenera-
tive disease. It is similar to other types of 
aphasia in that it entails a loss of previ-
ously acquired language abilities due to 
a neurological cause. It is distinguished 
from other types of aphasia in the follow-
ing ways:
• PPA has an insidious onset, whereas 
other forms of aphasia tend to 
develop suddenly.
• The cause of PPA is neurodegenera-
tive as opposed to being due to a 
sudden disruption in blood supply.
PPA is similar to neurodegenerative 
forms of dementia in that it is progressive. 
It is different in that the first symptoms 
of PPA to be noticed tend to be linguistic, 
especially related to word finding, in the 
face of relatively intact cognitive abilities. 
In contrast, the early symptoms of most 
people with dementia tend to be related 
to memory loss and confusion. Over time, 
people with PPA usually develop demen-
tia (Ceccaldi, Soubrouillard, Poncet, & 
Lecours, 1996; Damasio, 1998). PPA occurs 
in varied forms, and thus separate classi-
fication systems for PPA alone have been 
proposed. The most widely accepted clas-
sification to date includes three major sub-
types: semantic, logopenic, and agram-
matic (nonfluent). Details about these are 
discussed in Chapter 13 in the context of 
language disorders associated with neu-
rodegenerative conditions.
Crossed Aphasia
Crossed aphasia is any form of aphasia 
that is due to damage to the right hemi-
sphere instead of the left in a person 
who is right-handed. It is extremely rare 
(probably less than 3% to 4% of people 
with aphasia). The lesion sites most often 

Syndromes and Hallmark Characteristics of Aphasia   167
mirror the sites associated with classic 
aphasia syndromes in the left hemisphere, 
although some are said to be associated 
with unique and unpredictable sites of 
lesion. Many people with crossed apha-
sia also have concomitant symptoms that 
are typically associated with right hemi-
sphere lesions, such as left visual neglect 
and visuospatial deficits.
Just as there are cases of crossed apha-
sia, there are cases of crossed nonaphasia 
or crossed right hemisphere syndrome, as 
well. That is, a right-handed individual 
may have lesions in areas associated with 
specific syndromes of aphasia, yet have 
no symptoms of aphasia (Cohen, Remy, 
Leroy, Geny, & Degos, 1991; Fischer, Alex-
ander, Gabriel, Gould, & Milione, 1991; 
Hund-Georgiadis, Zysset, Weih, Guthke, 
& von Cramon, 2001; Judd, 1989; Junqué, 
Litvan, & Vendrell, 1986; Taylor & Solo-
mon, 1979).
Subcortical Aphasia
Subcortical aphasia is any form of apha-
sia that is associated with a lesion below 
the cortex. The very term defies the tradi-
tional viewpoint that aphasia can only be 
associated with cortical lesions. Research-
ers have provided neuroimaging evi-
dence associated with psycholinguistic 
profiles of people who have subcortical 
lesions but no evidence of cortical dam-
age (Kuljic-Obradovic, 2003; Marien, 
Engelborghs, Pickut, & De Deyn, 2000; 
Nadeau & Crosson, 1997; Schmahmann 
& Sherman, 1998). If the specialized struc-
tures and neural networks for language 
processing are all in the cortex, then how 
could aphasia be caused by a subcortical 
lesion? Primary structures that have been 
implicated in subcortical aphasia are the 
thalamus, the basal ganglia, and the cer-
ebellum. The subcortical white matter 
pathways that connect subcortical struc-
tures with one another (including the 
internal capsule) and with the cortex have 
also been implicated (Alexander, Naeser, 
& Palumbo, 1987; Craver & Small, 1997; 
de Boissezon et al., 2005; Hillis et al., 2004; 
Krishnan, Tiwari, Pai, & Rao, 2012; Kuljic-
Obradovic, 2003). Reported associated 
symptoms vary.
How Might Dyslexia and 
Dysgraphia Be Conceptualized as 
Symptoms Versus Syndromes?
In all types of aphasia, reading abilities 
tend to mirror auditory comprehension 
abilities and writing abilities tend to mir-
ror speaking abilities, unless there are con-
comitant deficits that would differentially 
affect any of those abilities, or unless a per-
son had low or no literacy prior to onset 
of aphasia. Thus, dyslexia and dysgraphia 
may be considered symptoms of aphasia. 
There are individuals, though, who have 
significant reading deficits but relatively 
good auditory receptive language abilities 
and good language production. In such 
cases, the primary diagnosis may be dys-
lexia rather than aphasia. Dyslexia may 
occur with or without dysgraphia.
What Are Limitations of 
Classification Systems Based 
on Relating Function to 
Neuroanatomic Structure?
All aphasia classification systems have 
limitations. Those based on associating 
linguistic deficits to structural deficits are 
listed here.

168   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Given that language and related 
aspects of cognition depend 
on multicomponent networks 
throughout the brain, functional 
correlates corresponding to specific 
structures are not truly separable.
• Linguistic functioning relies not 
only on structural components but 
also on electrochemical properties 
and dynamic blood flow.
• A minority of people with aphasia 
can be reliably classified based on 
their site of lesion alone (Marshall, 
1984).
• There are people whose aphasia 
symptom constellations fit into one 
particular category at one time but 
evolve to another type of aphasia at 
another time.
• The actual classification assigned 
based on aphasia assessment results 
may vary depending on which 
assessment battery is used (Henseler, 
Regenbrecht, & Obrig, 2014).
• People with right or bilateral 
hemispheric dominance for 
language still acquire aphasia.
• People with aphasia secondary to 
subcortical lesions, degenerative 
conditions, traumatic brain injury, 
and multiple or unknown sites 
of lesion further challenge us in 
classifying of aphasia subtypes 
based on neuroanatomical 
correlates.
• Current classification systems do 
not take into account important 
findings relevant to the distinction 
of highly specialized brain 
regions (e.g., Broca’s area) versus 
domain-general brain regions that 
contribute to cognitive aspects of 
language processing (e.g., working 
memory, executive functioning, and 
processing of actions; Fedorenko 
et al., 2012).
Whitaker (1984) suggests that the use 
of the term syndrome is in itself problem-
atic when considering aphasia. By defi-
nition, he argues, a syndrome is a set of 
symptoms that co-occur to constitute a 
certain condition. For an individual to be 
considered to have a certain type of apha-
sia, we tend not to be very strict about 
whether all of his or her symptoms fall 
within the symptom constellation that is 
characteristic of that type of aphasia. If 
not all of the set of symptoms associated 
with a type of aphasia have to be present 
for a person to have that type of aphasia, 
then in what way is it helpful to character-
ize a person as having a certain syndrome 
of aphasia?
Brookshire (1983) suggested that cat-
egorization of aphasia is more a matter 
of the beliefs and biases of aphasiologists 
than it is of the actual characteristics of 
people who have aphasia. Furthermore, 
even if we could be completely confident 
of an objective means of characterizing 
a person’s symptoms and correspond-
ing neuropathology according to a clas-
sic aphasia type, we still may not know a 
great deal about the underlying nature of 
his or her deficits.
There is no classification system that 
is agreed upon by the worldwide com-
munity of clinical aphasiologists (Byng, 
Kay, Edmundson, & Scott, 1990; Holland, 
Fromm, & Swindell, 1986; Luria & Hutton, 
1977; Marshall, 1983; McNeil & Kimel-
man, 2001). Even if there were a univer-
sally accepted classification scheme, con-
sider the limitations that would persist.
• There would be many people  
with aphasia whose symptoms 

Syndromes and Hallmark Characteristics of Aphasia   169
would defy the classification 
boundaries.
• There would still be tremendous 
variability in the symptom 
constellations and levels of severity 
according to each area of deficit 
within each aphasia type.
• There would still be overlap in 
symptoms noted (e.g., word-finding 
problems and challenges in life 
participation).
• Clinicians would likely remain 
inconsistent in terms of judgments 
about which specific aphasia sub-
type of aphasia any given person 
would be considered to have.
• Unless the classification scheme 
were based on site of lesion alone 
(thus not necessarily predictive 
of actual cognitive-linguistic 
symptoms), there would still be 
overlap of corresponding sites of 
lesion across people with varied 
types of aphasia.
• Clinical aphasiologists would still 
have to engage in excellent clinical 
judgment and problem solving to 
best promote an individual’s best 
recovery of language and social 
participation.
Given this state of affairs, some aphasiolo-
gists suggest that we may benefit by being 
flexible in using different classification 
models toward different ends (Bartlett 
& Pashek, 1994; Schwartz, 1984). As Bay 
so cleverly stated in 1964, “To ponder too 
much over one or another system of clas-
sification appears to be an idle and ster-
ile occupation” (p. 122). If you wish to be 
challenged further in considering alterna-
tive classification schemes for aphasia, be 
sure to check out the relevant references 
cited in this chapter.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Practice explaining to a partner what 
is meant by the dichotomous classifi-
cations of fluent/nonfluent aphasia, 
expressive/receptive aphasia, and 
posterior/anterior aphasia.
	 3.	 Why is it problematic to classify apha-
sia dichotomously as “fluent” versus 
“nonfluent”?
	 4.	 What does it mean when one refers to 
aphasia as a “dissociation syndrome”?
	 5.	 Give examples of phonemic (literal) 
and semantic (global) paraphasias.
	 6.	 Describe varied ways in which the 
cause of agrammatism in people with 
Broca’s aphasia might be explained. 
What are the strengths and weak-
nesses of arguments supporting any 
given explanation for why people 
with Broca’s aphasia tend to have 
trouble with grammatical processing?
	 7.	 Consider each of the following sub-
types of aphasia:
• Broca’s aphasia
• Wernicke’s aphasia
• Conduction aphasia
• Anomic aphasia
• Global aphasia
• Transcortical sensory aphasia
• Transcortical motor aphasia
• Primary progressive aphasia
• Crossed aphasia
• Subcortical aphasia
For each:
a.	 Identify typical associated site(s) 
of lesion according to classic 
models of structure and func-
tion. Be sure to refer to names of 

170   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
structures, names of any associ-
ated gyri and sulci, and numbers 
for associated Brodmann’s areas.
b.	 Identify the origin of the blood 
supply for associated structures/
brain regions.
c.	 List the hallmark features and 
symptoms.
	 8.	 Compare and contrast each apha-
sia subtype listed above with other 
subtypes.
	 9.	 Describe the similarities and differ-
ences between primary progressive 
aphasia (PPA) and dementia.
10.	 Imagine two people engaging in con-
versation with you, one with Broca’s 
aphasia and the other with Wernicke’s 
aphasia. Which one is most likely to:
a.	 Speak “fluently”?
b.	 Have concomitant hemiplegia?
c.	 Have relatively good comprehen-
sion in conversation?
d.	 Perseverate on a word or a task?
e.	 Be depressed?
f.	 Have phonemic paraphasias?
g.	 Have press of speech or 
logorrhea?
h.	 Use fewer function (closed-class) 
words than content (open-class) 
words?
i.	 Use more nouns than verbs?
j.	 Demonstrate emotional lability?
k.	 Use agrammatic speech?
l.	 Use telegraphic speech?
m.	Have poor self-monitoring of his 
or her linguistic errors?
n.	 Be especially upset or depressed 
about his or her loss of language 
abilities?
o.	 Struggle overtly with articulating 
words?
p.	 Have concomitant apraxia of 
speech?
q.	 Have concomitant dysarthria?
r.	 Have word-finding problems?
s.	 Show catastrophic reactions dur-
ing interaction?
t.	 Use jargon in conversation?
u.	 Perseverate on a word?
v.	 Perseverate on a task?
	 	 As you consider each of the items above, 
be sure to consider how any of these 
tendencies might be different within 
specific individuals with aphasia.
11.	 Observe video samples of people 
with varied types of aphasia. For each 
individual you observe, discuss the 
following:
a.	 Physical characteristics (specific 
aspects of appearance, muscle 
tone, coordination, speech, pos-
ture, etc.) that you think may have 
been affected by his or her stroke 
or brain injury
b.	 Aspects of language you think 
may have been affected by his or 
her stroke or brain injury
c.	 Aspects of speech you think may 
have been affected by his or her 
stroke or brain injury
d.	 The likely impact of aphasia on 
that individual’s participation in 
activities that might have been 
important to him or her before the 
stroke
Additional learning and teaching materials 
are available on the companion website.

171
Chapter
11
Cognitive-Communicative 
Disorders Associated With 
Traumatic Brain Injury
In Chapter 6, we reviewed basic aspects 
of the etiologies of traumatic brain injury 
(TBI). In the present chapter, we follow 
up with a brief discussion of the nature of 
the varied populations of TBI survivors, 
the many cognitive-communicative chal-
lenges that they (and those who care about 
them) face. We consider special clinical 
practice challenges for clinicians working 
with this extremely heterogeneous popu-
lation. We also review special situations 
related to economic influences and health 
care contexts in which speech-language 
pathologists (SLPs) may play a role, not 
only by providing direct clinical services 
but also by serving as consultants, expert 
witnesses, educators, and advocates.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What is the nature of people with TBI 
likely to be seen by SLPs?
	 2.	 What communication symptoms 
are likely to be experienced by TBI 
survivors?
	 3.	 What are special challenges for war- 
and terrorism-related TBI survivors?
	 4.	 What are special considerations for cli-
nicians working with TBI survivors?
	 5.	 What are special challenges faced 
by TBI survivors in the health care 
context?
	 6.	 What special economic considerations 
may affect clinical work with TBI 
survivors?
What Is the Nature of People With 
TBI Likely to Be Seen by SLPs?
The population of TBI survivors is ex- 
tremely heterogeneous. There is no clear 
diagnostic profile to describe this group. 
They represent a wide range of ages, 
nationalities, cultures, socioeconomic 
backgrounds, education levels, and races. 
Most are people who have fallen or who 
have been in motor vehicle accidents. Many 
are people injured in sporting activities. 
Some are violent criminals with gunshot  

172   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
or knife-stabbing wounds. Others are 
wounded in roles as military combat per-
sonnel, victims of violence, and innocent 
bystanders caught in unexpected trauma 
such as acts of terror or structural col-
lapses of buildings and bridges.
Overall, TBI survivors constitute a 
much younger population than the stroke 
or dementia population. The most com-
monly affected group is males between 14 
and 25 years old, although adults over 75 
and children under 4 have a relatively high 
incidence of TBI, too. Males are about two 
times as likely as females to experience a 
TBI. This is largely attributable to neuro-
physiological differences in gender-related 
hormones and frontal lobe development 
in males in the 14- to 25-year-old range and 
the corresponding relative lack of inhibi-
tion of dangerous impulses, risk-taking 
behaviors, and aggression. Given the 
younger age range of TBI survivors, those 
that are seen clinically by SLPs are more 
likely than other diagnostic groups with 
acquired neurogenic cognitive-linguistic 
disorders to have concerns about return to 
employment and education. Thus, inter-
vention goals and activities are more likely 
to focus on communicative competence 
required for work and schooling.
The severity of challenges faced by 
TBI survivors ranges from barely notice-
able symptoms to complete loss of func-
tional abilities in all activities of daily liv-
ing or even coma or vegetative state. Their 
concomitant medical concerns and disor-
ders are highly variable. For some, recov-
ery is quick, but for others, it is protracted 
over decades. Given the sheer diversity of 
causes that lead to TBI, clinicians working 
with this population ideally have a great 
deal of flexibility in adjusting to unpre-
dictable needs and behaviors, embracing 
complexity, and also potentially tolerating 
differences in values that may not align 
with their own.
What Communication 
Symptoms Are Likely to Be 
Experienced by TBI Survivors?
Although TBI may cause aphasia, rela-
tively few TBI survivors actually have 
aphasia per se. Their language problems 
are more commonly associated with cog-
nitive and behavioral challenges and are 
often grouped collectively as cognitive-
communicative impairments. Common 
sequelae related to cognition, communi-
cation, and behavior in TBI survivors are 
summarized in Box 11–1. Of course, any 
given individual with a TBI experiences 
his or her own unique set of challenges 
that may be only grossly summarized as 
a subset of symptoms on such a list. Given 
the focus of this book, our emphasis here 
is on cognitive-linguistic symptoms, not 
speech disorders. Still, knowing a great 
deal about motor speech disorders is crit-
ical for excellent clinical practice geared 
toward helping improve communication 
in TBI survivors.
Considering the ICF framework 
helps us to reflect on both the body struc-
ture and function of TBI survivors as 
they pertain to communication as well 
as the absolutely paramount aspects of 
activities and life participation. The items 
listed in Box 11–1 pertain primarily to 
specific aspects of functioning related to 
brain injury. Most of the body structure 
challenges associated with communica-
tion problems in people with TBI result 
from damage to the frontal lobes, limbic 
structures, and critical axonal connections 
among prefrontal and limbic structures. 

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Traumatic Brain Injury   173
Common Sequelae Related to Cognition,  
Communication, and Behavior in TBI Survivors
Cognitive characteristics
• Impaired verbal and nonverbal 
memory
	 Areas of deficit
n	 Working memory
n	 Short-term memory
n	 Long-term memory
n	 Procedural/implicit memory
n	 Declarative/explicit 
memory
n	 Episodic memory
n	 Semantic memory
n	 Prospective memory
n	 Source memory
	 Memory-associated learning 
problems
n	 Encoding
n	 Storage
n	 Retrieval
	 Amnesia
n	 Anterograde (loss of recall 
for events following injury)
n	 Retrograde (loss of recall 
for events preceding injury)
n	 Paramnesia (disturbance 
in identification of location 
and surroundings)
• Impaired sensory integration
• Reduced attention 
	 Decreased arousal
	 Decreased and variable 
alertness
	 Problems with selective/
focused attention
	 Problems with sustained 
attention
	 Deficits in attention 
switching/shifting/divided/
alternating attention
	 Variations in cognitive effort
	 Challenges with resource 
allocation
	 Slowed speed of processing/
reduced cognitive efficiency
• Problems with executive 
functions
	 Reasoning
	 Judgment
	 Decision making
	 Goal setting, planning, 
strategizing
	 Awareness of strengths and 
weaknesses
	 Organizing
	 Sequencing
• Impaired reasoning
	 Convergent thinking
	 Divergent thinking
Language characteristics
• Word-finding difficulties
• Difficulty with comprehension  
and production of abstract 
language
• Impaired verbal reasoning 
• Impaired verbal learning 
• Dyslexia
• Dysgraphia
• Paraphasias
• Impaired pragmatic abilities
	 Impaired organization and 
cohesion of written and 
spoken language
	 Inappropriate topic switching
	 Impaired turn taking
	 Inappropriate use and 
interpretation of facial 
expressions
Box
11–1

174   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 Difficulty interpreting and 
using prosody
	 Challenges interpreting 
metaphor and humor
	 Social disinhibition/impaired 
monitoring of appropriateness 
of language use in social 
contexts
n	 Inappropriate humor
n	 Inappropriate self-
disclosure in light of social 
contexts
	 Difficulties using language 
to aid memory and logical 
organization
Speech characteristics
• Slowed speech
• Slurred speech
• Inappropriate intonation
Hearing characteristics
• Conductive and sensorineural 
hearing loss
• Speech discrimination problems
• Central auditory processing 
disorders
TBI behavioral characteristics
• Personality changes due to 
increased irritability
• Sudden mood changes
• Anxiety and frustration
• Depression
• Restlessness
• Reduced self-esteem and 
self-confidence
• Hyperactivity
• Impaired concentration
• Impulsivity
• Egocentricity
• Emotional lability and excessive 
laughing or crying
• Inappropriate social judgment
• Fluctuating moods
• Hypersexuality
• Inability to self-monitor
• Lack of motivation
• Self-centeredness
• Inability to control emotions
• Lack of insight
• Denial of physical and mental 
limitations
• Literal interpretations of 
environmental situations
• Confusion
• Confabulation
• Perseverations
• Stimulus boundedness
• Decreased initiation
• Impaired visual processing skills
• Fatigue
• General mental slowing
• Low tolerance for visual and 
auditory extraneous stimuli
• Motor control difficulties
Note.  Characteristics are highly variable within and across individual TBI survivors, in 
terms of occurrence as well as severity. Social and environmental contexts are absolutely 
vital in determining the influence of any characteristic on an individual’s communicative 
competence at any given point in time. Many of the terms listed here may be found in 
the Glossary.
Sources:  Adamovich, Henderson, & Auerbach, 1985; Chan, 2000; Keltner & Cooke, 2007; 
Musiek, Baran, & Shinn, 2004; Myers, Wilmington, Gallun, Henry, & Fausti, 2009; Nie-
mann, Ruff, & Kramer, 1996; Sohlberg & Mateer, 2010b; Wallace, 2006.

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Traumatic Brain Injury   175
Given the bony prominence of the fron-
tal components of the skull, and thus the 
likelihood that the brain will contact those 
during a traumatic injury, most TBI survi-
vors have some involvement of the frontal 
lobes, regardless of the locus of coup or 
contrecoup injuries.
Left and right orbital frontal lobe 
injury tends to be associated with a con-
stellation of symptoms often called fron-
tal lobe syndrome (FLS). FLS symptoms 
and the severity are variable within and 
across individuals. The most common 
aspects of FLS are executive function def-
icits (challenges with self-regulation, rea-
soning, making judgments and decisions, 
goal setting, planning, strategizing, being 
aware of strengths and weaknesses, orga-
nizing, sequencing, allocating attention, 
and inhibiting in appropriate behaviors) 
and pragmatic deficits (problems with 
the social use of language). Some people 
with FLS have difficulty with use and 
interpretation of gestures, facial expres-
sions, and speech prosody, as we explore 
further in Chapter 12. Many have depres-
sion. FLS manifestations are often per-
ceived as aspects of personality change. 
Involvement of the hippocampus and 
surrounding limbic tissue is associated 
with impaired declarative and explicit 
memory. Injury to other limbic structures 
and frontolimbic connections contributes 
to difficulty in emotional and behavioral 
self-regulation.
Challenges with engaging in and 
maintaining meaningful interactions and 
relationships tend to occur across TBI sur-
vivors, regardless of the specific nature of 
their symptoms. Recall that the activities 
and participation components of the ICD 
include a distinction of capacity versus 
performance. Many people with TBI have 
highly variable performance character-
istics based on the actual environments 
in which they engage. For this reason, 
any aspect of assessing and treating the 
body structure and function challenges 
of a TBI survivor should be in the context 
of a focus on real-life social engagement 
and other aspects of life participation. All 
aspects of intervention should include 
friends, family members, and any others 
who play important roles in the TBI sur-
vivor’s life.
What Are Special Challenges 
for War- and Terrorism-
Related TBI Survivors?
The body of research on the neuropsy-
chological aspects of war- and terrorism-
related TBIs is steadily growing. Although 
blast injury (BI) TBI incidence has con-
tinued to rise dramatically, non-blast-
induced (NBI) TBI remains a serious con-
cern as well in the context of terrorism and 
war. Most reported military injuries since 
the early 2000s have been blast related; the 
next most common causes are vehicular 
accidents, falls, penetrating fragments, 
and bullets (Terrio et al., 2009).
Recall the complex nature of BI TBI 
etiologies discussed in Chapter 6. Clearly, 
impacts of BI TBI on individuals’ cog-
nitive-communicative abilities are also 
complex, and much remains to be stud-
ied about them. Hallmark symptoms of 
war- and terrorism-related BI TBI include 
deficits in language comprehension, lan-
guage formulation, speech, attention, 
memory, judgment, and decision mak-
ing, as well as hyperactivity, personality 
changes, irritability, anxiety, headaches, 
fatigue, increased sensitivity to noise and 
light, and insomnia (Cherney et al., 2010; 

176   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Trudeau et al., 1998). Even mild forms of 
BI TBI may lead to severe life-affecting 
consequences in all of these areas. Index-
ing these consequences is complicated by 
the fact that both BI and non-BI TBI are 
commonly accompanied by posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) and depression 
(Cherney et al., 2010; Elder & Cristian, 
2009; Hicks et al., 2010; Hoffman, Shesko, 
& Harrison, 2010; Hoge et al., 2008; Huck-
ans et al., 2010; Keltner & Cooke, 2007; 
Martin, Lu, Helmick, French, & Warden, 
2008; Rosenfeld & Ford, 2010; Schneider-
man et al., 2008; Vasterling et al., 2009; D. 
Wallace, 2009; G. L. Wallace, 2006), condi-
tions that tend to affect many of the same 
important aspects of daily functioning 
(Howe, 2009). Additionally, associated 
motor, hearing and visual impairments 
commonly affect the validity of patients’ 
responses during behavioral assessment 
of cognition and language.
What Are Special Considerations 
for Clinicians Working 
With TBI Survivors?
Scope of Practice
Clinical practice with TBI survivors has 
led to a deepening and widening of SLPs’ 
roles in the assessment and treatment 
of cognitive challenges that affect com-
munication. Knowing a great deal about 
language disorders, and having clinical 
expertise with people with aphasia, is a 
great foundation for work with TBI sur-
vivors. Additionally, the best practices 
and principles for effective assessment, 
treatment, counseling, and advocacy are 
similar across all clinical groups within 
the realm of acquired neurogenic commu-
nication disorders. Still, expert clinicians 
in this arena are ideally tooled with addi-
tional specialized knowledge and skills 
pertinent to TBI.
Interdisciplinary Collaboration
Given the numerous and variable physi-
cal, medical, cognitive, communicative, 
emotional, and mental health challenges 
of TBI survivors, it is especially vital that 
SLPs work as strong interprofessional 
team members in assessing, treating, 
educating, counseling, and advocating 
for TBI survivors and the people who care  
for them.
Assessment Challenges
Although it is relatively simple to list cog-
nitive, linguistic, and behavioral charac-
teristics (as in Box 11–1) — and to observe 
them in individual TBI survivors — it is 
far more complex to address fundamen-
tal questions related to assessment and 
rehabilitation. For example, consider the 
following questions:
• Given that many of these 
characteristics affect one another, 
is it possible to individually 
describe or index each characteristic 
distinctly using standardized 
assessment methods?
• How does one sort out which of 
these characteristics may have been 
present in an individual before the 
brain injury?
• What impact does each of these 
characteristics have on a particular 
individual’s actual communicative 
effectiveness in real-life situations?

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Traumatic Brain Injury   177
Special difficulties in the differential 
diagnosis of the many symptoms of TBI 
are rooted in six critical challenges:
• Inconsistencies across varied 
classification systems (e.g., 
the American Congress of 
Rehabilitation, the American 
Academy of Neurology, and the 
American Psychiatric Association) 
used to delineate TBI sequelae (see 
Halbauer et al., 2009)
• Inconsistency in design and lack of 
thoroughness among many of the 
available assessment instruments
• Discrepancies between 
standardized test results and how 
individuals actually perform in 
real-life contexts
• A lack of sophisticated and detailed 
research on cognition, language, 
and psychosocial aspects of the life-
affecting consequences of TBI
• A lack of understanding about how 
cognitive and linguistic challenges 
in TBI survivors are related and 
how deficits in these areas may be 
associated with other concerns, 
such as depression, posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD), and motor 
(including speech), vision, and 
hearing deficits
• Variability in performance within 
and across individuals, especially 
relative to the social use of language
All forms of TBI, whether involving 
blast, acceleration/deceleration, rota-
tional, or penetrating injuries, whether 
war related or not, pose critical diagnos-
tic challenges due to the complexity of 
overlapping symptoms. It is not always 
clear just which aspects of cognition and 
language are affected, in what ways, and 
to what degree for a given individual. As 
we explore in Section V, there are many 
tests, survey instruments, questionnaires, 
and rating scales that have been tested for 
administration with TBI survivors. Still, 
given the sheer variability in etiology and 
complexity of symptomatology across 
individuals, using and interpreting the 
results of such assessments requires in-
depth problem solving on the clinician’s 
part. Furthermore, unless one assesses an 
individual in real-life communicative sit-
uations, it cannot be clear how any aspect 
of his or her deficits influences his or her 
meaningful life participation. Ongoing 
creative and strategic assessment through-
out treatment in multiple contexts, using 
standardized and nonstandardized meth-
ods, is essential (Turkstra et al., 2005; 
Turkstra, Coelho, & Ylvisaker, 2005).
What Are Special Challenges 
Faced by TBI Survivors in the 
Health Care Context?
In much of the world, specialized inter-
disciplinary rehabilitation services for 
TBI survivors are lacking. Even when 
such services are available, though, these 
individuals face particular challenges in 
accessing them. That is, in addition to 
the myriad communicative and life par-
ticipation challenges of people with TBI, 
they face vital challenges in terms of get-
ting the services they need. A primary 
reason for this is that their communica-
tive deficits are often invisible. They may 
look fine. They may speak well. They may 
seem, especially during a brief visit with a 
health care provider, to be just fine.
A second reason is that many peo-
ple with TBI have concomitant medical  

178   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
conditions that distract health care provid-
ers during acute and subacute phases of 
care. A person admitted to the emergency 
room with facial lacerations, a broken leg, 
and dislocated shoulder following a car 
accident, for example, will likely immedi-
ately be treated for those relatively easily 
detectable physical injuries and then be 
referred for further care associated with 
those particular injuries. Even though he 
or she may have sustained a serious brain 
injury during the same accident, it may go 
undetected because of the focus on other 
problems.
Third, TBI survivors are not necessar-
ily the best judges of what they need in 
terms of rehabilitation. Many are unaware 
of their own deficits. Without education 
and counseling, typically including fam-
ily members or caregivers, many are 
unlikely to identify their own needs for 
further help. This is often the case even 
in the face of significant impacts of a head 
injury on their ability to engage meaning-
fully with others.
A fourth reason is that TBI survivors 
often do not independently seek services 
to address cognitive and communicative 
challenges. This may be because they feel 
embarrassed about certain symptoms 
they are experiencing or are afraid of con-
sequences of having their deficits noticed 
(e.g., due to social stigma or fear of not 
being able to return to work or other pre-
accident activities). Fifth, many TBI sur-
vivors and their family members do not 
know that it is normal to experience chal-
lenges with memory, judgment, moods, or 
concentration, for example, and thus do 
not know that it is possible to pursue ser-
vices to address them.
Sixth, many health care facilities do not 
incorporate effective head injury screen-
ing protocols. Survivors of accidents and 
violent incidents causing bodily harm are 
often not even screened using basic men-
tal status and cognitive-linguistic screen-
ing tools or surveys. In fact, many are not 
even asked whether they are experiencing 
related challenges. If problems go unde-
tected, they are discharged from health 
care facilities without referrals to profes-
sionals who are qualified to help them.
Often more than one of these six fac-
tors come into play and interact in any 
given individual’s posttrauma health care 
experience. Further complicating the situ-
ation is the fact that many members of a 
given health care team may not know that 
assessment and intervention of commu-
nicative challenges associated with cog-
nitive-linguistic deficits are within SLPs’ 
scope of practice. Even when cognitive-
linguistic challenges might be apparent, 
appropriate referrals may not be made. 
The ultimate excellent aphasiologist is 
alert to ongoing opportunities to raise 
awareness of head injury sequelae and 
available services to help address them, 
promote interprofessional posttrauma 
screening protocols, and provide educa-
tional and referral materials to TBI survi-
vors and the people who care about them.
What Special Economic 
Considerations Affect Clinical 
Work With TBI Survivors?
Unfortunately, the validity of statistics 
regarding employability and potential for 
return to work for TBI survivors is often 
suspect. This is in part because some TBI 
survivors receive greater financial benefits 
by not being employed and thus choose 
unemployment even when they actually 
could return to work. In the United States, 
financial benefits may include Social Secu-
rity Disability Income (SSDI), which often 

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Traumatic Brain Injury   179
includes support not only for patients 
themselves but for their dependents as 
well. In many counties, people who are 
injured while working may receive work-
ers’ compensation from their employers 
or from their employers’ insurance agen-
cies. Additionally, some patients receive 
funding by winning or settling lawsuits 
related to their injuries.
Potential financial benefits related to 
not returning to work and to legal cases 
associated with TBI may lead to inher-
ent conflicts of interest. This is because 
sometimes survivors stand to gain more 
financially if the long-term consequences 
of their injuries are documented as being 
worse than they may actually be. Thus, 
SLPs may be called upon to provide expert 
opinions and testimony about the validity 
of deficits claimed and the actual conse-
quences of an individual’s brain injury.
Of course, financial benefits to TBI 
survivors are sometimes highly war-
ranted. SLPs may be asked to provide 
professional judgments, not necessarily 
with the goals of finding that a person in 
question is malingering or trumping up 
the consequences of an injury for financial 
gain. TBI survivors often need help sub-
stantiating the real-life impacts of cogni-
tive and linguistic deficits because these 
deficits are less visible and concretely 
apparent to laypeople. SLPs may serve as 
advocates to TBI survivors by justifying 
and documenting concerns about lifelong 
challenges due to head injuries.
An additional area in which finan-
cial considerations might affect clini-
cal practice is in the pursuit of funding 
to support durable medical equipment 
(DME) for injured patients. TBI survivors 
who require augmentative and alterna-
tive communication devices or treatment 
software often rely on the help of SLPs 
to pursue such funding through insur-
ance arrangements, state or federal fund-
ing programs and agencies, or private 
foundations.
We will continue to consider impor-
tant aspects of serving TBI survivors in 
the next chapter focusing on right brain 
injury, as well as in the upcoming sec-
tions on service delivery, assessment, and 
intervention.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 In this chapter we noted that “given 
the sheer diversity of causes that lead 
to TBI, clinicians working with this 
population ideally have a great deal 
of flexibility in adjusting to unpredict-
able needs and behaviors, embracing 
complexity, and also tolerating dif-
ferences in values that may not align 
with their own.” With a partner, dis-
cuss how you, as an SLP, may feel 
about providing clinical services for 
each of the following types of people. 
What, if any, are your personal res-
ervations about working with them? 
Would you be able to draw clear 
boundaries between your profes-
sional responsibilities in treating them 
clinically versus your personal values 
and preferences?
• An injured terrorist who killed 
and maimed innocent people at a 
mass bombing
• A drug dealer who has been struck 
in the head during a violent brawl 
in a transaction that went bad
• An alcoholic driver who has a 
head injury due to a car accident 
that also killed a man, his wife, 

180   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
and two of their four small 
children because the drunk driver 
ran a red light
	 3.	 What might you do now to better 
prepare yourself as a flexible, tolerant 
clinician who embraces the complex-
ity of the TBI survivors you may treat 
and who works constructively with 
people who may be challenging in 
light of your own values and beliefs?
	 4.	 Consider the general relative age of 
TBI survivors compared to stroke sur-
vivors. How will this influence gen-
eral diagnostic processes and formu-
lation of treatment goals for people 
within each etiological category?
	 5.	 Refer to Box 11–1.
a.	 How might the symptoms listed 
influence the reliability of your 
diagnostic evaluation of a TBI 
survivor?
b.	 How might the various symptoms 
influence a patient’s prognosis?
c.	 Which symptoms would most 
influence your prioritization of 
treatment goals and how?
d.	 Give specific examples of how 
you, as an SLP, will collaborate 
with team members to address 
these factors.
	 6.	 Describe key difficulties in the differ-
ential diagnosis of the many symp-
toms of TBI.
	 7.	 How is the application of the ICF 
framework relevant to intervention 
in the context of TBI?
	 8.	 Give an explicit rationale for how 
treatment of a person with cogni-
tive sequelae associated with TBI are 
within the SLP’s scope of practice.
	 9.	 Describe how you would plan and 
implement a facility-wide screening 
protocol for trauma survivors seen at 
an acute care hospital or rehabilita-
tion center. Be sure to consider how 
you would address the six reasons 
given for a common lack of access to 
SLP services for TBI survivors, even 
in locations where such services are 
available.
10.	 Describe two hypothetical situations 
in which you might be called to act as 
an expert witness, documenting and 
perhaps testifying about the severity 
of a TBI survivor’s cognitive-linguistic  
symptoms and their likely lasting im- 
pact on his or her livelihood.
a.	 Give an example of a situation 
in which you might be asked to 
detect malingering or exaggera-
tion of a person’s deficits.
b.	 Give an example of a situation in 
which you might be advocating 
for a person legally by empha-
sizing the long-term and far-
reaching negative consequences 
of a TBI.
You may be interested in additional activi-
ties for learning and reflection on the com-
panion website.

181
Chapter
12
Cognitive-Communicative 
Disorders Associated With 
Right Hemisphere Syndrome
Speech-language pathologists (SLPs) play 
an important role in assessing and re- 
searching the cognitive-communicative 
challenges in people with right hemisphere 
syndrome (RHS) and in advocating for 
provision and reimbursement of related 
diagnostic and treatment services. In this 
chapter, we summarize what is meant by 
the term RHS, explore the diverse and 
myriad cognitive-communicative difficul-
ties associated with RHS, and review key 
challenges faced in health care contexts 
by people with RHS and their friends, 
caregivers, and clinicians. We conclude 
by emphasizing how essential it is that 
we continuously educate medical profes-
sionals, family members, stroke and brain 
injury survivors, and laypeople about the 
legitimacy and significance of the life-
affecting challenges of people with RHS.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What is right hemisphere syndrome?
	 2.	 How does RHS affect communication?
	 3.	 What are special challenges that SLPs 
face in serving people with RHS?
	 4.	 What are special challenges faced 
by people with RHS in health care 
contexts?
What Is Right  
Hemisphere Syndrome?
RHS is a constellation of symptoms asso-
ciated with right hemisphere damage 
(RHD), or right brain injury (RBI). It may 
be associated with any neurological etiol-
ogy, such as stroke, traumatic brain injury 
(TBI), tumors, or infectious processes, 
and the resultant damage may be located 
in any part of the right hemisphere. Peo-
ple with RHS are an extremely heteroge-
neous population in terms of the types 
and severity of challenges they face with 
communication and social participation. 
Further complicating attempts to study 
this population is the fact that people with 
RBI may have bilateral lesions and thus 
additional concomitant deficits associated 
with left hemisphere injury. Some people 
with RHS may not have any trouble com-
municating. After all, the term RHS is 
based on the location of some (any kind) 

182   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Cognitive-Communicative Challenges  
Associated With Right Brain Syndrome (RHS)
Challenges in conversation/
discourse/pragmatics
Expressive and receptive challenges
• Lack of perspective regarding 
another person’s feelings or 
point of view (theory of mind)
• Codeswitching deficits
• Inattentiveness
• Poor turn taking, frequent 
interruptions during conversation
• Poor eye contact
• Problems making use of 
contextual cues
Receptive challenges
• Problems interpreting themes, 
morals, main ideas
• Problems with making inferences
• Tendency toward literal 
interpretation of figurative 
language (difficulty with idioms, 
indirect requests, sarcasm)
• Difficulty shifting topics
• Difficulty interpreting facial 
expressions
• Difficulty interpreting humor
• Receptive aprosodia
Expressive challenges
• Poor topic maintenance, 
relevance, discourse cohesion, 
organization of content, use of 
macrostructure, main ideas, and 
themes
Box
12–1
of physical damage in the right hemi-
sphere, not on specific symptoms. RHS 
(or RBI) in and of itself is not a communi-
cation disorder. Still, a majority of people 
with RHS are projected to have difficulty 
with at least some aspect of communica-
tion (Tompkins, 2012).
How Does RHS Affect 
Communication?
Challenges of people with RHS that are 
within the purview of SLPs are primarily 
in the area of cognitive-communicative or 
cognitive-linguistic impairments. These 
labels, though, do not reflect the specific 
types of challenges a person with RHS 
might have with communicating success-
fully. There are myriad ways one might 
categorize communication-related impair-
ments in people with RHS. This is evident 
across varied descriptions of RHS in the 
literature. For example, Myers (1999) 
designates the following categories of 
deficits that affect cognition and commu-
nication in some way, whether the effects 
are direct or indirect: attentional deficits, 
neglect, visuospatial deficits, cognitive-
communicative deficits, and affective and 
emotional deficits. Blake (2006) suggests 
three categories of challenge in people 
with RHS: communication, attention/per-
ception, and cognition. Together, Myers 
and Blake (2008) suggest general catego-
ries of linguistic, extralinguistic, and non-
linguistic deficits. Blake, Frymark, and 
Venedictov (2013) categorize symptoms 
as verbal, nonverbal, and both verbal and 
nonverbal combined (pragmatics). Symp-
toms associated with RHS as reported by 
many authors combined are summarized 
in Box 12–1. Note that any of those symp-
toms could be reorganized into any of the 
categorical schemes mentioned above.

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Right Hemisphere Syndrome   183
• Inefficient expression, 
inappropriate level of detail
• Frequent tangential comments
• Flat affect or inappropriate 
emotional expression
• Dysprosody
• Limited initiation of 
conversations
• Reduced use of facial 
expressions to convey emotion 
and meaning
• Disinhibition of inappropriate 
language and humor
• Confabulation
• Hypoaffectivity
• Hyperaffectivity
• Expressive aprosodia
Attention problems
• Anosognosia
• Hemispatial (left) neglect
• Problems with vigilance, 
orientation, sustained attention, 
focused attention, selective 
attention, attention allocation, 
and alternating attention/
attention switching
Memory challenges (see also specific 
aspects of memory listed in Box 11–1)
• Verbal
• Nonverbal
Executive function deficits
Problems with
• Reasoning
• Judgment
• Decision making
• Goal setting, planning, 
strategizing
• Self-monitoring, awareness of 
strengths and weaknesses
• Problem solving
• Organizing
• Sequencing
Reading problems
• Visuospatial difficulties in 
interpreting letters and words
• Problems interpreting 
content, as noted for auditory 
comprehension
Writing problems
• Visuospatial difficulties with 
writing or copying letters, 
words, ideographs, and symbols
• Problems with expression, as 
noted for discourse
Visual-perceptual impairments
• Visual memory problems
• Prosopagnosia
• Visuo-constructive deficits
• Visuospatial disorientation
• Topographical disorientation
Auditory-perceptual impairments
• Amusia
• Auditory agnosia
• Sound localization deficits
• Tone perception deficits
Note.  Characteristics are highly variable within and across individual people with RBI, 
in terms of occurrence as well as severity. Many of these characteristics are interrelated. 
Social and environmental contexts are vital in determining the influence of any character-
istic on an individual’s communicative competence at any given point in time.
Sources:  Blake, 2005; Côté, Payer, Giroux, & Joanette, 2007; Foerch et al., 2005; Myers, 1999; 
Myers & Blake, 2008; Tompkins, 2008; Tompkins, Bloise, Timko, & Baumgaertner, 1994; Tomp­
kins, Fassbinder, Lehman-Blake, & Baumgaertner, 2002; Tompkins & Lehman, 1998.

184   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
There are two especially important 
points to keep in mind regarding RHS-
associated impairments. One is that their 
incidence and severity are highly variable 
within and across individuals. The sec-
ond is that, even if mild, the associated 
challenges may affect the quality of social 
interactions and communicative effec-
tiveness. Thus, they may have significant 
impacts on educational, career, social, 
and leisure pursuits. In the following 
paragraphs, we consider major catego-
ries of potential challenges and examples 
of each. As we do so, let’s keep in mind 
that people with RHS also have important 
strengths in terms of linguistic, intellec-
tual, and social abilities. As always, it is 
important that we balance any focus on 
challenges with an appreciation that all 
people have vital strengths.
Conversation, Discourse, Pragmatics
The complex interrelationships among 
cognitive and linguistic deficits in this 
population make it difficult or impossible 
to study and assess them separately (Côté, 
Payer, Giroux, & Joanette, 2007; Monetta, 
Tremblay, & Joanette, 2003). Overall, the 
language deficits of people with RHS 
are unlike those of people with aphasia, 
although there may be common symptoms 
between members of either group. Here, 
let’s review the combined expressive- 
receptive and then expressive and recep-
tive types of challenges that may be faced 
by people with RHS.
Combined Receptive and 
Expressive Challenges
Deficits in pragmatics, the social use of 
language in context, attributed to RHS 
include difficulty with topic maintenance 
and discourse cohesion, impulsivity, dis-
inhibition of inappropriate utterances, 
challenges with judging the appropriate-
ness of conversational content, poor eye 
contact, poor conversational turn taking, 
failure to interpret nonverbal cues from 
a conversational partner, problems notic-
ing communicative breakdown, and fail-
ure to back up and repair communicative 
breakdown.
Expression and appreciation of humor 
may change due to RBI. A person with 
RHS may be drawn to off-color, child-
like, or slapstick humor, sometimes in 
stark contrast to his or her preonset traits. 
In terms of production, this may relate 
to disinhibition of inappropriate content 
and a preference for more concrete over 
abstract content. In terms of comprehen-
sion, challenges seem to relate more to 
cognitive demands of tying usually incon-
gruous information between the body of 
the joke and its punchline (Brownell & 
Gardner, 1988).
Changes in affect associated with 
RHS include both hypo- and hyperaffec-
tivity. Hypoaffectivity may be demon-
strated as flat expression of emotion con-
veyed by reduced prosody and a lack of 
conversational or social initiative. Hyper-
affectivity may be evidenced as a degree 
of exuberance and incessant talking.
Several theories have been proposed 
to account for conversational, pragmatic, 
and social challenges of people with 
RHS. One is the social cognition deficit 
hypothesis (Brownell & Martino, 1998), 
the notion that right hemisphere net-
works are important for critical aspects 
of relating to others, such as empathy, 
and understanding and responding to 
others’ perspectives. Some authors have 
proposed that people with RHS may have 
deficits in theory of mind, the ability to 

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Right Hemisphere Syndrome   185
interpret, infer, and predict the thoughts, 
beliefs, feelings, and intentions of others 
and to differentiate the thoughts and per-
ceptions of others from one’s own. This 
has been suggested especially in light of 
a tendency not to take the perspectives of 
another person into account when com-
municating. For example, it might explain 
in part why an individual may not orient 
to a listener’s lack of knowledge about 
a topic and leave out important details 
the listener would need to know in order 
to understand the main idea or intent 
of what is being expressed. Likewise, 
it may help explain why he or she may 
include too much information, not tak-
ing into account the listener’s existing  
knowledge.
Critics of the theory-of-mind expla-
nation have suggested that it does not 
help us understand the nature of prag-
matic problems any more than describing 
the problems themselves does. Findings 
regarding theory of mind as a construct 
that can be indexed using explicit depen-
dent measures have not been consistently 
reported in the literature. Tompkins (2012) 
reports that once strict stimulus develop-
ment and metalinguistic demand controls 
are implemented, impaired performance 
based on theory of mind in people with 
RHS has not been supported.
Another theory for overall cognitive-
linguistic deficits in people with RBI is the 
cognitive resources hypothesis (Tomp-
kins et al., 2002). According to this view, 
the communication deficits seen in people 
with RHS are highly dependent on the 
degree of attention and working memory 
demands of a given communicative task. 
Also, deficits in linguistic performance 
are seen as being attributable to limited 
cognitive resources mediated by the right 
hemisphere, not to linguistic impairments 
per se.
Receptive Challenges
RBI survivors do not typically have much 
difficulty with lexical and grammatical 
processing. Written and auditory compre-
hension tends to be good or only mildly 
impaired. When they do have trouble 
with comprehension, it often may be 
attributable to cognitive deficits, espe-
cially attention and working memory, and 
to challenges with inferencing and inter-
pretation. Impairment of comprehension 
of written or spoken discourse may be 
exhibited through problems with identi-
fying main ideas (Brookshire & Nicholas, 
1984; Hough, 1990).
Several authors have reported that 
people with RHS tend to literally inter-
pret figurative language, that is, expres-
sions that require abstraction to infer 
meaning that cannot be gained through 
literal interpretation. Examples are figu-
rative language are often found in idioms 
(e.g., “it’s raining cats and dogs” when 
it’s pouring), indirect requests (e.g., “look 
at all those dishes piling up,” to suggest 
that one’s housemate pitch in with house-
work), and sarcasm (e.g., “nice job,” when 
someone has made a mistake). Kempler, 
Van Lancker, Marchman, and Bates (1999) 
suggested that part of the trouble with 
a tendency toward literal interpreta-
tion may have to do with difficulty with 
abstract thinking in general.
Myers and Linebaugh (1981) sug-
gested that tasks used to study under-
standing of figurative language may lead 
to inflated findings of deficits because 
of their heavy reliance on metalinguistic 
skills to explain explicitly what is meant 
by expressions in isolation. Actual inter-
pretation may be more accurate than is 
evidenced by overt explanations of inter-
preted meanings. In any case, the actual 
occurrence of incorrect interpretation of 

186   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
figurative language appears to be less 
when studied during conversational con-
texts, where there are more ample cues 
about what a speaker’s intended mean-
ings are.
Inferencing in the context of com-
munication is the act of making a logi-
cal conclusion about intended meaning 
based on what has been communicated. 
We make inferences whenever we make 
connections between different compo-
nents of discourse, even when we simply 
understand the relevance of one sentence 
or phrase based on a prior sentence. Peo-
ple with RHS tend to have more difficulty 
with inferencing when making judgments 
about the intentions or emotions of char-
acters in spoken language or written text. 
For example, explaining the motives of a 
character in a story is more difficult than 
comprehending what the character did.
Inferencing difficulty has been attrib-
uted at least in part to three factors: chal-
lenges with abstract thinking in general, 
metalinguistic abilities that are taxed 
when people are asked to explain their 
interpretations, and difficulty in taking 
the emotional perspectives of characters 
about whom inferences are to be made 
when the emotions of the respondent 
himself or herself differ from the charac-
ters’ emotions. Challenges in interpreting 
emotions of speakers and of characters 
in stories have been attributed by some 
authors as related to changes in processing 
of emotions. The nature of such changes 
is far from clear and may not be similar 
across groups of people with RHS (Blake, 
2005). The suppression deficit hypothe-
sis (Tompkins & Lehman, 1998) suggests 
that people with RHS are typically able to 
generate multiple interpretations of words, 
sentences, and stories but have a harder 
time selecting a most plausible interpreta-
tion when given suggested interpretations  
from which to choose. As with literal 
interpretation, the way that inferenc-
ing is studied in people with RHS has a 
strong influence on the results obtained 
(Lehman-Blake & Tompkins, 2001).
Expressive Challenges
Some people with RHS tend to have chal-
lenges with discourse coherence, the tying 
together of content in a logical way to 
express ideas effectively and efficiently. 
They may leave out important elements 
when telling a story, include irrelevant 
information, and get sidetracked into 
completely different topics without fully 
expressing something they seemed to have 
set out to express. When given elements 
of a story, conveyed through pictures or 
text, they may have trouble assembling 
them in a logical order (Schneiderman, 
Murasugi, & Saddy, 1992).
It has also been suggested that peo-
ple with RHS have greater difficulty than 
others with codeswitching, or taking 
into account the person with whom one 
is speaking in considering appropriate 
adaptations of what is being expressed 
and how it is being expressed. The ability 
to tailor our conversational style and con-
tent in light of what is socially, culturally, 
and linguistically acceptable according to 
a given communicative context is vital to 
our codeswitching competence. For exam-
ple, a bilingual speaker may not change 
readily back and forth between speaking 
Spanish to his mother and English to his 
daughter. A person who swears readily 
with friends and family who are com-
fortable with swearing at home may fail 
to cease swearing when engaging in con-
versations with professional colleagues or 
acquaintances in a religious organization 
who may find swearing offensive.

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Right Hemisphere Syndrome   187
Sometimes right hemisphere injuries 
lead to deficits in the use of prosody, the 
intonation, stress, and rhythm of speech. 
The degree to which the right hemi-
sphere is implicated directly in expres-
sive and receptive language is influenced 
by whether an individual speaks a tonal 
language. Tonal languages are languages 
in which changes in tones (or pitch and 
pitch contours) change the literal meaning 
of a word. Examples are Mandarin Chi-
nese, Cantonese, Taiwanese, Vietnamese, 
the class of Bantu languages in Africa, and 
some Mayan languages in Central Amer-
ica. In nontonal languages, pitch changes 
may be used for emphasis or to convey 
certain nuances of meaning, but they do 
not affect the literal meaning of words. 
Thus, speakers of tonal languages are at 
risk for greater language deficits associ-
ated with dysprosodia or dysprosody 
(prosodic deficits).
Regardless of whether a person speaks 
a tonal language or not, comprehension 
may be impaired due to a lack of appro-
priate interpretation of prosody and of 
nonverbal cues of another speaker. Addi-
tionally, challenges in interpretation of 
stress and intonation may be at the root 
of some of the figurative language defi-
cits explored above. In conversation, some 
people with RHS have trouble using pros-
ody for emphasis and to enliven engage-
ment with a listener. Speech output may 
seem monotonous. The rate of speech 
may be unusually fast or slow, and it 
may be difficult to interpret the speaker’s 
emotional state from the way he or she  
is talking.
Attention Deficits
Attention deficits that have been attrib-
uted to RHS include reduced alertness 
and orientation to the external environ-
ment, a decrease in the ability to sustain 
attention and vigilance, and a decrease 
in selective and alternating attention. 
Deficits in attention tend to co-occur with 
learning and memory problems; this is 
logical in that attention is vital to learn-
ing and memory. Also, the construct of 
attention is implicated in any means  
of indexing the constructs of learning  
and memory.
Left visual neglect, also called hemi-
inattention or hemispatial neglect, may 
also occur due to RBI. As reviewed in 
Chapter 7, left visual neglect is a reduced 
ability to attend to or generate an internal 
representation of information on a per-
son’s left side. It is not a sensory problem in 
that the information neglected is actually 
registered in the primary sensory areas of 
the brain. It may be perceived as a lack of 
sensitivity to, awareness of, and respon-
siveness to visual, auditory, somatosen-
sory, and olfactory stimuli (Myers, 1999). 
The area neglected may correspond to 
an individual’s bodily midline (egocen-
tric neglect). Alternatively, the neglected 
area may be relative to the individual’s 
subjective frame of reference at any given 
moment (allocentric neglect); for example, 
it may be relative to an object on which he 
or she is focusing or to the walls of a room. 
The degree of information neglected can 
often be modified by changing the posi-
tion of stimuli, adding auditory stimuli 
to a visual task, or changing the person’s 
intentional focus of attention. Hemispatial 
neglect often resolves itself within weeks 
or months following stroke or brain injury 
but can persist indefinitely, especially in 
people with large cortical lesions (Ma-
guire & Ogden, 2002). Means of screening 
for visual neglect are given in Chapter 18.
As with TBI survivors in general, 
another form of neglect that some people 

188   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
with RHS have is anosognosia, the lack 
of awareness of an illness or deficit, often 
resulting in denial of problems. One of 
the conditions neglected is often the con-
dition of neglect itself. Anosognosia can 
be a serious impediment to the commu-
nication rehabilitation process (Jehkonen, 
Laihosalo, & Kettunen, 2006); acknowl-
edging that there is a problem and want-
ing to address it are key motivational ele-
ments supporting an individual’s active 
engagement in treatment and associated 
activities to support the integration of 
treatment gains into everyday communi-
cative contexts.
Memory Challenges
Memory impairments in RHS have been 
generally categorized just as those con-
sidered in Chapter 11 for people with TBI. 
Everyday functional challenges related 
to memory may include difficulty with 
working memory for processing of long 
or complex sentences, remembering of 
instructions, and remembering to carry 
out specific actions such as taking medi-
cations, replacing batteries, or turning off 
a strove.
Executive Function Challenges
Other deficits attributed to RHS include 
deficits in executive functions, such as 
difficulty with reasoning, judgment, deci-
sion making, goal setting, planning, self-
monitoring, sequencing, problem solving, 
and organization. Note that many of the 
deficits described earlier actually include 
elements of these constructs, further 
highlighting the complexity of attempts 
to study and describe the nature of RHS. 
Some problems with executive function-
ing lead to difficult challenges in rehabili-
tation for people with RHS. For example, 
memory supports such as to-do lists, cal-
endars, medication reminders, and mem-
ory books may be in place, but an indi-
vidual may fail to actually engage in using 
such supports in real-life situations.
Visual-Perceptual Impairments
RBI survivors may have any of an array 
of visual processing deficits. Aside from 
visual acuity or color perception defi-
cits, their challenges primarily involve 
integrating and interpreting visual infor-
mation. For example, they may have 
difficulty judging spatial relationships, 
drawing, copying figures, distinguishing 
important components of images from 
background details (figure-ground prob-
lems), and interpreting visual cues in the 
environment or in pictures. Some experi-
ence visual agnosia or prosopagnosia, or 
difficulty recognizing familiar faces.
Auditory-Perceptual Impairments
As mentioned above, people with RHS 
may have impairments in processing and 
interpreting tonal and melodic aspects of 
speech (dyprosody). They may also have 
the following:
• Amusia, an impairment of 
processing, remembering, and 
recognizing music
• Auditory agnosia, an inability to 
recognize sounds
• Sound localization deficits
Reading and Writing Impairments
Reading challenges associated with RHS 
tend to be associated with visuospatial 

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Right Hemisphere Syndrome   189
problems as well as with the general 
cognitive-linguistic problems described 
above. The degree to which the right 
hemisphere is involved in reading and 
writing at visuospatial and cognitive-
linguistic levels may be influenced by the 
languages one uses. The use of graphemes 
that correspond to sounds or words (e.g., 
the letter-based Roman alphabet system), 
with general letter-to-sound relationships, 
may be affected differently in RHS than 
the use of ideographic scripts, such as  
in Chinese, Korean, and Japanese, in 
which meaning is conveyed through ideo-
grams, graphemes that represent concepts 
or ideas.
What Are Special Challenges 
That SLPs Face in Serving 
People With RHS?
In clinical and research contexts, SLPs nav-
igate challenges associated with underdi-
agnosis and lack of awareness of RHS as 
a clinical syndrome, classifying diverse 
RHS symptoms, understanding underly-
ing neurological structure-function rela-
tionships in the right hemisphere, and 
characterizing what is “normal” in the 
context of real-life communication.
The Challenge of Underdiagnosis 
and Lack of Awareness of RHS
One need only consider the long list of 
RHS symptoms described in this chapter 
to know that they certainly do have an 
impact on one’s ability to participate fully 
in daily life activities, especially in those 
involving interactions with others. Still, 
many among the complex array of RHS 
symptoms are less obvious and less easily 
describable than those of left brain injury 
survivors who have overt, obvious speech 
and language deficits.
Although it is logical that people 
would have an equal likelihood of having 
a left or right hemisphere stroke or brain 
injury, in fact many fewer cases of right 
brain compared to left brain strokes and 
injuries are diagnosed in medical charts 
and reported in the research literature. 
According to Foerch et al. (2005), who 
studied data collected for over 20,000 
stroke survivors, the reason for underdi-
agnosis and underreporting is not that 
the incidence in right versus left strokes 
is different but that medical professionals, 
family members, and patients themselves 
are less likely to notice or complain about 
the symptoms associated with RHS.
The Challenge of  
Symptom Classification
The very heterogeneity of the popula-
tion of people with RHS is daunting for 
researchers attempting to capture patterns 
of deficit that may characterize this group 
or even subgroups within the population. 
For example, some people with RHS are 
hyperresponsive, speaking incessantly, or 
hyporesponsive, withdrawing from com-
munication (Blake, Duffy, Myers, & Tomp-
kins, 2002). Some have flat affect while oth-
ers are ebullient, cheerful, and dramatic in 
nature when engaged in conversation.
Classifying the symptoms is also 
challenging because there are so many 
relationships among the abilities affected. 
For example, difficulty interpreting facial 
expressions might be a pragmatic prob-
lem, a problem of attention, or both. Fail-
ure to understand another person’s joke 
may be due to a language comprehension 
problem but also may be associated with 
problems of focused attention, flat affect, 
and literal interpretation.

190   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Given the multitude of diverse symp-
toms that may occur with RHS, it is impor-
tant that the diagnostic process be multi-
faceted and that it include standardized 
testing and qualitative observation during 
tasks that tap the wide range of abilities 
that may be affected, at varied levels of 
difficulty. Integrating input from sig-
nificant others who may have important 
insights about challenges of which the 
individual with RHS might be unaware 
is essential. These topics are addressed in 
greater detail in Section V.
The Challenge of Identifying 
Neurological Structure-
Function Relationships
Much less research has been published 
about right brain as compared to the left 
brain communicative functions. Also, 
much less has been defined in terms of 
specialization of cognitive, linguistic, and 
behavioral functions associated with spe-
cific right compared to left hemisphere 
structures. This may be because there 
really are fewer specialized structures 
and, rather, more distributed processing 
through interconnected neural networks 
in the right hemisphere and associated 
subcortical structures (Blake, 2005).
The Challenge of Characterizing 
What Is Normal
When determining what is normal, it is 
important to ask ourselves in comparison 
to whom we mean “normal.” Is it relative 
to others? Is it relative to how a person 
used to be? Note how many of the long 
list of RHS symptoms are traits that we 
notice in people in our everyday lives 
who have never experienced any neuro-
logical impairment. Consider poor eye 
contact, turn taking, and disinhibition 
of inappropriate language, for example. 
Although you might not know one per-
son who demonstrates all of those traits 
at once, I imagine you know at least one 
person who has trouble looking others in 
the eye, another who interrupts others 
regularly, and another who swears a lot. 
There are personality and sociocultural 
influences on such factors that have noth-
ing to do with brain injury.
Blake (2006) analyzed the discourse 
of adults with RHS and without any 
neurological disorder and found three 
characteristics that were more useful in 
distinguishing these two groups through 
discourse measures. People with RHS 
tended to have more tangential com-
ments, demonstrate more egocentrism, 
and have differences in quantity of pro-
duction (relatively too much or too little). 
Although such results are helpful in con-
sidering ways to determine communica-
tive strengths and weaknesses, we are 
still challenged with the issue of figuring 
out what is normal for a given person. We 
might attempt to assess this by in-depth 
interviewing of people who knew a given 
person with RHS prior to the neurological 
change that caused RHS.
Another level of challenge in differ-
entiating normal from disordered abili-
ties in people with RHS is that they fre-
quently appear to be normal, competent 
communicators and thinkers unless they 
are engaged in conversations, problem 
solving, and other cognitive-linguistic 
activities that rely on the sorts of abilities 
that are affected in their own particular 
cases. A person with RHS is most likely 
to overcome or mask deficits during easy 
tasks, experiencing more breaking down 
of abilities during difficult tasks. What 
makes a task more difficult depends on its 

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Right Hemisphere Syndrome   191
nature. It might be, for example, having to 
perform under time pressure or in front 
of an audience. It might be trying to com-
prehend or express abstract as opposed to 
concrete ideas. It might be having to make 
judgments about social appropriateness 
of utterances, describe emotions that are 
typically associated with certain facial 
expressions, or switch back and forth 
between the use of two languages.
What Are Special Challenges 
Faced by People With RHS 
in Health Care Contexts?
The challenges that RBI survivors face 
in getting services by qualified clinicians 
are akin to those discussed in Chapter 11 
regarding TBI survivors.
• Specialized interdisciplinary 
rehabilitation services are lacking.
• Communicative deficits of people 
with RHS are often invisible; they 
may look fine and seem normal, 
especially during brief interactions 
in clinical contexts.
• They may have concomitant 
medical conditions that distract 
medical staff from attending to 
their cognitive-communicative 
challenges.
• They may not be adept at making 
judgments about what their deficits 
are or what they need in terms of 
rehabilitation.
• They may not take initiative 
in seeking services to address 
cognitive and communicative 
challenges due to fear of stigma or 
other negative consequences.
• People with RHS, their families 
and caregivers, and even health 
care professionals may not know 
that RHS symptoms are treatable 
and that there are SLPs and 
neuropsychologists (among others) 
with expertise to address various 
RHS challenges.
• Most clinical agencies lack effective 
RHS screening protocols; as a 
result, even when people are aware 
of related expertise and services, 
problems are often not identified and 
appropriate referrals are not made.
The excellent SLP ensures active in- 
terprofessional RHS screening protocols 
wherever he or she works, seeks oppor-
tunities to educate others about RHS 
and available associated services, raises 
awareness that assessment and interven-
tion of cognitive-communicative chal-
lenges are within SLPs’ scope of practice, 
provides educational and referral mate-
rials to people with RHS and the people 
who care about them, and recognizes that 
people with RHS have numerous intellec-
tual and interpersonal strengths in addi-
tion to their challenges.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define all bolded terms in 
this chapter and any terms used in 
Box 12–1 that were unfamiliar to you 
or that you have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Explain why it is hard to summarize 
succinctly just what RHS is.
	 3.	 Consider Myers and Blake’s (2008) 
taxonomy of RBI symptoms entailing 
three broad categories of linguistic, 
extralinguistic, and nonlinguistic def-
icits. How would each of the symp-
toms listed in Box 12–1 fit into each of 
these categories?

192   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 4.	 Why is RHS better characterized as a 
cognitive-communicative syndrome 
than a linguistic syndrome?
	 5.	 What linguistic deficits may be attrib-
uted to RHS-associated impairments?
	 6.	 What executive function problems may 
be associated with RHS-associated 
impairments?
	 7.	 What attention deficits may be associ-
ated with RHS-associated impairments?
	 8.	 What memory challenges may be attrib-
uted to RHS-associated impairments?
	 9.	 What visual challenges may be associ-
ated with RHS-associated impairments?
10.	 What auditory-perceptual impair-
ments may be associated with RHS-
associated impairments?
11.	 How would you explain to a family 
member of a person with RHS the dif-
ference between cognitive-communi-
cative impairments in RHS from the 
linguistic impairments in aphasia?
12.	 Describe the pros and cons of using 
the construct theory of mind to account 
for some of the social and pragmatic 
deficits of people with RHS.
13.	 How might the cognitive resource 
hypothesis account for some of the 
variability in the communicative per-
formance of an individual with RHS?
14.	 List and describe key challenges to 
carrying out research on that under-
lying nature and cause of specific 
cognitive-communicative symptoms 
in people with RHS.
15.	 What impacts might anosagnosia 
have on the rehabilitation of a person 
with RHS?
16.	 Why is RHS likely underdiagnosed 
worldwide?
17.	 In what ways might the social com-
munication skills of a person with 
RHS be difficult to differentiate from 
those of a person who might be con-
sidered “normal”?
18.	 How might you, as an SLP, imple-
ment a screening protocol for RHS in 
an acute care hospital?
See the companion website for additional 
learning and teaching materials.

193
Chapter
13
Cognitive-Communicative 
Disorders Associated 
With Dementia and Other 
Neurodegenerative Conditions
In this chapter, we explore the most preva-
lent etiologies of neurogenic communica-
tion disorders, neurodegenerative condi-
tions. Given the vastness of this topic, we 
focus selectively on categories of condi-
tions for which speech-language patholo-
gists (SLPs) are most often called upon for 
education, advocacy, counseling, assess-
ment, and treatment. We review common 
forms of such conditions and discuss the 
importance of differential diagnosis, espe-
cially as it pertains to types of dementia 
and symptoms that may be misinterpreted 
as being due to dementia. As always, per-
son-first, empowering approaches on the 
part of SLPs are recommended.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What are neurodegenerative conditions?
	 2.	 What are general types of cognitive-
communicative impairments in peo-
ple with mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) and dementia?
	 3.	 What are common forms of dementia?
	 4.	 Is there such a thing as “reversible” 
dementia?
	 5.	 What are implications of an incorrect 
diagnosis of dementia?
	 6.	 What is the role of the SLP in working 
with people who have dementia?
	 7.	 How is working with people who 
have MCI and dementia recognized 
as a component of the SLP’s scope of 
practice?
	 8.	 What SLP services for people with 
dementia are typically reimbursable?
	 9.	 In what other ways may SLPs pro-
fessionally support the communica-
tion needs of people with MCI and 
dementia and the people who care 
about them?
10.	 What is primary progressive aphasia 
(PPA)?
11.	 What is the role of the aphasiologist in 
working with people who have PPA?

194   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
What Are Neurodegenerative 
Conditions?
As introduced in Chapter 6, neurodegen-
erative conditions or diseases are a broad 
category of disorders entailing progres-
sive changes in the brain that result in 
progressive loss of neurological function-
ing. Of course, in the realm of the SLP, the 
primary focus is on those that entail pro-
gressive loss of cognitive and linguistic 
abilities. In this chapter, we focus on three 
primary neurodegenerative conditions 
with great relevance to SLPs:
• Mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 
a condition of cognitive decline that 
is not consistent with normal aging
• Dementia, a constellation of 
symptoms including memory 
impairment plus one or more 
cognitive and/or linguistic 
impairments that have an impact 
on everyday functioning and 
social interactions, and represent a 
remarkable change from previous 
levels of functioning
• Primary progressive aphasia (PPA), 
the progressive loss of linguistic 
abilities in contrast to relatively 
intact cognitive abilities
In contrast to mild traumatic brain injury 
(mTBI), MCI tends to be associated with 
neurodegenerative changes, not injury.
Significant changes were made in 
how neurodegenerative conditions are 
classified in the fifth edition of the Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor-
ders (DSM-5; American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation, 2013). Dementia and amnestic 
disorders, which were previously consid-
ered separately, are now subsumed under 
a common term: neurocognitive disorder 
(NCD). NCDs are considered according to 
whether they are major or mild. The term 
dementia is still frequently used and has 
largely not fallen out of favor because of 
those changes. Recognition of mild NCDs 
helps to legitimize the fact that people 
may have minor degenerative changes 
that nevertheless have important impacts 
on their everyday activities.
What Are General Types of 
Cognitive-Communicative 
Impairments in People With 
MCI and Dementia?
Although MCI and dementia may co-
occur with aphasia, most people with 
MCI or dementia do not have aphasia. 
Like people with TBI, the language prob-
lems of people with MCI and dementia 
are more aptly characterized as cognitive-
communicative impairments. An increas-
ingly widely accepted term for the loss of 
language abilities in people with MCI and 
dementia is language of generalized intel-
lectual impairment. This term highlights 
the fact that the language loss is secondary 
to a loss of cognitive abilities; this is the 
key feature that differentiates these con-
ditions from aphasia. Another important 
distinguishing characteristic between lan-
guage disorders associated with demen-
tia versus aphasia is that symptoms in 
dementia continue to worsen over time, 
whereas the language of people with 
aphasia (with the exception of PPA) tends 
to get better, or at least to stabilize, rather 
than regress.
Although memory impairment is 
considered by many to be a hallmark 
or defining feature of dementia, some 
experts suggest that executive function 
deficits are actually more prominent traits 

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Dementia and Other . . . Conditions   195
for dementia than memory loss. Results 
from a study of 547 adults over 70 indi-
cate that when controlling for age and 
ability to engage in activities of daily liv-
ing, memory loss is a key component of 
dementia only when there are concomi-
tant impairments in executive functioning 
(Royall, Palmer, Chiodo, & Polk, 2005).
What Are Common 
Forms of Dementia?
Varied forms of dementia may be catego-
rized differently depending on the moti-
vation for classification. For example, one 
may categorize dementia in terms of the 
localization of associated brain pathol-
ogy, such as cortical, subcortical, or mixed 
dementias; cortical dementias might be 
further classified as frontal, temporal, or 
temporoparietal dementias.
Dementia types may also be clas-
sified in terms of etiology. For example, 
they may be classified as being primar-
ily vascular in nature, as being caused 
by changes in brain cell structure (e.g., 
Alzheimer’s disease), or as being due 
to some other type of medical condi-
tion (e.g., HIV, TBI, Parkinson’s disease, 
Pick’s disease, Korsakoff’s syndrome, or 
Creutzfelt-Jacob disease, each of which is 
discussed briefly below). Clinicians and 
laypeople alike also tend to refer to early, 
mid, or late stages of the disease or to use 
scales that characterize dementia progres-
sion over time (see Chapter 20).
Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer’s disease (AD, also referred 
to in the literature as dementia of the 
Alzheimer’s type, or DAT) is by far the 
most common form of dementia, esti-
mated to comprise about 50% to 80% of 
the population of people with demen-
tia (Alzheimer’s Association, 2013). It 
is increasingly common with age. AD is 
estimated to affect about 45% to 60% of 
people over 85 (National Institute on 
Aging, 2004). People at greater risk for AD 
include those with a family history of AD, 
prior experience of brain injury or stroke, 
and risk factors for cardiovascular prob-
lems, such as high blood pressure, high 
cholesterol, and diabetes (Alzheimer’s 
Association, 2013). Although there have 
been suggestions that environmental and 
nutritional exposure to toxins may cause 
AD, there are no definitive studies to date 
supporting such claims.
AD entails progressive diffuse brain 
atrophy and accumulation of amyloid 
plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (Braak 
& Braak, 1991). The neuropathological 
changes tend to begin in the medial and 
anterior temporal lobes, then progress 
to the hippocampi, and then eventu-
ally to the neocortex and limbic systems. 
A definitive diagnosis of AD requires an 
autopsy; clinical diagnoses of AD to living 
people are characterized as “probable” or 
“possible.” AD is often suspected if there 
is no clear evidence of another type of 
dementia.
The onset of AD is gradual. It affects 
many aspects of cognition, including mem-
ory, attention, and executive functions. 
Short-term and working memory deficits 
are apparent in the early stages, making 
remembering recent events and learn-
ing new material especially challenging. 
Long-term memory abilities, in contrast to 
short-term, are relatively well preserved 
in the early to mid stages.
MCI due to Alzheimer’s disease 
(MCI due to AD) is a condition of cogni-
tive decline that is not typical of normal 

196   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
aging and occurs prior to the onset of 
Alzheimer’s disease. A working group of 
the National Institute on Aging and the 
Alzheimer’s Association (Albert et al., 
2011) established two sets of criteria for 
diagnosing MCI due to AD: a clinical set 
that does not involve advanced labora-
tory-based testing and a research set (still 
requiring validation for clinical use).
The first step in the clinical diagnostic 
process is ruling out stroke, vascular dis-
ease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
(likely to be detected through communi-
cation or behavioral disorders as symp-
toms first emerge), neurodegenerative 
causes other than dementia, or rapid de- 
cline within weeks of months. Of course, 
the process of ruling out other causes is 
difficult, because there is always a possi-
bility that any given individual will have 
more than one of these conditions, such as  
a history of stroke in addition to evidence 
of AD. The second step is documenting 
a change in cognitive status over time 
reported by the patient, family mem-
ber, or a clinician who has observed the 
patient’s decline. Third, informal or for-
mal testing is done to provide objective 
evidence of and to describe specific cog-
nitive deficits, and also to ensure that the 
individual retains general functional abili-
ties for most activities of daily living and 
does not qualify as having dementia.
Research steps for diagnosis recom-
mended by Albert et al. (2011) include use 
of imaging to rule out traumatic and vas-
cular causes of cognitive decline and, if 
possible, to show patterns of brain disso-
lution over time. Also, genetic factors that 
may be relevant are considered. Biomark-
ers, such as evidence of amyloid pathol-
ogy detected through cerebrospinal fluid 
or positron emission tomography (PET), 
may also be detected.
Vascular Dementia
Vascular dementia (also called ischemic 
dementia) is the second most common 
form of dementia, accounting for about 
20% to 30% of dementia cases (Alzheim-
er’s Association, 2013). As the name sug-
gests, it is caused by problems of blood 
supply to the brain. It may result from a 
stroke, or a series of strokes or transient 
ischemic attacks (TIAs). As strokes and 
TIAs occur, symptoms tend to worsen. 
Thus, the progression of cognitive-com-
municative symptoms tends to be step-
wise, occurring in sudden, if minor, spurts 
rather than in a slowly continuous fash-
ion as is typical in other forms of demen-
tia. When there is evidence of multiple 
focal lesions, the condition may be called 
multi-infarct dementia.
Many people who are diagnosed with 
AD may, in actuality, have concomitant 
vascular dementia or ischemic cerebro-
vascular disease (ICVD), complicating 
the nature and manifestation of their 
dementia. Royall (2005) suggests that 40% 
to 60% of people diagnosed with AD also 
have ICVD and that the diagnosis of the 
latter is missed because associated frontal 
lesions are often not apparent in neuroim-
aging. The probability that the underlying 
etiologies will be mixed increases with 
age, as there is disproportionate risk of 
both AD and ICVD in older people, espe-
cially over age 79.
Dementia With Lewy Bodies (DLB)
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is 
the third most common form of demen-
tia, accounting for about 10% to 25% of 
reported dementia cases (Alzheimer’s 
Association, 2013). It affects more men 

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Dementia and Other . . . Conditions   197
than women. It is characterized by abnor-
mal protein (alpha-synuclein) deposits 
that are also commonly also found in peo-
ple with AD and in people with dementia 
associated with Parkinson’s disease. In 
addition to symptoms of confusion, vari-
able states of awareness and alertness, 
memory loss, autonomic nervous system 
problems, and visual hallucinations, many 
people with DLB also have neuromuscular 
problems that are common to Parkinson’s 
disease. The latter include muscle rigidity, 
tremors, and balance problems.
Parkinson’s-Associated Dementia
Parkinson’s-associated dementia is a 
form of dementia that entails Lewy bod-
ies and co-occurs with Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Some people with dementia associ-
ated with Parkinson’s disease also have 
plaques and neurofibrillary tangles typi-
cally associated with AD. It is important 
to note that dementia occurs in only some 
people with Parkinson’s disease; among 
those, some develop dementia only in the 
late stages of disease progression. Esti-
mates of the proportion of people with 
Parkinson’s disease who have an associ-
ated dementia vary widely (from 18%–
80%). Regardless of the actual incidence, 
one should not expect that any given per-
son with Parkinson’s disease will neces-
sarily develop dementia.
Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD)
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (also 
called frontotemporal degeneration, and 
originally called Pick’s disease) is a type 
of dementia caused by atrophy of the ante-
rior frontal and temporal lobes. It accounts 
for about 10% to 15% of dementia cases 
overall. It is more likely than most forms 
of dementia to occur in people younger 
than 65 (Alzheimer’s Association, 2013). 
The age of onset is typically in the 40s, 
50s, and 60s. Symptoms are determined 
largely by the associated functions of spe-
cific areas of the brain that are affected. 
PPA and certain types of movement dis-
orders entailing involuntary or automatic 
motor functions are also associated with 
some forms of FTD (National Institute 
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 
2015a). Communication problems include 
expressive and receptive language defi-
cits. Behavioral variant FTD is a form that 
manifests through personality and behav-
ior changes, often entailing disinhibition 
of inappropriate behaviors and expres-
sions during social interaction.
Huntington’s Disease
Huntington’s disease is a hereditary con-
dition characterized by chorea and psy-
chiatric and cognitive-linguistic problems. 
Communication challenges include poor 
language organization, dysnomia, and 
emotional lability (Sturrock & Leavitt, 2010.
Korsakoff’s Syndrome
Korsakoff’s syndrome is a condition of 
gradual cognitive decline associated with 
cortical atrophy. It is caused by a thia-
mine (vitamin B1) deficiency, most com-
monly (but not exclusively) due to chronic 
alcohol abuse (Kopelman, Thomson, 
Guerrini, & Marshall, 2009). Cognitive-
communicative challenges include short-
term and long-term memory deficits and 
confabulation.

198   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Creutzfelt-Jacob Disease
Creutzfelt-Jacob disease is a rare, rapidly 
progressive, degenerative viral disease. It 
entails a common bodily protein, prion, 
which forms into misshapen configura-
tions that destroy brain cells. Symptoms 
are a rapid loss of cognitive and linguistic 
abilities and cortical and cerebellar mus-
cular coordination, plus mood changes. It 
typically (about 85% of the time) occurs 
for no obvious reason in people between 
age 60 and 65. There is also a hereditary 
form, comprising about 10% to 15% of 
cases, and an infectious form associated 
with contamination through infected 
meats (sometimes referred to popularly as 
mad cow disease, which, in actuality, does 
not occur in humans) or medical instru-
ments (National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke, 2015b).
AIDS Dementia Complex
AIDS dementia complex is one of the 
many potential complications that may 
arise from HIV infection. An immune 
disorder, AIDS may affect any aspect of 
human functioning through primary and 
secondary infectious processes. Some-
times referred to as HIV/AIDS-associated 
dementia or HIV/AIDS-associated en- 
cephalopathy, it occurs when the brain is 
affected by the HIV virus itself or by any 
type of associated opportunistic infection. 
Symptoms may involve challenges with 
executive functions, pragmatic abilities, 
attention, and memory. Symptom pro-
gression may often be slowed through 
retroviral treatments. The term HIV- 
associated mild neurocognitive disorder is 
sometimes used to characterize mild ver-
sions of this condition.
Is There Such a Thing as 
“Reversible” Dementia?
Although the term reversible dementia is 
sometimes used in the research literature 
and in clinical practice, it is inaccurate and 
misleading. This is because, by definition, 
dementia is progressive; it gets worse 
over time. Although its progression may 
be slowed in some cases, and although 
some symptoms may reach plateaus for 
weeks or even months at a time, it cannot 
be reversed. For this reason, a condition 
that seems like dementia but in which sig-
nificant improvements in cognitive abili-
ties are noticed for a sustained period of 
time is most likely not truly dementia. 
For example, a person newly admitted 
to a long-term care facility after years 
of living at home, or a person who has 
recently lost a spouse, may show signs 
of confusion and disorientation that are 
characteristic of dementia. However, cog-
nitive decline and behavioral symptoms 
caused by a sudden life change that has 
led to major personal adjustment do not 
constitute symptoms of dementia. These 
typically dissipate over time, especially 
with the support of family, friends, and 
professionals.
Other situations in which dementia-
like symptoms may be noted despite the 
absence of true dementia are cases of 
depression, dietary imbalances or vitamin 
deficiencies, drug effects, drug interac-
tions, and postsurgical states. Some clini-
cians and scholars refer to such false cases 
of dementia as pseudodementia. How-
ever, a more accurate and descriptive term 
that does not include the word dementia 
at all is preferable. Many prefer the terms 
transient confusional state, acute confu-
sional state, or delirium.

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Dementia and Other . . . Conditions   199
What Are Implications of an 
Incorrect Diagnosis of Dementia?
It is important to avoid having a diagnosis 
of dementia be documented in a person’s 
medical records unless there is a high 
degree of certainty about that diagnosis. 
An incorrect diagnosis of dementia may 
lead to unnecessary stress and grief for 
patients and caregivers, hardships related 
to untoward stigma on a social level, and 
incorrect prescription of medication and 
other interventions. It may also lead to a 
person being deemed ineligible for cov-
erage of crucial rehabilitation-related ser-
vices. For example, third-party payors 
(e.g., case managers for insurance compa-
nies or federal or state health care plans) 
may refuse to reimburse service-provid-
ing agencies or clinicians for direct SLP 
intervention for a person with AD; their 
rationale may be that if a person is unable 
to remember what he or she learned from 
one treatment session to the next, then it 
makes no sense to provide one-on-one 
treatment to improve his or her commu-
nication strategies.
Some third-party payors consider 
dementia to be a “red flag” diagnosis. 
This means that as soon as a diagnostic 
code for dementia is recognized on an 
electronic medical record via computer-
ized tracking, approval of reimbursement 
for many types of rehabilitation services 
is automatically withdrawn, at least with-
out substantial further documentation 
and review. Making matters worse, once 
a dementia code is actually recorded in a 
patient record, it may be very difficult to 
have it deleted later once it becomes clear 
that an original diagnosis was wrong. 
Although medical doctors in most coun-
tries, not SLPs, have the ultimate authority 
to record specific diagnoses in a patient’s 
medical records, it is incumbent on SLPs 
and other rehabilitation professionals, 
as well as family members, to advocate 
for great care over a period of time that 
is long enough and that entails sufficient 
probing to rule out possibilities other than 
dementia that could account for memory 
difficulties and confusion.
What Communication Challenges 
Are Typically Associated With 
MCI and Dementia?
Cognitive changes associated with many 
forms of MCI and dementia are listed 
in Box 13–1. It is not difficult to imagine 
how any type of memory, executive func-
tion, or other cognitive impairment may, 
in some way, affect the quality and effec-
tiveness of communication. Often, early 
signs of dementia include symptoms of 
communication impairment related to 
memory loss, such as the following:
• Word-finding problems (including 
reduced verbal fluency, indexed 
in terms of the number of object 
names within semantic categories 
a person can generate within timed 
intervals)
• Semantic confusions in word usage
• Errors or gaps in spoken recall of 
recent events, especially in contrast 
to talking about topics that draw 
more from procedural memory
The use of humor to cover up or draw 
attention away from such symptoms is 
common. Some intentionally isolate them-
selves to avoid embarrassment. Many 
people with early dementia are adept at 

200   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
using circumlocution to compensate for 
their word-finding problems. Most have 
better preservation of comprehension 
and production of concrete compared to 
abstract semantic content.
In mid-stages of dementia, prag-
matic and executive functioning abili-
ties decline and word-finding continues 
to worsen, whereas speech and writing 
abilities remain relatively intact. Semantic 
deficits through early and mid-stages are 
more commonly associated with impaired 
access rather than with impaired stor-
age, a topic we explored in Chapter 9 as 
we considered theories about language 
changes in normal aging.
Problems with syntax and phonology 
tend not to occur until later in the disease 
progression; many people with slowly 
progressing dementia are able to carry 
on meaningful conversations for several 
years, especially if topics from the distant 
past are the focus of conversational con-
tent. Discourse-level deficits are primarily 
in the area of pragmatics, including prob-
lems with the following:
• Maintaining a topic for a cohesive 
conversation
• Organizing a logical progression of 
ideas
• Adjusting to an appropriate level of 
formality and politeness
• Orienting to the identity, needs, and 
desires of the person to whom they 
are speaking
Cognitive Changes Commonly  
Associated With MCI and Dementia
• Memory problems
	 Working versus short-term versus long-term memory
	 Episodic versus semantic versus procedural memory
	 Anterograde and retrograde amnesia
• Attention problems
	 Divided attention
	 Attention switching
	 Visual neglect
	 Focused/sustained attention
• Executive function problems
	 Disinhibition
	 Verbal and task perseveration
	 Inflexibility
	 Impaired judgment
	 Problems of codeswitching and social appropriateness
• Perceptual problems
	 Visuospatial discrimination
	 Prosopagnosia
	 Achromatopsia
Box
13–1

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Dementia and Other . . . Conditions   201
• Self-monitoring of inappropriate 
language use (such as swear words, 
sexual references, and racial slurs or 
use of other offensive terms)
Toward the end of life, many people with 
dementia cease to speak at all, and some 
produce only echolalic or repeated stereo-
typic utterances.
Many of the problematic behaviors 
reported by caregivers of people with de- 
mentia entail communication problems, 
such as repeated commenting or question-
ing, and expressions of frustration and 
anger over misunderstandings (Murray, 
Schneider, Banerjee, & Mann, 1999; Orange, 
Ryan, Meredith, & MacLean, 1995; Pow-
ell, Hale, & Bayer, 1995). As the disease 
progresses, the sense of grief that family 
members report due to lost companion-
ship and their loved one’s changing iden-
tity relates largely to lost communication 
abilities (Murray et al., 1999). Additional 
problems causing the greatest sense of bur-
den to caregivers include depression, anxi-
ety, agitation, and wandering. Some people 
with AD become physically combative at 
times. Symptoms tend to worsen in early 
evening hours; this is referred to as sun-
downing or sundowner’s syndrome.
In considering the communication 
challenges of people with dementia, it is 
important to appreciate that there is tre-
mendous variability within and between 
people who have it, not to mention the 
social and structural contexts in which 
they are living. There is also great variabil-
ity in symptoms relative to type of demen-
tia, as well as to severity, time postonset, 
and rate of deterioration. Not all people 
with dementia experience problems in 
all areas of communication and cognition 
that might be expected, especially in early 
stages of progression.
What Is the Role of the SLP 
in Working With People 
Who Have Dementia?
Given how central memory and other 
cognitive abilities are to language abili-
ties, worsening communication deficits 
are a fundamental component of all forms 
of dementia. There are five primary ways 
in which SLPs play a vital role in enhanc-
ing quality of life through quality of com-
munication for people with dementia.
• Assess communication strengths 
and weaknesses and help family 
members and rehabilitation and 
health care colleagues understand 
them
• Provide direct speech-language 
evidence-based intervention for 
some people with dementia (a point 
we discuss further in Section VII)
• Provide important training 
and counseling to professional 
colleagues and family members 
so that effective communication 
strategies and linguistic cues may 
be used to help enhance memory, 
meaningful communication, and 
behavior management in caring for 
people with dementia
• Advocate for the provision of 
communication-related services 
to people with dementia and their 
families
• Participate in documentation and 
research to support the evidence 
base for enhanced diagnostic 
procedures, direct and indirect 
treatment methods to address 
communication challenges, and 
training and education of caregivers 
and health professionals

202   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
There are numerous strategies for 
bringing out the best of the intact cogni-
tive and linguistic skills in people with 
dementia. Also, there are many effective 
strategies for preventing problematic 
behaviors in the first place by attending 
proactively to a person’s unmet needs. 
Kitwood (1997) wrote eloquently about 
this notion in his classic book Dementia 
Reconsidered, emphasizing that person-
centered approaches that bring out the 
strengths of people with dementia are not 
only the most humane but also the most 
effective. Unfortunately, especially in 
institutionalized settings, pharmacologi-
cal intervention to sedate and otherwise 
regulate the “problematic” behavior of 
people with dementia is used widely in 
many countries. Power (2010, 2014) offers 
wonderful guidance on using nonphar-
macological approaches to enhance well-
being in people with dementia. He shows 
how strategically addressing the domains 
of well-being (identity, connectedness, 
security, autonomy, meaning, growth, 
and joy; Thomas et al., 2005) helps us to 
promote quality of life in proactive ways. 
This, in turn, reduces reliance on dehu-
manizing physical restraints, institutional 
isolation, and drugs administered to con-
trol behavior.
Communication strategies that may 
be used to help improve the quality and 
effectiveness of communication and 
socialization are often not intuitive. With-
out training, many caregivers and health 
care professionals respond verbally and 
nonverbally in ways that actually exac-
erbate communication challenges, frus-
tration, and social isolation rather than 
reduce them. Explicit training to improve 
communication tends to enhance the 
quality of life for people with dementia 
and caregivers alike (Byrne & Orange, 
2005). People with dementia who may 
seem unable to engage in meaningful 
conversations with untrained conversa-
tion partners may actually engage much 
more meaningfully with a partner trained 
to elicit and support quality interactions 
(Hopper, 2003; Ripich & Wykle, 1996; 
Santo Pietro & Otsuni, 2003). General and 
specific approaches to communication 
enhancement for people with dementia 
and related neurodegenerative disorders 
are detailed in the upcoming chapters on 
treatment methods, especially Chapters 
25 and 26.
How Is Working With People 
Who Have MCI and Dementia 
Recognized as a Component of 
the SLP’s Scope of Practice?
SLPs are uniquely qualified to educate 
and train people with MCI and dementia, 
their loved ones and caregivers, and other 
health care professionals. The focus of this 
work tends to be on
• Lessening and compensating for 
communication challenges
• Fostering meaningful 
communication environments, 
whether in residential facilities, 
clinics, adult day care centers, 
or family homes, or community 
agencies
This role is consistent with the American 
Speech-Language-Hearing Association’s 
justification of the need for SLPs in pro-
viding intervention for people with com-
munication challenges related to cogni-
tive disorders and in engaging in related 
research (ASHA, 1988, 2005).

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Dementia and Other . . . Conditions   203
Unfortunately, not all medical pro-
fessionals fully appreciate that demen-
tia management is within SLPs’ scope 
of practice. Thus, many physicians do 
not refer people with dementia or their 
caregivers to SLPs in the first place. This 
means that the role of the SLP as an advo-
cate for people with dementia by educat-
ing others of the impact that SLP services 
can have is of paramount importance.
What SLP Services for People With 
Dementia Are Reimbursable?
As we discuss in detail in Chapter 14, the 
way that SLPs are paid for their services 
varies according to government-regulated 
health care policies and agencies in the 
country and region or state in which they 
work. There is wide variability in the types 
of justification needed to ensure that SLP 
services are paid for. Many third-party 
payor representatives who make deci-
sions about patients’ eligibility for ser-
vices do not understand the importance of 
SLP intervention for people with dementia. 
Thus, it is important not only that SLPs 
educate medical professionals who may 
refer people with dementia for services but 
also the insurance companies and health 
plan representatives who will be making 
decisions about whether SLP services may 
be authorized for reimbursement.
In the United States, since Medi-
care is the federal program providing 
health benefits to people over 65 and 
people with disabilities, Medicare is the 
most likely source of reimbursement for 
SLP services for people with dementia. 
Thus, it is important for U.S.-based SLPs 
to know about the ways that Medicare 
authorizes dementia services. One way is 
through providing direct assessment and 
treatment involving primarily the patient 
on his or her own; the other is through a 
more indirect assessment and interven-
tion approach called a functional mainte-
nance program.
Direct intervention for people with 
dementia entails an assessment process 
followed by treatment sessions, much as 
would be approved for people with other 
types of neurogenic communication defi-
cits, such as aphasia. To justify direct one-
on-one speech-language intervention for 
a person with dementia, it must be dem-
onstrated that he or she has sufficiently 
intact memory abilities to demonstrate 
carryover of communication benefits 
from one session to the next, and from 
the clinical treatment environment to 
real-world communication. In most clini-
cal environments, there is a general belief 
that the communication benefits a person 
with dementia is most likely to maintain 
typically relate to use of compensatory 
strategies, such as use of written and pic-
ture cues and other memory aids. Current 
research on direct behavioral intervention 
and computer stimulation aimed at slow-
ing the progression of cognitive deterio-
ration, and accumulating evidence of the 
capacity for people in late-stage dementia 
to learn and retain new information, has 
great promise for boosting the justifica-
tion for direct SLP intervention.
A functional maintenance program 
also entails assessment and treatment. 
The assessment process includes not only 
the patient but his or her significant oth-
ers, including any frequent caregivers. 
The “treatment” is a training program 
aimed at getting communication partners 
to understand and use specific commu-
nication strategies that will enhance that 
individual’s communication abilities.

204   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
In What Other Ways May Clinical 
Aphasiologists Professionally Support 
the Communication Needs of People 
With MCI and Dementia and the 
People Who Care About Them?
In contexts where SLPs are salaried with-
out being tied to billable schemes for their 
services (increasingly rare worldwide but 
still sometimes the case) and also in cases 
where SLPs are willing to provide volun-
teer services above and beyond their nor-
mal workday activities, there are ample 
additional ways they may make a differ-
ence in the lives of people with dementia. 
Examples are the following:
• Visiting local dementia caregiver 
support groups to provide caregiver 
training on effective communication 
strategies for reducing caregiver 
burden and enhancing quality of life
• Providing in-services on empower­
ing approaches to communication to 
staff members in residential, adult 
daycare, and hospice programs
• Training volunteers to provide 
reminiscence-based programs 
to people with dementia in their 
local communities (e.g., though 
the development of life review 
diaries and videos, memory books, 
memory wallets, and reminiscence-
based activities)
• Promoting programming that 
integrates interaction with animals 
(Gilbey & Tani, 2015; Matuszek, 
2010), music (Brotons & Koger, 
2000; Gerdner & Schoenfelder, 2010; 
Horowitz, 2013; Music and Memory, 
2015; Schlaug, Altenmüüller, & 
Thaut, 2010), art (Beard, 2012; Brotons 
& Koger, 2000; Cowl & Gaugler, 
2014; Hannemann, 2006; Kinney  
& Rentz, 2005; Mihailidis et al., 2010; 
Rentz, 2002; Rusted, Sheppard, & 
Waller, 2006; Seifert, 2001), and other 
creative activities, such as poetry 
writing, acting, and photography 
(Truscott, 2004; Zientz et al., 2007) 
to stimulate expression, socializa-
tion, and to enhance inclusiveness
Many of the general approaches for 
improving communication in older people 
and for addressing language of generalized 
intellectual impairment (see Section VII) 
can be adapted for effective volunteer and 
caregiver training. SLPs working in uni-
versity contexts may offer such commu-
nity-based volunteer services by training 
student volunteers to carry out communi-
cation-focused dementia management ser-
vices, which may also be combined with 
respite programming for caregivers.
What Is Primary 
Progressive Aphasia?
As introduced briefly in Chapter 10 and 
reiterated at the start of this chapter, PPA 
is the ongoing loss of language abilities in 
the face of relatively preserved cognitive 
abilities, caused by neurodegenerative 
disease. It meets the definition of apha-
sia in that it entails a loss of previously 
acquired language abilities due to a neu-
rological cause and is not attributable to 
psychiatric, sensory, motor, or intellectual 
deficits. Still, PPA is clearly different from 
other forms of aphasia.
• PPA has an insidious onset; other 
forms of aphasia tend to develop 
suddenly.

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Dementia and Other . . . Conditions   205
• PPA is caused by a neurodegen-
erative condition; other forms 
of aphasia are due to a sudden 
disruption in blood supply, most 
often a stroke.
• PPA symptoms get progressively 
worse; symptoms of other forms of 
aphasia continue to improve or at 
least stabilize.
Although PPA is a degenerative con-
dition, it is different from degenerative 
conditions that are primarily cognitive in 
nature. The first communication symp-
toms noticed in people with PPA tend to 
be verbal, not intellectual; the early symp-
toms of people with dementia tend to be 
memory loss, confusion, and executive 
function deficits. Noticeable word-finding 
problems that are uncharacteristic of a 
person’s prior status are especially preva-
lent in the early stages of PPA. Over time, 
people with PPA usually develop MCI and 
then dementia (Ceccaldi et al., 1996; Dam-
asio, 1998). PPA tends to occur, on average, 
at a younger age than does dementia; it is 
often first diagnosed in people in their 50s 
or 60s. PPA was not reported in the litera-
ture until much more recently than most 
other neurodegenerative conditions. It is 
difficult to ascertain actual demographic 
statistics regarding incidence and preva-
lence because PPA is not well understood 
by laypeople as well as by most profes-
sionals in health care. For this reason, peo-
ple with PPA are likely to be misdiagnosed, 
and many are not referred for appropriate 
support and clinical services.
PPA occurs in varied forms and as 
such may be characterized as a group of 
syndromes. The syndromes have in com-
mon the fact that brain regions and neural 
networks involved primarily in linguis-
tic processing are affected first and that 
further degeneration then affects other 
regions and networks. The most widely 
accepted classification to date includes 
three major subtypes: semantic, logope-
nic, and agrammatic (nonfluent).
People with semantic PPA tend to 
have challenges with wordfinding, espe-
cially in confrontation naming, and com-
prehension; even understanding at the 
single-word level is impaired. Other than 
being characterized by dysnomia, their 
verbal output is relatively good, includ-
ing intact syntax. They tend not to have 
concomitant motor speech impairments. 
People with logopenic PPA tend to have 
problems with word finding, especially in 
spontaneous conversation.
People with agrammatic PPA tend 
to have difficulty with syntax, especially 
in expression relative to comprehension. 
They also often have concomitant apraxia 
of speech. This form is also sometimes 
called nonfluent PPA. A fourth subtype 
has been suggested, although some con-
sider it to be a form of FTD while others 
consider it to be a variant of semantic PPA. 
This is a form in which the right rather 
than left hemisphere is first affected, 
such that pragmatic and extra-linguistic 
aspects of communication are affected 
initially; later, this form tends to develop 
into semantic PPA.
As with people who have aphasia 
in general, people with PPA may have 
symptoms that do not fit neatly into a 
single syndrome description (Mesulam 
& Weintraub, 2014) and may be catego-
rized as having mixed PPA or simply PPA 
of an unidentified type. Guidelines for 
improved diagnosis and subtyping are 
now being developed to help improve 
the meaningfulness of diagnostic labeling 
and the sensitivity and specificity of PPA 
assessment methods.

206   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
What Is the Role of the 
Aphasiologist in Working With 
People Who Have PPA?
It is important that aphasiologists engage 
as early as possible in assessment and 
intervention with people who have PPA. 
Assessment processes must be continued 
so as to track the progression of symp-
toms and anticipate needed support and 
compensatory strategies. Counseling and 
educating people with PPA and the peo-
ple who are important with them is vital; 
most are not likely to have had much help 
or explanation regarding the condition 
until they meet with an SLP. Given the 
relative recency of the recognition of PPA 
sydromes, there is a dearth of evidence-
based practice literature supporting PPA 
treatment methods. Still, several studies 
to date suggest promising results through 
direct intervention with people who have 
PPA, including restitutive lexical and syn-
tactic methods and compensatory meth-
ods, such as memory aids and written and 
pictorial communication supports. Given 
the inconsistency of recommendations 
for assessing and diagnostic subtyping of 
people with PPA, as well as in treatment 
strategies, it is paramount that clinicians 
continue to stay abreast of developments 
in this rapidly expanding area of research 
and clinical practice.
Overall, the role of the clinical apha-
siologist is vital in assessment, treatment, 
counseling, and advocacy for people with 
neurodegenerative conditions. This is a 
very large and diverse category of highly 
underserved people whose needs — and 
the needs of those who care about them ​
— ​often fall between the cracks in health 
care systems better suited to treating acute 
than chronic needs and better geared to- 
ward continued improvement as opposed 
to support and work to slow deterioration 
and loss. Person-first, empowering ap- 
proaches aimed at making the most of 
residual abilities, slowing progression, pro-
viding personal and environmental sup-
ports, and promoting quality of life of peo-
ple with neurodegenerative conditions can 
make a tremendous difference in the lives 
of individuals, families, and communities.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 What are three primary neurode-
generative conditions with great rel-
evance to clinical aphasiology?
	 3.	 How does mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) differ from age-related cognitive- 
communicative decline?
	 4.	 How does language of generalized 
intellectual impairment differ from 
aphasia?
	 5.	 What are three different schemes 
by which varied forms of dementia 
might be classified?
	 6.	 What are the primary causes of 
dementia?
	 7.	 Why is the term reversible dementia 
misleading? What term is preferable?
	 8.	 How is dementia different from tran-
sient confusional state?
	 9.	 Why is it important for SLPs to act 
as advocates to hold off on any for-
mal diagnosis of dementia until there 
is a great deal of certainty about the 
diagnosis?
10.	 List and describe key features of the 
types of dementia mentioned in this 
chapter.
11.	 What are some specific strategies 
you might implement as an SLP to 

Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Associated With Dementia and Other . . . Conditions   207
enhance referrals of people with neu-
rodegenerative disorders to you for 
clinical services?
12.	 Compare and contrast direct treatment 
with functional maintenance programs 
for people with dementia.
13.	 Aside from billable services, what are 
some other service-oriented means of 
offering your professional expertise 
to help support people with dementia 
and MCI?
14.	 Compare and contrast PPA with 
dementia.
15.	 Compare and contrast PPA with clas-
sical syndromes of aphasia.
16.	 Describe the status of classification 
and assessment of PPA.
17.	 Why are person-first and empower-
ment approaches to assessment, inter-
vention, counseling, and advocacy 
for people with neurodegenerative 
conditions so essential to individuals, 
families, and communities?
Visit the companion website to see more 
suggestions for learning and reflection.


Section IV
Delivering Excellent Services

210   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
This section is dedicated to helping read-
ers learn about the service delivery con-
texts in which we work and how we may 
serve as dedicated, vigorous, passionate, 
constructive advocates for people with 
acquired neurogenic communication dis-
orders. Many practicing clinicians work-
ing in health care contexts say they wish 
they had been equipped with such infor-
mation before they hit the clinical trenches 
as full-time aphasiologists. In Chapter 14, 
we review several aspects of the contexts 
in which we work, the way our services 
are paid for, and the impact of health care 
finance and cost-control systems on clini-
cal services in our field. In Chapter 15, 
addressing legal and ethical concerns, we 
take a proactive approach in considering 
how to promote access to our services and 
support the rights of people with aphasia 
and related disorders. We also review crit-
ical ethical dilemmas related to our own 
financial conflicts of interest as clinicians 
and consider what we can do about them. 
In Chapter 16, we consider global aspects 
of aphasiology, including what consti-
tutes cultural competence across cultural 
and natural borders, global trends that 
are affecting our field and the people we 
serve, and helpful resources for support-
ing transnational work in aphasiology.

211
Chapter
14
Contexts for Providing 
Excellent Services
In Chapters 1 and 2, we considered 
the rich career possibilities for speech-
language pathologists (SLPs) who spe-
cialize in neurogenic communication dis-
orders in clinical and research settings. 
In this chapter, we delve into the myriad 
roles that clinical aphasiologists play and 
consider the varied contexts for clinical 
practice, telepractice options, and aspects 
of interprofessional teamwork. We then 
explore a series of queries about how cli-
nicians get paid and related issues about 
reimbursement for our services. Finally, 
we address highly relevant aspects of 
health care finance and cost-control sys-
tems as they affect our clinical services.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What do SLPs who specialize in neu-
rogenic communication disorders do?
	 2.	 In what types of settings are clinical 
services provided?
	 3.	 In what ways may services be pro-
vided at a distance?
	 4.	 With what types of teams do clinical 
aphasiologists engage?
	 5.	 How do SLPs working in medical and 
rehabilitation contexts get paid?
	 6.	 Where does the money come from to 
pay for SLP services?
	 7.	 How do service-providing agencies 
get paid?
	 8.	 What makes services provided by 
SLPs reimbursable?
	 9.	 What do we do if we are denied reim-
bursement for our services?
10.	 How do health care finance and 
cost-control systems affect clinical 
services?
11.	 What are the impacts of health care 
cost cutting and cost control on clini-
cal aphasiology services for adults 
with neurogenic cognitive and lin-
guistic challenges?
What Do SLPs Who Specialize 
in Neurogenic Communication 
Disorders Do?
Just as the work environments and cultural 
contexts of aphasiologists vary widely, 
so do their professional responsibilities. 

212   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Here, let’s consider some of our pri- 
mary roles.
Clinical Intervention (Screening, 
Assessment, Treatment, 
Counseling, Educating)
Our roles in these diverse aspects of 
intervention are not separable, although 
it is helpful to examine each in detail as 
one gains knowledge, skills, and values 
related to each.
Interprofessional Collaboration 
and Interdisciplinary Learning
As discussed in Chapter 1, no aphasiolo-
gist represents a single discipline. The 
knowledge, skills, and values required for 
clinical excellence span numerous content 
areas. Continuous lifelong learning across 
disciplines is vital. Also, ideally every 
SLP works with one or more teams of 
professionals from a wide range of areas 
of expertise, a topic we discuss further in 
this chapter.
Advocacy
Supporting the rights of people with com-
munication challenges is fundamental to 
all of the professional roles and responsi-
bilities of SLPs, regardless of the context 
in which we work. We have already dis-
cussed this vital role in earlier chapters 
regarding work with older people and 
people who have varied types of neuro-
genic communication disorders, and we 
consider it further in Chapter 15 and in 
the context of intervention in Sections VI 
and VII.
Marketing, Negotiating Contracts, 
Billing, Recordkeeping, 
Documentation, Scheduling 
and Coordinating Care, Quality 
Assurance, and Fundraising
The business aspects of clinical practice 
are fundamental to sustaining clinical ser-
vices. Some clinicians have a great deal of 
help with many of the business-related 
aspects of clinical practice, but many do 
not. Such efforts require substantial time, 
expertise, and leadership (Hallowell & 
Chapey, 2008b).
Leadership and Management
Many aphasiologists have the communi-
cation and leadership skills, making them 
sought after for leadership positions. They 
may become heads of clinical SLP depart-
ments or rehabilitation units, managers 
of rehabilitation companies, and owners 
of businesses. In academic departments, 
they frequently rise in the ranks of leader-
ship from department chairs and clinical 
directors to deans, provosts, presidents, 
and chancellors.
Research
Given that evidence-based practice relies 
on practice-based evidence and vice versa, 
all SLPs are engaged in research in some 
way. Clinicians need not pursue research 
careers to be strong consumers of research 
and to contribute to research through col-
laboration with others. Opportunities 
for those wishing to engage in research 
careers in acquired neurogenic disorders 
in particular are summarized in Chapter 1.

Contexts for Providing Excellent Services   213
Teaching and Mentoring
University-based aphasiologists and clini-
cal supervisors have teaching and men-
toring roles as part of their ongoing pro-
fessional responsibilities. Those working 
in primarily service enterprises are often 
called upon, or often volunteer, to offer 
on-the-job mentoring and supervision of 
student clinicians, clinical fellows, and 
new hires who do not have a great deal of 
experience working in the area of neuro-
genic cognitive-linguistic disorders.
In What Types of Settings Do 
We Provide Clinical Services?
Decisions about where an individual will 
receive services depends on the type and 
severity of problems he or she is facing 
and the related type and extent of services 
needed, geographic location, insurance 
coverage, financial status, and personal 
and family preferences.
Hospitals
Aphasiologists who work in hospitals typ-
ically provide inpatient or outpatient ser-
vices, or both. Inpatient services may be 
categorized as acute care or subacute care. 
In recent years, there has been a trend to 
reduce the amount of time that a patient 
may stay in the hospital. This is primarily 
due to the high costs of acute care. Given 
that stroke and brain injury survivors are 
typically only in acute care for a short 
time, SLPs may engage in screenings, 
assessment, treatment planning, counsel-
ing, and family education with them but 
are less likely to actually get to implement 
ongoing treatment programs. A great deal 
of subacute service takes place bedside 
in patients’ rooms. Ongoing treatment is 
more likely provided in subacute care, 
rehabilitation settings, or patients’ homes. 
Hospitals ideally have comprehensive 
stroke management and trauma response 
programs, both of which require con-
certed interprofessional teamwork among 
professionals with varied areas of clinical 
expertise.
Rehabilitation Centers
Whether focused on inpatient or outpa-
tient services, rehabilitation centers are 
key contexts for diagnosis and ongoing 
poststroke and posttraumatic brain injury 
services. Many are equipped with spe-
cial facilities, such as dining rooms with  
restaurant-like components, mock shop-
ping areas, and kitchens, all set up for 
practicing needed life skills to maximize 
independence. A typical rehabilitation 
gym includes ample equipment to sup-
port occupational and physical therapy 
services. SLPs often engage in cotreat-
ments with clinicians from other dis-
ciplines in such gyms and sometimes 
may even provide their own direct ser-
vices there because the gym may be the 
rehabili­tation team’s primary dedicated 
space. Ideally, private spaces for direct 
communication intervention and counsel-
ing are also available.
Health Maintenance Organizations
Health maintenance organizations 
(HMOs) are agencies that provide health 
care services through contracts with 
clinical professionals rather than having 

214   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
patients see separate independent provid-
ers. People who have the choice between 
an HMO and another agency for SLP 
services may choose the HMO primarily 
because copays and other out-of-pocket 
costs tend to be lower and because HMOs 
offer a one-stop location for health care 
services and thus tend to be convenient 
and familiar. HMOs sometimes provide 
on-site SLPs to serve their members.
Skilled Nursing and  
Long-Term Care Facilities
In several countries, what once were called 
such ageist names as “old age homes” or 
“rest homes” are now typically called 
skilled nursing facilities (SNFs). SNFs 
offer health care services in a residential 
setting. Most SNFs identify themselves as 
rehabilitation centers, too. Residents may 
come for short-term rehabilitation stays 
following hospitalization (e.g., following 
a stroke or brain injury) so that they may 
continue to recover prior to going back 
home. Some SNFs offer rehabilitation ser-
vices that are provided by their own staff 
members; others contract with agencies 
that provide rehabilitation staffing and 
oversight. Many SNFs have special areas 
dedicated to ongoing care of people with 
dementia.
Continuing Care Retirement 
Communities (CCRCs)
CCRCs are increasingly popular alter-
natives to living as long as possible at 
home and only moving to a long-term 
care facility as a last resort, when no rela-
tives or paid caregivers are available or 
able to care for a person with a disability. 
At increasing rates in much of the world 
and especially in Western countries, older 
adults are actively choosing to move into 
CCRCs while they are healthy. Their goal 
is typically to live there independently 
in apartments or condominiums, all the 
while accessing shared recreational and 
social facilities and programming, as 
well as health care and dining facilities. 
Later, if they lose basic functional abilities 
required to maintain that level of inde-
pendence, they may move to assisted liv-
ing areas within the same community — or 
even have staff members who come to the 
places they already reside — to receive 
help as needed on an individualized basis. 
Help might include tracking and admin-
istering medications, dressing wounds, or 
assistance with housekeeping. Still later, 
if they need more intensive nursing care, 
they may move to a skilled nursing com-
ponent within the same community.
The continuity of care within the 
same location has many benefits. Life 
transitions due to health concerns need 
not be terribly disruptive; if one partner 
of a couple needs more care, the two need 
not be split up to live in different locations. 
Also, residents maintain access to friends, 
health professionals, and other staff mem-
bers within the other community, regard-
less of their level of care. Although they 
may engage in hobbies such as gardening 
and woodworking, they are free of such 
responsibilities as grounds keeping and 
home repair. Most such communities are 
brimming with activities. Residents may 
take academic courses offered on-site by 
local colleges, make use of workout facili-
ties and swimming pools, attend concerts, 
go on day trips, compete on sports teams, 
participate in discussion groups, serve on 
committees charged with oversight of var-
ious aspects of the community, and take 
part in groups with shared interests, such 
as political action, religious or cultural tra-

Contexts for Providing Excellent Services   215
ditions, sewing, cooking, or computer use, 
just to name a few. Many people choose 
the continuing care community option 
even if they do have adult children who 
would be glad to look after them, and 
even if they could afford in-home caregiv-
ing that would enable them to keep living 
in their family homes. CCRCs typically 
offer a full range of rehabilitation services, 
including those described above for SNFs.
Home Health Agencies
Given the cost of care for hospitaliza-
tion and follow-up inpatient rehabilita-
tion services, and time limits on access 
to these, many stroke and brain injury 
survivors still benefit from services deliv-
ered in their homes. These services may 
be offered at less cost and in many cases 
have been shown to lead to the best long-
term results, especially in terms of car-
ryover of progress made in rehabilitation 
to natural living environments. In-home 
care is ideally coordinated among several 
rehabilitation and medical disciplines. 
Housekeeping, shopping, and home 
maintenance services are also sometimes 
contracted through home health provid-
ers or through community-based groups 
dedicated to helping people live at home 
for as long as possible.
Private Practice and  
Not-for-Profit Clinics
Private clinical practices serving people 
with communication disorders typically 
provide a wide range of services to peo-
ple from birth through old age with any 
and all types of hearing, speech, language, 
balance, or swallowing disorders. In addi-
tion to having their own clinical facilities, 
some contract services to local schools, 
hospitals, rehabilitation providers, and 
other agencies. Although some are for-
profit businesses, some communication 
disorders clinics are run by not-for-profit 
groups with a mission to serve people 
regardless of their ability to pay for ser-
vices. In the United States, the National 
Association of Speech and Hearing Cen-
ters (NASHC, http://www.nashc.net) 
helps to foster networking and informa-
tion sharing among leaders of not-for-
profit clinics. The American Academy 
of Private Practice in Speech Pathology 
and Audiology (AAPPSPA, http://www​
.aappspa.org) is an organization sup-
porting private practitioners working in 
a wide array of clinical contexts through 
continuing education opportunities, net-
working, and legal consultation. There are 
parallel national and regional networks 
across the globe.
Unless a private practice has a large 
enough caseload to be able to afford 
specialized clinicians in specific areas of 
practice, SLPs working in such contexts 
are apt to practice across a vast array of 
areas within the field’s scope of practice. 
Still, this is a viable context for provid-
ing intervention for adults with acquired 
neurogenic language disorders. Also, 
some private practice clinics are set up 
especially to address people with specific 
types of communication needs; as such, 
some are dedicated to practice in clinical 
aphasiology.
University-Based Clinics
Many universities with programs in SLP 
and audiology have on-site clinics that 
provide services to the local community. 
The case mix tends to be diverse rather 
than specialized, as in many freestanding  

216   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
communication disorders clinics. Dra-
matic changes in funding models for uni-
versities as well as in health care fund-
ing models have had serious financial 
implications affecting the way such clin-
ics operate. For example, clinical supervi-
sors whose salaries were once supported 
through a university’s ongoing annual 
operating budget are now increasingly 
based on clinical revenues generated. 
Thus, many clinical supervisors have fis-
cal productivity requirements in addition 
to their clinical teaching and mentoring 
duties. While most university clinics in 
the past served community members at 
low or no cost as deemed helpful to the 
clients and beneficial to students’ clinical 
learning, this is rarely possible in today’s 
cost-strapped clinics. Most now operate 
as real businesses, billing private and fed-
eral insurance programs for services, and 
requiring copayments or out-of-pocket 
fees from clients. The changes are not all 
negative. Students offering clinical services 
in a real business-oriented operation have 
wonderful opportunities to learn about 
key areas of clinical practice management, 
such as billing and documentation to meet 
payer requirements. Also, they do not 
develop false expectations about how long 
a typical client may be kept on caseload or 
the amount of time available to engage in 
nonbillable activities.
Adult Daycare Centers
Families wishing to care for adults with 
disabilities at home but who are unable 
to do so during the day may rely on adult 
daycare centers. These may be freestand-
ing practices, or they may be offered in 
conjunction with hospitals, rehabilitation 
centers, and the like. Many adult day ser-
vices are dedicated to people with demen-
tia who cannot be left unsupervised and to 
people with severe motor disabilities that 
preclude their being left alone at home. 
Although there are not typically salaried 
positions for speech-language patholo-
gists at such centers, they may offer inter-
vention and caregiver training services on 
a contractual or volunteer basis.
Aphasia Centers
Given the severe restrictions that federal, 
state, and private insurance programs 
impose on rehabilitation services (dis-
cussed later in this chapter), and given 
that most people with neurogenic lan-
guage disorders have chronic challenges 
that require long-term intervention, there 
has been a trend over the past 20 years or 
so to provide long-term language inter-
vention services to people with aphasia 
and related disorders through indepen-
dent aphasia centers. Most aphasia cen-
ters offer primarily group intervention, 
although some offer private diagnostic 
and treatment sessions, too. By attending 
a group session, a participant need only 
pay a fraction of the cost of a typical pri-
vate session lasting the same duration; the 
cost of professional intervention is shared 
among members of a group, making the 
experience more affordable for all. This 
makes it possible for some to continue 
to participate in communication rehabili-
tation for years as opposed to just days, 
weeks, or months. Most aphasia centers 
are not-for-profit and allow for slid-
ing payment scales for people who lack 
financial resources to be seen elsewhere. 
Affordability is certainly not the only ben-
efit of such group-based practice models. 
As we discuss further in Section VII, there 
are ample reasons that group intervention 
may be optimal for many people.

Contexts for Providing Excellent Services   217
Most aphasia centers do not oper-
ate based on a medical model of service 
delivery, in contrast to many of the types 
of contexts described above, because few 
rely on reimbursement through health 
insurance. Instead, aphasia centers tend 
to derive income through private out-of-
pocket payment from the people served, 
plus donations and fundraising efforts. 
Without having to meet strict medically 
focused documentation and service provi-
sion criteria, SLPs in these settings are free 
to focus on life participation and social 
models of service delivery. For example, 
instead of being called clients or patients, 
people who seek services at aphasia cen-
ters tend to be called “members.” At many 
such centers, members are welcome to 
visit with one another in shared kitchen or 
living room spaces when they are not nec-
essarily engaged in programmed sessions, 
further fostering a sense of mutual sup-
port and camaraderie. Groups are formed 
based on patterns of needs and interests 
of members. Some groups engage in cre-
ative community-based activities outside 
of center facilities.
Hospice
Hospice services, designed to support 
people who are dying and the people 
who care about them through the end of 
life, are provided in myriad types of clini-
cal contexts. They are most commonly 
provided in private homes, skilled nurs-
ing and rehabilitation facilities, hospitals, 
and specialized residential centers for 
hospice and palliative care, all of which 
are contexts in which SLPs work. Pollens 
(2004) describes the primary roles of the 
SLP in hospice that are central to address-
ing neurogenic disorders of cognition and 
communication:
• Providing information and 
consultation to patients, families, 
and other hospice team members
• Developing supportive 
communication strategies to 
facilitate the patient’s participation 
in decision making, participation in 
social relationships, and expression 
and fulfillment of end-of-life wishes
We discuss those roles further in the con-
text of counseling and life coaching in 
Chapter 27. Clinical aphasiologists are 
also often at the forefront of helping to 
determine decision-making capacity and 
competency of people in hospice care 
(Brody, 2005; Dietz et al., 2013; Griffith & 
Tengnah, 2007; Horton-Deutsch, Twigg, 
& Evans, 2007; Moberg & Rick, 2008; Pol-
lens, 2004; Sabat, 2005).
In What Ways May Services 
Be Provided at a Distance?
There are many reasons for which a per-
son with a neurogenic cognitive-linguistic 
disorder may need or desire diagnostic or 
treatment services from a clinician who 
is not in the same location. For example, 
those who do not speak the language of 
local clinicians, those who are too weak 
or ill to travel to clinical centers, those 
without transportation, those who live 
in areas remote from qualified clinicians, 
and those who live in war zones or unsafe 
neighborhoods may wish to access clini-
cians at a distance (Doolittle, Yaezel, Otto, 
& Clemens, 1998; Khazei, Jarvis-Selinger, 
Ho, & Lee, 2005).
Telepractice is the application of 
technology to deliver health, counseling, 
consulting, assessment, or rehabilitative 
services at a distance. It offers promise for 

218   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
providing access to services where access 
is otherwise reduced or nonexistent due 
to distance, lack of availability of appro-
priate expertise, lack of mobility, or lack 
of transportation.
The terms telerehabilitation, telehealth, 
and telemedicine are sometimes used inter-
changeably with this term, or to convey 
varied connotations in referring to service 
delivery from afar. Telepractice may be 
synchronous (live and in real time, usu-
ally via audio and video connection) or 
asynchronous (recorded and later shared 
for review or interpretation) (Berman & 
Fenaughty, 2005; Brown, 2005; Hickman 
& Dyer, 1998; Martínez, Villarroel, Seoane,  
& del Pozo, 2004; Whitten, 2006).
Much of the evidence for the effec-
tiveness of telerehabilitation is based on 
research from disciplines other than SLP. 
Several studies support the feasibility of 
using distance technologies, from simple 
telephone contact to sophisticated video-
conferencing, to evaluate speech and lan-
guage disorders (e.g., Glykas & Chytas, 
2004; Mashima & Doarn, 2008; Sicotte, 
Lehoux, Fortier-Blanc, & Leblanc, 2003; 
Wilson, Onslow, & Lincoln, 2004).
The evidence base for the effective-
ness of telerehabilitation in neurogenic 
language disorders is small but growing. 
There is mounting evidence that in-person  
and telerehabilitation diagnosis and treat-
ment may be similarly effective when 
used in specific ways for particular pur-
poses with stroke and brain injury survi-
vors and people with dementia (Brennan, 
George­adis, Baron, & Barker, 2004; Duffy, 
Werven, & Aronson, 1997; Georgeadis, 
Brennan, Barker, & Baron, 2004; Hall, 
Boisvert, & Steele, 2013; Hill et al., 2006; 
Lasker, Stierwalt, Spence, & Calvin-Root, 
2010; Theodoros, Hill, Russell, Ward, & 
Wootton, 2008; Wertz et al., 1992).
Clinicians practicing through dis-
tance technology are accountable in terms 
of ethical and scope-of-practice issues just 
as they are for in-person treatment and 
must adhere to related local, regional, and 
federal regulations and policies (Cason & 
Brannon, 2011; Cohn, 2012; Cohn, Bran-
non, & Cason, 2011; Cohn & Watzlaf, 2011). 
Also, it is important to verify whether dis-
tance services are reimbursable. Factors 
that have the greatest impact on options 
of expanding telerehabilitation for people 
with neurogenic communication disor-
ders are summarized in Box 14–1.
With What Types of Teams Do 
Clinical Aphasiologists Engage?
Teamwork is central to coordination and 
providing the best clinical services, and 
ensuring effective documentation and re- 
imbursement for services. Team members 
often include the person with a neuro-
genic communication disorder and any 
friends, relatives, or caregivers he or she 
chooses to include; physicians (physiat-
rists, geriatricians, neurologists, radi-
ologists, family physicians, hospitalists, 
etc.); occupational therapists; physical 
therapists; neuropsychologists; rehabili-
tation counselors; social workers; nurses; 
nursing assistants; and dietitians. Ide-
ally, through true interprofessional col-
laboration, all team members orient their 
expertise toward holistically fostering a 
person’s reach toward his or her fullest 
potential (Hallowell & Chapey, 2008b). 
In Chapter 2, we considered the inter-
professional collaborative competencies 
that lead to clinical excellence. Here let’s 
briefly discuss three basic types of teams 
in which we might serve as collaborators: 
multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, and 
transdisciplinary teams.
In a multidisciplinary team, each 
team member represents his or her own 

Contexts for Providing Excellent Services   219
expertise and also ideally confers with 
other team members regularly about dis-
cipline-specific and general rehabilitation 
goals. In an interdisciplinary team, there 
is greater synergy across team members 
and a high degree of collaborative deci-
sion making about strategies for work-
ing together to achieve the best outcomes 
for the patient’s overall health and well-
being. Cotreatments by clinicians from 
two or more disciplines at once are more 
likely. Also, clinicians tend to implement 
strategies recommended and modeled by 
those from other disciplines to comple-
ment each team member’s efforts. For 
example, a physical therapist may train 
the SLP, occupational therapist, and nurs-
ing staff to remind a stroke survivor with 
aphasia and hemiparesis to engage in her 
prescribed range-of-motion exercises at 
varied times during the day. The SLP may 
train others on the team to check on the 
patient’s hearing aid use, provide specific 
reminders about safe swallowing during 
mealtimes, and use a series of basic com-
mands rather than complex instructions 
when helping her engage in self-care tasks. 
Interdisciplinary teams represent much of 
the current educational and clinical focus 
of interprofessional collaboration.
In a transdisciplinary team, there is 
further cross-training of team members; 
the lines clearly demarcating the expertise 
of one discipline’s scope of practice may 
Factors Influencing Options of Expanding 
Telerehabilitation for People With 
Neurogenic Communication Disorders
• Means of ensuring relationship-centered services
• Training in use of telepractice technology
• Client abilities (technology use and control, hearing and 
visual abilities, local support)
• Attitudes of providers and clients
• Establishment and enforcement of clinical standards
• Reimbursement rules and related considerations of 
government and insurance programs
• Licensure and certification issues, especially for services 
provided between states, provinces, and regions, or across 
national borders
• Physician referrals
• Means of ensuring patient confidentiality
• Means of adapting and designing assessment and 
treatment materials
• Methods for tracking and reporting clinical outcomes
• Internet connectivity and other telecommunications 
infrastructure and cost
• Potential cost savings
Sources:  American Telemedicine Association, 2010; Hallowell & Chapey, 
2008b; Hallowell & Henri, 2013.
Box
14–1

220   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
be blurred. This type of team is increas-
ingly common in home health care envi-
ronments, where the sheer expense and 
the lack of sufficient numbers of special-
ists in each discipline make it difficult or 
impossible to send a separate clinician 
representing each area of rehabilitation 
need to a patient’s home. Each member of 
the rehabilitation team, for example, may 
engage in monitoring vital signs, check-
ing up on physical therapy, occupational 
therapy, and SLP homework, and counsel-
ing. In the transdisciplinary context, it is 
important to ensure that the proper train-
ing required to carry out any type of ser-
vice is provided and that each discipline’s 
recognized scope of practice is respected.
Many tools for evaluating interpro-
fessional practice teams and teamwork 
have been developed and tested. Refer-
ring to these may help administrators 
as well as team members tune into their 
collective strengths and weaknesses and 
establish plans for ongoing goal setting 
and improvements. The National Center 
for Interprofessional Practice and Educa-
tion offers a rich set of such tools on its 
website (https://nexusipe.org).
How Do SLPs Working in 
Medical and Rehabilitation 
Contexts Get Paid?
SLPs are paid directly or indirectly for 
their services in a variety of ways. These 
include being paid:
• A salary
• An hourly rate for all services 
rendered
• An hourly rate only for billable 
services rendered
• A per diem (daily) rate for covering 
the caseload within one or more 
facilities serviced by the same 
agency
• A specified dollar amount per unit 
of time (day, week, month) based 
on a proportion of billable revenue 
generated
• Privately, by an individual client 
(also called out of pocket)
Where Does the Money Come 
From to Pay for SLP Services?
If SLPs are to be paid, the money must be 
generated to supply the coffers that keep 
the payments coming. Most are paid by 
an employing agency (a private practice, 
hospital, rehabilitation center, etc.). Self-
employed SLPs typically pay themselves 
a fixed salary or a proportion of profits 
from their business revenues. Worldwide, 
funds paid to SLPs working with adults 
tend to be generated through govern-
ment-sponsored programs, health insur-
ance plans, private pay, philanthropic 
donations, or a combination of these.
Government-Sponsored Programs
In much of the world, in fact in most 
countries outside of the United States, 
national health care plans cover most of 
the costs of health-related services. That 
is, the government pays for a large pro-
portion of health care costs for citizens 
who need health-related services or medi-
cine. Throughout the world, nationalized 
health care plans were established to pro-
vide free or low-cost needed health care 
to all citizens. Examples are the United 
Kingdom’s national health care system, 
the National Health Service (NHS), ini-
tiated in the mid-1940s, and Australia’s 

Contexts for Providing Excellent Services   221
similar health care system launched in the 
late 1970s.
A majority of SLPs who work pri-
marily with adults in non-U.S. countries 
in which SLP is a recognized profession 
are paid a salary by an employer, such 
as a hospital or rehabilitation agency. 
Their employer typically receives all or a 
majority of the funds to pay them from 
a government agency, such as a national 
ministry of health. In such cases, the SLP 
is typically expected to work for a speci-
fied number of hours per day for a certain 
number of days per week, providing diag-
nostic and treatment services as needed to 
anyone who needs them in a given facility 
or set of facilities.
In the United States, federal health 
care plans include Medicare, Medicaid, 
and funding for military veterans, all initi-
ated in the 1960s. Medicare is the U.S. fed-
eral and state health insurance program 
for people who are 65 years or older and 
for people with disabilities and end-stage 
renal disease. Medicare Part A addresses 
inpatient care in skilled nursing, hospital 
acute care, rehabilitation hospital, and 
home health settings. To qualify for Part A  
coverage, the patient must meet criteria 
for needing a certain amount of “skilled” 
nursing and/or rehabilitation care. Within 
Part A, there are five levels of qualification, 
influenced by the amount of medical care 
and rehabilitation a person needs. Medi-
care reimbursement rates are higher for 
addressing needs for intensive intervention 
compared to lesser levels of care. Further 
aspects of skilled care are detailed below.
Medicare Part B addresses outpa-
tient rehabilitation and long-term care. 
Since 1999, the total amount that may be 
reimbursed for a given patient for SLP 
and physical therapy services, combined, 
has been capped. This amount may be 
exceeded if further treatment is preap-
proved based on appropriate justification. 
Medicare Part D is a program to help de- 
fray the costs of prescription medication.
Medicaid is the U.S. federal and state 
health insurance program for people with 
limited income and financial resources, 
including older people and people with 
disabilities. Medicaid can help cover some 
of the costs not covered through Medi-
care, such as preventive care and glasses. 
The distribution of Medicare and Medic-
aid funds, and the management of how 
those funds are approved based on the 
justification for services provided, is often 
coordinated by an insurance intermedi-
ary, a professional insurance company 
that ensures that Medicare and Medicaid 
policies are obeyed and that funds are 
distributed as government regulations 
dictate. The U.S. Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) funding helps pay for health 
care services incurred by people who 
have served in the U.S. armed forces. Such 
services are usually provided through 
specialized VA hospitals or clinics but are 
sometimes offered through facilities that 
serve the general public when VA facili-
ties are not available. Worldwide, as the 
proportion of the world’s population over 
age 65 continues to swell, there are more 
and more people who are outliving their 
accrued savings, and there is more and 
more depletion of and competition for 
government-sponsored funds.
Health Insurance
Health insurance plans are contracted 
arrangements that enable individuals to 
receive health care at a set or reduced 
rate. The care may include diagnostic and 
treatment services, medicine, and durable 
medical goods (supplies needed for medi-
cal care or rehabilitation, which might 
include hearing aids, alternative and 
augmentative communications devices, 

222   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
and adaptive technology). Typically, the 
people who are insured still have to pay 
something for their care. This is often in 
the form of:
• an annual deductible, a certain 
amount of expense they must pay 
for themselves before the insurance 
funds start to cover their health care 
bills; or
• a copay, or a portion of the costs 
they pay themselves, for various 
services, prescription medications, 
and medical equipment.
The majority of people in the United 
States who have health insurance get 
their insurance through their employer 
or through the employer of a parent or 
spouse. In employer-sponsored insur-
ance arrangements, the employer and the 
employee share the cost of enrollment in 
a medical plan. Often, employees have 
choices about the level of insurance cov-
erage they wish to have. More expensive 
insurance plans tend to cover more types 
of services (such as vision care and den-
tistry) and may entail lower deductible 
and copay amounts.
Some people who do not have 
employer-sponsored insurance opt to buy 
insurance for themselves and, if appropri-
ate, their families. They typically do this 
as protection in case there is a traumatic 
accident or devastating illness that leads 
to unwieldy medical costs. Some people 
who have employer-sponsored insurance 
may opt for additional insurance coverage 
so that they are especially well protected 
in case there are needs for costly medical 
care in the future. Although recent regu-
latory initiatives at the federal level have 
improved the affordability of some forms 
of health care, many U.S. citizens who do 
not have employer-sponsored insurance 
live without insurance coverage and are 
vulnerable to major financial hardships if 
costly medical conditions arise.
Private Pay
Private pay, or out-of-pocket pay, is pay-
ment from an individual. It does not 
involve any insurance company or govern-
ment-sponsored plan. It is paid through 
an arrangement between an individual 
(the client or a significant other) and the 
SLP or the SLP’s employer. Private-pay 
arrangements allow for SLPs to provide 
services to people with chronic communi-
cation problems for much longer periods 
of time than tend to be allowed by other 
means. Many freestanding aphasia cen-
ters offer services to people who will ben-
efit from them no matter how long such 
services might be needed. Such centers 
offer private diagnosis and treatment ses-
sions, along with therapy, conversation, 
and support for groups of people with 
aphasia and related disorders and their 
caregivers. Clients or members of such 
centers pay privately for the services they 
need for as long as they wish to engage in 
those services. Group formats, in addition 
to being effective for enhancing commu-
nication skills and quality of interactions, 
also allow for hourly rates for services 
to be less costly than they would be for 
individual sessions, especially in a more 
medically focused context.
Mixed Funding Options
In and outside the United States, even 
where government programs pay for 
health care coverage, individuals often 
opt to purchase private insurance. This is 
to enable them to afford more expensive 

Contexts for Providing Excellent Services   223
and at times better quality services should 
their health care needs exceed what is 
typically covered by a government plan. 
Individuals can also pay privately to sup-
plement what might be covered through 
a government or private insurance plan.
Philanthropic Donations
Many service-providing agencies, espe-
cially not-for-profit and nongovernmental 
agencies, rely on financial contributions 
from donors to support the financial base 
from which they pay clinical employees. 
Even for-profit agencies have been tend-
ing to develop their own affiliated not-for-
profit foundations or partner with other 
philanthropic group to help raise funds 
to support clinical services. Fundraising 
campaigns may include special events 
(e.g., 5k or 10k runs or marathons, dance-
a-thons, galas, concerts), annual fund 
campaigns, and planned giving programs 
(e.g., gift annuities and charitable remain-
der trusts, charitable life insurance, and 
gifts of goods (e.g., real estate, antiques, 
artwork) to be bequeathed to the agency 
upon the donor’s death (Hallowell & 
Henri, 2013).
How Do Service-Providing 
Agencies Get Paid?
There are varied schemes that determine 
just what a government-based or insur-
ance program will pay a service-providing  
agency for clinical services. At a very basic 
level, these include:
• Fee-for-service, a rate paid for a 
specific diagnostic or intervention 
service, which may be based on 
units of time or based on numbers 
of visits or sessions provided by 
each professional in each discipline, 
regardless of their duration
• Case rate, a fee for treating a patient 
based on his or her diagnosis, 
regardless of which specific services 
he or she is provided
• Per diem, a set fee paid on a daily 
basis, regardless of which specific 
services he or she is provided
• Capitation, a fixed sum based on 
the number of people enrolled 
in a contracted health care plan, 
regardless of how many of those 
people actually receive services and 
regardless of which services are 
provided
What Makes Services Provided 
by SLPs Reimbursable?
For insurance-sponsored services to be 
covered (i.e., reimbursable), they must 
meet the requirements of the program or 
company that offers such services. Those 
requirements are often enforced by a 
third-party payer (the agency that is actu-
ally handling the payment for services). 
The third-party payer is often the insur-
ance company through which an individ-
ual has an insurance plan. In cases of gov-
ernment-sponsored plans, the third-party 
payer might be an insurance company that 
has a contract with a government agency 
to handle administration of the plan, and 
the administration is carried out much as 
would be done through regular insurance 
plans. The requirements vary according 
to the specific plan that an individual has. 
Factors that promote the likelihood of 
successful billing are described here and 
summarized in Box 14–2.

224   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Effective Documentation Meeting All 
Requirements for Reimbursement
No matter how justifiable and high qual-
ity our services, if we do not provide 
the type and quality of documentation 
required for reimbursement, a third-party 
payer is unlikely to pay.
A Physician’s Order
Sometimes the first order for a given 
patient new to a caseload is for a diag-
nostic session and a second order is 
made later for treatment based on what 
is learned in the diagnostic process. More 
commonly, an order is given for an assess-
ment and a specified number of treatment 
sessions per week for a specified number 
of weeks. The physicians’ order may be 
on paper, through electronic media, or 
conveyed by telephone, depending on 
the specific requirements of the insurance 
intermediary.
Preauthorization for Services 
by the Third-Party Payer
Preauthorization is commonly but not 
always required. If it is, it must be obtained 
before any SLP services are offered. The 
SLP must know whether preauthorization 
is required; if it is, he or she must know 
how to obtain it. Sometimes it requires just 
a simple telephone call. It may also be Inter-
net based or accomplished through a paper 
document. Of course, the clinician must 
also be savvy about requirements for cov-
ered services and documentation and about 
effective ways to justify services. Services 
tend to be preauthorized if they meet the 
criteria for reimbursable services and the 
appropriate documentation is provided.
Evidence That the Services Are 
Actually Covered by the Plan
No matter how much good a specific type 
of treatment might be for a given indi-
Factors That Promote the  
Likelihood of Successful Billing
• Effective documentation meeting all requirements for 
reimbursement
• A physician’s order for SLP services
• Preauthorization for services by the third-party payer
• Evidence that the services are actually covered by the plan
• Evidence of the need for skilled services
• Confirmation that the methods used are evidence based
• Documentation of the life-affecting nature of services
• Evidence of treatment progress
• Good relationships with decision makers at the agencies 
that reimburse us
Box
14–2

Contexts for Providing Excellent Services   225
vidual, if his or her plan does not cover 
it, the treatment will not be reimbursable. 
Although it is increasingly uncommon, 
some private and employer-sponsored 
health plans, for example, do not allow for 
coverage of any SLP services at all. Most 
limit the number of diagnostic and treat-
ment sessions (or units of time spent in 
such sessions) allowed. Part of the process 
of ensuring coverage is requesting autho-
rization to continue providing services 
once a previously approved amount of 
service has already been provided.
Evidence of the  
Need for Skilled Services
Important qualifications for reimburs-
able services in much of the world, and 
(as mentioned earlier) required by Medi-
care and Medicaid in the United States, 
include that the service provided require 
the skills and abilities of a highly trained 
clinician. There are two types of skill 
entailed in skilled services. One pertains 
to the skills of the clinician providing the 
services. The other pertains to the level of 
skill required to carry out the actual ser-
vices being rendered.
In the United States, a skilled clinician 
is considered as one with a minimum of a 
master’s degree in a program with national 
accreditation by the Council on Aca-
demic Accreditation in Speech-Language 
Pathology (or an approved equivalent 
degree). There may be an exception to 
this in some cases where students or clini-
cal fellows (e.g., U.S. clinicians who have 
a master’s degree but who are still work-
ing toward national certification and/or 
state licensure) engage in clinical activi-
ties that meet stringent criteria for skilled 
services supervised by a licensed and cer-
tified SLP. In most countries outside the 
United States where SLP is a recognized 
profession, a skilled clinician is one with a 
minimum of a 3- or 4-year undergraduate 
degree in which the majority of the degree 
program has been focused on clinical edu-
cation (course work and supervised clini-
cal practice) in the field.
In the United States, “skilled” ser-
vices are those for which it can be docu-
mented that people need certain types and 
intensity of care that would not typically 
be available for extended periods of time. 
These may include, for example, intensive 
wound care by nursing, dysphagia man-
agement or communication intervention 
by an SLP, intervention to improve safety 
and independence by occupational therapy, 
or treatment for strengthening and mobility 
by physical therapy. Often a combination 
of such services is provided in SNFs.
Services that are considered to require 
the skills of a qualified SLP include ongo-
ing monitoring, assessment, feedback, and 
treatment modification based on patient 
needs, desires, and performance. Services 
that do not require such skills (unskilled 
services) include oversight of rote exer-
cises, repetitive drill and practice, and no 
requirement for evaluation or feedback to 
the patient (Sampson, Johnson, & Brown, 
2013). Given the expectation that the skills 
of a fully qualified clinician are required 
for the services to be paid for, the onus 
is on the SLP to document clearly and 
convincingly that all services provided 
require such skills.
Confirmation That the Methods 
Used Are Evidence Based
Evidence-based practice is at the heart of 
justifiable health care services. If there is 

226   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
not documented evidence that a certain 
procedure, process, or method has been 
shown to lead to clear improvements in 
people with conditions similar to the per-
son we are treating, then the service we are 
providing does not constitute evidence- 
based practice. Requirements for such evi-
dence vary. In some cases, the SLP may 
not be required to document the evidence 
for each method he or she uses unless the 
third-party payer denies preauthorization 
or reimbursement. In cases where an appeal 
must be made to contest a denial (discussed 
further in this chapter), the SLP almost 
always must substantiate the evidence base 
that justifies the service provided.
Documentation of the  
Life-Affecting Nature of Services
It is not sufficient to rely on our own 
confidence that our services have mean-
ingful impacts on the lives of the people 
we serve. We must document how this is 
the case. Just what is to be documented 
in this regard varies according to clinical 
contexts. We typically must provide sup-
port, for example, for our effectiveness 
in enabling functional communication, 
medical management, independence, and 
quality of life of the people we serve.
A common requirement is documen-
tation of how our services are “medically 
necessary.” Medical necessity is a loosely 
defined term, applied inconsistently 
among third-party payers. Suggestions 
for defending the medical necessity of 
intervention to address cognitive-linguis-
tic challenges include documenting how 
improved communication abilities may:
• Enhance medical management 
through better interaction with 
providers
• Prevent further decline
• Promote intact abilities
• Improve safety
• Enhance independence
Including statements from clients, sig-
nificant others, and other members of the 
rehabilitation team helps to support such 
documentation.
Evidence of Treatment Progress
If we cannot document that a person we 
are treating is making gains in treatment, 
then payers are unlikely to continue reim-
bursing us for our services for that per-
son. Daily, weekly, and monthly progress 
notes help us to track gains relative to 
specific functional communication goals. 
Specific documentation requirements 
vary among payers, so it is important to 
be familiar with what is required by the 
third-party payers associated with each of 
the people we serve. If there are changes 
in an individual’s health or social status 
that might negatively affect communi-
cation improvement, it is important to 
document these. The onus is on the cli-
nician to justify how a lack of continued 
improvement is not a failure of the client 
to engage, the client’s lack of potential 
for improvement, or a failure of the clini-
cian or treatment program. When work-
ing with people who have degenerative 
conditions, documenting treatment prog-
ress can be a major challenge. We must 
address that challenge directly by:
• Strategically selecting metrics used 
to track improvement
• Advocating vigorously for people 
who need and benefit from direct 
intervention to help slow the 
progression of symptoms and 

Contexts for Providing Excellent Services   227
enhance quality of life, medical 
management, and social interaction
Good Relationships With Decision 
Makers at Third-Party Payer Agencies
When we have positive professional 
relationships with decision makers who 
understand and respect what we do, they 
are more likely to make judgments in our 
favor. Ongoing educational and advocacy 
efforts with case managers and utilization 
reviewers at insurance companies are 
vital to healthy business relationships. If 
possible, don’t wait to have a conflict with 
them to educate them about the great ser-
vice that you provide. Do so in a construc-
tive and friendly way. If you are new to an 
agency or you learn of new case manag-
ers or utilization reviewers working for a 
payer with which you are likely to have 
frequent billings, send a friendly intro-
ductory email with Web links or a letter 
and brochures about what you do. Take 
advantage of the fact that many insurance 
companies hold regular continuing edu-
cation events; offer to provide a workshop 
on evidence-based practice in SLP. Most 
case managers and utilization reviewers 
are not SLPs. Common backgrounds are 
in business or nursing, not communica-
tion disorders. Thus, helping them to 
learn about the life-changing work that 
we do helps to promote our services as 
well as payment of our bills.
What Are the Primary Reasons 
for Which Reimbursement for 
SLP Services Are Denied?
The reasons for denying reimbursement 
are typically related to:
• Clerical errors on the part of the 
clinician or other professionals in 
the service-providing agency
• Misunderstanding or lack of 
knowledge on the part of the third-
party payer’s case manager
• Failure to document each of the 
items listed above regarding what 
makes services reimbursable
By proactively addressing to these key 
reasons for denial, we can promote effec-
tive reimbursement (Hallowell & Henri, 
2013).
What Do We Do if We Are Denied 
Reimbursement for Our Services?
If we have adhered to all of the require-
ments of reimbursable services described 
above, we ideally will receive payment 
for our services from a third-party payer. 
Of course, maintaining ongoing positive 
and cooperative relationships with insur-
ers is the best means of avoiding denials 
in the first place and appealing them suc-
cessfully if we must. However, no matter 
how superb our efforts, sometimes our 
requests for reimbursement are denied. 
If this is the case, it is important that we 
appeal the denial. The success of our 
appeal depends on the excellence of our 
documentation and on our persistence in 
pursuing the appeal (Hallowell & Chapey, 
2008b; Hallowell & Henri, 2013). The first 
step in appealing a denial is typically the 
submission of an appeal form or letter 
along with associated clinical documen-
tation to the third-party payer.
Additional steps to contest a denial 
may involve having a patient or signifi-
cant other make a complaint to the insur-
ance company. Most payer organizations 

228   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
have a customer liaison who serves as 
a point of contact for inquiries or com-
plaints from patients covered by the plans 
the agency oversees. Patients who have 
employer-sponsored insurance plans may 
file complaints with the human resources 
department of their employers.
In the United States, the clinician, a 
representative of the service-providing 
agency, the patient, or a caregiver may 
also file a complaint with the state insur-
ance commissioner. For continued, egre-
gious denials of reimbursement, other 
possibilities include attracting media 
coverage to shed public light on ethical 
questions related to coverage for services. 
Of course, it is always best to foster and 
maintain the most positive of professional 
relationships and use such tactics only as 
a last resort. Still, pursuing what is right 
is important and may build public aware-
ness of the needs of people with commu-
nication disorders.
In the everyday hectic work life of a 
clinician, the time and effort required to 
appeal denials for reimbursement — and 
the fact that this type of work is truly not 
enjoyable for most of us — make it easy to 
avoid the task altogether. It does not help 
that such efforts themselves are not reim-
bursable. However, it is of paramount 
importance that we all appeal every 
denial. Why? First, if we don’t appeal it, we 
won’t get reimbursed for worthy services 
we already provided. Second, we would 
be setting a precedent (or providing fur-
ther incentive) for that payer to leave our 
bills unpaid. Third, we would be tacitly 
agreeing that our services are not valu-
able. Fourth, when we do not promote the 
value of our own professional services, 
we detract from the perceived value of 
SLP services. In sum, making a commit-
ment to appealing every single denial 
and following through with that com-
mitment are important acts of advocacy, 
not only for ourselves and the people we 
serve but for the whole of our profession.
How Do Health Care Finance 
and Cost-Control Systems 
Affect Clinical Services?
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, spiral-
ing government health care expenditures 
led to ongoing and sometimes dramatic 
changes in the way health-related services 
are funded. Related cost-cutting schemes 
have affected virtually every area of 
health-related practice. More and more, 
the responsibility for allocating health care  
funds has been transferred from federal to 
provincial or state governments, a move-
ment that has coincided with ongoing 
reforms in policies and reimbursement 
schemes aimed at cutting costs.
Given drastic cost-saving measures, 
national insurance schemes worldwide 
now tend to be aimed largely at the needs 
of people who have insufficient resources 
to pay for their own health care needs. 
Many with the means to pay for private 
care through private hospitals and clinics 
opt to do so. Those with higher income 
also tend to obtain their own private 
insurance coverage. As a result, in much 
of the world, a divergence in public versus 
private health care facilities has evolved. 
In most of Australia, Asia, Europe, Africa, 
Central America, and South America, 
wherever there are significant disparities 
in income among local citizens, the nature 
of public versus private hospitals is read-
ily apparent. Private hospitals tend to 
have shorter wait times for appointments, 
newer facilities, more modern technology, 
and more “boutique” or elective sorts of 
services (e.g., cosmetic plastic surgery).

Contexts for Providing Excellent Services   229
Worldwide, as costs for private medi-
cal care and insurance have risen over the 
past two decades, even citizens with rela-
tively higher income have sought publi-
cally funded care. This has led to greater 
financial strain on public hospitals and 
clinics, which has led to even more dire 
cost-cutting schemes. The impact on the 
private sector has been great as well, as 
there is greater competition for dwin-
dling private-payer funds. Across varied 
national systems globally, cost-cutting 
measures have reduced the amount and 
types of services that may be provided to 
people who want it and need it. Health 
care cost-saving tactics used by govern-
ment agencies and insurance companies 
are summarized in Box 14–3.
What Are the Impacts of  
Health Care Cost Cutting 
and Cost Control on Clinical 
Aphasiology Services?
Reimbursement rates for SLP services, 
and the means by which they have been 
determined, have fluctuated over the past 
three decades. Managed care is a term 
used to capture the combined goals of
• Controlling health care costs 
through a system of care 
authorization that is controlled 
largely by physicians plus case 
managers and utilization reviewers 
employed by third-party payers
• Coordinating care to reduce waste, 
abuse, and redundancy of services
• Ensuring access to care, quality of 
services, and positive outcomes
Now, across health care contexts globally, 
aspects of managed care are so pervasive 
that the term is used less and less; it is 
now commonly assumed that such strate-
gies for managing care are in place. The 
goals of managed care are echoed in the 
frameworks of several current regulatory 
initiatives. Consider, for example, the 
similar goals espoused by the Institute for 
Health Care Improvement, in its “Triple 
Aim Initiative”:
• Improving the patient experience 
of care (including quality and 
satisfaction)
Health Care Cost-Savings Tactics Used by 
Government Agencies and Insurance Companies
• Required preauthorization for diagnostic and treatment 
services
• Incentives to physicians for not authorizing specialty or 
rehabilitation services
• Stringent billing review and increased denials for billed 
services
• Reduced reimbursement rates
• Reduced frequency, intensity, and duration of services 
paid for
Box
14–3

230   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Improving the health of 
populations
• Reducing the per capita cost of 
health care (Institute for Health 
Care Improvement, n.d.)
Many people who would have been 
hospitalized for serious neurological 
events (e.g., stroke and brain injuries) in 
the past are discharged from emergency 
rooms without even being admitted or are 
admitted for only brief hospital stays and 
then are discharged to home or to rehabil-
itation facilities. This has led to decreased 
continuity of care and to shorter time win-
dows in which people with neurogenic 
cognitive-linguistic disorders may be 
seen by SLPs. Those factors have made it 
such that the timing of treatment and pri-
oritization of what aphasiologists actually 
do in varied service delivery contexts are 
vital considerations in intervention plan-
ning, a topic we discuss in further detail 
in Chapters 23 and 24.
In a system focused on cost control, 
the perceived “customers” in health care 
were once the patients/clients/consum-
ers themselves. Now the customer is 
more typically seen as the third-party 
payer. The professionals making decisions 
about allowable services (case managers 
and utilization reviewers) are often not 
educated about the nature of neurogenic 
communication disorders. Having people 
other than qualified providers determine 
which people may receive which services 
and at what intensity and for what dura-
tion generally does not constitute optimal 
care. In the United States, a Medicare cap 
on SLP and physical therapy combined 
reimbursements has not only exacerbated 
restrictions on treatment, but has made 
it such that clinicians across disciplines 
must make challenging and often arbi-
trary decisions about the priority of one 
discipline over the other.
Overall, the frequency, intensity, and 
duration of services we are allowed to pro-
vide have been reduced and held under 
greater scrutiny. Treatment for neurogenic 
disorders is limited often to brief acute 
and subacute care stages, and rehabilita-
tion care within the first 6 months poston-
set (Katz et al., 2000; Verna, Davidson, & 
Rose, 2009). Requirements for evidence of 
progress in treatment has led to reduced 
coverage of people with degenerative con-
ditions, who often do not meet the crite-
ria for consistent improvement from the 
initiation of treatment to discharge. Also, 
people with low income and people from 
underrepresented ethnic and racial groups 
have disproportionately greater challenges 
in accessing coverage for the services they 
need (Hallowell & Henri, 2013).
Given that SLPs typically provide 
intervention for both swallowing and 
cognitive-communicative disorders, 
another serious challenge is that far more 
time, effort, and funding are allocated to 
dysphagia over intervention for cognitive-
linguistic disorders in medical settings ​
— ​almost three times as much in coun-
tries where such data have been reported 
(American Speech-Language-Hearing As- 
sociation, 2013; Enderby & Petheram, 2002; 
Rose, Ferguson, Power, Togher, & Worrall, 
2014; Verna et al., 2009). A trend to allow 
reimbursement services that are consid-
ered “medically necessary” as opposed 
to those promoting quality of life has 
supported this prioritization. Relatedly, 
professional colleagues from other disci-
plines more easily understand the physi-
cal nature of swallowing and eating than 
they do the abstract nature of language 
and communication. It is thus easier for 
SLPs to rationalize and receive authoriza-

Contexts for Providing Excellent Services   231
tions and reimbursement for dysphagia 
services (Enderby & Petheram, 2002).
Adding to this challenge is that many 
SLPs working in medical contexts actually 
prefer the concreteness of working with 
swallowing disorders over the abstract-
ness and complexity of work in cognition 
and language. Furthermore, practicing 
SLPs have also reported that the clinical 
education programs from which they grad-
uated underemphasized content about  
cognitive-linguistic disorders. Foster, O’Hal­
loran, Rose, and Worrall (2014) report that 
practicing SLPs rate themselves as more 
confident in swallowing than language 
and rate their mastery of knowledge and 
skills in swallowing as greater than their 
mastery in language disorders.
Another repercussion of a cost-
focused health care system is that the 
integrity of separate health professions 
has been challenged through the use of 
aides and assistants. Use of support per-
sonnel saves on costs because they are 
paid far less than fully qualified profes-
sionals. Such individuals are often trained 
in transdisciplinary modes to provide 
basic drill-and-practice routines as they 
attempt to replace skilled services from 
qualified professionals.
When agencies that employ reha-
bilitation professionals face financial 
pressures, these pressures are often felt 
directly by those professionals themselves 
in the form of cost-savings and revenue-
generation pressure. Such pressures often 
lead to serious ethical challenges for clini-
cal professionals, a topic that we consider 
in further detail in Chapter 15.
Globally, government policies have 
been developed to alleviate some of the 
challenges of health care cost controls 
and access to care. Of course, government 
policies can also impose barriers to access 
to care. Thus, it is important for aphasi-
ologists to stay abreast of local, regional, 
and federal regulations that affect access 
to SLP services for people who need them 
and to take seriously their role as politi-
cally engaged citizens, speaking up for 
and with people who may not be able to 
communicate so well on their own behalf. 
In Chapter 15, we consider specific actions 
that clinical aphasiologists may take to 
promote access to services.
Lest we end this chapter with only 
the bleakest of news about health care cost 
controls, let’s also recognize that some 
good things have arisen from managed 
health care. Most important, the height-
ened focus on evidence-based practice 
and accountability has stimulated new 
research initiatives and priorities of clini-
cians, researchers, academic institutions, 
and professional organizations. We are 
now required to consider how our ser-
vices lead to life-affecting changes and 
to document that the methods we use are 
evidence based. Such advancements help 
not only to justify our services but also to 
improve the way we diagnose and treat 
people with neurogenic cognitive-com-
municative disorders.
Changes in the positive direction also 
include improved coordination of care 
through enhanced recordkeeping, and 
increasingly automated billing and docu-
mentation programs that free up more of 
clinicians’ time to engage in direct inter-
vention. Also, to reduce costs of health 
care services, many insurance companies 
have stepped up support for preventive 
care and healthy lifestyle education. Such 
efforts may help to reduce the risk of 
stroke and brain injury and slow the pro-
gression of neurodegenerative conditions.
Clinicians and clinical administrators 
who have been in practice over the past 

232   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
two or three decades commonly observe 
that the business savvy of clinicians has 
been enhanced through an increased per-
sonal sense of investment in their agen-
cies’ revenue generation and professional 
operations. Clinicians now tend to play 
a more critical role in marketing, billing, 
and quality assurance, for example.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 With a partner, review the list of roles 
of SLPs who specialize in acquired 
neurogenic communication disorders. 
Discuss which are your personal most 
and least favorite roles and why.
	 3.	 With a partner, review the list of clini-
cal service settings described. Discuss 
the pros and cons you would consider 
if you were contemplating a profes-
sional position in each type of setting.
	 4.	 If you are a student, consider organiz-
ing a panel of professional SLPs who 
work in varied contexts to come speak 
to your class or to an extracurricular 
group about their experiences work-
ing in varied settings.
	 5.	 If you had a neurogenic language dis-
order, in what type of clinical setting 
would you choose to seek treatment 
for it?
	 6.	 Research the agencies that provide 
services for adults with neurogenic 
communication disorders in your 
local your community. Learn about 
the types of services provided there. 
If possible, contact an SLP at each (or, 
if appropriate, make such contacts 
through a university-based aphasi-
ologist). Consider visiting and per-
haps even observing related clinical 
or social activities.
	 7.	 Describe what types of SLP services 
would be appropriate for a dying per-
son under hospice care.
	 8.	 Describe specific ways that you might 
ensure relationship-centered interac-
tions when providing clinical sessions 
via telepractice.
	 9.	 Compare and contrast the three pri-
mary types of rehabilitation teams.
10.	 Summarize the sources of funding 
that support services in clinical apha-
siology in your local region.
11.	 Describe the opportunities for access-
ing SLP services in your region for 
adults who have little or no income.
12.	 Consider the list of factors that pro-
mote the likelihood of successful bill-
ing, summarized in Box 14–2. Describe 
how a potential employer might be 
interested in your knowledge about 
these if you were seeking a clinical 
position in his or her agency.
13.	 Describe the ways in which promot-
ing successful billing practice is an 
act of advocacy for adults with neu-
rogenic cognitive-communicative 
disorders.
14.	 Describe what is meant by the follow-
ing statement: “Making a commit-
ment to appealing every single denial 
and following through with that com-
mitment are important acts of advo-
cacy, not only for ourselves and the 
people we serve but for the whole of 
our profession.”
15.	 List specific steps that you might take 
to enhance the proportion of time you 
spend as a clinician treating cognitive-
communicative disorders compared 
to swallowing disorders in a rehabili-
tation setting.

Contexts for Providing Excellent Services   233
16.	 Describe how trends in health care 
over the past three decades have 
influenced the following for people 
with aphasia and related disorders:
a.	 Affordability of care
b.	 Access to care
c.	 Quality of care
d.	 Ethics in care delivery
See the companion website for additional 
learning and teaching materials.


235
Chapter
15
Engaging Proactively in Advocacy 
and Legal and Ethical Concerns
As we note throughout this book, speech-
language pathologists (SLPs) play critical 
roles as advocates in virtually every aspect 
of clinical and scholarly work in the field. 
In this chapter, we consider the importance 
of advocacy related to ethical and legal 
concerns. We also consider the interplay 
among morality, ethics, and law and how 
these constructs are so vital to our work 
related to access to care, human rights, and 
judgments about competence and decision 
making. Finally, we explore how the finan-
cial pressures felt in many of our work 
environments lead to ethical dilemmas for 
clinicians and what can be done to proac-
tively to address such dilemmas.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 How may aphasiologists promote 
access to SLP services and communi-
cation support?
	 2.	 How are morality, ethics, and law 
relevant to advocacy for people with 
acquired neurogenic disorders of lan-
guage and cognition?
	 3.	 What is the role of the SLP in sup-
porting the rights of individuals with 
aphasia and related disorders?
	 4.	 How do aphasiologists engage in 
decisions regarding competence and 
decision making?
	 5.	 How do financial conflicts of inter-
est affect the practice of clinical 
aphasiologists?
	 6.	 What are potential means of helping 
address financial conflicts of interest 
in clinical practice?
How May Aphasiologists Promote 
Access to SLP Services and 
Communication Support?
Worldwide changes in health care poli-
cies, along with sweeping changes in 
the ways that health care is delivered 
and paid for, have dramatically affected 
access to rehabilitation services for people 
who would benefit from them. Although 
there have been recent significant gains 
in access to care in much of the develop-
ing world, there have also been increas-
ing limitations — and threats of further 
limitations — for people with aphasia and 
related disorders. This is especially the 
case in countries where private insurance 
and federally sponsored health care plans 
have undergone continuing policy and 

236   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
cost-cutting modifications over the past 
three decades. Actions that aphasiologists 
may take to promote access to their pro-
fessional services are listed in Box 15–1. 
Key strategies are described here.
Enhance Awareness of 
Communication as a Human Right
As we have discussed in previous chap-
ters, human communication is a right. 
People with disabilities have equal rights; 
older people have rights, too. Yet health 
and disability programs and policies 
globally are sorely lacking in terms of a 
focus on both aging and disability (Wick-
enden, 2013; World Health Organization, 
n.d.-a). Despite great efforts since the 
1980s represented through the First and 
Second World Assemblies on Ageing, 
The United Nations Principles for Older 
Persons, the World Bank Office of Dis-
ability and Development, HelpAge Inter-
national — and efforts of thousands of non-
governmental organizations addressing 
Actions That Aphasiologists May Take to  
Promote Access to Their Professional Services
• Educate others about neurogenic communication 
disorders, their life-affecting consequences, and the need 
for intervention and support
• Provide truly excellent clinical services
• Enhance awareness of communication as a human right
• Stay abreast of political forces and policy developments 
that influence health care and wellness
• Educate and mobilize consumers to advocate for 
themselves
• Educate and market to current and potential referral 
sources
• Appeal denials of all treatment authorization and 
reimbursement
• Contribute financially to political action committees 
that engage in professional advocacy with government 
agencies
• In writing and through in-person visits, educate and 
express concerns and needs to elected officials and those 
running for office
• Join professional advocacy networks through professional 
associations
• Engage in and promote evidence-based practice research
• Disseminate information about positive clinical outcomes
• Mentor future clinicians about their roles as advocates and 
provide opportunities for hands-on advocacy work for 
clinical students
Box
15–1

Engaging Proactively in Advocacy and Legal and Ethical Concerns   237
health, aging, and disability — few such 
initiatives address communication dis-
orders or even mention communication 
disorders in policy statements or working 
papers (Hartley, 1998; Wylie et al., 2013). 
Also, less than 1% of humanitarian aid 
is allocated for older people and people 
with disabilities (HelpAge International 
and Handicap International, 2011). This is 
a travesty, given how vital one’s ability to 
communicate is to one’s sense of human-
ity, independence, sense of fulfillment in a 
social world, and quality of life.
The World Report on Disability (World 
Health Organization & World Bank, 2011) 
emphasizes a hierarchy of societal exclu-
sion, in recognition that disabilities related 
to cognition, communication, and behav-
ior are more marginalizing than are physi-
cal disabilities and blindness. Yet physical 
disabilities tend to attract the greatest 
attention from the medical community 
and capture the majority of health care 
funding globally.
The International Communication 
Project (http://www.communication2014​
.com), a movement to advance commu-
nication as a human right, was launched 
in 2014. Anyone interested in supporting 
that cause is invited to sign a pledge on 
the organization’s website and to share 
information about related awareness-
raising and advocacy campaigns.
Many hospitals, clinics, and other 
health and wellness agencies across the 
globe have policies regarding the rights 
of the people they serve. With increas-
ing frequency, these are seen posted on 
the walls of such agencies and distrib-
uted in print and made available online. 
In some countries, the accrediting bodies 
overseeing health care agencies provide 
guidance and sometimes accreditation 
requirements pertaining to human rights 
of health care consumers. An example is 
the U.S. Joint Commission (2010) “road-
map” for hospitals, which addresses 
such important topics as communication 
standards, patient-centered care, and cul-
tural competence and provides tutorial 
materials for promoting patients’ rights, 
assessment tools, and information about 
laws and other regulations. The National 
Aphasia Association (http://www.apha​
sia.org) offers print and downloadable 
documents pertaining to the rights of 
people with aphasia and also to the rights 
of caregivers.
In addition to supporting awareness 
of rights of people with communication 
challenges, clinical aphasiologists have 
roles to play in ethical and legal issues 
related to the rights of the people they 
serve. These are discussed later in this 
chapter.
Raise Awareness Among Laypeople
Educating others about aphasia and 
related disorders is fundamental to our 
role as advocates. For someone who has 
never learned about aphasia and related 
disorders, communicating with a per-
son who has one may lead to incorrect 
conclusions about his or her intelligence 
or mental stability. Despite the fact that 
aphasia has high incidence and preva-
lence rates in comparison to many other 
conditions, several studies have shown 
that, across the globe, laypeople in gen-
eral lack awareness of what it is (Code 
et al., 2001; Flynn, Cumberland, & Mar-
shall, 2009; Mavi, 2007; McCann, Tunni-
cliffe, & Anderson, 2013; Patterson et al., 
2012; Simmons-Mackie, Code, Armstrong, 
Stiegler, & Elman, 2002).
People with aphasia report that a 
lack of awareness of aphasia and resul-
tant negative assumptions and imposition 

238   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
of stereotypes contribute to the negative 
impacts of their communication chal-
lenges (Worrall et al., 2011). Lack of knowl-
edge about neurogenic communication 
disorders may also be a barrier to commu-
nity reintegration (Patterson et al., 2012). 
Other negative consequences include 
that agencies and donors that could help 
fund services for people with aphasia and 
related challenges are unlikely to do so if 
they are unfamiliar with aphasia (Elman, 
Ogar, & Elman, 2000). It is vital that we 
help people with neurogenic commu-
nication disorders educate others about 
their conditions. Also, having family and 
friends clarify with others just what apha-
sia and related disorders are and are not 
can be a great way for them to advocate 
for a loved one.
Means of raising awareness about 
neurogenic cognitive-linguistic disorders 
include sharing stories, videos, and pho-
tos via social media and publishing of arti-
cles for laypeople in newspapers, blogs, 
and in the popular press. When doing so, 
it is important to use relevant terminology 
rather than simplifying explanations so 
much that an opportunity to enhance oth-
ers’ educated reference to such conditions 
is lost. For example, when writing an arti-
cle for a local newspaper, do not avoid use 
of the term aphasia. Rather, use the term 
and explain what it means. When celeb-
rities and public officials acquire neuro-
genic communication disorders, draw on 
public interest by turning news stories 
into public education opportunities.
Initiate or take part in expanding 
aphasia- and dementia-friendly commu-
nities. Several organizations and aphasia 
centers have launched effective outreach 
programs to develop and implement 
aphasia-friendly businesses and commu-
nities (Cruice, Worrall, & Hickson, 2005; 
Howe, Worrall, & Hickson, 2004; Pound, 
Duchan, Penman, Hewitt, & Parr, 2007; 
Worrall, Rose, Howe, McKenna, & Hick-
son, 2007). Examples include:
• Communication access training for 
community leaders and businesses, 
including suggestions for enhanced 
legibility and readability of signage, 
menus, insurance and health care 
documents, activity schedules, 
calendars, and Web pages
• Assessments of businesses for 
communication accessibility 
and other aspects of aphasia 
friendliness, and presentation 
of awards for aphasia-friendly 
businesses
• First-responder training programs, 
offering awareness and sensitivity 
training to police, firefighters, and 
other emergency personnel
• Awareness-raising events and 
celebrations, perhaps including 
performances of actors and 
musicians with language 
disorders or films that promote 
empowering views of people with 
communication disabilities
• Promotion of local and national 
aphasia awareness month activities 
and political representatives’ city, 
state/provincial, and national 
proclamations of the importance  
of empowering people with 
cognitive-linguistic challenges 
(American Heart Association and 
American Stroke Association, 
n.d.; King, Simmons-Mackie, & 
Beukelman, 2013; Simmons-Mackie 
et al., 2007)
Substantial information and materials 
to support such activities are provided 

Engaging Proactively in Advocacy and Legal and Ethical Concerns   239
through many of the organizations for 
which websites are listed in Chapter 27.
Help Educate Professionals 
in Health Care Contexts
Lack of knowledge about aphasia and 
other disorders, and about how to best 
facilitate communication, is common 
among professionals in health care set-
tings and is a serious source of stress and 
anxiety as well as missed communication 
opportunities for people with acquired lan-
guage disorders. One cannot assume that 
because someone has a medical or health 
professional degree that he or she knows 
much about cognitive-communicative 
disorders, let alone optimal ways of sup-
porting people who have them (Simmons-
Mackie et al., 2007).
Consider how Jill Bolte Taylor’s per-
sonal observation following her stroke 
and onset of aphasia:
To someone looking on, I may have 
been judged as less than what I had 
been before because I could not process 
information like a normal person. I was 
saddened by the inability of the medi-
cal community to know how to com-
municate with someone in my condi-
tion . . . I wanted my doctors to focus 
on how my brain was working rather 
than on whether it worked according 
to their criteria or timetable. I still knew 
volumes of information and I was sim-
ply going to have to figure out how to 
access it again. (Taylor, 2006, p. 78)
Providing regularly scheduled practical, 
dynamic, and interactive in-services to 
staff members, be they physicians, nurses, 
dietitians, housekeepers, and so on, is  
a valuable form of advocacy. So is infor-
mal coaching of clinical colleagues and 
other staff members as they interact with 
people with communication disorders on 
a daily basis.
Encourage Referrals
One important way to ensure ongoing 
referrals is to develop a positive working 
relationship with referring physicians. 
Recall that a physician’s order is typically 
required for diagnostic or treatment ser-
vices. Thus, for better or worse, physicians 
can control your access to patients and pa- 
tients’ access to you. Some physicians are 
phenomenal, rehabilitation-promoting, 
relationship-centered colleagues. Some, 
however, have closed minds related to the 
work that SLPs do. Some ignore or reject 
the literature on treatment efficacy for 
cognitive-linguistic disorders. Some treat 
nonphysicians as inferior professionals. 
Let’s be articulate, assertive, and proac-
tive in having our physician colleagues 
learn about our scope of practice, exper-
tise, and competence. Working zealously, 
affirmatively, and professionally, rather 
than conveying a resigning attitude, often 
pays off, as in many other areas of profes-
sional practice and life.
Advocate for Reduced Medicalization 
of Communication Disabilities
In much of the Western world, definitions 
of disability, and disability-related laws 
and policies, tend to be medicalized. That 
is, they are based on “the highly esteemed 
science of medicine” (Harry, 1992, p. 113), 
with a strong focus on physical impair-
ments. Medicalizing may actually do more 

240   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
harm than good in the sense of fostering 
normal versus abnormal or disordered 
dichotomies, especially in the context of 
developing regions of the world and 
underrepresented groups. In what Ndi 
(2012) refers to as the “professionalized 
legacy of the post-industrial revolution-
ary epoch” (also referred to as neocolo-
nialism), “it was presumed that there was 
an objective condition in which the con-
cept of normality of the body was to be 
referred, and the role of the rehabilitation 
professional was to make changes on the 
body of the disabled person in order to 
bring it as closely as possible to the condi-
tion of normality” (p. 1). Of course, more 
important than how we define disabilities 
across cultures and groups is how we 
treat people who have them (Barron & 
Amerena, 2007; Ingstad & Reynolds 
Whyte, 1995; Wickenden, 2013).
Let’s be mindful that some people 
that we might consider to have disabili-
ties do not necessarily agree that they 
have disabilities (Edmonds, 2005). An 
interesting case in point is Schensul, Tor-
res, and Wetle’s (1992) finding that older 
Puerto Ricans living in the United States 
were aware of their cognitive and behav-
ioral changes associated with Alzheimer’s 
disease but considered them to be normal. 
It is important to note that those authors’ 
findings are not necessarily valid, current, 
or representative of people in broader 
Puerto Rican or Hispanic communities. 
Still, the implications bring up potentially 
far-reaching questions. Is it important for 
clinicians to prove wrong people who do 
not believe they have a problem? If so, 
why? Are there ways that cognitive-com-
municative strengths can be emphasized 
in people with differing communication 
abilities without insisting on diagnostic 
categorization? Of course, even when 
there is clarity or agreement that a person 
has a disability per se, what an individ-
ual and his or her family or others might 
consider to be important outcomes for 
rehabilitation also is highly variable (Dil-
worth-Anderson, Pierre, & Hilliard, 2012; 
Shogren, 2011).
Promote Community-Based  
Approaches
Extending communicative support through-
out local communities helps increase the 
likelihood that people who need such 
support will be able to access it. In addi-
tion to raising community awareness 
about and support for people with com-
munication disorders, we may extend 
communication support through volun-
teer communication partner programs 
(Kagan, Black, Duchan, Simmons-Mackie, 
& Square, 2001; Lyon et al., 1997), in-home 
respite programs (Hallowell, 1999, 2000), 
and caregiver training programs and sup-
port groups (Fox, Poulsen, Clark Bawden, 
& Packard, 2004; Lyon, 1996; Purdy & 
Hindenlang, 2005; Ripich, Ziol, Fritsch,  
& Durand, 2000). We may also pro-
vide opportunities for enhanced access 
through aphasia centers and telepractice 
(see Chapter 14).
Such locally oriented activities are 
key to our role in promoting commu-
nity-based rehabilitation (CBR). CBR is 
defined by the World Health Organiza-
tion (n.d.-b) as follows:
[A means of] enhancing the quality 
of life for people with disabilities and 
their families; meeting basic needs; 
and ensuring inclusion and participa-
tion. It is a multi-sectoral strategy that 
empowers persons with disabilities 
to access and benefit from education, 
employment, health and social ser-

Engaging Proactively in Advocacy and Legal and Ethical Concerns   241
vices. CBR is implemented through 
the combined efforts of people with 
disabilities, their families and commu-
nities, and relevant government and 
nongovernment health, education, 
vocational, social and other services.
Some of our community-based work 
is not reimbursable. Many of us volunteer 
substantial amounts of time to such activi-
ties, above and beyond the requirements 
of our paid positions, because of our com-
mitment to the people who benefit from 
our support and expertise. As profession-
als, when we promote networks of con-
sumers, volunteers, and professionals who 
are accessible in local communities, we:
• Empower meaningful engagement 
with and for people with 
neurogenic communication 
disorders and other disabilities
• Advance public education and 
understanding about neurogenic 
communication disorders and their 
impacts on people’s lives
• Provide extended opportunities for 
inclusive socialization
CBR approaches are the emphasis of many 
programs being developed through non-
governmental agencies and volunteers 
in areas of the world where SLP services 
are minimal or nonexistent. Those of us 
in more developed regions have much to 
learn from the effective models of extended 
care and opportunity provided through 
CBR in underresourced regions.
Expand Evidence-Based Practice 
and Knowledge Translation
Representatives of international govern-
mental and nongovernmental agencies 
and health care providers are engaged in 
ongoing global efforts to promote the use 
of research evidence to shape health care 
policy, working to bridge the gaps between 
research, policy, and practice endorsing 
translation of research into best practices 
(Global Ministerial Forum on Research for 
Health, 2008; World Health Organization, 
2004). Health-focused funding agencies 
are implementing policies to help ensure 
the relevance of health-related scholar-
ship to the lives of actual people with the 
conditions. Still, it isn’t clear how much 
of the work being published in apha-
siology can be or is being translated to 
clinical use (Onslow, 2008). SLPs’ roles in 
clinical translation of research are essen-
tial to every aspect of clinical practice.  
It is important that research aphasiolo-
gists not only consider and emphasize 
the clinical relevance of their scholarly 
work but also collaborate with clinicians 
to ensure that their findings are translated 
to actual practice.
How Are Morality, Ethics, and Law 
Relevant to Advocacy for People 
With Acquired Neurogenic Disorders 
of Language and Cognition?
Consider some of the tough questions 
being asked by the people we serve and 
the professionals with whom we work:
• Should people who are near  
death be provided rehabilitative 
services?
• Who has the right to decide 
whether a person is to have access 
to rehabilitative services?
• At what point is it time to stop 
promoting curative solutions and 
instead provide palliative care?

242   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Who has the right to decide how 
long a person should be enabled to 
live?
• By what means should a given 
individual be kept alive or allowed 
to die?
• How much of our limited financial 
resources should be used to prolong 
a given person’s life?
Excellent clinical SLPs simultane-
ously uphold standards according to 
ethics, morality, and law (Horner, 2003). 
Morality consists of subjective judgment 
of what conduct and consequences are 
good and bad. Moral principles include:
• Respect for people, including 
respect for choices that others make 
or would make for themselves, and 
respect for their autonomy
• Beneficence, acting for others’ good
• Nonmaleficence, avoiding doing 
harm to others
• Justice, making decisions and 
sharing resources fairly
Ethics involves subjective decision mak-
ing about what is right or wrong, what our 
obligations to other are, and what is appro-
priate. Law consists of locally, regionally, 
or nationally adopted rules and principles 
about rights, equality, and fairness and 
involves the balancing of varied interests.
The principle of equal protection 
of the laws maintains that people with 
disabilities have the same opportunities 
as everyone to participate in society. All 
people have rights to do certain things 
and not to have their rights restricted, 
according to applicable laws. Among 
the many international covenants that 
have addressed (directly or indirectly) 
the rights of people with disabilities, the 
most recent far-reaching one is the United 
Nations Convention of the Rights of Per-
sons with Disabilities (United Nations, 
2006). According to the Convention, its 
purpose is to
promote, protect and ensure the full 
and equal enjoyment of all human 
rights and fundamental freedoms by 
all persons with disabilities, and to 
promote respect for their inherent dig-
nity (Article 1).
The Convention includes provisions 
for accessibility, independent living, and 
inclusion in the community, health, habil-
itation, and rehabilitation. One hundred 
eighty-one countries plus the European 
Union have signed and/or ratified the 
Convention at the time of this writing. 
The Convention complements the World 
Health Organization’s efforts to consider 
disability from a biopsychosocial perspec-
tive (see Chapters 4 and 5). Rather than 
being seen as charity cases, people with 
disabilities are seen as equal members 
of society with the same rights as others 
governed by the same laws. Rather than 
beings seen as “patients” as defined by 
medical needs, environmental supports 
and social contexts are considered vital 
components of equal rights. As men-
tioned earlier, there are numerous addi-
tional national and international policies 
and laws that support the rights of people 
with disabilities.
What Is the Role of the SLP in 
Supporting the Rights of Individuals 
With Aphasia and Related Disorders?
Despite significant documented commit-
ments to the rights of people with disabili-
ties, and despite institutions’ commitments 
to those rights, people with communi-
cation disorders often fall through the 

Engaging Proactively in Advocacy and Legal and Ethical Concerns   243
cracks when it comes to actually realizing 
such rights. Challenges with communica-
tion and others’ lack of awareness of their 
needs and desires often impede full par-
ticipation in social relationships. These 
challenges may also restrict appropriate 
and ideal participation in decision mak-
ing about concerns that profoundly affect 
lives of people with communication dis-
orders, such as decisions about driving, 
independent living, financial manage-
ment, legal affairs, medical services and 
medications, eating and nutrition, reha-
bilitation goals, and sexual consent (Bing-
ham, 2012; Boswell, 2011; Horner, 2013).
Although it is not within the SLP’s 
scope of practice to provide legal advice, 
supporting communication to help people 
with communication challenges engage 
in self-advocacy related to their rights is 
important. Many SLPs are well suited to 
play a key role in:
• Helping physicians, legal 
professionals, and courts to 
determine decision-making 
capacity and competence of people 
with aphasia and related disorders
• Raising awareness about potential 
rights violations
• Advocating for communication 
supports and intervention required 
to enable each individual to 
participate actively in his or her 
own decision making
• Providing communication support 
and training others to do so during 
competency evaluations, decision-
making discussions, and legal 
proceedings
SLPs should review accreditation or 
licensure standards with which the facil-
ity or agency is required to comply. In 
the United States, the Joint Commission, 
which accredits hospitals, has explicit 
standards for promoting provider-patient 
communication to ensure that patients’ 
communicative participation is facilitated 
so that they may actively participate in 
their own care (Joint Commission, 2010; 
Simmons-Mackie, 2013b). Patients’ rights 
statements are often required to be posted 
publicly in hospitals and clinics in many 
countries. SLPs may support communi-
cation about these with people who need 
such support.
How Do SLPs Engage in 
Decisions Regarding Competence 
and Decision Making?
Despite the fact that engagement in issues 
of competence and decision making is 
central to the role of SLP, many do not 
have training or experience in this area 
(Ferguson, Duffield, & Worrall, 2010). 
Others are highly sophisticated about this 
topic and some are engaged as expert wit-
nesses in related legal cases.
Important elements of decision-
making capacity and competence include 
determining:
• Comprehension, the ability to 
understand written or spoken 
communication in the language 
being used
• Choice, the ability to deliberate 
about and logically consider 
possible alternatives
• Appreciation of consequences and 
risks and benefits of decisions
• Whether a person is being coerced
There is no simple way to index capac-
ity, and there is no single method or tool 
that can be applied to all people with 
cognitive-linguistic challenges to deter-
mine capacity or competence (Ferguson 

244   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
et al., 2003; Karlawish, 2008; Pachet, Ast-
ner, & Brown, 2010; Rowland & McDon-
ald, 2009; Stein & Brady Wagner, 2006). 
Interprofessional collaboration in such 
efforts is important (Barton, Mallik, Orr, & 
Janofsky, 1996; Brady Wagner, 2003; Fine-
stone & Blackmer, 2007; Togher, Balandin, 
Young, Given, & Canty, 2006).
When there are concerns or disagree-
ments about a person’s competence to 
make decisions, all health and wellness 
professionals have the duty to advocate 
for intervention, be it through consulta-
tion with an ethicist, engagement of a 
mediator, or launching of or involvement 
in a legal case. Legal processes that help 
to ensure the self-determination of people 
whose decision-making competence or 
capacity is in question (or may eventually 
come into question) are summarized in 
Box 15–2.
For those wishing to learn more 
about this topic, Horner (2013) and Brady 
Wagner (2003) provide excellent tutori-
als on communication rights and poli-
cies relevant to people with aphasia and 
related disorders, and the role of SLPs in 
promoting ethical practice in this regard. 
Kagan and Kimelman (1995), Palmer 
and Patterson (2011), and Penn, Frankel, 
Watermeyer, and Müller (2009) provide 
guidance on how the rights of people 
with aphasia may be taken into account 
for informed consent in research contexts. 
Pape, Jaffe, Savage, Collins, and Warden 
(2004) suggest special challenges in this 
regard to be addressed with traumatic 
brain injury (TBI) survivors. Chang and 
Bourgeois (2015) provide excellent tuto-
rial materials about ways to promote end-
of-life decision-making capacity through 
visual supports for people with dementia.
Legal Procedures to Help to  
Ensure Self-Determination
• Advance directives:  Documentation of a person’s wishes 
for medical care in case he or she becomes unable to 
convey them
• Living will:  A document detailing a person’s wishes in 
case he or she has a terminal condition and is near death 
and cannot make his or her own decisions about potential 
life-prolonging treatments
• Durable power of attorney for health care:  A document 
used to appoint a trusted  person to make health care 
decisions for a person if he or she becomes incapacitated
• Guardianship of a person:  Full or limited, temporary or 
permanent oversight of an individual
• Conservatorship of a person’s property:  Full or limited, 
temporary or permanent oversight of the things a person 
owns
• Statutory surrogacy:  Legal designation of a person to 
make decision for an adult who is deemed incompetent
Box
15–2

Engaging Proactively in Advocacy and Legal and Ethical Concerns   245
How Do Financial Conflicts  
of Interest Affect the Practice of  
Clinical Aphasiologists?
Clinicians often have conflicts of inter-
est related to their own financial gains. 
For example, they may be paid bonuses 
in addition to their regular salary for 
achieving target rates of billable services. 
Sometimes such bonuses are paid reha-
bilitation teams for meeting or exceeding 
collective revenue targets. With increas-
ing frequency, demonstration of a certain 
rate of billable productivity is required  
for SLPs to keep their jobs, which poses 
even more severe inherent financial con-
flicts of interest.
Ways in which the quality and eth-
ics of our services may be influenced by 
financial incentives include the follow-
ing unethical and sometimes fraudulent 
activity:
• Seeing patients too long or beyond 
the point of expecting significant 
continued progress
• Imposing clinical services even 
when patients refuse to participate
• When serving low-income or low-
resourced patients who qualify for 
low-cost service rates, providing 
intervention too briefly or at a 
frequency and intensity that is not 
optimal
• Providing intervention to 
people with limited potential for 
rehabilitation, who are unlikely to 
benefit from skilled treatment
• Overstating a person’s potential 
for improvement to justify billable 
services
• Misrepresenting actual progress 
made in treatment
• Misrepresenting the time spent in 
billable sessions
• Avoiding or limiting nonbillable 
activities that are important to 
quality of service (e.g., in-services, 
informal discussions with team 
members, staff meetings) (Cutter & 
Polovoy, 2014; Hallowell & Henri, 
2013)
Pressures to maintain billable activity 
have mounted under the service delivery 
and cost-saving pressures described in 
Chapter 14. In the United States, SLPs 
working in skilled nursing facilities report 
billable productivity expectations in the 
range of 85% to 100% (Cutter & Polovoy, 
2014). This means that they are expected 
to dedicate this proportion of time to bill-
able activities in their everyday workload. 
Consequences of not doing so may include 
salary reduction, reprimands, extra train-
ing requirements, reduced work hours, or 
being fired.
Such high productivity requirements 
challenge the ethical standards not only of 
clinicians but also of the service-providing 
agencies. Consider the SLPs’ nonbillable 
activities that are essential to quality care 
and to the maintenance of healthy com-
munication and business environments in 
such facilities. Typical nonbillable activi-
ties include report writing, billing work, 
attendance at team meetings, screening, 
reading of medical charts, marketing, 
providing and attending in-services, con-
ferring with professional colleagues, pro-
viding information and counseling for 
residents who are not on the SLP’s case-
load, and training and mentoring student 
clinicians or clinical fellows. Of course, the 
time when a clinician uses the restroom is 
also nonbillable. To permit themselves to 
engage in such activities, SLPs are often 

246   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
forced to engage in them without being 
paid, often in addition to a full-time job, 
or to engage in unethical or fraudulent 
activity (Cutter & Polovoy, 2014). SLPs 
are not alone in facing clinical productiv-
ity pressure. Others working in rehabilita-
tion (especially occupational and physical 
therapists) are also susceptible.
What Are Potential Means of 
Helping Address Financial Conflicts 
of Interest in Clinical Practice?
Solutions to such extreme productiv-
ity requirements and their ethical con-
sequences include values-focused pro-
gramming and incorporation of clinical 
outcomes and service quality (rather than 
merely productivity) in evaluating clini-
cians and making decisions about their 
pay (Rao, 2015). Since most rehabilitation 
professionals working in skilled nursing 
facilities (SNFs) are actually employed by 
contracted rehabilitation companies, not 
the SNFs themselves, another affirma-
tive approach is for the SNF administra-
tors to limit productivity requirements 
in their contracts with those companies. 
SNFs may then benefit from having more 
of those nonbillable but essential activi-
ties carried out in their facilities, thus 
raising the quality of the care they offer 
their residents. In the long term, legisla-
tion is needed to control productivity 
expectations and change patient classifi-
cation schemes that provide incentive to 
agencies for trumping up their residents’ 
needs for rehabilitation.
Regardless of the pressures felt 
regarding potentially unethical activities, 
clinicians are responsible for maintain-
ing their own ethical and legal standards. 
As advised by the Consensus Statement 
on Clinical Judgment and Health Care 
Settings:
Read the regulations and coverage 
policies for the payers and settings 
relevant to your work setting. Igno-
rance of the requirements is not a legal 
defense or ethical excuse for inappro-
priate coding, billing, or service deliv-
ery . . . it is an ethical duty to support 
evidence-based practice to achieve 
effective patient/client outcomes. 
(AOTA, APTA, ASHA, 2014, pp. 1–2)
Clinicians’ options in the face of such 
pressures include insisting on ethical 
billing and documentation practices, 
working to foster change in productivity 
requirements from within their agencies, 
reporting unethical behaviors, and seek-
ing employment elsewhere. When inves-
tigating employment opportunities with 
a particular agency, it’s a good idea to ask 
about how productivity requirements are 
addressed and to query clinicians cur-
rently employed there about perceived 
ethical pressures.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Describe what is meant by the state-
ment that communication is a human 
right.
	 3.	 If you have not done so yet, peruse 
the International Communication 
Project website. If you have not done 
so yet, consider signing the associated 
pledge.

Engaging Proactively in Advocacy and Legal and Ethical Concerns   247
	 4.	 As mentioned in this chapter, resources 
to help people learn about the rights of 
people with aphasia and related dis-
orders and their caregivers are readily 
available, yet many people are still not 
aware of them. What are some specific 
steps you might take to ensure that 
the people with neurogenic disorders 
with whom you work, their caregiv-
ers, and other health professionals are 
aware of and understand their rights?
	 5.	 Make a list of celebrities with acquired 
neurogenic communication disor-
ders. In what way might it be helpful 
to refer to such a list in your role as 
advocate for awareness about aphasia 
and related disorders?
	 6.	 Outline a plan to make your own 
community a dementia-friendly and/
or aphasia-friendly community.
	 7.	 Describe what is meant by medicaliza-
tion of disabilities. In what ways can it 
be detrimental to people with neuro-
genic communication disorders?
	 8.	 CBR is seen as an effective way of ex- 
panding access to care in underserved 
regions, where access to health care, 
rehabilitation care, and SLP services is 
lacking. Describe how the principles 
of CBR might be applied to expand-
ing access to services even in high-
income regions where SLP programs 
and expertise are well developed.
	 9.	 Describe specific examples of how 
research findings may be translated 
to clinical use.
10.	 How are morality, ethics, and law inter-
related? How are the three constructs 
distinguishable from one another?
11.	 What knowledge and skills are required 
for an SLP to be able to assist in deter-
mining a person’s cognitive-linguistic 
competence to make important life 
decisions? Outline an action plan for 
an SLP wishing to become expert in 
this area.
12.	 Look up examples of legal documents 
related to the procedures listed in Box 
15–2. Provide specific examples of 
how the language in such documents 
may pose special challenges for peo-
ple with language disorders. Describe 
how you might support comprehen-
sion of such language for people with 
dementia or MCI.
13.	 High productivity standards for bill-
able SLP services pose several types 
of ethical challenges. Describe these 
in your own words. Then list specific 
actions you would take, as a practic-
ing SLP, to maintain your own ethical 
standards and integrity in the face of 
those challenges.
See the companion website for additional 
learning and teaching materials.


249
Chapter
16
Global Aspects of  
Clinical Aphasiology
In recognition of its absolute importance 
and relevance to every area of clinical prac-
tice in neurogenic disorders of communi-
cation and cognition, information relevant 
to multicultural, multilingual, and inter-
national content is infused throughout 
all of the sections of this book. We have 
considered global trends, transnational 
opportunities, and varying educational 
and certification requirements for aphasi-
ologists across the globe in the introduc-
tion (Section I), issues of multicultural-
ism and multilingualism relative to basic 
aspects of neurogenic cognitive-linguistic 
disorders (Section II), and categories of 
cognitive-linguistic disorders in aphasi-
ology (Section III). In other chapters in 
this current section, we have considered 
global and multicultural topics relevant 
to human rights, ethics, and our roles as 
advocates, plus variations in how health 
care systems affect service delivery and 
the ways that speech-language patholo-
gists (SLPs) are reimbursed for clinical 
services. In Section V, we consider issues 
of multiculturalism and multilingualism 
as they affect assessment, and in Sections 
VI through VIII, we consider them in light 
of treatment principles, best practices, 
and methods. Still, this separate chapter 
is dedicated to specific queries related to 
global aspects of aphasiology that may 
help foster further important reflection 
and stimulate information seeking about 
these topics.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 How do we become culturally compe-
tent clinicians?
	 2.	 What are important priorities for 
global capacity building to serve peo-
ple with acquired neurogenic disor-
ders of cognition and language?
	 3.	 What are key challenges to enhancing 
global research and knowledge trans-
lation in acquired neurogenic com-
munication disorders?
	 4.	 What global organizations foster trans-
national, multicultural, and collabora-
tion in aphasiology?
How Do We Become Culturally 
Competent Clinicians?
Cultural competence is a critical aspect of 
clinical excellence that affects every aspect 
of our roles as clinical aphasiologists, 

250   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
locally and globally. According to Westby 
(2009), cultural competence “involves 
effective use of cultural knowledge while 
interviewing, assessing, and treating. The 
culturally competent individual is able to 
think, feel, and act in ways that acknowl-
edge, respect, and build on ethnic, socio-
cultural, and linguistic diversity” (p. 280). 
Threats (2010a) adds to this by highlight-
ing a self-reflective component to cultural 
competency: “to be culturally competent 
requires that the clinician examine his or 
her own culture, biases, and views toward 
communication and communication dis-
ability. Thus, in order to effectively realize 
the influence of culture, persons must first 
realize the influence of culture on them-
selves” (p. 163).
We tend to recognize that cultural com-
petence is absolutely essential to excellence 
in clinical practice, yet we have trouble 
defining measureable indices of such 
competence (even though many have at- 
tempted to do so). This is partly because 
cultural competence is not an ability to 
be attained in any definitive sense but 
rather an ideal for which to constantly 
strive. It is also because cultural com-
petence can only be judged relative to a 
specific context. A sense of mutual trust 
and comfort may develop over years of 
interaction between a White Australian 
clinician working effectively for years 
with low-income Aboriginal people near 
Perth, Australia. She may learn to appreci-
ate deeply myriad aspects of culture and 
language that are essential to her being a 
strong and supportive agent for cognitive-
linguistic rehabilitation with that group. 
However, if she were to move to work in 
community-based rehabilitation in urban 
Cape Town in the Western Cape of South 
Africa, she may not be so culturally com-
petent there. Cultural competence is not 
an achievable learning outcome that we 
can check off on our personal or profes-
sional development to-do list. Fortu-
nately, practically everything we do to 
enhance our cultural competence within 
our own countries can be applied when 
we consider collaboration across national 
boundaries.
National Standards for Culturally 
and Linguistically Appropriate Services 
(CLAS) in Health Care have been estab-
lished by the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services (2010) as “a blue-
print for organizations to deliver effective, 
understandable and respectful services at 
every point of patient contact. They are 
designed to advance health equity, improve 
quality and help eliminate healthcare dis-
parities.” There are numerous additional 
resources supporting the development of 
cultural competence, including skills and 
knowledge for working with multilingual 
speakers and people who differ according 
to race, culture, ethnicity, geographic ori-
gin, socioeconomic status, sexual orienta-
tion, sexual identity, gender, gender iden-
tity, disability, and ability. Some of these 
are available for general audiences, some 
for health care workers, some for reha-
bilitation professionals, some for SLPs, 
and some for aphasiologists in particu-
lar (see Battle, 2012; Hays & Erford, 2014; 
Orozco, Lee, Blando, & Shooshani, 2014; 
Payne, 2014). It is important for all of us 
to tap into these as we continue to grow 
professionally.
What Global Trends Are 
Affecting the Incidence and 
Prevalence of Neurogenic 
Communication Disorders?
Three important global trends are influ-
encing the incidence and prevalence of 
neurogenic communication disorders, as 
summarized here.

Global Aspects of Clinical Aphasiology   251
A Rapidly Expanding 
Aging Population
As discussed in Chapter 9, the propor-
tion of the world’s population composed 
of older adults relative to younger adults 
and children is ever-increasing. This is 
especially the case in most of the rela-
tively underresourced areas of the world 
(developing regions, sometimes also 
called majority regions because they are 
more plentiful than highly resourced or 
developed regions).
Increasing and Disproportionate 
Incidence and Prevalence of 
Conditions That Cause Neurogenic 
Communication Disorders
A predisposition to language disorders 
is culturally and geographically contex-
tual. Three of the most common causes 
of language disorders in adults are most 
prevalent in the developing world: stroke, 
brain injury, and dementia. The incidence 
of stroke and brain injury in developing 
regions is twice that of developed regions. 
Dementia is the greatest cause of years 
lost to disability in developed regions and 
second greatest worldwide. By 2050, 71% 
of the expected 115 million people with 
Alzheimer’s disease and other forms of 
dementia worldwide will be living in low- 
and middle-income countries (Alzheim-
er’s Disease International, 2010).
Health Care and Prevention 
Infrastructure Challenges
Throughout the world, a lack of preven-
tive and medical care, limited transporta-
tion, poverty, poor nutrition, and low lev-
els of health literacy are all factors related 
to infrastructure that lead to greater inci-
dence and prevalence of neurogenic com-
munication disorders.
What Are Important Priorities 
for Global Capacity Building 
to Serve People With Acquired 
Neurogenic Disorders of 
Cognition and Language?
Despite the fact that SLP intervention can 
lead to vital life-affecting outcomes, peo-
ple with neurogenic language disorders 
in much of the world do not even have 
SLP services available in their communi-
ties or cannot access them. Let’s consider 
two categories of high-priority actions 
that may be taken to expand capacity to 
meet needs for clinical services and com-
munication support: building culturally 
contextualized academic and clinical pro-
grams, and attending to cultural aspects 
of health, aging, and disability that may 
affect receptivity to services.
Build Culturally Contextualized 
Academic and Clinical Programs
Worldwide recognition of the need for 
services to address communication disor-
ders in general, and acquired neurogenic 
communication disorders in adults in 
particular, is ever-growing. Those of us 
with expertise in transnational academic 
and clinical program development are 
being called on more and more to help 
build capacity in our field in regions 
where the field is not yet officially rec-
ognized or is just beginning. As such, 
representatives from highly resourced 
regions (often White and Western) tend to 
serve in “expert” roles, advising cultural 
insiders on program development. It is 
critical that those of us engaged in such 

252   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
work take seriously the need to help fos-
ter within-region sustainable leadership 
and expertise and not enable dependence 
on our ongoing roles there (Hallowell, 
2012b; Hallowell & Hickey, 2014, 2015). It 
is also important that we take great care to 
appreciate the cultural factors that might 
affect how students learn to become clini-
cal experts in those contexts and how peo-
ple in their region who might benefit from 
their future services would actually access 
such services.
As we consider planning for future 
academic and clinical programs focused 
on communication disorders in adults, 
we must consider important infrastruc-
ture factors that will affect access to SLP 
services, as summarized in Box 16–1.
Attend to Cultural Aspects of Health, 
Aging, and Disability That May 
Affect Receptivity to Services
At the same time that we focus on con-
textual infrastructure, we must consider 
cultural aspects of health care, aging, dis-
ability, and society in general that may 
restrict access to services for people with 
acquired communication disabilities, once 
they become more available (Wickenden, 
2013). Availability of qualified clinicians 
and clinical facilities does not necessarily 
lead to service accessibility.
Pioneers in aphasiology in under-
served regions of the world must proac-
tively address cultural aspects of aging 
and disability that have a direct impact 
on access to communication interven-
tion. One important consideration is that 
throughout much of the world, there is a 
long-standing tradition of older people 
living as long and as independently as 
possible at home. The idea of moving to 
a long-term care center would be the last 
and least acceptable alternative for many, 
only to be considered if one could not 
live with their adult children or hire paid 
caregivers, or if one had such extensive 
caregiving needs that they simply could 
not be met at home. In many regions of 
the world, including much of Asia, Africa, 
Infrastructure Factors That  
Affect Access to SLP Services
• Appropriately educated and experienced SLP personnel 
with opportunities for continuing education
• Government-recognized, salaried positions for SLPs
• Facilities or agencies that will hire SLPs and offer their 
services
• Equipment and culturally and linguistically appropriate 
materials to support SLP services
• Public education about communication disorders and the 
benefits of SLP services
• Transportation for potential clients to access SLPs
• Distance to facilities that offer SLP services
• Affordability of SLP services
• Language proficiency of service providers
Box
16–1

Global Aspects of Clinical Aphasiology   253
Eastern Europe, Central America, and 
South America, and even in regions and 
groups in North America, there continue 
to be strong cultural taboos regarding 
having one’s older relatives live in insti-
tutional environments; it is incumbent on 
families to make sure they meet caregiv-
ing needs at home. The notion of import-
ing Western models of skilled nursing 
facilities or even retirement communi-
ties is often rejected by those who were 
not raised in environments where such 
options were the norm.
At the same time, despite cultural 
resistance to reaching outside the home 
and family structure in caring for older 
people, sociodemographic shifts require 
that new strategies for care be consid-
ered. Consider, for example, the following 
global trends:
• Rural to urban migration such that 
parents are left in rural areas with 
children working and living in 
cities
• Migration of adult children outside 
of their home countries
• Full-time employment of adult 
children who may live in the same 
home as a parent but who are not 
home during the day
• Decline of three-generation 
households such that fewer people 
are present to assist
• Increased numbers of women 
working outside the home
• Hiring of in-home caregivers 
who often are unskilled and 
not proficient in the household 
language and who do not have 
training in supporting adults with 
communication challenges
• Competing priorities of time, effort, 
and finances within the family for 
meeting multiple needs, often with 
priorities geared toward younger 
family members
Despite these trends, cultural accep-
tance of Western models of care (e.g., hos-
pitalization, rehabilitation stays, nursing 
home care, and hospice care) is not what 
many non-Western families consider to be 
acceptable alternatives. Considerations of 
alternative living arrangements, health 
care, and rehabilitation services and 
means of family support for care of adults 
with disabilities all require the utmost of 
cultural sensitivity and adaptability.
What Are Key Challenges to 
Enhancing Global Research 
and Knowledge Translation 
in Acquired Neurogenic 
Communication Disorders?
Despite wonderful efforts to expand 
transnational research, in many countries 
and regions, there is a lack of training and 
designated personnel with the time and 
encouragement to engage in research. 
Given that the specialty of aphasiology, 
let alone the field of communication sci-
ences and disorders, does not exist in 
many countries, there is frequently a lack 
of guidance and mentorship for cultural 
insiders willing to engage in research. 
Also, many researchers and clinicians are 
simply unfamiliar with global efforts in 
research on aphasia and related disorders 
(Lavis et al., 2010).
An additional challenge to transna-
tional approaches to research in aphasiol-
ogy is the extreme language bias of our 
scholarly journals (Karanth, 2000). In a 
recent study, Beveridge and Bak (2011) 
report that over 85% of aphasia research 
studies are based on observations of 

254   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
English-speaking people. The authors 
conclude that the literature is not repre-
sentative of the world’s languages or of 
its speakers. This bias toward English 
poses a serious limitation to the applica-
bility of reported results. There is a need 
for advocacy on the part of journal edi-
tors and reviewers as well as research 
mentors to promote research pertaining 
to non-English-speaking participants and 
research done by those who are cultural 
and linguistic insiders in non-English-
speaking regions. There is also a need for 
seasoned research aphasiologists who are 
proficient in English to collaborate with 
and help build the research capacity of 
cultural insiders.
What Global Organizations  
Foster Transnational 
Collaboration in Aphasiology?
As discussed in Chapter 1, one of the 
joys of being a clinical aphasiologist is 
the connections across cultures, nations, 
languages, races, and ethnicities that are 
inherent in our professional organizations 
and in the populations with which we 
work. Several international research orga-
nizations for professionals and research-
ers are dedicated to acquired neurogenic 
cognitive-linguistic disorders. Likewise, 
there are many country-specific organi-
zations for professionals and research-
ers specializing in this area. Information 
about several international organizations 
supporting networking and professional 
development is given in Table 1–1. Infor-
mation about many of the organizations 
providing support to people coping with 
aphasia and related disorders worldwide 
is given in Chapter 27. Here let’s briefly 
consider three special consumer-focused 
entities focused on global and multicul-
tural engagement in aphasiology.
Aphasia United
Aphasia United (http://www.aphasia​
united.org) was established in 2012 to 
facilitate networking and collaboration 
among aphasia-related consumer, research, 
and professional organizations world-
wide. It is aligned with the World Stroke 
Organization (WSO; http://www.world-
stroke.org), the leading global organiza-
tion aimed at prevention and treatment of 
stroke and a nongovernmental organiza-
tion affiliated with the World Health 
Organization (WHO; http://www.who 
.int/en/). Aphasia United goals are to 
increase visibility of people with aphasia, 
create formal global networks that con-
nect people living with aphasia and the 
clinicians and researchers who support 
them, set a global research agenda, 
strengthen transnational research partner-
ships, and encourage best standards of 
practice in aphasia care.
The National Aphasia Association 
(NAA) Multicultural Task Force (MTF)
The mission of the National Aphasia Asso-
ciation (NAA) Multicultural Task Force  
(MTF) (http://www.aphasia.org) is to 
enhance understanding about multicul-
tural aspects of aphasia and to promote 
advocacy and services to benefit people 
of diverse linguistic and sociocultural 
backgrounds who have aphasia. Initially 
formed in 2007, the task force comprises 
clinicians, educators, and researchers 
from a variety of cultural experiences and 
linguistic backgrounds having expertise 
in a wide range of areas related to aphasia. 

Global Aspects of Clinical Aphasiology   255
MTF projects include the development of 
online tutorial materials to educate clini-
cians about working with interpreters 
and translators, and translation of the 
NAA educational materials into many 
languages. The MTF has collaborative ties 
with several U.S.-based and international 
aphasia-related organizations. In 2010, the 
MTF oversaw a film project for Spanish-
speaking people with aphasia, supported 
by the American Speech-Language-Hearing 
Association (ASHA).
Association Internationale 
d’Aphasie (AIA)
The AIA (http://www.aphasia-interna​
tional.com/) represents aphasia interna-
tional consumer organizations; it consists 
predominantly of European members. On 
its website, the AIA provides materials 
about aphasia in many languages.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Provide examples of how cultural 
competence in clinical work with one 
cultural group may not be translat-
able to another cultural group.
	 3.	 Provide examples of how specific 
actions taken to enhance one’s cultural 
competence for clinical work with one 
cultural group may help boost his or 
her work to become more culturally 
competent in working with another 
cultural group.
	 4.	 Imagine that you are an aphasiologist 
from a Western country with well-
developed academic and clinical pro-
grams in aphasiology and strongly 
established licensure and clinical cer-
tification standards in SLP. Imagine 
that you are invited to help build a 
clinical program to serve people with 
aphasia and related disorders in a 
country where the field of SLP is not 
established and in which there are no 
experts in clinical aphasiology.
a.	 List the primary challenges you 
would face if you accepted such 
an invitation.
b.	 Describe specific steps you 
might recommend for building a 
sustainable clinical program that 
would not indefinitely rely on 
leadership from cultural outsiders 
like you.
c.	 Describe features of a clinical pro-
gram that you might recommend 
that would differ from features 
of clinical program in your own 
local community.
	 5.	 Some people love to travel to other 
countries and experience new cul-
tures. Some health care professionals 
take advantage of opportunities to 
travel to new places to serve as vol-
unteers, building clinical programs or 
providing clinical services.
a.	 When people do this primarily 
to serve their own curiosity and 
enjoy the corresponding intellec-
tual and cultural stimulation, this 
constitutes “voluntourism.”
b.	 What are some of the 
potential ethical hazards of 
clinical aphasiologists engaging in 
voluntourism?
	 6.	 Describe the features of an ideal pro-
gram for engaging volunteer clinical 
aphasiologists to engage in meaning-
ful, ethical, and sustainable services 
in countries and cultures other than 
their own.

256   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 7.	 Even if programs to serve adults with 
acquired communication disabilities 
are developed in regions that previ-
ously had no such programs, older 
adults with such disabilities may still 
not access those programs.
a.	 List aspects of infrastructure that 
might affect their accessing such 
programs.
b.	 List cultural factors that might 
affect their accessing such 
programs.
c.	 Describe how the items you listed 
for (a) and (b), above, could be 
proactively addressed within the 
cultural contexts of such programs.
	 8.	 List steps that could be taken to reduce 
the English-language bias of scholarly 
journals reporting research relevant to 
aphasia and related disorders.
	 9.	 Peruse the websites of the three inter-
national aphasiology groups men-
tioned at the end of this chapter. In 
what ways might the resources avail-
able through those organizations 
be useful for work with underrep-
resented groups within the country 
where you live?
Additional teaching and learning mate-
rials may be found on the companion 
website.

Section V
Assessment

258   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
In this section, we address assessment as 
an ongoing problem-solving process that 
occurs in all of the contexts and stages of 
rehabilitation. In Chapter 17, we draw 
from several decades of work by clini-
cal and research aphasiologists as we 
explore recommended best practices in 
assessment. We then review psychomet-
ric aspects of assessment and components 
of assessment processes in Chapter 18. In 
Chapter 19, we focus on a problem-solving 
approach to assessment, emphasizing the  
need for critical thinking and process 
analysis as we strive to describe, classify, 
and interpret the nature of any individu-
al’s neurogenic language disorder and its 
life-affecting consequences. In Chapter 20, 
we consider how to choose an assessment 
instrument based on our assessment goals, 
and we review published scales, tests, and 
screening tools used for people with any 
of a wide variety of acquired neurogenic 
cognitive-linguistic disorders. In Chap-
ter 21, we consider discourse sampling, 
a means of describing important aspects 
of communication that are typically not 
well captured through published tests 
and instruments. To conclude this section 
on assessment, we review means of docu-
menting assessment results in Chapter 22. 
We also consider how assessment results 
might be used to inform our thinking 
about an individual’s prognosis for recov-
ery and to guide treatment planning.

259
Chapter
17
Best Practices in Assessment
In this chapter, a strengths-based, empow-
ering, person-centered approach to assess-
ment is advocated. Wisdom gained from 
leading aphasiologists over the past sev-
eral decades is shared. The aim is to set 
the stage for a holistic approach to clini-
cal excellence in assessment. After read-
ing and reflecting on the content in this 
chapter, you will ideally be able to answer, 
in your own words, the following queries:
	 1.	 Where and when does assessment 
happen?
	 2.	 What are the purposes of assessment?
	 3.	 What aspects of assessment are truly 
relevant to actual clinical practice?
	 4.	 What are the best practices in assess-
ment of acquired neurogenic lan-
guage disorders?
Where and When Does 
Assessment Happen?
Assessment is any means of evaluation. 
Two important points about assessment 
and treatment as interwoven components 
are that
• assessment happens throughout 
intervention, and
• treatment begins the moment 
assessment starts.
Let’s briefly consider each of these points.
Assessment Happens 
Throughout Intervention
We do not first assess and then treat. As 
noted in the introduction to this section 
of the book, the nature of assessment is 
much deeper, broader, and more holis-
tic than testing people and diagnosing 
impairments. This is why we refer to 
the “assessment” process as opposed to 
the “diagnostic” process, the latter term 
having the narrow connotation of label-
ing impairment-level problems — a very 
small part of what assessment ideally 
entails. In fact, assessment happens con-
stantly throughout intervention and even 
afterward (e.g., in follow-up counseling, 
screening, or group activities).
Treatment Begins the Moment 
Assessment Starts
We need not wait to complete an assess-
ment (as if it were a final product) to be 
able to make a difference in helping 

260   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
improve communication and socializa-
tion. From the moment we meet a per-
son with a language disorder, we ideally 
bring our healing presence and affirming 
attitude into his or her space, as Taylor 
(2006) suggests. Even during initial case 
history interviews and testing, we moti-
vate, counsel, and share information. 
We also model the types of communica-
tive support likely to be used throughout 
intervention, not just during a designated 
“assessment” session.
What Are the  
Purposes of Assessment?
We most often engage in assessment so 
that we may:
• Support initial and ongoing 
intervention through rapport 
building, counseling, motivation, 
information sharing, and 
demonstrating communication 
enhancement strategies most likely 
to be effective
• Contribute to the diagnostic 
process, determining whether 
a person has one or more 
communication disorders and, if so, 
what is the nature of each
• Index and describe the severity 
of language and related cognitive 
impairments and the nature of 
cognitive and linguistic strengths
• Index and describe declining 
abilities throughout a 
neurodegenerative process, or after 
a recent health incident, such as a 
repeated stroke
• Index and describe the impacts 
of language and related cognitive 
impairments on life participation, 
including quality of life, medical 
management, and independence
• Help inform prognosis
• Inform decisions to recommend 
further assessment, treatment, 
discharge from treatment, referrals 
to other professionals, and 
patient and family education and 
counseling
• Plan intervention with substantial 
patient and family input, including 
determining long- and short-term 
goals, prioritizing goals, deciding 
on which strengths and weaknesses 
to focus, and selecting appropriate 
treatment methods and materials
• Measure, describe, and document 
baselines and progress during 
treatment
• Justify treatment to payors
• Determine when a person has met 
goals such that new goals should 
be set or treatment should be 
discontinued
• Collect data to be aggregated with 
data from others to document 
clinical outcomes related to our 
services, or to the services within 
our discipline, facility, rehabilitation 
team, and so on
Note that many of these purposes apply 
to assessment in clinical research as well 
as in clinical practice.
What Aspects of Assessment 
Are Truly Relevant to Actual 
Clinical Practice?
The degree of organization and prepara-
tion in which we may engage to assess a 
person’s abilities in any particular domain 
or set of domains is influenced by the con-

Best Practices in Assessment   261
text in which we work. So is the amount 
of time that we are allotted for engaging 
in specific types of assessment tasks, such 
as administration of formal tests. Whether 
we are making a quick judgment call on 
the fly based on observable behavior dur-
ing a spontaneous conversation, or engag-
ing in hours of testing and methodical 
discourse analysis, the more savvy we 
are about best practices in assessment, 
the more effective we will be. The ulti-
mate excellent clinician is highly skilled 
and knowledgeable about many facets 
of assessment and constantly engages 
in problem solving to achieve the best 
assessment outcomes.
Consider this comment from a clini-
cal supervisor working in a busy rehabili-
tation center to a new student clinician:
I don’t care if you learned anything 
about tests in your clinical education 
program. I don’t care what theories 
you know. Theories don’t fix anyone.  
I just want you to get in there and figure 
out what’s going on with a person and 
move as quickly as possible into help-
ing them communicate. Besides, we’re 
only allowed to bill for 15 minutes of 
assessment in most cases anyway.
Unfortunately, the disturbing attitude 
conveyed by that supervisor is not uncom-
mon in many of today’s clinical practice 
contexts. The ability to help people with 
neurogenic language disorders is directly 
connected to a profound understanding 
of the complex nature of each person’s 
challenges in light of his or her real-life 
needs. Even if you rarely administer pub-
lished standardized tests in your actual 
practice, knowing about tests and their 
design is essential to your sophistication 
as a skilled clinical problem solver. Even 
if you don’t typically engage in thorough 
discourse analysis, knowing about meth-
ods of assessing conversational and writ-
ten competence in meaningful commu-
nicative contexts is paramount to your 
astute observations and judgments. Even 
if you adhere to a social framework for 
intervention geared toward supportive 
discourse, if you don’t know what under-
lies the problems causing barriers to social 
participation, the type, intensity, and tim-
ing of support that you encourage may be 
misguided.
What Are the Best Practices 
in Assessment of Acquired 
Neurogenic Language Disorders?
Best practices in assessment entail a set 
of strong principles, a solid theoreti-
cal base supporting assessment and the 
constructs to be assessed, knowledge of 
numerous assessment methods and tools, 
and adherence to pearls of wisdom that 
have been shared and honed by seasoned 
clinical aphasiologists. These elements of 
best practice are interwoven in the list and 
descriptions of guidelines provided here.
Do Not Underestimate  
How Impactful Your Role Is
As discussed in Chapter 2, what makes 
one clinician more excellent than another 
is complex, depends on the context at 
hand, and is difficult to define. Still, 
there are many ways to continuously 
improve one’s degree of excellence. This 
is especially important in the arena of 
assessment.
The person doing the assessing has 
a tremendous influence on assessment 
results. Of course, the influence is partly 

262   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
shaped by the clinician’s knowledge 
and skills. It is also partly due to the fact 
that the clinician typically determines 
what assessment questions are asked, 
what tools are used, and what logisti-
cal arrangements are made for assess-
ment activities. There is even more to it. 
The nebulous but very real influence of 
assessor effects related to affect, values, 
culture, and interpersonal behaviors has 
been documented over several decades 
of interdisciplinary research in the behav-
ioral sciences (Björklund, Bäckström, & 
Jørgensen, 2011; Decker & Martino, 2013; 
Kelley, Kraft-Todd, Schapira, Kossowsky, 
& Riess, 2014; Keren & Willemsen, 2009; 
Michaelson, Rose, & May, 1967; Rosenthal 
& Rosnow, 2009).
Focus on the Person
Recall our discussion in Chapter 2 about 
being a vehicle. The assessment process is 
not about you, the clinician. No matter 
how worried you are about your prepara-
tion, competence, or knowledge, let your 
focus on your own ego slide into the back-
ground as you focus on this person. Who is 
he? What is or was her profession? Where 
does he come from? What hobbies and 
interests does she have? What languages 
does he speak? What is she experiencing 
right now? What are his wants and needs 
that are within your realm of expertise to 
address? You are the vehicle to getting the 
best information you can and synthesiz-
ing it so that the best informed decisions 
can be made about further intervention.
Could he be nervous or worried 
about what deficits you might find? Could 
she be unaccustomed to formal testing  
situations? Consider alternative words 
you might say, the tone of voice you might 
use, and the reassuring nonverbal signs 
you might give to express the follow-
ing to a person with aphasia or a related 
disorder:
• Mistakes and wrong answers are 
okay and even help us learn more 
about how we can help you.
• Assessment materials are designed 
so that most people cannot do every 
task perfectly.
• A lot of other people have trouble 
with particular items or tasks, too.
• Incorrect answers do not reflect 
a lack of personal worth or the 
quality of who you are as a person.
• Performance on a test does not 
capture the whole picture of what 
is relevant to your communication 
abilities.
Could he feel devalued as an older per-
son? Especially if you are younger than a 
person with whom you are working, con-
sider how you might demonstrate respect 
and appreciation for her experience and 
wisdom, and guard against conveying 
ageist stereotypes (see Chapter 9). Also 
be sure to have age-appropriate materials 
available as assessment stimuli.
Focus on Life Participation 
Goals From the Start
The clinical aphasiologist is ideally a cata-
lyst for improved quality of life, socializa-
tion, activity engagement, independence, 
medical management, and wellness. This 
applies to every step of the intervention 
process, including during his or her first 
introduction to the client and significant 
others and through all aspects of assess-
ment. This notion is central to clinical 

Best Practices in Assessment   263
excellence. We explore it in further de- 
tail in Chapter 23. In terms of assess-
ment, no matter how specific our evalu-
ation is in terms of identifying deficits at  
the impairment level, it is only impor-
tant if it is relevant to the individual we 
are serving and it can be tied to a per- 
son’s actual use of communication in 
ways that are important to him or her in 
everyday life.
Focus on Strengths
Strengths-based assessment is all the more 
essential in the deficit-focused contexts 
that characterize many medical environ-
ments. Assessment reports in the arena 
of acquired neurological disorders are 
replete with limiting statements. Be sure 
to balance this with findings of what is 
possible despite impairments.
When assessing at the impairment 
level, focus on much more than deficits. 
Be sure to note intact skills and abilities 
as well as challenges. For example, a sum-
mary of assessment results for a woman 
with global aphasia may include a long 
list of things she cannot do. Consider 
these statements:
• She is unable to read at the single-
word level.
• She cannot identify more than 2 of 
20 simple concrete everyday objects 
in an auditory comprehension task.
• Her verbal output is primarily in the 
form of one stereotypic utterance.
• Her verbal imitation abilities are 
poor.
What can she do? Does she have a reliable 
yes/no response? Is she affectionate with 
people she loves? Is she responsive to oth-
ers’ touch? Does she use meaningful into-
nation patterns even if her utterances are 
not literally meaningful? Does she some-
times use appropriate gestures? Does she 
show responsiveness to any particular 
variety of supported communication?
Be sure to note strengths pertaining 
to life participation for every individual. 
Focus not only on barriers, isolation, and 
the risk of loneliness. Does a person take 
initiative to engage others in interactions? 
Does the person join in-group activities 
enjoyed preonset? Perhaps there are even 
some things that have improved since 
the onset of an acquired disorder, such as 
willingness to try new things, and a deep-
ened relationship and sense of closeness 
with a partner or adult child.
People with dementia merit special 
consideration of strengths. As reviewed in 
Chapter 13, many people with Alzheim-
er’s disease and related disorders retain 
abilities to participate in conversations 
and meaningful interaction even in the 
late stages of disease progression. Tun-
ing into performance during reminis-
cence activities and tasks that tap pro-
cedural memory, for example, is vital to 
demonstrating cognitive-communicative 
strengths. So is the use of supported com-
munication strategies that make the most 
of intact abilities (Bayles & Tomoeda, 
2007; Davidson, Worrall, & Hickson, 2003; 
Hopper, Bayles, Harris, & Holland, 2001; 
Mahendra, Bayles, & Harris, 2005).
Have a Clear Purpose
The excellent clinician knows what he or 
she is doing with a patient and why at 
any given time. When engaging in assess-
ment, we are often addressing more than 
one of the purposes listed above. Still, the 

264   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
clinician should have a clear idea of his 
or her goals and purpose in the process, 
and these should be clearly in line with 
the individual’s own personal goals.
Ensure the Best Possible 
Assessment Conditions
Clinicians often have little control over 
the types of physical space available 
within facilities where they work. We may  
be expected to carry out an assessment 
session in a hospital room, a busy reha-
bilitation gym in which occupational and 
physical therapists are working with oth-
ers at the same time, or in shared office 
space. No matter what the circumstances, 
it is important to ensure that the room is 
well lit and that distracting noise, activi-
ties, and visual clutter be minimized. Any-
one in the room who may be distracting 
or unhelpful at any given moment should 
probably simply not be in the room. It 
may be necessary to have a caregiver in 
the room for assistance with documenting 
case history information, but it may be a 
good idea to have that person leave dur-
ing other aspects of the assessment if his 
or her presence leads to distraction, inter-
ruption, embarrassment, or stress on the 
part of the person being assessed.
Be Strategic in Setting the Location
If it’s feasible, get out of a clinical space or 
hospital room. Get outside. Go to a store, 
the person’s home, workplace, or school. 
Assess the individual’s functioning in 
true daily communication environments. 
Go to whatever context might help tie in 
the carryover of strategies on which you 
are working. Changing contexts is impor-
tant for generalizing treatment results 
and may also help boost motivation by 
enhancing the relevance and applicability 
of treatment strategies.
Be Strategic About Timing
Be thoughtful about scheduling an assess-
ment session. The time of day can make 
an important difference in people whose 
moods and energy levels may shift 
cyclically. Consider scheduling around 
moments when such potential confounds 
as fatigue, pain, hunger, or low mood may 
be especially problematic. Important con-
siderations about timing may come up 
within a given assessment session as well. 
If too much frustration develops over 
difficult language tasks during assess-
ment, think about when it is time to stop. 
Although some insurance companies and 
health care plans require the use of some 
sort of standardized test in a diagnos-
tic session, most do not require that the 
entire examination be given or even that 
the actual scores be reported.
Include Others in the Process
Keep in mind how personal and environ-
mental factors are critical contextual fac-
tors for life participation (WHO, 2001). 
Language disorders affect relationships. 
Assessment of personal and environmen-
tal factors includes assessment of these 
complex impacts, which differ according 
to whose relationships one is consider-
ing. Consider, for example, the diagrams 
in Figure 17–1, depicting the most impor-
tant relationships to a specific person with 
aphasia and to those of his or her partner. 
We might consider either person’s most 
important relationships from the perspec-
tive of the other. How we do this has great 

265
A
B
Figure 17–1.  Varied perspectives on social circles. In images A 
through C, the person with aphasia is the one whose primary every-
day relationships are being considered. The other circles represent 
important people or groups in that person’s life. Closer circles rep-
resent people seen more often. The size of the circle represents 
the degree of personal importance of that person as indicated by 
the person assessed. A. Represents the most important personal 
relationships in everyday life from the viewpoint of a person with 
aphasia. B. Shows the same set of relationships, highlighting the 
perspective on the person with aphasia on the partner.  continues

266   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
relevance to the way we might assess the 
impact of the language disorder (Brumfitt, 
2009; Shadden, 2005).
Be Mindful of Multiple 
Perspectives on Real-Life Impacts 
of Communication Disability
A spouse, partner, or adult child of a per-
son with a language disorder often has 
a different perception of the severity of 
the language disorder, and of the life-
affecting consequences of the disorder, 
compared to the individuals’ own per-
ception. In some cases, the perception of 
a significant other is that the severity and 
impact are worse than the individual with 
the language challenge thinks they are. In 
other cases, the individual with the lan-
guage disorder suggests greater severity. 
Acknowledging these differences in view-
points is important. So is taking them into 
account throughout intervention.
Speak Directly to the Person
People with communication disabilities  
often mention that their greatest pet peeve 
in health care contexts is being talked 
about as if they are not in the room. When 
C
Figure 17–1.  continued  partner. C. Illustrates how the frequency 
of contact and importance of relationships may be perceived dif-
ferently by the partner. Source: Adapted from Shadden, 2004. Full-
color versions of these figures can be found in the Color Insert.

Best Practices in Assessment   267
we are collecting case history information, 
it can be easy to shift attention away from 
a person who has trouble answering those 
questions, focusing instead on a spouse, 
partner, or adult child, for example, to 
most efficiently seek information. Effi-
ciency is not usually as important as the 
quality of our connection to the people 
we are serving. Making eye contact and 
directly addressing a person with a lan-
guage disorder, using whatever adaptive  
communication techniques will help 
exchange information, are vital to empow-
ering that person as the key player in his 
or her intervention. In cases where it is 
necessary to ask questions of or address 
someone else in the room, it is important 
to keep drawing in the participation of the 
person with a language disorder. Foster a 
sense that his or her own role is essential 
to the process.
Collaborate
Assessment is a collaborative process 
with the individual assessed and anyone 
else involved in his or her care. Many 
aspects of assessment require and benefit 
from input from other professionals with 
whom we work. As is apparent when we 
consider assessment problem-solving chal-
lenges in Chapter 19, drawing on input 
from neuropsychologists, social workers, 
nurses, physicians, occupational thera-
pists, physical therapists, audiologists, 
and dieticians, among others, is key.
Being knowledgeable about the scope 
of practice of other disciplines and show-
ing respect for real and perceived bound-
aries about whose role it is to assess what 
help ensure sustainable and effective 
working relationships. For example, in 
some contexts, neuropsychologists are 
considered the designated experts in 
assessment of cognitive constructs (e.g., 
memory, attention, visuospatial percep-
tion) and SLPs are not encouraged — and 
sometimes are even disallowed — to ad- 
minister corresponding tests. Occupa-
tional therapists and physical therapists, 
too, have important areas of overlapping 
expertise with clinical aphasiologists. For 
example, all three of these disciplines 
have scope of practice components related 
to executive functions, expressive modali-
ties, and information processing.
Appreciate That Experts, Not Tests, 
Are What Determine Diagnoses
Tests are tools for helping to better under-
stand the nature of a person’s strengths 
and weaknesses. In and of themselves, 
they are not clinical decision makers; 
expert clinicians are. Tests do not diag-
nose language disorders; clinicians do. 
If you administer an aphasia battery to 
a person with a congenital cognitive dis-
ability and no acquired neurogenic condi-
tion, you could use your results to indi-
cate that he or she has aphasia; you could 
even classify him or her in terms of type 
and severity of aphasia. Your use of the 
results would be mere bunk. Certainly 
you would not do this.
Using test scores to diagnose neuro-
genic language disorders is misguided 
for another important reason. People 
who don’t have the condition for which 
you are assessing sometimes do worse 
than the people who do have it. Consider, 
for example, the fact that people with-
out aphasia do not necessarily perform 
without errors on aphasia tests. People 
with aphasia may score within “normal” 
ranges on an aphasia battery yet clearly 
have what, by definition, is aphasia. The 
mean aphasia battery score of a group 

268   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
of people with aphasia is, of course, sig-
nificantly lower than the mean score of a 
group of people without any neurological 
impairment; still, there is likely to be over-
lap between the distributions of scores for 
the two groups (Ross & Wertz, 2003, 2004).
Attend to Cultural and 
Linguistic Differences
Attending to cultural and linguistic differ-
ences when assessing people with neuro-
genic communication disorders is a topic 
worthy of an entire tome. In fact, there 
are several texts focused on multicultural 
approaches to intervention in adults with 
neurogenic communication disorders. 
Readers of this book are encouraged to 
continue study in this area throughout 
their professional lives. Here we review 
important strategies to address multicul-
tural aspects of every type of assessment.
Recognize That Our Multicultural 
Strengths Are Always Limited
Of course, it is important that we engage 
in lifelong learning about other cultures 
and languages so that we may be sensitive, 
thoughtful, and strategic in working with 
people who differ from us culturally and 
linguistically. We probably all know that 
we should, for example, pay close attention 
to pragmatic differences across cultures in 
terms of our use of body language, expres-
sion of affection, and use of formal titles 
versus first names. Still, no matter how 
sophisticated we may be about multicul-
tural aspects of health well-being, language, 
and human interaction, it is important that 
we recognize our limitations in terms of 
appreciating cultural and linguistic differ-
ences that may influence our assessments 
(Björklund et al., 2011; Ivanova & Hallow-
ell, 2013; Threats, 2005, 2010a).
Index Language Proficiency 
Across All Languages Spoken
It is ideal if a clinician who is proficient in 
each language the individual spoke prior 
to the onset of a disorder directly assesses 
the individual’s communicative abilities. 
However, this is rarely the case. It is often 
helpful to incorporate an interpreter; how-
ever, this is not always feasible. Also, the 
role and actions of interpreters are impor-
tant considerations in their own right; for 
example, it is especially challenging to 
work with an interpreter who is not will-
ing or able to compartmentalize his own 
opinions and ideas during the process. 
Computer and phone apps for translation 
and interpretation are available to provide 
spoken and written output in many lan-
guages, and their capabilities are readily 
improving. Of course, they are unlikely 
ever to replace the strengths of actual 
multilingual speakers in terms of the flex-
ibility and creativity required for effective 
interpersonal communication.
Use Dynamic and 
Standardized Methods
A mixture of standardized testing and 
flexibly adapted assessment is recom-
mended regardless of who is being as- 
sessed. When working with a person 
whose cultural background is different 
from yours and different from the back-
ground of those included in test standard-
ization, this is especially critical. Because 
this is an issue for all people, regardless of 
culture, we address it further below.
Consider Potential Cultural 
Impacts on Assessment Results
The very act of testing may be unfamil-
iar to some people we assess. Medical or 
clinical environments may be unfamiliar 

Best Practices in Assessment   269
and even alienating to some. Further, the 
situation of having a clinician who is in 
charge probe a person through questions 
and tasks with which that person has dif-
ficulty results in an imbalance of power 
and, for some, perceived respect. When 
clinicians are younger than the people 
they are assessing, this may exacerbate 
such imbalances. A sort of teacher-stu-
dent or boss-underling role establishment 
between clinician and patient is inherently 
demeaning to some. The clinician cannot 
know with certainty just how he or she is 
being perceived in terms of the cultural 
acceptance and respect he or she intends 
to convey. In any case, it is important to 
consider how such factors might influ-
ence assessment results.
Attend to Special Needs of 
Multilingual Speakers
The number of tests for aphasia and related 
disorders is limited in most of the world’s 
languages, even among those spoken 
most commonly. Ivanova and Hallowell 
(2013) provide a table of aphasia tests in 
20 of the world’s most commonly spoken 
languages, along with information about 
reported normative sampling and refer-
ences for each. Clinicians assessing people 
who speak languages in which tests are 
unavailable are challenged with having 
to depend on qualitative descriptions and 
observations, or translated versions of 
existing tests.
Given differences in phonology, mor-
phology, semantics, syntax, and prag-
matics across any two languages, literal 
translations of any given test are never 
appropriate (Bates, Wulfeck, & MacWhin-
ney, 1991). Also, psycholinguistic controls 
implemented in testing stimuli developed 
in one language are typically not applica-
ble in a different language. Examples of 
important aspects of control that would 
not necessarily apply once translated into 
a different language include:
• Phonetic complexity and articulatory 
difficulty of words to be spoken
• Graphemic complexity of words to 
be written
• Morphological length and 
complexity
• Word frequency, familiarity, and 
associated age of acquisition
• Syntactic complexity
• Specific grammatical structures 
(e.g., articles and inflections, verb 
tense and mood, and noun case and 
gender)
• Verbal stimulus length
• Cultural relevance of visual and 
linguistic stimuli and tasks
Even when a test is translated well 
and appropriately adapted to as many of 
these factors as possible, it is still impor-
tant that it be standardized anew in the 
target language. Norms and patterns of 
performance for people with similar types 
and severity levels of language impair-
ments are not equivalent across languages 
into which tests have been translated (Bates 
et al., 1991; Ivanova & Hallowell, 2013).
Promote Acceptance Regardless 
of Sexual Orientation
We noted earlier (and will continue to 
note) the importance of cultural compe-
tence in our work as it may pertain to 
working with people who differ accord-
ing to language, ethnicity, race, age, and 
socioeconomic status. Ensuring a context 
that welcomes diversity in terms of sexual 
orientation is also paramount. There are 
ample challenges that people who are les-
bian, gay, bisexual, transgender, or queer 
(see the University of Michigan Spectrum 
Center, n.d., for a discussion on nuances 

270   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
related to such terms) face when navigat-
ing health care systems; these go beyond 
the myriad challenges already faced 
when coping with life-altering aspects of 
acquired neurological disorders. Avoid 
use of heterosexist language. Do not ask 
questions that convey an assumption 
about the gender of a person’s partner. Do 
not ask whether a patient has a “spouse.” 
Asking if a person is married tends to 
convey an assumption that he or she is 
heterosexual. Although legal marriages 
of same-sex couples are on the rise in 
some Western countries, they are not the 
norm in much of the world. Heterosexist 
language is often used unintentionally, 
merely out of ignorance, not intentionally 
to convey judgment or discrimination. 
It is important for the clinical aphasiolo-
gist to play an active advocacy role in this 
area, perhaps nudging other colleagues to 
revise the wording they use, and perhaps 
editing clinical forms and records that 
include heterosexist language.
Adopt a Process Analysis Approach
A process analysis approach to assess-
ment entails:
• Considering all possible skills, 
abilities, predispositions, and 
aptitudes that a person must have 
to carry out a particular assessment 
task
• Considering which of those directly 
pertain to the construct under study 
and which do not, and determining 
the potential impact of confounding 
factors on our conclusions
• Acknowledging any uncertainty 
we may have about the validity 
of results in light of inherent 
confounding factors
Examples and illustrations of this approach 
are explored further in Chapter 19.
Recognize That There Is Always a 
Chance of Measurement Error
Measurement error is a reality. No mat-
ter how clever we are as diagnosticians, 
how phenomenal our assessment tools, 
and how hard we try to achieve the most 
valid results possible, there is always a 
chance that we will be mistaken when we 
draw conclusions from results. We may 
misunderstand the nature of a problem. 
We may misdiagnose a condition. We may 
underestimate or overestimate severity. 
Recognizing the possibility of question-
able results and wrong conclusions is part 
of clinical excellence.
A strong body of research in the area 
of judgment and decision making under-
scores that the degree of confidence that 
experts in a variety of disciplines have 
about the professional decisions they 
make has little relationship to the accu-
racy of their actual decisions. Also, the 
confidence that clinicians have about their 
knowledge and skills is often unrelated to 
their actual knowledge and skills. Recog-
nizing these facts, and accepting what we 
don’t know, makes us more honest clini-
cians, helps us remain open to lifelong 
learning, and makes it more likely that we 
will make valid conclusions.
Embrace Assessment as 
a Research Process
There is much to be gained by thinking of 
the assessment of any individual’s com-
munication abilities as a research project. 
Research consists of methodically formu-
lating questions and hypotheses, design-

Best Practices in Assessment   271
ing a method to test the hypotheses and 
answer the questions, collecting data, 
analyzing the data, interpreting the data 
in light of the questions and hypotheses, 
and reflecting on and planning for the 
possible next steps. The next steps might 
include contributing to any of the assess-
ment goals listed above as purposes of 
assessment or perhaps generating new 
questions and hypotheses to be addressed 
in a continuing assessment process. See 
Figure 17–2 for examples of how assess-
ment activities may be conceived within a 
research process. Given that we typically 
have many hypotheses we aim to test and 
questions we aim to answer in any given 
assessment process, we might actually 
view the process as several research proj-
ects or experiments combined.
Consider the Appropriate Balance 
of Dynamic Nonstandardized 
and Standardized Assessment
Dynamic assessments are those that allow 
tailoring of assessment materials to the 
interests, ability level, and cultural and 
linguistic background of the person being 
assessed. Standardized assessments are 
those that:
• Have normative data, ideally 
collected from people without 
any neurological disorders and 
from people with the disorder 
corresponding to the assessment 
tool’s target clinical population, 
enabling comparisons of individual 
results to group results
• Entail explicit instructions for test 
administration and scoring
Ideally, standardized tests include direc-
tions for how many and what types of 
cues can be given, how many times any 
item may be repeated, and ceiling/floor 
rules. A ceiling rule indicates how many 
times a person may get consecutive items 
or items within a subtest wrong before the 
test administrator stops or moves on to the 
next section or subtest. A floor rule (also 
called a basal rule) indicates when certain 
items or groups of items may be skipped 
because the test taker gets so many correct 
that those items are apparently too easy.
Dynamic assessments allow great 
flexibility in terms of how much any par-
ticular domain is sampled, what types 
of cues are given, and how relevant the 
type of ability being assessed is to an indi-
vidual’s life participation and quality of 
life. Discourse is an essential component 
of dynamic assessment, as discussed in 
greater detail in Chapter 21. It is impor-
tant to observe varied communication 
strategies and their relative effectiveness 
across a variety of discourse tasks. Exam-
ples of discourse manipulation that may 
yield important information include:
• Varying discourse genres (conver-
sational, persuasive, descriptive, 
expository, procedural, narrative)
• Varying grammatical complexity 
of statements and questions 
to note differential impacts on 
comprehension
• Drawing on content from the 
distant past versus the immediate 
past and from highly familiar to less 
familiar content to gauge changes in 
the quality of interaction with each
• Continuing to converse in depth 
in some content areas to observe 
discourse cohesion
• Trying out varied types of cueing to 
elicit responses
• Inviting varied levels of partner 
support

272
Formulate	
questons	and	
hypotheses
Design	a	
method
Collect	
data
Analyze	
data
Interpret	
results
Reﬂect	on	
and	plan	
for	next	
steps
Questons:	Does	he	have	aphasia?	Would	she	be	likely	to	beneﬁt	from	a	treatment	program?
Hypotheses:	Her	aphasia	is	impactng	her	ability	to	manage	her	ﬁnances	independently.	He	is	having	
severe	diﬃculty	with	reading	for	leisure.	She	has	a	moderate	word-ﬁnding	deﬁcit	in	spontaneous	
conversaton.
Select	tests,	questonnaires,	screening	instruments,	etc.	Plan	for	tming and	scheduling of	signiﬁcant	
others,	organize	materials	and	supplies.	Address	funding	issues.
Carry	out	the	method	as	planned,	adaptng	as	necessary	to	the	individual’s	needs	and	responses	
throughout	the	process.
Analyze	quanttatve	and	qualitatve	results	from	standardized	testng, screenings,	interviews,	and	
observatons.
Use	results	to	address	hypotheses	and	answer	questons.	Consider	shortcomings	of	the	approach	taken	
and	what	might	be	done	to	remedy	those.	Recognize	additonal	informaton	needed.	
Make	recommendatons	for	treatment,	discharge,	patent	and	family	educaton	and	support,	referrals	to	
other	professionals,	etc.	Document	additonal	assessment	needs.
Research process steps
Examples of research steps duringassessment
Figure 17–2.  Assessment activities corresponding to steps in a research process.

Best Practices in Assessment   273
Shortcomings of dynamic assessment 
are that it:
• Does not enable comparison of the 
individual tested to a normative 
sample
• Does not ensure consistency or 
comparable types or quality of 
information gained from one 
session to the next
• Is less likely than standardized 
assessment to entail methodical 
assessment of simple to complex 
levels in a prespecified array of 
tasks and language domains
Shortcomings of standardized test-
ing are that currently available published 
assessment tools tend to:
• Fail to meet a wide range of criteria 
for test design, psychometric 
properties, and means of controlling 
for confounding factors
• Fail to provide an account of the 
underlying neuropsychological 
nature of and reasons for the 
deficits indexed
• Have an impairment-level focus, 
limiting our ability to index 
treatment outcomes related to social 
participation and quality of life 
across a wide range of individuals
• Fail to lead to clear suggestions for 
appropriate treatment approaches
• Be deficient in indexing meaningful 
changes in language recovery over 
time
Given that clinical aphasiology has a 
much longer history of focusing on what 
the ICF refers to as body structure and 
function than on activity and participation, 
there are far more established published 
assessment protocols that entail testing  
at the level of body functions. Most pub-
lished tests for assessing people with 
aphasia and language impairments asso-
ciated with stroke, TBI, and dementia are 
focused on specific aspects of impairment, 
such as reading, writing, word finding, 
auditory comprehension, working mem-
ory, and attention. These are certainly 
important areas to focus on in terms of 
identifying potential body-function-level 
areas to target in treatment. They are not, 
however, necessarily meaningful in and of 
themselves without considering an indi-
vidual’s vast array of personal and envi-
ronmental factors.
Knowing just the severity of a given 
person’s postonset reading deficits, for 
example, is not necessarily relevant to a 
rehabilitation program in and of itself. 
To interpret reading assessment scores 
and apply them in intervention, we must 
also know how important reading is to 
that person, what about his or her read-
ing activities has been lost, what he or 
she needs and wants to read on a regular 
basis, and what reading topics are most 
interesting and relevant to him or her. We 
explore the factors that guide the selection 
of an assessment tool despite its possible 
weaknesses in Chapter 20.
The distinction between standardized 
versus nonstandardized testing by defini-
tion is clear in that one either administers 
a test in a way that meets the psychometric 
criteria of a standardized test or one does 
not. Nonstandardized testing is consid-
ered “dynamic” because it is altered based 
on the needs and desires of the clinician  
and the person being assessed. In actuality, 
the distinction between standardized and 
dynamic assessment is often blurred, as 
some clinicians use published standardized 
tests in a dynamic way. Examples include:
• Altering the type of cues and 
feedback given and the kinds of 

274   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
responses interpreted as “correct”; 
selecting only certain subtests or 
items within subtests to administer
• Altering the content of verbal or 
visual stimuli to adjust for cultural 
and linguistic differences
• Using materials from a standard-
ized test that has not been normed 
on people with the same type of 
communication impairment or  
etiology as the person being 
assessed
A key point in comparing and contrast-
ing standardized and nonstandardized 
assessment methods is not to determine 
which approach is better but to recognize 
that the effectiveness, validity, and qual-
ity of assessment for a given person are 
often based on an appropriate balance 
between the two. Striving for that balance 
is an important task of the excellent clini-
cal aphasiologist.
Integrate Criterion-
Referenced Measures
Criterion-referenced measures (also called 
domain-referenced measures) are indi-
ces used to gauge a person’s own ability 
without direct comparison to others. This 
is in contrast to norm-referenced mea-
sures (indices compared to a sample of a 
population with similar traits). In clinical 
practice, we use criterion-referenced mea-
sures in several practical ways. We use 
them when we establish a person’s initial 
performance abilities on a certain task, 
such as object naming or comprehension 
of sentences having a certain grammatical 
construction, and then measure changes 
from that baseline during the course of 
treatment. We also use them to determine 
whether a person might be appropri-
ate for a given treatment. For example, 
if a given person is able to demonstrate 
accurate reading comprehension at a cer-
tain prespecified level, we may consider 
him or her eligible for a book discussion 
group for stroke and brain injury survi-
vors. Researchers often similarly use cri-
terion-referenced measures to determine 
whether a person qualifies to participate 
in a study. For example, depending on the 
nature of a study, we may say that a per-
son must be able to accurately read aloud 
a certain set of sentences or to name cor-
rectly a certain percentage of the verbs 
depicted in a series of action scenes.
Further, we use criterion-referenced 
measures to determine when a certain 
treatment goal has been met. Consider, 
for example, a TBI survivor who does not 
self-monitor or control his tendency to say 
off-topic comments during spontaneous 
conversation. We may have a goal to help 
him work toward topic maintenance or 
discourse cohesion and operationalize his 
target for meeting that goal as indepen-
dently demonstrating on-topic comments 
80% of the time during spontaneous con-
versation with his wife.
Sometimes tasks and stimuli from 
standardized tests are used in a nonstan-
dardized way when determining crite-
rion-referenced performance. We might 
index information units produced when a 
person describes a picture from the West-
ern Aphasia Battery–Revised (WAB-R; 
Kertesz, 2007), the number of commands 
followed accurately on one of the sub-
tests of the Revised Token Test (McNeil 
& Prescott, 1978), or the number of phone 
numbers identified in a minute during 
a phonebook search task on the Test of 
Everyday Attention (Ridgeway, Robert-
son, Ward, & Nimmo-Smith, 1994).

Best Practices in Assessment   275
The list of best practices for assess-
ment is summarized in Box 17–1. Of course, 
reading about and studying best practices 
is not sufficient. We must engage holisti-
cally in ongoing efforts to become the most 
excellent aphasiologists we can be.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
Summary of Best Practices for Assessment
• Do not underestimate how impactful your role is.
• Focus on the person.
• Focus on life participation goals from the start.
• Focus on strengths.
• Have a clear purpose.
• Ensure the best possible assessment conditions.
• Be strategic in setting the location.
• Be strategic about timing.
• Include others in the process.
• Be mindful of multiple perspectives on real-life impacts of 
communication disability.
• Speak directly to the person.
• Collaborate.
• Appreciate that experts, not tests, are what determine 
diagnoses.
• Attend to cultural and linguistic differences.
	 Recognize that our multicultural strengths are always 
limited.
	 Index language proficiency across all languages spoken.
	 Use dynamic and standardized methods.
	 Consider potential cultural impacts on assessment 
results.
	 Promote acceptance regardless of sexual orientation, 
race, religion, and socioeconomic status.
	 Attend to special needs of multilingual speakers.
• Adopt a process analysis approach.
• Recognize that there is always a chance of measurement 
error.
• Embrace assessment as a research process.
• Consider the appropriate balance of dynamic 
nonstandardized and standardized assessment.
• Integrate criterion-referenced measures.
Box
17–1

276   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 2.	 What are some ways in which treat-
ment might be integrated into the 
assessment process?
	 3.	 What are some ways in which assess-
ment might be integrated into the 
treatment process?
	 4.	 How is the ICF framework relevant to 
life participation goals in the context 
of assessment?
	 5.	 How might knowing about stan-
dardized tests be helpful in clinical 
practice even when there are no pub-
lished tests available or when there 
is insufficient time allotted for test 
administration?
	 6.	 In this chapter, it was noted that the 
person carrying out assessment has a 
tremendous influence on assessment 
results. Describe at least three exam-
ples of how this could be the case.
	 7.	 Recall a situation (personal, academic, 
or professional) in which you found it 
difficult to let go of your own ego and 
self-awareness to simply be present in 
terms of doing your best work.
a.	 How might you have handled 
yourself differently in that situa-
tion if you had not been so wor-
ried about your own performance 
and instead focused more on the 
mission of what you were doing?
b.	 How might you prepare yourself 
to be a vehicle for empowerment 
and strength finding in assess-
ment contexts?
	 8.	 Recall a situation in which you were 
assessed and felt that your weak-
nesses were emphasized far more 
than your strengths.
a.	 Was the assessment helpful? Why 
or why not?
b.	 What could the assessor have 
done to help you feel more 
empowered to do something to 
address your weaknesses?
c.	 What might you do as a clinician 
to ensure a strengths-based focus 
in your assessment practices?
	 9.	 How might location and timing affect 
the reliability and validity of assess-
ment results?
10.	 How would tuning into varied social 
circles of a person with a communi-
cation disorder affect your treatment 
and discharge planning?
11.	 Describe a situation in which inter-
professional collaboration would be 
essential for assessing the nature of 
person’s language disorder.
12.	 Why can test scores alone not be used 
to determine the diagnosis of a lan-
guage problem?
13.	 List ways in which cultural and lin-
guistic differences may be addressed 
during assessment. For each, describe 
its strengths and weaknesses.
14.	 What are the pros and cons of having 
an interpreter assist in testing a per-
son with a language disorder whose 
language you do not speak?
15.	 What are some specific strategies 
you would recommend in a clinical 
agency where you work to ensure 
an accepting and welcoming atmo-
sphere for people with diverse sexual 
orientations?
16.	 Describe the limitations of each of 
the strategies below, used to help 
reduce bias when evaluating people 
from culturally and ethnically diverse 
populations.
a.	 Translate existing tests for speak-
ers of other languages.
b.	 Modify existing standardized 
tests to make them appropriate 
for clients from other cultures.
c.	 Use tests that include a small 
percentage of minorities in the 
standardization sample when 
developing tests.

Best Practices in Assessment   277
d.	 Standardize existing tests on 
minority populations.
e.	 Use a language sample and 
naturalistic observations.
f.	 Use criterion-referenced 
measures.
17.	 What strategies will you use to dem-
onstrate your recognition of the 
fact that there is always a chance of 
measurement error in your clinical 
assessments?
18.	 Describe how an excellent clinical 
aphasiologist can adopt a process-
analysis approach during the course 
of assessment.
19.	 Describe how the assessment process 
with each individual you assess could 
be conceived as a research process.
20.	 Summarize the relative advantages and 
weaknesses of standardized and dy- 
namic (nonstandardized) assessment.
21.	 Describe how the distinction between 
standardized and dynamic assess-
ment can be blurry.
22.	 What are potential advantages and dis-
advantages for using norm-referenced  
versus criterion-referenced scores in 
the assessment of neurogenic language  
disorders?
See the companion website for additional 
learning and teaching materials.


279
Chapter
18
Psychometric Aspects of Assessment 
and Assessment Processes
In this chapter, we review psychometric 
properties of assessment methods and 
tools. We also summarize the basic ele-
ments of diagnostic tests and processes. 
Practical examples of screening and case 
history items are provided. After reading 
and reflecting on the content in this chap-
ter, you will ideally be able to answer, in 
your own words, the following queries:
	 1.	 What psychometric properties should 
be addressed in assessment processes?
	 2.	 What are potentially confounding 
factors?
	 3.	 What is entailed in screening for ac- 
quired neurogenic language disorders?
	 4.	 What are the typical components of a 
comprehensive assessment process?
	 5.	 What information is pertinent to col-
lect during the case history?
What Psychometric Properties 
Should Be Addressed in 
Assessment Processes?
For readers who already have ample 
sophistication in assessment, the defini-
tion and relevance of psychometric con-
structs may seem obvious. Still, clinicians 
who may have mastered these constructs 
during their academic studies do not 
always use them correctly in clinical prac-
tice. For example, the constructs of reli-
ability and validity are often erroneously 
used interchangeably.
It is a good idea even for seasoned 
clinical aphasiologists to brush up peri-
odically on psychometric terminology.
Reliability refers to the consistency 
with which something is measured or 
evaluated. Four types of reliability are par-
ticularly relevant to clinical aphasiology: 
test-retest reliability, interexaminer reli-
ability, intraexaminer reliability, and inter-
nal reliability. Test-retest reliability is the 
consistency with which the same result is 
achieved when a test is administered at 
two different times. Several factors may 
influence this in people with neurological 
disorders. If we give the same test twice 
within a brief period of time, they may 
do better the second time because they 
have recently had a chance to practice 
and remember stimuli and answers when 
taking the test the first time. If we allow 
a longer period of time until we assess 
them again, they may actually improve 
due to spontaneous recovery, practice, or 
intervention; in that case, it is the person’s 
ability that is inconsistent, not the test’s 

280   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
ability to capture similar results from one 
time to the next.
Interexaminer reliability is the con-
sistency of results obtained by two dif-
ferent assessors. The two examiners may 
score the same administration of a test 
(both being in the room at the same time 
or using a video recording of the very 
same administration). Alternatively, they 
may each administer the test on separate 
occasions to the same individual. In the lat-
ter case, the reliability indexes the degree 
to which the individual test administra-
tor and the nature of his or her interac-
tion with the test taker influences the 
results. Intraexaminer reliability refers to 
the consistency with which an individual 
assessor gets the same assessment results. 
Using high-quality video-recorded assess-
ments helps to rule out the influence of 
test-retest inconsistencies on intraexam-
iner reliability. Internal reliability (also 
called internal consistency) refers to the 
consistency with which results are ob- 
tained across items or components of 
items within a test. One type of internal 
validity sometimes reported is split-half 
reliability; this is the degree to which 
half of the items on a test yield consis-
tent results compared to the other half. Of 
course, for a test that is designed to index 
performance across varied difficulty lev-
els in any given domain, one would not 
expect results for easy items on the test to 
correlate highly with results for difficult 
items. At times, when a smaller number 
of items on a test yield similar results to 
the test as a whole, shortened forms of 
the test may be recommended. However, 
it matters a great deal which items have 
been shown to lead to similar results as 
the test in its entirety. Ivanova and Hal-
lowell (2013) provide detailed guidance 
for the calculation of varied metrics of 
internal reliability on adult language tests.
Validity refers to the degree to which 
what one intends or purports to measure 
really is what is being measured. Valid-
ity is not inherent in a test, test item, or 
task. Rather, it is the inferences we make 
based on performance we observe, or our 
interpretations of test results, that can be 
judged in terms of their validity. Some 
argue that validity is a singular construct 
without distinct subtypes (Strauss, Sher-
man, & Spreen, 2006; Wolfe & Smith, 2007). 
Even if that is the case, one may analyze the 
construct in varied ways. Any test, test item, 
or task may be judged in terms its content, 
construct, criterion, and face validity.
Content validity is the degree to 
which the items on a test or scale tap into 
the construct to be assessed. Nicholas, 
MacLennan, and Brookshire (1986) pro-
vided an excellent illustration of chal-
lenges to content validity in testing people 
with and without aphasia. They presented 
questions taken from aphasia tests meant 
to assess reading ability but without first 
showing test takers the corresponding 
reading passages. Both groups of partici-
pants were able to answer many of the 
questions accurately. Thus, many of the 
reading test items were tapping into gen-
eral knowledge and reasoning, not neces-
sarily reading comprehension. An area of 
frequent challenge to content validity is 
the use of speaking tasks to index language 
formulation in people who have concomi-
tant language and motor speech problems. 
An index of the number of words a person 
can say in a minute when given a certain 
category (e.g., types of transportation, 
words that begin with the letter t) may be 
a good indicator of generative naming or 
verbal fluency in a person without a motor 
speech disorder; however, having apraxia 
of speech could certainly negatively affect 
the index without reflecting anything 
about his or her language formulation abil-

Psychometric Aspects of Assessment and Assessment Processes   281
ity. To achieve high-content validity, we 
must operationalize exactly what we mean 
to index and then ensure that our assess-
ment addresses all of the components of 
what we have operationalized.
Construct validity is the ability of a 
means of assessment to capture what it is 
intended to assess. It can be quantified by 
measuring its degree of agreement with 
other measures of the same construct (i.e., 
through convergent validity indices). It 
can also be quantified by measuring its 
lack of relationship with measures of con-
structs that differ from the target construct 
(i.e., though discriminant validity).
Criterion validity reflects how pre-
dictive performance on a measure is of a 
certain outcome. It may be measured by 
calculating the correlation between scores 
from one test with scores on another that is 
intended to assess a similar construct (con-
current validity). It may also be measured 
by calculating the correlation between 
test results and future performance in a 
relevant area (predictive validity). For 
example, a great deal of attention is paid 
to word-finding abilities through lexical-
semantic approaches to treatment in peo-
ple with anomia. It is logical that an index 
of the number of well-controlled objects 
or pictures a person names correctly is a 
valid index of her naming ability. How-
ever, it may not be a valid predictor of how 
accurately or how often she uses those 
same words in spontaneous conversa-
tion. Very few tests in the realm of clinical 
aphasiology have been studied in terms 
of their predictive validity. In their review 
of 31 instruments used to index var-
ied aspects of cognitive-communicative  
abilities in traumatic brain injury (TBI) 
survivors, Turkstra, Coelho, and Ylvisa-
ker (2005) report that only four had been 
evaluated according to whether they pre-
dicted abilities outside of clinical settings.
Criterion validity may also be evalu-
ated in terms of how well a test distin-
guishes between two groups of individu-
als. It is said to have good sensitivity if 
scores generated are likely to help iden-
tify the impairment you are testing if there 
really is one (avoiding false negatives) and 
good specificity if the scores are likely to 
help rule out impairment if there is not 
one (avoiding false positives).
Face validity is the degree to which 
a test or measure is judged by others to 
be valid. For example, an aphasiologist  
applying for a competitive research grant 
may wish to select a test that is well 
respected by senior scientists studying in 
a similar area. A speech-language pathol-
ogist (SLP) may value the face validity 
of a test in terms of the credibility it has 
among his or her clinical supervisors or 
the respect it was accorded by professors 
during his or her formal clinical education.
Ecological validity is the degree to 
which a test, or any specific stimulus or 
set of stimuli within a test, represents 
actual real-word types of stimuli that 
would be encountered in the everyday life 
of the person being tested. For example, 
for a picture-naming task, consider the 
lack of ecological validity for an image of 
a sled for a person in a tropical region, a 
Christmas tree for a person in a country 
where Christian holidays are not widely 
celebrated, or a popular singer from the 
1950s for a person born in the 1990s.
What Are Potentially 
Confounding Factors?
A confounding factor in assessment is 
any characteristic of a person’s abilities; 
any aspect of the assessment tools, pro-
cedures, and processes that we use; and 

282   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
any aspect of the testing context or situ-
ation the assessment context that could 
lead to invalid results. Let’s consider four 
broad categories of potential confounds 
in assessment of people with neurogenic 
language disorders: factors related to con-
comitant challenges to health and well-
being, test design factors, testing context 
factors, and interpersonal factors.
Factors Related to Concomitant 
Challenges to Health and Well-Being
A large and important set of potential 
confounding factors relates to the myriad 
impairments and conditions that people 
with neurogenic language disorders may 
have that can affect their linguistic perfor-
mance. Key categories of such sources of 
potential confounds are visual problems, 
hearing problems, apraxia of speech, dys-
arthria, limb apraxia, paralysis or paresis, 
constructional apraxia, intellectual and 
learning disabilities, attention deficits, 
working memory deficits, concomitant 
language deficits, and other challenges 
to health and well-being (e.g., metabolic 
and mood disorders). Because they are 
so important for clinical aphasiologists 
to know about and address proactively, 
these are discussed separately in our 
exploration of how to screen for and take 
into account concomitant challenges to 
health and well-being during language 
assessment, in Chapter 19.
Test Design Factors
There are ample ways in which aspects 
of the test itself could influence results in 
ways that are not directly related to the 
language abilities of the person being 
assessed. Factors that are important to 
control for in test design are listed in 
Table  18–1 in relationship to constructs 
typically assessed. Any one of these fac-
tors not well controlled for could be 
considered a potentially confounding 
factor. For example, if lexical stimuli are 
not developed with careful attention to 
psycholinguistic factors that are known 
to influence word difficulty, such as 
word frequency, word familiarity, age of 
acquisition, concept imageability, level of 
abstractness/concreteness, and grammat-
ical class, then any one of these factors or 
a combination of them could influence the 
validity of conclusions drawn about the 
test taker’s lexical abilities.
Assessment Context Factors
Additional potentially confounding fac-
tors are related to the assessment context. 
Poorly lit or noisy areas may influence a 
person’s ability to respond well. So may 
visual clutter and the presence of other 
people.
Interpersonal Factors
Another category of potentially con-
founding factors relates to the relation-
ship between the examiner and the per-
son being tested. If the examiner does not 
speak the test taker’s language at a native-
like level or has a strong nonnative accent, 
this could certainly affect the validity of 
assessment. So could distracting viola-
tions of politeness as perceived by the 
test taker; this might result, for example, 
when a male patient with strict beliefs 
that a woman should not touch him is 
touched repeatedly by a female clinician 
who believes that being affectionate with 
her clients helps build rapport.

283
Table 18–1.  Cognitive-Linguistic Functions, Corresponding Test Item Types, and Potentially Confounding Factors
Cognitive-Linguistic  
Functions and Associated 
Abilities and Deficits
Assessment Item Types
Potentially Confounding 
Cognitive-Linguistic Factors
Additional Potentially 
Confounding Factors
Receptive Language
Auditory processing and 
comprehension:
• Phonological processing
• Word recognition
• Word comprehension
• Grammatical processing and 
comprehension; receptive 
agrammatism
• Discourse comprehension
• Lexical decision (word vs. 
nonword discrimination)
• Selection of a multiple-choice 
image corresponding to a 
verbal stimulus
• Commands
• Yes/no questions
• True/false questions
• Statements
• Questions following a story 
(complex ideational material)
• Story retell tasks
• Spontaneous conversation
• Metaphor interpretation
• Semantic and phonological 
priming
• Word frequency
• Word familiarity
• Noun case and gender
• Age of acquisition
• Imageability
• Concreteness/abstractness
• Word, phrase, sentence length
• Phonemic complexity
• Grammatical complexity (e.g., 
semantically constrained vs. 
not; canonicity; clausal types, 
verb tense, mood)
• Density of propositions
• Plausibility of content
• Audibility, clarity, and rate of 
spoken language
• Discourse genre
These apply to all 
aspects of assessment:
• Clinician expertise
• Clinician-client rapport
• Arousal, alertness, 
attention
• Concomitant cognitive, 
linguistic, sensory, and 
motor problems
• Preonset intelligence, 
education, and abilities 
in all areas assessed
• Preonset proficiency 
in language of 
assessment
• Literacy
• Time
• Pain
• Overall health
• Depression, mood
continues

284
Cognitive-Linguistic  
Functions and Associated 
Abilities and Deficits
Assessment Item Types
Potentially Confounding 
Cognitive-Linguistic Factors
Additional Potentially 
Confounding Factors
Reading comprehension:
• Reading ability, dyslexia
• Matching cases/script/numbers
• Copying letters, words, phrases, 
sentences
• Orthographic lexical decision
• Reading aloud
• Word/sentence/paragraph 
reading with picture matching
• Paragraph/text reading with 
comprehension questions
• Metaphor interpretation
• Script, font
• Word frequency
• Word familiarity
• Noun case and gender
• Age of acquisition
• Imageability
• Concreteness/abstractness
• Word, phrase, sentence length
• Phonemic composition and 
articulatory difficulty
• Grammatical complexity
• Density of propositions
• Plausibility of content
• Self-esteem
• Shyness
• Test anxiety
• Fear of stigma
• Sociocultural factors
• Motivation
• Locus of control
• Desire to deceive, 
malinger
• Location, context, 
ambiance
• Presence of others in 
the room
• Ecological validity, 
personal relevance of 
constructs assessed 
and of stimulus/topic 
content
Expressive Language
Repetition:
• Repetition
• Perseveration
• Repetition of phonemes, words 
(nonsense words, single words, 
series of words), phrases, 
sentences
• Phonetic/phonemic composition 
and articulatory difficulty of 
stimulus to be repeated
• Word, phrase, sentence length
• Grammatical complexity
• Grammatical and semantic
• Plausibility
• Audibility, clarity, and rate
Table 18–1.  continued

285
Cognitive-Linguistic  
Functions and Associated 
Abilities and Deficits
Assessment Item Types
Potentially Confounding 
Cognitive-Linguistic Factors
Additional Potentially 
Confounding Factors
Automatic speech:
• Rote, highly learned speech
• Perseveration
• Recitation of automatic 
sequences (numbers, days of 
the week, months)
• Recitation of nursery rhymes, 
poems, songs
• Spontaneous automatic 
utterances during conversation
• Articulatory difficulty
• Familiarity of rote sequences
Naming:
• Word retrieval, dysnomia
• Paraphasias (literal/phonemic, 
semantic/global)
• Perseveration
• Circumlocution
• Stereotypy
• Confrontation naming
• Word descriptions/definitions 
requiring naming response
• Cloze sentences or phrases
• Word (verbal) fluency tasks
• Word frequency
• Word familiarity
• Age of acquisition
• Imageability
• Concreteness/abstractness
• Phonemic composition and 
articulatory difficulty
• Word length
• Semantic category
• Visual/tactile stimulation
• Real objects versus images
• Degree of control of physical 
stimulus properties of images
continues

286
Cognitive-Linguistic  
Functions and Associated 
Abilities and Deficits
Assessment Item Types
Potentially Confounding 
Cognitive-Linguistic Factors
Additional Potentially 
Confounding Factors
Spontaneous spoken (or sign) 
language:
• Expressive language, 
agrammatism, telegraphic speech
• Word finding, dysnomia
• Paraphasias
• Perseveration
• Circumlocution
• Stereotypy
• Picture description
• Conversation/discussion
• Degree of conversational 
structure and support
• Topic complexity, concreteness/
abstractness
• Topic familiarity
• Personal relevance
• Relationship to conversational 
partner
• Means of scoring/rating
Writing:
• Writing ability, dysgraphia
• Letter matching
• Writing of words, phrases, 
sentences to dictation
• Copying
• Written picture naming
• Narrative writing
• Word frequency
• Word familiarity
• Age of acquisition
• Imageability
• Concreteness/abstractness
• Length of word, phrase, 
sentence, discourse stimuli
• Phonemic complexity
• Regular vs. irregular words
• Topic complexity
• Topic familiarity
• Personal relevance
• Relationship to intended reader
• Type of writing instrument/
keyboard
Table 18–1.  continued

287
Cognitive-Linguistic  
Functions and Associated 
Abilities and Deficits
Assessment Item Types
Potentially Confounding 
Cognitive-Linguistic Factors
Additional Potentially 
Confounding Factors
Discourse/pragmatics
• Topic maintenance, cohesion, 
politeness, informativeness, 
codeswitching, appropriateness 
of word choice, impulsivity, 
confabulation, hyper/
hypoaffectivity, use and 
interpretation of prosodic cues; 
use and interpretation of facial 
expressions
• Spoken and written discourse 
sampling and analysis: 
conversational, narrative, 
procedural, expository, 
persuasive, descriptive
• Use of gestures/pantomime
• All aspects noted above
Cognitive
Verbal and nonverbal memory 
abilities and challenges:
• Working memory
• Short-term memory
• Long-term memory
• Procedural/implicit memory
• Declarative/explicit memory
• Episodic memory
• Semantic memory
• Prospective memory
• Source memory
• Encoding, storage, retrieval
• Memory for events preceding 
and following injury
• Interview, conversation
• Verbal and visual span tasks
• Immediate and delayed story 
retelling
• Immediate and delayed recall 
and recognition of words, 
objects, object locations (spatial 
memory), symbols, patterns
• Copy and delayed copy of 
simple to complex figures
• All aspects noted above
continues

288
Cognitive-Linguistic  
Functions and Associated 
Abilities and Deficits
Assessment Item Types
Potentially Confounding 
Cognitive-Linguistic Factors
Additional Potentially 
Confounding Factors
Attention
• Arousal
• Alertness
• Selective/focused attention
• Sustained attention
• Attention switching/shifting/
divided/alternating attention
• Cognitive effort
• Resource allocation
• Speed of processing/ cognitive 
efficiency
• Auditory, visual, and tactile 
vigilance tasks
• Visual scanning and tracking
• Sorting tasks
• Category switching tasks
• All aspects noted above
Table 18–1.  continued

289
Cognitive-Linguistic  
Functions and Associated 
Abilities and Deficits
Assessment Item Types
Potentially Confounding 
Cognitive-Linguistic Factors
Additional Potentially 
Confounding Factors
Executive function and reasoning:
• Reasoning
• Judgment
• Decision making
• Goal setting, planning, 
strategizing
• Awareness of strengths and 
weaknesses
• Organizing
• Sequencing
• Convergent thinking
• Divergent thinking
• Verbal and nonverbal problem 
solving
• Spontaneous language and 
discourse tasks (see above)
• Verbal and nonverbal analogy 
tasks
• All aspects noted above
Calculation, acalculia
• Verbal and nonverbal 
mathematical problem solving
• Counting and number concept 
tasks
• Task difficulty
• Sensory deficits
• Response deficits
Note.  Many of the terms here are listed in the Glossary.
Sources:  Edwards & Bastiaanse, 2007; Hallowell & Ivanova, 2009; Hallowell, Wertz, & Kruse, 2002; Heuer & Hallowell, 2007, 2009; Ivanova & Hallowell, 
2012, 2013, 2014; Lorenzen & Murray, 2008; Murray & Clark, 2006; Odekar, Hallowell, Kruse, Moates, & Lee, 2009; Roberts, 2008; Roberts & Doucet, 2011.

290   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
What Is Entailed in Screening 
for Acquired Neurogenic 
Language Disorders?
A screening is typically a brief evalua-
tion of whether a person has a problem 
that may benefit from further professional 
attention and, if so, what the problem may 
be and what type of services might help. 
Initially, where appropriate, the SLP may 
consult a patient’s medical chart to con-
sider any notes about basic challenges to 
body structure and function and about 
the patient’s recent living situation and 
social and caregiving support noted by 
a physician, nurse, or others on the reha-
bilitation team. If other members of the 
rehabilitation team have already screened 
the patient, it is often helpful to hear their 
impressions directly. If possible, observing 
the patient communicating with a family 
or staff member is helpful for noting spon-
taneous use of language, and facilitative 
or maladaptive strategies that the patient 
and others use to support communicative 
effectiveness. For in-person screening, the 
SLP may visit a patient at bedside or in his 
or her room if the patient is an inpatient or 
resident at a particular facility.
In insurance-based, fee-for-service, 
and government-sponsored contexts, SLP 
screenings are typically performed at no 
charge to the person screened. Despite 
the fact that screenings do not directly 
generate revenue in such contexts, they 
are vital to the recruitment of patients 
into one’s caseload, and bigger caseloads 
ideally do lead to more revenue through 
billable services provided. They are also 
vital to promoting access to services for 
people who may not know about the full 
scope of practice of SLPs and the related 
services that might help them. Many hos-
pitals, clinics, rehabilitation centers, and 
long-term care facilities have policies and 
procedures in place for the screening of 
newly admitted patients or residents, and 
periodic screening of individuals stay-
ing at the facility for extended periods  
of time.
Basic interview questions are essen-
tial to screening as well as comprehensive 
assessment. The nature of the questions 
we ask depends on the communication 
abilities of the individual and whether 
there is a caregiver or someone who 
knows the patient well who can help to fill 
in information if and when the patient has 
trouble answering. Of course, it is vital to 
include the person with the language dis-
order as wholly as possible regardless of 
the severity of his or her communication 
impairments. Not only is this essential to 
empowering the person with the language 
disorder but also to enable the clinician to 
observe directly his or her communication 
strengths and weaknesses.
Although open-ended requests (e.g., 
starting with “Tell me about . . . ”) are best 
for getting rich descriptions of the prob-
lems in the patient’s own words, some 
people with language challenges are best 
able to respond to more direct or yes/no 
questions. Prior to asking interview-type 
questions, it is important to engage in rap-
port-building conversation and to learn 
enough about the patient’s background 
to ensure the relevance of questions to be 
asked. The interview questions shown in 
Box 18–1 serve as an example and may be 
adapted according to the person’s abilities 
and the appropriateness of the content. As 
shown in parentheses in Box 18–1, basic 
screening tasks may also be administered 
and direct observations made as you pro-
ceed with an interview.
Asking a person directly what both-
ers him or her most about communication 
and thinking and what he or she most 

Psychometric Aspects of Assessment and Assessment Processes   291
Possible Screening Interview Questions and Tasks
A.  Tell me about what is troubling you 
about your communication abilities.
1.  Tell me about trouble you are 
having with communication.
• Speaking
	 Coming up with names of 
people (Point to people or 
pictures of family members and 
ask names.)
	 Finding words for things you 
want to say (Show common 
objects and point to objects in the 
room and basic body parts and 
ask the person to name them.)
	 Repetition (Provide words 
and sentences of increasing 
complexity to be repeated.)
	 Automatic/rote speech (Ask to 
recite days of the week, months 
of the year, nursery rhymes, 
song lyrics, numbers from 1 to 
20, etc.)
	 Propositional language (Ask 
questions requiring spoken 
responses; tell a story and have 
the patient retell it; ask for 
descriptions of objects and pic-
tures; ask for procedural descrip-
tions. Ask, for example, how to 
make toast or change a diaper; 
ask for a description of distant 
past and recent past events.)
	 Getting “stuck” on the same 
words or phrases even if they 
don’t convey what you mean
	 Use of swear words
• Understanding others speaking
	 When listening to single words 
(Sample object naming with 
body parts and objects in  
the room and descriptions of 
objects)
	 In a one-on-one conversation 
(Engage in social conversation; 
observe following of one-, two-, 
and three-step commands, 
responses to yes/no and open-
ended questions, object naming; 
compare automatic with 
propositional speech.)
	 In a group discussion
	 Responding to requests
	 Following spoken directions
	 Listening to speech on the radio
	 Watching and understanding 
television shows and movies
• Reading and understanding
	 Single words
	 Numbers
	 Signs
	 A newspaper or magazine
	 A restaurant menu
	 At your computer
	 On your mobile phone
	 Other things you have typically 
read
• Writing (by typing and 
handwriting)
	 Individual letters of the alphabet
	 Your name
	 Single words
	 Sentences
	 Paragraphs
	 Written correspondence, emails
	 Other things you have typically 
written
	 Copying letters, words, sentences
• Managing emails and using the 
Internet
• Engaging in social activities
	 Using the telephone
Box
18–1

292   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 Using social media
	 Connecting in person with your 
family and friends
	 Going out to restaurants
	 Participating in activities you 
typically enjoyed before
2.  Tell me about what about your com-
munication you most wish you could 
improve.
B.  Tell me about your thinking 
abilities overall.
1.  Describe the trouble you are having:
• Thinking clearly
• Remembering things (Request a 
recounting of an event [episodic]; 
request instructions for carrying 
out a common task [procedural]; 
request a description of the purpose 
of common and uncommon objects 
[semantic]. Ask questions about 
childhood, about events just prior 
to and following onset, and about 
recent events within the past few 
hours.)
• Paying attention (Observe ability 
to notice changes [vigilance], stay 
focused with distraction [sustained 
and selective attention], multitask 
[attention switching])
• Counting change
• Managing your finances
• Doing simple arithmetic
• Telling time
• Keeping track of time
• Planning activities
• Working
• Keeping track of your medications
• Drawing
2.	Tell me about what about your 
thinking abilities you most wish 
you could improve.
C.  Tell me how you are coping with 
your challenges.
	 1.	 How do you feel about the 
changes in your communication 
and thinking abilities?
	 2.	 How is your mood?
	 3.	 Describe any changes in your 
mood since before you had this 
condition.
	 4.	 Describe any changes in your  
personality since before you had 
this condition.
	 5.	 What strategies do you use to 
communicate when you face bar-
riers with talking and listening?
	 6.	 What types of support do you 
think you most need?
	 7.	 What questions do you have 
about your condition?
	 8.	 What questions do you have 
about your assessments?
	 9.	 What questions do you have about 
rehabilitation or treatment plans?
10.	 What additional information 
would you like to have?
D.  Tell me about your everyday 
participation in activities now and 
before.
	 1.	 What activities that involve 
communication are most 
important to you?
	 2.	 What challenges are you having 
in doing things that are most 
important to you?
Note.  Attend to the individual’s perception of how important each item is, now and prior 
to onset of a language disorder. These items are framed as questions and requests to the 

Psychometric Aspects of Assessment and Assessment Processes   293
client/patient; all may be reframed to also be asked of caregivers or significant others; all 
may be reframed in a less linguistically loaded format through supported communication. 
In addition to noting content offered by the individual, observe evidence of each ability 
in context, as feasible. See Box 18–2 for case history content that may be integrated into a 
screening form and/or process.
wishes to improve is a vital component of 
screening. Answers to interview questions 
and open-ended requests for information 
(e.g., Tell me about . . . , Please describe 
. . . ) provide rich information, not only 
in terms of the content conveyed but also 
in terms of what we may glean about his 
or her insights, concerns, fears, level of 
awareness of potential deficits, life context 
and preonset aspects of life participation, 
family and social support, memory, atten-
tion, phonology, morphology, semantics, 
syntax, pragmatics, discourse abilities, 
and concomitant impairments.
It is often helpful, too, to give a patient 
and/or his caregiver a questionnaire for 
answering basic questions about commu-
nication challenges. A rating scale such as 
the Communicative Effectiveness Index 
(Lomas et al., 1989) may also be given to 
the client and/or significant others; when 
given to both, it may be informative to 
compare responses between the two.
Examples of additional language 
and mental status screening activities are 
shown in items within parentheses in Box 
18–1. Further screening tasks to address 
concomitant areas of functioning, such as 
for visual neglect, attention, and memory, 
reviewed in Chapter 19, may be presented 
as appropriate. Published screening pro-
tocols may be administered to assess 
practically any aspect of language and 
cognition. Information about published 
screening tools is given in Chapter 20. 
Many clinicians prefer to use their own 
screening materials and processes.
A screening occurs in a small win-
dow of time as we begin to learn about 
a person’s communicative and cognitive 
status. It is not in-depth enough to pro-
vide a full picture of a person’s wide array 
of communicative strengths and weak-
nesses. Even when standardized screen-
ing tests and protocols are used, screen-
ing results do not entail enough detailed 
and repeated sampling to provide highly 
reliable and valid results on which to base 
firm prognostic, diagnostic, or treatment 
decisions. Imagine having a time limit of 
only 5 or 10 minutes to glean information 
about every item listed in Box 18–1. Is it 
possible? No. You would simply do your 
best to glean the most information possi-
ble across a wide array of areas of function 
and harness the best in your reservoir of 
clinical judgment capacities to draw con-
clusions pertinent to next steps. Whether 
your time is so severely restricted or not, 
be sure to keep your mind open to new 
information and ongoing changes in status.
What Are the Typical 
Components of a Comprehensive 
Assessment Process?
A comprehensive assessment of a person 
with a neurogenic cognitive-linguistic 
disorder includes a case history, discourse  
sampling, and speech, language, and 
cognitive testing. Unlike screening, there 
is typically a financial charge for a full 

294   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
assessment (whether paid by the client, 
an insurance company, or another source). 
Thorough assessment of cognition and 
communication for any of the adult 
neurogenic language disorders should 
include indexing of:
• Perceived strengths and challenges 
associated with communication, 
socialization, and quality of life 
(ways in which challenges are 
affecting the individual’s life 
participation according to his or 
her own perceptions and those 
of others who are important to 
him or her; the type and degree 
of communication supports and 
barriers in his or her social and 
physical environment)
• Language formulation and 
production at all language levels 
(phonology, morphology, semantics, 
syntax, and pragmatics) and in 
written and spoken modalities 
(plus sign language in cases of sign 
language users)
• Cognition, including multiple 
aspects of mental status or 
orientation, memory, attention,  
and executive functions
Of course, many people with neurogenic 
language disorders also have motor speech 
and swallowing disorders, among other 
concomitant challenges, each of which 
must be carefully assessed. The ultimate 
excellent clinical aphasiologist will pur-
sue knowledge and skills in those areas 
and ensure effective assessment and inter-
vention to meet holistic needs.
Perceived strengths and challenges 
associated with communication, socializa-
tion, and quality of life may be ascertained 
through the case history process (see 
below) and also through the use of pub-
lished assessment tools and rating forms. 
A thoughtful discussion of the ultimate 
goals of each person assessed, from his 
or her own perspective, is essential. Use 
of supported communication to explore 
such goals from the start is important. 
Haley, Womach, Helm-Estabrooks, Caig­
non, and McCulloch (2010) developed a 
set of Life Interests and Values Cards to 
be used for this purpose. The process of 
using such supports ideally promotes 
autonomy and self-efficacy in goal setting 
(Helm-Estabrooks & Whiteside, 2012).
Examples of specific assessment 
tasks used to index linguistic abilities are 
listed in Table 18–1. Examples of tasks 
used to index cognitive abilities are more 
challenging to encapsulate into such a 
cohesive listing; cognitive constructs to be 
assessed are referred to with tremendous 
inconsistency, and the means of indexing 
cognitive abilities is extremely variable. 
An effective way of getting a good grasp 
on means of indexing such constructs as 
memory (in its multiple forms), attention 
(in its multiple forms), reasoning, problem 
solving, inferencing, sequencing, inferenc-
ing, discourse organization, and humor is 
to read about and peruse published instru-
ments designed to assess these.
What Information Is Pertinent to 
Collect During the Case History?
Some case history information may be 
gleaned from medical charts; some may 
be learned through other health profes-
sionals. Still, input from the person being 
assessed and his or her significant others 
is of paramount importance. Examples of 
items on a case history form that are espe-
cially pertinent to acquired adult neuro-
genic language disorders in adults are 
listed in Box 18–2. Many examples of case 
history forms are available online and in 

Psychometric Aspects of Assessment and Assessment Processes   295
Sample Cognitive-Communicative Items on a Case History
General information
• Date of case history
• Name
• Identification number
• Contact information
• Gender
• Family physician
• Referral source
• Previous services received 
through this clinic/agency
• Dates of previous services
Personal history
• Birth date
• Age
• Handedness
• Native language
• Additional languages spoken 
and levels of proficiency in each
• Where he or she grew up
• Highest level of education
• Professional background
• Current educational and/or 
professional status
• Hobbies, volunteer work, and 
personal interests
• Everyday types of communication 
activities in which the individual 
wants and needs to participate
• Living arrangement
	 Physical location and type of 
housing
	 Other people living in the home
• Current caregivers
Background
• Date of injury or onset, or when 
symptoms were first noticed
• Etiology
• Site and extent of lesion and 
other neurological findings
• Loss of consciousness and 
duration
• Description of any of the following 
through records or referrals
	 Language problems
	 Cognitive problems
	 Speech problems
	 Motor control problems in the 
body (weakness, paralysis)
	 Dysphagia
	 Vision problems
	 Hearing problems
Previous services or consultation: 
nature of services and corresponding 
dates
• Speech-language pathology 
assessment and/or intervention
• Psychological assessment
• Psychological counseling
• Vocational counseling
• Physical therapy
• Occupational therapy
• Speech and language information
Patient/client and caregiver/
significant other descriptions of 
communication problemsa
aSee Box 18–1 for interview questions and tasks that may be integrated into a case history 
form and/or process.
Note.  Be sure any actual case history form does not include heterosexist language or 
convey assumptions about gender identity and the nature of family structures and living 
arrangements. The items listed are items to consider in context; actual wording should fit 
the intended context and purpose. Content should be integrated with that of other areas 
of clinical practice as appropriate.
Box
18–2

296   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
related textbooks and can be adapted to 
fit assessment goals and contextual con-
straints. Each agency or facility in which 
an SLP might work is likely to have its 
own case history forms, and these are 
increasingly generated in electronic rather 
than paper formats.
Note that, depending on the context 
and the nature of the patient’s problems, 
a complete case history form may include 
information about many other topics as 
well, including items related to motor 
speech and swallowing. Many case his-
tory forms also include the types of items 
listed as screening content in Box 18–1. In 
the examples given, case history informa-
tion might be collected through sources 
other than direct screening or interview-
ing; in actuality, the processes for obtain-
ing both types of information are often 
intermingled.
Keep in mind that many case history 
forms in current use include heterosexist 
language (e.g., regarding marital status) 
and biased content about gender identity 
(e.g., no choices to check anything other 
than “male” or “female” as gender). These 
require revision to convey greater accep-
tance to those with sexual orientation and 
gender identity differences.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Compare and contrast different types 
of reliability.
	 3.	 Provide two examples of how two 
nonlinguistic challenges that often 
co-occur with aphasia might affect 
the reliability of language assessment 
results for a person with aphasia.
	 4.	 Provide two examples of how spe-
cific cognitive-communicative deficits 
associated with right brain syndrome 
(RBS) might affect the reliability of 
language assessment results with a 
survivor of a right brain injury (RBI).
	 5.	 Provide two examples of how spe-
cific concomitant deficits associated 
with cognitive-communicative defi-
cits subsequent to TBI might affect 
the reliability of language assessment 
results with a TBI survivor.
	 6.	 List three factors might influence 
interexaminer reliability for a specific 
published language test.
	 7.	 List three factors might influence 
intraexaminer reliability for a specific 
published language test.
	 8.	 Compare and contrast different types 
of validity.
	 9.	 Provide two examples of how two 
nonlinguistic challenges that often 
co-occur with aphasia might affect 
the validity of language assessment 
results for a person with aphasia.
10.	 Provide two examples of how specific 
cognitive-communicative deficits asso-
ciated with RBS might affect the valid-
ity of language assessment results with 
a survivor of a RBI.
11.	 Provide two examples of how specific 
concomitant deficits associated with 
cognitive-communicative deficits sub-
sequent to TBI might affect the valid-
ity of language assessment results 
with a TBI survivor.
12.	 Describe specific means by which a 
test, subtest, or test item may have 
weak content validity.
13.	 Describe how one would establish 
each the following (in general terms, 
not in terms of statistical procedures):
a.	 Construct validity (convergent 
validity and discriminant 
validity)

Psychometric Aspects of Assessment and Assessment Processes   297
b.	 Criterion validity (concurrent 
validity, predictive validity, 
sensitivity, and specificity)
c.	 Face validity
d.	 Ecological validity
14.	 Describe why it is important for a test, 
subtest, or test item to have each of 
the following:
a.	 Construct validity (convergent 
validity and discriminant 
validity)
b.	 Criterion validity (concurrent 
validity, predictive validity, 
sensitivity, and specificity)
c.	 Face validity
d.	 Ecological validity
15.	 Consider the “cognitive-linguistic 
functions and associated abilities and 
deficits” listed in the first column of 
Table 18–1. As a clinician or researcher, 
you are not likely to have sufficient 
to time to directly assess all of these 
abilities and challenges for every indi-
vidual. What are the most important 
criteria for deciding which constructs 
to assess for a given individual?
16.	 Consider the “assessment item types” 
listed in the second column of Table 
18–1. As a clinician or researcher, you 
are not likely to have sufficient to time 
to assess abilities using all of the pos-
sible types of items for any specific 
ability you wish to assess. What are 
the most important criteria for decid-
ing which types of assessment items 
to administer for a given individual?
17.	 Consider the list of potentially con-
founding factors listed the second and 
third columns in Table 18–1.
a.	 Note how the items in the third 
column, labeled “potentially 
confounding factors,” are largely 
controlled by the authors of 
assessment instruments and/
or clinicians who are carrying 
out assessment tasks. Describe 
specific ways in which the poten-
tial for such factors to confound 
assessment results could be 
avoided by test authors and 
clinicians.
b.	 Note how the items in the fourth 
column, labeled “additionally 
potentially confounding factors,” 
have little to do with design of 
assessment tools and more to 
do with how, when, by whom, 
and to whom assessments are 
administered. Describe specific 
ways in which the potential for 
such factors to confound assess-
ment results could be avoided by 
clinicians.
18.	 Compare and contrast a screening 
from a comprehensive evaluation of a 
person’s cognitive-linguistic abilities.
19.	 Describe why it is important to estab-
lish rapport with an individual prior 
to engaging in any formal screening 
or assessment.
20.	 Consider the screening interview 
items and tasks listed in Box 18–1. 
As a clinician or researcher, you are 
not likely have sufficient to time to 
implement all of the items and tasks 
listed for a screening. What are the 
most important criteria for deciding 
which items and tasks to administer 
in a screening for a given individual?
21.	 Many clinical facilities have preestab-
lished screening forms for cognitive-
linguistic assessment in adults. What 
would be the strengths and weak-
nesses of having one standard form 
to be used for all screenings?
22.	 Many clinical facilities have preestab-
lished case history forms for adult cli-
ents. What would be the strengths and 
weaknesses of having one standard 
form to be used for all case histories?

298   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
23.	 If you could ask only five questions of 
a person with an acquired neurogenic 
language disorder during a case his-
tory session, what would they be?
24.	 During a screening or case history ses-
sion, if you could ask only five ques-
tions of a person most socially and 
emotionally connected with a person 
with an acquired language disorder, 
what would they be?
You may find additional learning and 
teaching materials on the companion 
website.

299
Chapter
19
Problem-Solving Approaches 
to Differential Diagnosis and 
Confounding Factors
Some of the greatest challenges for speech-
language pathologists (SLPs) relate to the 
complexity of problem solving required to 
understand any individual’s neurological 
and psychosocial condition and to draw 
conclusions about the myriad influences 
on that person’s ability to communicate, 
participate maximally in desired daily 
life activities, and have a strong sense 
of identity and well-being. In terms of 
assessment, there are two critical consid-
erations as we work to address those great 
challenges:
• How to differentially diagnose one 
condition from another
• How to be sure that our 
assessments truly reflect a given 
condition, and its severity and 
impact, in the face of many 
potentially confounding factors
This chapter is intended to help address 
those challenges.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 How are potentially confounding fac-
tors relevant to differential diagnosis?
	 2.	 What are important potentially con-
founding factors in language assess-
ment and how do we address them?
	 3.	 How does a process analysis approach 
to assessment help address poten-
tially confounding factors?
How Are Potentially 
Confounding Factors Relevant 
to Differential Diagnosis?
The term differential diagnosis typically 
refers to identifying disorder labels that 
either apply or do not apply to an indi-
vidual according to an evaluation of his or 
her body structure and function.
In the differential diagnostic process, 
we tend to label the disorders that a per-
son has and clarify which disorders he or 
she does not have. Differential diagnosis 
in a person with a neurogenic communi-
cation disorder can be particularly per-
plexing for four primary reasons. First, 
given the interconnectivity of structures 

300   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
throughout the brain — as well as with 
subcortical structures and systems — plus 
their functional connections and the 
interrelationships with one another, it is 
not always easy to tell just what a per-
son with a neurogenic language disorder 
can or cannot do. Second, there are many 
underlying reasons why a person may 
have trouble with any particular aspect of 
cognition or communication; identifying 
the symptoms does not necessarily lead 
to clarity about the nature of those symp-
toms or their causes. Third, any person 
we are assessing is likely to have multiple 
concomitant conditions, such that we are 
not just making conclusions about one 
diagnosis at a time. Fourth, many of the 
influences on a person’s ability to com-
municate cannot be distilled neatly into 
health or medical conditions that can be 
readily labeled.
The term confounding factor, as we 
noted in Chapters 17 and 18, refers to any 
aspect of a person’s abilities; any aspect of 
the assessment tools, procedures, and pro-
cesses that we use; and any aspect of the 
testing context or situation that could lead 
to invalid results. We add the term poten-
tially confounding factor in many cases 
because we cannot always know when 
a particular factor is affecting our assess-
ments. Several categories of problems that 
tend to co-occur with language problems 
are potentially confounding factors. In 
Chapter 18, we noted many test design 
factors, testing context factors, and inter-
personal factors that may influence the 
actual assessment process as well as our 
interpretation of assessment results. Many 
of those are factors that we may control 
for or at least take into account by imple-
menting best practices in assessment.
Any condition that we might con-
sider as a possibility in the differential 
diagnostic process is also likely to be asso-
ciated with factors that confound assess-
ment of cognition and communication. 
In this chapter, we focus on potentially 
confounding factors that relate especially 
to concomitant challenges to health and 
well-being. All of these may influence the 
validity and reliability of differential diag-
nosis as well as of the overall conclusions 
that may be drawn about any aspect of a 
person’s communication and socialization 
status. Potentially confounding factors 
represent a mixed collection of constructs. 
Some are personal traits or demographic 
factors (e.g., age, intelligence), some relate 
to prior learning (e.g., education, literacy), 
and some are diagnostic categories (e.g., 
hearing problems, visual problems, read-
ing disorders, depression). Still others 
relate to the social and communication 
contexts of any given assessment process 
and the interpersonal dynamics between 
the person assessing and the person being 
assessed. For some confounding factors, 
specific assessment procedures and tools 
may be recommended to help in differen-
tial diagnosis. For others, means of taking 
them into account during the assessment 
process and weighing their potential influ-
ences are considered in light of theory and 
research to date.
What Are Important Potentially 
Confounding Factors in 
Language Assessment and How 
Do We Address Them?
Age
Old age is not a diagnosis; nor is it an 
explanation for impairment. Age as 
defined by time since birth has been 
shown to correlate with some patterns of 
brain change that correspond with some 

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   301
symptoms in a majority of people, par-
ticularly when tested in research contexts. 
Such patterns are explored and summa-
rized in Chapter 9. In the assessment pro-
cess, knowing about such patterns may be 
helpful if we are considering hypotheses 
about the potential influence of a person’s 
age on his or her communication abilities. 
At the same time, knowing that any given 
individual may defy such patterns is of 
paramount importance. Also, attribut-
ing a person’s communicative deficits to 
age alone is almost always inappropriate; 
when we find ourselves or others doing 
so, it is good to reflect on whether overt 
or covert ageism may be at play.
Intelligence, Literacy, and Education
A person’s levels of intelligence, liter-
acy, and education prior to the onset of 
an acquired neurogenic disorder are all 
important to gauge. These are important 
potential confounds to take into account 
because they can directly and indirectly 
influence language assessment. Preonset 
intelligence is a potential confounding 
factor in the differential diagnosis of any 
and all cognitive deficits. Below-average 
intelligence may influence the validity 
of assessment results when using tools 
normed on people of average or higher 
intelligence. Knowing about any prior 
intellectual challenges helps us interpret 
current performance and has implica-
tions for guiding treatment plans and 
implementing rehabilitation strategies 
(Gao, Jiang, Wang, & Chen, 2000; Leritz, 
McGlinchey, Lundgren, Grande, & Mil-
berg, 2008).
Measures that control for intelligence 
versus years of education do not neces-
sarily lead to parallel results; it is often 
important to consider both intelligence 
and education levels (Steinberg, Bieliaus-
kas, Smith, Langellotti, & Ivnik, 2005). The 
Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR; 
Wechsler, 2001) is one of the few tests that  
have been shown to be correlated with 
intelligence test scores obtained prior 
to the onset of brain injury (Mathias, 
Bowden, Bigler, & Rosenfeld, 2007). How-
ever, illiteracy would certainly be a signif-
icant confound in WTAR results.
It is impossible to tease apart the 
influence of education in general and lit-
eracy in particular on language abilities 
of an individual living in a region where 
people are typically engaged in formal 
education throughout childhood. Further 
complicating matters, literacy has been 
shown to be a confound in assessment 
of skills beyond reading. For example, 
low literacy has been linked to deficits in 
phonological awareness, naming, word 
finding, drawing, abstract thinking, and 
sentence-picture matching tasks in peo-
ple with and without neurogenic lan-
guage disorders (Colaço, Mineiro, Leal, 
& Castro-Caldas, 2010; Coppens, Parente, 
& Lecours, 1998; Reitan & Wolfson, 1997; 
Tsegaye, De Bleser, & Iribarren, 2011) and 
thus may affect language test results in 
assessment of constructs beyond reading 
and writing. Again, to what degree lit-
eracy per se versus education in general 
may influence such links is probably inde-
terminable for a given person.
Given that socioeconomic status 
is often tied to one’s level of education 
and literacy, it, too, may be considered 
an assessment confound. However, its 
specific impact on language impairment 
severity is unclear (González-Fernández 
et al., 2011). A complicating factor in 
understanding the nature of the influence 
of socioeconomic status on any cognitive-
linguistic ability is that low socioeconomic 
status is linked to poor overall health,  

302   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
limited access to health care, and increased 
risk for cardiovascular and neurological 
disorders (Connor, Obler, Tocco, Fitzpat-
rick, & Albert, 2001; Kuller et al., 1995).
Visual Problems
Many people with neurogenic com-
munication disorders have some type 
of visual dysfunction, and many have 
multiple concomitant visual problems. 
Many already had visual acuity, color 
vision, and ocular motor problems prior 
to onset of a communication disorder. 
Visual problems also may be exacerbated 
by aging and by peripheral neuropathies 
associated with metabolic disorders such 
as diabetes mellitus. Given the great deal 
of reliance on visual material (e.g., text, 
pictures, objects) and to visual aspects 
of communicative situations (e.g., facial 
expressions, gestures, postures, location 
of people involved), screening for visual 
deficits is fundamental to the cognitive-
linguistic assessment process.
Hallowell, Douglas, Wertz, and Kim 
(2004) tracked assessment and experimen-
tal task materials used in every research 
article on neurogenic language disorders 
in each of 17 journals over a 10-year period. 
We found that all but one of 668 studies 
(99.85%) included the use of visual stim-
uli. However, less than 3% of those that 
involved visual materials included men-
tion of any aspect of vision (e.g., whether 
it was included in inclusion/exclusion cri-
teria, participant descriptions, or methods 
of experimental control). Clearly, there is a 
need for greater attention to vision in our 
work as clinical aphasiologists.
Failing to take visual deficits into 
account in assessment and in the inter-
pretation of results leads to serious valid-
ity problems. Ideally, stroke and brain 
injury survivors should be referred to a 
neuro-ophthalmologist for a full visual 
evaluation early in the rehabilitation pro-
cess and periodically as needed. Whether 
this is feasible or not, it is still important 
for SLPs to take into account the poten-
tial influences of visual deficits through-
out assessment and treatment. Hallowell 
(2008) offers details on designing screen-
ing protocols and case history procedures 
to capture information about visual abili-
ties in people with acquired neurogenic 
disorders. Here, let’s review specific 
means of indexing key problems in terms 
of acuity and color vision deficits, ocular 
motor problems, visual neglect, and var-
ied types of higher-level visual integra-
tion problems.
Visual Acuity Deficits
Age-related macular degeneration is the 
most common cause for loss of visual 
acuity. Other common causes are diabetic 
retinopathy, glaucoma, and cataracts. Be 
sure to ask if the person you are assessing 
normally wears glasses or contact lenses. 
Especially if he or she needs glasses for 
near vision and/or correction of nys-
tagmus or double vision, it is vital that 
he or she use them during assessment. 
Far vision (for viewing at a distance of  
3 feet or more) is important for everyday 
functioning (e.g., viewing traffic signals, 
reading signs, watching movies or slides 
projected on a screen) but is less likely 
to influence performance on the types of 
tasks typically used in cognitive-linguistic 
assessment.
Charts and other tools for visual 
screening are readily available through 
ophthalmologic, optometric, medical, 
and educational supply companies. The 
Rosenbaum Pocket Vision Screener is 
commonly distributed at no or low cost 

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   303
by medical supply companies. Some com-
puterized assessment tools are available; 
it is important to scrutinize these carefully, 
as actual computerized displays may dif-
fer from what was intended, especially in 
terms of color, resolution, and projected 
size of images and characters.
Visual acuity tests typically entail 
identifying the smallest characters that 
can be read at a specified distance. Snel-
len charts, composed of rows of letters 
in progressively smaller font, are typi-
cally used. However, for people with lan-
guage disorders, it may be preferable to 
use nonlinguistic symbols, such as shapes 
and simple images. When using the Tum-
bling E chart, the person may simply hold 
up three fingers to indicate the direction 
of an E pattern shown in varied orienta-
tions. With the Lea chart, symbols for a 
ball, apple, house, and square are shown 
(Figure 19–1). The Allen chart includes 
everyday objects that are typically easy 
to recognize (bird, horse, cake, telephone, 
hand). With any of these adapted charts, 
if he or she is unable to speak, the respon-
dent may point to a multiple-choice dis-
play to indicate what is seen. For people 
with low vision (acuity worse than the 
top row of a far-vision acuity chart 20 feet 
Figure 19–1.  Example of a visual screening chart requiring no verbal responses. The Lea 
chart (shown on the left ) depicts line drawings of four objects. As a clinician points to images 
on the chart, a person who has difficulty speaking may simply point to a corresponding 
image on a multiple-choice card (top right ). He or she may also give a yes/no response 
when shown one image at a time on a separate card (bottom right ). Image courtesy of Lea 
Test International, LLC.

304   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
away), screening tasks may involve hav-
ing them count the number of fingers you 
hold up or detect nearby motion or light.
Visual Field Deficits
Visual field deficits, or visual field cuts, 
are a loss of visual information regard-
ing specific components of the visual 
space. They are very common, especially 
immediately postonset, in stroke and 
brain injury survivors. Types of visual 
field deficits are reviewed in Chapter 7. 
They include homonymous hemianopsia 
or quantrantopsia, heteronymous hemi-
anopsia, and scotoma. Visual fields are 
tested when the individual’s head is held 
stable. While SLPs may carry out visual 
field screening, it is important to con-
fer with an ophthalmologist for precise 
visual field testing because of the instru-
mentation and expertise required. Visual 
field deficits tend not to be as confound-
ing in cognitive-linguistic assessment as 
visual acuity problems and neglect; this 
is because people with visual field defi-
cits tend to compensate for them via head 
movement, even if they are unware of 
doing so. Basic screening procedures for 
visual field and peripheral vision screen-
ing are provided by Hallowell (2008).
Color Vision Deficits
To the degree that color is implicated in 
assessment stimuli, color vision deficits 
(of which there are many varied forms) 
are potentially confounding factors in 
indexing communication abilities. Ishi-
hara plates are a common screening tool. 
These are images or shapes composed 
of small dots in primary colors superim-
posed on a background of dots in a sec-
ondary color. They are shown on a com-
puter monitor or on printed cards. If color 
perception is deficient for a given color 
contrast, the respondent is unable to iden-
tify the image or shape. An example of a 
screening tool that is amenable to adapta-
tion through supported communication, 
especially multiple-choice formats and 
picture matching, is Color Vision Testing 
Made Easy (Waggoner, 1994).
Ocular Motor Problems
Problems of alignment and movement of 
the eyes may be caused by impairments 
of the extraocular muscles that control 
eye movement, ocular motor nerves, or 
cortical systems involved in motor con-
trol of those nerves. Ocular motor con-
trol in itself is not likely to negatively 
affect assessment of language and cogni-
tion for most people. In cases where an 
individual’s communication ability may 
depend on eyetracking input, or when 
ocular motor control deficits impair pro-
cessing of orthographic or picture stim-
uli, it is a good idea to screen for ocular 
motor deficits and consult with a neuro-
ophthalmologist. See Hallowell (2008) for 
suggestions.
Visual Neglect
As reviewed in Chapter 7, visual atten-
tion deficits have a direct impact on com-
munication abilities, so they may pose an 
important barrier to valid testing. Note 
that not all researchers agree that visual 
neglect is a problem of attention per se. 
As indicated in Chapter 12, a minority of 
scholars in this area prefer to consider it a 
cognitive problem of being able to gener-
ate an abstract internal representation of 
the external physical world.
People with hemineglect of the visual 
space also often ignore nonvisual aspects 
of the same hemispace as well. For exam-
ple, they may not attend to or use the 
limbs on the neglected side and may not 

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   305
attend to olfactory, auditory, or somato-
sensory input on the neglected side. As 
reviewed in Chapter 12, sometimes the 
space neglected is relative to the midline 
of an individual’s own body (egocentric 
neglect). Sometimes it is relative to what-
ever object, display, or real-world scene 
they are focused on at the moment (allo-
centric neglect) (Ting et al., 2011). Differ-
ences among subtypes of neglect have 
been attributed to differing types and 
locations of underlying lesions (Karnath & 
Rorden, 2012). Hemispatial neglect often 
resolves itself within the first few weeks 
or months after a stroke or brain injury. It 
also can persist indefinitely, which is more 
likely in people with large cortical lesions 
(Maguire & Ogden, 2002).
Estimates of the incidence of hemi-
spatial neglect in people with right and 
left hemisphere lesions vary widely. Rea-
sons for this include the following: Differ-
ent means of indexing neglect lead to dif-
fering levels of sensitivity and specificity, 
some tasks depend on the person’s com-
munication abilities and thus have inher-
ent confounds for people with speech and 
language disorders, numbers of people 
sampled and sampling procedures differ 
across reported incidence studies, peo-
ple with lesions due to varied etiologies 
are included within and across studies, 
and symptoms evolve quickly in many 
people soon after onset so the timing of 
assessment may influence the proportions 
reported.
There is general agreement in the lit-
erature that the incidence of left neglect 
is high in people with right hemisphere 
lesions (up to about 66%; Schenkenberg, 
Bradford, & Ajax, 1980). Incidence of 
right-sided neglect in people with left 
hemisphere lesions is often reported to 
be lower, although visual neglect is much 
more prevalent than once thought in peo-
ple with aphasia and related disorders 
(occurring in up to 65% of survivors of 
left brain injuries; Karnath, Milner, & Val-
lar, 2002; Pedersen, Jorgensen, Nakayama, 
Raaschou, & Olsen, 1997). It may be that 
left hemineglect is more readily detected 
in people with right brain injury (RBI) 
because clinicians and researchers are 
more predisposed to screen for it in that 
population, and because language dis-
orders in people with left hemisphere 
lesions may confound assessment of 
visual attention.
Deficits in visual attention may be 
a serious confounding factor in many of 
the most common types of assessment 
tasks used by SLPs to index performance 
according to any of a host of constructs. 
For example, imagine the impact that 
neglect of half of a picture could have on 
language formulation scores based on a 
picture description task. Imagine how not 
attending to half of the images in multi-
ple-choice displays could affect auditory 
and reading comprehension test results. 
Imagine how pragmatic appropriateness 
in conversation might be misjudged if a 
person completely ignores visitors on one 
side of the room. Keep in mind that people 
with neglect are unlikely to be aware of it, 
even if they are told that they have it, and 
so they tend not to report it or compensate 
for it. It is thus important that we go out of 
our way to look for it. Input from family 
members is important; still, they may be 
unaware of it as well.
One means of screening for visual 
neglect is through observation. People 
with hemispatial visual neglect may 
ignore people or activities on the neglected 
side of the room. Some fail to eat the food 
placed on the neglected side of a plate or 
cafeteria tray. Some who wear makeup 
may fail to apply makeup to one side of 
the face. You may learn that an individual 
has walked across a street without attend-
ing to oncoming traffic from one direction; 

306   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
this is a potentially serious consequence 
of not attending to one side.
A series of simple screening tasks 
may be carried out. The line bisection 
task entails asking a person to mark the 
midpoint of a straight line. Note the result 
for a person with hemispatial neglect in 
Figure 19–2. It is as if the neglected por-
tion of the line does not exist in the view 
of the individual, and bisection mark is 
made toward the nonneglected side.
A line cancellation task (also called 
the Albert test; Albert, 1973) entails pre-
senting a series of lines in varied orienta-
tions on a page and asking the individual 
to mark each line to create a cross or plus 
sign. This is illustrated in Figure 19–3. 
Note that the lines in the neglected por-
Figure 19–3.  Line cancellation task result for a person with left visual 
hemineglect.
Figure 19–2.  Line bisection task. A. Shows the bisection mark made 
by a person without visual hemineglect. B. Shows the mark made by 
a person with left visual field neglect.

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   307
tion of the visual field (in this case, the left 
side) are not marked. Variations of line 
cancellation tasks entail pages of varied 
shapes or letters; respondents are asked to 
circle or otherwise mark all of any shape 
(e.g., all the squares) or letter (all the As).
The clock drawing task is commonly 
used in screening for visual neglect. Sim-
ply ask the individual to draw a clock. 
A  tendency to draw the numbers and 
hands of the clock on one side of the 
clock’s face suggests that the opposite side 
is neglected, as illustrated in Figure 19–4. 
Interestingly, the circular structure of the 
clock face is often appropriately drawn, as 
highly predictable, common symmetrical 
shapes are. Drawing or copying other 
items, such as a flower, person, or tree, 
may also yield insights about potential 
visual neglect.
Reading tasks also may be helpful. If 
a person is able to read and speak, give 
him or her a page of text to read aloud. 
People with visual neglect often fail to 
read words on the neglected side of a page 
or column, as illustrated in Figure 19–5.  
Considering the lost content during a 
reading task, it is apparent how visual 
neglect may be falsely interpreted as a 
linguistic or reading comprehension prob-
lem per se.
Another means of using reading to 
screen for neglect is to present individual 
cards with printed compound words, 
such as mailman, boyfriend, or matchbox. If 
a person reading these aloud consistently 
pronounces only one component mor-
pheme on the right or left, this may indi-
cate neglect of one side of the visual space. 
For people who have sufficient linguistic 
abilities to engage in a picture description 
or reading-aloud task, we may gain addi-
tional insight into the condition by adding 
irrelevant visual stimuli on the neglected 
side of the stimulus of interest. People 
with allocentric neglect may neglect the 
Figure 19–4.  Clock drawing by a TBI survivor with left 
visual field neglect.

308   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
added stimulus on the contralateral side 
instead of the contralateral portion of the 
stimulus and attend to all or at least more 
of the stimulus of interest; thus, their 
responses may improve. Another strategy 
to try is to present multiple-choice stimuli 
or rating scales in a vertical rather than 
horizontal orientation.
Many of language batteries include 
screening tools for visual neglect. The 
Behavioral Inattention Test (BIT; Wilson, 
Cockburn, & Halligan, 1987a) includes 
means of indexing varied forms of hemi-
spatial neglect. The severity of hemispa-
tial neglect may be modified by manipu-
lating alertness, such as through imposing 
time limits on cognitive-linguistic tasks 
(George, Mercer, Walker, & Manly, 2008).
Higher-Level Visual 
Integration Problems
Visual agnosia is a deficit in recognizing 
visual stimuli. Types of visual agnosia 
include visual object agnosia (deficit in 
recognizing objects or images of objects), 
prosopagnosia (deficit in recognizing 
faces), or autopagnosia (deficit in recog-
nizing body parts). Although they are not 
common, any of these may affect assess-
Figure 19–5.  Illustration of right-sided visual neglect during a reading task. Highlighted 
words indicate portions of text neglected for an individual with a left hemisphere lesion 
reading the letter aloud. A full-color version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   309
ment as well. There are several assessment  
tools for indexing such problems, although 
challenges with language may potentially 
confound corresponding results. Assess-
ment for these problems is often consid-
ered more within the scope of practice of 
neuropsychology than of SLPs.
Visuoconstructive disability is a def-
icit in drawing original images, copying 
images, or manipulating three-dimensional  
objects into specified design or patterns. 
Some use the term constructional apraxia, 
although it is less accurate in a literal 
sense, because the behavioral manifesta-
tion may occur due to a perceptual dis-
order not involving a motor component 
(Benton & Tranel, 1993; Rothi, Raymer, 
& Heilman, 1997). Visuoconstructive dis-
ability may be a confounding factor in any 
cognitive-linguistic assessment involving 
drawing tasks. Some language batter-
ies include screening tools to index this 
construct.
Hearing Problems
Hearing problems are more likely in peo-
ple with neurogenic language disorders 
than in the general population. Some of 
the disproportion is due to the effects of 
age on hearing abilities, and some is due 
to the impact of neurological changes on 
hearing abilities. Auditory acuity and dis-
crimination challenges tend to occur with 
advancing age, as do most etiologies of 
neurogenic language disorders. Still, there 
is wide variability in how age and neuro-
logical injuries affect hearing, such that it 
is essential to consider each older person’s 
hearing status individually.
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) survi-
vors have a high rate of hearing loss due 
to otologic injuries, and many are said to 
have central auditory processing difficul-
ties (Lubinski, Moscato, & Willer, 1997; 
Musiek, Baran, & Shinn, 2004) or diffi-
culty responding to rapid rates of speech 
(Poeck & Pietron, 1981). Injuries of the ear 
are among the most common of all inju-
ries reported among soldiers engaging in 
modern warfare; ears are also susceptible 
to blast injury (Myers, Wilmington, Gal-
lun, Henry, & Fausti, 2009). The actual 
incidence of hearing loss within any of the 
same diagnostic groups with neurogenic 
loss of language abilities is difficult to esti-
mate due to multiple potential assessment 
confounds and due to the fact that many 
are unaware of their hearing deficits and 
thus do not report them or seek hearing 
assessment.
It is a great asset to have an audi-
ologist on your rehabilitation team, one 
experienced in adapting instructions and 
procedures as needed and engaging in 
supported communication with people 
with neurogenic disorders; where there 
is not one, it is often appropriate to refer 
to an outside audiologist for a hearing 
evaluation to index, at least, the person’s 
pure-tone thresholds (air and bone) and 
auditory discrimination and processing 
abilities. Auditory evoked response test-
ing is recommended by some; auditory 
evoked response results have even been 
validated, at least to some degree, as a 
prognostic indicator for language recov-
ery in people with aphasia due to stroke 
(Sosa, Martínez, Gómez, & Jáuregui-Ren-
aud, 2009). Most central auditory testing 
procedures entail long and complex ver-
bal instructions and response tasks that 
are linguistically loaded and lave low eco-
logical validity. Thus, incidence statistics 
for central auditory processing disorders 
in people with neurogenic language defi-
cits typically have questionable validity 
(Feeney & Hallowell, 2000).
It is within the SLP’s scope of practice 
to screen for hearing difficulties. When 
performing a hearing screening, attend 

310   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
to any appropriate adaptations for people 
with language deficits, such as allow-
ing for alternative instructions (auditory, 
written, graphic, gestural) and response 
modes (hand raising, button pressing, 
eye blink, written responses). For intel-
ligibility testing, picture-pointing tasks 
may be a more valid indicator than word 
repetition.
Does the person have a hearing aid 
(or two)? If so, make sure he or she is wear-
ing it and that it is clean and functioning 
correctly, with functional batteries. If the 
hearing aid is not present or functional or 
if the user wishes not to use it, it may be 
helpful to use a simple battery-powered 
personal listening device, such as a sound 
amplification system that may be worn 
around the neck and a microphone and 
headphone set. They are available at low 
to moderate cost, depending on quality 
and features. Some people even without 
hearing impairment seem more alert and 
interactive when wearing these, perhaps 
because they are aided by the reduction 
in background noise or the physical sen-
sation of the headphones causes them to 
attend more closely to auditory stimuli 
and conversation. Individual people or 
the people who interact with them may 
wish to have one of their own if it seems 
to improve communication. It is well 
worth the investment to have at least one 
of these on hand to try out as appropriate 
during assessment.
Whether or not the individual is 
using amplification, be sure to deter-
mine at what loudness level you should 
be speaking to accommodate hearing 
problems. Do not assume that a person 
has a significant hearing impairment just 
because he or she is older. Ask directly for 
feedback about whether you are speaking 
too loudly or too quietly, too quickly or 
too slowly. It is also important, through-
out the intervention, to tune into possible 
auditory agnosia (difficulty recogniz-
ing sounds) — especially auditory sound 
agnosia (inability to recognize nonlinguis-
tic sounds) or pure word deafness (inabil-
ity to recognize spoken language in the 
face of good recognition of nonlinguistic 
sounds) (Burns, 2004).
Finally, consider whether the indi-
vidual experiences noise buildup, that 
is, increased difficulty with cognitive-
linguistic tasks over time. It is said to 
occur within sentences (such that the end 
of a long sentence may be especially diffi-
cult to understand compared to the begin-
ning) or within a specific activity, conver-
sation, or clinical session (Porch, 1967; 
Schuell, 1953, 1954; Schuell et al., 1964).
Although there is no consensus among 
aphasiologists about the underlying na- 
ture of this phenomenon or even about 
whether it truly exists, many clinicians as 
well as people with neurogenic language 
disorders describe it as problematic in 
terms of decreased language processing 
abilities as an assessment session contin-
ues. A challenge in indexing the phenom-
enon as a clinical symptom itself is that 
many of our assessment tools are designed 
to begin with easy tasks and then progress 
to more difficult tasks. Given that people 
are more likely to become fatigued, frus-
trated, and challenged with the later 
tasks, then, it may not be clear whether 
decreased abilities noted over time are 
due to this rather nebulous but still poten-
tially aggravating symptom.
Motor Challenges
Any of an array of motor challenges may 
occur in people with neurological disor-
ders. The may involve innervation, motor 
programming, control, and coordination 

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   311
of musculature required for speech or 
bodily movement.
Apraxia of Speech (AoS)
Apraxia of speech (AoS) is impairment 
in motor programming and sequencing of 
movements of the articulators for inten-
tional or volitional speech. It is character-
ized by articulatory groping, inconsistent 
articulatory errors (sound substitutions, 
omission, substitutions, repetitions, and 
distortions), slow speech rate, and abnor-
mal stress patterns. It is not a problem of 
muscular innervation (Croot, 2002; Duffy, 
2013). The primary way in which AoS 
threatens the validity of language assess-
ment is when problems speaking are 
interpreted as language problems. For a 
person who has both AoS and aphasia, it 
can be especially challenging to sort out 
which aspects of his or her spoken pro-
duction problems are due to which under-
lying impairment (Knollman-Porter, 2008; 
Mumby, Bowen, & Hesketh, 2007).
Here are a few strategies to help dis-
cern AoS from a language problem.
• If the individual is literate, look 
for a marked distinction in content 
expressed through speaking versus 
writing. A difference between the 
two is a good indicator of AoS; a 
similar level of expression is more 
likely across modalities in people 
with aphasia.
• Compare the production of 
automatic or highly learned 
utterances with propositional 
speech. Both a person with AoS  
and a person with aphasia may 
speak better in an automatic speech 
task; however, the distinction may 
be more marked in a person with 
AoS.
• Note articulatory groping 
behaviors. These are common in 
AoS but not in aphasia without 
AoS.
• Note whether there are 
inconsistencies in articulatory 
errors. A person with AoS typically 
has more of these relative to a 
person with only aphasia.
• Try testing articulation with 
longer and increasingly complex 
utterances; people from both 
groups tend to have more difficulty 
on longer and more phonologically 
complex sound sequences than 
on shorter, simpler ones, but the 
contrast may be more marked in a 
person with AoS.
If an individual has little or no speech, 
be sure to have writing paper and pens 
or pencils handy. Also, yes/no cards, pic-
ture cards, image books, and like/dislike 
rating scales may be helpful for eliciting 
responses. Textbooks on motor speech 
disorders (e.g., Duffy, 2013; Lowit & Kent, 
2011) typically provide protocols and sug-
gested tasks for diagnosis of AoS — and 
the differential diagnosis of AoS in peo-
ple with aphasia. Several aphasia batter-
ies include screening tools or tasks to help 
identify AoS. Separate assessment tools 
may also be used, for example, the Test 
of Oral and Limb Apraxia (TOLA; Helm-
Estabrooks, 1992b) and the Apraxia Bat-
tery for Adults-2 (ABA-2; Dabul, 2000).
Dysarthria
Dysarthria is an impairment of neuromus-
cular innervation of the muscles involved 
in speech. It results in slow, weak, and 
poorly coordinated speech production. 
Most people with dysarthria due to unilat-
eral cortical lesions are still able to speak 

312   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
with at least moderate intelligibility due 
to the bilateral innervation of the articula-
tory musculature. Still, intelligibility may 
be affected. Dysarthria may affect the 
validity of language assessment in cases 
when the clinician does not understand 
an individual’s intended utterances. Also 
given that speech may be slower, scores 
may be lower for timed tasks. For exam-
ple, items within a category named per 
minute and spoken language indices of 
average information units expressed per 
unit of time may reflect, at least partially, 
a motor speech as opposed to a language 
deficit. Still, the distinction between the 
two is much simpler than with AoS and 
aphasia. Here are some strategies to dis-
tinguish dysarthria from aphasia.
• Observe the individual’s muscular 
control and carry out an oral 
mechanism exam; a primary 
distinguishing feature of people 
with dysarthria (with or without 
concomitant aphasia) is oral and/or 
facial asymmetry.
• Note semantic, syntactic, and 
pragmatic errors; these are not 
likely in a person with dysarthria 
but they are in a person with 
aphasia.
• Note difficulty following directions; 
these, too, are not likely in a person 
with dysarthria but they are in a 
person with aphasia.
• Use reading and writing tasks 
to index language reception and 
production abilities; people with 
dysarthria and not aphasia perform 
relatively well through written and 
spoken modalities.
As with AoS, several language assess-
ment batteries include tasks designed to 
screen for dysarthria, and most textbooks 
on motor speech disorders (e.g., Duffy, 
2013; Lowit & Kent, 2011) address spe-
cific means of differential diagnosis of 
various types of dysarthria. Tools devel-
oped to assess presence, type, and sever-
ity of dysarthria include the Assessment 
of the Intelligibility of Dysarthric Speech 
(AIDS; Yorkston & Beukelman, 1984), 
the Frenchay Dysarthria Assessment 
(Enderby, 1983), the Dysarthia Examina-
tion Battery (Drummond, 1993), and the 
Quick Assessment for Dysarthria (Tanner 
& Culbertson, 1999).
Limb Apraxia
Limb apraxia is a deficit in motor pro-
gramming of the arm, elbow, wrist, hand, 
or fingers for volitional movement. Limb 
apraxia has been associated with two 
underlying processes: ideational apraxia 
(a problem generating a plan to carry out 
a purposeful movement) and ideomotor 
apraxia (a problem executing the plan); 
some argue that these two constructs are 
not actually separable (Duffy, 1974). Heil-
man and Gonzalez Rothi’s (2003) dual-
component model of limb apraxia suggests a 
mix of conceptual and preparatory aspects 
involving perception and movement.
People with limb apraxia may per-
form reflexive or highly rote movements 
using the very same body parts but have 
difficulty when they try to do so intention-
ally. For example, if you approach a West-
ern person with limb apraxia with your 
arm extended as if to shake her hand, she 
may easily extend a hand to shake yours. 
This is because handshaking is so com-
mon in her culture that it happens with-
out planning or a great deal of attention. 
However, when you ask her to show you 
the arm and hand movement required for 
a handshake, she may be unable to do so. 
Limb apraxia is likely to be underreported 

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   313
because it is overlooked in comparison to 
other motor symptoms, especially paresis 
or paralysis of the limbs (Pazzaglia, Sma-
nia, Corato, & Aglioti, 2008). It may also 
be mistaken for poor coordination of the 
nondominant but more functional arm 
or hand in a person whose has paraly-
sis or paresis on the side contralateral to  
the stroke.
Limb apraxia may lead to incorrect 
or unreliable pointing, gesture, responses 
to commands, and use of some response 
modes, such as button pressing or typ-
ing, during testing. Sequencing of mul-
tiple limb movements typically results in 
more errors than single movements (Nei-
man, Duffy, Belanger, & Coelho, 2000). To 
screen for limb apraxia informally, engage 
the person you are testing in a range of 
simple to complex pantomime tasks and 
motor commands using the arms and 
hands (Bartolo, Cubelli, & Sala, 2008; 
Duffy, 1974; Neiman, Duffy, Belanger, & 
Coelho, 1994; Rothi et al., 1997) or use one 
of the apraxia screening tests mentioned 
earlier (i.e., ABA-2; Dabul, 2000 and 
TOLA; Helm-Estabrooks, 1992b).
Limb apraxia is distinct from the 
spontaneous use of gestures to convey 
meaning during conversation. In fact, a 
caution with more explicit testing is that 
gestures or pantomime movements elic-
ited via commands and requests of imita-
tion are not likely to be as accurate as ges-
tures occurring in natural conversation in 
people with language disorders and con-
comitant limb apraxia (Rose & Douglas, 
2003). There may be differences in how 
an individual uses pantomime gestures 
for transitive object use (such as hammer-
ing or tooth brushing) versus intransitive 
(such as making a hitchhiking gesture) 
(Pazzaglia et al., 2008). Theories regarding 
differences among manifestations of limb 
apraxia and underlying associated neuro-
pathologies continue to be developed and 
tested through functional neuroimaging 
and behavioral studies (Foundas, 2013; 
Gonzalez Rothi & Heilman, 2014).
Paralysis or Paresis
Many people with neurogenic language 
disorders have right-sided paralysis or 
hemiparesis. Given that most are right-
handed, use of the dominant hand may 
be slowed or poorly coordinated. Also, 
for most people, using the dominant left 
hand in lieu of the right results in slower 
and less coordinated use of the hand and 
arm for writing, typing, button pressing, 
drawing, and gesturing. Paralysis or pare-
sis of the body in general may affect the 
ability to demonstrate comprehension 
of commands. Thus, paralysis and pare-
sis may affect the speed and accuracy of 
responses in a way that affects the valid-
ity of language test results that depend 
on such more control. Often, problems of 
muscular innervation of the face, hands, 
or body are visibly noticeable. Ideally, the 
SLP will have access to records of a full 
neurological exam performed by a neurol-
ogist. If not, it is a good idea to engage in 
a basic screening for weakness, including 
asking the person and significant others 
directly about related symptoms.
Other Motor Deficits
Additional motor-related symptoms may 
interfere with cognitive-linguistic assess-
ment. Bradykinesia, a condition of excess 
muscle tone, results in slowed move-
ments with reduced range of motion; it 
typically leads to problems with writing 
and manipulating objects, and it may 
cause reduced facial expression. Bradyki-
nesia is common in Parkinson’s disease, 
and some TBI survivors have it. Ataxia, a 

314   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
problem of muscle coordination that may 
affect speaking and voluntary movements 
of the eyes and limbs, is often associated 
with cerebellar lesions. It is common in 
multiple sclerosis and cerebral palsy and 
may also be caused by stroke, brain injury, 
or tumors. It may affect accuracy of point-
ing responses, command following, and 
object manipulation. Involuntary hyper-
kinetic movement disorders such as cho-
rea (rapid, repetitive, jerky movements), 
athetosis (slow writhing movements), or 
ballismus (jerking, flinging movements, 
especially of the arms and legs) may also 
affect assessment performance.
Reading Problems
Indexing of reading abilities at least to 
some degree is typical of most screenings 
or assessment sessions. Before evaluat-
ing what reading deficits a person might 
have due to some sort of change in the 
brain, be sure to stop and learn about his 
or her degree of literacy prior to the onset 
of any acquired neurological condition. 
This is a critical step that far too many 
clinicians ignore. Given their highly edu-
cated, highly literate backgrounds, clinical 
aphasiologists are at risk of ethnocentric 
assumptions about another person’s abil-
ity and desire to read. Keep in mind that 
a person who is unable to read may not 
have ever been able to read or to read well.
Reading is a potential assessment 
confound whenever we rely on written 
material for instructions or for evoking 
any type of communicative response 
when reading itself is not what is being 
assessed. In some cases, we may seek to 
learn generally whether a person can read, 
if there are acquired reading problems, 
and what are the life-affecting aspects of 
any reading deficits. In other cases, when 
reading deficits are an important concern 
to an individual and we are considering 
treatment options specifically focused on 
reading, we may delve more deeply into 
the nature of a person’s reading deficits. 
By analyzing performance according to 
a cognitive processing model of reading 
(Hillis & Caramazza, 1992), we may con-
sider where in the reading process there 
could be a breakdown.
Almost all general language assess-
ment batteries include reading com-
ponents, and additional reading tests 
enable more detailed assessment to help 
determine severity of functional read-
ing deficits, whether a person may have 
pure alexia or alexia with agraphia, and 
whether reading challenges may be due 
to grapheme-to-phoneme (letter to sound) 
conversion, lexical-sematic access, or 
other aspects involved in reading aloud 
or copying what one has read. Some com-
monly recommended tools are listed and 
described in Chapter 20. One in particu-
lar that was designed for use with people 
who have aphasia is the Reading Com-
prehension Battery for Aphasia (RCBA; 
LaPointe & Horner, 1998); the Psycholin-
guistic Assessments of Language Process-
ing in Aphasia (PALPA; Kay et al., 1997) 
also has reading-specific subtests. These 
tools and many subtests from language 
batteries intended for people with neu-
rological disorders entail relatively easy 
material and do not necessarily require 
the reader to have understood what he or 
she has read to answer correctly some for 
the corresponding comprehension ques-
tions (Nicholas et al., 1986). Several read-
ing assessment tools normed on children 
and young adults have better controls for 
reading level, means of error analysis, and 
psychometric properties. Many of these 
normative data do not pertain to people 
with neurological disorders but still may 
be helpful if administered and interpreted 
appropriately.

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   315
Dysgraphia and Other Writing Deficits
To the degree that written responses are 
relied upon for any aspect of assessment 
not directly intended to index writing, they 
may confound assessment. Basic writing 
abilities may be assessed using most gen-
eral language assessment batteries listed 
and described in Chapter 20. For more 
in-depth assessment, there are few tools 
explicitly developed for older adults, let 
alone adults with neurological impair-
ments. Some use spelling and expository 
writing subtests from writing batteries 
developed for use with younger people 
with and/or without disabilities.
Problems of Awareness and Arousal
Arousal (also called alertness or vigilance) 
and awareness are components of the con-
struct of consciousness. It can be extremely 
challenging to discern the influence of 
potentially altered states of conscious-
ness on cognitive and linguistic abilities. 
Consciousness is indexed on a continuum 
rather than in terms of a present/not 
present dichotomy. Consciousness states 
include coma (no arousal or awareness), 
vegetative state (arousal without aware-
ness, also called unresponsive wakeful-
ness syndrome), deep sleep, paradoxical 
sleep (rapid eye movement [REM] sleep), 
anesthesia, minimally conscious state 
(arousal with fluctuating awareness), and 
wakefulness (Gosseries et al., 2011). The 
boundaries between these states are often 
unclear, and transitions from one to the 
next are often unnoticeable through mere 
observation. Potential stages that follow 
a coma due to stroke or brain injury are 
shown schematically in Figure 19–6.
Signs of consciousness may easily be 
missed. Further complicating this situation 
is that people who are motorically unre-
sponsive may be perceived as cognitively 
and linguistically incompetent when in 
Figure 19–6.  Potential consciousness conditions after stroke or brain injury. Sources: Gos-
series et al., 2011; Laureys, Owen, & Schiff, 2004.

316   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
fact they merely lack a means of express-
ing their intact cognitive and linguistic 
abilities. There are heart-wrenching cases 
of people without cognitive-linguistic dis-
orders who remained institutionalized for 
years as if they were vegetative, without 
appropriate stimulation, socialization, 
rehabilitation, information, and inclusion 
in daily activities and decision making, 
and without assistive technology that 
would have enabled them to communi-
cate. An example is described in an auto-
biographical account by Tavalaro (1997), 
who had locked-in syndrome, a condi-
tion caused by a brainstem-level stroke or 
injury and resulting in complete paralysis 
of the body’s voluntary muscles (with the 
exception of certain types of eye move-
ment). She describes her experience being 
hospitalized without recognition of her 
intact abilities for 6 years until, finally, an 
SLP discovered that she was alert, highly 
intelligent, and had no language disability 
whatsoever.
The SLP is not likely to take the lead 
in differential diagnosis of conscious-
ness states; still, it is important that he or 
she be involved as a critically thinking 
member of a rehabilitation team. The fact 
that coma and persistent vegetative state 
are frequently misdiagnosed (estimated 
at 37% to 42% of the time; Andrews, 
Murphy, Munday, & Littlewood, 1996; 
Schnakers et al., 2009) suggests that there 
is a dire need for all rehabilitation team 
members to engage in astute observation, 
inquisitiveness, and advocacy for thor-
ough assessment even for people who are 
not on their caseload.
There is no universally accepted tech-
nique or tool for indexing levels of con-
sciousness, and diagnoses are often made 
based on behavioral observation. Stan-
dardized assessments help to improve 
validity and reliability. Differential diag-
nosis includes neuroimaging (e.g., CT, 
MRI, rCBF, PET), EEG, ERP, behavioral 
observation, and behavioral testing for 
reflexes and responses to commands 
(hand squeeze, eye blink, eye move-
ment for those who are not otherwise 
overtly responsive). Repeated screenings 
for responsiveness at each translational 
stage of recovery should be implemented 
because of the high potential for marked 
inconsistencies. Once any consistent pat-
tern of responding or means of eliciting 
behavioral responses has been identified, 
the role of the SLP is critical, not only for 
direct clinical intervention but also for 
consultation regarding ethical issues and 
decision-making capacity.
The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS; 
Teasdale & Jennett, 1974), summarized in  
Box 19–1, is, worldwide, the most widely 
used index applied to people in and 
emerging from coma. Individuals are 
scored on a scale of 3 to 15 points for eye, 
verbal, and motor behaviors. Several other 
coma scales are in use as well. In most 
clinical contexts, there is one particular 
scale of choice established for agency- or 
facility-wide use.
Attention Problems
As we reviewed in detail in Chapter 9, 
attention and the ability to allocate it effi-
ciently during the processing of linguistic 
and nonlinguistic information is often a 
fundamental consideration in charac-
terizing language abilities. Attention is 
essential to all communication and learn-
ing tasks so it affects virtually all aspects 
of assessment and treatment. It is impor-
tant that the SLP be aware of the myriad 
types or manifestations of attention and 
attention deficits, and consider whether 
there are particular challenges with any 

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   317
particular aspects of attention. The Test 
of Everyday Attention (TEA; Ridgeway 
et al., 1994) is an example of a published 
battery that includes tasks to index vari-
ous forms of attention: focused or selec-
tive attention, sustained attention, atten-
tion allocation or divided attention, and 
attentional switching.
Unfortunately, as described in Chap-
ter 9, there are serious methodological 
challenges associated with indexing atten-
tion allocation in people with acquired 
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
The GCS is scored between 3 and 15, with 3 being the worst 
and 15 the best. It is composed of three parameters: best eye 
response, best verbal response, and best motor response, as 
indicated below:
Best eye response. (4)
	 1.	 No eye opening.
	 2.	 Eye opening to pain.
	 3.	 Eye opening to verbal command.
	 4.	 Eyes open spontaneously.
Best verbal response. (5)
	 1.	 No verbal response
	 2.	 Incomprehensible sounds.
	 3.	 Inappropriate words.
	 4.	 Confused
	 5.	 Orientated
Best motor response. (6)
	 1.	 No motor response.
	 2.	 Extension to pain.
	 3.	 Flexion to pain.
	 4.	 Withdrawal from pain.
	 5.	 Localizing pain.
	 6.	 Obeys commands.
Note that the phrase “GCS of 11” is essentially meaningless, 
and it is important to break the score down into its compo-
nents, such as E3V3M5 = GCS 11. A Coma Score of 13 or higher 
correlates with a mild brain injury, 9 to 12 a moderate injury, 
and 8 or less a severe brain injury.
Source:  Teasdale & Jennett, 1974.
Box
19–1

318   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
neurogenic language disorders. Even 
when using published batteries, the clini-
cian must reflect critically on what defi-
cits other than attention might influence 
results. Also, it is important to observe 
how well the person being assessed man-
ages attention resources during everyday 
communication and problem-solving 
tasks in naturalistic contexts.
Lack of Awareness of Deficits
A lack of awareness and unwillingness 
to consider the importance of a deficit 
are executive function deficits common 
in the clinical syndromes addressed by 
SLPs. Lack of awareness may be caused 
by cognitive impairments that limit self-
reflection, psychological reactions to 
changes in function, and organic changes 
in brain regions involved in awareness 
(Sohlberg, 2000). Deficits in general self-
awareness and the ability to reflect on and 
have insights about one’s own condition 
are associated with prefrontal lesions, 
especially in TBI survivors. More spe-
cific forms of anosagnosia are associated 
with damage in other areas of the brain. 
For example, people with left hemisphere 
lesions in the superior temporal lobe 
often appear unaware of or not bothered 
by their language deficits. Symptoms of 
failing to notice or use one or more con-
tralateral limbs, denial of hemiplegia or of 
the severity of its impact, and denial that 
one’s limbs are truly one’s own tend to be 
associated with parietal lesions (Myers, 
1999; Sohlberg, 2000). Anosagnosia is 
much more prevalent in right than left 
brain injuries.
A person with anosognosia, who 
denies or is unaware of any particular 
impairment, may not be particularly 
motivated to participate in the assess-
ment process or in treatment. Thus, it is 
an important characteristic to tune into, 
as it is highly relevant to the communi-
cation rehabilitation process. Sohlberg 
(2000) recommends the following means 
of indexing awareness of deficits:
• Having the person describe his or 
her own abilities and disabilities
• Comparing reports of deficits from 
the individual being assessed with 
those of significant others
• Comparing the individual’s 
prediction of how he or she will 
perform on a given task with actual 
performance
• Analyzing error detection and 
correction
• Directly observing interactions with 
the individual
Factors that potentially confound 
self-report of deficits in general are the 
stigma an individual may feel about the 
deficit and the fear of losing indepen-
dence, such as driving privileges or con-
trol of finances. Potential confounds of 
reports from significant others include 
personal biases and resistance to notic-
ing changes in self-awareness over time 
(Bach & David, 2006). Potential confounds 
in comparing predicted with actual task 
performance include the possible lack of 
relevance of such tasks to real-world func-
tioning (Schlund, 1999).
Sohlberg (2000) outlines important as- 
sessment items relevant to self-awareness, 
including:
• Whether the individual knows 
about his or her strengths and 
weaknesses
• Whether any denial of deficits 
appears to be organically based, 
psychologically based, or both

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   319
• Whether the individual engages 
in compensatory or self-corrective 
behaviors
• What the consequences of the lack 
of awareness might be
Drawing attention to limitations through 
discussion or demonstration typically has 
little influence; brief attempts to do so may 
be helpful in terms of getting a notion of 
how strong any associated resistance to 
treatment may be.
Executive Function Deficits
In addition to lack of awareness of defi-
cits, other executive function deficits may 
negatively affect the validity of cognitive-
linguistic assessment by masking intact 
cognitive-linguistic abilities, interfering 
with compliance during assessment tasks, 
restricting assessment time and access due 
to problematic behavior, and distraction 
of clinicians such that key communication 
strengths may go unappreciated. Indices 
of executive functioning have been shown 
to independently influence independence 
in activities of daily living in older people 
with and without neurological disorders 
(Royall et al., 2005).
The complexity and diversity of con-
structs subsumed under the broad term 
executive function (planning, initiative, 
problem solving, judgment, organization, 
sequencing, inhibition, cognitive flexibil-
ity, self-monitoring, self-reflection, etc.) 
make it difficult to pinpoint just what is 
meant when we refer to executive func-
tion impairments. It is important, then, 
to be clear about areas of performance 
about which we have particular assess-
ment hypotheses or questions, to choose 
assessment stimuli and methods that cap-
ture constructs related to those areas, and 
to present results in light of those particu-
lar constructs.
The Delis-Kaplan Executive Func-
tion System (D-KEFS; Delis, Kaplan, & 
Kramer, 2001) enables indexing of a vari-
ety of executive function constructs. The 
Executive Interview (Royall, Mahurin, 
& Gray, 1992) is a screening instrument 
designed to assess executive functions in 
adults in varied types of living arrange-
ments (nursing homes, retirement com-
munities, dementia units, and private 
family homes). It has been shown to be 
sensitive to disruptive and other prob-
lematic behaviors. Additional assessment 
tools include the Behavioral Assessment 
of Dysexecutive Syndrome (BADS; Ufer 
& Wilson, 2000) and subtests of most bat-
teries developed for survivors of TBI and 
right brain injury.
Given that actual executive perfor-
mance is highly dependent on the nature 
of the tasks, stimuli, assessment environ-
ments, and ecological validity of assess-
ment tools and methods, it is important 
to scrutinize test results carefully and to 
observe executive functioning in a variety 
of structured and unstructured everyday 
tasks over time. Just as executive func-
tion deficits may confound assessment of 
other cognitive and linguistic constructs, 
so may other cognitive and linguistic defi-
cits confound the assessment of executive 
functions.
Pragmatic Deficits
Pragmatic abilities are closely tied to 
executive function abilities. They may 
affect the validity of assessment of other 
constructs in a variety of ways. Poor social 
use of language may make it appear that  
a person’s receptive and expressive abili-
ties are not as strong as they actually 

320   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
are. Excellent pragmatic skills may also 
be deceiving. For example, people with 
word-finding deficits often find clever 
ways to cover them up through astute 
circumlocution and by redirecting con-
versations. People with mild cognitive 
impairment are often adept at redirect-
ing conversational topics and engag-
ing in lively social banter in a way that 
makes their cognitive-linguistic deficits 
less apparent. Means of conversational 
analysis focused on pragmatic behavior 
are discussed in Chapter 21. Repeated 
observation in conversational contexts 
and gaining insight through caregivers 
and family members helps clarify the 
influence of pragmatic abilities on specific 
cognitive-linguistic abilities.
Memory Problems
Memory deficits are key potential 
sequelae of RBI, TBI, and stroke and are 
also inherent characteristics of varied 
forms of dementia. Numerous assess-
ment batteries include subtests created 
to index memory relative to the timing of 
onset (retrograde and anterograde), the 
duration for which content is remembered 
(working memory, short-term memory, 
long-term memory), the nature of what 
is remembered (e.g., episodic or seman-
tic), and the means of indexing memory 
(e.g., recall or recognition). Memory may 
be assessed in any relevant modalities; 
it is most commonly examined in visual 
and verbal modalities but may also be 
examined in tactile and olfactory modali-
ties. As with intelligence tests, even when 
tests are said to be nonverbal, this does not 
mean that people who take them do not 
use verbal strategies to accomplish sup-
posedly nonverbal tasks.
Other Concomitant Cognitive 
and Linguistic Deficits
Even aspects of language impairment 
in and of themselves may interfere with 
assessment of other cognitive and linguis-
tic abilities. For example, if a task requires 
comprehension of complex instructions, 
then not being able to understand those 
instructions could confound responses to 
the task itself when it is administered to 
people with comprehension impairments. 
In fact, people without cognitive-linguistic  
disorders often experience challenges 
with comprehending task instructions 
(Keren & Willemsen, 2009). Likewise, if a 
particular task is cognitively demanding, 
for example, requiring a long bout of sus-
tained attention or demanding working 
memory allocation that exceeds a person’s 
capacity, then the individual’s true com-
petence according to any other construct 
the clinician is attempting to evaluate may 
be masked.
Depression and  
Other Mood Disorders
Almost everyone with a neurogenic loss of 
communication ability, regardless of etiol-
ogy and regardless of site of lesion, experi-
ences depression. The American Psychiatric 
Association (APA) criteria for clinical diag-
nosis of depression are given in Box 19–2. 
Symptoms of depression also include 
any of the following: persistent sadness, 
frequent crying; a sense of helplessness, 
hopelessness, anxiousness, or empty feel-
ings; social withdrawal; and associated 
aches, pains, headaches, and digestive 
problems that do not ease with treatment 
(National Stroke Association, 2006).

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   321
A person with a neurogenic language 
disorder may have depression for any or 
all of the following reasons:
• Continuation of preexisting 
depression the individual already 
had before the stroke or brain injury 
(which in itself may be linked to 
multiple causes, such as changes in 
life circumstance, illness, loss of a 
loved one, and genetics)
• Depression caused by neurochemical 
and structural changes in neuronal 
functioning
• Situational depression (Lyon, 1998) or 
grief response (Währborg, 1991) over 
the loss of abilities and independence, 
and changes in relationships and 
identity (Patterson, 2002)
• Depression exacerbated by 
ineffective coping strategies related 
to changes in life participation
Depression may be a confounding  
factor in assessment in that a lack of 
responsiveness may be inappropriately 
perceived as an inability to respond, and 
associated difficulties concentrating may 
affect the ability to respond during formal 
and informal assessment. Additionally, a 
lack of motivation to participate and do 
one’s best may negatively affect assess-
ment results. Likewise, communication 
disorders may be confounding factors in 
the assessment of depression and other 
mood disorders. Sambunaris and Hyde 
(1994) illustrate this point through two 
case studies of people with aphasia whose 
American Psychiatric Association  
Criteria for Depression
The American Psychiatric Association (APA, 2013) defines 
depression as a low mood for a period of at least 2 weeks, 
entailing any of the symptoms below. 
• Low mood or irritability for most of the day, almost 
every day, as reported by the individual or others
• Decreased interest or pleasure in everyday activities 
most of the day, almost every day
• 5% change in weight or change in appetite
• Sleep disturbance (insomnia or hypersomnia)
• Slowed or agitated psychomotor activity
• Fatigue or reduced energy
• Feelings of worthlessness or inappropriate guilt
• Difficulty concentrating or indecisiveness
• Suicidal thoughts or planning
Having at least five of the nine symptoms listed is considered 
major depression while having fewer than five is considered 
minor depression.
Box
19–2

322   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
communication-based symptoms led to 
erroneous diagnosis of psychotic disor-
ders. A case report on a similar situation is 
described by Owolabi and Yakasai (2012).
It is often difficult to identify depres-
sion, and it may be impossible to under-
stand its nature for a given person. This 
is because (1) there are so many possible 
causes underlying it, any of which may 
occur in combination; (2) communica-
tion and cognitive impairments can limit 
expression of feelings and/or limit capac-
ity for judgment and personal reflection; 
and (3) many people experiencing depres-
sion do not feel comfortable talking about 
it even if they are capable of doing so, 
due to guilt, embarrassment, fear of judg-
ment, and associated stigma. Sometimes 
diagnosis is based on caregiver report and 
observation, the validity of which may be 
in question.
Rating scales are commonly used 
to learn about the mood of people with 
language disorders. One specifically 
developed for people with aphasia is the 
Stroke Aphasic Depression Questionnaire 
(SADQ-H; Lincoln, Sutcliffe, & Unsworth, 
2000). It is designed to be completed 
through caregiver (including nursing 
staff) input and may be supplemented 
with input from the person assessed. It is 
a revised version of the original 21-item 
SADQ (Sutcliffe & Lincoln, 1998), which 
had fewer rating-scale response options. 
Bennett et al. (2006) tested a briefer 
10-item version and demonstrated its con-
current validity with the Hospital Anxiety 
and Depression Scale (HADS; Zigmond 
& Snaith, 1983). Cobley, Thomas, Lin-
coln, and Walker (2012) report internal 
consistency and concurrent validity of 
the SADQH-10 for people with aphasia 
due to stroke. Hacker, Thomas, and Stark 
(2009) demonstrated its concurrent valid-
ity with the Brief Assessment Schedule 
Depression Cards (BASDEC; Adshead, 
Cody, & Pitt, 1992).
A disadvantage of indexing the self-
ratings of people with language disorders 
themselves, rather than through caregiv-
ers, is that they are highly linguistically 
loaded (typically composed of words and 
no images; Brumfitt & Sheeran, 1999; Pat-
terson, 2002). Of course, a disadvantage 
in having others provide ratings is that 
the degree to which their ratings reflect 
the actual feelings of the person being 
assessed is usually unknown. Conferring 
with a psychiatrist, psychologist, and/or 
physiatrist who understands the nature 
of acquired language disorders can be 
helpful; still it does not necessarily ensure 
the validity of formal or informal assess-
ments of mood in people with communi-
cation disorders. The assistance of others, 
be they relatives, friends, or profession-
als, increases the feasibility of assess-
ing mood but does not ensure validity 
(Laska, Mårtensson, Kahan, von Arbin, & 
Murray, 2007).
Visual analog scales have been cre-
ated to circumvent the linguistic load of 
depression scales based on self-ratings. In 
the Visual Analog Mood Scales (VAMS; 
Stern, 1997), instead of verbal labels, 
iconic or cartoon-like faces are used to 
indicate self-ratings according to each of 
eight moods, along with verbal labels. The 
moods indexed are afraid, confused, sad, 
angry, energetic, tired, happy, and tense. 
Each scale has a neutral face and accom-
panying label “neutral” at the top of a 
vertical line and a mood face with a word 
at the bottom. Respondents mark the spot 
on the line that corresponds to how they 
feel. The VAMS-Revised (VMS-R; Kon-
tou, Thomas, & Lincoln, 2012) is a newer 
version that positions the more positive 
aspects of moods (sometimes “neutral” 
and sometimes positive descriptors such 

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   323
as “happy” or “energetic”) consistently at 
the top of the vertical line and more nega-
tive aspects (sometimes “neutral” and 
sometimes negative descriptors such as 
“sad” or “angry”) consistently at the bot-
tom. The authors of both versions report 
high internal consistency and high con-
current validity with other mood indices. 
A related analog scale created expressly 
for people with aphasia is the Visual Ana-
logues Self-Esteem Scale (VASES; Brumfitt 
& Sheeran, 1999). Brumfitt (2009) provides 
an excellent overview of a wide range 
of assessment instruments for indexing 
depression, mood, self-esteem, and well-
being. In any case, whether or not there is 
an official diagnosis of depression or even 
a transient low mood, it is critical that the 
SLP consider how strong the influence of 
low mood may be on the validity and reli-
ability of assessment results.
Anxiety
Many people with acquired neurogenic 
disorders experience anxiety, which dif-
fers from depression. Poststroke anxiety 
has been attributed to medical factors 
(e.g., higher incidence in people with epi-
lepsy, migraine, and frontal lobe lesions), 
insomnia, and depression (Leppävuori, 
Pohjasvaara, Vataja, Kaste, & Erkinjuntti, 
2003). Anxiety symptoms include ongo-
ing worry, fear, restlessness, and irritabil-
ity; low energy levels; poor concentration; 
muscle tension; panicky feelings, and 
physical symptoms of headache, shaking, 
or feeling sick in the stomach. Any one of 
these symptoms may affect the reliability 
and validity of assessment and may be 
exacerbated by the assessment process 
itself. Thus, these symptoms should be 
considered when scheduling and man-
aging assessment activities. Also, each 
should be considered as a potentially con-
founding factor when interpreting assess-
ment results (Cahana-Amitay et al., 2011).
Emotional Lability
Emotional lability, also called pathologic 
lability and pseudobulbar affect (PBA), 
causes people with brain injury to exhibit 
emotional reactions that are inconsistent 
with the appropriate degree of emotion or 
even the appropriate emotion for a given 
situation. For example, a person may cry 
when welcome visitors arrive or laugh 
when someone is expressing sadness over 
a death in the family. Emotional lability 
is a potential confound in assessment in 
that it may distract the individual, the cli-
nician, and anyone else present from the 
assessment process itself. As you work 
with a person, if you notice sudden cry-
ing or an emotional outburst that does not 
appear to have been evoked by a corre-
sponding event or situation, the best thing 
to do is to continue, perhaps mentioning 
or showing that you notice the feelings 
being expressed, but not focusing on them 
at the expense of continuing with the tasks 
or activities at hand. If the individual and 
any significant others present seem not to 
know about emotional lability, this may 
be a good occasion to help educate and 
counsel them about the condition and 
things they might do to lessen its impacts 
(see Chapter 27).
Other Challenges to Health 
and Well-Being
Any influence on mood, perception, and 
behavior may confound cognitive-linguistic 
behavior. Think about how painkillers, sleep 
aids, and antidepressants, as well as fatigue 

324   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
and hunger, might affect a person’s ability 
to attend and think clearly during assess-
ment (Chaumet et al., 2008). Imagine tak-
ing a language test while you are in severe 
pain from a decubitus ulcer, migraine 
headache, or surgical incision — examples 
of conditions common among people 
served by clinical aphasiologists.
How Does a Process Analysis 
Approach to Assessment 
Help Address Potentially 
Confounding Factors?
A process analysis approach is one in 
which we consider the ability, skill, or 
construct we wish to assess in light of 
the tasks used to assess it and analyze 
the other aspects of performance that 
may also be reflected in what is assessed. 
A simple scheme for these process analy-
sis components is shown in Figure 19–7. 
The process (middle) component depicted 
is the focus as we analyze the skills and 
abilities we actually tap into when we 
attempt to index an ability according to 
any particular construct.
For example, we may wish to index 
auditory comprehension (the ability of 
interest) through a pointing response 
(what is assessed) during a multiple-
choice task. The task entails our ask-
ing the person to point to an image that 
best corresponds to a word, phrase, or 
sentence. We present the verbal stimu-
lus and note he or she points to the cor-
rect image. If he or she does well on this 
task across repeated exposures to various 
types of verbal stimuli, we might deduce 
with confidence that he or she under-
stands those types of verbal stimuli. If he 
or she does not do well, however, what 
do we know? To answer that question, 
we could first analyze the components  
of the task and all of the skills and abili-
ties that are required to perform it. One 
way of analyzing the task is illustrated in 
Figure 19–8.
To point to an image correspond-
ing to the verbal stimulus, the individual 
must have sufficient auditory and visual 
sensory processing abilities to perceive 
accurately the visual and auditory stim-
uli at each level of processing. Deficits 
in visual acuity, visual attention, color 
vision, visual integration, visual memory, 
visual search, and eye-hand coordination 
could all influence the response. Locating 
the target among foils requires processing 
of spatial relationships, exerting greater 
demands on processing capacity than 
simple target detection. Furthermore, the 
efficiency and accuracy of visual percep-
tual processing and also of visual search 
Figure 19–7.  Components of the process analysis approach to assessment.

Problem-Solving Approaches to Differential Diagnosis and Confounding Factors   325
may be influenced by stimulus complex-
ity, the degree of similarity between the 
target and the foils, the number of colors in 
a display, and the number of images pre-
sented (Heuer & Hallowell, 2007, 2009).
Adding time pressure such that the 
task must be completed within a brief 
timeframe may increase the difficulty at 
each level of processing. Although visual 
processing is not a part of the construct 
ideally measured in the multiple-choice 
task, the task clearly entails several 
aspects of visual processing; each of those 
aspects could be a confounding factor 
when assessing auditory comprehension. 
Note, too, that once a target image is iden-
tified and localized, the individual must 
plan and execute a pointing response. 
Thus, any deficits that affect motor plan-
ning, neuromuscular control, or coordina-
tion could affect the response and thus be 
confounding factors. The process analysis 
approach helps us to conceptualize and 
be mindful of such potential confounds. 
Figure 19–8.  Process analysis for a multiple-choice auditory comprehension task. A full-
color version of this figure can be found in the Color Insert.

326   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
During comprehension assessment, an 
incorrect response is typically attributed 
to a comprehension deficit.
Let’s return to the question above: 
What do we know about a person’s com-
prehension if she gets an item wrong? Not 
much. In fact, there are many reasons for 
an incorrect response that have nothing 
to do with comprehension. Intact com-
prehension abilities are easily underes-
timated and unappreciated (Hallowell, 
2012a; Hallowell, Wertz, & Kruse, 2002). 
This is especially problematic, considering 
the great frequency with which multiple-
choice testing is used to assess linguistic 
comprehension.
Throughout this chapter, we have 
explored numerous assessment challenges 
and accompanying solutions to address 
them. Although myriad published tests 
are available as tools for assessment, all 
fall short without keen clinical problem-
solving strategies and expert judgment. 
Let’s keep this in mind as we proceed to 
examining published assessment tools in 
the upcoming chapter.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 For each of the following constructs, 
describe (1) how it may confound 
cognitive-linguistic assessment results 
in a person with a neurogenic language 
disorders, and (2) how you might con-
trol for it as you strive to achieve a 
valid and reliable assessment:
a.	 Age
b.	 Intelligence, literacy, and 
education
c.	 Visual problems
	
i.	 Visual acuity deficits
	
iii.	 Visual field deficits
	
iii.	 Color vision deficits
	
iv.	 Ocular motor problems
	
v.	 Visual neglect
d.	 Hearing problems
e.	 Apraxia of speech
f.	 Dysarthria
g.	 Limb apraxia
h.	 Paralysis or paresis
i.	 Visuoconstructive disability
j.	 Reading problems
k.	 Dysgraphia and other deficits
l.	 Problems of awareness and 
arousal
m.	Attention problems
n.	 Lack of awareness of deficits
o.	 Executive function deficits
p.	 Pragmatic deficits
q.	 Memory problems
r.	 Depression and other mood 
disorders
s.	 Anxiety
t.	 Emotional lability
There are additional teaching and learn-
ing activities on the companion website.

327
Chapter
20
Tests, Scales, and  
Screening Instruments
In the previous chapters in this section, 
we emphasized that clinicians, not tests, 
determine diagnoses and that assessment 
processes depend on much more than the 
use of published tests, scales, and screen-
ing instruments. Still, it is important for 
the excellent clinical aphasiologist to be 
knowledgeable about available assess-
ment tools and how to select which ones 
to use in given context and with given 
individuals. In this chapter, we review 
important factors in selecting and evaluat-
ing assessments instruments. Substantial 
information about available tools for use 
with people who have acquired neuro-
genic language disorders is provided.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What are the most important  
factors in selecting an assessment 
instrument?
	 2.	 What are the most important  
factors in evaluating assessment 
instruments?
	 3.	 What assessment tools are  
available?
What Are the Most Important 
Factors in Selecting an 
Assessment Instrument?
The most critical factors that influence our 
selection of assessment tools vary accord-
ing to five categories:
• The reason we are carrying out a 
given assessment
• The nature of the individual being 
assessed
• The quality of any given tool under 
consideration
• Our own preferences and preferred 
theoretical frameworks
• The practicality of using a 
particular tool
Each of these five categories pertains to a 
relevant query highlighted here.

328   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
What Is the Reason for 
Your Assessment?
Do You Need to Determine a Baseline 
and Detect Changes Over Time?
If so, it is best that you select an instru-
ment that has sampling of many similar 
items within a domain.
Do You Wish to Determine 
Receptive and Expressive Strengths 
and Weaknesses Across Spoken 
and Written Modalities in a 
Variety of Language Domains?
If so, you will want a tool that taps items of 
varied difficulty levels with several types 
of stimuli and tasks (Goodglass, Kaplan, 
Barresi, Weintraub, & Segal, 2001). Typi-
cal aphasia batteries, for example, include 
items that help assess language abilities 
and impairments in auditory compre-
hension, reading, naming, spontaneous 
speech, automatic speech, repetition, 
and writing. In Chapter 18, we reviewed 
tasks typically used to index perfor-
mance in each of these areas (Table 20–1). 
Some tools are designed to index a spe-
cific domain, such as reading or auditory 
comprehension.
Do You Wish to Index Nonverbal 
Aspects of Cognition?
There is ample evidence that nonlinguistic 
deficits exacerbate neurogenic language 
impairments. Some aphasia batteries and 
most TBI and RHS batteries include sub-
tests or screening tools to index attention, 
memory, and executive skills, as you will 
see by perusing the tables of assessment 
instruments (Tables 20–2 through 20–8, 
at the end of this chapter). There are also 
many means of testing such abilities using 
separate instruments.
Do You Wish to Index Motor Speech 
in Addition to Language Abilities?
Some batteries include means of assess-
ing concomitant motor speech problems. 
Separate motor speech batteries are also 
available.
Table 20–1.  FIM Scores and Interpretations
1.  Total Assistance
= The individual expends less than half of the effort
2.  Maximal Assistance
3.  Moderate Assistance
= Modified dependence
4.  Minimal Contact Assistance
5.  Supervision of Setup
6.  Modified Independence
= Modified independence 
7.  Complete Independence
= Complete independence 
Source:  State University of New York at Buffalo Research Foundation, 1990.

Tests, Scales, and Screening Instruments   329
If You Are Testing a Person With 
Aphasia, Do You Wish to Determine 
the Type of Aphasia He or She Has?
If so, you will want an aphasia battery 
that provides such a diagnostic profile. 
For example, the Boston Diagnostic Apha-
sia Examination–3 (BDAE-3; Goodglass 
et al., 2001), the Western Aphasia Battery–
Revised (WAB-R; Kertesz, 2007), and the 
Aphasia Diagnostic Profiles (ADP; Helm-
Estabrooks, 1992a) provide means of 
interpreting test results to assign diagnos-
tic categories according to classical apha-
sia subtypes as well as severity levels. The 
ADP suggests interpretation according to 
behavioral, error, and alternative com-
munication profiles. The WAB provides 
separate indices, including an “aphasia 
quotient” (based on oral language subtest 
scores), a “language quotient” (based on 
speaking, reading, and writing scores), and 
a “cortical quotient” (overall cognitive- 
linguistic abilities in terms of the constructs 
represented through diverse subtests).
Do You Wish to Index Aspects  
Such as Social Engagement, 
Self-Esteem, Coping Strategies, 
and Quality of Life?
If so, be sure to consider strategic ways of 
doing so. Most tools and batteries address-
ing specific impairment-level cognitive 
and linguistic deficits do not include sub-
stantial means of indexing such constructs 
so vital to life participation. Examples of 
tools that may be used for this purpose 
are the Assessment for Living with Apha-
sia (ALA) (Kagan et al., 2011) and the 
Stroke and Aphasia Quality of Life Scale 
(SAQOL-39; Hilari, Byng, Lamping, & 
Smith, 2003). Several additional examples 
are given in Tables 20–4 and 20–8.
Is Your Goal to Collect Data That 
Will Be Used to Document Outcomes 
Across a Group of People (e.g., 
People Seen in a Certain Facility or 
Throughout a Multisite Organization)?
If so, it will be important to consider whether 
the tool is appropriate for that purpose. 
Outcomes assessment tools must be gen-
eral enough to be applied to a wide range 
of people with varied types of impairments 
and associated etiologies. Some rehabilita-
tion outcomes measures are designed to be 
applied across disciplines, such as the Ther-
apy Outcome Measure (TOM; Enderby & 
John, 2015), in common usage in the United 
Kingdom, or the Australian Therapy Out-
come Measure (AusTOM; Perry et al., 
2004), adapted for use in Australia. Both of 
those tools enable monitoring of changes 
based on ICF constructs of impairment, 
activity, participation, and well-being.
Especially if you are working in the 
United States, you might consider incor-
porating the ASHA Functional Assess-
ment of Communication Skills for Adults 
(ASHA FACS; Frattali, Holland, Thomp-
son, Wohl, & Ferketic, 2004) to comple-
ment scores from disciplines using Func-
tional Independence Measures (FIMs; 
State University of New York at Buffalo 
Research Foundation & Center for Func-
tional Assessment Research, 1990). FIM 
scores were adopted in the United States 
by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services (CMS) in 1990 for application 
across medical and rehabilitation disci-
plines. The intent was to have treatment 
outcomes reported by any clinician bill-
ing for services to be reimbursed by the 
U.S. government fit a uniform data set for-
mat, that is, one with a consistent scoring 
system and format that would be easily  
understood by others. Eighteen functional 

330   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
abilities representing a total of six domains 
are assessed, each to be rated from 1 to 7. 
The domains include self-care, sphincter 
control, mobility, locomotion, communi-
cation, and social cognition.
Those of us who have been expected 
to apply FIM scores to people with cog-
nitive-linguistic disorders have been per-
plexed as we have tried to comply with 
the expectation. Consider why. Peruse 
the FIM scores and their general interpre-
tations, summarized in Table 20–1. Now, 
imagine an occupational therapist assess-
ing how well a TBI survivor can dress 
himself. It might not be so hard to give 
him a score. If the therapist can help him 
by setting out his clean clothes and putting 
away his dirty ones without significant 
cues and not physically assisting him, he 
would score a 5 for upper and lower body 
dressing. Now imagine you are a physi-
cal therapist assessing how well a per-
son with hemiparesis of the lower body 
transfers from his bed to a wheelchair. 
If it takes two people to lift him and he 
only slightly helps by extending an arm to 
grasp the chair, the therapist would likely 
give a score of 2 for this ability.
Consider now how an SLP would 
apply such scores to expressive and recep-
tive communication abilities, social inter-
action, problem solving, and memory. 
How would the clinician use this scale to 
rate, say, the ability of a person with apha-
sia to communicate? In most situations, 
it is a strange task to be asked to assess 
such constructs in terms of the degree of 
“assistance” or “setup” required. The rat-
ing scale is simply not relevant. Moreover, 
the constructs indexed are so broad and 
the scaling so imprecise that the measures 
are simply not sensitive to important 
gains that people tend to make through 
cognitive-linguistic intervention.
This dilemma is the primary rea-
son why ASHA launched efforts to de- 
velop the ASHA FACS and the related 
Functional Communication Measure, a 
7-point scaling system that SLPs may use 
for a similar purpose in medical and reha-
bilitation contexts but with greater rel-
evance to language, cognition, and swal-
lowing (created in 1995, then updated in 
2003 with a rating key card, and again in 
2004; Frattali et al., 2004). The ASHA FACS 
includes 43 items for rating cognitive-lin-
guistic abilities across four domains (see 
Table 20–4). Scoring according to qualita-
tive dimensions such as appropriateness, 
promptness, and adequacy is also encour-
aged. The tool is certainly not a panacea in 
terms of needed indices for outcomes for 
people with neurogenic communication 
disorders. However, it is far more appro-
priate than FIM scores. Clinical aphasi-
ologists who are asked to use FIM scores 
are well advised to advocate for using 
the ASHA FACS instead. A limitation for 
some SLPs is that training is required for 
valid and reliable scoring.
A tool specifically developed for out-
comes assessment in speech-language 
pathology and audiology is ASHA’s 
National Outcomes Measurement System 
(NOMS; American Speech-Language-
Hearing Association, n.d.). The NOMS 
includes 15 Functional Communication 
Measures (FCMs) for tracking changes 
in communication and swallowing abili-
ties. Cognitive-linguistic abilities may be 
indexed by scales that address attention, 
memory, spoken language comprehen-
sion, spoken language expression, read-
ing, and writing. In addition to enabling 
outcomes assessment for a given pro-
gram, agency, or organization, NOMS 
data are collected nationally in the United 
States. This enables participating agen-

Tests, Scales, and Screening Instruments   331
cies to compare their data with national 
statistics.
Other tools commonly used for pro-
grammatic outcomes assessment are 
the Communicative Effectiveness Index 
(CETI; Lomas et al., 1989), which indexes 
communication strengths and weak-
nesses as perceived by family members, 
and the Communication Disability Profile 
(CDP; Swinburn & Byng, 2006), which is 
based on self-report of aphasia impacts on 
everyday living. More recently, and more 
specific to aphasia, Kagan et al. (2011) and 
Simmons-Mackie et al. (2014) developed 
the Assessment for Living with Aphasia 
(ALA) and Hula et al., (2015) developed 
the Aphasia Communication Outcome 
Measure (ACOM), both based on self-
report of people with aphasia. Such tools 
that are more specific to particular disor-
ders hold promise for increasing consis-
tency of across research studies reporting 
outcomes associated with specific treat-
ment methods (Wallace, Worrall, Rose, & 
Le Dorze, 2014). Additional details about 
these and several other measures that 
may be used to index treatment outcomes 
are given in Tables 20–2 through 20–8.
Who, Specifically, Is Being Assessed?
Is the Tool in the Appropriate 
Language and Does It Account 
for Dialectic Differences?
Be sure to check the demographic data 
related to any norms you may be using 
for comparative purposes and consider 
whether they are appropriate for a given 
person. Consider the ecological validity of 
the stimuli in light of potential linguistic 
and cultural differences (see Chapter 18).
Is the Tool Normed and 
Standardized on a Sample of People 
With a Similar Condition?
For example, if you are assessing a person 
with TBI, does the tool include appropri-
ate normative samples of TBI survivors? 
Although particular items and tasks on 
an aphasia test may be of interest for 
the sake of performance description or 
criterion-based indices for a person with 
TBI or dementia, it is not appropriate to 
compare his or her scores to norms for 
the test unless that test has norms for TBI 
survivors. Some tools are developed with 
norms for certain clinical populations by 
the tests’ authors and then are normed 
for additional populations by the same or 
different authors. Even when a particu-
lar test’s title suggests a certain clinical 
group, the test still may have associated 
norms corresponding to other groups. If 
you wish to investigate what clinically rel-
evant norms are available for any given 
tool, it is important to search the research 
literature, not just the manual accompa-
nying the published test.
Is the Instrument Normed and 
Standardized on a Sample of 
People With Similar Attributes?
For example, does the person you are 
assessing have the same general age, 
educational level, socioeconomic status, 
cultural background, and ethnicity as 
others represented in the tool’s norms? 
All of these factors have been shown to 
influence language test results (Lezak, 
Howieson, Loring, Hannay, & Fischer, 
2004; Mitrushina, Boone, Razani, & 
D’Elia, 2005). It is also important that the 
standardization sample include a clinical  

332   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
population with similar attributes, for 
example, people with a similar type of 
aphasia, head injury, or dementia, and 
people with a similar level of language 
impairment.
Does the Instrument Have Items at 
an Appropriate Difficulty Level?
Some tools are too easy for people with 
mild language impairments such that 
the tool is not helpful in identifying the 
challenges they are having. Some tests, 
and some subtests in particular, are just 
too difficult for some people with severe 
impairments. Some tests include items 
with greater demands on working mem-
ory, general knowledge, and general intel-
ligence than others; if not accounted for, 
such demands may confound language 
assessment results.
Does It Provide an Appropriate Index 
of the Constructs You Wish to Assess?
Language and cognitive batteries tend to 
enable sampling of a wide array of com-
municative behaviors at varied levels of 
difficulty. Often we wish to learn about 
an individual’s abilities in a particular 
area in greater detail. Several tests devel-
oped to index specific language functions 
are listed among the batteries in tables 
in this chapter. Examples are as follows: 
the Reading Comprehension Battery for 
Aphasia­-2 (RCBA-2; LaPointe & Horner, 
1998) for indexing reading; the Revised 
Token Test (RTT; McNeil & Prescott, 1978) 
for auditory comprehension; the Philadel-
phia Naming Test (Roach, Schwartz, Mar-
tin, Grewal, & Brecher, 1996), the Action 
Naming Test (ANT; Obler & Albert, 1979), 
and Boston Naming Test (BNT; Goodglass 
et al., 2001) for naming; the SOAP Test 
of Syntactic Complexity (Love & Oster, 
2002) and Northwestern Assessment of 
Verbs and Sentences (NAVS; Cho-Reyes 
& Thompson, 2012) for syntax; and the 
Johns Hopkins University Dysgraphia 
Battery (Goodman & Caramazza, 1985) 
for writing. The Psycholinguistic Assess-
ments of Language Processing in Aphasia 
(PALPA; Kay, Lesser, & Coltheart, 1992) 
enables in-depth testing of many differ-
ent aspects of receptive and expressive 
language processing, and any of these 
may be separately administered to index 
performance according to a particular 
construct of interest.
Keep in mind that just because a test 
is intended to index a particular construct 
does not mean it does so well or holisti-
cally. For example, the most popular test 
of word finding across English-speaking 
countries (see Katz et al., 2000), the BNT, 
addresses only nouns, not other important 
parts of speech and lacks recent detailed 
normative information, especially per-
taining to older adults. Another example 
pertains to the picture description tasks, 
common in popular aphasia batteries; 
these often fall far short of capturing real-
life expressive language abilities. Also, 
the means of administering, scoring, and 
interpreting corresponding results are 
fraught with potential confounds.
Are There Sufficient Means 
of Controlling for Potentially 
Confounding Factors?
Recall the myriad potential assessment 
confounds we explored in Chapters 18 and 
19. As many of those as possible should 
be controlled for in a language assessment 
tool’s design and in test administration to 
heighten assessment validity.

Tests, Scales, and Screening Instruments   333
Does the Tool Allow for Alternative 
Response Modes in Cases Where 
Clients May Have Trouble With 
Traditional Response Modes?
As discussed in the previous chap-
ter, motor and visual disabilities may 
impose serious threats to the assess-
ment validity. Some tests allow varied 
types of response modes, such as yes/
no responding through eye blink, button 
press, hand squeeze, or use of an AAC 
device. For more complex tasks, such as 
comprehension assessment using multi-
ple-choice images, there may be no suit-
able response alternatives given the way 
the tasks were designed. Some tests are 
designed to reduce reliance on visual and 
motor abilities. An example is the Putney 
Auditory Comprehension Screening Test 
(Beaumont, Marjoribanks, Flury, & Lint-
ern, 2002). Eyetracking-based assessment 
methods promising alternatives as well 
(Hallowell, 2012a; Hallowell & Lansing, 
2004; Hallowell, Wertz, & Kruse, 2002).
Might Instructions and Tasks 
Involved Confound Results?
Many tools used for assessing abilities 
across a wide array of domains require 
comprehension of instructions as well as 
of verbal stimuli. When the intent is not  
to index comprehension but rather some 
other construct, the reliance on compre-
hension abilities may invalidate responses.  
Likewise, reliance on speech and limb-
motor abilities to demonstrate cognitive-
linguistic abilities is often problematic. 
An example of a common tool used in 
many clinical environments that is prob-
lematic in terms of linguistic load as well 
as motor requirements is the Mini-Mental 
State Examination–2nd Edition (MMSE-2;  
Folstein, Folstein, White, & Messer, 2010). 
For people with cognitive and linguistic 
impairments, visual analog rating scales 
may be used to minimize the influence 
of cognitive-linguistic impairments on 
response validity. For example, the Stroke 
Aphasia Depression Questionnaire (SADQ; 
Sutcliffe & Lincoln, 1998) has rating scales 
with response selections consisting of 
faces that represent varied moods.
What Is the Quality of a Given Tool?
Be sure to evaluate the instrument accord-
ing to the psychometric properties sum-
marized in Chapter 18. For example, does 
the tool have robust indices of test-retest, 
interexaminer, intraexaminer, and internal 
reliability? Does it have strong evidence 
of content, construct, criterion (includ-
ing concurrent and predictive), and face 
validity? Does it have good sensitivity 
in that scores generated are likely to help 
identify the impairment you are testing 
for, if it is there? Does the tool have good 
specificity in that people who do not have 
a disorder or impairment for which you 
are testing are not likely to score at a level 
that would suggest an impairment?
Is the Normative Group Substantial?
If there are not sufficient data to support 
valid and reliable test interpretation, then 
the use of norms is not recommended. 
A  good guideline for a minimally suf-
ficient normative sample is 100 people 
(Franzen, 2003).
Is the Normative Group Well Defined?
If the test developers have not taken 
care to carefully describe the clinical and  

334   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
control groups from which normative 
data have been derived, it may not be 
possible to know if the norms are appli-
cable to a person you are assessing. Con-
sider the degree that factors such as age, 
gender, education level, preonset intelli-
gence, socioeconomic status, literacy, and 
any concomitant disabilities are relevant 
to the constructs you wish to index.
Are the Psychometric Strengths 
of a Subtest Well Substantiated 
for Standalone Use?
If you intend to use a subtest of a more 
comprehensive battery to index a particu-
lar construct, it is important to consider 
whether the psychometric properties of 
that subtest itself have been verified.
Are There Two or More 
Forms of the Tool With High 
Consistency Between Them?
Having more than one form of a test, with 
all forms having been shown to result in 
similar scores for a given person, reduces 
the likelihood that learning during the 
first administration will improve scores 
on a subsequent administration. Many of 
the most commonly used language tests 
do not have multiple forms. An example 
of one with two forms having strong test-
retest validity is the Amsterdam Nijme-
gen Everyday Language Test (ANELT; 
Blomert, Kean, Koster, & Schokker, 1994). 
A greater proportion of tests for indexing 
cognitive constructs have parallel forms. 
Examples are the Test of Everyday Atten-
tion (TEA; Ridgeway, Robertson, Ward, & 
Nimmo-Smith, 1994), the Wechsler Mem-
ory Scale–III (WMS-III; Wechsler, 2009), 
and the Rivermead Behavioral Memory 
Test–3 (RBMT-3; Wilson, Baddeley, & 
Cockburn, 2008).
Is It Up to Date?
Cognitive-linguistic assessment tools are 
ideally periodically updated to reflect 
current research findings, enhance valid-
ity and reliability, and (when applicable) 
improve standardization and related 
norms. If you do not have access to the 
most recent version of a test, be sure to 
learn about what was changed in a more 
recent version and consider that infor-
mation as you decide whether to use the 
one you have. Such information may also 
help you in advocating for the purchase 
of the latest version. In some cases, using 
an old version of a test leads to violations 
of professional codes of ethics (e.g., stan-
dards regarding integrity, evidence-based 
practice, competence, and high-quality 
service; Jakubowitz & Schill, 2008).
The fact that a tool is published does 
not mean that it has been developed well, 
with proper attention to test construction 
and psychometric principles (Roberts, 
2001). Psychometric indices that should 
ideally be addressed were reviewed in 
Chapter 19. Most, if not all, tests are lack-
ing in some aspects of test design and 
psychometric principles (see McCauley & 
Swisher, 1984; Skenes & McCauley, 1985; 
Spreen & Risser, 2003). When selecting a 
test, it is the clinician’s responsibility to 
scrutinize such features, as they are fun-
damental to clinical excellence.
Does the Tool Complement Your 
Own Preferences and Preferred 
Theoretical Frameworks?
Does It Have a Framework 
for Conceptualizing Language 
and Communication That 
You Respect and Value?
For example, what you consider to be 
“functional” and most relevant to life par-

Tests, Scales, and Screening Instruments   335
ticipation will likely influence your choice 
of a tool. The Porch Index of Communi-
cative Ability–Revised (PICA-R; Porch, 
2001b) for example, is touted by many as a 
robust test with a long-standing history in 
our field. At the same time, it lacks a focus 
on spontaneous speech or discourse and 
does not, in and of itself, include refer-
ences to life participation and contextual 
supports.
Is It Based on a Theoretical 
Model That You Favor?
Some tests have very loose theoretical 
bases. Others are based on certain models 
of language processing, functional com-
munication, and life participation. Some 
of these are directly related to the first set 
of factors, pertaining to what you most 
want to know. For example, when assess-
ing a person with aphasia, if you believe 
that testing should include assessment of 
a range of specific linguistic abilities, you 
might select a language-focused battery 
such as the BDAE-3. If you believe that 
associated cognitive-communicative defi-
cits (e.g., use of gesture, arithmetic skills, 
visual neglect, and semantic and recog-
nition memory) are fundamental to the 
person’s assessment, you might choose 
the Comprehensive Aphasia Test (CAT; 
Swinburn, Porter, & Howard, 2004); alter-
natively, you may choose to administer 
additional screenings or tests, such as the 
Cognitive Linguistic Quick Test (CLQT; 
Helm-Estabrooks, 2001), in addition to an 
aphasia battery. If you believe that assess-
ing the impact of language loss on psycho-
social well-being (or perhaps of changes 
in mood or life participation over time) is 
important, you may choose to prioritize 
your assessment time to include tools for 
indexing such constructs as mood (e.g., 
Kontou et al., 1997), self-esteem (e.g., 
Brumfitt & Sheeran, 1999), confidence 
(Babbitt & Cherney, 2010), participation 
(see Eadie et al., 2006), or quality of life 
(e.g., Paul et al., 2004; von Steinbüchel  
et al., 2010).
How Practical Is the Tool 
Under Consideration?
Just because you may wish to use a tool 
does not mean it will be practical for you 
to do so.
Are You Seeking a Test That 
Meets Certain Standards for 
Billable Diagnostic Services?
In a health care business context, it is 
important that you comply with regula-
tions. Be sure that the tool you document 
in a report is not one that will lead to a 
denial of reimbursement.
Is the Tool Available to You Physically 
in the Context Where You Work 
or in Any Other Way Accessible?
Be sure to consider whether the instru-
ment is physically available to you. If not, 
has it been published and is it in print? 
Can you afford to purchase it?
Do You Have Enough Time 
to Administer the Tool?
In busy clinical environments with high 
productivity standards, clinicians often 
do not have time to administer an entire 
language test battery, let alone a series of 
screenings and additional tools. What we 
desire to do in terms of best practice is 
often not consonant with the demands of 
our professional contexts.

336   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Are the Instructions Clear 
and Easy to Follow?
Are there clear floor (basal) and ceiling 
rules and guidelines on the types and 
numbers of cues that are allowable? If 
needed, are normative data easily found 
along with the instrument or must those 
be procured separately?
Do You (or the Person to Be 
Administering the Assessment) Have 
Sufficient Training to Administer 
and Score a Particular Test?
Most assessment tools have scoring 
procedures that are not difficult for a 
skilled clinician to implement, provided 
the instructions are clear. Most batteries 
administered by clinicians use a variety 
of scoring procedures. For example, the 
ADP includes 4-point scale ratings, plus/
minus scoring, frequency of correct infor-
mation units, and phrase-length indices. 
The BDAE-3 incorporates plus/minus 
scoring, 5-point and 7-point rating scales, 
and frequency counts. Many tests provide 
guidance for converting raw scores to per-
centile and z scores.
Some tests require substantial train-
ing to ensure appropriate validity and 
reliability of scoring. Examples are the 
PICA-R, for which a 40-hour training 
course is recommended (Martin, 1977; 
McNeil, Prescott, & Chang, 1975), and 
the RTT, which uses a multidimensional 
scoring system modeled after that of the 
PICA. PICA-R and RTT performance is 
scored according to a multidimensional 
scoring system (16-point system for PICA, 
15-point for RTT), both based on five 
dimensions of performance: complete-
ness, accuracy, promptness, responsive-
ness, and efficiency. To the degree that 
training requirements alone keep some 
clinicians from using otherwise poten-
tially valuable instruments, simpler scor-
ing alternatives have been proposed and 
tested. An example is a method of cor-
rect/incorrect scoring on every element of 
every command in the RTT, accompanied 
by astute qualitative observation (Odekar 
& Hallowell, 2005). Some tests have com-
puterized scoring options. This may ease 
the burden of scoring and scoring training 
but does not obviate the chance of error 
in terms of data entry or response track-
ing, and certainly does not replace a cli-
nician’s expert administration, judgment, 
and interpretation.
Do Others on Your Rehabilitation 
Team Understand the 
Results You Report and Your 
Interpretation of Them?
Some measures used by SLPs and neu-
ropsychologists index constructs that are 
not easily understood by those without 
related education and experience. Being 
able to convey results clearly so that oth-
ers, including clients, family members, 
and other professionals, may interpret 
them in ways that are relevant to every-
day concerns is essential.
Does a Tool’s Scoring System 
Make Sense in Terms of How 
Results Are to Be Interpreted?
An example of a challenge in this area 
commonly confronted in rehabilitation 
contexts is related to the use of FIMS, as 
discussed earlier. An additional tool often 
used to share information across rehabili-
tation team members is the Rancho Los 
Amigos Scale of Cognitive Functioning 

Tests, Scales, and Screening Instruments   337
Review Form for Assessment Tools
Title of the test, author(s), and publisher:
	 1.	 Target population
• Is the tool intended for use  
with a person or group of 
people with whom you wish to 
use it?
• Are any norms available that 
are pertinent to your clinical 
population(s) of interest?
	 2.	 Purpose
• Is there a clear operational 
definition of what is being 
assessed?
• Are specific aspects of 
language, cognition, life 
participation, or other 
constructs of interest being 
Box
20–1
(Hagen, Malkmus, & Durham, 1972; Mal-
kmus & Stenderup, 1974). Intended for 
use with TBI survivors, it includes eight 
items that apply to varied types of daily 
functioning, with scoring based on obser-
vation of the person’s responses to stimu-
lation. An important caution in the use of 
such tools is that determining a stage or 
level of recovery does not help predict the 
extent or rate of expected recovery.
What Are the Most Important 
Factors in Evaluating 
Assessment Instruments?
The factors that are important for selecting 
an assessment instrument can be applied 
to evaluating them. As with tool selection, 
the way we evaluate any given tool will 
depend a great deal on our reasons for 
assessment, the specific characteristics of 
the individuals and groups we are serving, 
our theoretical principles and values, and 
the sheer practicality for use in the context 
where we work. A review form for assess-
ing assessment tools is given in Box 20–1.
What Assessment Tools 
Are Available?
Aphasiologists working with speak-
ers of English are highly privileged in 
terms the number of standardized tests 
available in English. For the majority of 
the world’s languages other than Eng-
lish, there are few standardized tests of 
aphasia and related disorders. Of those 
that do exist, most lack validity and reli-
ability statistics and do not meet other 
important psychometric criteria. Many 
are translations of assessment batteries 
in English. Others are developed origi-
nally in the target language. Many are 
unpublished. Refer to Ivanova and Hal-
lowell (2013) for substantial details about 
aphasia tests in non-English languages 
and suggestions for developing new 
tests in any language. In the tables that 
follow you will find crucial information 
about English-language tests, scales, and 
screening instruments. Of course, there 
are also wonderful resources already 
published and in progress in many other  
languages.

338   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
assessed? If so, are they 
pertinent to the way you would 
use this instrument?
	 3.	 Theoretical framework
• Is the theoretical framework 
on which this tool is based 
consistent with your own?
	 4.	 Specific abilities tested and types 
of items used to elicit responses
• Does it take into account a 
person’s ability to communicate 
meaning as well as form and 
content?
• Does it take into account 
accuracy? Speed of processing? 
Levels of effort involved in 
carrying out the tasks?
	 5.	 Reliability information
• What is the quality of 
reported data (if there are any) 
regarding:
	 Test-retest reliability?
	 Intrarater reliability?
	 Interrater reliability?
	 Split-half reliability?
• Is there adequate sampling of 
the specific constructs you most 
wish to assess?
• Can the test be readministered? 
If so, in what form and how 
often?
	 6.	 Validity information
• What is the quality of data 
regarding:
	 Construct validity 
(convergent validity and 
discriminant validity)?
	 Criterion validity (concurrent 
validity, predictive validity, 
sensitivity, and specificity)?
	 Face validity?
	 7.	 Normative information
• What norms are available?
• What are the characteristics 
of the normative sample(s)? 
Do they match those of the 
client(s) whose abilities you are 
assessing?
• Are aspects of gender, 
socioeconomic status, age, 
concomitant disorder, and/
or culture controlled for so 
as to reduce the influence of 
such potentially confounding 
factors?
• Is it normed by age in a way 
that would be useful for the 
population of interest?
• How large is the standardization 
sample?
• Is the standardization sample 
sufficient for the population of 
interest?
	 8.	 Administration modality
• Does it allow for adaptive 
instructions and stimuli in 
cases where a person may have 
difficulty with the standard 
modalities?
• How might hearing problems, 
speech perception problems, 
language problems, visual 
deficits, and attention problems 
affect the ability to understand 
task instructions?
	 9.	 Response modes
• Does it allow for alternative 
response modes in cases where 
a person may have trouble with 
traditional response modes?
	 How might concomitant 
motor speech disorders, 
paralysis, paresis, limb 
apraxia, dysgraphia, 
dyslexia, or visual deficits 
confound results?

Tests, Scales, and Screening Instruments   339
• Are there response 
modifications suggested for 
special populations that meet 
the needs of the population of 
interest?
10.	 Estimated time to administer and 
score
• Is the administration and 
scoring time realistic in light of 
the context in which you would 
use it?
11.	 Ease of administration, scoring, 
and interpretation of results
• Are administration instructions 
clear?
• Are there ceiling and floor 
rules, if appropriate?
• How long does it take to learn 
to score the test validly and 
reliably?
• Does the clinician require 
training to administer it? If so, 
is it logistically feasible and 
affordable?
• Are raw scores easily converted 
to percentiles, standard 
deviations, language age 
equivalents, and so on?
• Is guidance provided on how 
to interpret scores in a way that 
fits your purpose?
12.	 Quality of test materials/stimuli
• Is there an appropriate 
rationale for the design of 
stimulus items?
• How ecologically valid are the 
test items?
	 Are the stimuli relevant to 
the everyday lives of the 
people with whom you 
would use the tool?
	 Do the stimuli convey 
cultural, age, or other biases?
	 Would familiarity with 
test items be typical in the 
intended population?
• Have the stimulus materials 
been developed with attention 
to appropriate psycholinguistic 
controls (e.g., word frequency 
and familiarity, imageability, 
concreteness/abstractness, 
grammatical complexity, 
plausibility, script, font, verbal 
stimulus length, 
pronounceability)?
• Are the materials appealing?
• If there are objects, are 
they appropriately sized, 
manipulable, and durable?
• Are the stimuli age 
appropriate?
• Is the tool portable?
• Are memory and attention 
demands controlled?
13.	 Administrative manual, 
instructions, scoring, and 
reporting documentation for  
the clinician
• Are scoring forms provided?
• Are there clear means of 
summarizing results in a 
meaningful way?
14.	 Relevance of results to 
determination of prognosis and  
to treatment planning
• Is it clear how results would 
be pertinent to treatment 
planning?
15.	 Cost
• Can you afford it?
16.	 Any additional limitations
17.	 Any additional strengths

340   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
A summary of available screening 
instruments and tests is given in Tables 
20–2 through 20–8, along with information 
about targeted clinical groups, constructs 
assessed (as expressed by the authors), 
and the approximate time it takes to 
administer each. At times, such informa-
tion is reported inconsistently. This is the 
case, for example, when targeted clinical 
groups differ from information subse-
quently published separately. Also, the 
age range of normative samples is not 
included in these tables simply because 
age is so inconsistently reported, mak-
ing comparisons of the ages of intended 
target groups across tests ineffectual. Age 
ranges associated with published tools 
sometimes apply to clinical groups tested 
as normative samples and sometimes to 
samples of people without neurological 
disorders. Some authors report means 
and standard deviations of ages, others 
report age ranges, still others report all 
three of these indices, and some do not 
specify ages at all. In any case, all of the 
instruments are applicable to adults.
The tools listed in Tables 20–2 through 
20–8 are highly representative but not 
exhaustive. Also, they do not include 
comprehensive sets of published informal 
assessment tools and screening instru-
ments in related areas, such as auditory 
processing, motor speech ability, vision, 
and mathematical ability, unless these 
constructs are addressed in components of 
batteries included in the list. New instru-
ments are continuously appearing in the 
literature while some older tests come out 
in new editions or go out of print. Thus, it 
is important to keep abreast of new devel-
opments in assessment tools.
For the most part, the tables exclude 
tools that are no longer readily available, 
even though they may have had a strong 
influence on past research and clinical 
practice (e.g., Schuell, 1965). Not all tools 
fit neatly into the categories listed. For 
example, some tests and screening instru-
ments listed as cognitive tools also include 
means of indexing language; several lan-
guage-focused tools also include means 
of assessing varied aspects of cognition; 
many tests are applicable to multiple clin-
ical groups. Similarly, many assessment 
batteries include screening tools that may 
be used separately from the primary tests.
Of course, the excellent clinical apha-
siologist is highly discriminating and 
knows to consider published work criti-
cally. In the arena of assessment, this is 
especially crucial. Every assessment tool 
has strengths and weaknesses. No tool 
meets all of the criteria for what one might 
consider to be most important in terms 
of inherent properties and design char-
acteristics and in terms of its relevance 
and practicality in a given assessment 
situation. When selecting an assessment 
instrument, it is always important to 
consider the five sets of factors summa-
rized above and to choose wisely based 
on a balance of the relative importance of 
all factors. Excellent online resources for 
information about psychometric proper-
ties of many tools used by aphasiologists 
and other rehabilitation professionals are 
the Canadian Stroke Network (Stroke 
Engine-Assess; http://strokengine.ca/
assess/) and the Academy of Neurologic 
Communication Disorders and Sciences 
(http://www.ancds.org).

341
Table 20–2.  Language Screening Tools
Acute Aphasia Screening Protocol (AASP; Crary, Haak, & Malinsky, 1989)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Attention/orientation to communication, auditory 
comprehension, expressive ability, conversational style 
Typical time to administer:
10 minutes
Aphasia Language Performance Scales (ALPS; Keenan & Brassell, 1975)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Listening, talking, reading, writing
Typical time to administer:
30 minutes
Aphasia Screening Test, 2nd Edition (AST; Whurr, 1996)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia 
Constructs assessed:
Auditory and reading comprehension, oral and written 
language production, calculation
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Bedside Evaluation Screening Test, 2nd Edition (BEST-2; Fitch-West, Ross-Swain, 
& Sands, 1998)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:   
Conversational expression, object naming, object 
description, sentence repetition, single-word 
comprehension, reading 
Typical time to administer: 
15–20 minutes
Frenchay Aphasia Screening Test, 2nd Edition (FAST-2; Enderby, Wood, &  
Wade, 2006)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Comprehension, expression, reading, writing; to be 
assessed by professionals who are not SLPs
Typical time to administer:
3–10 minutes
Mississippi Aphasia Screening Test (MAST; Nakase-Thompson, 2004) 
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Naming; automatic speech; repetition, yes/no accuracy; 
object recognition; verbal instructions; reading 
instructions; verbal fluency; writing/spelling to dictation
Typical time to administer:
5–15 minutes
continues

342
Multilingual Aphasia Examination, 3rd Edition (MAE; Benton, Hamsher, &  
Sivan, 1994)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Naming, repetition, fluency, articulation, spelling, aural 
comprehension, reading, writing
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Multimodal Communication Screening Task for Persons with Aphasia (MCSTPA; 
Lasker & Garrett, 2005) 
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia, including aphasia with concomitant 
apraxia of speech
Constructs assessed: 
Likelihood of benefitting from augmentative and 
alternative communication (AAC) use, and partner 
dependence versus independence of AAC use
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified; subtests may be administered across 
multiple days
Putney Auditory Comprehension Screening Test (PACST; Beaumont et al., 2002)
Target clinical population:
People with severe motor and visual disabilities
Constructs assessed: 
Auditory comprehension
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Quick Assessment for Aphasia (QAA; Tanner & Culbertson, 1999)
Target clinical population:  
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Naming, answering questions, providing basic 
information, conversational ability 
Typical time to administer: 
10–15 minutes
Reitan-Indiana Aphasia Screening Test (AST; Reitan, 1981) 
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Language and other neurocognitive abilities via naming 
and copying of line drawings, reading, verbal repetition, 
simple arithmetic problems, and following simple 
commands
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Sheffield Screening Test for Acquired Language Disorders (SSTALD; Syder, Body, 
Parker, & Boddy, 1993) 
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Spoken language and understanding (no reading or 
writing items)
Typical time to administer:
Approximately 10 minutes
Table 20–2.  continued

343
Sklar Aphasia Scale (SAS; Sklar, 1983)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Auditory and visual decoding, oral and graphic decoding
Typical time to administer:
20–30 minutes
Note.  Several additional screening tools listed in Table 20–3 include relevant indices for aphasia 
screening.
Table 20–2.  continued
Table 20–3.  Cognitive Screening Tools
Alzheimer’s Quick Test (AQT; Wiig, Nielson, Minthon, & Warkentin, 2003)
Target clinical population: 
Adults with Alzheimer’s disease
Constructs assessed: 
Naming response time and accuracy
Typical time to administer:
3–10 minutes
Birmingham Cognitive Screen (BCS; Humphreys, Bickerton, Samson, & Riddoch, 
2012)
Target clinical population:
Stroke survivors
Constructs assessed:
Attention and executive function, language, memory, 
number processing, action planning and control
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Cognistat (Kiernan, Mueller, Langston, & van Dyke, 1987; Mueller, Kiernan, & 
Langston, 2014)
Target clinical population: 
Adults
Constructs assessed: 
Neurocognitive functioning (consciousness, orientation, 
and attention span), language, constructional ability, 
memory, calculation skills, reasoning/judgment
Typical time to administer: 
15–30 minutes (shortened version, the Cognistat Five, 
also available, which takes approximately 5 minutes)
Cognitive Linguistic Quick Test (CLQT; Helm-Estabrooks, 2001)
Target clinical population:
People with stroke, dementia,  and TBI
Constructs assessed: 
Orientation, attention, memory, language (naming, 
auditory comprehension), visuospatial skills, executive 
functions
Typical time to administer:
15–30 minutes
continues

344
344
General Practitioner Assessment of Cognition (GPCOG; Brodaty et al., 2002)
Target clinical population: 
Older adults, people with dementia
Constructs assessed: 
Cognitive abilities and caregiver report of cognitive 
abilities
Typical time to administer: 
 6 minutes
Mini-Mental State Examination–2nd Edition (MMSE-2; Folstein et al., 2010)
Target clinical population:  
Adults
Constructs assessed: 
Orientation to time and place, attention, mental 
calculation, immediate memory, delayed memory, 
visuospatial construction, object relations
Typical time to administer: 
10 minutes; MMSE-2 Brief version is even shorter
Modified Mini-Mental State Examination (3MS; Teng & Chui, 1987)
Target clinical population: 
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Orientation, attention, calculation, immediate memory, 
delayed memory, visuospatial construction (copied)
Typical time to administer: 
10 minutes
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA; Nasreddine, 2003)
Target clinical population:
People with mild cognitive impairment
Constructs assessed:
Attention/concentration, executive functions, memory, 
language, visuoconstructional abilities, conceptual 
thinking, calculation, orientation
Typical time to administer:
10 minutes
Saint Louis University Mental Status Examination (SLUMS; Tariq, Tumosa, 
Chibnall, Perry, & Morley, 2006)
Target clinical population:
Adults suspected to have MCI or dementia
Constructs assessed:
Orientation, short-term memory, attention, calculations, 
naming, clock drawing, and recognition of geometric 
figures 
Typical time to administer:
Approximately 7 minutes
Scales of Cognitive and Communicative Ability for Neurorehabilitation (SCCAN; 
Milman & Holland, 2012)
Target clinical population:
People with cognitive-communicative deficits and those 
for whom a diagnosis is not established
Constructs assessed:
Oral expression, orientation, memory, speech 
comprehension, reading comprehension, writing, 
attention, problem solving
Typical time to administer:
35–40 minutes
Table 20–3.  continued

345
Table 20–4.  Aphasia Assessment Tools
Action Naming Test (ANT; Obler & Albert, 1979)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Verb naming
Typical time to administer: 
Unspecified
Amsterdam Nijmegen Everyday Language Test (ANELT; Blomert et al., 1994)
Target clinical population:
Stroke survivors, people with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Change in communication over time; understandability 
and intelligibility of responses to scripted interview 
questions about everyday life situations
Typical time to administer:
10 minutes
Aphasia Communication Outcome Measure (ACOM; Hula et al., 2015)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Patient-reported communicative functioning
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Aphasia Diagnostic Profiles (ADP; Helm-Estabrooks, 1992a)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Speaking, listening, reading, writing, gesture; type and 
severity of aphasia; includes aphasia severity profile, 
alternative communication profile, classification profile, 
behavioral profile, and error profile
Typical time to administer: 
40–50 minutes
ASHA Functional Assessment of Communication Skills for Adults (ASHA FACS; 
Frattali et al., 2004)
Target clinical population:
Adults with speech, language, or cognitive impairment
Constructs assessed: 
Social communication, communication of basic needs, 
reading, writing, number concepts, daily planning
Typical time to administer:
20 minutes
Assessment of Communicative Effectiveness in Severe Aphasia (ACESA; 
Cunningham, Farrow, Davies, & Lincoln, 1995)
Target clinical population:
People with severe aphasia due to stroke
Constructs assessed:
Has modified tasks, stimuli, and scoring procedures
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
continues

346
Assessment for Living with Aphasia (ALA; Kagan et al., 2011; Simmons-Mackie  
et al., 2014)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Pictographically supported self-report of the impacts 
of aphasia on daily life; includes participation in life 
situations, communication and language environment, 
language and related impairments, personal identity, 
feelings, and attitudes, moving on with life, and 
descriptive questions
Typical time to administer:
10–95 minutes
Assessment of Language-Related Functional Activities (ALFA; Baines, Heeringa, 
& Martin, 1999)
Target clinical population: 
People with a history of “neurological episodes”
Constructs assessed: 
Telling time, counting money, addressing an envelope, 
solving math problems, writing a check and balancing 
a checkbook, understanding medicine labels, using a 
calendar, reading instructions, using the telephone, and 
writing a phone message
Typical time to administer: 
30–90 minutes
Boston Assessment of Severe Aphasia (BASA; Helm-Estabrooks, Ramsberger, 
Morgan, & Nicholas, 1989)
Target clinical population: 
People with severe aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Auditory comprehension, buccofacial and limb praxis, 
gesture recognition, oral and gestural expression, reading 
comprehension, writing, and visuospatial abilities; 
includes scoring of verbal and nonverbal responses, 
refusals, affect, and perseveration
Typical time to administer: 
20–30 minutes
Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination–Third Edition (BDAE; Goodglass, 
Kaplan, & Baresi, 2001); Includes Boston Naming Test and Visuospatial Quantitative 
Battery
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Conversational and expository speech, auditory 
comprehension, oral expression, repetition, reading, 
writing; helps identify type of aphasia
Typical time to administer:
Short form: 30–45 minutes; Long form: dependent on 
how many tests the examiner chooses to administer; 
Extended Testing options: more thoroughly probe 
particular language functions within each area of testing
Table 20–4.  continued

347
Boston Naming Test (BNT; Kaplan, Goodglass, & Weintraub, 2000); also included in 
the BDAE-3
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia, dementia, and/or concerns about 
naming
Constructs assessed: 
Naming/lexical retrieval (based on naming of black-
and-white line drawings), including responsiveness to 
semantic and phonemic cues
Typical time to administer: 
35–45 minutes; may also be given in a short form 
(Fastenau, Denburg, & Mauer, 1998)
Butt Nonverbal Reasoning Test (BNVR; Butt & Bucks, 2004)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Everyday problem solving; identifies cognitive and/or 
linguistic deficits
Typical time to administer:
10–20 minutes
Code-Müller Protocols (CMP; Code & Müller, 1992; Code, Müller, & Herrmann, 1999)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia and other communication disorders 
including dysarthria, laryngectomy, and acquired 
deafness
Constructs assessed:
Psychosocial state, associated changes over time, 
optimism, and predicted future adjustment to aphasia and 
related disorders
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Communication Confidence Rating Scale for Aphasia (CCRSA; Babbitt &  
Cherney, 2010)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Communication confidence
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Communication Disability Profile (CDP; Swinburn & Byng, 2006)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Self-report of the impact of aphasia on everyday life; 
activities, participation, and emotions
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Table 20–4.  continued
continues

348
Communicative Activities of Daily Living–Second Edition (CADL-2; Holland, 
Frattali, & Fromm, 1999)
Target clinical population: 
People with neurogenic communication disorders, 
including aphasia, Alzheimer’s disease, and TBI
Constructs assessed: 
Communication and interaction abilities for functional 
interaction (reading, writing, using numbers; social, 
divergent, and contextual communication; nonverbal 
communication; sequential relationships; humor/
metaphor/absurdity)
Typical time to administer: 
Approximately 30 minutes
Communicative Effectiveness Index (CETI; Lomas, Pickard, Bester, Elbard, 
Finlayson, & Zoghaib, 1989)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Functional verbal and nonverbal communication, as 
assessed by significant others; especially designed to 
allow detection of change in function
Typical time to administer:
15 minutes
Comprehensive Aphasia Test (CAT; Swinburn et al., 2004)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Recognition, comprehension, production of spoken 
and written language; includes cognitive screening and 
disability questionnaire in addition to language battery
Typical time to administer:
90–120 minutes; can be completed over one or two 
assessment sessions
Discourse Comprehension Test, 2nd Edition (DCT-2; Brookshire & Nicholas, 1997)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia, right hemisphere damage, and TBI
Constructs assessed: 
Listening and reading comprehension at a discourse level
Typical time to administer: 
20 minutes
Everyday Communication Needs Assessment (ECNA; Worrall, 1992) and the more 
recent Functional Communication Therapy Planner (FCTP; Worrall, 1999)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Preonset communicative style and everyday activities; 
elicited via nonstandardized questionnaire to help 
develop, administer, and evaluate aphasia intervention
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Table 20–4.  continued

349
Examining for Aphasia–Fourth Edition (EFA-4; LaPointe & Eisenson, 2008)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Visual, tactile, and auditory recognition; auditory 
comprehension; speech; writing
Typical time to administer:
30–60 minutes
Galveston Orientation and Amnesia Test for Aphasia (A-GOAT; Jain, Layton, & 
Murray, 2000)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia due to head injury
Constructs assessed: 
Orientation to person, place, and time, and memory for 
events preceding and following the injury
Typical time to administer:
3–15 minutes
Inpatient Functional Communication Interview (IFCI; McCooey-O’Halloran, Worrall, 
Toffolo, Code, & Hickson, 2004)
Target clinical population:
Hospital inpatients with communication difficulties
Constructs assessed:
Everyday communication needs and abilities of patients 
while they are in the hospital
Typical time to administer:
30–45 minutes (includes medical history/chart review, 
patient interview, and interview of relevant members of 
the health care team)
Neurosensory Center Comprehensive Examination for Aphasia (NCCEA; Spreen 
& Benton, 1977)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Visual and tactile naming, repetition, verbal fluency, 
object description, immediate verbal memory, auditory 
comprehension of single words and commands of varied 
length and complexity, reading of words and sentences, 
writing (dictation, copying, and naming), articulation
Typical time to administer:
24 subtests, most of which can be administered in less 
than 5 minutes
Naming and Oral Reading for Language in Aphasia 6-Point Scale (NORLA-6 
Scale; Gingrich, Hurwitz, Lee, Carpenter, & Cherney, 2013)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
6-point scale used for quantifying naming and oral 
reading
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Table 20–4.  continued
continues

350
Northwestern Syntax Screening Test (NSST; Lee, 1971)
Target clinical population:
Sometimes applied to people with aphasia (originally 
developed for children)
Constructs assessed: 
Expressive and receptive portions: prepositions, personal 
pronouns, noun-verb agreement, tense, possessives, 
present progressives, active and passive voice, and 
wh- questions
Typical time to administer:
20 minutes
Philadelphia Naming Test (PNT; Roach, Schwartz, Martin, Grewal, & Brecher, 1996) 
(Also can be administered in two matched short forms; Walker & Schwartz, 2012)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Object naming
Typical time to administer: 
Unspecified
Porch Index of Communicative Ability–Revised (PICA-R; Porch, 2001)
Target clinical population: 
People with brain injury and aphasia due to stroke
Constructs assessed: 
Gestural, verbal, and graphic abilities; entails 
multidimensional scoring according to accuracy, 
responsiveness, completeness, promptness, and 
efficiency of response
Typical time to administer: 
60 minutes; requires extensive training to administer
Progressive Aphasia Severity Scale (PASS; Sapolsky, Domoto-Reilly, & Dickerson, 
2014)
Target clinical population: 
People with primary progressive aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Articulation, fluency, syntax/grammar, word retrieval/
expression, repetition, auditory comprehension, single-
word comprehension, reading, writing, functional 
communication; includes supplemental domains for 
communication initiation, turn taking, and language 
generation
Typical time to administer: 
10 minutes (in addition to accompanying evaluation and 
interviews on which ratings are partially based)
Psycholinguistic Assessment of Aphasic Language Ability (PALPA; Kay et al., 
1992)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Auditory processing; reading and spelling; picture and 
word semantics; sentence comprehension
Typical time to administer: 
Length beyond feasibility in its entirety in clinical 
environments; individual subtests can be administered
Table 20–4.  continued

351
Pyramids and Palm Trees Test (PPT; Patterson & Howard, 1992)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia, visual agnosia, general semantic 
impairment (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease)
Constructs assessed:
Semantic access from words and pictures
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Quality of Communication Life Scale (QCLS; Paul et al., 2004)
Target clinical population:
Adults with neurogenic communication disorders
Constructs assessed: 
Impact of a communication disorder on relationships, 
communication, interactions, and participation in social, 
leisure, work, and education activities; overall quality of life
Typical time to administer:
15 minutes
Reading Comprehension Battery for Aphasia, 2nd Edition (RCBA-2; LaPointe & 
Horner, 1998)
Target clinical population:
Adults with acquired language disorders
Constructs assessed: 
Reading of single words; includes manipulations of visual, 
auditory, and semantic confusions; synonyms; sentences; 
paragraphs; addresses silent reading, not just reading aloud
Typical time to administer: 
30 minutes
Revised Token Test (RTT; McNeil & Prescott, 1978)
Target clinical population:
People with auditory processing impairment associated 
with brain damage, aphasia, and language and learning 
disabilities
Constructs assessed: 
Auditory comprehension of commands of varying length 
and complexity
Typical time to administer: 
30 minutes
Sentence Production Test for Aphasia (SPTA; Wilshire, Lukkien, & Burmester, 2014)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Production of words in sentences, including contrast of 
production in sentences with single-word production
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
SOAP Test of Syntactic Complexity (SOAP-TSC; Love & Oster, 2002)
Target clinical population:
People with TBI and aphasia
Constructs assessed: 
Comprehension of sentences (matched for length) of 
four syntactic construction types: active, passive, subject-
relative, and object-relative
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Table 20–4.  continued
continues

352
Stroke and Aphasia Quality of Life Scale (SAQOL-39; Hilari, Byng, Lamping, & 
Smith, 2003)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Self-report of health-related quality of life; includes self-
care, mobility, upper-extremity function, work, vision, 
language, thinking, personality, mood, energy, and family 
and social roles
Typical time to administer:
10–15 minutes
Stroke Aphasia Depression Questionnaire (SADQ; Sutcliffe & Lincoln, 1998)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
21-item questionnaire completed by the client’s caregiver, 
developed based on observable behaviors thought to be 
associated with depressed mood
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Verb and Sentence Test (VAST; Bastiaanse, Edwards, & Rispens, 2002)
Target clinical population:
People with aphasia
Constructs assessed:
Understanding of verb forms (transitive and intransitive), 
derivational morphemes, inflectional morphemes; 
understanding of canonical and noncanonical sentences; 
morphosyntactic production of words and sentences
Typical time to administer:
2–3 hours; individual subtests may be given
Western Aphasia Battery–Revised (WAB-R; Kertesz, 2007; and WAB-Extended 
[WAB-E] an “extension” of the WAB-Revised, Kertesz, 2006)
Target clinical population: 
People with aphasia due to stroke, TBI survivors, people 
with dementia
Constructs assessed: 
Fluency, auditory comprehension, repetition, naming, 
word finding, reading, writing, drawing; supplemental 
tools to index block design, calculation, praxis, and 
differentiation of deep, surface, and visual dyslexia; 
suggests classification according to classical aphasia 
types; includes bedside evaluation
Typical time to administer: 
Full battery 30–45 minutes; additional 45–60 minutes for 
reading, writing, praxis, and construction sections; 15 
minutes for bedside form
Note.  Many of the tools listed in this table are applicable also to people with TBI, RBI, and dementia; 
to avoid duplication, they are not listed in the additional tables for those target clinical groups.
Table 20–4.  continued

353
Table 20–5.  Traumatic Brain Injury Assessment Tools
Attention Process Training Test (APT-Test; Sohlberg & Mateer, 2001a)
Target clinical population:
Adolescents, adults and veterans with mild, moderate, 
and severe TBI; postconcussion syndrome, and other 
neurological disorders
Constructs assessed:
Sustained, selective, divided, and alternating attention on 
paced tasks
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Behavioral Assessment of the Dysexecutive Syndrome (BADS; Wilson, Alderman, 
Burgess, Emslie, & Evans, 1996)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Executive functioning (mental flexibility, problem solving, 
abstract thinking, temporal judgment)
Typical time to administer:
40 minutes
Brief Test of Head Injury (BTHI; Helm-Estabrooks & Hotz, 1991)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Orientation/attention, command following, linguistic 
organization, reading comprehension, naming, and 
visual-spatial skills
Typical time to administer:
20–30 minutes
Comprehensive Assessment of Prospective Memory (CAPM; Roche, Fleming, & 
Shum, 2002)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Prospective memory
Typical time to administer:
10–15 minutes
Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System (D-KEFS; Baldo, Shimamura, & Delis, 
2001; Delis, Kaplan, & Kramer, 2001)
Target clinical population:
Adults with mild brain injury, especially with frontal lobe 
challenges
Constructs assessed:
Executive functions within verbal and spatial modalities, 
including initiation, flexibility of thinking, inhibition, 
problem solving, planning, impulse control, concept 
formation, abstract thinking, and creativity; sustained, 
focused, and divided attention
Typical time to administer:
90 minutes; specific subtests may be given
continues

354
Functional Assessment of Verbal Reasoning and Executive Strategies (FAVRES; 
MacDonald, 2005)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Everyday life reasoning and executive functioning skills 
(reasoning accuracy, rationale, and efficiency), and 
reasoning skills (getting facts, eliminating irrelevant 
information, weighing facts, flexibility, generating 
alternatives, and predicting consequences)
Typical time to administer:
Approximately 60 minutes
Galveston Orientation and Amnesia Test (GOAT; Levin, O’Donnell, & Grossman, 
1979; A-GOAT form available for individuals with aphasia)
Target clinical population:
People at a subacute stage of recovery from closed head 
injury
Constructs assessed:
Duration of posttraumatic amnesia; orientation to person, 
place, and time, and memory for events preceding and 
following the injury
Typical time to administer:
3–15 minutes
The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS; Teasdale & Jennett, 1974)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Responsiveness following coma; 3 to 15 points—best 
eye, verbal, and motor behaviors
Typical time to administer:
Approximately 1 minute
LaTrobe Communication Questionnaire (LCQ; Douglas, O’Flaherty, & Snow, 2000)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Perceived communication ability in adults with TBI based 
on information gathered from patient and significant other
Typical time to administer:
20–40 minutes
Measure of Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities (MCLA; Ellmo, Graser, Krchnavek, Hauck, 
& Calabrese, 1995)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Reading comprehension, functional reading, pragmatics 
in discourse, narrative discourse, written narrative 
abilities, story recall, verbal abstract reasoning, 
confrontation naming, oral mechanism function
Typical time to administer:
45–60 minutes
Table 20–5.  continued

355
Mount Wilga High Level Language Test (MWHLLT; Clark, Mortensen, & Christie, 
1986) and Mount Wilga High Level Language Test–Revised (MWHLLT-R; Simpson, 
2006)
Target clinical population:
People with mild language problems due to head injury
Constructs assessed:
Naming skills, verbal explanation, planning, 
auditory memory, auditory comprehension, reading 
comprehension, written expression, numeracy
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test (PASAT; Gronwall, 1977)
Target clinical population:
People with mild head injury
Constructs assessed:
Measure of cognitive function that assesses auditory 
information-processing speed and flexibility, and 
calculation ability
Typical time to administer:
10–15 minutes
Quality of Life after Brain Injury (QOLIBRI; von Steinbüchel et al., 2010)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Satisfaction in the areas of cognition, self, daily life, 
autonomy, and social relationships, and perception of 
“feeling bothered” by emotions and physical problems
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Rancho Los Amigos Scale of Cognitive Functioning–Revised (RLASCF-R; 
Reimer et al., 1995)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Stages of recovery after brain injury; responsiveness 
to stimuli, ability to follow commands, presence of 
nonpurposeful behavior, cooperation, confusion, attention 
to environment, focus, coherence of verbalization, 
appropriateness of verbalizations and actions, memory 
recall, orientation, and judgment and reasoning
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test–Third Edition (RBMT-3; Wilson et al., 2008)
Target clinical population:
People with acquired, nonprogressive brain injury
Constructs assessed:
Verbal and nonverbal episodic memory, spatial memory, 
prospective memory, and procedural memory during 
everyday functional tasks
Typical time to administer:
25–30 minutes
Table 20–5.  continued
continues

356
Ross Information Processing Assessment, 2nd Edition (RIPA-2; Ross-Swain & 
Fogle, 1996)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Recent memory, temporal orientation (recent memory), 
temporal orientation (remote memory), spatial orientation, 
orientation to environment, recall of general information, 
problem solving and abstract reasoning, organization 
auditory processing and retention
Typical time to administer:
45–60 minutes
Ruff Figural Fluency Test (RFFT; Ruff, 1996)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Nonverbal capacity for initiation, planning, and divergent 
reasoning
Typical time to administer:
5 minutes
Scales of Cognitive Injury for Traumatic Brain Injury (SCATBI; Adamovich & 
Henderson, 1992)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Perception/discrimination, orientation, organization, 
recall, reasoning
Typical time to administer:
2 hours; subtests can be given separately
Wiig-Semel Test of Linguistic Concepts (W-STLC; Wiig & Semel, 1974)
Target clinical population:
TBI survivors
Constructs assessed:
Comprehension of a range of complex grammatical 
structures, including passive, comparative, temporal, 
spatial, and familial structures
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Note.  Many of the tools in Table 20–6 are also applicable to TBI survivors.
Table 20–5.  continued

357
Table 20–6.  Right Brain Injury Assessment Tools
Burns Brief Inventory of Communication and Cognition: Right Hemisphere 
Inventory (BBICC-RHI; Burns, 1997) 
Target clinical population: 
Adults with right hemisphere injury
Constructs assessed: 
Scanning and tracking, visuospatial skills, prosody and 
abstract language
Typical time to administer: 
30 minutes
Mini Inventory of Right Brain Injury–Second Edition (MIRBI-2; Pimental & Knight, 
2000) 
Target clinical population: 
Adults with right hemisphere injury
Constructs assessed: 
Attention, ability to explain incongruities, absurdities, 
figurative language and similarities, affective language, 
emotions and affect processing, understanding humor, 
praxis, and expressive ability
Typical time to administer: 
30 minutes
The RIC Evaluation in Right Hemisphere Dysfunction–Revised (RICE-R; Halper, 
Cherney, Burns, & Mogil, 1996) 
Target clinical population: 
Adults with right hemisphere injury
Constructs assessed: 
Characteristics of pragmatics, visual scanning and 
tracking, analysis of writing, metaphorical language
Typical time to administer:
60 minutes
Right Hemisphere Language Battery 2nd Edition (RHLB-2; Bryan, 1994)
Target clinical population: 
Adults with right hemisphere injury
Constructs assessed: 
Metaphor, comprehension of inferred meaning, humor, 
lexical semantic comprehension, emotional and linguistic 
prosody, discourse
Typical time to administer: 
Approximately 60 minutes
Note.  Some of the tools in Table 20–4 and many in Table 20–5 are also applicable to RBI survivors.

358
Table 20–7.  Tools for Assessing Dementia and Other Neurodegenerative Conditions
Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination–Revised (ACE-R; Mioshi et al., 2006)
Target clinical population:
People with dementia and MCI
Constructs assessed:
Orientation, verbal recall/recognition, attention and 
concentration, anterograde memory, retrograde 
memory, verbal fluency, auditory comprehension, 
writing, repetition, naming, reading, visuospatial abilities, 
perceptual abilities
Typical time to administer:
15 minutes
Arizona Battery for Communication Disorders of Dementia (ABCD; Bayles & 
Tomoeda, 1993)
Target clinical population: 
People with dementia 
Constructs assessed:
Mental status, story retelling (immediate and delayed), 
command following, comparative questions, word 
learning (free recall, total recall, recognition), repetition, 
object description, word and sentence reading 
comprehension, generative naming, confrontation 
naming, concept definition, generative drawing, and 
figure copying; includes screening for visual perception, 
literacy, and speech discrimination
Typical time to administer:
45–90 minutes
Dementia Rating Scale-2 (DRS-2; Jurica, Leitten, & Mattis, 2001) 
Target clinical population: 
People with dementia
Constructs assessed: 
Attention, initiation-perseveration, construction, 
conceptualization, memory
Typical time to administer: 
15–30 minutes
The Executive Interview (EXIT25; Royall, Mahurin, & Gray, 1992)
Target clinical population:
People with mild dementia
Constructs assessed:
Executive functions, including verbal fluency, design 
fluency, frontal release signs, motor/impulse control, 
imitation behavior, and other symptoms associated with 
frontal lobe changes
Typical time to administer:
15 minutes
Functional Linguistic Communication Inventory (FLCI; Bayles & Tomoeda, 1994)
Target clinical population: 
People with dementia
Constructs assessed: 
Greeting, naming, answering questions, writing, 
comprehension of signs, following commands, 
conversation, reminiscing, gesture/pantomime, and word 
reading
Typical time to administer: 
30 minutes

359
Global Deterioration Scale (GDS; Reisberg, Ferris, de Leon, & Crook, 1982)
Target clinical population:
People with dementia 
Constructs assessed:
Seven stages of cognitive decline 
Typical time to administer:
5–10 minutes
Location Learning Test-Revised (LLT-R; Kessels, Bucks, Willison, & Byrne, 2011)
Target clinical population:
Older adults with and without dementia
Constructs assessed:
Visuospatial learning
Typical time to administer:
30 minutes
Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS; 
Randolph, Tierney, Mohr, & Chase, 1998) 
Target clinical population:  
Adults, especially people with dementia
Constructs assessed: 
Immediate recall, visuospatial construction, language, 
attention, delayed recall
Typical time to administer:
30–45 minutes
Ross Information Processing Assessment–Geriatric, 2nd Edition (RIPA-G:2; 
Ross-Swain & Fogle, 2012)
Target clinical population: 
People older than 55 years; people with MCI, AD, right 
CVA, TBI
Constructs assessed: 
Immediate memory, temporal orientation, spatial 
orientation, general information, situational knowledge, 
categorical vocabulary, listening comprehension
Typical time to administer:
25–35 minutes
Rowland Universal Dementia Assessment Scale (RUDAS; Storey, Rowland, 
Conforti, & Dickson, 2004)
Target clinical population: 
Older adults
Constructs assessed: 
Memory, gnosis (body orientation), praxis (fist-palm 
alternation), visuospatial ability (cube copying), judgment, 
language (generative naming)
Typical time to administer:
5 minutes
Scales of Adult Independence, Language, and Recall (SAILR; Sonies, 1997) 
Target clinical population: 
Older adults
Constructs assessed: 
Functional independence (assessed via checklists and 
interviews with clients and caregivers), language and 
recall (confrontation naming, sentence comprehension, 
paragraph recall)
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Table 20–7.  continued
continues

360
The Severe Impairment Battery (SIB; Saxton, 2004)
Target clinical population: 
Adults with severe dementia who are unable to complete 
standard types of neuropsychological testing
Constructs assessed: 
Measures cognitive dysfunction in advanced stage 
dementia based on behavioral observations and direct 
performance on a wide variety of low-level tasks (one-
step questions and commands; social interaction, 
memory, orientation, language, attention, praxis, 
visuospatial ability, construction, orienting to name) 
Typical time to administer:
20 minutes
Table 20–7.  continued

361
Table 20–8.  Other Tools for People With Acquired Neurogenic Cognitive-Linguistic 
Disorders
Assessment of the Intelligibility of Dysarthric Speech (AIDS; Yorkston & 
Beukelman, 1984)
Target clinical population:
People with dysarthria
Constructs assessed:
Single-word intelligibility, sentence intelligibility, and 
speaking rate
Typical time to administer:
30 minutes
Balloons Test (BT; Edgeworth, Robertson, & McMillan, 1998)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Visual inattention
Typical time to administer:
5–10 minutes
Barkley Deficits in Executive Functioning Scale (BDEFS; Barkley, 2011)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Executive functioning in daily life activities
Typical time to administer:
Long form: 15–20 minutes; short form: 4–5 minutes
Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function–Adult Version (BRIEF-A; Roth, 
Isquith, & Gioia, 2005)
Target clinical population:
Children and adolescents with executive function/self-
regulation impairment (may have relevance to adults)
Constructs assessed:
Self and informant report of inhibition, self-monitoring, 
planning/organization, shifting attention, initiating, 
monitoring tasks, emotional control, working memory, 
organization of materials
Typical time to administer:
10–15 minutes
Behavioral Inattention Test (BIT; Wilson, Cockburn, & Halligan, 1987a)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Visual neglect in everyday activities
Typical time to administer:
30–40 minutes
Benton Visual Retention Test, 5th Edition (BVRT-5; Benton & Benton Sivan, 1992)
Target clinical population:
Adults, especially those with reading disabilities, 
nonverbal learning disabilities, TBI, ADHD, and dementia
Constructs assessed:
Visual perception, memory, visuoconstructive abilities
Typical time to administer:
15–20 minutes
continues

362
Bilingual Verbal Ability Tests (BVAT; Munoz-Sandoval, Cummins, Alvarado, & 
Ruef, 1998; normative update edition available through Munoz-Sandoval, Cummins, 
Alvarado, & Ruef, 2005)
Target clinical population:
People who are bilingual
Constructs assessed:
Overall verbal ability: Picture vocabulary, oral vocabulary, 
verbal analogies measures first in English, with 
supplementation in another language; provides and index 
of English language proficiency and of overall bilingual 
ability for speakers of English and 17 other languages
Typical time to administer:
30 minutes
Brief Test of Attention (BTA; Schretlen, 1997)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Attention
Typical time to administer:
10 minutes or less
Brief Visuospatial Memory Test–Revised (BVMT-R; Benedict, 1997)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Visuospatial memory
Typical time to administer:
45 minutes (including 25-minute delay)
The Burden of Stroke Scale (BOSS; Doyle, McNeil, & Hula, 2003)
Target clinical population:
Stroke survivors with and without communication disorders
Constructs assessed:
Health status and related clinical outcomes; patient-
reported difficulty in well-being and multiple domains of 
functioning following stroke
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Burns Brief Inventory of Cognition and Communication (Burns Inventory;  
Burns, 1997)
Target clinical population:
People with left hemisphere lesions, right hemisphere 
lesions, and complex neuropathologies
Constructs assessed:
Language, speech prosody, visuospatial abilities
Typical time to administer:
30 minutes
California Verbal Learning Test–Second Edition (CVLT-II; Delis, Kramer, Kaplan, & 
Ober, 2000)
Target clinical population:
Adults, including those with left or right hemisphere stoke 
or TBI
Constructs assessed:
Verbal learning and memory (recall and recognition of 
word lists over immediate and delayed memory trials)
Typical time to administer:
30 minutes testing plus 30 minutes of delay; short form: 
15 minutes testing plus 15 minutes of delay
Table 20–8.  continued

363
Cambridge Prospective Memory Test (CAMPROMPT; Wilson et al., 2005)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Prospective memory
Typical time to administer:
25 minutes
Color Trails Test (CTT; D’Elia, Satz, Uchiyama, & White, 1996)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Sustained attention, sequencing
Typical time to administer:
3–8 minutes
Comb and Razor Test (CRT; McIntosh, Brodie, Beschin, & Robertson, 2000)
Target clinical population:
Adult stroke survivors
Constructs assessed:
Unilateral spatial neglect
Typical time to administer:
5 minutes or less
Common Objects Memory Test (COMT; Kempler, Teng, Taussig, & Dick, 2010)
Target clinical population:
Adult stroke survivors
Constructs assessed:
Memory for common objects based on pictures
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Communication Profile for the Hearing Impaired (CPHI; Demorest & Erdman, 1986)
Target clinical population:
Adults with hearing impairment
Constructs assessed:
Self-ratings of hearing and auditory processing in four 
areas: communication performance, communication 
environment, communication strategies, and personal 
adjustment
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Comprehensive Test of Nonverbal Intelligence, 2nd Edition (CTONI-2; Hammill, 
Pearson, & Wiederholt, 2009)
Target clinical population:
People with language disabilities, hearing impairment, 
motor control problem, history of stroke or brain injury
Constructs assessed:
General intelligence
Typical time to administer:
60 minutes
Comprehensive Trail-Making Test (CTMT; Reynolds, 2002)
Target clinical population:
People with TBI and other neurogenic disorders, 
especially frontal lobe deficits
Constructs assessed:
Visual search, scanning, speed of processing, mental 
flexibility, and executive functions, attention, concentration
Typical time to administer:
5–12 minutes
Table 20–8.  continued
continues

364
d2 Test of Attention (d2TA; Brickenkamp & Zillmer, 1998)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Attention, concentration, processing speed, rule 
compliance (originally developed to measure driving 
aptitude and efficiency)
Typical time to administer:
8 minutes
Doors and People (DP; Baddeley, Emslie, & Nimmo-Smith, 1994)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Long-term memory; visual and verbal recall and 
recognition
Typical time to administer:
35–40 minutes
Detroit Test of Learning Aptitude–Adult (DTLA-A; Hammill & Bryant, 1991)
Target clinical population:
Adults with learning disabilities
Constructs assessed:
General intelligence, word opposites, form assembly, 
sentence imitation, reversed letters, mathematical 
problems, design sequences, basic information, 
quantitative relations, word sequences, design 
reproduction, symbolic relations, story sequences
Typical time to administer:
40 minutes to 2 hours
Dysarthria Examination Battery (DEB; Drummond, 1993)
Target clinical population:
People with dysarthria
Constructs assessed:
Respiration, phonation, resonation, articulation, 
intelligibility, prosody, oral sensitivity to tactile stimulation
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Executive Control Battery (ECB; Goldberg, Podell, Bilder, & Jaeger, 2000)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Executive functioning/control
Typical time to administer:
60 minutes (15 minutes per subtest)
Expressive Vocabulary Test (EVT; Williams, 1997)
Target clinical population:
Children and adults
Constructs assessed:
Expressive vocabulary and word retrieval
Typical time to administer:
10–20 minutes
Table 20–8.  continued

365
Florida Affect Battery­–Revised (FAB-R; Bowers, Blonder, & Heilman, 1999)
Target clinical population:
People with neurological or psychiatric disorders
Constructs assessed:
Perception and understanding of nonverbal (i.e., facial 
and prosodic) communicative signals of emotion under a 
variety of task demands
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Frenchay Dysarthria Assessment (FDA; Enderby, 1983); Frenchay Dysarthria 
Assessment–Second Edition (FDA-2; Enderby & Palmer, 2008)
Target clinical population:
People with motor speech disorders
Constructs assessed:
Reflexes, respiration, lips ratings, palate ratings, laryngeal 
ratings, tongue ratings, intelligibility, influencing factors 
(hearing, sight, teeth, language, mood, posture, rate, and 
sensation)
Typical time to administer:
20 minutes
Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly (HHIE; Ventry & Weinstein, 1982) and 
the Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly–Spouse (HHIE-SP; Newman & 
Weinstein, 1986)
Target clinical population:
Older adults with hearing impairment and their spouses, 
respectively
Constructs assessed:
Self-ratings of hearing and auditory processing
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Johns Hopkins University Dysgraphia Battery (JHUDB; Goodman & Caramazza, 
1985)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Spelling of dictated words and nonwords, transcoding, 
written picture naming
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Location Learning Test-Revised (LLT-R; Kessels et al., 2011)
Target clinical population:
People with dementia, amnesia, and milder memory 
deficits
Constructs assessed:
Visuospatial recall and learning
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Memory for Intentions Test (MIST; Raskin, Buckheit, & Sherrod, 2010)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Prospective memory
Typical time to administer:
30 minutes
Table 20–8.  continued
continues

366
Modified Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (M-WCST; Schretlen, 2010)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Abstract reasoning, perseveration
Typical time to administer:
7–10 minutes
Neuropsychological Assessment Battery (NAB; White & Stern, 2003)
Target clinical population:
People with known or suspected disorders of the central 
nervous system
Constructs assessed:
Attention, oral and written language production, memory, 
spatial abilities, executive functions
Typical time to administer:
4 hours; also includes screening modules; individual 
subtests may be given
Northwestern Assessment of Verbs and Sentences (NAVS; Cho-Reyes & 
Thompson, 2012)
Target clinical population:
People with neurological disorders
Constructs assessed:
Comprehension and production of action verbs, 
production of verb argument structure in sentence 
contexts, and comprehension and production of canonical 
and noncanonical sentences
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Neuropsychological Assessment Battery (NAB; White & Stern, 2003)
Target clinical population:
Adults with neurological disorders
Constructs assessed:
Attention, oral and written language production, memory, 
spatial abilities, executive functions
Typical time to administer:
4 hours; also includes screening modules; individual 
subtests may be given
Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test–adapted version (PASAT; Rao, Leo, 
Haughton, St Aubin-Faubert, & Bernardin, 1989)
Target clinical population:
People with multiple sclerosis
Constructs assessed:
Measure of cognitive function that assesses auditory 
information-processing speed and flexibility, and 
calculation ability
Typical time to administer:
10–15 minutes
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, 4th Edition (PPVT-4; Dunn & Dunn, 2007)
Target clinical population:
Children and adults
Constructs assessed:
Single-word receptive vocabulary
Typical time to administer:
10–15 minutes
Table 20–8.  continued

367
Quick Assessment for Dysarthria (QAD; Tanner & Culbertson, 1999)
Target clinical population:
People with dysarthria
Constructs assessed:
Respiration, phonation, articulation, resonance, and 
prosody
Typical time to administer:
10–15 minutes
Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices (RAPM; Raven, 2007)
Target clinical population:
Adults with high intellectual ability
Constructs assessed:
High-level observation skills, clear thinking ability, 
intellectual capacity
Typical time to administer:
40–60 minutes
Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RMP; Raven, Raven, & Court, 2003)
Target clinical population:
Anyone
Constructs assessed:
Reasoning ability, nonverbal abilities, general intelligence
Typical time to administer:
40 minutes
Rey Complex Figure Test (RCFT; Meyers & Meyers, 1995)
Target clinical population:
Adults with and without neurological and psychiatric 
impairments
Constructs assessed:
Visuospatial recall memory, visuospatial recognition 
memory, response bias, processing speed, visuospatial 
constructional ability, and ability to use cues to retrieve 
information
Typical time to administer:
45 minutes, including a 30-minute delay interval (timed), 
and 15 minutes scoring time
Ross Test of Higher Cognitive Processes (RTHCP; Ross & Ross, 1976)
Target clinical population:
Students (used to identify students for gifted programs in 
schools; sometimes applied to adults)
Constructs assessed:
High-level thinking skills (analysis, synthesis, and 
evaluation, organization and reasoning); includes verbal 
analogies, deduction, assumption, identification, word 
relationships, sentence sequencing, interpreting answers 
to questions, information sufficiency and relevance in 
mathematical problems, and analysis of attributes of 
complex stick figures
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Table 20–8.  continued
continues

368
SCAN-3:A Test for Auditory Processing Disorders in Children and Adults 
(SCAN3-A; Keith, 2009)
Target clinical population:
People age 13 and older
Constructs assessed:
Auditory processing
Typical time to administer:
Screening: 10–15 minutes; diagnostic assessment: 30–45 
minutes
Speed and Capacity of Language Processing Test (SCOLP; Baddeley, Emslie, & 
Nimmo-Smith, 1992)
Target clinical population:
People with brain injury, dementia, schizophrenia, older 
people, and people exposed to drugs, stressors, and 
alcohol
Constructs assessed:
Speed of cognitive processing , cognitive capacity
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
The Speech, Spatial, and Qualities of Hearing Scale (SSQ; Gatehouse & Noble, 
2004)
Target clinical population:
Adults, with or without hearing aids or cochlear implants
Constructs assessed:
Self-ratings of hearing and auditory processing in a 
variety of competing contexts and related to directional, 
distance, and movement components of spatial hearing
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Stroop Color and Word Test-Adult (SCWT-A; Golden & Freshwater, 2002)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Attention, executive functioning
Typical time to administer:
5 minutes
Symbol Digit Modality Test (SDMT; Smith, 1973)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Psychomotor speed and attention/integration without 
requiring linguistic responses
Typical time to administer:
5 minutes
Test of Adolescent/Adult Word Finding-2 (TAWF-2; German, 2016)
Target clinical population:
People age 12 and above
Constructs assessed:
Word finding
Typical time to administer:
20–30 minutes
Table 20–8.  continued

369
Tasks of Executive Control (TEC; Isquith, Roth, & Gioia, 2010)
Target clinical population:
Children and adolescents with executive function 
impairment (may be applied with adults if relevant)
Constructs assessed:
Word finding
Typical time to administer:
20–30 minutes
Test of Everyday Attention (TEA; Ridgeway et al., 1994)
Target clinical population:
People suspected of having attention deficits
Constructs assessed:
Selective attention, sustained attention, divided attention, 
attentional switching
Typical time to administer:
45–60 minutes
Test of Language Competence–Expanded Edition (TLC-E; Wiig & Secord, 1989)
Target clinical population:
People with delayed language (may be applied with 
adults if relevant)
Constructs assessed:
Processing of lexical and syntactic ambiguities, 
logical inferencing, syntax and semantics in sentence 
generation, interpretation of metaphor, and recall of word 
pairs
Typical time to administer:
Less than 60 minutes
Test of Nonverbal Intelligence-4 (TONI-4; Brown, Sherbenou, & Johnson, 2010)
Target clinical population:
Anyone
Constructs assessed:
Intelligence, aptitude, abstract reasoning, problem solving
Typical time to administer:
5–20 minutes
Visual Analog Mood Scales (VAMS; Stern, 1997) and Visual Analog Mood Scales–
Revised (VAMS-R; Kontou et al., 2012)
Target clinical population:
Adults with neurological impairments, especially in adults 
in medical and psychiatric settings
Constructs assessed:
Internal mood states (Afraid, Confused, Sad, Angry, 
Energetic, Tired, Happy, and Tense)
Typical time to administer:
5–15 minutes
Visual Analogue Self-Esteem Scale (VASES; Brumfitt & Sheeran, 1999)
Target clinical population:
People with communication impairment
Constructs assessed:
Self-esteem
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Table 20–8.  continued
continues

370
Wechsler Memory Scale-III (WMS; Wechsler, 2009)
Target clinical population:
Adults with suspected memory problems
Constructs assessed:
Auditory and visual learning, auditory and visual short- 
and long-term memory; includes brief cognitive status 
screening tool
Typical time to administer:
60–90 minutes
Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR; Wechsler, 2001)
Target clinical population:
Adults
Constructs assessed:
Preonset intellectual and memory abilities
Typical time to administer:
5–10 minutes
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST; Heaton, Thompson, Psychological 
Assessment Resources, & Business Video Productions, 1995)
Target clinical population:
People with TBI, neurodegenerative disease, or mental 
illness such as schizophrenia
Constructs assessed:
Abstract reasoning and executive function: strategic 
planning; organized searching; and ability to utilize 
environmental feedback to shift cognitive sets, direct 
behavior toward achieving a goal, and modulate 
impulsive responding
Typical time to administer:
20–30 minutes
Woodcock Johnson III Normative Update (NU) Tests of Cognitive Abilities (WJIII 
NU; Woodcock, McGregor, & Mather, 2007)
Target clinical population:
Children and adults
Constructs assessed:
General intellectual ability, information-processing 
abilities, (working memory, planning, naming speed, 
attention, and executive functioning), oral language, and 
academic achievement
Typical time to administer:
About 5 minutes per test; Cognitive Standard 7 tests 
(35–45 minutes); Achievement Standard 11 tests (55–65 
minutes)
Word Test-Revised (TWT-R; Huisingh, Bowers, Zachman, Blagden, & Orman, 1990)
Target clinical population:
School-age children (may be applied with adults if relevant)
Constructs assessed:
Semantics at the word level (categorizing, finding 
relationships among words, generating synonyms and 
antonyms, detecting semantic incongruities, and defining 
words)
Typical time to administer:
Unspecified
Note.  Additional tools that may be used to index potentially confounding factors in assessment are 
described in Chapter 19.
Table 20–8.  continued

Tests, Scales, and Screening Instruments   371
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 How might each of the following help 
you determine which assessment 
tools to use in a given situation:
a.	 The reason you are carrying out a 
given assessment?
b.	 The nature of the individual being 
assessed?
c.	 The quality of any given tool 
under consideration?
d.	 Your own preferences and pre-
ferred theoretical frameworks?
e.	 The practicality of using a par-
ticular tool?
	 3.	 What are FIM scores?
a.	 Why are these problematic in 
terms of issues related to assess-
ment, treatment, and dismissal 
from treatment in speech-
language pathology?
b.	 What alternative to FIM scores 
might you suggest that SLPs use 
in a rehabilitation context?
c.	 Why might you suggest that 
alternative?
	 4.	 How might standardized tools 
other than those designed to explic-
itly examine aphasia be used in the 
diagnostic process for a person with 
aphasia? Discuss what informa-
tion such tools may yield to help in 
the differential diagnosis of aphasia. 
Why is it important to distinguish 
this information from that generally 
obtained through standardized apha-
sia batteries?
	 5.	 Name and briefly describe at least 
two screening instruments used to 
get a quick idea of an adult’s linguis-
tic strengths and weaknesses.
	 6.	 Name and briefly describe at least 
two screening instruments used to 
get a quick idea of an adult’s cogni-
tive strengths and weaknesses.
	 7.	 List and briefly describe at least three 
standardized aphasia batteries.
	 8.	 List and briefly describe at least one 
published assessment tool for index-
ing the cognitive-communicative abil-
ities of a TBI survivor.
	 9.	 List and briefly describe at least one 
published assessment tool for index-
ing the cognitive-communicative abil-
ities of a person with RBS.
10.	 List and briefly describe at least one 
published assessment tool for index-
ing the cognitive-communicative abil-
ities of a person with dementia.
For additional learning and reflection activ-
ities, see the companion website.


373
Chapter
21
Discourse Sampling and 
Conversational Analysis
As discussed in the Chapter 17, learning 
about individuals’ abilities in a variety of 
discourse contexts is essential to dynamic 
assessment. Challenges in the interactive 
use of language are the most detrimental 
impacts of a language disorder in terms 
of social relationships, quality of life, 
independence, self-esteem, and profes-
sional and educational opportunities. If 
we don’t assess how a person functions 
in authentic communicative contexts, 
then we are failing to assess an abso-
lutely fundamental aspect of his or her 
true communicative strengths and weak-
nesses. In this chapter, we consider what 
we mean by discourse, discourse genres, 
and discourse analysis. We then consider 
specific ways in which discourse analy-
sis is clinically important, means of sam-
pling and analyzing discourse, and best 
practices in analyzing results. Finally, 
challenges in discourse sampling and 
conversational analysis in the context of 
real-world clinical and research practice  
are considered.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What is discourse?
	 2.	 What are general categories, types, or 
genres of discourse?
	 3.	 What is conversational or discourse 
analysis?
	 4.	 Why is discourse sampling and analy-
sis important?
	 5.	 What are key strategies for sampling 
discourse?
	 6.	 What are key measures for indexing 
discourse competence?
	 7.	 What are best practices in interpreting 
discourse analysis results?
	 8.	 What challenges do aphasiologists 
face in applying discourse analysis in 
clinical practice and research?
	 9.	 How may aphasiologists confront the 
challenges in applying discourse anal-
ysis in clinical practice and research?
What Is Discourse?
Discourse is the interactive use of lan-
guage, encompassing comprehension and  
production, regardless of modality (writ-
ten, spoken, or signed language, and ver-
bal as well as nonverbal communication).  

374   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
In the 1970s, Bloom and Lahey (1978) 
conceptualized language as having three 
subsystems: form, content, and use. Form 
(phonology, morphology, and syntax) and 
content (semantics) are subjects that had 
long been studied in linguistics, speech-
language pathology, and related areas. 
However, the emphasis on the actual use 
of language was novel at the time and 
led to a host of new analytic methods as 
well as treatment strategies focused on 
pragmatics, the social use of language 
(Bates, 1976). Pragmatic abilities include 
an integrated combination of cognitive 
and linguistic abilities (Coelho, Liles, & 
Duffy, 1995; Duff, Mutlu, Byom, & Turk-
stra, 2012; Lê, Coelho, Mozeiko, Krueger, 
& Grafman, 2012; Mozeiko, Le, Coelho, 
Krueger, & Grafman, 2011).
Just as the systems underlying the 
form and content of language are rule 
based, so is pragmatics. People sharing 
interactive communication must share 
and apply knowledge about how dis-
course is to be carried out. They must 
know, for example, how and when to 
take turns; how to take into account the 
listener’s (or reader’s) point of view and 
prior knowledge; how to adjust to the 
appropriate level of formality; which 
language and dialect to use; what words 
and expressions are appropriate or inap-
propriate in the given context; which ges-
tures, facial expressions, and intonation to 
use and how to interpret those of others; 
how close to stand or sit to others; and in 
what patterns of eye contact to engage.
Many use the word conversation inter-
changeably with the word discourse. Others 
argue that conversation connotes primarily 
oral communication; written communica-
tion is also important when considering 
discourse. Given the degree of conversa-
tion that occurs in written form through 
letters, texting, e-mail, and social media, 
the separation of written versus nonwrit-
ten aspects of conversation is blurred. 
For that reason, some prefer the word 
discourse when the purpose is to convey a 
more all-encompassing notion of expres-
sive, receptive, written, oral, and nonver-
bal communication.
What Are General Categories, 
Types, or Genres of Discourse?
Different genres of discourse entail differ-
ent underlying rules and require different 
types of knowledge and skill. Commonly 
studied genres include:
• Conversational (social, interactive)
• Narrative (telling and retelling 
stories)
• Procedural (giving instructions)
• Expository (providing information, 
explaining ideas or processes, 
defining constructs)
• Persuasive (convincing, providing 
evidence to support an opinion or 
request for action)
• Descriptive (conveying attributes)
Each genre requires engaging in certain 
aspects of discourse. For example, story-
telling typically includes establishing who 
the characters are, establishing the time 
and place, and conveying main ideas, 
actions, and outcomes; most of these 
aspects are less relevant to other discourse 
types. Typically, production and com-
prehension in narrative tasks are easiest 
because narrative structures are so famil-
iar and so well practiced from an early 
age. Procedural and expository speech 
has less predictable structure, and the pro-
portion of new information exchanged is 
much greater than in narrative discourse; 

Discourse Sampling and Conversational Analysis   375
thus, producing and comprehending it is 
more difficult (Shadden, 2011).
One way of categorizing aspects of 
the social use of language, regardless of 
genre, is by designating three levels:
• Linguistic (the verbal form and 
content)
• Extralinguistic (the environmental 
context of language use and the roles 
and backgrounds of the individuals 
involved in an exchange)
• Paralinguistic (prosodic aspects of 
intonation, pitch, and stress, use 
of gestures and facial expressions) 
(Davis, 1986)
Recall that this categorical scheme was 
discussed in Chapter 12 as a way of cat-
egorizing areas of discourse or pragmatics 
challenge for people with RBI.
Discourse may also be considered in 
terms of speech acts, the intended pur-
pose underlying a specific communicative 
intent in discourse at any given moment 
or in a given context (Grice, 1975; Searle, 
1969). Examples of speech acts are:
• Greetings
• Requests for information
• Assertions
• Persuasion
• Protests
• Agreements
• Conversational repair
Speech acts may be direct or indirect, ver-
bal or nonverbal. Different types of speech 
acts require different types of knowledge 
and skill.
Additional means of classifying types 
of discourse include:
• Register (the level of formality/
informality, or the degree of highly 
specialized jargon used within 
specific professional or social 
groups)
• Context (e.g., clinical facility, home, 
workplace, etc.)
• Means of elicitation (e.g., solicited 
versus unsolicited, naturalistic 
versus constrained)
What Is Conversational or 
Discourse Analysis?
Discourse analysis entails the methodical 
recording of discourse samples as people 
communicate in well-described contexts, 
selection of specific segments of discourse 
for analysis, and application of specific 
analytic methods using specific units or 
measures of discourse performance. Dis-
course analysis enables us to tune in sys-
tematically to linguistic, extralinguistic, 
and paralinguistic aspects of performance 
across varied discourse genres.
Why Is Discourse Sampling 
and Analysis Important?
Let’s consider briefly how discourse sam-
pling and analysis are vital to clinical 
practice and research.
Discourse, Especially the Social Use of 
Language, Is Highly Relevant to Every 
Type of Acquired Neurogenic Disorder
Regardless of etiology, severity, type, or 
lesion location, a language disorder is 
likely to affect discourse abilities. At the 
same time, impaired or unusual patterns 
of pragmatic performance tend to be asso-
ciated with people who have certain types 

376   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
of neurogenic language disorders. For 
example, people with Wernicke’s aphasia 
often violate turn-taking rules and fail to 
repair conversational breakdown. People 
with Broca’s aphasia tend to initiate new 
topics less than people without neuro-
logical disorders. People with frontal 
lobe lesions due to TBI often demonstrate 
challenges with inhibition of inappro-
priate content and with discourse cohe-
sion. People with RBI tend to have more 
difficulty than others with interpreting 
facial expressions and speech intonation 
patterns. People with neurogenic mem-
ory impairments tend to have difficulty 
with discourse cohesion and coherence, 
as discussed further below (Kurczek & 
Duff, 2011; Peach, 2013). Still, given the 
diversity of preonset pragmatic abilities 
and the complexity of communication in 
social contexts, it is impossible to predict 
for any individual what his or her prag-
matic strengths and weaknesses are with-
out carefully assessing them.
Discourse Analysis Helps Determine 
Strengths and Weaknesses Not Evident 
Through Other Forms of Assessment
The cognitive-linguistic profile assembled 
based on speech and language test results 
is often in stark contrast to statements that 
caregivers, friends, and family members 
make about an individual’s functional 
communication abilities. Discourse abili-
ties are often at the heart of such contrasts 
and are the primary reasons for which 
psychosocial aspects of acquired language 
disorders can be more disabling than the 
neuropsychological ones.
A person with a severe language dis-
order may have intact pragmatic abilities 
that serve as communicative strengths. For  
example, many people with aphasia dem-
onstrate exceptional pragmatic abilities 
that enable them to communicate effec-
tively in situations in which one would 
predict poor performance based on verbal 
abilities alone. Varying the discourse genre 
sampled often helps uncover strengths in 
people with MCI and dementia that might 
otherwise go unnoticed. Conversations 
about topics of varied levels of relevance 
to a person’s past (e.g., entailing career 
expertise, hobbies, and upbringing ver-
sus world events or general knowledge 
of less personal relevance) help elucidate 
strengths that are often left unassessed in 
older adults and brain injury survivors 
(Coelho, Ylvisaker, &Turkstra, 2005; Dijk-
stra, Bourgeois, Allen, & Burgio, 2004). 
Knowing about such strengths is espe-
cially important for those in institutional 
settings where there is a paucity of infor-
mation available to staff members regard-
ing the sorts of conversational topics that 
will best bring out an individual’s best 
communicative competence.
Conversely, a person with even a mild 
language disorder may have impaired 
pragmatic abilities that dramatically affect 
everyday communication. Many TBI sur-
vivors, for example, are discharged from 
inpatient acute care or rehabilitation stays 
and are never offered SLP assessment or 
treatment because of their high-level ver-
bal abilities, only to later confront pro-
found interpersonal communication chal-
lenges associated with pragmatic deficits. 
Such deficits are often ignored in assess-
ments that rely primarily on standardized 
aphasia batteries (Coelho et al., 2005).
Discourse Analysis May Yield Critical 
Information for Differential Diagnosis
Just as certain patterns of discourse 
strengths and weaknesses tend to charac-

Discourse Sampling and Conversational Analysis   377
terize people with varied types of language 
disorders, examining these patterns may 
help in substantiating diagnostic results. 
Consider, for example, the challenge of 
differentiating characteristics of normal 
aging from MCI, as discussed in Chapter 9.  
If a person leaves out a few details in a 
story retelling task (which could occur 
in normal aging), this may be contrasted 
with leaving out main ideas or getting dis-
tracted from the very task of retelling the 
story (which is more suggestive of MCI 
or dementia). People with dementia tend 
to have trouble with productive narrative 
organization, whereas age-matched older 
people tend not to. Also, people with 
dementia are less competent at identifying 
the main points of a story (Welland, Lubin-
ski, & Higginbotham, 2002) and deducing 
the moral of a story (Shadden, 2011).
There are limitations, of course, to 
basing conclusions about differential 
diagnosis solely on discourse analysis.  
Consider, for example, the concerns 
noted in Chapter 10 regarding the terms 
fluent versus nonfluent as diagnostic cat-
egories for people with aphasia. People 
classified as having “nonfluent” apha-
sia have been shown to have reduced 
grammatical structural complexity and 
shorter utterance length in conversation 
for different underlying reasons (Saffran, 
Berndt, & Schwartz, 1989). It is impor-
tant to explore those underlying reasons 
through methodical testing in addition to 
studying discourse production.
Discourse Analysis Is Vital 
to Treatment Planning
The actual use of language is fundamen-
tal to the most important treatment out-
comes. For many people with neurogenic 
communication disorders, focusing on 
pragmatic abilities is vital to educational 
and professional opportunities and suc-
cess and to social relationships. It is thus 
important to incorporate discourse-related 
goals in treatment planning (Ehlhardt 
et al., 2008; Kennedy et al., 2008; Kilov, 
Togher, & Grant, 2009; Ylvisaker, Turkstra, 
& Coelho, 2005). Doing so requires that 
discourse-related metrics be incorporated 
as baselines before treatment, as ongoing 
measures of progress during treatment, 
and as indices of treatment outcomes.  
As Lyon (1999) aptly states, “No matter 
how good, valid, or accurate our clinical 
constructs and solutions, they will not 
endure unless the living of life is measur-
ably and decisively better for those we 
treat” (p. 689).
Discourse Analysis Is an 
Essential Aspect of Research
For all of the reasons stated above, dis-
course analysis is an important focus of 
research on neurogenic language disorders, 
not just of clinical practice. Consideration 
of discourse is fundamental to research 
underlying evidence-based practice.
What Are Key Strategies for 
Sampling Discourse?
All the principles for best practice for 
assessment mentioned in Chapter 17 
apply to discourse sampling and analysis. 
A foremost consideration in deciding on 
discourse sampling strategies is what the 
goals of sampling are. Are there certain 
clinical hypotheses to be explored? Are 
there questions pertaining to differential 
diagnosis? Is there a discourse-related 
concern that the person you are serving or 

378   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
that a significant other wishes to explore 
further? Is there a critical aspect of interac-
tion that you think may become the focus 
of an intervention goal?
Examining discourse does not nec-
essarily restrict us to using nonstandard-
ized methods. Several examples of stan-
dardized tests that address discourse and 
pragmatic performance are included in 
the listings of assessment tools in Chap-
ter 20. The Discourse Comprehension Test 
(Brookshire & Nicholas, 1997), for exam-
ple, is based on paragraph-level spoken 
stories. Communicative Abilities of Daily 
Living–2 (CADL-2; Holland et al., 1999) 
contains items that address several aspects 
of pragmatics, including social interac-
tion, use of humor and metaphor, “func-
tional” reading and writing abilities, and 
contextual communication. The Amster-
dam Nijmegen Everyday Language Test 
(ANELT; Blomert, Kean, Koster, & Schok-
ker, 1994) includes scripted interview 
items pertaining to common situations. 
Other tools for indexing communicative 
effectiveness, such as the CETI (Lomas  
et al., 1989), include ratings of the use of 
language in daily situations. Still, there  
is no single comprehensive tool for assess-
ing discourse abilities that is agreed upon 
by all or that fits all discourse analysis 
needs.
Most general standardized language 
assessment batteries also include some 
form of discourse elicitation; however, 
they tend to comprise primarily picture 
description tasks. Although these may 
be informative and lend themselves to 
standardized means of scoring language 
production, picture descriptions alone 
are not sufficient for developing a holistic  
appreciation for a person’s discourse com-
petence (Capilouto, Wright, &Wagovich, 
2005, 2006; Wright, Capilouto, Srinivasan, 
& Fergadiotis, 2011). When describing 
pictures, many people ​— even with mild 
linguistic challenges — limit themselves 
to labeling objects, people, and actions 
and to using simple syntactic structures. 
The content of pictures shown is often not 
personally relevant to them. Also, scor-
ing systems tend not to allow credit for 
expounding on related ideas or personal 
interpretations or associated ideas.
Several aphasiologists have devel-
oped means of methodically analyzing 
language samples once they are collected. 
These include the Profile of Communica-
tion Appropriateness (Penn, 1988), the 
Assessment Protocol of Pragmatic Skills 
(Gerber & Gurland, 1989), and the Dis-
course Abilities Profile (Terrell & Ripich, 
1989). Each includes a distinct set of dis-
course or pragmatic behaviors to be moni-
tored and metrics to be tracked.
Regardless of the specific approach 
selected, it is important that the approach 
be methodical so as not to miss important 
strengths and weaknesses. It is also criti-
cal to sample both production and under-
standing during a variety of discourse 
tasks and genres. Quantitative and quali-
tative results tend to differ across analyses 
of varied types of discourse elicited from 
a single person (Armstrong, 2000; Cher-
ney, 1998). Thus, it is essential to assess 
performance across a variety of the genres 
listed above.
In addition to varying genre and 
discourse tasks, there are many varied 
means of eliciting responses. Probe ques-
tions during a discourse comprehension 
task, for example, may entail asking yes/
no questions, asking what the main idea 
is, requesting that the individual tell what 
happens next in a story, or an instruction 
to analyze facts versus opinions expressed 
in a conversation or written passage.

Discourse Sampling and Conversational Analysis   379
Results of discourse analysis tend to 
differ in evoked conversation compared 
to naturally occurring spontaneous con-
versation, especially if the scoring rules 
are not sufficiently detailed and explicit 
to be interpreted and applied consistently 
by multiple evaluators (Oelschlaeger & 
Thorne, 1999). This makes it challenging 
to judge the carryover from more to less 
structured conversation and from conver-
sations in a clinical environment to those 
in real-life contexts.
The context in which discourse is 
elicited for each genre may also affect, 
sometimes dramatically, the indices of 
communicative competence. Context may 
be manipulated, for example, in terms of:
• The degree of short-term or long-
term recall implicated
• The degree of communicative 
support provided
• The relationship and roles between 
the individual being assessed and 
the conversational partner and/or 
clinician
TBI survivors have been shown to have 
greater dependence on examiners than 
those without brain injuries for maintain-
ing conversational topics, sharing infor-
mation, and keeping conversations going 
(Coelho, Youse, & Le, 2002). Interactive 
support provided by an examiner or other 
conversational partner may have a strong 
influence on discourse production mea-
sures. The role of the clinician with regard 
to the person being assessed, including 
perceived status, comfort level, and social 
connectedness, are additional factors that 
might influence performance.
The degree of communicative sup-
port is not only based on the input from 
the communication partner; it is also 
inherently dependent on the tasks imple-
mented. For example, results may vary 
for video description and narration, tele-
phone conversation, role-playing, picture-
based descriptions, assembly of pictures 
into a story sequence, and real-life use of 
language (say, asking for help in a store, 
or informing people about the nature of 
one’s stroke or TBI).
Task instructions matter, too. Simply 
asking a person to describe an event, retell 
a story, or describe a picture may yield 
different results compared to requesting 
specific information. For example, asking 
a person to tell story with a beginning, 
middle, and end rather than simply to tell 
a story has been shown to yield qualita-
tively and quantitatively different narra-
tives (Wright & Capilouto, 2009).
What Are Key Measures for 
Indexing Discourse Competence?
Once decisions have been made about 
discourse tasks, associated stimuli, and 
means of evoking responses and instruct-
ing participants, a speech sample is col-
lected, ideally using audio-video record-
ing. Nicholas and Brookshire (1993) 
recommend at least 300 to 400 words per 
sample for sufficient reliability over time; 
similarly, Doyle et al. (2000) recommend a 
sample of about 400 words.
If spoken, the discourse sample is 
then transcribed and coded. Coding is any 
means of marking the discourse input in 
terms of aspects and metrics of interest. 
A variety of computerized transcription 
and analysis programs may be used to 
aid in this process. Examples are given 
in Table 21–1. Some, such as Systematic 
Analysis of Language Transcripts (SALT), 

380
Table 21–1.  Programs for Transcribing and Analyzing Discourse
Name
Source
Description
Coding 
Analysis 
Toolkit (CAT)
University Center for Social 
and Urban Research at 
the University of Pittsburgh 
and  College of Social and 
Behavioral Sciences at the 
University of Massachusetts 
Amherst:  
http://cat.ucsur.pitt.edu/
Open-source free software for 
coding, managing, and analyzing text; 
allows for multiple collaborators and 
indexes interrater reliability.
Computerized 
Profiling
Steven Long:  http://
computerizedprofiling.org/
Free software for orthographic and 
phonetic transcript analysis. 
Dedoose
Dedoose: http://www.
dedoose.com/
Web-based app for qualitative and 
mixed-methods analysis; includes 
text, video, and spreadsheet features.
General 
Architecture 
for Text 
Engineering 
(GATE)
GATE:  https://gate.ac.uk/
Open-source free software for 
tagging and quantifying several 
types of linguistic and extralinguistic 
elements; available in several 
languages.
Hyper 
RESEARCH
Researchware:  http://www​
.researchware.com/products/
hyperresearch.html
Software that allows coding, analysis, 
and reporting, including mind-
mapping tools.
Kwalitan
Kwalitan:  
http://www.kwalitan.nl
Program that permits coding, 
retrieval, and categorization of text, 
image, audio, and video input.
Natural 
Language 
Toolkit (NLTK)
NLTK:  http://www.nltk.org/
Program that enables coding and 
tagging for syntactic and sematic 
analysis with a basis in computational 
linguistics.
MAXQDA
MAXQDA:  
http://www.maxqda.com/
Software for organization, evaluation, 
coding, annotation, and interpretation 
of data plus report generation and 
data visualization.
QDA Miner
Provalis Research:  
http://provalisresearch.com/
products/qualitative-data-
analysis-software/
Qualitative software for coding, 
annotating, retrieving, and analyzing 
transcripts and other documents, plus 
images.
RJCA
Will Lowe:  
http://conjugateprior.org/
Open-source free software for 
word counts, content analysis, 
classification, and more.

Discourse Sampling and Conversational Analysis   381
Name
Source
Description
Systematic 
Analysis of 
Language 
Transcripts 
(SALT)
SALT Software:  
http://www.saltsoftware.com/
Software for elicitation and 
transcription of language samples; 
enables comparisons with “typical 
speakers”; offers free online training.
Tropes
Semantic Knowledge:  
http://www.semantic-
knowledge.com/
Free natural language software 
enabling semantic analysis, keyword 
extraction, and identification of 
“fundamental propositions.”
UAM Corpus 
Tool
Wagsoft:  
http://www.wagsoft.com/
CorpusTool
Tool that enables text annotation for 
linguistic analysis, from single words 
to whole texts.
WordStat
Provalis Research: 
http://provalisresearch​
.com/products/
content-analysis-software/
Software for content analysis and text 
mining, automatic tagging.
Table 21–1.  continued
were designed especially for clinical use, 
whereas others have been designed for 
varied types of qualitative research and 
data mining. Applications for such tools 
range far beyond the types of discourse 
analysis discussed in this chapter. Many 
of these tools may be applied to ethno-
graphic research and to analyses of such 
diverse sources of input as interviews, 
surveys, focus group discussions, Inter-
net content, and written and pictographic 
material in general (e.g., book, articles, 
newspapers, etc.). Although computer-
ized transcription, coding, and analysis 
certainly reduce the labor and increase the 
reliability of discourse analysis compared 
to what can be done without such soft-
ware, coding in itself can be time-consum-
ing and many software programs require 
training or at least significant learning 
and practice.
A network of clinicians and research-
ers who contribute clinical data, including 
discourse videos and analyses, is orga-
nized through Talkbank (talkbank.org). 
Talkbank consists of data, resources, stim-
uli, and additional information that sup-
port communication analyses. It includes 
CHAT, a transcription and coding tool; 
CLAN, an analysis tool; and a database 
tool. Clinical areas include AphasiaBank, 
TBIBank, and DementiaBank.
Possible means of studying a dis-
course sample include dividing samples 
into varied units of time or numbers of 
words, segments corresponding to speci-
fied tasks or activities, and identifying 
minimum terminal units, or T-units 
(Hunt, 1970); Shadden (1998) defines 
these as “one main clause plus any sub-
ordinate clauses or nonclausal structures 
attached to or embedded in the main 

382   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
clause” (p. 22). The specific measures to be 
used in discourse analysis depend upon 
the information needed to address assess-
ment questions or track gains in discourse 
abilities over time. A summary of metrics 
commonly used in published work on 
discourse analysis is given in Box 21–1.
Surface-level metrics (as listed in Box 
21–1) are those that are primarily based 
on linguistic aspects of communication, 
especially phonology, morphology, syn-
tax, and semantics. Type-token ratios 
may be calculated for semantic (lexical) 
as well as syntactic performance. A lexi-
cally based type-token ratio is calculated 
as the total number of unique words in 
a sample divided by the total number 
of words in the sample. A syntactically 
based type-token ratio is calculated as the 
total number of distinct syntactic struc-
tures produced divided by the number of 
sentences or T-units.
Indices of informativeness are based 
on the accuracy and relevance of informa-
tion conveyed. Nicholas and Brookshire’s 
(1993) correct information unit (CIU) 
analysis is a standardized rule-based scor-
ing system for indexing informativeness 
that has been studied extensively for 
people with aphasia and adults without 
neurological disorders. The CIU metric 
is derived by counting the number of 
words and content information units that 
are accurate, relevant, and informative in 
terms of the stimulus used for elicitation, 
then dividing the number of words by the 
number of CIUs.
Another way to index informative-
ness is by indexing propositions, or spe-
cific ideas conveyed within a sentence. 
For a given language sample, a proposi-
tional complexity index (PCI) may be cal-
culated. PCI is the number of propositions 
in the sample, divided by the number 
of T-units. PCI thus enables an index of 
semantic complexity that may not be cap-
tured through indices of syntactic com-
plexity (Coelho, Grela, Corso, Gamble, & 
Feinn, 2005).
A main event index was developed 
by Wright, Capilouto, Wagovich, Cran-
fill, and Davis (2005) to focus on an indi-
vidual’s ability to convey the relation-
ships and causal connections between 
ideas in narrative discourse. The number 
and accuracy of main events identified is 
especially relevant in storytelling/retell-
ing and picture description (Capilouto et 
al., 2006; Capilouto et al., 2005; Nicholas & 
Brookshire, 1995).
A story goodness index has been 
proposed to capture indices of the orga-
nizational structure of storytelling (story 
grammar) and story completeness (Lê et 
al., 2012; Mozeiko et al., 2011). Story gram-
mar is based on the proportion of T-units 
within a story narrative that contributes to 
conveying the story content. Story com-
pleteness is based on comparisons with 
the most common events and characters 
mentioned by people without any neu-
rological disorder who have retold sto-
ries based on a standard set of pictures. 
Measures of efficiency take into account 
that not only the amount and accuracy of 
discourse matter; the amount of informa-
tion conveyed per unit of time, task, or 
specified discourse sample length is also 
important (Yorkston & Beukelman, 1980). 
Measures of speaking rate are included in 
this category.
Metrics corresponding to language 
disorder symptoms or compensatory strat-
egies are also frequently tracked as a means 
of indexing communicative strengths and 
weaknesses as well as improvements or 
regression over time. For example, pauses, 
interjections, revisions, and repetitions 
may indicate word-finding problems or 
challenges related to organizational 

Discourse Sampling and Conversational Analysis   383
Summary of Discourse Analysis Measures
Surface-level linguistic metrics
• Number of words, mean number 
of words per sample
• Number of words after fillers, 
revisions, and false starts are 
removed
• Number of utterances
• Type-token ratio for semantic 
performance
• Type-token ratio for syntactic 
performance
• Syntactic, phrase, or utterance 
length (in words or morphemes)
• Completeness (of utterances, 
ideas, or syntactic structures)
• Number of open- and closed-
class words
• Number of nouns and verbs
Indices of informativeness
• Content units
• Propositions
• Correct information unit (CIU) 
and mean correct information 
units
• Number and accuracy of main 
ideas
• Number and accuracy of main 
events or other important 
elements mentioned during 
storytelling/retelling
• Main events indexed during 
narrative tasks
• Steps described when explaining 
a procedural task
• Story goodness (story grammar 
and story completeness)
Efficiency
• Syllables, words, clauses, 
phrases, or content information 
units per minute, per given 
communicative task, T-unit, 
or written or spoken discourse 
sample
Symptom- and compensatory 
strategy-related metrics
• Pauses, interjections, revisions, 
and repetitions
• Paraphasias, neologisms
• Relevance, numbers and 
proportions of on- and off-topic 
comments
• Correctness of pronoun use
• Number and type of literal and 
semantic paraphasias
• Number of ambiguous terms
• Number and type of 
circumlocutions
• Use of alternative strategies such 
as gesture, AAC, drawing, and 
writing
Indices of discourse comprehension
• Responses to yes/no questions 
about stated or implicit content 
and about main ideas
• Written and spoken questions 
regarding inferences
Measures of information exchange 
and pragmatics
• Eye contact
• Gaze direction
• Joint visual attention
• Turn-taking behaviors
• Codeswitching behaviors
• Topic initiation
• Topic maintenance patterns, 
frequency of on- and off-topic 
utterances
Box
21–1

384   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Conversational repair behaviors
• Response appropriateness
• Elaboration
• Requests for repetition, clarifica-
tion, additional information
• Use of compensatory strategies 
(e.g., drawing, gestures, 
pantomime, vocalizing, and 
intoning without words)
• Verbal and nonverbal cues
• Feedback that the listener had 
understood content conveyed
Cohesion analysis indices
• Number of cohesive ties, e.g.:
	 Personal pronouns (e.g., we, 
you, they)
	 Demonstrative pronouns  
(e.g., that, those, here, there)
	 Reiteration
	 Causal conjunctives (e.g., 
because, in order to)
	 Temporal conjunctives (e.g., 
yet, while, during)
	 Additive conjunctives (e.g., 
and, furthermore, likewise)
	 Ellipsis (leaving out 
information previously stated 
because it is assumed the 
listener knows it)
• Proportion of cohesive ties that 
are complete/incomplete or 
appropriate/erroneous
Coherence analysis
• Ratings of local and global 
relatedness of utterance or 
T-units
Speech act analysis
• Type and frequency of speech 
acts (e.g., greetings, requests 
for information, assertions, 
statements of protests)
• Adherence to social rules
• Strengths and weaknesses 
in sending and receiving 
information
demands (Schiller et al., 2007). Tracking 
such symptoms and strategies at the dis-
course level is vital when they are relevant 
to treatment goals. Tracking the relevance 
and appropriateness of comments is 
important for an individual working 
toward improved executive strategies 
during conversation. Indexing indepen-
dent and supported use of compensatory 
strategies to communicate content regard-
less of modality or linguistic correctness is 
important for people with a wide array of 
communication problems.
Means of indexing discourse compre-
hension in people with neurogenic cog-
nitive-linguistic disorders are addressed 
less frequently in the literature than those 
focused on discourse production. Writ-
ten and spoken discourse comprehension 
assessment is often focused on one of two 
areas: the ability to make inferences and 
the ability to understand main ideas. Infer-
encing in the context of discourse entails 
the ability to draw conclusions that are not 
explicitly stated by synthesizing informa-
tion across components of discourse con-
tent. Understanding of main ideas entails 
detecting what information is most salient 
and discerning critical aspects of what is 
said or written from details.
Indices of information exchange 
are those that pertain more to dyads or 
groups during interaction, not just to the 
individual with a communication disor-

Discourse Sampling and Conversational Analysis   385
der. Examples are use of eye contact and 
joint visual attention, turn-taking behav-
iors, conversational repair strategies, 
compensatory strategies, reminders and 
cues to use supported communication 
strategies, and feedback about communi-
cative effectiveness.
Discourse cohesion entails indi-
vidual and collective means of making 
connections across utterances, individu-
als, and topics in spoken or written com-
munication. Metrics for cohesion analysis 
include cohesive ties, that is, discourse 
markers indicative of a speaker’s or writ-
er’s ability to maintain a common theme 
or topic, weaving together content at var-
ied levels (e.g., phrases, sentences, para-
graphs, conversations, stories) (Cherney, 
1998). Examples are pronoun use, use of 
causal conjunctives (specifying a cause, 
reason, or result, e.g., otherwise, because), 
temporal conjunctives (referring to time, 
e.g., afterward, beforehand, then, simulta-
neously), additive conjunctives (introduc-
ing added information, e.g., furthermore, 
in addition, in contrast), ellipsis (leaving 
out information previously stated because 
it is assumed the listener knows it), and 
instances of reiterating content previously 
stated to help tie components of discourse 
together. These may be tracked in terms of 
frequency (i.e., the number used per unit 
of time or number of words) as well as in 
terms of correctness and appropriateness. 
Although challenges with cohesion in 
discourse may occur in language-normal 
adults and in people with any type of lan-
guage disorder, they have been especially 
noted in TBI survivors and people with 
dementia (Coelho et al., 1995; Coelho et al.,  
2002; Kurczek & Duff, 2011; Mentis & 
Prutting, 1987).
Discourse coherence refers to the 
continuity of meaning throughout conver-
sation or text. It may be local (referring to 
continuity across consecutive utterances) 
or global (referring to topic maintenance or 
interrelatedness across larger samples of  
discourse). It may be indexed via subjec-
tive ratings of how hard or easy it is to 
relate an utterance or T-unit to a topic 
(Kurczek & Duff, 2011).
Speech acts, too, discussed above as 
important aspects of discourse may be 
analyzed according to the apparent inten-
tion of the person communicating, what 
is expressed, what is understood by oth-
ers, and the social rules that pertain to a 
given communicative exchange. People 
with aphasia have been shown to have 
strengths in roles as senders and receiv-
ers during speech acts despite specific lin-
guistics deficits (Armstrong, 2001; Wilcox, 
Davis, & Leonard, 1978).
Speech acts may be largely influenced 
by the specific discourse genre or task 
being targeted for analysis. For example, 
it would be unlikely that a person engaged 
in a picture description task would engage 
in greeting or protest as part of the pic-
ture description process. For this reason, 
speech act analysis is most pertinent to 
spontaneous conversation. If specific 
types of speech acts are particularly rel-
evant to an individual and an important 
focus of treatment, then it is logical that 
those particular speech acts would be 
monitored in conversational analysis.
What Are Best Practices 
in Interpreting Discourse 
Analysis Results?
Valid and reliable coding takes a great 
deal of training and practice. Even then, 
changing contexts, content, and partners 

386   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
may make evaluations inconsistent. If dis-
course indices are to be used to document 
treatment outcomes, it is critical to obtain 
stable baselines prior to treatment (Cam-
eron, Wambaugh, & Mauszycki, 2010; 
Wright et al., 2005). Primary sources of 
intraindividual variability to be taken into 
account in discourse analysis are summa-
rized in Box 21–2.
When interpreting discourse analysis 
results, it is essential to keep in mind the 
great variability in discourse production 
and comprehension across individuals, 
too, whether or not they have a language 
disorder. A person’s general cognitive 
ability, vocabulary, education level, and 
general interest in and knowledge of top-
ics discussed are all important factors 
influencing discourse performance. Cul-
tural background also has a strong influ-
ence on discourse patterns, so it must be 
taken into account in any evaluation of 
effectiveness. One may not confidently 
draw discourse assessment conclusions 
without ongoing thorough evaluation, 
observation, and consultation with oth-
ers who have known the individual for a 
long time and can attest to which aspects 
of discourse performance appear to have 
changed compared to specific points in 
the past.
An essential element of best practice 
in discourse analysis is to apply assess-
ment findings to effective intervention 
planning. Discourse-based intervention 
may entail a combination of attention 
process training and memory treatment 
from sentence to discourse (oral or writ-
Primary Sources of Intraindividual Variability to Be 
Taken Into Account in Discourse Analysis
• Discourse genre
• Discourse modality (spoken, 
written, signed)
• Task and elicitation procedure
• Sampling method
• Sample length
• Specific discourse indices tracked 
and analyzed
• Task instructions
• Cues
• Topic difficulty 
• Topic familiarity
• Transcription procedures
• Abstractness/concreteness of 
content
• Degree of short-term and long-term 
recall implicated
• Availability and use of supports 
(e.g., gesture, AAC devices, 
drawing and writing during 
conversation)
• Physical environment
• Mood, motivation, interests, and 
other aspects of psychological 
states of participants
• Concomitant medical challenges 
of participants that may influence 
reliability (e.g., pain, glucose level, 
somnolescence)
• Skills, abilities, interpersonal 
familiarity, roles, and affective 
qualities of participants (all 
involved in a given discourse 
context)
• Expertise, prior training and 
practice, and biases of the person 
analyzing the sample
• Metrics used for analysis
Box
21–2

Discourse Sampling and Conversational Analysis   387
ten) contexts, practice with specific con-
versational strategies, and coaching with 
conversational partners (see Sections VI 
through VIII).
What Challenges Do Aphasiologists 
Face in Applying Discourse Analysis 
in Clinical Practice and Research?
Challenges in carrying out discourse anal-
ysis in the everyday work life of the SLP 
include issues of time, training, and men-
torship; equipment and software; commu-
nication and perceived relevance; replica-
bility; and variability in the evidence base. 
Let’s consider these briefly.
Time
Discourse analysis is time- and labor-
intensive. In addition to transcribing 
and coding conversational samples, the 
aphasiologist must also spend time ana-
lyzing findings and then, ideally, verify-
ing the validity and reliability of findings 
through triangulation (repeated evalua-
tion across varied contexts and discourse 
genres) and verification (separate evalua-
tion by trained independent evaluators). 
Given productivity demands and busy 
schedules in most clinical and research 
environments, engaging in extensive dis-
course analysis on a regular basis is often 
not an option.
Training and Mentorship
There are relatively few clinicians and 
researchers who are sophisticated in dis-
course analysis. This makes it such that 
even relatively fewer student clinicians 
and researchers are mentored in discourse-
analytic approaches.
Equipment and Software
Discourse analysis is relatively low-tech 
compared to many clinical and research 
methods. Still, audio and video recording 
equipment, computers, and software for 
transcription analysis and reporting are 
important tools to have in place.
Clear Communication and 
Perceived Relevance
Few medical and rehabilitation profes-
sionals other than SLPs, let alone people 
with communication disorders and their 
families, have training about detailed 
aspects of discourse. It can be difficult to 
describe aspects of discourse in ways that 
are meaningful and relevant to the people 
for whom our results are ideally most 
pertinent.
Replicability
Given that naturalistic settings entail 
myriad uncontrolled contextual aspects, 
and given the numerous intraindividual 
variables, as summarized in Box 21–2, the 
same findings may not be easily repli-
cated across sessions or contexts.
Variability in the Evidence Base
Discourse analysis includes a mixture 
of quantitative and qualitative methods 
and measures. Analysis tends to be based 

388   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
less on specific a priori hypotheses about 
the nature of communicative strengths 
and weaknesses than on observation of 
and reflection on patterns of communi-
cative behaviors observed. It is difficult 
to draw firm conclusions based across 
diverse studies employing vastly different 
approaches, methods, and measures.
How May Aphasiologists 
Confront Challenges in Applying 
Discourse Analysis in Clinical 
Practice and Research?
Although not all of the challenges noted 
above are easily solvable, clinicians may 
be proactive in constructively address-
ing them. Consider, for example, the seri-
ous issue of time constraints discussed in 
Chapter 14. Despite the fact that extensive 
use of discourse analysis is not feasible in 
most of today’s clinical environments, 
having at least some experience and men-
torship in this vital area is important. We 
may not always have time to transcribe, 
code, and analyze in detail communica-
tive interactions with the people we serve. 
Still, learning to carry out such analyses 
may help to sharpen an aphasiologist’s 
observational skills and make him or her 
more aware of the vast array of param-
eters of language use that affect the con-
textual language use of a person with a 
language disorder and those who com-
municate with that person. This, in turn, 
may help to stimulate inclusion or related 
metrics of ongoing naturalistic assess-
ments and observations. Aphasiologists 
in training may seek special courses or 
independent study options to gain such 
experience, and practicing professionals 
may take advantage of continuing educa-
tion opportunities to do so.
Consider, too, how you might address 
concerns about the relevance of discourse 
analysis processes and results. Conveying 
results to people with cognitive-linguistic  
disorders and the people who care about 
them requires thoughtful attention to 
avoiding jargon and explaining findings 
in the most relevant ways possible. Show-
ing clips of recorded conversational sam-
ples to the people being assessed is often 
helpful in terms of making clear what dis-
course-level challenges seem to be most 
problematic for a person or dyad and 
what strategies seem to be most effective 
in terms of enhancing discourse. Contrast-
ing earlier videos with more recent sam-
ples may also be helpful for conveying 
the degree of improvement an individual, 
dyad, or group has made in the course of 
communication intervention.
In any case, knowledge of discourse 
collection and analysis methods is impor-
tant for research aphasiologists whose 
work is grounded in real-world language 
use. Those who are interested in engaging 
in extensive discourse analysis are encour-
aged to consult texts dedicated to the topic 
(e.g., Ball, 1992; Bloom, Obler, DeSanti, & 
Ehrlich, 1994; Cherney, Coelho, & Shad-
den, 1998; Damico & Simmons-Mackie, 
2003; Lyon, 1999; Simmons-Mackie & 
Damico, 1999, 2003).
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 List and describe varied discourse 
genres. What are some specific exam-
ples of each?
	 3.	 In what specific ways is discourse 
analysis important in clinical practice?

Discourse Sampling and Conversational Analysis   389
	 4.	 In what specific ways is discourse 
analysis important in clinical research?
	 5.	 Imagine that you are an SLP supervis-
ing SLP students in a clinical practi-
cum in a rehabilitation setting.
a.	 Outline the points you would 
make to them regarding the 
importance of learning to engage 
in thorough discourse analyses.
b.	 List the points that you would 
make in recognizing challenges of 
engaging in discourse analysis in 
everyday clinical environments.
c.	 Describe specific means of 
addressing the challenges you 
mentioned in Item 5b.
	 6.	 Review some of the discourse assess-
ment tools mentioned in this chapter. 
Describe their strengths and weak-
nesses in terms of clinical relevance 
and practicality of use.
	 7.	 Describe key ways in which discourse 
production may vary based on means 
of elicitation, context, degree of con-
versational support, memory load, 
and roles of conversational partners.
	 8.	 Describe key ways in which discourse 
comprehension may vary based on 
tasks, modality of presentation, means 
of assessment, degree of conversational 
support, memory load, and roles of 
conversational partners.
	 9.	 Investigate some of the online pro-
grams for transcribing and analyzing 
discourse samples that are listed in 
Table 21–1.
a.	 Which ones seem user-friendly 
for clinicians?
b.	 What would be your personal  
criteria for selecting such a 
program for clinical or clinical 
research use?
10.	 Peruse the AphasiaBank, TBIBank, 
and DementiaBank resources (talk-
bank.org). How might you, as a clini-
cian, contribute to and take advantage 
of these resources?
11.	 Consider the diverse types of dis-
course analysis measures listed in Box 
21–1. What factors would determine 
your selection of specific measures to 
track for a given individual or dyad?
12.	 Describe three different hypothetical 
clinical scenarios in which indexing 
specific aspects of discourse would 
provide you with important infor-
mation for treatment planning and 
assessment of treatment progress and 
outcomes.
13.	 In what ways might each of the sources 
of variability in Box 21–2 influence 
discourse analysis results?
14.	 How might you defend or rational-
ize the need to engage in discourse 
analysis despite the time constraints 
in most clinical practice settings?
15.	 Even if you are not able to carry out 
extensive discourse analysis in your 
everyday clinical practice, how might 
your experience with and knowledge 
about discourse analysis enrich your 
clinical expertise?
See the companion website for additional 
learning and teaching materials.


391
Chapter
22
Documenting Assessment Results 
and Considering Prognosis
Sharing assessment results in writing and 
through interpersonal interactions is a fun-
damental component of clinical practice 
with people who have neurogenic com-
munication disorders. The way we con-
vey assessment findings is important for 
building rapport with and empowering 
the people we serve, helping them under-
stand the nature of their challenges, and 
helping them consider the relevance of 
our findings to their daily lives and future 
plans. Documenting assessment results is 
also central to information sharing with 
other professionals and for ensuring that 
services meet criteria for reimbursement 
by third-party payors. In this chapter, 
we review strategies for effectively shar-
ing and documenting assessment results. 
Given that consideration of prognosis is 
essentially linked with assessment, we 
also consider means of making and con-
veying prognostic judgments. A listing 
of common abbreviations used in clinical 
documentation is provided.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What are best practices in sharing 
assessment results with adults who 
have acquired cognitive-linguistic 
disorders and the people who care 
about them?
	 2.	 How do we best make judgments 
about prognosis?
	 3.	 What are best practices for reporting 
assessment results in writing?
	 4.	 What information is typically in- 
cluded in assessment reports?
	 5.	 What abbreviations are commonly 
used in clinical reporting?
What Are Best Practices in Sharing 
Assessment Results With Adults 
Who Have Acquired Cognitive-
Linguistic Disorders and the 
People Who Care About Them?
Whether in writing or in person, there are 
important strategies for sharing assess-
ment results with people who have 
acquired neurogenic language disorders. 
Consider how you will do each of the fol-
lowing in information-sharing meetings:
• Adjust the expression of content 
to the communication needs of the 
individual and family member, 
friends, and caregivers.

392   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Include the person with a 
communication disorder as a 
central and active member of the 
process.
• Support communication through 
images, written cues, use of simple 
terms and phrases, and gestures.
• Have brain images and models 
on hand; they can be helpful for 
showing affected structures and 
associated functions.
• Acknowledge limitations of 
findings. Keep in mind that there 
are always potentially confounding 
factors and reliability challenges.
• If you have used assessment tools 
and methods that largely focus on 
impairments, be especially careful 
about making interpretations 
regarding life participation.
• Focus on the relevance of results 
to life-affecting aspects of 
communication.
• If your assessments have been 
carried out in clinical contexts, 
be careful about the limitations 
for generalizing what you have 
observed to naturalistic everyday 
contexts.
• Focus on strengths while remaining 
realistic about challenges.
• Anticipate questions that the people 
you are serving may have.
• Avoid discussing initial assessment 
results with individuals or 
family members by telephone; 
in-person meetings allow for better 
inclusiveness of the primary person 
being discussed and allow better 
communication supports for all.
• Be careful about information 
overload. Imagine that people with 
neurogenic disorders and caregivers 
may be exhausted, stressed, and 
fearful, and may feel bombarded 
with too much information at once.
Even when we attend to all of these 
practices, it is usually not sufficient to 
explain assessment results and their 
implications just once. Regardless of 
whether people with neurogenic commu-
nication disorders and their family mem-
bers appear to understand your expla-
nations, don’t assume that they do. And 
even if they do understand, don’t assume 
they will retain what you have discussed. 
This point is nicely captured by Thomas 
G. Broussard (2015), a person with apha-
sia, in his book Stroke Diary: A Primer for 
Aphasia Therapy (Box 22–1).
How Do We Best Make 
Judgments About Prognosis?
In Chapter 7, we noted that there are 
many factors that determine the pattern of 
recovery expected for a given individual 
who has had a stroke or brain injury and 
the progression of decline expected for 
a person with a neurodegenerative con-
dition. It is important to review each of 
those in considering the rate and extent 
of recovery or decline that is likely. Before 
making any statements about a person’s 
prognosis, we must be extremely thought-
ful. We must be honest and at the same 
time sensitive and careful. Be especially 
careful not to:
• Overstate gravely negative or 
cheerfully positive predictions
• Oversimplify the complex interaction 
of factors that influence recovery
• Be overly confident about what you 
know
In considering prognosis, we must 
also consider: prognosis for what? What 
aspect of recovery? For improved lan-
guage in terms of use of grammar? word-

Documenting Assessment Results and Considering Prognosis   393
finding? social engagement? lifelong 
coping? use of compensatory strategies? 
return to work? return to school? Some-
one with a bleak prognosis with respect 
to one such domain may have an excel-
lent prognosis with respect to another. 
Keep in mind, too, that many prognos-
tic factors may be manipulated through 
behavioral intervention, counseling, 
medication, nutrition, family support, 
enhanced awareness of deficits, relief of 
depression, and positive coping skills. 
Like assessment in general, prognostic 
considerations are ongoing throughout 
intervention.
What Are Best Practices 
for Reporting Assessment 
Results in Writing?
The format for reporting assessment 
results is determined largely by the clini-
cal context in which we work. In some 
agencies, assessment results are encapsu-
lated in brief boxes within paper or online 
forms, whereas others allow for more 
open-ended summaries. Often the official 
assessment (or “diagnostic”) report for-
matting is made to align with documen-
tation requirements for reimbursement. 
Key strategies for making SLP services 
reimbursable are detailed in Chapter 14.
Many clinicians keep separate files 
with greater amounts of detail that can 
be included on official forms. Some-
times more detailed notes are kept in an 
individual’s file in a centralized location 
within a given facility. SLPs involved in 
documentation for medicolegal cases 
must address additional documentation 
requirements in line with their contracted 
responsibilities.
Written content should be free of 
ageist and stereotypes and heterosexist 
biases (see Chapters 6, 18, and 19) and 
adhere to important principles for writing 
about people with disabilities and health 
problems (see Chapter 3). In many cases, 
assessment reports are given to a patient 
or caregivers, either by the clinician or 
A Stroke Survivor’s Account of 
Receiving Assessment Results
That morning before I left the Neuro ICU room for my new 
room, a speech pathologist came by. She talked to me about 
the possibility of having a problem with my language. That is 
to say, she explained things to me that I still didn’t understand 
. . . I certainly didn’t understand my deficits at the time. It was 
not until I received the medical records . . . (two and a half 
years later) that I discovered the conversation between us. Of 
course, it was hardly a conversation. She talked and I imagine 
I blabbered.
The speech-language pathologist related that I appeared 
to be aware of all those things. If that was the case, I was trying 
to focus; I was trying to express myself; I was trying to under-
stand. But if I knew of my deficits in the moment, I certainly 
couldn’t remember them later. (Broussard, 2015, p. 3)
Box
22–1

394   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
through the service-providing agency. 
Imagine that any written report you send 
by mail may be opened by the person you 
have assessed or a caregiver with no one 
else around to help interpret or explain it. 
Is there content that may be disturbing, 
confusing, or discouraging?
An example of what might be consid-
ered disturbing is characterization of the 
individual that he or she does not like. 
Subjective terms such as “cooperative” and 
“pleasant” may be intended to portray a 
person in a positive light but can be inter-
preted negatively: “Well of course!” she 
might say, “Why would I not be coopera-
tive?” Another example of what might be 
disturbing is diagnostic labeling about def-
icits with which an individual might not 
agree. A person with early signs of demen-
tia may not be ready or willing to see the 
actual label as applied to her. A person in 
denial of certain deficits may be offended 
by the suggestion of such deficits.
An example of what might be consid-
ered confusing is the use of abbreviations 
and jargon that the reader doesn’t under-
stand or the mention of diagnostic labels 
that no one has previously mentioned 
in person. An example of what might be 
discouraging is a focus on deficits with-
out balanced information about strengths 
or a clear statement supporting hope for 
improvement. A tough challenge related to 
documentation in the clinical context is to 
provide empowering information and sup-
port to clients and their families while high-
lighting deficits that make clear the need 
for skilled services to third-party payors.
The excellent clinician is strategic 
about these issues. He or she:
• Anticipates how written reports 
of any type will be interpreted 
by an individual with language 
challenges and the people who care 
about them
• Writes and edits reports with 
sensitivity about perceptions by 
varied readers
• Is sensitive to the perspectives of 
people with language disorders and 
the people who care about them in 
terms of what gets documented
• Proactively meets with the person 
assessed — and anyone that person 
chooses to have included — to 
review report content
• Uses supportive communication 
strategies to ensure comprehension 
and address potential confusion 
or concerns, and provides 
compassionate education and 
counseling about the diagnostic 
labels and deficits noted
No matter how excellent your docu-
mentation, unless it is read by others, it 
will not be helpful. Make sure it is con-
cise, clear, and relevant and that it gets 
shared with others who will make use of 
the information you provide. One of the 
intended audiences often left out of the 
loop includes clinicians who will be work-
ing with the same individual in the future 
(King, 2013a). Every time a person is 
discharged, be sure that copies of assess-
ment and treatment progress reports are 
sent along with him to be shared with 
future clinicians. With appropriate per-
missions in place and in adherence with 
related policies, you may also send copies 
of reports directly to clinicians that you 
know will be working with an individual 
you are discharging.
What Information Is Typically 
Included in Assessment Reports?
The amount of detail to be included in an 
assessment report depends upon the doc-

Documenting Assessment Results and Considering Prognosis   395
umentation policies and forms required in 
a given context. Typically, an assessment 
report includes the items described here.
• A brief description of the 
individual’s background, including 
the reason he or she was referred 
to you, current communication-
related diagnoses and other related 
diagnoses, living and social context, 
vocation, education, and age
• A brief summary of communicative 
strengths and weaknesses based 
on a synthesis of observation, case 
history, interviews, and formal 
and informal screening and testing 
results. In some contexts, reference 
to a published, standardized 
test is required. Contextualizing 
assessment results in light of the 
real-life communication impacts of 
the impairments is vital.
• A brief summary of recommenda-
tions. If treatment is recommended, 
suggest long- and short-term goals 
(see Chapter 23) that are consistent 
with the individual’s own wants 
and needs. Also include a state-
ment about how evidence-based 
intervention will likely lead to the 
person’s improved independence, 
medical management, socialization, 
and quality of life.
Many agencies require specific cod-
ing schemes for documenting clinical 
information, including diagnostic codes 
and codes that represent various types 
of services (e.g., assessment or treatment 
sessions). The International Classifica-
tion of Diseases–Clinical Modification, 
10th Revision (ICD-10-CM) is a system 
of classification and coding for diseases, 
conditions, and symptoms. In the United 
States, ICD-10 codes are required on most 
documents used in justifying, document-
ing, and billing for health-related services 
that are supported through government 
or private health insurance.
With productivity requirements as 
they are in so many health care contexts, 
most SLPs have very little time in their 
workday for documentation. In many 
cases, time spent on documentation is 
not billable time, or if it is, only a small 
amount of billable time can be allocated to 
documentation. At the same time, excel-
lent documentation is essential for reim-
bursement. No matter how justifiable and 
high quality our services, if we do not pro-
vide the type and quality of documenta-
tion required for reimbursement, a third-
party payor is unlikely to pay.
What Abbreviations Are Commonly 
Used in Clinical Reporting?
Just as documentation and coding require-
ments vary by agency, region, and coun-
try, so do abbreviations used for clinical 
reporting. Common abbreviations used 
in work with people who have acquired 
neurogenic communication disorders are 
summarized in Table 22–1. They are used 
throughout intervention, including in 
progress and discharge notes. Note that 
some employers request or require that 
certain abbreviations be used and that 
others be avoided. Some abbreviations 
are considered to be frequently misin-
terpreted and thus have increased like-
lihood of leading to potentially serious 
communication errors (see Institute of 
Safe Medicine Practices, 2013, for a list). 
In cases where consequences of misinter-
pretation could be serious, or when the 
intended readers of our notes and reports 
would not be familiar with abbreviations, 
it is best to use actual words instead of 
abbreviations.

396
Table 22–1. Common Abbreviations Used in Rehabilitation Documentation
@
At; each
f
Female; female
m
Male; male
-
Negative; no; none; deficiency; subtract; not ordered
+
Positive; added; ordered
<
Smaller than; less than; caused by
=
Equal; equal to
≠
Not equal; not equal to
>
Larger than; greater than; causes
↑
Above; elevated; enlarged; improved
∅
Null, zero
↓
Below; decreased; falling; depressed
A
Assessment (in problem-oriented medical record)
a
Before
≥
A
Assist, assistance
AC
Auditory comprehension
ADD
Attention deficit disorder (ADHD now typically preferred)
ADHD
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
ADL
Activities of daily living
AER
Auditory evoked response
A fib
Atrial fibrillation
AIDS
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome
ALS
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
AMA
Against medical advice
amb
Ambulatory, ambulate, ambulation
angio
Angiogram
ant
Anterior
ax
Assessment
A & O
Alert and oriented
AOD
Arterial occlusive disease
A/P
Assessment/plan
AP
Anterior-posterior
A-P
Anterior-posterior
apt
Appointment
ASAP
As soon as possible

397
ASCVD
Arteriosclerotic cardiovascular disease
ASHD
Atherosclerotic heart disease
≥
B 
Bilateral
BG
Blood glucose
bid
Twice daily (bis in die)
bil
Bilateral
biw
Twice weekly
bp
Blood pressure
buc
Buccal
Bx
Biopsy
c
With (cum)
CA
Carcinoma
Ca
Calcium
CABG
Coronary artery bypass graft
CAD
Coronary artery disease
CAT
Computerized axial tomography
CC
Chief complaint
cc
Cubic centimeter
CCU
Coronary care unit
cea
Carotid endarterectomy
CGA
Contact guard assist
CHD
Congenital heart disease; coronary heart disease
CHF
Congestive heart failure
CHI
Closed head injury
chol
Cholesterol
CI
Cardiac index
cm
Centimeters
CNS
Central nervous system; clinical nurse specialist
CO
Carbon monoxide
c/o
Complains of
CO2
Carbon dioxide
cont.
Continue
COPD
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
COTA
Certified occupational therapy assistant
Table 22–1.  continued
continues

398
CSF
Cerebrospinal fluid
CT
Computerized tomography
CV
Color vision
CVA
Cerebrovascular accident
CVD
Cardiovascular disease
CVI
Cerebrovascular incident
CX
Cancellation, cancel
CXR
Chest X-ray
D/C
Discharge, discontinue
≥
D
Dependent
D
Dependent
d
Day
Dep
Dependent
diff
Differential
DM
Diabetes mellitus
DME
Durable medical equipment
DNI
Do not intubate
DNR
Do not resuscitate
DNT
Did not test
DOB
Date of birth
DOC
Doctor on call
DOI
Date of injury
DRG
Diagnosis/diagnostic related group
DVT
Deep vein thrombosis/deep venous thrombosis
DZ, Ds
Disease
Dx
Diagnosis
EBRT
External beam radiation therapy
ECA
External carotid artery
ECG, EKG
Electrocardiogram
ECHO
Echocardiogram
EEG
Electroencephalogram
EMG
Electromyogram
EMS
Emergency medical services
EMT
Emergency medical technician
ENT
Ear, nose, throat
Table 22–1.  continued

399
E/O
Expected outcome
Equip
Equipment
ER
Emergency room
eval
Evaluation
Ex
Exercise
Exam
Examination
exp
Expired
FBS
Fasting blood sugar
FHx
Family history
freq
Frequency
FROM
Full range of motion
F/U
Follow-up
GCS
Glasgow Coma Scale
Geri
Geriatrics
gluc
Glucose
gm
Gram
GSW
Gunshot wound
G-tube
Gastrostomy tube
GTT
Glucose tolerance test
HA
Headache
h/a
Headache
HASHD
Hypertensive arteriosclerotic heart disease
HBO
Hyperbaric oxygen
HEENT
Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat
HGB/Hgb
Hemoglobin
HHD
Hypertensive heart disease
HIV
Human immunodeficiency virus
HMO
Health maintenance organization
h/o
History of
H&P
History and physical
HPI
History of present illness
hr
Hours, hour
HSV
Herpes simplex virus
HTN
Hypertension
Table 22–1.  continued
continues

400
HVD
Hypertension vascular disease
Hx
History
I&O
In and out/input and output/intake and output
ICH
Intracranial hemorrhage
ICP
Intracranial pressure
ICU
Intensive care unit
ID
Infectious disease
IDD
Insulin-dependent diabetes
IDDM
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
inf
Inferior
inj
Injection
int
Internal
ip
Inpatient
IV
Intravenous
IVUS
Intravascular ultrasound
JVD
Jugular venous distention
JVP
Jugular venous pressure
kg
Kilogram
≥
L
Left
L
Left
L&R
Left and right
lab
Laboratory
lat
Lateral
LOC
Loss of consciousness
LP
Lumbar puncture
L-Spine
Lumbar spine
LTG
Long-term goal
lytes
Electrolytes
M
Male
MAC
Monitored anesthesia care
MAR
Medication administration record
max
Maximum, maximal
mcg
Microgram
MD
Doctor of medicine
ME
Medical examiner
Table 22–1.  continued

401
meds
Medications
mes
Mesial
mg
Milligram
MI
Myocardial infarction
Min A
Minimum assist
misc
Miscellaneous
ml
Milliliter
mm
Millimeters
mod
Moderate
Mod A
Moderate assist
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
MR Scan
Magnetic resonance scan
MRSA
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
MSE
Mental status examination
NA
Not available; not applicable
NAD
No apparent (acute) distress
Narc
Narcotic
NC
Noncontributory
NCV
Nerve conduction velocity
Neg
Negative
Neuro
Neurology
Ng
Nanogram
NG
Nasogastric
NG tube
Nasogastric tube
NIDDM
Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
NKDA
No known drug allergies
noc
Nocte (at night)
NOS
Not otherwise specified
n.p.o.
Nothing by mouth (nil per os)
NPO
Nothing by mouth (nil per os)
NT
Not tested
O
Oral
occ
Occupational
OCD
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Table 22–1.  continued
continues

402
o.p.
Outpatient department, osteoporosis
OR
Operating room
OSA
Obstructive sleep apnea
OT
Occupational therapy
OTC
Over the counter
OU
Both eyes
p
After, following
PACU
Postanesthesia care unit
PCA
Patient-controlled analgesia
PCP
Primary care physician
PE
Physical examination
PEG
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
PMH
Past medical history
PM & R
Physical medicine and rehabilitation
p.o.
By mouth
POD
Postoperative day (#)
pos
Positive
p.r.n
As needed (pro re nata)
pt
Patient
PT
Physical therapy/physical therapist
PTSD
Posttraumatic stress disorder
q
Each, every (quaque)
Q
Each, every (quaque)
qad
Every other day (quoquealternis die)
qam
Every morning
qh
Every hour (quaque hora)
q2h
Every 2 hours
q.d.
Every day (quaque die)
R
Right
≥
R
Right
reg
Regular
rehab
Rehabilitation
RN
Registered nurse
R/O
Rule out
ROM
Range of motion/rupture of membranes
ROS
Review of systems
Table 22–1.  continued

403
rpt
Repeat; report
RT
Radiation therapy
RTW
Return to work
Rx
Prescription; treatment
S/P
Status post
s
Without (sine)
sec
Seconds
SNF
Skilled nursing facility
SOAP
Subjective, objective, assessment, plans
SSEPs
Somatosensory evoked potential
SSI
Sliding scale insulin
SSRI
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor
STAT
Immediately
STG
Short-term goal
subcu/subq
Subcutaneous; subcutaneously
sup
Superior
TBI
Traumatic brain injury
TIA
Transient ischemic attack
tid
Three times a day (ter in die)
T-O
Temperature, oral
Tx
Treatment, therapy
UTI
Urinary tract infection
vs
Versus
VTE
Venous thromboembolism
w/
With
W/C
Wheelchair
WC
Wheelchair
WFL
Within functional limits
WNL
Within normal limits
wt
Weight
w/u
Workup
x
Times
YO
Years old
y.o.
Years old
yr
Year
Table 22–1.  continued

404   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 With two colleagues, practice sharing 
assessment information through role-
play in each of the scenarios below. 
Take turns in playing three roles: per-
son with a communication disorder, 
caregiver or partner of that person, 
and clinician. Clinicians, for each sce-
nario, convey information about the 
condition and its severity, the limi-
tations of your assessment findings, 
your best guess at prognosis, and 
limitations to guessing about progno-
sis. Others, ask questions and respond 
to the clinician in ways you think 
would be likely in such scenarios.
a.	 The clinician conveys that the 
person has global aphasia due to 
a stroke that occurred 5 days ago.
b.	 The clinician conveys that the 
person has a mild posterior form 
of aphasia due to a stroke that 
occurred 1 year ago.
c.	 The clinician confirms that 
findings are consistent with a 
diagnosis of cognitive-linguistic 
deficits due to MCI.
d.	 The clinician summarizes findings 
suggesting that the person has 
PPA.
	 	 Be sure to practice suggestions for 
information sharing and making 
prognostic statements given in your 
readings.
	 3.	 Describe important strategies for 
using in an assessment information-
sharing session to empower a person 
with a language disorder and focus 
on strengths while remaining realistic 
about challenges.
	 4.	 Describe how the contents of a writ-
ten assessment report to be sent to an 
insurance company as part of a billing 
procedure may differ from a written 
report shared with the family.
	 5.	 Review the abbreviations in Table 22–1.  
How might each be relevant to your 
own reading and writing of docu-
ments in medical and rehabilitation 
settings?
More materials to foster teaching and 
learning on this chapter’s content may be 
found on the companion website.

Section VI
Theories and Best Practices 
in Intervention

406   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
This section addresses best practices and 
theories of intervention for adults with 
acquired cognitive-linguistic disorders. In 
Chapter 23, we focus on what we mean by 
“best practices,” what we need to know 
about them, and how to find informa-
tion about the evidence base in our field 
to support our work as clinicians. You are 
encouraged to reflect on how you will 
implement evidence-based practice in 
your own professional work. In Chapter 
24, we consider the theories that support 
the wide range of treatment methods (and 
components of those methods) used in 
clinical practice serving people with cog-
nitive-linguistic challenges. This content 
serves as an important foundation for the 
final two sections of the book regarding 
treatment methods.

407
Chapter
23
Best Practices in Intervention
The excellent clinician is a dedicated vehi-
cle for fostering brain changes and help-
ing people compensate for and cope with 
chronic challenges. As we discussed in 
the context of best practices in assessment 
(Chapter 17), honing in on the people with 
whom we are in an empowering, affirm-
ing clinical role is paramount in serving as 
that vehicle. So is grounding our work in 
evidence-based practice. In this chapter, 
we consider wisdom about intervention 
best practices offered by clinical aphasiol-
ogists over many decades. We also review 
means of determining levels of evidence 
for methods of intervention.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What are the best practices in the 
treatment of neurogenic language 
disorders?
	 2.	 What does the excellent clinical apha-
siologist know about evidence-based 
practice?
	 3.	 Where can we find pertinent infor-
mation to support evidence-based 
practice?
	 4.	 How does the excellent clinician apply 
evidence-based practice?
What Are the Best Practices in 
the Treatment of Neurogenic 
Language Disorders?
Below is a list of best practices for engag-
ing in clinical excellence in treatment of 
neurogenic language disorders. All of the 
best practices recommended for assess-
ment in Chapter 17 also apply to treat-
ment, although some noted here have a 
special nature that is important to con-
sider in the treatment context. Of course, 
there are additional best practices that are 
particular to treatment itself.
Embrace Communication 
as a Human Right
The ability to communicate is a funda-
mental human right. Advocate vigorously 
for the people you serve. Be sure to review 
the strategies for advocacy to boost access 

408   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
to services and supports for people with 
neurogenic communication disorders in 
Chapter 14.
Recognize Assessment as an 
Ongoing Intervention Process
We noted in Chapter 17 that, although 
we might be expected to document that 
we are engaged in a formal assessment 
session prior to initiating treatment, we 
must continue to ask and answer ques-
tions about a particular person’s commu-
nication abilities throughout the entire 
time that he or she is seen for professional 
services. Every treatment session entails 
assessment of some type. For example, 
how much has been retained from one 
clinical interaction to the next? Is there 
carryover of progress from one area to 
another? How is he or she progressing 
toward his or her goals? We constantly 
learn new information about a person’s 
life context that might influence our goals, 
the content and location of our sessions, 
and who might be included in any of our 
interactions.
Monitoring of progress through-
out intervention fits into the single-case 
hypothesis-testing scheme akin to the 
assessment-focused research process 
illustrated in Chapter 17. With an indi-
vidual person, we may apply a specific 
approach for which there is empirical 
support detailed in the literature based on 
individual cases or groups. Then, as we 
assess its effects with a particular individ-
ual, we may continuously tweak the pro-
cess to best suit that individual’s needs 
(Turkstra, 2010). Ylvisaker (e.g., in Ylvi-
saker, Shaughnessy, & Greathouse, 2002) 
referred to this as patient-specific hypothesis 
testing and case-based decision making.
Be Person Centered
Person-centered care is reflected in our 
demonstrating that the individuals we 
serve are the core of our purpose as clini-
cal professionals (DiLollo & Favreau, 
2010; Kitwood, 1997; Kitwood & Bredin, 
1994; Leach et al., 2010; Lewin, Skea, 
Entwistle, Zwarenstein, & Dick, 2001; 
Peri, Kerse, & Halliwell, 2004; Worrall, 
2006). At the heart of person-centered 
care is the direct inclusion of the indi-
vidual with a communication disorder in 
decisions about all aspects of assessment, 
treatment planning, and decisions about 
intervention alternatives and follow-up 
after direct intervention (Hinckley, Boyle, 
Lombard, & Bartels-Tobin, 2014; Lund, 
Tamm, & Branholm, 2001). This may seem 
obvious when considered in the abstract. 
However, in our everyday busy clinical 
and research environments, we have con-
stant time and fiscal pressures. We have 
many demands that do not involve direct 
contact with the people we serve. Thus, 
the goal of person-centered care can easily 
be undermined (Rohde, Townley-O’Neill, 
Trendall, Worrall, & Cornwell, 2012). No 
matter how stressed we may be, who is 
observing or not observing us, how much 
confidence we may lack . . . when we are 
in gear as clinicians, we ideally focus pri-
marily on those we serve and not on our-
selves or our own performance.
Include Family Members, Caregivers, 
and Others Whose Roles Are Relevant
Communication is not typically an activity 
that we carry out alone. It relies on inter-
action with and engagement of others. 
Achieving communicative success with a 
person who has a communication disor-

Best Practices in Intervention   409
der depends not only on the abilities and 
strategies of the person with the disorder 
but also on the abilities and strategies of 
the people with whom she communicates.
Include caregivers and significant 
others to enhance and expand the net-
work of supportive people in a person’s 
environment to continue recovery and 
ensure maximal generalization of prog-
ress to everyday use in naturalistic envi-
ronments. Authors of several studies have 
demonstrated that training of partners 
in the use of supportive communication 
strategies improves short- and long-
term treatment outcomes (see Simmons-
Mackie, Raymer, Armstrong, Holland, & 
Cherney, 2010). We explore this notion 
further in Chapter 24.
Have a Clear Sense of 
Purpose and Goals
A key tenet of Covey’s (2013) strategies 
for “highly effective people” is to begin 
with the end in mind. It is unlikely that we 
will reach a goal if we don’t know what 
the goal is, let alone how to get there. As 
noted above and throughout this book, 
our ultimate goal is to help people with 
neurogenic language disorders foster the 
most successful and fulfilling lives possi-
ble. The way toward that goal is shaped by 
the people we serve — their strengths and 
weaknesses, their support systems, and 
their own sense of what is “successful” 
and what is “fulfilling.” As mentioned in 
our discussion of assessment best prac-
tices, the excellent clinician knows what 
he or she is doing with a person and why 
at any given time. He or she begins with 
the end in mind. If we don’t know our cli-
ents’ own personal goals — what defines 
the “end” for them — then we cannot 
possibly have the end in mind. At least 
not the right end. Kagan and Simmons-
Mackie (2007) eloquently declare that the 
concept of beginning with the end in mind 
is central to outcomes-focused treatment 
planning.
Unfortunately, stories of unprepared 
SLPs demonstrating their ignorance of 
the literature on treatment methods are 
not uncommon. For some, it seems that 
completing photocopied workbook sheets 
from a book of language exercises or hav-
ing a person name objects depicted on a 
stock set of cards constitutes a treatment 
approach. Practices without sound theo-
retical foundations and evidence of effec-
tiveness are unethical and unworthy of 
the skills and abilities of a qualified SLP.
Directly tied to having a clear pur-
pose and goals is having a strong basis 
supporting the methods we use and the 
activities in which we engage in through-
out intervention. As we discuss through-
out this book, the excellent clinician typi-
cally does not champion one theoretical 
framework at the cost of recognizing the 
validity or utility of others. He or she 
knows about multiple approaches and 
frameworks, integrates multiple theories, 
evaluates critically the results of pub-
lished research results in light of what 
is most relevant to specific people with 
language disorders, and remains open to 
modifying theoretical perspectives based 
on new learning.
Engage Communication Partners 
Outside of the Client’s Immediate 
Circle of Friends and Family
In cases where there are not sufficient 
numbers of truly supportive people, find 
ways to enlist volunteers who may be 

410   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
helpful. Members of community service 
organizations, students in clinical or pre-
clinical academic programs, and retired 
people can become wonderful commu-
nication partners to assist in supporting 
social communication in general and  
carryover of specific communication goals 
in particular.
Embrace Cultural and 
Linguistic Differences
Treatment content and goals must take 
into account each individual’s unique 
background. This is essential to our focus 
on the person, on “functional” communi-
cation, and on life participation.
Encourage Self-Coaching
Ylvisaker, well known for person-centered 
approaches that promote emotional self-
regulation in TBI survivors, preferred 
the metaphor of “self-coaching” to self-
regulation to enhance the relevance of 
the notion to clients. Most of us would 
probably rather be coached than regulated 
(Ylvisaker, 2006). Let’s keep this in mind 
as we work with people who have execu-
tive function problems, lack of awareness 
of deficits, and needs for improved self-
monitoring or self-cuing.
Consider Optimal Timing
We must make every effort to time treat-
ment sessions to minimize negative influ-
ences of pain, illness, fatigue, distraction, 
and so on. Additionally, there is important 
research emerging indicating that the tim-
ing of intervention in terms of stages of 
recovery from stroke or brain injury is 
of vital importance. We discuss this fur-
ther in Chapter 24, under queries about 
optimal times in recovery to initiate treat-
ment, and about intensity and duration of 
treatment.
Consider Optimal  
Locations and Conditions
Often the ideal environment for treat-
ment meets the same criteria as for opti-
mal assessment conditions: well lit, quiet, 
without clutter and excess visual stimu-
lation, and including or excluding spe-
cific people as appropriate. Of course, we 
must take into account space availability. 
It is also important that we contextualize 
treatment in real-world environments to 
enhance the likelihood of maximal carry-
over of treatment gains to everyday life 
contexts. Be sure to get outside of typi-
cal clinical contexts. When possible and 
where appropriate, engage in home visits 
and go to other places where communi-
cation is paramount for the person with 
whom you are working (e.g., workplaces, 
civic organization meetings, shopping 
centers, restaurants, and school, college, 
or university settings). We discuss this 
further as we consider “functional com-
munication” below.
Focus on Functional Communication
The term functional in clinical practice has 
multiple interpretations. In the 1980s and 
1990s, our field saw a surge of “functional” 
approaches to treatment of communica-
tion disorders. Audrey Holland was a 
magnificent catalyst of such approaches, 
through her early work on functional com-
munication per se (Holland, 1982) and her 
more recent work since then on quality of 

Best Practices in Intervention   411
life in aphasia. Many others joined forces 
to enrich foci on enhancing quality of life 
through communication intervention (see 
LaPointe, 1999, 2000; Ross & Wertz, 2003).
What was typically intended by the 
authors of such approaches was to get 
away from focusing on specific linguistic 
constructs in decontextualized clinical 
exchanges and orient intervention more 
toward the use of language in real com-
municative situations in ways that are 
important to the person being treated. For 
example, some early treatment approaches  
to help improve naming abilities (such as 
the cueing hierarchy approach [Line-
baugh & Lehner, 1977], described in Sec-
tion VIII) had us focus on working through 
a series of cues to help people get better at 
naming objects. The authors of functional 
approaches toward the same method en- 
couraged us to make sure that the stimuli 
(words, objects, and pictures) were highly 
relevant to each individual in terms of 
their own daily word-finding needs. They 
also encouraged us to make sure we 
probed to see that word-finding improve-
ments at the single word level were being 
carried over into sentences and into con-
versations. Extending this further, several 
authors of functional approaches height-
ened our collective awareness of the need 
for clinicians to get out of the clinic room 
and into real-world situations with our 
clients to be sure that communication gains 
we saw in the clinic were transferring to 
the individual’s real-world interactions.
The functional approaches of the 
1980s and 1990s evolved into social mod-
els for contextualizing work with people 
with neurogenic communication disor-
ders near the start of the 21st century. As 
the WHO ICF has risen to prominence, 
we have been made more aware of its 
relevance to working with people with 
neurogenic communication disorders. In 
that light, the term functional is now fre-
quently applied to embracing aspects of 
life participation that may be improved 
through improved communication abili-
ties. Examples (certainly not an exhaus-
tive list) of pioneers in this area are:
• Roberta Chapey, Judith Duchan, 
Roberta Elman, Linda Garcia, 
Aura Kagan, Jon Lyon, and Nina 
Simmons Mackie, The LPAA Project 
Group, who launched the Life 
Participation Approach to Aphasia 
(e.g., LPAA Project Group, 2000)
• Barbara Shadden, who highlighted 
the impact of neurogenic language 
disorders on caregivers and the 
effects of aphasia on identity (e.g., 
Shadden, 2005)
• Mark Ylvisaker, Jon Lyon, Susie 
Parr, Sally Byng, Sue Gilpion, 
Judith Duchan, and Carole Pound, 
who emphasized the importance 
of helping stroke and brain injury 
survivors to cope with long-term 
life-affecting consequences of their 
communication challenges (e.g., 
Byng, Pound, & Parr, 2000; Lyon 
1998; Ylvisaker, 1992)
• The multiple authors of a 
wonderful edited book on 
supporting communication for 
people with aphasia (see Simmons-
Mackie & King, 2013 )
• Margaret Rogers, Nancy Alarcon, 
and colleagues, who emphasized 
practical means of training 
caregivers of people with aphasia to 
use supported communication (e.g., 
Alarcon & Rogers, 2006)
• Travis Threats, who promoted 
and spearheaded a great deal 
of international work aimed at 
incorporating communication needs 
and related services into ICF- and 

412   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
other WHO-related programs and 
projects (e.g. Threats, 2010a)
• Kerry Byrne and J. B. Orange (2005), 
who promoted principles for using 
ICF constructs and tenets in the 
assessment, treatment, and support 
of people with dementia
• Aura Kagan, Nina Simmons-
Mackie, Jack Damico, and 
colleagues, who developed means 
of indexing real-life outcomes 
of aphasia intervention and 
emphasized the importance 
of conversational analysis for 
capturing many of these (e.g., 
Kagan et al., 2008; Simmons-
Mackie, Elman, Holland, &  
Damico, 2007)
• David Beukelman and colleagues, 
who developed the Participation 
Model of AAC (e.g., Beukelman, 
Garrett, & Yorkston, 2007; 
Beukelman & Mirenda, 2013)
• The founding members of Aphasia 
Access, an organization created in 
2014 to promote LPAA approaches 
(http://www.aphasiaaccess.org)
All the while, some aphasiologists 
have taken exception to the notion that 
all things functional must be beyond the 
level of linguistic analysis and couched in 
terms of life participation. For example, 
what if someone has limited grammati-
cal processing deficits, making it difficult 
to process long and complex sentences? 
Grammatically composed phrases and 
sentences are primary vehicles through 
which meaning is expressed. Isn’t gram-
mar, then, in and of itself, functional, in 
the sense that it is useful and relevant to 
real-world communication? Understand-
ing reversible passive sentences, coping 
with syntactic ambiguities, parsing rela-
tive clauses, and interpreting pronoun 
references are all essential to competent 
language use in daily life. Thus, just 
because the focus of a particular treatment 
approach may be aimed at the impair-
ment level, that approach should not nec-
essarily be considered “nonfunctional.” 
As long as a treatment method focused on 
impairments is couched in a more holistic 
framework of ensuring real-life relevance 
and carryover such that the individual 
patient’s life participation is enhanced, 
then certainly it, too, may be considered 
functional.
Focus on Abilities the Individual 
Really Needs and Wants to Improve
If a person scores poorly on reading  
comprehension but well on auditory  
comprehension, this does not mean that 
working on reading comprehension is 
more important to him or her. If a person 
is having trouble with comprehending 
and producing complex sentence struc-
tures yet feels that working on grammati-
cal processing is irrelevant to her com-
munication needs, it is important to pay 
attention to that. If you are keen on work-
ing with your client in his work environ-
ment with hopes of training coworkers to 
support his professional communication 
and maintain his status and productivity 
at work, but he is much more concerned 
about the trouble he is having connecting 
with his teenage children, then change 
your plans and go with his preferences.  
In sum, be sure to tune into the person 
and his or her own perceptions, and 
guard against assuming that the help you 
might value most if you had a communi-
cation disorder is similar to what the cli-
ent values.

Best Practices in Intervention   413
Focus on Relevant Material
A focus on the use of relevant tasks and 
stimuli is not only a sound principle in 
terms of social frameworks for inter-
vention. It also makes the best sense in 
terms of neuropsychological approaches 
to intervention: The more relevant and 
personally salient treatment foci are, the 
greater the activation of neural networks 
involved in processing that material 
(Kleim & Jones, 2008; Raymer et al., 2006).
Focus on Strengths
Of course, sometimes it is appropriate to 
focus on a person’s cognitive-linguistic 
deficits. After all, those are the reasons he 
or she has likely been referred to us. We 
must clearly document deficits to carry 
out effective assessments and justify 
working with our patients. We must ana-
lyze the nature of a person’s impairments 
and their negative effects on life partici-
pation as we facilitate treatment plan-
ning. Acknowledging deficits directly 
with a stroke or brain injury survivor is 
usually essential during assessment and 
throughout intervention. For example, 
during treatment, we may be review-
ing test results that highlight cognitive- 
linguistic impairments. We may be track-
ing the number of errors during a given 
treatment task to monitor progress. We may 
be pointing out weaknesses as a means of 
enhancing a person’s self-awareness of 
communication breakdown. All of this 
is typically appropriate. And as we are 
doing such things, that person may be 
seeing other professionals (occupational 
and physical therapists, physicians, 
etc.) who are also focusing on his or her 
impairments in other areas. Let’s keep in 
mind that such a focus on deficits requires 
a hearty balance of positivity. The excel-
lent clinician is a motivator, cheerleader, 
and encourager. Celebrating successes, no 
matter how small, is essential to helping a 
person persist in the face of challenges and 
stay engaged in his or her own recovery.
Be an Interdisciplinary Team Player
Tapping into the expertise of our col-
leagues across medical, rehabilitation, 
and other health disciplines is essential. 
So is sharing complementary intervention 
strategies, educating others in construc-
tive ways about our scope of practice, 
and advocating for attention to the life-
affecting cognitive-linguistic challenges 
faced by the people we serve. If regular 
action-focused, synergistic, interdisciplin-
ary team meetings focused on the people 
we are treating are not taking place within 
a facility where we work, it is important 
that we advocate for such meetings — or 
initiate them ourselves.
Use Evidence-Based Approaches
The excellent clinician is an avid clini-
cal researcher and a consumer of the 
research literature. He or she is devoted to  
evidence-based practice, in terms of select-
ing intervention methods and designing 
and implementing treatment plans based 
on peer-reviewed literature. The excellent 
clinician modifies treatment according 
to evidence collected throughout inter-
vention with specific people. Having an 
expansive repertoire of treatment meth-
ods in mind, and knowing about the the-
ory and evidence base supporting each, 
is essential. For this reason, numerous  

414   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
general and specific treatment methods 
are presented in the upcoming sections of 
this book, with summaries about underly-
ing theory and reviews of the correspond-
ing evidence base. We explore important 
content related to critical factors in evi-
dence-based practice later in this chapter.
Blend Art With Science
As discussed in Chapter 2, the ability to 
balance art with science in clinical work 
is essential to clinical excellence. Master-
ing important scientific knowledge across 
key disciplinary areas that are pertinent to 
aphasiology, and being able to call on that 
knowledge in applicable ways, is vital. At 
the same time, the excellent clinician uses 
keen and sensitive judgment and engages 
with people in empathetic, thoughtful, and 
creative ways in the art of clinical practice.
Encourage Aphasia-Friendly 
Communication
General recommendations for aphasia-
friendly language, whether spoken or 
written, include use of short and simple 
sentence structures, supported by clear 
photos or pictographs that lack irrelevant 
content. Considering that some people 
with aphasia and related disorders have 
good reading and/or oral language com-
prehension, it is important not to simplify 
language too much for a given individual. 
Still, written, audio, and video materials 
meant for general use by people with 
aphasia should be designed to facilitate 
comprehension by people with moderate 
to severe comprehension deficits if possi-
ble so as to increase accessibility of content.
Recommendations for oral lan-
guage include use of multiple modali-
ties (speech, gesture, facial expressions, 
body language, writing with key words 
pointed to or underlined, and photo and 
pictographic support) and repetitions, 
expansions, and paraphrasing as appro-
priate. Some authors have recommended 
avoiding “exaggerated speech.” In fact, 
clearly articulated speech that exceeds the 
articulatory precision of everyday infor-
mal speech has been shown to facilitate 
comprehension, especially in older adults 
and in people with hearing impairment. 
Although clear speech is sometimes con-
fused with elderspeak (see Chapter 9), 
the two are distinct; that is, clear speech 
facilitates comprehension and elderspeak 
conveys ageism.
There are two constructs related to 
the ease of reading that are relevant to 
potential means of optimizing print: leg-
ibility and readability. Legibility refers to 
the ease or difficulty of identifying indi-
vidual printed letters, numbers, or char-
acters. Readability refers to the degree of 
ease or difficulty of comprehending writ-
ten text. Both influence reading time and 
reading efficiency.
Published recommendations for 
aphasia-friendly print materials include 
use of ample white space and emphasis 
of key words by underlining, capitaliz-
ing, or bolding. Some recommendations 
for aphasia-friendly print include “easy-
to-read” font (e.g., Rose, Worrall, Hick-
son, & Hoffmann, 2009, 2010; Simmons-
Mackie, 2013a). Recommendations for 
the use of sans-serif font have been made; 
however, such recommendations have yet 
to be substantiated with solid published 
evidence. Even in people without neuro-
logical disorders, findings about legibil-
ity and readability of print in serif versus 
sans serif print is equivocal (Poole, 2012). 
Some argue that use of serif markings aids 
legibility because they add redundancy to 

Best Practices in Intervention   415
graphemic cues, whereas others suggest 
that block print is most legible. A caveat 
in this regard is that there is a paucity of 
research on just which font is easiest to 
read for any particular clinical subgroup 
and whether legibility and readability 
are similar across individuals with varied 
neurogenic language disorders and types 
and severity of aphasia.
Varied minimum font sizes have also 
been recommended. For example, Sim-
mons-Mackie (2013a) suggests a minimum 
of 20-point font, whereas others suggest 
a range of 14 to 22 (Australian Aphasia 
Association Inc., 2010; Brennan, Worrall, &  
McKenna, 2005). Certainly an important 
factor in this regard is the visual acuity and  
contrast sensitivity of the reader (Connolly, 
1998; Owsley & Sloane, 1990). Further evi-
dence for the improved legibility of any par-
ticular font style and size for people with  
aphasia and related disorders — and its 
potential influence on readability — is need- 
ed. Of course, regardless of what group 
studies may reveal, it would be ideal to 
try out varied font size and style with a 
particular individual where possible to 
optimize personalized written material. 
Attend to Behavioral Challenges  
That Impede Successful Interactions
Antecedent-based behavior management  
is a proactive approach to reducing prob-
lem behaviors by reducing the likelihood 
of their occurring in the first place. Pro-
moted by Ylvisaker (Ylvisaker & Fee-
ney, 2009) for use with TBI survivors, it 
is applicable to work with anyone who 
engages in disruptive or inappropriate 
behavior. The clinician proactively notes 
patterns in occurrences prior to problem 
behaviors (the antecedents) and then 
works to prevent those from happening. 
Likewise, the clinician tunes into the ante-
cedents of positive behavior and works to 
facilitate those. The goal is to take advan-
tage of constructive ways of shaping the 
client’s environment and others’ roles in 
it to reduce the need for negative conse-
quences to address problem behaviors 
(Turkstra, 2010; Ylvisaker & Feeney, 2009).
A similar, more holistic approach 
is espoused by Thomas Kitwood (1997) 
in his seminal text, Dementia Reconsid-
ered, and by Power in his popular books, 
Dementia Beyond Drugs: Changing the Cul-
ture of Care (2010) and Dementia Beyond 
Disease: Enhancing Well-Being (2014). As 
we considered in Chapter 13, focusing on 
addressing unmet needs of people with 
dementia as the cause of unwanted behav-
ior, rather than reacting to such behavior 
through behavioral and pharmacological 
approaches, is more effective and more 
humane. Power highlights the impor-
tance of considering behavioral problems 
as symptoms of fundamental challenges 
to a person’s well-being. He recommends 
that we focus on strengths from a well-
ness perspective rather than problem 
behavior from a biomedical perspective. 
Power provides evidence that approaches 
steeped in a wellness perspective best sus-
tain quality in relationships with people 
who might otherwise be considered to be 
acting out, unruly, or out of control.
A list of best practices for treatment is 
summarized in Box 23–1.
What Does the Excellent Clinical 
Aphasiologist Know About 
Evidence-Based Practice?
In the list of best practices for treatment, 
above, we considered that excellent cli-
nicians know about the evidence base 

416   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
for whatever they do professionally, as 
documented in peer-reviewed research 
literature and also as grounded in their 
own data collection and observation with 
the people they serve. Here let’s review 
information about evidence-based prac-
tice most pertinent to clinical excellence.
Four constructs are especially impor-
tant as we consider types of evidence for 
treatment outcomes:
• Efficacy, the likelihood of benefit 
from a given treatment for a defined 
population under ideal conditions 
(applicable to a population, not to 
an individual)
• Effectiveness, the likelihood of 
benefit of treatment to an individual 
under average conditions (based on 
studies of efficacious treatment)
• Efficiency, an index of productivity, 
that is, how much can be gained 
with a minimum of expense, time, 
and effort (especially important in 
comparing two or more treatments 
that have been found to be 
efficacious)
• Outcome, an index of change 
that occurs as a result of time, 
intervention, or both (a term that 
encompasses efficacy, effectiveness, 
and efficiency) (Golper et al., 2001; 
Wertz & Irwin, 2001)
The strength of recommendations for clin-
ical practice is ideally based on levels of 
Summary of Best Practices in Intervention
• Embrace communication as a human right.
• Recognize assessment as an ongoing intervention process.
• Be person centered.
• Include family members, caregivers, and others whose 
roles are relevant.
• Have a clear sense of purpose and goals.
• Engage communication partners outside of the client’s 
immediate circle of friends and family.
• Embrace cultural and linguistic differences.
• Encourage self-coaching.
• Consider optimal timing and conditions.
• Consider optimal locations.
• Focus on functional communication.
• Focus on abilities the individual really needs and wants to 
improve.
• Focus on relevant material.
• Focus on strengths.
• Be an interdisciplinary team player.
• Use evidence-based approaches.
• Blend art with science.
• Encourage aphasia-friendly communication.
• Attend to behavioral challenges that impede successful 
interactions.
Box
23–1

Best Practices in Intervention   417
evidence. Levels of evidence pertaining to 
treatment outcomes have been defined dif-
ferently by different authors and groups.
The Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development and Evalua-
tion (GRADE) Working Group (http://
www.graeworkinggroup.org) is an inter-
national group dedicated to helping eval-
uate the quality of evidence for health care 
practices. Evidence is graded as follows:
• High:  It is highly is unlikely 
that further research will change 
confidence in the estimation of 
treatment effectiveness.
• Moderate:  It is likely that further 
research will affect confidence 
in the estimation of treatment 
effectiveness.
• Low:  Further research is very likely 
to have an impact on confidence 
in the estimation of treatment 
effectiveness.
• Very low:  Any estimate of 
effectiveness is very uncertain.
The Clinical Guidelines for Stroke 
Management offered by the Stroke Foun-
dation of Australia (2010) and by the 
Stroke Foundation of New Zealand (2010) 
include grades ranging from A to D to be 
applied to any intervention method:
• A:  Can be trusted to guide practice
• B:  Can be trusted to guide practice 
in most situations
• C:  Provides some support for 
recommendation but care should be 
taken in its application
• D:  Weak and recommendation 
must be applied with caution 
(National Health and Medical 
Research Council, 2009a)
Additionally, a grade of GPP (standing for 
“good practice point”) is given to aspects 
of “best practice based on clinical expe-
rience and expert opinion” (NHMRC, 
2009b, p. 7). The guidelines also include 
recommendations for attention to quantity 
and quality of evidence, potential clinical 
impact, generalizability, and applicability.
The American Academy of Neurol-
ogy (French & Gronseth, 2008; Gronseth 
& French, 2008) suggests four classes of 
evidence:
• I:  Evidence from one or more well-
designed randomized, controlled 
clinical trials that include objective 
measures and baseline controls and 
that meet five additional criteria
• II:  Evidence from one or more well-
designed randomized, controlled 
clinical trials or prospective matched 
cohort study that includes objective 
measures and baseline controls and 
that meets all but one of the five 
additional criteria for Level I
• III:  All other controlled trials 
(including case history controls or 
participants who serve as their own 
controls and objective measures)
• IV:  Studies not meeting the criteria 
for Level I, II, or III, including 
expert opinion and consensus 
statements
An alternative approach is Robey and 
Schultz’s (1998) five-phase outcome research 
model. Rather than defining levels of evi-
dence, those authors define five phases of 
outcomes research:
• Phase I:  A discovery phase, when 
investigators develop hypotheses 
about treatment, estimate the 
optimal treatment intensity, and 
specify the population to benefit 
from treatment. Phase I studies 
include single participants or case 
studies, studies with small sample 

418   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
sizes, and studies with no control 
group.
• Phase II:  An optimizing phase, 
when hypotheses are refined, a 
rationale for the treatment method 
is specified, the selection criteria for 
participants are explicitly detailed, 
and the treatment protocol is 
standardized. Like Phase I studies, 
Phase II studies include single-
participant or case studies and 
studies with small sample sizes; 
they may include studies with no 
control group.
• Phase III:  An efficacy test 
phase, which involves testing of 
a treatment method developed 
through Phases I and II, with 
large samples of people who 
represent the target populations 
in a randomized control trial (a 
trial in which participants who 
meet explicit selection criteria are 
assigned randomly to treatment 
and control groups, often 
conducted across multiple sites).
• Phase IV:  An effectiveness test 
phase, when the effects of treatment 
already studied in Phase III are 
studied under average clinical 
conditions. Phase IV studies allow 
for variation in the frequency and 
intensity of treatment and even in 
the definition of target populations. 
These include single-participant 
studies, replications of Phase III 
studies, and large-group studies.
• Phase V:  An effectiveness and 
efficiency test phase, in which 
time allocation and cost are 
studied along with satisfaction 
and quality-of-life indices of large 
samples of individuals treated as 
well as significant others and their 
caregivers.
The Cochrane Collaboration (http://
www.cochrane.org) is an international 
network of scholars, professionals, and 
consumers established to help con-
sider the evidence base that supports 
any area of health-related intervention. 
The Cochrane Libraries (http://www.co​
chranelibrary.com) include a database 
of systematic reviews of evidence for a 
wide range of health care practices. The 
Cochrane criteria for levels of evidence 
include attention to strengths in terms of 
research design (randomized, controlled 
clinical trials being the highest level), sta-
tistical precision, relevance or usefulness, 
and effect size (the statistical measure of 
the degree of likelihood that a treatment 
will be beneficial or harmful). Currently, 
there are few systematic reviews specific 
to acquired neurogenic language disor-
ders in the Cochrane Collection (see Kelly, 
Brady, & Enderby, 2010; Townend, Brady, 
& McLaughlan, 2007b). The collection in 
this area is likely to grow, and clinicians as 
well as scholars may find it helpful to stay 
abreast of new studies as they are added 
to the collection.
Note that Aphasia United (see Chap-
ter 16) has a working group dedicated to 
establishing a list of top 10 practice rec-
ommendations for aphasia intervention 
based on guidelines from national and 
international professional associations 
worldwide. The current version, to be 
regularly updated on the group’s website 
(http://www.aphasiaunited.org), provides 
sources for each recommendation, along 
with indicators of level of recommen-
dations or evidence (which correspond 
closely to levels of evidence from Austra-
lia and New Zealand described earlier).
A major challenge in building a solid 
evidence base for the treatment of neuro-
genic language disorders is that the gold 
standard for evidence-based practice, the 

Best Practices in Intervention   419
randomized, double-blind, controlled 
clinical trial, is extremely difficult to con-
duct. Reasons for this include:
• The ethical problem of assigning 
people randomly to no-treatment 
groups, thus withholding treatment 
when we know that treatment may 
be helpful
• Researcher bias, in that it is difficult 
to establish a context in which the 
researcher would not know if a 
person has undergone treatment
• The sheer heterogeneity of people 
in each diagnostic category 
and subcategory such that 
generalization of results is always 
questionable (Berthier, 2005; Fama 
& Turkeltaub, 2014)
Where Can We Find Pertinent 
Information to Support 
Evidence-Based Practice?
An excellent resource for SLPs seeking 
evidence-based practice guidance in vir-
tually any area of speech-language pathol-
ogy is SpeechBite (speechbite.com).  
SpeechBite is a free, online, searchable 
database of intervention studies, along 
with ratings of research quality for each 
study. The quality ratings are based on 
the PEDro scale (Sherrington, Herbert, 
Maher, & Moseley, 2000), an 11-item rat-
ing system for assessing external and 
internal validity and interpretability of 
research. The American Speech-Lan-
guage-Hearing Association also provides 
a free, searchable online Compendium of 
EBP Guidelines and Systematic Reviews 
on its website (http://www.asha.org). An 
excellent source of information specific to 
acquired neurogenic cognitive-linguistic 
disorders is the website of the Academic 
of Neurologic Communication Disorders 
and Sciences, which provides a a rich set 
of evidence-based practice guidelines and 
practice resources on its website (http://
www.ancds.org).
How Does the Excellent Clinician 
Apply Evidence-Based Practice?
It is important to be able to judge levels 
of evidence for any treatment method we 
consider applying. This requires staying 
abreast of the peer-reviewed intervention 
research literature and scrutinizing the 
quality and quantity of evidence under-
lying any method. Still, external scientific 
evidence must be considered in light of 
our clinical expertise and the perspec-
tives of the people we serve. For now, let 
us consider evidence-based practice at the 
level of intervention with specific indi-
viduals with acquired cognitive-linguistic 
disorders.
In the context of best practices in 
assessment (Chapter 17), we examined 
ways in which the assessment process can 
be viewed as a research process. It is also 
important to view the treatment process 
for every individual as an ongoing scien-
tific process requiring repeated hypoth-
esis generation, data collection, analysis, 
interpretation, and action planning to 
guide the next steps.
Certainly, there are times that we 
must think on our toes, not necessarily 
having advance notice about an immi-
nent treatment session that allows for 
researching an individual’s detailed case 
history or preparation time that enables 
us to assemble the materials that would 
be appropriate for using a given method. 
Still, being armed with a wide array of 

420   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
approaches and knowing when to use 
which — and why — is essential to clini-
cal practice no matter what the situation. 
At any given time, the clinician should be 
able to answer:
• What is the method he or she is 
using?
• What is the purpose of that 
method?
• What are the theories that support 
the method being used?
• What evidence is there in the 
research literature that the method 
works?
• What evidence is there that a given 
patient is benefiting from it?
We consider this further in the context of 
the evidence base supporting each of the 
treatment approaches discussed in subse-
quent chapters.
Keep in mind that evidence-based 
practice is not cookbook practice. We may 
create lists of “how-to” strategies for car-
rying out specific approaches, but this 
does not mean that each step should be 
carried out in a prescribed way with any 
particular individual, unless that individ-
ual is enrolled in a research study and has 
consented overtly to participating in such 
a study. Even when we wish to adhere in 
detail to a published treatment program 
for which there is ample empirical sup-
port, we must come to terms with the fact 
that much of the research on specific treat-
ment approaches entails a frequency and 
intensity of treatment that is not feasible 
to attain in most clinical environments 
(Code, 2012; Code & Petheram, 2011). 
We must consider critically how research 
findings may best be interpreted and 
translated in a practical sense to the indi-
vidual people with whom we work (Fama 
& Turkeltaub, 2014; Foster, Worrall, Rose, 
& O’Halloran, 2015). With steady ground-
ing in best practices for intervention, we 
proceed to the next chapter, considering 
specific purposes of intervention and the-
ories that underlie the rationale for gen-
eral and specific intervention methods.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Consider the recommended best prac-
tices for intervention listed in the chart  
on the following page. For each (by 
checking the corresponding box), rate 
the degree to which you value its im- 
portance in your own role as a clini-
cian. Use your ratings to order them 
from most to least important. Then 
compare your ratings and overall order 
with those of other colleagues. Dis-
cuss the similarities and differences in 
your views on the relative importance 
of specific aspects of best practice.
	 3.	 Compare and contrast the meaning 
of the terms efficacy, effectiveness, effi-
ciency, and outcome.
	 4.	 How might the phases of Robey and 
Schulz’s (1998) five-phase outcome 
research overlap with the American 
Academy of Neurology classes of evi-
dence and with the grading scheme 
for levels of evidence suggested by 
the Stroke Foundation of Australia 
and by the Stroke Foundation of New 
Zealand?
	 5.	 Which of the means of considering 
levels of evidence presented in this 
chapter would be most helpful to 
practicing clinicians in evaluating the 
evidence base for any particular treat-
ment method?

Best Practices in Intervention   421
	 6.	 Peruse each of the online databases 
mentioned as evidence-based practice 
resources in this chapter. How might 
you put such resources to use as you 
consider various approaches to inter-
vention for a given person?
1 = Extremely important
3 = Moderately important
5 = Of little importance
1
2
3
4
5
Embrace communication as a human right.
Recognize assessment as an ongoing 
intervention process.
Be person centered.
Include family members, caregivers, and others 
whose roles are relevant.
Have a clear sense of purpose and goals.
Ensure the best possible treatment conditions.
Engage communication partners outside of the 
client’s immediate circle of friends and family.
Embrace cultural and linguistic differences.
Encourage self-coaching.
Consider optimal timing.
Consider optimal locations.
Focus on functional communication.
Focus on abilities the individual really needs 
and wants to improve.
Focus on relevant material.
Focus on strengths.
Be an interdisciplinary team player.
Use evidence-based approaches.
Blend art with science.
Encourage aphasia-friendly communication.
Attend to behavioral challenges that impede 
successful interactions.

422   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 7.	 How do you plan to implement  
evidence-based practice in your own 
clinical work?
	 8.	 Describe challenges to evidence-based 
practice that you envision in everyday 
clinical work. What are specific strate-
gies might you implement to address 
those challenges?
Additional teaching and learning materials 
are available on the companion website.

423
Chapter
24
Theories of Intervention
In this chapter, we delve further into 
important aspects of best practices in 
intervention, focusing on the purposes 
of intervention and theories that support 
the ever-growing gamut of intervention 
methods. After reading and reflecting on 
the content in this chapter, you should be 
able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What are the purposes of treatment 
methods?
	 2.	 What are the mechanisms of recovery 
after stroke and brain injury?
	 3.	 How can behavioral treatment facili-
tate brain recovery?
	 4.	 How can pharmacological agents 
facilitate brain changes?
	 5.	 What other types of intervention may 
facilitate brain changes?
	 6.	 What are the optimal times during 
recovery to initiate treatment?
	 7.	 What is the best level of complexity 
for treatment foci?
	 8.	 What other treatment parameters are 
important to consider?
	 9.	 How might intervention in neurode-
generative conditions slow cognitive-
linguistic decline?
10.	 What is the best time to initiate treat-
ment with people who have neurode-
generative conditions?
What Are the Purposes of 
Treatment Methods?
The ultimate goal of clinical aphasiologists 
is to help people with neurogenic lan-
guage disorders foster the most successful 
and fulfilling lives possible. To that end, 
there are four primary purposes for any 
aspect of treatment related to acquired 
neurogenic communication disorders:
• Facilitate brain-based recovery 
of abilities that have been lost or 
reduced
• Help compensate for language 
impairments and empower use of 
intact abilities to maximize effective 
communication
• Support people psychologically 
and socially in coping with lost or 
reduced abilities
• Encourage the fullest participation 
in social engagement appropriate 
for that individual and the people 
who are important to him or her
Published treatment approaches for 
aphasia and related disorders tend to 
address primarily either the first or sec-
ond of these goals and sometimes both. 
These are highlighted in the descriptions  

424   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
of theories supporting each specific 
approach in the upcoming chapters on 
treatment methods. Methods aimed at 
fostering brain-based recovery are some-
times called restorative or restitutive 
approaches, in contrast to compensatory 
approaches.
For example, let’s consider two dif-
ferent approaches to help people with 
aphasia improve their communicative 
ability in the face of word-finding defi-
cits. Semantic Feature Analysis (Boyle 
& Coelho, 1995) is a treatment method 
aimed at enhancing activation of neural 
networks involved in semantic repre-
sentation of words. It is generally con-
sidered a restitutive approach because 
the goal is to foster actual changes in 
brain mechanisms that underlie seman-
tic representation. In contrast, Promoting 
Aphasics’ Communicative Effectiveness 
(PACE; Davis & Wilcox, 1985) is a treat-
ment approach that entails use of any and 
all modalities (speech, writing, drawing, 
gesturing) to communicate; the measure 
of communicative success is based on 
whether the listener has understood, not 
on linguistic accuracy. It is typically con-
sidered a compensatory approach because 
the goal is to help the person with aphasia 
compensate for deficits by using alterna-
tive and mixed modalities, not on restor-
ing impaired brain functions.
Means of supporting people in cop-
ing with the long-lasting effects of lan-
guage disability are more rooted in coun-
seling, coaching, and education-oriented 
practices (see Chapter 27) than they are 
specific cognitive-linguistic treatment 
methods. The excellent clinician pursues 
a multifaceted approach to treatment, 
blending strategies that address each of 
the four primary purposes for interven-
tion as appropriate in a given situation.
What Are the Mechanisms 
of Recovery After Stroke 
and Brain Injury?
In Chapter 7, we considered the impor-
tance of neuroplasticity (the ability of the 
nervous system to change and adapt to 
internal or external influences) as a basic 
principle enabling improvement in abili-
ties following stroke or brain injury. The 
brain’s plasticity is fundamental to spon-
taneous recovery as well as to changes that 
are due to learning, behavioral interven-
tion, pharmacotherapy, and other treat-
ments. Research in this area is based on 
animals and on people with and without 
a wide range of neurological disorders, 
including people undergoing surgery.
Mechanisms of brain changes under-
lying recovery include the following:
• Reduction of edema:  As swelling 
goes down, the compression of 
surrounding brain tissue is reduced; 
areas that were temporarily 
malfunctioning due to increased 
intracranial pressure begin to 
function more normally again.
• Reperfusion:  Blood flow is 
restored to areas of hypoperfusion 
(e.g., ischemic penumbrae); with 
refreshed blood supply to areas 
surrounding necrotic tissue, 
surrounding brain tissue becomes 
more functional.
• Resolution of diaschisis:  Functions 
associated with brain structures 
remote from the area of damage 
that had been initially impaired  
(a phenomenon described in 
Chapter 6) improve over time.
• Neuronal regeneration:  Although 
necrotic neurons (those whose cell 

Theories of Intervention   425
bodies have died) in the brain are 
typically not considered revivable, 
components of injured neurons can 
be restored. This can happen in two 
ways, through:
	 Dendritic branching, an increase 
in dendritic connections and thus 
the number of synapses that can 
be made per neuron
	 Collateral sprouting, an increase 
in axonal receptivity per neuron 
to other neurons through the 
growth of new axonal branches 
in uninjured axons near injured 
cells
• Long-term potentiation (LTP): 
The efficiency of transmission 
at the synaptic level is increased 
in surviving neurons, thus 
compensating for reduced 
transmission from others.
• Unmasking of preexisting 
pathways:  Neural connections 
that already existed before injury 
but that were not active (or that 
were previously inhibited) may be 
activated and thus help compensate 
for connections lost through injury.
• Cortical reorganization:  Basic 
brain-behavior relationships are 
modified as areas of brain tissue 
that were not centrally involved 
in certain functions prior to injury 
take over those functions. Examples 
of this are seen within and between 
hemispheres.
These mechanisms of postinjury re- 
covery are highly interactive and in some 
cases not separable. For example, long-
term potentiation may be a means of facil-
itating dendritic branching and collateral 
sprouting and thus the fostering of new 
synapses. Cortical reorganization is facili-
tated largely through neuronal regenera-
tion, long-term potentiation, and unmask-
ing of preexisting pathways. Compared 
to those three latter aspects of recovery, 
cortical reorganization as a construct is 
more easily studied in living people with 
neurogenic disorders because it can be 
more readily investigated through the 
use of neuroimaging (see Pataraia et al.,  
2004; Thompson, 2000a; Thompson & den 
Ouden, 2008). All of the mechanisms of 
recovery listed above can be facilitated, in 
most cases, by some type of intervention. 
The primary means of intervention are 
behavioral and pharmacological, although 
there are several additional known and 
purported influences on recovery.
How Can Behavioral Treatment 
Facilitate Brain Recovery?
Enriched environmental input (includ-
ing multimodal stimulation) and active 
engagement in cognitive-linguistic activ-
ity may help support cortical growth and 
synaptic transmission at every age, includ-
ing very old age. Studies with animals 
and humans have demonstrated evidence 
of the effects of behavioral intervention in 
terms of outcomes such as increased den-
dritic areas, collateral sprouting, the num-
ber of synapses per neuron, the degree of 
reactivation of impaired functional areas, 
and the degree of enhanced activation 
of intact structures that appear to help 
compensate for impaired structures. At a 
basic level, the very acts of learning and 
remembering increase synaptic efficiency 
in the brain in all people, not just those 
with neurological disorders. The role of 
the SLP is central in fostering recovery 
through strategic cognitive-linguistic 

426   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
intervention methods. The specific treat-
ment approaches we use lead to different 
effects on cortical reorganization (Thomp-
son, 2000b).
The more we learn about how neuro-
logical functioning is influenced by behav-
ioral intervention, cognitive-linguistic 
practice, and general active use of intact 
cognitive and linguistic abilities in every-
day activities, the more we might be able 
to channel that knowledge into develop-
ing new approaches to intervention. The 
rapid expansion of new knowledge made 
possible through neuroimaging methods 
bodes well for enhancing understanding 
in this area. So does the ever-increasing 
synergy of expertise across disciplines 
(e.g., chemistry, biology, engineering, 
linguistics, psychology, and education), 
including the testing of theories of learn-
ing and memory, through neuroscientific 
methods. It is important to keep in mind 
that, in cases where neurological function-
ing may not be fully restored, compensa-
tory strategies remain a vital aspect of 
rehabilitation.
How Can Pharmacological Agents 
Facilitate Brain Changes?
Pharmacological intervention (also called 
pharmacotherapy and neuropharmacol-
ogy) is a potentially important means 
of facilitating recovery from stroke and 
brain injury according to individual con-
ditions and responsiveness (Berthier, 
Pulvermüller, Dávila, Casares, & Gutiér-
rez, 2011). Drugs generally work in one 
of three ways: by blocking the reception 
of neurotransmitters, modulating (aug-
menting) the uptake of neurotransmitters 
by receptors, or mimicking (imitating) 
natural neurotransmitters. Of course it 
is not within the SLP’s scope of practice 
to administer pharmacotherapy. Still, we 
are very often in a consulting and infor-
mation-sharing role with medical profes-
sionals who do, and we play important 
roles in discussing whether certain medi-
cations might be considered and whether 
current drugs prescribed — or interactions 
among them — might be negatively affect-
ing communication and socialization. 
Another important role aphasiologists 
play is in helping people with cognitive 
and linguistic disorders adhere to pre-
scribed drug regimens through memory 
enhancement methods and the use of 
memory aids.
Some drugs play a key role in directly 
enhancing neural recovery mechanisms. 
In the acute phase, for example, edema 
may be reduced through the use of drugs 
that regulate the permeability of the 
blood-brain barrier to water, thus restrict-
ing the accumulation of fluid that leads 
to swelling in the brain after an injury 
(Bouzat et al., 2011; Donkin & Vink, 2010). 
Reperfusion of ischemic penumbrae can 
be facilitated through thrombolytic agents 
such as tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) 
(Hillis et al., 2006; Saver et al., 2013; Ward-
law et al., 2012). During postacute care, 
drugs may also be used to enhance LTP 
and, in turn, enhance cognitive abilities 
(Cooke & Bliss, 2005). Some researchers 
have studied how drugs that stimulate 
the neurotransmitter dopamine (dopa-
minergic drugs, such as bromocriptine) 
might help modulate brain activity in a 
way that enhances language comprehen-
sion and formulation by selectively inhib-
iting transmission of sensory informa-
tion that may interfere with information 
processing (Albert, Bachman, Morgan, & 
Helm-Estabrooks, 1988; Galling, Goorah, 
Berthier, & Sage, 2014; Gill & Leff, 2014; 
Gold, VanDam, & Silliman, 2000).

Theories of Intervention   427
Amphetamines (such as Adderall) 
have also been considered as possible 
means of neuromodulation, perhaps by 
enhancing collateral sprouting (Walker-
Batson, 2000; Walker-Batson, Mehta, 
Smith, & Johnson, 2015). Serotoninergic 
drugs (which block presynaptic transfer 
of the transmitter serotonin) have been 
found to improve language abilities in 
studies of small numbers of people with 
aphasia (e.g., Tanaka, Miyazaki, & Albert, 
1997; Walker-Batson et al., 2001). Cholin-
ergic drugs that affect the thalamic nuclei 
and their connections to the cortex have 
been found to improve linguistic abilities 
in some stroke survivors. One such drug, 
donepezil (Aricept), has been found to 
have positive effects on some people with 
aphasia (Berthier, 2005; Berthier, Pulver-
müller, Dávila, Casares, & Gutiérrez, 
2011), and it might have an impact beyond 
the acute phase of recovery.
Unfortunately, no particular drug has 
been consistently or unequivocally dem-
onstrated to foster recovery of neurologi-
cal functioning associated with language 
(see de Boissezon, Peran, de Boysson, & 
Démonet, 2007). Also, no drug in isolation 
appears consistently to improve the cog-
nitive or linguistic abilities of people with 
acquired neurogenic cognitive-linguis-
tic disorders without being paired with 
behavioral intervention (Galling et al.,  
2014; Small, 2004). There is a need for 
drug effects reported to date to be tested 
at higher levels of evidence than has typi-
cally been done, such as through stud-
ies with randomized, placebo-controlled 
designs and careful controls for placebo 
and practice effects (see Cahana-Amitay, 
Albert, & Oveis, 2014; Klein & Albert, 
2004; Tanaka et al., 2013).
Additionally, consumers of research 
on pharmacological treatments must care-
fully scrutinize whether statistically sig-
nificant effects are applicable to relevant 
clinical outcomes for people within a 
diagnostic category as well as for a given 
person (Royall, 2005). Finally, for each 
individual, it is important to consider the 
many potentially negative side effects 
associated with any of the drugs men-
tioned here, as well as with other medi-
cations that may be prescribed for other 
conditions, such as pain, insomnia, and 
depression. Side effects and consequences 
of drug interactions may include slowed 
recovery, lessened affective response, 
reduced speed of processing, and dimin-
ished working memory and attention 
abilities.
What Other Types of Intervention 
May Facilitate Brain Changes?
There are several other types of interven-
tion that may be administered in addition 
to behavioral and pharmacological inter-
vention to address cognitive-communica-
tive impairments. It is important to weigh 
potential risks and benefits of each. In 
some cases, surgical interventions may 
facilitate recovery. Removal of neoplasm 
and shunting of excess cerebrospinal fluid 
are examples; they work primarily by 
reducing intracranial pressure and thus 
displacement of and pressure on func-
tional areas of the brain. During surgery, 
direct electrical stimulation to specific 
brain structures may activate or inhibit 
them; however, since direct stimulation 
is so highly invasive, it is only adminis-
tered if a person’s brain is already being 
operated on. Surgical interventions are 
not recommended for most people with 
aphasia and related disorders whose con-
ditions are due to necrosis or atrophy of 
brain tissue.

428   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS; also called repetitive TMS, or rTMS) 
is under study as a potentially important, 
noninvasive means of enhancing recov-
ery of language in people with aphasia 
(Naeser et al., 2005, 2010; Weiduschat et 
al., 2011). Magnetic coils are placed on the 
scalp to stimulate or inhibit activation of 
targeted brain regions beneath the scalp 
with low-frequency magnetic pulses. One 
of the reasons TMS may be helpful is that 
it reduces diaschisis through activation 
of areas that are intact but have ceased 
to function normally (Carrera & Tononi, 
2014). Another is that TMS helps to inhibit 
overactivation of right hemisphere homo-
logues of damaged left hemisphere brain 
regions specialized for language. It may 
be that the natural inclination of the right 
hemisphere to be activated as a means of 
cortical reorganization to compensate for 
left hemisphere damage is actually less 
helpful (at least for some people with 
aphasia) than restoring as much activity 
as possible in the left hemisphere itself 
(Winhuisen et al., 2005).
Transcranial direct current stimu-
lation (tDCS) is a technique that entails 
pulses of low-level electrical current, 
delivered though the scalp (de Aguiar, 
Paolazzi, & Miceli, 2015). Fridriksson, 
Hubbard, and Hudspeth (2012) provide 
an excellent overview of recent research 
and potential future applications of non-
invasive brain stimulations techniques.
Sensory stimulation is a category 
of methods, some loosely defined and 
others highly specific, that have been 
purported to enhance recovery in stroke 
and brain injury and to slow decline in 
neurodegenerative conditions. Basically, 
sensory stimulation involves exposure 
to touch, vibration, light, scent, sound, 
or taste; it may be passive or include 
interactive experience. Sensory stimula-
tion has been recommended by many to 
enhance awareness, alertness, attention, 
and responsiveness in people in coma or 
minimally conscious states (e.g., Urben-
japhol, Jitpanya, & Khaoropthum, 2009). 
It has been recommended as a means of 
promoting intellectual and social engage-
ment for people with dementia, especially 
those living in sensory-deprived contexts 
(Bourgeois & Hickey, 2009; Chung & Lai, 
2009). As an approach overall, though, 
sensory stimulation is not well described. 
Much of the related research is weak in 
terms of being based on samples, hav-
ing poorly controlled stimuli, and failing 
to report details pertaining to dosage, 
methods, and participant characteristics 
(Meyer et al., 2010). Further research is 
needed to validate claims about how, 
when, and for whom specific types of 
stimulation may facilitate brain recovery 
or slow deterioration.
Nutritional supplements are another 
category of potential intervention to sup-
port neurological recovery. Antioxidants, 
a category of natural and human-made 
substances that counteract the damag-
ing effects of oxidation on bodily tissue, 
are understudied in animals and humans 
(Gasparova, Stara, & Stolc, 2014; Sarkaki 
et al., 2013). Several authors have recom-
mended them with respect to promoting 
brain health in general. Antioxidants are 
found naturally in many fruits and vege-
tables; they are also available as dietary 
supplements. Examples include beta-car-
otene, lycopene, and vitamins A, C, and 
E. Herbal supplements have been com-
monly prescribed in Eastern approaches 
to health and medicine for years, a topic 
we explore further in Chapter 28.
Other means of supporting spontane-
ous recovery and brain health in general 
include good nutrition, solid rest, and 
strong social support. Avoidance of nega-

Theories of Intervention   429
tive factors on the brain is also important. 
For example, it is vital to reduce the risk 
of further stroke or injury and exposure 
to harmful substances (e.g., cocaine, ste-
roids, lead, and excessive alcohol).
Can We Differentiate Spontaneous 
Recovery From Progress Made 
Through Treatment?
A large body of literature provides evi-
dence that treatment of aphasia and 
related disorders leads to improvements 
that cannot be accounted for by sponta-
neous recovery alone (e.g., Allen, Mehta, 
McClure, & Teasell, 2012; Brady, Kelly, 
Godwin, & Enderby, 2012; Kelly, Brady, & 
Enderby, 2010; Robey, 1998; Wertz et al., 
1986). A great deal remains to be studied 
to address questions about specific out-
comes associated with specific areas of 
communication-related impairment and 
life participation and with specific inter-
vention methods. There is also a need 
for research on how to best complement 
pharmacological and other approaches to 
fostering physical neurological recovery 
with behavioral intervention by clinical 
aphasiologists (see Raymer et al., 2008).
What Are the Optimal Times During 
Recovery to Initiate Treatment?
Immediately following stroke or brain 
injury, the focus of health care tends to 
be on the individual’s survival. Unfortu-
nately, many SLPs and other rehabilitation 
professionals working with stroke and 
brain injury survivors in the acute stage 
often have little time to spend in assess-
ment and treatment because of restric-
tions on the amount of time an individual 
is allowed to stay in an acute care setting. 
Fortunately, there is ample evidence that 
direct SLP intervention can have positive 
effects in acute and postacute phases and 
even in decades following onset (Wertz  
et al., 1986).
Even if a person is not yet ready for 
or responsive to direct treatment, it is 
never too early for the SLP to begin the 
process of helping a person cope with the 
life-affecting consequences of an acquired 
cognitive-linguistic disorder. Keep in 
mind that a great deal of changes occur in 
the brain in the days and weeks following 
brain injury. Cognitive-linguistic symp-
toms tend to evolve during the hyper-
acute stage due to changes in blood flow 
around ischemic penumbrae, resolution 
of diaschisis, and reduction of edema. An 
approach that does not work at one time 
may work later.
What Is the Optimal Focus of 
Initial Treatment Soon After 
a Stroke or Brain Injury?
A great deal of literature addresses how 
we should prioritize precious time spent 
with people in the days and weeks follow-
ing newly acquired neurogenic communi-
cation disorders. Let’s consider important 
guidance about how to focus our work 
early postonset.
Focus on Communication Needs
At all levels of care (during hospitaliza-
tion, in acute and subacute care, during 
rehabilitation, and in home, long-term 
care, and assisted living environments), 
people with language impairments need 

430   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
to be able to send and receive informa-
tion. They need to take an active part in 
their medical management and in deci-
sion making about their care, learn about 
their conditions, and express themselves 
about such topics as pain level, dietary 
wants and needs, concerns about medica-
tions, and wishes to involve or not involve 
friends and significant others in commu-
nications and decision making about their 
care (Simmons-Mackie, 201b3).
Counsel and Share Information
Without a doubt, the earliest SLP interven-
tion should entail counseling and informa-
tion sharing with people who have com-
munication challenges and their friends 
and family. If the individual is not able to 
communicate sufficiently to express needs 
and desires, then setting up basic means 
of communication through communica-
tion boards, devices, and apps is most 
critical. Also, caregiver training focused 
on supportive communication strategies 
is essential. Building a strong sense of alli-
ance with the individual and the people 
most important to him or her is an impor-
tant priority through early intervention of 
any type (Schönberger, Humle, & Teas-
dale, 2006; Sohlberg, McLaughlin, Todis, 
Larsen, & Glang, 2001; Turkstra, 2013).
Promote Rest
Most people who have just experienced 
a stroke or brain injury are in dire need 
of rest. Sleep is essential to cortical health 
and healing. Unfortunately, medical con-
texts are notoriously noisy and not condu-
cive to rest. Patients are often awakened 
for all sorts of things that might be better 
delayed until they waken naturally after 
solid sleep. SLPs are often perpetrators 
of this, prioritizing their own assessment 
and treatment scheduling demands over 
the basic needs of the individual to be 
served. Try not to be one of them.
Consider the Balance of Compensatory 
With Restitutive Approaches
Historically, many aphasiologists (e.g., 
Darley, 1982) have recommended the 
use of impairment-focused restitutive 
approaches during early acute and post-
acute treatment, with the aim of enhanc-
ing the brain’s physiological recovery. 
More recently, the trend has been not to 
recommend impairment-focused treat-
ment during an acute care hospital stay 
immediately after a stroke or brain injury 
(Duffy, Fossett, & Thomas, 2011; Holland 
& Fridriksson, 2001; Simmons-Mackie, 
2013b; Sohlberg & Turkstra, 2011). Some 
refer to animal studies demonstrating that 
too much focus on intensive learning tasks 
soon after brain injury can exacerbate the 
injury itself (see Kleim & Jones, 2008).
Some aphasiologists have argued that  
using compensatory approaches early will 
reduce the likelihood of greater physi-
ological recovery. Proponents of this view 
often cite the work of Pulvermüller and 
colleagues on constraint-induced therapy 
(CIT; Pulvermüller et al., 2001). CIT entails 
restricting an individual’s use of intact 
abilities to maximize reliance on, and thus 
use and stimulation of, impaired abilities. 
The origin of CIT was in treatment of peo-
ple who had hemiparalysis or hemipare-
sis of the limbs; restricting use of a func-
tional arm or leg was shown to increase  
motor functioning in the impaired limb.
Constraint-induced language treat-
ment (CILT, see Chapter 30) shares with 
CIT the underlying rationale that it is 

Theories of Intervention   431
important to encourage patients to use 
the language modalities that are most 
impaired. There is no credible evidence, 
however, that using supported commu-
nication across all modalities impedes 
recovery of impaired modalities. Further-
more, failing to attend to the communi-
cation needs of people with acquired 
language disorders as soon as possible is 
simply unethical.
Consider Pros and Cons of 
Focusing on Attention
Some aphasiologists have debated whether 
intervention during the acute phase should 
include a focus on enhancing attention. 
The rationale for treating attention early 
was that attention is essential to further 
learning and memory. However, others 
have demonstrated that there is no ben-
efit from attention treatment in the acute 
phase post-TBI (Novack, Caldwell, Duke, 
Bergquist, & Gage, 1996; Ponsford & Kin-
sella, 1988).
What Is the Optimal Intensity 
and Duration of Treatment?
The concept of treatment intensity includes 
consideration of the number, frequency, 
and duration of treatment sessions; inten-
sity of treatment over a specified period 
of time is sometimes referred to as treat-
ment dosage. Optimal intensity depends 
on several factors. These include:
• The health and well-being of the 
person being treated, including 
the degree of personal and 
environmental support for his or 
her recovery
• The nature of his or her cognitive 
linguistic impairments and their 
life-affecting consequences
• The goals of treatment
• The treatment methods 
implemented (how and at what 
pace they are administered, what 
type of feedback is given, the 
amount of practice entailed, etc.)
• The therapeutic relationship 
established between the clinician 
and the person treated
In general, more intense interven-
tion leads to the greatest brain changes 
as well as the greatest functional abilities 
(Cherney, 2012; Enderby, 2012). However, 
it is extremely important to recognize 
that this is not always the case. In people 
with neurological disorders, if intensity 
exceeds one’s ability to attend and partici-
pate actively, or if it leads a person to tire 
of or resist treatment, then it is no longer 
beneficial. If the intensity of a particular 
intervention is too great for a particular 
individual at a particular point in time, it 
can be more harmful to recovery than pro-
viding no treatment at all.
The factors that determine optimal 
intensity interact in complex ways that are 
not well understood. Reasons they are not 
well understood include:
• A lack of research studies in 
which each factor is carefully 
controlled for and described and in 
which precise and well-validated 
indices of treatment outcomes are 
implemented
• The sheer complexity of those factors, 
individually and in combination
• Inconsistencies among authors 
of various studies on the topic 
regarding what dosage is considered 
“intense”

432   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• The fact that some individuals may 
reach a maximum level of benefit 
after a specific dose of treatment 
and may not make gains beyond 
that point, regardless of intensity 
(Baker, 2012; Enderby, 2012)
Overall, keep in mind that the degree of 
benefit from and tolerance of specific lev-
els of intensity depends on the person we 
are treating at a given time. This makes it 
all the more paramount that we monitor 
each individual’s progress carefully and 
continuously, making ongoing treatment 
decisions based on evidence.
What Is the Best Level of 
Complexity for Treatment Foci?
It was once considered “best practice” to 
begin treatment at a level of complexity 
that is relatively easy for an individual 
and then to progressively build up the 
level of difficulty as treatment progresses 
(e.g., Porch, 2008). More recently, how-
ever, evidence has been mounting that 
using more complex stimuli and tasks 
actually seems to optimize recovery by 
recruiting more intact neural networks 
and enhancing their interconnections 
through behavioral intervention (Kiran & 
Thompson, 2003; Thompson et al., 2003). 
Such evidence has been incorporated as 
the complexity account of treatment effi-
cacy (CATE).
Support for this account has been 
provided through evidence that:
• Training of naming for atypical 
exemplars of words within 
categories leads to generalization of 
naming for words corresponding to 
typical exemplars but not vice versa 
(Kiran & Johnson, 2008; Kiran, 
Sandberg, & Sebastian, 2011).
• Training of abstract words within a 
category leads to generalization of 
naming for words corresponding 
to more concepts but not vice versa 
(Kiran & Johnson, 2008)
• Training of more complex verbs 
(based on argument structure, 
which is reflected in the number of 
sematic roles attached to the verb in 
a clause or sentence, such as subject 
direct object) leads to generalization 
to untrained verbs with simpler 
argument structure (Thompson, 
Riley, den Ouden, Meltzer-Asscher, 
& Lukic, 2013).
• Training of more complex syntactic 
structures generalizes to less 
complex structures (Dickey & 
Thompson, 2007; Thompson, Choy, 
Holland, & Cole, 2010).
The expert clinician balances judg-
ments about evidence-based practice rela-
tive to task and stimulus complexity with 
judgments about the degree of frustration 
or lost confidence that a given individual 
may experience through repeated com-
plex and challenging tasks.
What Other Treatment Parameters 
Are Important to Consider?
Some advocate the application of prin-
ciples of motor learning to cognitive-
linguistic rehabilitation (see Maas et al., 
2008, for a review). This includes the fol-
lowing notions:
• Varied practice (across tasks and 
activities) is better than constant 
practice on the same thing.

Theories of Intervention   433
• Random practice on varied types of 
cognitive-linguistic stimuli is better 
than blocks of practice on the same 
stimuli.
• A greater number of repetitions is 
better than fewer repetitions.
• Low frequency of feedback 
encourages self-evaluation 
of performance and thus 
independence in implementing 
what is learned in treatment.
• Knowledge of performance 
(knowing how accurately one 
has accomplished a task) is more 
important than knowledge of 
response (receiving detailed 
feedback about just what one did 
correctly or incorrectly during a 
given task).
Other parameters that may influence learn-
ing and memory include:
• Interstimulus intervals (ISIs). 
ISI, the amount of time between 
presentations of cognitive-linguistic 
stimuli, influences learning and 
memory related to those stimuli. 
Specific influences of ISI duration 
depend on an individual’s unique 
neurological status.
• The degree of ecological validity 
of stimuli used. The more the 
types of stimuli and behavior 
addressed in a treatment setting 
complement real-world use, the 
greater the likelihood of carryover 
of treatment effects to everyday life 
participation.
• Modalities of treatment. Recent 
studies in neuroscience support 
long-standing cognitive and learning  
theories suggesting that stimulation 
through multiple modalities leads 
to greater storage of, and access to, 
information. This is likely due to 
the fact that attempts to engage a 
greater number of connections or 
routes leading to the activation of 
a neural network enhance LTP and 
increase the likelihood of activating 
that network.
How Might Intervention in 
Neurodegenerative Conditions Slow 
Cognitive-Linguistic Decline?
The principles of neurobiology of recov-
ery that apply to stroke and brain injury 
are largely applicable to neurodegenera-
tive conditions, with one critical excep-
tion: People with degenerative conditions 
may have periods of improvement or 
plateaus; still, overall, their affected func-
tional abilities will continue to decline 
over time. Many of the mechanisms of 
recovery mentioned above, and the strate-
gies to facilitate them, apply to people with 
dementia and related conditions as well.
Given that impaired LTP may be 
a primary cause of cognitive-linguistic 
decline in people with PPA, Alzheimer’s 
disease, and other forms of dementia, 
facilitating synaptic transmission within 
intact neurons through new learning, 
experience, pharmacological agents, diet, 
nutritional supplements, exercise, and 
social support likely boosts the health of 
intact neural connections. In combina-
tion, and implemented strategically with 
individual needs and real-life contexts in 
mind, intervention may delay onset and 
slow progression of symptoms. Promis-
ing results have been shown for certain 
drugs, including cholinesterase inhibi-
tors — donepezil (the most commonly pre-
scribed drug to address dementia), galan-
tamine, and rivastigmine — as well as 

434   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
memantine (Falchook, Heilman, Finney, 
Gonzalez-Rothi, & Nadeau, 2014; Klein, 
McNamara, & Albert, 2006; Tocco et al., 
2014); the effects are not consistent across 
varied types of degenerative conditions, 
making diagnostic processes paramount 
to decisions regarding possible drug 
prescriptions.
Many drugs commonly prescribed to 
people with neurogenic cognitive impair-
ments have deleterious effects on their 
intact cognitive abilities. As mentioned 
earlier in the context of pharmacotherapy 
for stroke and brain injury survivors, 
medication prescribed for any number 
of concomitant health conditions (e.g., 
cancer, diabetes, allergies, seizure disor-
ders, infections) may lead to exacerbation 
of cognitive-communicative symptoms. 
Antipsychotic medications in particular 
(often administered to control undesir-
able behavior; see Chapters 13 and 23) can 
increase the risk of infection, heart failure, 
hallucination, delirium, confabulation, 
and death.
What Is the Best Time to Initiate 
Treatment With People Who Have 
Neurodegenerative Conditions?
For people with neurodegenerative con-
ditions, the best time to initiate treatment 
is as soon as possible, once symptoms 
related to language of generalized intel-
lectual impairment arise. It is vital to 
develop memory aids and communica-
tion supports while a person is still able 
to participate in active decision making 
about what content and activities are most 
important. Also, to the degree that mem-
ory- and communication-enhancing tech-
nology may be helpful, training a person 
to use it early is likely to help ensure long-
er successful use as his or her cognitive 
abilities decline. As with all of our clinical 
work, building positive, affirming alli-
ances with the people served, including 
the people who care for them, is essential 
to enhancing quality of life through qual-
ity of communication.
Scientifically based theory plays a 
crucial role in evidence-based clinical 
practice. At the same time, on any given 
day, we treat specific people, not groups 
of people categorized by clinical symp-
tomatology. Theories of intervention must 
be translated to applicable, clinical prac-
tice, even if the translation is not always 
clearly direct or immediate.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Four basic purposes of treatment 
methods for people with acquired 
neurogenic disorders of cognition 
and language are listed early in this 
chapter. In what ways will focusing 
on your specific purpose at a given 
moment in time with a given client 
help you to be most effective?
	 3.	 Compare and contrast restorative and 
restitutive approaches to treatment.
	 4.	 Consider the mechanisms of brain 
changes listed and described in this 
chapter.
a.	 In what ways might each be 
facilitated through some sort of 
intervention?
b.	 Describe specific ways in which 
behavioral, pharmacological, and 
other aspects of intervention may 
lead to enhanced neurobiological 
recovery.

Theories of Intervention   435
	 5.	 Describe the optimal timing and foci 
of treatment for people with language 
disorders due to stroke and brain 
injury.
	 6.	 What factors influence the optimal 
intensity of treatment focused on  
cognitive-linguistic abilities?
	 7.	 What are the key challenges in determin-
ing the optimal intensity of treatment?
	 8.	 What are some specific means of 
slowing cognitive-linguistic decline 
in people with neurodegenerative 
conditions?
For additional learning and reflection 
activities, see the companion website.


Section VII
General Treatment Approaches

438   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
This section addresses general approaches 
to intervention for a wide range of 
cognitive-communicative disorders. In 
Chapter 25, we address the construct 
of treatment fidelity and discuss many 
general approaches, from social and life 
participation models to cognitive neuro-
psychological and cognitive rehabilita-
tion programs, to stimulation-facilitation 
methods, and on to smartphone apps, 
computer programs, and intensive and 
residential programs. We note that many 
of these approaches are not mutually 
exclusive from one another or from the 
more “specific” approaches discussed in 
Section VIII. In Chapter 26, we explore 
approaches to promoting communication, 
cognition, and life participation of people 
with various forms of dementia. In Chap-
ter 27, we consider how we might best 
engage as counselors and coaches in our 
work to support, empower, and inform 
people with neurogenic disorders of cog-
nition and language and the people who 
care about them. Finally, in Chapter 28, 
we delve into the topic of complementary 
and integrative approaches to wellness 
and their relevance to clinical practice.

439
Chapter
25
General Approaches for Enhancing 
Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities
In this chapter, we review a rich set of 
general approaches to treatment in neu-
rogenic language disorders. By general 
approaches, we mean that they are sets 
of principles and recommendations for 
how intervention is to be delivered. They 
reflect experts’ distillations of best prac-
tice in clinical aphasiology. These are 
loosely differentiated from the approaches 
described in the chapters in Section VIII, 
which include approaches and methods 
that can be encapsulated through more 
specific guidelines about how a method 
is to be carried out. The distinction is a 
blurry one. Researchers have completed 
carefully controlled intervention out-
come studies on some aspects of general 
approaches, whereas some specific meth-
ods have not been investigated at levels of 
evidence higher than anecdotal, descrip-
tive, or single-case studies.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you should be able 
to answer, in your own words, the follow-
ing queries:
	 1.	 What is treatment fidelity and how 
is it relevant to clinical practice with 
people who have cognitive-linguistic 
disorders?
	 2.	 What general social and life partici-
pation approaches are applicable to 
treatment?
	 3.	 What general treatment methods fit 
within social and life participation 
models?
	 4.	 What general cognitive neuropsycho-
logical approaches are applicable to 
treatment?
	 5.	 What is cognitive rehabilitation?
	 6.	 What is the stimulation-facilitation 
approach?
	 7.	 How may group treatment be imple-
mented and how can it help people 
with aphasia and related disorders?
	 8.	 How may apps and computer soft-
ware may be used to support com-
munication and aid in treatment?
	 9.	 What are intensive and residential 
aphasia programs and how can they 
help people with aphasia and related 
disorders?
What Is Treatment Fidelity and How Is 
It Relevant to Clinical Aphasiology?
One consideration in determining whether 
a treatment approach fits within a general 

440   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
or specific treatment category is whether 
it could be described in sufficient detail 
such that it is clear when one is using the 
approach specifically as it was designed 
or whether clinicians take liberties in 
adapting the approach. Therapist drift, 
the tendency for clinicians to vary a treat-
ment protocol according to their own pre-
dilections and in response to behaviors 
of the individual being treated (Waller, 
2009), is part of what makes intervention 
research extremely challenging.
Treatment fidelity is the degree to 
which an intervention method is admin-
istered in a reliable way or in accordance 
with a specific protocol. If treatment stud-
ies are carried out without consistency in 
research design and means of indexing 
treatment effects, then it is difficult to 
make conclusions about just what aspects 
of a method are effective, for whom, and 
under what circumstances (Gearing et al., 
2011; Waller, 2009). Despite the impor-
tance of treatment fidelity, it is rarely 
indexed (or even mentioned) explicitly in 
treatment studies in aphasiology (Hinck-
ley & Douglas, 2013). This is an area in 
need of improvement as we continue to 
build the evidence base supporting our 
intervention methods (Kaderavek & Jus-
tice, 2010; Schlosser, 2002). At the same 
time, especially outside the research con-
text, clinicians sometimes have good rea-
son to modify a method in a given context 
to suit individual circumstances.
What General Social and Life 
Participation Approaches Are 
Applicable to Treatment?
Social and life participation models share 
common tenets that quality of life is 
directly connected to quality of relation-
ships and the ability to participate actively 
in meaningful activities. Since being able 
to communicate is vital to relationships 
and activities, enhancing communication 
in people with communication disorders 
is fundamental to promoting their qual-
ity of life. These approaches view apha-
sia as a chronic condition with long-term 
life-affecting consequences and encourage 
clinicians to use creative, socially contex-
tualized methods to enhance functional 
outcomes.
The notion that enhancing life partic-
ipation is our ultimate goal as SLPs may 
seem obvious to some. However, when 
one examines actual practice, the common 
degree of focus on impairment-level defi-
cits without corresponding focus on real-
life communication needs is dishearten-
ing. Perception of social communication 
challenges as expressed by people with 
aphasia include:
• Having others misunderstand the 
nature of their communication 
disorder
• Feeling disrespected and being 
treated as children or as less 
competent or less intelligent
• Being left out of conversations
• Being unable to follow 
conversations because of fast 
talking and multiple speakers 
talking at once
• Being given insufficient time to 
respond during conversations
• Being treated as if they are a burden
• Being treated as if they are ill or 
unhealthy
• Feeling incapable of contributing 
meaningfully to others (Brown, 
Worrall, Davidson, & Howe, 2010; 
Dalemans, De Witte, Beurskens, 
Van Den Heuvel, & Wade, 2010; 
Shadden, 2005; Worrall et al., 2011)

General Approaches for Enhancing Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities   441
Social and life participation approaches 
are not specific treatment approaches that 
are typically encapsulated into explicit 
lists of treatment steps. Instead, they are 
addressed throughout this book as vital 
frameworks to embrace in all aspects of 
clinical practice. Here we review some of 
the key social approaches as they pertain 
to intervention for people with acquired 
neurogenic language disorders.
Life Participation Approach 
to Aphasia (LPPA)
The Life Participation Approach to Apha-
sia (LPAA) (introduced in Chapter 4 and 
expounded upon in Chapter 23) puts the 
life concerns of people with aphasia at 
the center of decision making. Although 
developed with a focus on aphasia, it is 
applicable to all people with acquired 
neurogenic communication disorders. 
Excellent clinical aphasiologists may 
ascribe to many other approaches as well; 
still, clinical practice with LPAA prin-
ciples as a foundation is vital to clinical 
excellence among all aphasiologists. For 
this reason, I am supposing that you are 
already a devotee of this approach.
Proponents of LPAA recognize that 
communication problems affect interper-
sonal bonds and thus virtually all aspects 
of one’s life. We also recognize the com-
plexity of communication in real-life 
contexts and that impairment-focused 
treatment strategies are only meaningful 
and effective when they are grounded in 
what is relevant, meaningful, and impor-
tant in the lives of the people we serve. 
We consider holistically the many factors 
that influence lifelong coping with apha-
sia. We see the role of clinical aphasiolo-
gists as vital to helping people live suc-
cessfully with aphasia, not just in acute, 
subacute, and rehabilitation contexts, but 
over years and decades, through various 
life transitions.
ICF-Focused Approaches
The WHO ICF (described among the 
conceptual frameworks in Chapter 4 and 
expounded upon in Chapter 5) has been 
the focus of several social approaches to 
all of the acquired neurogenic language 
disorders addressed in this book. The Liv-
ing with Aphasia: Framework for Out-
come Measurement (A-FROM; Kagan, 
2011; Kagan et al., 2008) is a means of con-
ceptualizing the outcomes of intervention 
for people with aphasia based largely on 
the ICF. Proponents recommend that cli-
nicians and scholars attend to four inter-
related life-affecting impacts of aphasia:
• Language and related processing
• Participation
• Personal factors, identity, and 
feelings
• The environment
These recommendations are certainly 
applicable to all other forms of acquired 
neurogenic language disorders, not just 
aphasia.
In ICF-focused approaches, aphasiol-
ogists are recognized as playing a critical 
role in modifying environmental barriers 
to life participation and enhancing com-
munication support. Adherents to this 
approach recognize how individual dif-
ferences are paramount in considering life 
impacts of communication disorders. We 
also recognize that just as family members 
and caregivers are important potential 
facilitators and supporters, they also may 
be responsible for exacerbating communi-
cation barriers.

442   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
An important point to note is that we 
can consider existing treatment methods 
through the perspectives offered by an 
ICF framework, even if those methods 
were not originally designed to address 
language disability through the ICF con-
structs. It is also important to recognize 
that decades before the emergence of the 
ICF, many clinicians advocated for envi-
ronmental systems approaches, which 
have much in common with ICF foci. 
Adherents of environmental systems ap- 
proaches recognized the dynamic aspects 
of individuals, their communication needs, 
and the social systems in which they play 
roles as part of their everyday activities. 
Proponents recommended that rehabili-
tation address not only the individual 
but his or her family, work environment, 
and social circles and that it should also 
emphasize sociocultural relevance.
Supported Communication
Supported communication is not a spe-
cific method but rather a philosophy and 
set of tenets and strategies that should 
be implemented as part of all aspects of 
intervention. Although major proponents 
have framed it as an approach to support 
people with aphasia, it is highly relevant 
and directly applicable to people with all 
forms of communication challenge. King 
et al. (2013) define communication sup-
port as “anything that improves access to 
or participation in communication, events 
or activities,” including:
• “Strategies, material, or resources” 
used by the person with the 
language disorder or anyone 
communicating with him or her
• Modifications to the person’s 
environment or activities
• “Supportive attitudes that foster 
communicative participation” (p. 9)
Communication support may involve any 
modality (e.g., gestures, drawing, writ-
ing, speaking, intonation patterns, facial 
expressions, postures, use of pictures, and 
use of augmentative and alternative com-
munication [AAC] devices or other forms 
of technology).
Simmons-Mackie (2013a) clarifies 
that support
might also involve internal proper-
ties, such as respect for the inherent 
competence of the speaker or knowl-
edge about the communication disor-
der. It includes methods that provide 
the skills, opportunity, resources, 
and assistance needed to participate 
in communicative exchanges, social 
interactions, and individually relevant 
roles or life situations . . . [It] requires 
not only an understanding of the . . . 
impairment and its consequences but 
also insight into what each individual 
requires to live successfully despite 
residual language impairments. (p. 11)
Examples of ways to make the com-
municative environment more accessible 
include:
• Supporting the individual and 
significant others in learning more 
about the nature and etiology of the 
communication disorder, strengths, 
and weaknesses and providing 
information through supported 
communication
• Providing education and counseling 
to significant others to improve 
attitudes and reduce stigma 
associated with communication 
problems

General Approaches for Enhancing Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities   443
• Providing local community-
based training programs to raise 
awareness and acceptance of 
aphasia and related disorders
• Advocating for improved policies 
and insurance coverage to support 
people with communication 
disabilities
• Continuously adding to and 
updating communication 
supports (communication 
booklets or notebooks, memory 
wallets and notebooks, remnant 
books, reminiscence materials, 
calendars, sticky notes, scripts, 
new apps, speech-generating 
devices, other forms of assistive 
technology, etc.) through dynamic 
interactive processes with multiple 
communication partners and 
ongoing assessment of what 
works best for whom (Garrett & 
Kimelman, 2000; Garrett & Lasker, 
2013; Hinckley, Douglas, Goff, & 
Nakano, 2013; Ho, Weiss, Garrett, & 
Lloyd, 2005; Kagan, Black, Duchan, 
Simmons-Mackie, & Square, 2001; 
King, 2013a, 2013b; Rogers, King, 
& Alcorn, 2000; Simmons-Mackie, 
2013b; Simmons-Mackie & King, 
2013)
In supported communication, people 
without language disorders are encour-
aged to take an active role in ensuring 
the best exchange of information pos-
sible, providing help in the form of cuing, 
requesting clarification, paraphrasing, 
asking for verification of what one has 
understood, and supporting content 
through multiple modalities. Aphasia-
friendly communication (described in 
Chapter 23) is encouraged. The use of 
pictures and graphic contextual support 
during conversation is recommended; it 
has been found to increase the number 
and degree of success of conversational 
exchanges and to enhance the number of 
conversational initiatives in people with 
aphasia (Garrett & Huth, 2002; Ho et al., 
2005). Assistive technologies that are rec-
ommended to help support communi-
cation include dedicated augmentative 
communication devices, speech-generat-
ing technology, digital recording devices, 
computers, software, smart phones, and 
apps for phones and tablet computers.
What General Treatment 
Methods Fit Within Social and 
Life Participation Models?
Several additional approaches repre-
sent important aspects of LPAA, ICF-
focused, and supported communication 
approaches. These include total commu-
nication approaches, AAC, partner and 
caregiver training, reciprocal scaffolding, 
aphasia mentoring programs, Toastmas-
ter programs, humor as therapy, and a 
variety of additional and often highly 
creative types of programming. Let’s con-
sider each of these briefly here.
Total Communication Approaches
Total communication approaches are those 
that encourage any means of communica-
tion to convey and receive information. 
No particular modality is required, and 
all attempts to communicate are consid-
ered acceptable (Collins, 1986; Lawson & 
Fawcus, 1999). In other words, the con-
tent is more important than how the con-
tent is delivered. Strategies include the 
use of gesture, mime, drawing, reading, 
and writing. Some people with aphasia 

444   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
and related disorders naturally gravitate 
toward total communication approaches, 
initiating their own means of compen-
sating for challenges with language for-
mulation and comprehension; others 
require more assistance (Rautakoski, 
2011). Combining means of expression 
rather than relying on verbal expression 
alone appears to actually facilitate spoken 
language abilities. Use of gesture with 
speech, for example, has been shown to 
enhance word retrieval (Lanyon & Rose, 
2009). Overall, using total communica-
tion approaches in conversation with 
people with neurogenic language disor-
ders, rather than spoken language alone, 
enables significantly more exchange of 
meaningful information (Luck & Rose, 
2007; Rose, 2013).
A challenge with total communica-
tion approaches is that many people have 
difficulty carrying over total communica-
tion strategies learned in a clinical context 
to actual spontaneous use in conversation 
(Purdy, 2002; Wallace, Purdy, & Skidmore, 
2014). This may be especially true for peo-
ple with executive functioning impair-
ments (Purdy, 2002). Some researchers 
have suggested that this challenge be 
addressed through training focused on 
multiple means of communication in an 
integrated way for a single concept at a 
time, enhancing the association of seman-
tic representations through combined 
modalities (Purdy & Van Dyke, 2011; Wal-
lace et al., 2014).
AAC
As we’ve already discussed, people who 
cannot communicate sufficiently through 
spoken language often benefit from alter-
native means of communicating (Bee-
son, Rising, & Volk, 2003; Ho et al., 2005; 
Marshall et al., 2012; Nicholas, Sinotte, & 
Helm-Estabrooks, 2011). Many research-
ers have demonstrated the benefits of 
specific types and combinations of AAC 
strategies. AAC is broadly defined and 
includes high-tech, low-tech, and no-tech 
means of communicating; it includes not 
only speech-generating devices and com-
munication notebooks but also gesturing 
and writing.
The Life Participation Model of AAC 
(Beukelman, Garrett, & Yorkston, 2007; 
Beukelman & Mirenda, 2013) provides a 
framework for proactively considering 
and implementing means of enhancing 
communication in people with complex 
and severe communication disorders. 
Interactive steps include:
• Assessment of participation 
preferences and needs
• Assessment of barriers to 
communication access and barriers 
to communication opportunities
• Trying out various AAC options
• Implementing promising forms of 
AAC
• Continuously assessing and 
providing support for AAC use
• Modifying recommendations about 
forms of AAC use as appropriate
In recent years, researchers have re- 
ported that using visual scene displays, 
rather than separate words or icons in 
printed or computerized AAC media, 
may help to enhance interaction in people 
with aphasia and related disorders. Visual 
scene displays are images of scenes that 
are “contextually rich pictures that depict 
situations, places, or experiences that 
clearly represent relationships and inter-
actions with important people or objects” 
(King, 2013b, p. 87). They may be com-
puter projected or printed and combined 

General Approaches for Enhancing Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities   445
with relevant text and have been shown 
to enhance active supported communi-
cation between people with aphasia and 
their conversation partners (Beukelman, 
Fager, Ball, & Dietz, 2007; Hux, Buechter, 
Wallace, & Weissling, 2010). 
Partner and Caregiver Training
Given how vital communication part-
ners are to communication rehabilita-
tion and coping with long-term commu-
nication challenges, and how little time 
people with neurogenic communication 
disorders have access to professional 
services for communication rehabilita-
tion, enlisting of others to participate in 
the continued process of communicative 
support is essential. Lyon and colleagues 
(Lyon, 1996; Lyon et al., 1997) described 
programs for recruiting and training vol-
unteers in local communities to support 
social and conversational participation of 
people with aphasia. Numerous research-
ers, clinicians, and higher education per-
sonnel offer such programs. McVicker, 
Parr, Pound, and Duchan (2009) offer a 
description and evaluation of the Com-
munication Partner Scheme, a program 
involving trained volunteers engaging 
with people with aphasia in meaningful 
home-based interactions.
Conversational coaching, originally 
described by Holland (1991), is a process 
of helping conversation partners learn to 
use strategies to improve communica-
tive interactions. Hopper, Holland, and 
Rewega (2002) demonstrated that conver-
sational coaching of people with aphasia 
and their spouses led to qualitative judg-
ments of improved communication by  
all involved; following a coaching pro-
gram, people with aphasia also demon-
strated improved standardized language 
test scores.
Many partner and caregiver training 
programs have been developed. Some 
are central to intervention approaches for 
people with dementia and their caregiv-
ers (see Bourgeois, Burgio, Schulz, Beach, 
& Palmer, 1997; Ripich, Ziol, Fritsch, & 
Durand, 2000). Some are integrated into 
specific treatment approaches described in 
Section VIII. Some are focused on couples, 
such as Boles’s (2009) Aphasia Couples 
Therapy (ACT). ACT entails educational 
components to facilitate understanding 
about aphasia, training and practice in 
supported communication, and mutual 
sharing of evaluations of quality of com-
munication and strategy implementation. 
Caregiver coaching and training programs 
often extend beyond foci on communica-
tion and conversation and into the realm 
of coping with the lifelong consequences 
of acquired language challenges, a topic 
discussed further in Chapter 27.
Reciprocal Scaffolding
Reciprocal scaffolding is a method in 
which a person with a neurogenic lan-
guage disorder serves as an expert or 
teacher in an interaction with a person 
(called a novice, learner, or apprentice). 
The novice may have greater language 
abilities but does not know as much about 
the content to be learned. The novice pro-
vides language modeling and feedback 
during naturalistic interactions while the 
person with aphasia teaches. The intent 
is to provide naturalistic means of sup-
porting meaningful communication and 
natural feedback regarding communica-
tive effectiveness, while empowering the 
person with a language disorder through 

446   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
a teaching role (Avent & Austermann, 
2003; Avent, Patterson, Lu, & Small, 2009).
Aphasia Mentoring Programs
An aphasia mentoring program (Purves, 
Petersen, & Puurveen, 2013) is a program 
in which people with aphasia serve as 
mentors to students in clinical education 
programs in the health sciences. The peo-
ple with aphasia share their knowledge 
about what it is like to live with aphasia 
and what they have learned as consumers 
of clinical services related to neurological 
disorders. Students benefit from the men-
tors’ personal sharing and the humaniza-
tion of clinical conditions. Mentors benefit 
through enhanced social engagement and 
empowerment through making important 
contributions.
Toastmaster Programs
Toastmasters International is an organi-
zation with clubs worldwide that provide 
means of developing communication 
and leadership skills for adults. Some 
clinics, aphasia centers, and universities 
offer special Toastmasters programs (or 
affiliated “Gavel Clubs”) for people with 
aphasia and related disorders. People 
with language disorders prepare, prac-
tice, and deliver speeches to one another. 
The intent is to provide real-word com-
munication practice in a supportive envi-
ronment, while enhancing social support  
and networking.
Humor as Therapy
Simmons-Mackie and colleagues have 
suggested that humor can be incorpo-
rated during language treatment and can 
even be used as a method of treatment 
itself (Potter & Goodman, 1983; Simmons-
Mackie, 2004; Simmons-Mackie & Schultz, 
2003). Benefits of humor include relief of 
embarrassment and tension, alleviation of 
sadness or depression, enhanced motiva-
tion, enjoyment, and a deepened sense of 
connection among participants in a con-
versation. There may be neuropsychologi-
cal benefits as well:
• Cognitive-linguistic associations 
evoked or enhanced through humor 
may improve learning and memory.
• Humor may lead to increased right 
hemisphere activation, enhancing 
bilateral cortical processing during 
language use.
• Funny material may focus attention 
on conversational or treatment 
content (see Simmons-Mackie, 
2004).
Importantly, humor may be effective 
regardless of the severity of a person’s 
cognitive-linguistic impairments.
Funny things often happen when 
we work with adults who have acquired 
neurogenic language disorders. As noted 
in Chapter 1, sharing humor is one of the 
wonderful aspects of getting to work with 
this diverse population. The positive feel-
ings that might be shared through occur-
rences of spontaneous humor can be 
harnessed by the excellent clinician as a 
means of building rapport. Spontaneous 
moments of laughter often occur when a 
person with a language disorder makes 
an error or struggles with a task. Making 
good, immediate judgments about how to 
respond in such situations is an important 
part of the art of clinical practice. Using 
humor to cover up a clinician’s lack of 
preparation is not appropriate. It is not 

General Approaches for Enhancing Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities   447
helpful if a person with a language disor-
der regularly resorts to superficial humor 
as a reaction to embarrassment; ideally, a 
person feels sufficiently unguarded such 
that he or she may practice and make mis-
takes without fear of judgment.
Assessing any given individual’s 
sense of humor and the sorts of con-
tent that he or she finds funny is impor-
tant. Simmons-Mackie suggests overtly 
explaining the importance and relevance 
of humor to the individual being served. 
Materials might involve cartoons, web-
sites, and movie and TV show clips. 
Activities might include joke sharing, 
journaling about funny stories, and mak-
ing funny gestures or facial expressions. 
Benefits of humor use might be indexed 
through conversational analyses, includ-
ing measures pertaining to such constructs 
as informational content, conversational 
initiation, turn taking, eye contact, and 
facial expressions.
Other Socially Focused Programs
Group treatment and intensive treatment 
programs (discussed later in this chapter) 
often provide a mixture of cognitive-neu-
ropsychological and social approaches. 
Additional models of supporting people 
with acquired neurogenic language dis-
orders include community-based and 
online stroke clubs and support groups, 
although these are typically not means of 
direct intervention by the SLP. Additional 
creative means of enhancing communica-
tion through socialization include art and 
music programs (Beard, 2012; Brotons 
& Koger, 2000; Cowl & Gaugler, 2014; 
Horowitz, 2013; Kahn-Denis, 1997; Luck-
owski, 2014; Macauley, 2006; Mihailidis 
et al., 2010; Seifert, 2001; Stallings, 2010; 
Truscott, 2004), aphasia theater troupes 
(Côté & Lafance, 2012), aphasia choirs 
(Polovoy, 2014), and companion animal 
and pet therapy programs (Gilbey & Tani, 
2015; Macauley, 2006; Matuszek, 2010).
What General Cognitive 
Neuropsychological Approaches 
Are Applicable to Treatment?
Since all language abilities can be said to 
be cognitive and neuropsychological, then 
almost all of our treatment approaches in 
clinical aphasiology could be said fit this 
category. However, we tend to associate 
the terms cognitive, neuropsychological, neu-
rolinguistic, and the like with information-
processing models (which may or may 
not entail assumptions about underly-
ing neural structures and processes). We 
generally consider approaches to belong 
in this category if they are based on mod-
els of mental representation and types 
and stages of information processing (see 
Chapter 4).
In treatment contexts, cognitive neu-
ropsychological approaches tend to focus 
on underlying impairments, with the pri-
mary goal of fostering restitution of brain 
function, and the secondary goal of helping 
compensate for lasting deficits. An advan-
tage of these approaches is that they lend 
themselves well to the process analysis 
approach to assessment (see Chapter 19). 
Process analysis helps to delineate areas of 
deficit, which, in turn, helps us plan treat-
ment programs to address those deficits.
At the same time, as we’ve discussed 
in previous chapters, one limitation of 
cognitive neuropsychological models is 
that they tend to oversimplify the over-
lapping and parallel nature of processing 
by suggesting that much of information 
processing is accomplished in a serial 

448   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
fashion. Another limitation is that the 
component constructs suggested (aware-
ness, storage, retrieval, recall, input and 
output buffers, etc.) do not generally cap-
ture the complexity of actual neural struc-
tures and processes required to achieve 
what is represented by those constructs. 
In the context of treatment, this is a prob-
lem in that, by focusing on specific neu-
ropsychological functions (e.g., attention, 
memory, and executive functioning) and 
tasks (e.g., comprehension of reversible 
passive sentences, subject-verb-object 
sentence construction, naming, writing 
words to dictation, completing sentences), 
we may oversimplify what is entailed in 
the types of cognitive-linguistic deficits 
we mean to treat and in the types of tasks 
we administer to treat them.
An associated challenge in treatment 
is a tendency to focus on decontextual-
ized impairment-level problems without 
incorporating relevant stimuli and tasks 
and without working toward real life-
affecting gains. Ylvisaker (1998) recom-
mended that we address this challenge in 
treatment by:
• Contextualizing goals for any 
cognitive activity into real-life 
needs and desires of the person 
being treated
• Using decontextualized exercise to 
reduce impairment only when there 
is clear evidence base for doing so
• Not first treating deficits in a 
decontextualized way and waiting 
to address them in a contextual 
way after some level of mastery, 
but rather contextualizing all of our 
stimuli tasks, activities, and goals 
from the start of intervention
Politis (2014) discusses how he was influ-
enced in his role as a clinician by taking 
on this context-sensitive approach to 
neuropsychological rehabilitation. For 
example, he writes that when working 
with a person with “language formulation 
difficulties,”
Instead of creating this goal:
•  Patient will produce a grammati-
cally and semantically correct sen-
tence using one given word (noun 
or verb) with 80% accuracy in each 
of two consecutive sessions.
I could target this:
•  Max will use a practiced script to 
communicate three key ideas to his 
grandparent via Skype (p. 7).
The merging of cognitive-neuropsycho-
logical approaches with social and life 
participation approaches is key to clinical 
excellence.
Several treatment approaches that fit 
within this general category are describ-
ed in Section VIII. The continued building 
of strong evidence-based treatment meth-
ods based on neuropsychological models 
will depend upon detailed specification  
of the theoretical rationale underlying 
each and clearly detailed aspects of treat-
ment stimuli and procedures (Cicerone  
et al., 2005).
What Is Cognitive Rehabilitation?
Cognitive rehabilitation is a general term 
used to encompass intervention to facili-
tate cognitive-communicative recovery 
following brain injury. It may include 
any training, teaching, coaching, model-
ing, behavior modification programming, 
and counseling. It may address any of the 
cognitive-linguistic and behavioral chal-

General Approaches for Enhancing Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities   449
lenges summarized in Chapters 12 and 
13. It may be restitutive or compensatory. 
It may be focused on impairment-level 
deficits or on life participation. Given how 
broad the term is, it is not highly useful 
in terms of enabling us to make state-
ments about underlying theories, specific 
methods, means of indexing outcomes, 
or evidence of efficacy, effectiveness, or 
efficiency.
A classic text on an “integrative neu-
ropsychological” approach to cognitive 
rehabilitation by Sohlberg and Mateer 
(2001b) set the stage for a great deal of 
research and clinical program develop-
ment in aphasiology and neuropsychol-
ogy. Those authors suggested a frame-
work for intervention with TBI survivors 
that includes:
• Problem orientation, awareness 
of problems, and goal setting 
(determining what the problem is 
and what to do about it)
• Compensation (learning how to 
function despite impairments)
• Internalization (enhancing the 
automaticity of strategy use)
• Generalization (applying what 
is learned in multiple real-life 
contexts)
Kennedy et al. (2008) provide a 
systemic review of treatment methods 
intended to improve executive functions 
in TBI survivors. Specifically, they exam-
ined outcomes associated with methods 
focused on problem solving, planning, 
organization, and multitasking. Overall, 
results are supportive in terms of docu-
menting positive effects of treatment on 
dysexecutive syndrome. At the same time, 
the authors highlight important weak-
nesses in outcomes research related to 
such methods. Weaknesses include:
• Failure to include sufficient sampling 
of older adults and combat veterans
• Underrepresentation of research 
participants from minority and low-
income groups, who are especially 
at risk for TBI
• A lack of data pertaining to TBI 
survivors who are in acute and 
subacute stages of rehabilitation
• Great variability across studies in 
terms of clinical methods, dosage, 
outcomes indices, and details of 
participant descriptions
Sohlberg and Mateer’s (2010) Atten-
tion Process Training (APT) for TBI sur-
vivors, a program designed to enhance 
focused, sustained, selective, alternating, 
and divided attention, has continued to be 
of interest in the clinical and research and 
literature. Other training programs geared 
toward enhanced attention and working 
memory have been described in the litera-
ture, but few are described well enough 
for replicability, an essential aspect of 
research supporting treatment outcomes 
(see Sohlberg et al., 2003; Wiseman-Hakes, 
MacDonald, & Keightley, 2010).
Given the vital role of attention and 
working memory in all aspects of lan-
guage processing, and given that deficits 
in various aspects of attention exacerbate 
or even because language challenges, this 
is a fertile area for continued growth in 
evidence-based practice in aphasiology 
(Heuer & Hallowell, 2009, 2015; Ivanova 
& Hallowell, 2011; Murray, 2004, 2012; 
Sung et al., 2009; Wright & Shisler, 2005).
The use of external memory aids 
with TBI survivors is often described as 
important in texts on cognitive rehabilita-
tion; however, as noted for other targets of 
treatment in the general domain of cogni-
tive rehabilitation, research in this area is 
also lacking in terms of design specificity,  

450   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
making it difficult to determine what 
aspects of intervention led to outcomes 
reported across studies (Sohlberg et al., 
2007). Specific treatment approaches 
related to people with memory impair-
ment, including not only TBI survivors 
but also with dementia, are described in 
Chapter 26.
Several authors have recommended 
variations of behavioral management 
and self-regulation approaches as part of 
cognitive rehabilitation for TBI survivors. 
Across published studies, results are posi-
tive for treatments geared toward:
• Contingency management 
(systematic and intentional 
manipulation of consequences 
for desirable and undesirable 
behaviors)
• Positive behavior interventions 
(methods focused on an 
individual’s internal control, 
leading to lifestyle change as a 
priority, with specific behaviors 
receiving less attention)
• Cognitive supports (e.g., assistance 
and prompts through memory 
aids, devices, and interactional 
participants (Ylvisaker et al., 2007)
Ylvisaker, Turkstra, and Coelho (2005) offer 
an excellent summary of such approaches, 
along with a summary of social approaches 
for improving cognitive abilities.
Some approaches to language treat-
ment in aphasia entail a focus on cognitive 
aspects of language processing such that 
they, too, might be considered to be sub-
sumed into the general category of cog-
nitive rehabilitation. For example, Helm-
Estabrooks, Albert, and Nicholas (2014) 
describe a method they call the Cognitive 
Approach to Improving Auditory Com-
prehension (CAIAC). It involves tasks of 
“attention” and “conceptual knowledge” 
said to help improve everyday cognition 
and communication from the single word 
to discourse level. Treatment involves:
• Abstract design cancellation tasks 
requiring a person to cross out 
target designs from arrays of targets 
and foils
• A variety of pattern-copying 
(“graphomotor”) tasks
• A symbols trails task, requiring 
drawing of lines between symbols 
within a given category
• “Odd-man-out” tasks that require a 
person to select designs and images 
that do not fit among a set of others
• Tasks requiring sorting of images 
by size and weight
Complexity across the first four tasks is 
increased by adding more designs and 
background distraction and by manipulat-
ing nontarget (distractor) designs in terms 
of their similarity to targets. The influence 
of progress on such tasks on actual com-
munication abilities has not been well 
addressed in the research literature.
Another example of cognitive reha-
bilitation applied to people with aphasia 
is Chapey’s (2008) “cognitive stimulation” 
approach, in which language treatment is 
considered to benefit from foci on cog-
nitive “operations,” including memory, 
convergent thinking, divergent thinking, 
and evaluation. She recommends carrying 
out problem-solving tasks requiring each 
of these operations in discourse contexts 
that are relevant to the individual treated, 
thus increasing the likelihood of carry-
over to spontaneous use in conversation. 
“To display higher-level cognitive behav-
ior, [clients] must go beyond information 
given in some way — for example, relating 
it to something else, reorganizing it, infer-

General Approaches for Enhancing Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities   451
ring from it, and using it as a springboard 
for creatively solving new problems. It 
involves applying, analyzing, synthesiz-
ing, and evaluating” (p. 487). As is the 
case with many approaches, the transla-
tion from such strong and important prin-
ciples underlying a method to a method 
specific enough to be tested empirically is 
a daunting challenge.
What Is the Stimulation-
Facilitation Approach?
The stimulation-facilitation approach to 
language treatment (Schuell, Jenkins, & 
Jimenez-Pabon, 1964), or Schuell’s stim-
ulation approach, is a set of strategies 
and principles developed by Schuell in 
the 1960s and 1970s. Recall that Schuell’s 
framework for conceptualizing aphasia 
as a unidimensional disorder was one 
of the frameworks for conceptualizing 
aphasia that we reviewed in Chapter 4. 
Her principles for treatment arose from 
her recognition of the interdependence 
of all aspects of language, receptive and 
expressive, from phonology to pragmat-
ics. Her recommendations for treatment 
stem from appreciation of the functional 
interconnectivity among brain structures 
involved in language.
Coelho, Duffy, and Sinotte (2008) 
aptly describe the stimulation approach as 
a method of “strong, controlled and inten-
sive auditory stimulation of the impaired 
auditory symbol system” (p. 439) in people 
with aphasia. The focus on auditory stim-
ulation is in recognition of the fact that all 
people with aphasia tend to have at least 
some difficulty with auditory comprehen-
sion. This is a general restitutive approach 
that includes recommendations on best 
practices for treatment and includes con-
ditions that we should consider control-
ling for optimal auditory stimulation:
• Linguistic structure
• Articulatory clarity
• Discriminability among response 
choices
• Multisensory stimulation
• Repetition
• Rate and pause
• Prompts and cues
• Attention to meaningfulness and 
frequency of words
• Abstractness
• Word stress
• Parts of speech
• Psychological and physical factors
• Response modalities
• Appropriateness of feedback
Note that any of the factors listed above 
might be manipulated to enhance or detract 
from linguistic performance in people 
with aphasia and thus are consistent with 
the type of potentially confounding fac-
tors we considered in Chapter 19.
How May Group Treatment 
Be Implemented and How Can 
It Help People With Aphasia 
and Related Disorders?
Group treatment in aphasia and related 
disorders has become more and more 
popular as restrictions on access to indi-
vidualized treatment in health care con-
texts has led to the offering of alternative 
means of providing intervention. By com-
bining multiple people in one session, the 
cost per person is less, so group treatment 
can be a more affordable option for many, 
especially if they do not have insurance 
coverage for individual treatment. Cost 

452   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Group Treatment Activity Ideas
• Review and develop the group’s individual and collective 
goals together.
• Give each group member a list of topics discussed in 
the group during the year. Have each member take one 
to review with the group. Examples might be listing 
activities they can do over the summer, strategies for 
educating others about aphasia or related disorders, 
specific strategies to help when one can’t find a word 
for something one wants to say, ways other people can 
help improve communication, and so on. This is a good 
review strategy and gives each member a chance to lead a 
discussion.
• Have all members write down a goal they want to 
accomplish, and then put it in an envelope and mail it to 
themselves in a month or so.
• Have a slide show of pictures from several sessions set to 
music.
Box
25–1
is certainly not the only or even primary 
benefit of treatment in groups. Bonds 
among group members can help them to 
cope with multiple challenges, especially 
social withdrawal and isolation, which are 
serious consequences of acquired neuro-
genic language disorders. Also, supported 
communicative interactions in authentic 
social contexts ideally promote general-
ization of conversational strategies.
There are several types of treatment 
groups. They may be designed to facilitate 
recovery, coping strategies, information 
sharing, or social support; they are often 
used to address any combination of these 
at once. Sometimes significant others are 
included in groups for education and sup-
port. Sometimes they are excluded so that 
group members may focus on connecting 
with one another.
Groups may comprise people with 
similar types of communication disor-
ders and similar levels of severity, or they 
may include more eclectic combinations 
of people. Several researchers have doc-
umented the efficacy of varied types of 
group treatment approaches for people 
with aphasia and related disorders (Allen, 
Mehta, McClure, & Teasell, 2012; Bol-
linger, Musson, & Holland, 1993; Booth 
& Swabey, 1999; Clausen & Beeson, 2003; 
Elman, 2007a, 2007b; Elman & Bernstein-
Ellis, 1999; Falconer & Antonucci, 2012; 
Kearns & Elman, 2008; Marshall et al., 
2012; Simmons-Mackie & Elman, 2011; 
van der Gaag et al., 2005; Wertz et al., 
1981). Group treatment may be impair-
ment focused at times, incorporating spe-
cific evidence-based neuropsychologi-
cally based treatment approaches. Still, 
groups are naturally social in nature. Sug-
gestions for activities that could be used 
to enhance opportunities to complement 
group goals are listed in Box 25–1.

General Approaches for Enhancing Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities   453
• Take pictures of the group members. You could have a 
discussion about who is the tallest, shortest, wearing the 
most colorful shirt/blouse, has the least hair, and so on.
• Have a fire in a fireplace, burning cards describing 
something negative each group member wants to get 
rid of.
• Play 20 questions with a given picture of known topic (e.g., 
food).
• Write a get well card for a member who is ill.
• Bring in pictures from family vacations and discuss them.
• Given a letter, have each person name as many of 
something (e.g., foods, animals, clothes, cars, places, things 
that start with a certain letter, etc.) as they can.
• Discuss how as a group they support each other.
• Ask each other questions, varying types of information 
requested.
• Discuss memories associated with holidays as those 
holidays arise.
• Review major parts of speech; use Madlibs-type games to 
elicit parts of speech within contrived stories about group 
members.
• Ask them to imagine they are stranded in a forest; have 
them name the top five things they would want to have.
• When a member has a grandchild, have group members 
ask questions, discuss, and congratulate.
• Discuss what is involved in buying a house, how to do it, 
and so on.
• Write a letter to a group member who is gone, traveling, 
ill, or no longer in the group.
• Discuss places where group members have family; talk 
about who has the most dispersed family.
• Have a surprise retirement party for a group member.
• Play Scrabble.
• Play aphasia bingo, containing some information about 
particular members; members and other people present 
walk around trying to find this info from others at the 
meeting.
• Go out to dinner to various ethnic or theme restaurants.
• Have an aphasia grand rounds attended by SLPs and 
graduate students.
• Create “advice to ____” sheets; have members give advice 
to SLPs, RNs, doctors, caregivers, as well as other people 
with aphasia visiting the group.

454   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Practice a sales presentation for the group.
• Practice explaining what aphasia is and is not.
• Play a word game: come up with the word that begins 
with the last letter of the previously named word (e.g., 
“beg” – “gate” – “eat” – etc.).
• Discuss planning and execution of different activities 
(making an omelet, planning a vacation).
• Decided what one should bring to a party.
• Make a list of the least favorite things to bring to a  
party.
• Have midterm evaluations of personal goals.
• Take a personality questionnaire and talk about the  
results.
• Play hangman.
• Discuss “What if” situations (e.g., What if you could meet 
any person from history? Who would you want to meet?)
• Play commercially available games that encourage 
social interaction through multiple modalities, such as 
Zobmondo, Moods, Pictionary, and Hilarium.
• Make clay sculptures and discuss the creations that 
emerge.
• Paint a large canvas together and discuss the painting that 
emerges.
• Go bowling.
• Have a picnic.
• Have a potluck meal.
• Watch a film and discuss it.
• Invite a local performing artist to entertain the group in an 
interactive way.
• Tell chain stories (stories in which one person begins with 
a sentence or two and then the next continues, and so on, 
around the room).
• Make bookmarks from old greeting cards.
• Have brief guest lectures on supportive topics (e.g., coping 
with depression, facilitating communication, enhancing 
motivation) and leave plenty of time for discussion and 
questions.
• Have a workshop on computer use.
• Have a workshop on using social media, such as Facebook 
and Instagram, to connect with other people who have 
aphasia.
• Have a book club series using supported communication 
for reading and discussing books.

General Approaches for Enhancing Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities   455
How May Apps and 
Computer Software Be Used 
to Support Communication 
and Aid in Treatment?
Apps for use on smartphones and touch-
screen tablets or iPad computers as well 
as computer software programs are ever-
increasing in number and scope. Some 
enable extensive practice outside of treat-
ment, tailored to individual needs. This 
extends the amount of practice in which 
a person can engage outside of treatment 
sessions with a clinician. Apps may also 
help consolidate and generate treatment 
stimuli to be used in treatment, saving 
valuable preparation time and helping 
to ensure that stimulus images are not 
outdated.
Tactus Therapy Solutions (http://
www.tactustherapy.com) provides a 
wide range of apps that generate activi-
ties related to a host of cognitive-linguistic 
abilities (e.g., naming, asking and answer-
ing questions, reading comprehension, 
writing, visual attention, and memory). 
Subscription-based apps and activities 
within apps can be selected to target an 
individual’s goals. Features within apps, 
such as the difficulty level and the num-
ber of items to be included in practice 
sessions, can be manipulated by the SLP. 
The user gets feedback on each activity 
and session. Scores and reports can be 
generated for the clinician. The clinician 
can monitor the user’s performance and 
adjust practice assignments by logging in 
remotely from a separate device or while 
working in person with the user.
Morespeech (moresopeech.com) is 
another subscription-based program that 
enables practice with a variety of cognitive- 
linguistic tasks at varied difficulty levels. 
It has a feature that automatically adjusts 
task difficulty according to how the user 
is performing. Morespeech is a Web app, 
meaning that it can be run from a com-
puter, tablet, or smartphone, regardless of 
operating system.
Examples of specialized software 
include AphasiaScripts (Cherney, Halper, 
Holland, & Cole, 2008) for practice and 
use in supported conversation, allow-
ing personalization (ricaaphasiascripts​
.contentshelf.com), and Coglink (coglink.
com), a simple program that facilitates 
email use that may be personalized for 
an individual’s needs. Several types of 
software packages are available to sup-
port reading and writing, including word 
prediction, text-to-speech, and speech-
to-text functions. Some are available for 
free or low cost (e.g., Dragon Dictation 
[http://www.nuance.com/dragon], Nat-
uralReader [http://naturalreaders.com], 
and TTSReader [http://sphenet.com]). 
Some software programs and apps allow 
for preprogramming of things people are 
likely to want to say frequently and also 
allow for preparing in advance to tell sto-
ries or jokes. Examples are Video-Assisted 
Speech Technology (VAST) (http://www​
.speakinmotion.com) and SentenceShaper 
(http://www.sentenceshaper.com). Others 
help with depression, self-empowerment, 
and fatigue management.
General programs and apps that are  
not specifically designed for clinical groups 
may be helpful for people with memory 
challenges. Examples are calendars, talk-
ing photo albums, grocery lists, alarms, 
and text reminders. Word-processing pro-
grams (spellchecking, grammatical assis-
tance, thesaurus) may also be helpful for 
supporting written communication.
Many AAC apps are designed for peo-
ple with little or no speech but good lan-
guage skills so are not appropriate for peo-
ple with significant language problems.  

456   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
AAC apps that are symbol based and allow 
for generating spoken messages include:
• Proloquo2Go (http://www​
.assistiveware.com/product/
proloquo2go)
• TalkTablet (http://www.talktablet​
.com)
• Lingraphica SmallTalk (http://
www.aphasia.com/)
• TalkRocket Go (http://myvoiceaac​
.com/app/talkrocketgo/)
• Touch Chat (https://touchchatapp​
.com/)
A dynamic feature-matching process 
for apps entails identifying an individual’s 
current and potential future communica-
tion needs, matching strengths and needs 
to available technology with input from 
the individual, and assessing appropriate-
ness of the match by actually trying it out 
in supported naturalistic environments 
(Gosnell, Costello, & Shane, 2011). Since 
there are literally thousands of apps that 
may be beneficial to adults with acquired 
language disorders, and since there 
are more emerging all the time, a more 
substantial listing here would quickly 
become outdated. It is best that SLPs stay 
abreast of new developments through the 
research literature, continuing education 
opportunities, professional listservs, and 
individualized testing of tools that are 
easily found online.
Commercial vendor websites abound. 
When considering available technology, 
it may be helpful to refer to third-party 
online resources to reduce the influence 
of commercial claims made by companies 
selling the technology described. Aphasia 
Software Finder (ASF) (http://www.apha-
siasoftwarefinder.org) offers a large array 
of references about software and apps 
that may benefit people with cognitive-
linguistic disorders. ASF was established 
through a not-for-profit entity (Tavistock 
Trust for Aphasia). Its content is presented 
in a manner designed to facilitate naviga-
tion and comprehension by people with 
aphasia, including video demonstrations 
about how to use almost each of its pages, 
simplified language, clear print with 
important words highlighted, and sub-
stantial white space. ASF provides search-
able databases by app name or by desired 
features.
Additional helpful online resources 
for learning about apps and other poten-
tially helpful technology include:
• AAC TechConnect (aactechconnect.
com)
• Ablenet (http://www.ablenetinc​
.com)
• AbilityNet (https://www.ability 
net.org.uk/)
• Aphasia Toolbox (http://www​
.aphasiaapps.com/)
It may also be helpful to search online 
apps stores associated with the brand of 
any device being used. No matter what 
technology is used in treatment, a tool 
and its use do not constitute treatment. 
Also, just using an app or practicing a 
skill is not necessarily helpful. As with all 
treatment tools and methods, attention to 
principles of evidence-based practice is 
essential.
What Are Intensive and Residential 
Aphasia Programs and How Can 
They Help People With Aphasia 
and Related Disorders?
A growing trend over the past three 
decades has been the offering of intensive 
aphasia programs. This usually involves 
registration for a set period (1 to 4 weeks, 

General Approaches for Enhancing Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities   457
for example), often at a university or free-
standing aphasia center. Participants join 
in group and individual treatment and 
provide mutual support. In some pro-
grams, spouse/partner/caregiver support 
and education are also incorporated. Many 
provide training on use of smartphone and 
tablet apps (Hoover & Carney, 2014).
Although the nature of programs 
varies widely, most have in common the 
goals of harnessing the power of intensive 
treatment and practice to advance neuro-
plasticity in recovery and social support 
through information sharing and group 
activities (Rose, Cherney, & Worrall, 
2013). Most published literature about 
such programs is merely descriptive. 
Based on results of a survey of intensive 
programs in four countries, Rose et al. 
(2013) discuss commonalities and differ-
ences among programs in terms of how 
they are staffed, their philosophies and 
values, means of funding, admission cri-
teria, types of activities in which partici-
pants engage, degree of family/caregiver 
involvement, and the means by which out-
comes are assessed. Winans-Mitrik et al.  
(2014) provide an excellent summary of 
important variables that influence the 
outcomes of intensive programs. They 
also detail evidence of positive treatment 
outcomes associated with a residential 
aphasia program offered through the 
VA Pittsburgh Healthcare System. They 
frame their results according to outcomes 
pertaining to cognitive-linguistic abili-
ties, client-reported effects, and caregiver 
(“surrogate”) assessments of the client’s 
communicative abilities.
Some residential programs provide 
lodging for participants, whereas some 
require that participants from out of town 
secure lodging in nearby hotels. The costs 
of programs vary widely. Given that qual-
ity may vary according to the type of pro-
gram offered and the expertise of the cli-
nicians and staff members, it is important 
that consumers investigate their options 
carefully. Jackie Hinkley provides an 
online list of U.S.-based intensive aphasia 
programs on her website (http://www.
slandp.com/?p=56). Bungalow Software 
(http://bungalowsoftware.com/rehab/
aphasia_rehab_centers.htm) has a listing 
of aphasia centers in the United States and 
Canada, many of which provide inten-
sive programming. Several of the web-
sites provided in Chapter 27 (see Table 
27–1) include summaries of residential 
and intensive programs in different geo-
graphic regions.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Describe how a lack of treatment 
fidelity in studies of intervention is a 
challenge to evidence-based practice.
	 3.	 How do you think too much focus on 
treatment fidelity might impede the 
best approach to treatment for a given 
person with a neurogenic language 
disorder?
	 4.	 Describe some social communication 
challenges reported by people with 
aphasia. How might you, as a clini-
cian, help to address these?
	 5.	 Many authors who write about and 
are proponents of LPAA are the same 
as those who write about ICF-focused 
approaches. Why do you think this is 
the case?
	 6.	 Describe how you might implement 
staff training on supported commu-
nication within a skilled nursing or 
rehabilitation facility.
	 7.	 Describe how you might include a 
partner or significant other in the use 

458   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
of supported communication during 
direct treatment sessions.
	 8.	 In what ways is AAC use relevant to 
treatment of people with aphasia?
	 9.	 What do you think would be the ben-
efits and challenges of an aphasia 
mentoring program?
10.	 How might a Toastmaster’s program 
bring about benefits to a person with 
a neurogenic language disorder that 
would be hard to achieve through 
individual treatment sessions?
11.	 Do you think humor is a viable com-
ponent of treatment for neurogenic 
communication disorders? Why or 
why not?
12.	 Is it possible to be a proponent of 
LPAA and also of neuropsychological 
approaches? Why or why not?
13.	 Describe how Schuell’s stimula-
tion-facilitation approach might be 
described within a general frame-
work of best practices for treatment, 
as described in Chapter 23.
14.	 Describe the aspects of group treat-
ment that might have the greatest 
influence on treatment outcomes.
15.	 What are the optimal treatment out-
comes measure for group treatment? 
Why?
16.	 What do you think might be some 
of the logistical challenges in start-
ing and maintaining group treatment 
programs?
17.	 Which of the group activities listed in 
Box 25–1 most interest you? Why?
18.	 Add your own ideas to the list in Box 
25–1.
19.	 Download some of the free apps and 
software programs mentioned in this 
chapter, or others that you find on 
your own. What are some features 
that you think would be especially 
helpful?
20.	 What are advantages and challenges 
of using apps during actual treatment 
sessions? Of having clients use them 
on their own outside of treatment?
21.	 How might you help people inter-
ested in an intensive residential apha-
sia program choose the best program 
to fit their needs?
22.	 Many clinical aphasiologists are so 
busy fulfilling heavy caseloads and 
productivity demands, they do not 
have time to engage in intervention 
that does not fit the mode of one-
on-one treatment sessions in clinical 
environments. If you did not have 
such demands and could engage in 
any type of creative programming to 
assist people with aphasia and related 
disorders, what types of programs 
might you choose to initiate? What 
would be the goals of such programs?
See the companion website for additional 
learning and teaching materials.

459
Chapter
26
Facilitating Communication 
in People With Dementia
As reviewed in Chapters 11, 12, and 13, 
many of the greatest challenges reported 
by formal and informal caregivers of 
people with dementia entail challenges 
in communication. Challenges such as 
repeated questioning, perseverative com-
ments, and mutual expressions of frustra-
tion and anger over breakdowns in com-
munication lead to frustration and reduce 
the quality of relationships. For people 
who care for a person with dementia, the 
progressive loss of companionship and 
the ongoing change in the person’s iden-
tity lead to a sense of grief and lack of con-
trol. Strategies to help caregivers improve 
communication are thus paramount to 
enhancing quality of communication, 
which we know enhances quality of life.
We noted in Chapter 13 that there are 
numerous strategies that help elicit the 
best of intact cognitive and linguistic skills 
and reduce problematic behaviors in peo-
ple with dementia and other degenerative 
conditions. Unfortunately, strategies that 
may be used to help improve communica-
tion are often not intuitive. Without train-
ing, caregivers and professionals may 
respond in ways that actually exacerbate 
communication challenges, frustration, 
and social isolation rather than reduce 
them and promote person-first, empow-
ering strategies. There is substantial evi-
dence that people with memory loss and 
related executive function deficits who 
have difficulty engaging in meaningful 
conversations with untrained partners 
may engage much more meaningfully 
with partners trained to elicit and sup-
port quality interactions (Byrne & Orange, 
2005; Hopper, 2003; Orange, Ryan, Mer-
edith, & MacLean, 1995; Ripich & Wykle, 
1996; Santo Pietro & Otsuni, 2003). Addi-
tionally, there is a growing evidence 
base supporting direct SLP treatment for 
people with dementia (see Hopper et al., 
2013, for a systematic review).
In earlier chapters, we have addressed 
how people who have degenerative cog-
nitive disorders often encounter barriers 
to accessing treatment that would likely 
benefit them. This is largely due to:
• The acute care medical model on 
which most health care delivery 
systems are based (i.e., people are 
treated and they get better or are 
cured and get on with their lives), 
which does not take into account 
the ongoing long-term needs of  
people with degenerative conditions.
• Beliefs that people with incurable 
memory loss will not retain enough 

460   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
content from direct speech and 
language intervention (which 
typically requires learning) to 
warrant such intervention.
Many of the general approaches dis-
cussed in Chapter 25 are applicable for 
promoting life participation of people 
with various forms of dementia. Addi-
tionally, several methods have been 
developed specifically to address com-
munication challenges in people with 
dementia. In this chapter, we review some 
of the most well-known programs in this 
category.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries:
	 1.	 What are memory books and memory 
wallets and how are they implemented?
	 2.	 What is spaced retrieval training and 
how is it implemented?
	 3.	 What is the FOCUSED program and 
how is it implemented?
	 4.	 What are Montessori approaches to 
dementia management?
	 5.	 What are additional forms of pro-
gramming to support people with 
dementia?
What Are Memory Books and 
Memory Wallets and How 
Are They Implemented?
Memory books and wallets are collec-
tions of pictures, phrases, and words asso-
ciated with familiar people, places, and 
events that a person may have difficulty 
remembering (Bourgeois, 1992). They are 
generally used with people who have 
memory loss, including people with lan-
guage of generalized intellectual impair-
ment and memory loss associated with 
TBI. They have been shown to be useful as 
memory aids, AAC materials, direct treat-
ment materials, communication partner 
training strategies, and general supports 
to assist in meaningful conversation (Bur-
gio et al., 2001).
Memory books are often in the form 
of three-ring binders containing photo­
graphs and printed words; these can 
easily be edited and added to over time. 
Photo albums may also be used. Some 
that allow voice recording and playback 
to accompany each page are available. 
Pocket-sized notebooks or index cards 
connected through a metal ring, both 
of which are easy to carry in a purse or 
pocket, may also be used. Memory wallets 
are typically plastic wallet inserts contain-
ing emergency contact information, words 
that are important to remember, schedul-
ing/calendar/appointment information, 
addresses, names, phone numbers, and 
associated pictures. Contents of memory 
books and wallets may also be kept on tab-
let computers and smartphones if the user 
is able to initiate using those media.
The rationale for the use of memory 
wallets and memory books is that people 
with dementia tend to retain long-term 
memory abilities far beyond the time 
that they lose short-term memory abili-
ties. Images and words help to stimulate 
retrieval of memories (McPherson et al., 
2001). Thus, conversations that focus on 
recall of content from the distant past will 
likely result in enhanced communicative 
interaction and social engagement. Also, 
repeated practice with personally relevant 
stimuli helps to enhance access to associ-
ated facts, words, and names. In addition 
to providing supports of social interac-
tion, memory books and wallets may also 
be used as reminders to engage in certain 

Facilitating Communication in People With Dementia   461
activities (such as taking medicine, keep-
ing appointments, and finding objects 
[such as keys]).
Many studies have demonstrated 
positive outcomes, according to a range of 
indices. In conversations in which mem-
ory notebooks have been used to support 
communication, people with dementia 
have been shown to:
• Increase the duration of 
engagement in conversation
• Produce more utterances within a 
conversation
• Produce fewer perseverative 
utterances
• Produce fewer off-topic utterances 
and more on-topic utterances
• Engage in a single topic for a 
greater number of conversational 
turns
• Produce utterances of greater length 
and complexity
• Produce less ambiguous (more 
easily interpretable) utterances
• Provide more appropriate answers 
to questions about related content
• Improve naming and accuracy 
of naming of people and object 
depicted and labeled
• Demonstrate independent use of 
the aid (Alm et al., 2004; Bourgeois, 
1990, 1992, 1993; Bourgeois & 
Mason, 1996; Burgio et al., 2001; 
Gómez Taibo, Parga Amado, 
Canosa Domínguez, Vieiro Iglesias, 
& García Real, 2014; Hoerster, 
Hickey, & Bourgeois, 2001; 
Ingersoll-Dayton et al., 2013; Singh, 
Lancioni, Sigafoos, O’Reilly, & 
Winton, 2014)
Such benefits reinforce others who engage 
in communication while using them for 
conversational support; this, in turn, 
enhances the likelihood of continued 
engagement in higher-quality conversa-
tions than unsupported communication 
(Allen-Burge, Burgio, Bourgeois, Sims, & 
Nunnikhoven, 2001; Hoerster et al., 2001).
The communicative content of daily 
conversations as nursing staff members, 
physicians, volunteers, and other visitors 
engage with long-term care and rehabili-
tation center residents tends to be focused 
on content that relies on recall for recent 
events. Consider the following typical 
questions from a nursing assistant:
• When is the last time you used the 
restroom?
• Was your son here this morning?
• Has anyone changed your sheets?
• What did you have for lunch?
Quality of life may be enhanced by 
evoking more meaningful conversations, 
especially in an institutionalized setting 
where staff members may not be famil-
iar with an individual’s past and thus 
not otherwise have sufficient content to 
support communication about person-
ally relevant topics. According to myriad 
measures of communicative competence, 
strategies that evoke reminiscence and 
telling of life stories are far more effective 
than are those that rely on recent declara-
tive and semantic memory.
Consider how the following might 
evoke more meaningful and successful 
conversational interactions as well as 
positive affect, when supported through 
pictures and text:
• So, I see you were an opera singer. 
That’s amazing. Where did you 
perform? Do you still like to sing? 
What is your favorite opera?
• I see you have two children, Jules 
and Yvette. Tell me about how you 

462   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
used to celebrate their birthdays 
when they were little.
• I see you had a corgi named Willie. 
He was so cute. I used to have a 
corgi, too. What did you like best 
about having a dog?
Such conversations may also lead to fur-
ther meaningful positive interactions 
later. Consider, for example, how a nurs-
ing assistant might be more likely to:
• play a recording of opera music in 
the resident’s room or ask that the 
activities director initiate an opera-
related activity,
• ask additional questions about Jules 
and Yvette during a subsequent 
visit, and
• have a friend with a corgi stop by 
and let the resident pet it.
Creating memory books or wallets 
entails development of stimulus pages 
that contain photographs and words, 
phrases, or sentences, organized accord-
ing to general topics that pertain to that 
individual (e.g., My daily schedule; My 
family; My career; Places I have visited; 
My hobbies). Biographical information 
may be arranged from past to present 
or vice versa. Phrases and sentences are 
written from the perspective of the per-
son (e.g., I was born on January 31, 1978; 
My favorite foods are artichokes, candied 
ginger, and egg rolls; My son’s name is 
Zhuoming Chen). The ideal size and com-
plexity of words and pictures depend on 
the individual’s cognitive-linguistic abili-
ties as well as his or her visual acuity.
Including the individual in the pro-
cess of creating the materials is ideal. If 
a person in the early stages of demen-
tia assists, it will help ensure personal 
engagement in the development process 
as well as personal relevance. When pos-
sible, it is good to have family members 
or others who know the individual well 
tell about key past events, people, and 
accomplishments and provide personal 
photographs and other memorabilia that 
would most likely trigger distant memo-
ries. When such people are not available 
to participate or resources are unavailable, 
photos may be obtained through other 
sources, such as through online image 
searches and magazine clippings.
Once the initial materials are devel-
oped, they may be introduced by the SLP, 
a family member, or a trained volunteer. 
Uses depend on the goals for an individ-
ual. Activities may include:
• Looking at and reading one page at 
a time, stopping to converse about 
the relevant context
• Looking at a picture and using 
open-ended prompts, such as “tell 
me about . . . ,” or “what was it like 
when you . . . ”
• Elaborating on comments made by 
the person
• Asking for additional details
• Reading words phrases aloud or 
asking the person to do so
• Having the person show the book 
to someone else and explain content 
within it
• Suggesting looking at or discussing 
content in the book to distract the 
individual when he or she is sad or 
engages in undesirable behavior
Training staff and family members 
to use the book in supported communi-
cation, with encouragement for positive 
aspects, enhances the likelihood of mean-
ingful conversations in future interac-
tions. To increase the likelihood of their 
being used, it is important to see that the 

Facilitating Communication in People With Dementia   463
materials are not stuck in a drawer or cov-
ered by other items on a bedside table. 
Using a bookstand or attaching the book 
or wallet to a wheelchair may be helpful. 
As the person’s cognitive-linguistic status 
changes, treatment goals are to be reeval-
uated, and as additional input is provided 
by the person, staff members, and sig-
nificant others, the memory aids should  
be updated.
Some SLPs develop memory books 
and wallets as a component of direct treat-
ment. Some do so as part of a functional 
maintenance program (a brief period of 
evaluation, development of an interven-
tion plan, and caregiver training, as dis-
cussed in Chapter 13). Unfortunately, 
many SLPs do not have sufficient time 
allocated to create memory books and 
wallets for all of the people within a given 
facility who might benefit from them, let 
alone to train each staff member and fam-
ily member in how to use them to address 
individual goals. Thus, the role of the SLP 
is often one of trainer and coach of oth-
ers, such as family members, activities 
directors, and volunteer coordinators. The 
excellent clinician advocates for material 
resources and personnel to support the 
development, implementation, monitor-
ing of use, and revision of such aids on a 
regular basis, continuously building a cul-
ture of enhanced communication empow-
erment for people who have memory 
impairments.
What Is Spaced Retrieval Training 
and How Is It Implemented?
Spaced retrieval training (SRT) is “a 
method of learning and retaining infor-
mation by recalling the information over 
increasingly longer periods of time” 
(Camp, Foss, O’Hanlon, & Stevens, 1996, 
p. 196). The goal is to enhance accessibil-
ity to stored representations by repeat-
edly activating them and making a person 
aware of them (Bayles & Tomoeda, 1997; 
Camp et al., 1996; Cherry & Simmons-
D’Gerolamo, 2005). It is said to target 
implicit (unconscious, involuntary) mem-
ory, considered to be relatively robust in 
people with memory disorders associated 
with TBI and various forms of demen-
tia. Hopper et al. (2005) suggest that 
SRT facilitates cue-behavior associations 
(between verbal and auditory cues and 
face or object name associations; Hopper 
et al., 2005). SRT is classified as an error-
less learning method, which means that 
the individual is encouraged and praised 
for successes and not corrected or given 
negative feedback when he or she does 
not perform a task correctly.
There are two basic forms of SRT:
• A fixed-interval/uniform approach, 
in which the time between trials 
remains constant, said to help 
transfer information into long-term 
storage
• A randomized-interval/adjusted 
approach, in which the time 
between trials is adjusted according 
to the individual’s performance, 
said to enhance long-term retention 
(Morrow & Fridriksson, 2006)
The latter form is featured in most of the 
relevant published literature. The delay 
between subsequent trials is increased 
when the person responds correctly, first 
in intervals of 10 seconds until correct 
responses are given with a 1-minute delay, 
and then in increments of 30 seconds 
and 1 minute. When the person does not 
respond or responds incorrectly, the clini-
cian or caregiver restates the information  

464   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
and asks the person to repeat it. The delay 
is then decreased to the interval of the 
prior correct response.
Consider the sample script for an SRT 
session in Box 26–1. In the example, remem-
bering the doctor’s name is the focus. Use 
of memory aids, such as a memory wal-
let or calendar, could also be the focus. So 
could environmental cues and directions, 
such as where the cafeteria is located and 
how to get to the activities room. The tech-
nique can be taught to other caregivers.
Sample Script for an SRT Session  
Using an Adjusted Interval Approach
Clinician:  Let’s work on remembering 
your doctor’s name. Her name is Dr. 
Gutmann. What is her name? 
Client:  I’m not sure. Who?
Clinician:  We’re talking about your 
doctor’s name. Her name is Dr. 
Gutmann. What is her name?
Client:  Dr. Gutmann. 
Clinician:  Good. You know her name. 
She’s Dr. Gutmann.
(interval of 10 seconds)
Clinician:  Let’s see if you can remem-
ber now. What’s your doctor’s name? 
(20, then 30, and 40 seconds later . . . )
Client:  Dr. Gutmann. 
Clinician:  Right. Dr. Gutmann. Let’s 
keep practicing this. (10 seconds later) 
What’s your doctor’s name?
Client:  Dr. Cohen.
Clinician:  Your doctor’s name is Dr. 
Gutmann. (30 seconds later) We’re 
working on remembering who your 
doctor is. What’s your doctor’s name?
Client:  Dr. Gutmann.
Clinician:  Good. That’s right. It’s  
Dr. Gutmann. You’re doing well with 
remembering.
(40, then 50, then 60 seconds later)
Clinician:  We’re working on 
remembering your doctor’s name. 
Your doctor is Dr. Gutmann. What’s 
your doctor’s name? 
Client:  It’s Dr. Gutmann. I’m pretty 
sure.
Clinician:  Good. You’re sure and 
you’re right! 
(2 minutes of intervening activity or 
conversation) 
Clinician:  We’ve been talking about 
your doctor and remembering her 
name. What’s her name?
Client:  Dr. Gutmann.
Clinician:  You’ve got it! It’s Dr. 
Gutmann. (Then proceed to 4, 6, 12 
minutes, etc.)
The client and clinician may engage in 
other treatment activities and conver-
sation during the intervals.
At the start of the next session, the cli-
nician says, “Last time we worked on 
remembering the name of your doctor. 
What’s your doctor’s name?”
The same pattern is repeated until the 
response is correct at the start of the 
next session or two.
Box
26–1

Facilitating Communication in People With Dementia   465
SRT treatment outcomes that have 
been documented include:
• Improved ability to remember 
simple associations following an 
initial presentation, within minutes 
and days
• Improved face-name associations
• Improved naming of objects
• Improved use of memory aids
Joltin, Camp, and McMahon (2003) demon-
strated that treatment effects could also be 
obtained over the telephone. In a systematic 
review of SRT as carried out in 12 qualifying 
studies, Oren, Willerton, and Small (2014) 
concluded that SRT yields positive results 
in terms of learning of new information.
Although SRT is typically thought to 
be an approach to treat memory impair-
ment per se, Fridriksson, Holland, Beeson, 
and Morrow (2005) demonstrated that 
it could help people with aphasia with 
word finding and found that it was more 
efficient than a cueing hierarchy approach 
to naming. Of course, specific outcomes 
are variable according to the intervals 
implemented, environmental factors, eti-
ology of memory disorder, individual cli-
ent and clinician factors, and testing inter-
vals (e.g., within weeks, months, or even 
years). Challenges with SRT include that 
a person may remember the specific piece 
of information practiced but not the con-
text for it (e.g., remembering a doctor’s 
name, as in Box 26–1, but not knowing 
what type of doctor she is and where or 
why the client might see her).
What Is the FOCUSED Program 
and How Is It Implemented?
FOCUSED is not a treatment method but 
rather a set of strategies for enhancing 
communication with people who have 
dementia. It is not based on a single set of 
theoretical principles but rather represents 
the original authors’ (Ripich & Wykle, 
1996; Ripich et al., 1995) interpretation 
and testing of best practices in this general 
area. General strategies are recommended 
for use in real-life contextualized commu-
nication and are intended to be the basis 
for training of caregivers, family mem-
bers, health care professionals, and volun-
teers (Ripich & Horner, 2004). The goals of 
FOCUSED are to promote the best qual-
ity of interactions with people who have 
dementia and thus enhance quality of life 
for the person with dementia as well as all 
involved in such interactions.
A great deal of work on supported 
and total communication (see Chap-
ter 25) since the inception of FOCUSED 
has gradually decreased the empha-
sis on FOCUSED in caregiver training 
programs. However, it is summarized 
briefly here given the import it has had  
within the literature in this area. FOCUSED 
is an acronym representing each of the 
strategies listed and described in Box  
26–2.
Recommended training for profes-
sionals and volunteers using the approach 
involves six 2-hour modules. Research 
support is primarily in the form of case 
studies and small-group studies and does 
not tend to include quality-of-life indi-
ces or address long-term maintenance 
of effects (see Ripich, Ziol, Fritsch, & 
Durand, 2000, for an exception). Still, the 
simple approach to training, with hands-
on practice with each strategy, may lead to 
greater satisfaction of trained personnel in 
communicating meaningfully with people 
who have dementia (Ripich et al., 1995; 
Ripich, Ziol, & Lee, 1998; Small, Gutman, 
Makela, & Hillhouse, 2003). In addition 
to hands-on practice, an important com-
ponent of training is caregiver support  

466   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
in recognition of the added burden of 
communication on the part of caregivers 
(Orange & Colton-Hudson, 1998).
What Are Montessori Approaches 
to Dementia Management?
The Montessori approach, initially devel-
oped for use with children in educational 
contexts, is intended to enhance activation 
of intact intellectual and communicative 
activities and improved compensatory 
strategies through the use of:
• Emphasis on intact abilities
• AAC and other means of supported 
communication
• Multimodal stimulation
• Environmental accommodations 
taking into account participants’ 
cognitive, linguistic, motoric, and 
perceptual abilities
• Ecologically valid and personally 
relevant, concrete stimuli
FOCUSED Communication Strategies
F = Face to face. Face the individual directly; attract the 
individual’s attention; maintain eye contact.
O = Orientation. Orient the individual by repeating key 
words several times; repeat sentences exactly; give the 
individual time to comprehend what you say.
C = Continuity. Continue the same topic of conversation 
for as long as possible; prepare the individual if a new topic 
must be introduced.
U = Unsticking. Help the individual become “unstuck” 
when he or she uses a word incorrectly by suggesting the 
word he or she is looking for; repeat the individual’s sentence 
using the correct word; ask, “Do you mean . . . ?”
S = Structure. Structure the questions to give the individual a 
simple choice to respond with; provide only two options at a 
time; provide options that the individual would like.
E = Exchange. Keep up the normal exchange of ideas we find 
in conversation; begin conversations with pleasant, normal 
topics; ask easy questions that the individual can answer; 
give the individual clues as to how to answer.
D = Direct. Keep sentences short, simple, and direct; use 
specific, concrete nouns, rather than pronouns; use hand 
signals, pictures, and facial expressions.
Source:  Adapted from Ripich et al., 1995, p. 16.
Box
26–2

Facilitating Communication in People With Dementia   467
• Supported and contextualized 
cueing
• Positive feedback and opportunities 
for success
• Repetition
• Minimal reliance on episodic and 
working memory (Camp, 2001; 
Mahendra et al., 2006; Vance & 
Johns, 2003; van der Ploeg et al., 
2013)
The first-in/last-out model of cogni-
tive loss, the theory that the functional 
abilities learned earliest in life are those 
most likely to be preserved in people with 
dementia, is an important crux. The high-
est level tasks in which a person is still 
able to engage are the ones that should 
be implemented; as functional abilities 
decrease, easier tasks that lead to a sense 
of success should be implemented. Multi-
modal sensory exploration is encouraged. 
Facilitators of the approach are encour-
aged to adapt instructions according to 
the comprehension abilities of partici-
pants. Training of partners to be involved 
is a vital component of the approach 
(Schneider & Camp, 2003).
The Montessori approach is said to 
complement intervention goals of im- 
proved independence, self-esteem, posi-
tive affect, and participation in mean-
ingful social roles and activities. Given 
that the approach is highly adaptable, 
there are few parameters that would help 
ensure treatment fidelity within the con-
text of carefully controlled research on  
the approach. Activities may range, for 
example, from art projects using var-
ied media to seriation tasks involving 
arrangement of colored tiles from light to 
dark hues (Vance & Johns, 2003), to hair 
brushing or other self-grooming activi-
ties, to playing of card games to practice 
memory skills.
The approach may be implemented 
by SLPs, activities directors, nursing staff 
members, and other health care providers 
as well as trained volunteers. Montessori-
based activities to facilitate socialization 
and enhance communication in people 
with dementia have been tested in long-
term care contexts (Orsulic-Jeras, Schnei-
der, & Camp, 2000; Orsulic-Jeras, Schnei-
der, Camp, Nicholson, & Helbig, 2001), 
adult daycare centers (Vance & Johns, 
2003), intergenerational programs (Camp 
et al., 1997), and individual and group 
settings. Montessori-based programming 
for people with dementia is used in many 
countries, and training materials have 
been developed in multiple languages 
(Camp, 2010).
What Are Additional Forms 
of Programming to Support 
People With Dementia?
A multitude of additional caregiver train-
ing programs are available to support 
communication, slow the progression of 
cognitive-communicative decline, reduce 
caregiver burden, and improve social 
interaction for people with dementia and 
other forms of memory loss. An exam-
ple of a social approach used in a nurs-
ing home context is The Breakfast Club, 
described by Boczko (1994). The motiva-
tion for this approach is that long-term 
care residents with MCI and dementia 
are at risk for social isolation and have 
reduced opportunities for social interac-
tion. The basis for the approach is pro-
viding an ongoing breakfast club that 
encourages social participation during 
a multisensory activity, encourages use 
of each participant’s strength in com-
munication, and includes adaptations to 

468   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
individual preference, needs, strengths, 
and weaknesses. Possible activities are 
encapsulated in the form of sequential 
steps summarized in Box 26–3. Of course, 
progression through each step need not 
be completed in a linear fashion, as the 
approach is adaptable to individuals and 
context.
An example of a caregiver training 
program for which formal and informal 
caregivers may receive training and train-
ers may be certified to train others is the 
Savvy Caregiver Program (SCP). SCP is a 
packaged program focused on mediating 
caregiver stress through improved inter-
actions with people who have dementia. 
Components include in-person work-
shops, Internet-based training, a caregiver 
manual, a DVD, and an online workbook. 
Training content includes background 
information about dementia, notions of 
control, goal setting, means of manag-
ing daily care and behavior, self-care, and 
decision-making strategies (Healthcare 
Interactive, Inc, 2008; Hepburn, Lewis, 
Sherman, & Tornatore, 2003). The methods 
are said to be evidence based, although 
the research on outcomes is primarily gen-
erated by the authors and owners of the 
program. Benefits include positive care-
Breakfast Club Activities
	 1.	 Greetings and choice of nametags (varying field of choices 
to promote success)
	 2.	 Introduction of a topic: juice. Reading labels and each per-
son’s selection of juice choice
• Semantic cues:  Which is made from a red fruit? This 
one is from a fruit we squeeze . . .
• Forced-choice:  Would you like prune juice or apple 
juice? Do you prefer orange juice or apricot juice?
• Cloze sentence or carrier phrase:  I would love a  
fresh-squeezed glass of . . .
	 3.	 Introduction of a new topic: coffee. Use cues as above and 
also promote sensory experience by having members smell 
the coffee and talk about its temperature.
	 4.	 Discuss foods available and decisions on what each person 
wants.
	 5.	 Discuss how the foods are prepared (ingredients and pro-
cedures for making them).
	 6.	 Pass silverware, plates, and napkins, and serve breakfast.
	 7.	 Serve coffee. Facilitate discussion about how much cream, 
milk, and/or sugar to add.
	 8.	 Discussion while eating and cleaning up.
	 9.	 Continue discussion based on themes that arose during 
breakfast and clean-up activities.
Source:  Adapted from Boczko, 1994; Santo Pietro & Boczko, 1998.
Box
26–3

Facilitating Communication in People With Dementia   469
giver ratings of relevance, usefulness of  
strategies learned, and increased confidence 
in handling their caregiving roles. Draw-
backs are a lack of personalization on the  
individuals and situations at hand, a lack  
of suggested cultural and linguistic adap-
tations, a reliance on computer and Internet  
access, and the possibility of overwhelm- 
ing caregivers with substantial information.
For additional information about 
intervention related to memory problems 
and language of generalized intellectual 
impairment, see the evidence-based prac-
tice guidelines for dementia offered by the 
Academy of Neurologic Communication 
Disorders and Sciences (ANCDS; http://
www.ancds.org/). Also, search Speechbite 
(speechbite.com) for systematic reviews 
and research studies pertaining to several 
related topics as addressed from multiple 
disciplinary perspectives.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Why is it important that formal and 
informal caregivers be trained in strat-
egies to facilitate communication in 
people with dementia and other con-
ditions characterized by memory loss?
	 3.	 Imagine you were in an early stage of 
dementia.
a.	 What content would you most 
want in your memory book and 
memory wallet?
b.	 In what ways would you want 
your materials to be organized 
(e.g., themes, topics, types of 
materials, media and materials 
to be used)? On what would you 
base such preferences?
	 4.	 Describe the benefits that have been 
demonstrated through research on 
the use of memory books and wallets.
	 5.	 Imagine that you are the only SLP in 
a large skilled nursing and rehabilita-
tion center with a large number of res-
idents who have dementia. Imagine 
that you are unable to include work 
on memory books and wallets as part 
of your caseload.
a.	 What programming might you 
develop to ensure that every 
resident with dementia has a 
memory book in his or her room 
to be used during staff and visitor 
interactions?
b.	 How would you ensure that 
the memory books and wallets 
continue to be used in meaningful 
ways?
c.	 How would you ensure that these 
aids get updated periodically?
	 6.	 What are the benefits and limitations 
of SRT?
	 7.	 Engage in role-play with a colleague, 
with one of you playing the role of a 
person with dementia and the other 
as his or her caregiver. Take turns 
illustrating each of the seven strate-
gies in the FOCUSED program.
	 8.	 Develop a menu of options of activi-
ties in a Montessori-based program 
for people with dementia.
	 9.	 Describe the Breakfast Club approach. 
How might you implement it in a 
context other than a long-term care 
facility?
10.	 What are the strengths and weak-
nesses of packaged caregiver training 
programs, such as the Savvy Care-
giver Program?
More materials to foster teaching and 
learning on this chapter’s content may be 
found on the companion website.


471
Chapter
27
Counseling and Life Coaching
As we discussed in Chapter 23, our means 
of supporting people in coping with the 
long-lasting effects of language disability 
are more rooted in counseling, coaching, 
and education-oriented practices than 
they are in direct language intervention. 
Given the life-affecting nature of acquired 
neurogenic communication disorders, 
counseling or life coaching can benefit 
all people touched by such disorders. As 
clinicians, it is important for us to help 
determine the best people, approaches, 
and timing for extending support and 
empowerment for meaningful, fulfilling 
life participation. Given dynamic fluc-
tuations in each individual’s well-being 
during recovery from an acquired com-
munication disorder, or progressive loss 
of cognitive-linguistic abilities, what con-
stitutes optimal support is typically ever-
changing (Worrall et al., 2010). Despite 
the fact that counseling and life coaching  
are among the most important services 
that SLPs can provide to people with 
acquired cognitive-linguistic challenges, 
many clinicians report being underpre-
pared for the role (Sekhon, Douglas, & 
Rose, 2015).
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you should be able 
to answer, in your own words, the follow-
ing queries:
	 1.	 How might an SLP become an effec-
tive counselor and coach?
	 2.	 Is the SLP working with adults to be a 
counselor, life coach, or both?
	 3.	 What are important considerations 
related to counseling and scope of 
practice?
	 4.	 How might a speech-language clini-
cian adopt a counseling mind-set?
	 5.	 How does a clinician listen and re- 
spond empathetically and compas-
sionately?
	 6.	 How do we promote a positive out-
look without conveying a Pollyanna 
attitude?
	 7.	 How might multicultural differences 
affect counseling and coaching?
	 8.	 How might counseling moments 
be influenced by the time course of 
recovery and intervention?
	 9.	 How may coaching enhance self- 
advocacy?
10.	 What are best practices in responding 
to seemingly misguided statements 
by patients and their significant 
others?
11.	 What are effective ways to address 
emotional lability during clinical in- 
teractions?
12.	 What is the role of the SLP in address-
ing depression in people with neuro-
genic communication disorders?

472   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
13.	 How can communication counseling 
enhance end-of-life care?
14.	 What are ways in which opportunities 
for counseling can be missed?
15.	 How might some aspects of life 
improve after onset of an acquired 
neurogenic communication disorder?
16.	 What are some helpful information-
sharing strategies and resources?
How Might an SLP Become an 
Effective Counselor and Coach?
Throughout this book, we have empha-
sized the supportive and empowering role 
of the SLP in serving people with acquired 
neurogenic communication disorders 
and the people who care about them. 
Our counseling roles cannot be clearly 
distinguished from our roles as wellness- 
focused experts in other areas of practice, 
such as assessment and treatment. Many 
of the features of ultimate excellent clini-
cians highlighted throughout this book 
(e.g., summarized in Boxes 2–1, 17–1, and 
23–1) include important counseling traits. 
Given just how paramount this aspect 
of practice is to our work, we explore it 
further in this chapter. Of course, all SLPs 
should have mentored practice and formal 
education in counseling and life coaching 
that extends far beyond the content of this 
book. Counseling and coaching courses, 
continuing education programs, readings 
and reflection, and mentorship from expe-
rienced counselors are fundamental to 
continuous pursuit of clinical excellence.
There are several excellent texts de- 
signed to foster empowerment skills in 
general. Brumfitt (2009) provides excel-
lent theoretical and practical information 
about a vast array of approaches to assess-
ing and treating anxiety and depression 
and promoting well-being in adults with 
acquired communication disorders. Luter-
man (2008) offers advice and instructions 
for counseling with people who have any 
of a wide array of communication disor-
ders and their families. He provides clini-
cal examples along with specific counsel-
ing techniques.
Holland and Nelson (2014) offer a 
wonderful text on counseling from a well-
ness perspective for people with commu-
nication disorders across the life span. 
They include information- and inspira-
tion-rich chapters on counseling work 
with adults with acquired communication 
disorders and with people at the end of 
life. Their framework is rooted in positive 
psychology, the discipline of helping peo-
ple to lead full, meaningful lives and pur-
sue well-being and happiness. Strategies 
used in positive psychology are focused 
on optimism, resilience, hope, mindful-
ness, affirmation, and positive thinking, 
not on abnormal behavior or personality 
impairment (Seligman, 2002; Snyder & 
Lopez, 2002).
Payne (2015) provides a rich resource 
guide in her book, Supporting Family Care-
givers of Adults With Communication Disor-
ders. Emphasizing the importance of family 
dynamics, the complex roles of caregivers, 
and multicultural aspects of caregiving, 
she provides ample practical content to 
guide communication disorders profes-
sionals for developing skills and knowl-
edge in this significant area of practice.
Is the SLP Working With Adults to  
Be a Counselor, Life Coach, or Both?
It is worth taking a moment to reflect 
on similarities and distinctions between 
terms here.

Counseling and Life Coaching   473
Counseling is a professional, goal-
based collaborative process geared toward 
fostering mental health and wellness by 
encouraging changes in ways of thinking, 
feeling, and behaving (Kaplan, Tarvydas, 
& Gladding, 2014; NBCC International, 
2015). Life coaching (or wellness coach-
ing) is a professional means of helping 
people develop a clear vision of what is 
most important to them and empower-
ing them toward wellness and maximiz-
ing their personal potential; it is typically 
based on promoting strengths, moving 
beyond challenges, and keeping in mind 
a big-picture view of what they most want 
to achieve (International Coach Federa-
tion, 2015).
Counseling and life coaching out-
comes may include improved perspectives 
on challenges and strengths, empower-
ment, coping skills, relationships, and 
reduced anxiety, depression, and helpless-
ness. Both approaches depend on profes-
sional relationships that are focused on 
the client and his or her environment, not 
a mutual friendship. Although some but 
not all counseling approaches involve 
delving into analysis of past experiences, 
life coaching is more exclusively focused 
on what can be done in the present and in 
the future. Also, counseling may involve 
working to help people struggling with 
mental illness, whereas life coaching tends 
to be more holistically focused on wellness.
The term counseling for many has 
the connotation of a service provided by 
a qualified (certified and/or licensed) 
professional, such as a social worker, 
psychologist, or rehabilitation counselor. 
Although it may be practiced profession-
ally, life coaching is not necessarily prac-
ticed in a “clinical” environment; it has 
the connotation for some people as being 
less formal, and it is not regulated. That  
is, although there are certifications for 
professional life coaches (and accredita-
tion standards for training programs), 
these tend not to be required to practice 
as a life coach.
The type of psychosocial assistance 
most needed and desired by people with 
neurogenic communication disorders and 
that can be aptly provided by SLPs tends 
to fit in the intersection of counseling and 
life coaching. That is, we are profession-
als who foster mental health and well-
ness through changes in thinking, feel-
ing, and behaving, and it is incumbent 
upon us to provide support and empow-
erment to help the people we serve set 
goals and reach their greatest potential 
in terms of life participation. We do this 
to the extent that such work fits in our 
scope of practice; that is, inasmuch as our 
coaching and counseling are focused on 
enhanced communication and socializa-
tion, improved coping with persistent 
challenges, and reduction of the disabling 
aspects of cognitive-linguistic challenges. 
In this light, Holland and Nelson (2014) 
refer to our blended role as “communica-
tion counselors.” This role fits with the 
role of the clinician as “expert compan-
ion,” promoted by Park, Lechner, Antoni, 
and Stanton (2008) in their book on how 
medical challenges can lead to positive 
life change.
What Are Important Considerations 
Related to Counseling and 
Scope of Practice?
Counseling people with communication 
disorders is within the scope of practice of 
SLPs as characterized by virtually every 
national association or council overseeing 
SLP services globally and is a rich area for 
interprofessional practice (Wertheimer 

474   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
et al., 2008; Winblad et al., 2004; Work-
ing Group on Cognitive-Communication 
Disorders, 2005). At the same time, it is 
important to recognize the boundaries of 
our scope of practice and also the ethical 
ramifications of engaging in any type of 
service for which we do not have demon-
strated training and competence. Some 
SLPs and other rehabilitation profession-
als consider counseling in the realm of 
mental health professionals; they feel that 
anyone with an acquired neurogenic com-
munication disorder who would benefit 
from mental health treatment should be 
referred to others. There are four major 
problems with this:
• Mental health services are not 
always available.
• Mental health services are often not 
covered by third-party payors.
• Even when a psychologist, 
psychotherapist, or rehabilitation 
counselor is available and 
services are reimbursable, many 
do not have a solid background 
in communication disabilities, 
and many do not have training 
in supported communication 
(Mikolajczyk & Bateman, 2012).
• Some people, even when referred, 
do not pursue the referral, perhaps 
due to financial concerns and lack 
of insurance coverage, lack of 
convenience, and unfortunately 
pervasive myths that counseling 
is for people who have personality 
disturbances, are self-absorbed, 
or have deep-seeded secrets in 
requiring extensive dwelling on  
the past.
Ideally, mental health and rehabilita-
tion counseling goes hand-in-hand with 
SLP services to support people coping 
with cognitive and communicative chal-
lenges and the people who care about 
them. Within the SLP scope of practice, 
Holland and Nelson (2014) suggest that 
we view counseling not just as a specific 
service we provide but that we see it as 
integrated with the rest of the work that 
we do; they aptly recommend infusing 
intervention with “counseling moments.” 
The thrust of such moments may be cop-
ing, acceptance, insights, goal setting, or 
future planning (Brumfitt, 1995; Carvalho 
et al., 2011; Simmons-Mackie & Damico, 
2011). The context may be in direct indi-
vidual treatment, couples counseling, 
group intervention, caregiver training 
programs, or support groups (see Chap-
ter 25).
For reasons just described, referring a 
person for mental health services is often 
not sufficient, even when it is warranted, 
such as in cases of ongoing depression. 
Sometimes being an outsider to the per-
son’s immediate family context, especially 
in a friendly but professional role, helps 
boost a person’s receptivity to sugges-
tions. Many people need repeated encour-
agement to seek additional support. For 
people who are depressed, their depres-
sion itself may limit their willingness to 
pursue mental health services; many peo-
ple are embarrassed or feel stigmatized by 
having others know of their depression, 
let alone their communication problems. 
As anyone who has supported a person 
with depression knows, it can be a chal-
lenge finding an effective way to reach 
out and be supportive. Those who may 
have memory, attention, and comprehen-
sion problems may be more apt to follow 
up if they are given written reminders of 
referrals and engaged repeatedly in con-
versations about the potential benefits of 
mental health services and if their care-
givers are included in formation sharing 
about opportunities for mental health 
counseling.

Counseling and Life Coaching   475
How Might a Speech-
Language Clinician Adopt a 
Counseling Mind-Set?
Counseling starts from the moment we 
connect with a person we are serving pro-
fessionally. Before you enter a person’s 
space, pause, even if briefly, to adopt a 
counseling mind-set. Take a moment to 
reflect on your role as a motivator, a com-
forter, and a catalyst for hope, reassurance, 
and recovery. Consider what the person 
you are about to meet might be experienc-
ing. Consider what people who love that 
person are thinking and feeling. You have 
your own unique way of expressing your-
self as an affirmative, recovery-promoting 
presence. Whatever that is, before you go 
meet the person you are about to serve, 
take a deep breath and gear up to be the 
best helpful, knowledgeable, reassuring, 
and confident professional you can be.
Ideally, we provide counseling and 
life coaching throughout the interven-
tion process. Suggestions for doing so are 
summarized in Box 27–1.
How Does a Clinician Listen 
and Respond Empathetically 
and Compassionately?
Empathy is the ability to see the world 
from another person’s point of view; it 
involves tuning into another’s emotional 
state, desires, and sense of need. Compas-
sion is like empathy but has the conno-
tation of shared feeling, not just under-
standing; it is also linked to a sincere 
desire to provide support and help. Being 
Suggestions for Psychosocial Support
• Listen actively, paraphrase, and ask for feedback about 
what you think you have heard. 
• Repair communication breakdown rather than moving 
on as if you understand or assuming that you have been 
understood.
• Provide encouragement about strengths and progress.
• Provide active supported communication for expression of 
feelings and reflections on coping strategies.
• Encourage engagement in meaningful activities.
• Encourage scheduling of pleasurable activities on a regular 
basis.
• Enlist the support of family members and friends in 
addressing emotional concerns.
• Consult with others regarding environmental factors, 
such as room furnishings, lighting, wall art, photos, and 
decorative colors that may positively influence moods.
• Take your time; don’t rush interactions.
Source:  Brumfitt, 2009; Dunkle & Hooper, 1983; Holland & Nelson, 
2014; Payne, 2015.
Box
27–1

476   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
compassionate does not mean feeling pity 
for someone. In fact, feeling sorry for a 
person with a disability can be extremely 
disempowering (Northcott & Hilari, 2011; 
Simmons-Mackie & Elman, 2011).
We best express compassion and em- 
pathy as active listeners, not as experts try-
ing to fix a person’s problems. Empathic 
responding involves listening and reflect-
ing with true concern about a person’s 
feelings and perceived needs. Although 
some people are more naturally empa-
thetic than others, empathic skills can be 
learned and practiced; this is one of the 
reasons it is so important that clinical 
aphasiologists invest in in-depth training 
and mentorship in counseling.
How Do We Promote a Positive 
Outlook Without Conveying 
a Pollyanna Attitude?
Coaching from a positive psychology 
framework does not mean that we act 
as if all is fine and well, minimizing 
the degree of anger, mourning, frustra-
tion, grief, and loss that the people we 
serve may be experiencing. Although an 
empowering attitude is central to being 
a positive presence, cheerfulness is not 
a goal that trumps empathy or compas-
sion. Responding with “Great job” when 
a person has failed miserably at a memory 
or word-finding task, for example, is not 
typically empowering. A more authentic 
response might be to just move on, or to 
respond nonverbally in recognition of 
the attempt, or periodically (not too fre-
quently) saying, “I know, that is really 
tough. Let’s keep working at it.”
Saying “Well at least she got to live 95 
years” to a client whose mother just died 
is not typically helpful. A more empathic 
response would be, “I am so sorry. What 
a painful loss that is. I know she was so 
important to you.” Nonverbal responses, 
too, such as a simple stroke on the arm or 
hug (if appropriate in the context), may 
also convey empathy.
How Might Multicultural 
Differences Affect Counseling 
and Coaching?
Throughout this book, we discuss cul-
tural competence as a key ingredient of 
clinical excellence. Given that empathic 
responding requires seeing the world the 
way it is seen by another person, the more 
we know about a person’s background, 
including his or her values, cultural tradi-
tions, and religious or spiritual beliefs, the 
more empathic we may be.
Tuning in to a person’s locus of con-
trol is one aspect of the intersection of 
culture and personality that can influ-
ence the effectiveness of our counseling 
efforts. Locus of control is a person’s own 
view of what and/or who has shaped the 
events in his or her life, and of what and/
or who has the power to shape his or her 
circumstances. The construct was initially 
introduced in the 1950s by Julian Rotter 
in his work on behavior changes (see Kor-
manik & Rocco, 2009, for a review). The 
construct is considered broadly in two 
categories of belief: internal and external. 
External locus of control includes a sense 
that other forces, such as God, luck, fate, 
and other people (family, friends, profes-
sionals, etc.), determine what will happen. 
Internal locus of control includes one’s 
sense of having the power and the ability 
to do something about one’s situation.
If a person believes that his stroke 
was caused by God as punishment for 
past wrongdoings, this would be an 
example of an external locus of control at 

Counseling and Life Coaching   477
play. Another person might consider that 
his brain injury is attributable to his own 
negligence in not wearing a helmet while 
driving a motorcycle fast and drunk; this 
would be an example of internal locus of 
control. Most of us have a mix of beliefs 
in external and internal forces in our 
own lives.
Since Rotter’s initial work, a rich lit-
erature has been developed on how locus 
of control influences health care, rehabili-
tation, and counseling (Gruber-Baldini, 
Ye, Anderson, & Shulman, 2009; Harris, 
2014; Papadopoulos, Paralikas, Barouti, 
& Chronopoulou, 2014). Several authors 
have developed instruments in attempts 
to index locus of control for clinical use 
(e.g., Baken, 2003; Baken & Stephens, 2005; 
Wallston et al., 1999; Wallston, Wallston, 
& DeVellis, 1978). One way this construct 
comes into play in counseling is when 
we work to help a person foster a stron-
ger sense of internal control as a means of 
empowerment to engage actively in reha-
bilitation, coping, and moving on with 
plans for a full and active life as a person 
with ongoing cognitive-communicative 
challenges (Hassan & Hallowell, 2015). 
Doing this effectively, however, requires a 
deep appreciation for others’ beliefs, tol-
erance for beliefs that might be contrary 
to our own, and support for behavior 
and attitude changes that do not violate a  
person’s core cultural, spiritual, or reli-
gious tenets.
How Might Counseling Moments 
Be Influenced by the Time Course 
of Recovery and Intervention?
Counseling or coaching moments often 
arise spontaneously, according to evolv-
ing needs and circumstances. Still, there 
are key times during intervention that cer-
tain aspects of counseling are especially 
important.
Counseling Following a 
Traumatic Change
If you are working in an acute care set-
ting, your counseling role is key in help-
ing people cope with immediate needs 
for information and reassurance and for 
planning next steps. If a person has had a 
stroke, imagine how suddenly the person 
has seemingly been plucked from every-
day life and dropped into a strange new 
world of changed abilities.
If there has been a traumatic injury 
to the brain, imagine how suddenly all of 
life as one has known it seemingly comes 
to a halt, at least initially. Consider that 
there are likely other injuries to the body 
as well, some perhaps life-threatening 
and painful, that alter basic functions of 
mobility, breathing, eating, in addition 
to thinking and communicating. Fears of 
dying and the shock of having a brush 
with mortality may be foremost on the 
minds of stroke and brain injury survivors 
and the minds of the people who love and 
care about them.
Consider, too, what it is like for the 
person just realizing that his or her commu-
nication abilities are impaired. See Box 27–2 
for firsthand quotes from people describ-
ing their own initial realizations about the 
sudden loss of language abilities. The first 
is from Taylor, from her book My Stroke 
of Insight. The others are from individuals 
with aphasia with whom I have worked.
Counseling at the Start of Intervention
Counseling by the SLP soon after a stroke 
or brain injury is usually the first counsel-
ing that a patient or family receives. The 

478   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Quotes on Initial Realizations About 
the Sudden Onset of Aphasia
J.B.T., neuroscientist, author
[When] I tried to speak, I was blown away to discover that 
although I could hear myself speaking clearly, within my mind, 
no sound came out of my throat. Not even the grunts that I was 
able to produce earlier. I was flabbergasted. Oh my gosh! I can’t 
talk, I can’t talk! And it wasn’t until this moment when I tried 
to speak out loud that I had any idea that I couldn’t. My vocal 
cords were inoperative and nothing, no sounds at all, would 
come forth. (Taylor, 2006, pp. 58–59)
R.M., automechanic
Alone in bed. Um, uh. Wake up. Strange. Something strange. 
But what? Head really strange. Go to pee. Foot on flum, flick, 
I mean floor. Then bam.  All of me on flick, floor. Yell for help. 
Yell in my head. But nothing. Nothing. Pfffft. No word. Maybe 
a little squeak. Scared scared scared. What happen? No idea. 
No word. Scared scared scared.
P.L.
Before the wedding. At night. Everybody there. Everybody. 
And flowers and food and music and love. Even from England 
and one, or no, two Tunisia came. All that way. And dancing. 
And, you know, the guys, microphone, say how happy we, 
best wishes. Then I just couldn’t. At night changed everything. 
No wedding. Hospital. I still don’t know. All those people? 
They left then? They stay then and marky . . . park . . . party 
anyway? I still don’t know. I just know no wedding. My wed-
ding. Just gone. She goes too. I don’t even know where she go.
D.L., physician
I woke up with a terrible headache and felt kind of sick to my 
stomach. I turned on the radio, just as I do every morning. 
I always listen to the morning news. But I had no idea what 
the guy was saying. Sounded just like he should: nice radio 
voice, all professional and authoritative. But what was he say-
ing? I just could not make out what he meant. I thought I was 
going crazy. So I turned on the TV. CNN. You know the scroll-
ing words they always show with news updates? They looked 
like they were in hieroglyphics. I couldn’t make any of it out. 
Box
27–2

Counseling and Life Coaching   479
And this person and that were on the screen and I had no idea 
what anyone was saying. Every once and a while I could get 
a word. But that was it. So I just got into my car to go to the 
ER. So weird, though. I felt so weird. So confused. I live really 
close to the hospital. It’s the same one where I’ve been working 
for 14 years. I came around the corner to see the name of the 
hospital and I just could not read it. The emergency entrance 
sign? I knew what the arrow meant. And of course I knew 
how to get there. But oh man I could not make out that word, 
“emergency.” That’s when it hit me. I have aphasia! I must’ve 
had a stroke! But of course I couldn’t think that in words. I just 
knew it. Changed me forever. I’ve treated people with aphasia 
for years. Now I was one of them. Way to completely shake up 
my world!
most immediate needs tend to be for infor-
mation, reassurance, and hope. In terms 
of information, stroke and brain injury 
survivors and the people who care about 
them most want to know the cause of the 
problem, the type and extent of changes 
in their abilities, and what the progno-
sis is (whether and how soon they will 
improve; Hersh et al., 2013; Parr, Byng, 
Gilpin, & Ireland, 1997; Payne, 2015).
People with PPA, MCI, and dementia 
and the people who care about them want 
to know the expected rate and nature of 
the likely progression of the condition. 
All are likely to want to know how to best 
cope with communication and related 
social challenges, how to get further 
informational and emotional support, 
and what sorts of services are available to 
them, a topic we discuss further below.
Counseling Related to Assessment 
Results and Sharing Prognosis
The way we document and share assess-
ment results and the way we discuss 
prognosis are fundamentally related to 
our empowerment and advocacy roles. 
This is discussed in Chapter 22.
Counseling During Treatment
During treatment, stroke and TBI survi-
vors may feel that they are not progress-
ing sufficiently. Reassurance that pla-
teaus in progress are common and that, in 
fact, people tend to continue to improve 
for years can be reassuring. People with 
neurodegenerative conditions may feel 
discouraged and helpless. Reassurance 
regarding persistent strengths and train-
ing in supported communication can help 
to alleviate stress and refocus efforts on 
what still can be done. Throughout treat-
ment, relationships continue to evolve. 
People who were highly supportive at 
the start may become less engaged as 
time goes on. Caregivers may move or 
die. There is always a need for empathic, 
active listening and coaching in modifica-
tion of life participation goals.

480   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Counseling at Discharge
Tuning in to emotional and information 
needs is essential to effective discharge 
planning. Rarely is a person discharged 
from SLP services because he or she would 
no longer benefit from SLP services. As 
we considered in Section IV, many other 
forces are at play in determining when 
and for how long a person has access to 
SLP services. Recognize that people may 
feel abandoned when treatment is termi-
nated, especially if they feel they have not 
achieved their personal communication 
goals (Hersh, 2009; Shadden, 2005). Addi-
tionally, emotional attachments to clini-
cians may make it especially difficult to 
suddenly lose access to such a key source 
of support.
How May Coaching Enhance 
Self-Advocacy?
In Chapter 15 and elsewhere in this book, 
we have discussed the need to expand 
awareness about neurogenic language 
disorders, improve the way laypeople 
respond to people with communication 
challenges, reduce stigma, and facilitate 
empowerment. Although people with 
language disorders are typically at a dis-
advantage in terms of the communication 
skills required to advocate for themselves, 
enlisting them as key self-advocates is 
important.
Encourage people with neurogenic 
communication disorders to carry print 
material to share with others about the 
nature of their communication challenges. 
For people with aphasia, a card that 
defines aphasia and suggests means of 
facilitating communication with them is 
not only helpful in terms of increasing the 
likelihood of information exchange with 
a given person; it is also a good way to 
increase awareness and knowledge about 
aphasia. Such cards are available through 
the National Aphasia Association. They 
may also be created by clinicians and sig-
nificant others and tailored to the prefer-
ences and needs of an individual with any 
type of communication disorder. Some 
people with aphasia take a picture of such 
cards or have the information printed in 
a “notes” page on their smartphones for 
ready access.
What Are Best Practices in 
Responding to Seemingly 
Misguided Statements by Patients 
and Their Significant Others?
Consider this comment from the wife of 
a man with aphasia who does not use 
writing or gesture effectively to express 
meaning and whose spoken language 
comprises mostly jargon:
“I know everything he means.”
On one level, the astute clinician probably 
knows that it is simply unlikely that his 
wife understands everything. On another, 
it is important to consider whether overtly 
contesting the veracity of such a statement 
is helpful. Often a more effective approach 
is to demonstrate the process of deducing 
meaning through conversations and other 
tasks requiring conveyance of new infor-
mation — content that his wife would not 
know. Helping her take part in the process 
of discerning what she thinks he means 
from what he is expressing may best help 
her accept the challenge that there are 

Counseling and Life Coaching   481
simply times when no one can tell what 
he means. This, in turn, may help with 
heightening his wife’s focus on commu-
nicative support, perhaps encouraging 
more use of computer and phone apps, 
pictures, gesture, and drawing.
Consider this comment from the part-
ner of a woman with global aphasia who 
is known, based on extensive assessment 
and treatment probes, to have severe com-
prehension deficits and no reliable yes/no 
response:
“He understands everything we say.”
Can this be true? We can’t refute it entirely 
because the understanding of the per-
son with aphasia may only be deduced 
through some overt index; we may sim-
ply lack any such index in this situation. 
Still, there is a high probability that the 
statement is incorrect. So, is it best to 
tell the partner that what she is saying is 
probably not true? It could be. However, 
many caregivers in this situation respond 
better to validation of the emotion behind 
the statement. Consider possible clinician 
responses:
• “No, he definitely doesn’t 
understand a lot of what you’re 
saying. I know it based on my 
testing results.”
• “I understand why you might 
think that. Would you like to try 
some things together to figure 
out just what she may or may not 
understand?”
In choosing a response, it is important 
for the clinician to consider which is 
more important: that the partner’s state-
ment stand corrected or that the partner 
be enlisted as an essential ally in the next 
steps toward improved communication. It 
is also important to consider the partner’s 
likely emotional investment in the mat-
ter. This may be a true asset in the great 
scheme of things as we transition into a 
treatment program.
Gentle guidance and hands-on dem-
onstration by someone who cares to take 
the caregiver’s perspective is likely to be 
far more effective than refuting her “mis-
guided” statements. The ultimate excel-
lent clinician considers creative and com-
passionate ways to heighten the degree to 
which the partner’s assumptions are real-
istic, yet keep her motivated and engaged 
in collaborating to seek ways of further 
enhancing communication.
Consider this dialogue between an 
SLP and a man with severe aphasia whose 
expressive language is highly neologistic.
SLP:  “I know you’re having trouble 
saying what you mean. I’d like to help 
you improve your communication. 
How do you feel about getting started 
in therapy so that we can work on 
this?”
Patient:  (Shaking head) “I really don’t 
think there’s much of a problem here. 
I’ve got all the squirrels I need to be 
able to, you know, get what you need 
from me.”
What is the most constructive way for the 
SLP to respond? Is the goal to “teach” the 
patient how severe his problems really 
are? Or is it to enlist him as the most 
important ally on his own recovery team? 
The excellent clinician takes into account 
that lack of awareness of deficits is a 
hallmark characteristic of this person’s 
aphasia and thus part of what is to be 
addressed through intervention — hope-
fully not a roadblock to enrolling him in 

482   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
treatment. Enlisting him as an ally may 
involve a shift from talking about whether 
to enroll in treatment to actually demon-
strating helpful strategies for detecting a 
communication breakdown and repairing 
it. Rather than showing resistance to his 
resistance, having him participate directly 
in what is a meaningful therapeutic activ-
ity may be far more effective in convinc-
ing him that you have something to offer.
What Are Effective Ways to 
Address Emotional Lability 
During Clinical Interactions?
Emotional lability, or pseudobulbar affect 
(PSA), common in people with neurogenic 
communication disorders, was discussed 
in Chapter 19 as a potential confound in 
assessment. It is also a potentially debili-
tating condition in terms of its impact on 
communication, for two primary reasons. 
First, it can easily sidetrack a conversa-
tion or activity. Most of us, when we see 
a person burst into tears in the midst of a 
conversation, naturally feel led to comfort 
him or her and show sympathy. For peo-
ple with PSA, our comforting response 
may actually exacerbate the outburst and 
further interfere with whatever it is that 
we were doing together. Although it may 
not be intuitive because we are so driven 
to be nurturing, often the best thing a lis-
tener can do is to acknowledge the tears 
with a tender touch or an empathetic look 
but move on with what we were doing, 
perhaps encouraging the person to change 
positions or take some deep breaths, but 
not delving into discussion of feelings. 
A second reason that emotional lability is 
a detriment to communication is that the 
outburst and lack of control over them 
may, in turn, lead to feelings of shame 
or embarrassment around others, which 
then may lead to avoidance of social situ-
ations and thus social isolation.
You might suggest directly to a per-
son with PSA that her or she:
• Educate others that the emotions 
he or she shows do not necessarily 
reflect what he or she is really 
feeling.
• Ask others to move on in a 
conversation or activity when an 
emotional outburst occurs rather 
than trying to comfort or give other 
emotional feedback.
• Find a means of distracting himself 
or herself (perhaps by trying to 
remember lyrics to a song; counting 
the change in a pocket or purse; 
walking around; or taking deep, 
slow breaths and letting the air out 
gradually).
What Is the Role of the SLP 
in Addressing Depression 
in People With Neurogenic 
Communication Disorders?
In each of the chapters on etiologies under-
lying neurogenic language disorders, we 
saw depression and as an inherent chal-
lenge. Not only is depression an obvious 
detractor from quality of life, but it is also 
a cause of poorer rehabilitation outcomes 
(Aström, Asplund, & Aström, 1992; Sim-
mons-Mackie, 2013a; Spencer, Tompkins, 
Schultz, & Rau, 1995). When depression 
continues for 2 or more weeks, it is termed 
by the American Psychiatric Association 
(APA, 2013) as persistent depressive 
disorder, a component of chronic major 

Counseling and Life Coaching   483
depressive disorder. What had previously 
been called dysthymic disorder (a chronic 
state of depression for most of the time 
over a period of at least 2 years) in earlier 
versions of the APA’s Diagnostic and Sta-
tistical Manual (DSM) is now included in 
this category. Bereavement over the death 
of a loved one, previously considered to 
fit within the definition of depression, is 
now excluded from the definition. This is 
in recognition of the fact that features of 
bereavement and other aspects of depres-
sion are often intertwined and indistin-
guishable and that there is no specific 
time period for the duration of bereave-
ment (previously set at 2 months but 
recognized to last more typically for 1 to  
2 years).
One of the most important ways of 
alleviating depression, sadness, and grief 
is to talk about feelings with others; hav-
ing restrictions in communication makes 
coping all the more challenging. In Chap-
ter 19, we reviewed the definition of 
depression and means of screening for it 
during the assessment process. Here, let’s 
consider the role of the SLP in helping, 
directly and indirectly, to promote mental 
health and wellness.
The actual incidence of depression in 
people with acquired neurogenic commu-
nication disorders is unknown. Although 
incidence statistics for depression have 
been published for stroke and TBI survi-
vors and people with RBS and dementia, 
the studies on which they are based have 
serious limitations. Many use language-
based indices, do not include input from 
the people being assessed, require reflec-
tion and judgment abilities that exceed 
the capabilities of some who are assessed, 
and/or exclude people with severe com-
munication impairments (Patterson, 
2002; Townend, Brady, & McLaughlan, 
2007a, 2007b). Those of us with decades 
of experience working with this broad 
population will attest that the condi-
tion is severely underreported and the 
rate is close to 100%. Some already had 
depression prior to onset of a cognitive-
communicative disorder. Additionally, 
most have a combination of neurobiologi-
cally induced mood changes and negative 
emotional reactions to their life-changing 
disability. Stroke survivors with aphasia 
tend to have a higher rate of depression 
than those without aphasia. The preva-
lence of major depression in people with 
aphasia has been shown to increase dur-
ing the 12 months following acute care for 
stroke (Kauhanen et al., 2000). Regardless 
of whether they are depressed, many 
people with aphasia experience anxiety, 
stress, and worry associated with their 
self-perceptions of communicative inad-
equacy and anticipation of communica-
tive failure (Cahana-Amitay et al., 2011; 
Cahana-Amitay, Oveis, & Sayers, 2013).
As always, whether or not a person 
actually has a diagnosis of depression, a 
clinical aphasiologist can play an impor-
tant role as a provider and facilitator of 
psychosocial support and wellness. As 
discussed in Chapter 19, identifying 
depression and understanding its nature 
in people with neurogenic disorders is 
complex due to interactions among mul-
tiple potential causes, communication 
barriers, challenges with judgment and 
reflection, guilt, embarrassment, and asso-
ciated stigma. Although the diagnosis of 
mood disorders fits more within the scope 
of practice for psychiatry and psychology 
than for SLP, when a language disorder is 
overlaid on suspected depression, the SLP 
may be extremely helpful by consulting in 
the diagnosis of depression and by mak-
ing referrals for psychological counseling 

484   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
and possible pharmacotherapy. Ongoing 
assessment of mood states, coping strate-
gies, self-esteem, optimism, and level of 
adjustment to changes in body function 
and structure and life participation is also 
important. Means of indexing changes 
according to such constructs are given in 
Chapters 19 and 20.
How Can Communication 
Counseling Enhance 
End-of-Life Care?
In Chapter 14, we noted that SLPs play 
important roles in hospice and palliative 
care contexts, by providing information, 
encouraging expression about end-of-life 
wishes, and supporting important com-
munication about comfort, needs, and 
relationships. Given the frequent intense 
focus on restoring health and curing dis-
ease in medical contexts, people who are 
nearing the end of life are often attended 
to medically rather than in a holistic, sup-
portive, life-affirming way (Gawande, 
2014). SLPs can play a pivotal role in 
reducing the focus on medicalization of 
care through counseling and communica-
tive support and in encouraging conver-
sations about things that matter most to 
people nearing the end of life and those 
who care about them. SLPs with special 
expertise in end-of-life and palliative care 
concerns may provide much-needed in-
services and workshops to other profes-
sionals to promote critical reflection and 
planning to enhance communication and 
quality of life through their varied clinical 
roles (Roberts & Gaspard, 2013). As pro-
fessional team members, we may also be 
helpful in mutual support of colleagues 
coping with client death and bereavement 
(Barton, Grudzen, & Zielske, 2003).
What Are Ways in Which 
Opportunities for Counseling 
Can Be Missed?
Simmons-Mackie and Damico (2011) pro-
vide a thoughtful ethnographic analysis of 
how some SLPs actually avoid counseling 
moments and thus miss important oppor-
tunities for providing emotional support 
during treatment sessions. They interpret 
missed counseling opportunities as being 
due to SLPs’ tendencies to take control of 
interactions by:
• Focusing on facts rather than 
feelings or discussions about 
abstract or vague ideas
• Engaging in “staged” conversation
• Using humor to deflect emotional 
expression
• Transitioning from expressions 
of emotion to “objective therapy 
tasks”
The authors suggest that the underlying 
causes of these missed opportunities in- 
clude a lack of training and mentorship in 
supporting the value of counseling, a fail-
ure to appreciate counseling as part of our 
scope of practice, discomfort or awkward-
ness with handling intimacy and depth 
of social interaction, and adoption of a 
clinician-centered rather than a person-
centered approach to intervention. They 
recommend that we explore our own 
beliefs, values, and habits that might lead 
to missed opportunities. We might do this 
through analysis of videos of our clini-
cal sessions, introspection, vigilance for 
counseling opportunities that arise, and 
conscious self-monitoring of what evokes 
embarrassment or negative emotions in 
us. We might also observe what happens 
when, instead of taking control, we sim-

Counseling and Life Coaching   485
ply engage in active, reflective, empathic 
listening and collaborate as communica-
tion partners in exploring the challenges 
at hand. Let’s try this.
How Might Some Aspects 
of Life Improve After Onset 
of an Acquired Neurogenic 
Communication Disorder?
People with neurogenic communication 
disorders often express wonderfully affir-
mative comments about how they have 
maintained positive feelings about their 
identity and life purpose — sometimes 
even expressing better self-regard than 
they had before the onset of their commu-
nication disability. Consider this eloquent 
quote from Taylor (2006):
I knew I was different now — but never 
once did my right mind indicate that 
I  was “less than” what I had been 
before. I was simply a being of light 
radiating life into the world. Regard-
less of whether or not I had a body 
that could connect me to the world 
of others, I saw myself as a cellular 
masterpiece. In the absence of my left 
hemisphere’s negative judgment, I per-
ceived myself as perfect, whole, and 
beautiful, just the way I was. (p. 71)
It is not uncommon for stroke and  
brain injury survivors to point out aspects 
of their lives that have improved post-
onset. See Box 27–3 for an example as 
described by a TBI survivor. Benefits 
noted by people with acquired neuro-
genic communication disorders and their 
friends and families vary widely and 
include increased time and availability to 
help others, wisdom, patience, apprecia-
tion for others, renunciation of workaholic 
tendencies, deepened loving relationships 
and friendships, and clarity in priorities.
What Are Some Helpful 
Information-Sharing 
Strategies and Resources?
Counseling and coaching involve not only 
empathic support but also information 
sharing. This might be in the form of expla-
nations about the causes and nature of cog-
nitive-communication challenges as well 
as in referrals and extension of opportuni-
ties for support. Be sure to have informa-
tion on hand about any local stroke clubs, 
aphasia centers, and support groups for 
those with traumatic brain injury, stroke 
survivors, people with neurodegenerative 
conditions, and caregivers, too.
Note, too, that almost all of these 
sites provide information and support to 
a wider audience than might be assumed 
given the name of the site-hosting entity. 
For example, most aphasia resource sites 
listed also provide information that is 
helpful to people with dementia and TBI 
and the people who care about them.
There are many online and print 
resources to help people with aphasia 
and other disorders — and those who care 
about them — understand more about 
their conditions, learn means of support-
ing communication, and help foster posi-
tive and proactive attitudes about moving 
forward in pursuit of the fullest life par-
ticipation possible. Examples of helpful, 
informative websites are given in Table 
27–1. Note that these resource sites origi-
nate from varied countries all over the 
world; given Internet access, one need 
not be restricted geographically in seek-
ing information and support.

486   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Many of the websites listed in Table 
27–1 have links to videos that can be 
helpful in terms of providing supportive 
information as well as examples of suc-
cessful coping strategies. For example, the 
National Stroke Association’s website pro-
vides a series of informative videos and 
prerecorded webinars on topics such as 
sex and sexuality after stroke, depression 
and other emotional problems, fatigue, 
returning to work, and various aspects of 
caregiving and caregiver support.
Social media, too, provide opportuni-
ties for people with aphasia and caregiv-
ers to connect with one another for infor-
mation exchange and support. Using a 
keyword search in Facebook, for example, 
for most of the many diagnostic categories 
or conditions mentioned in this book will 
lead to a selection of groups and pages of 
potential interest to people seeking online 
interaction regarding their challenges and 
triumphs. Many of the websites listed in 
Table 27–1 have corresponding Facebook 
Quote From a TBI Survivor (Lucy) About 
Improvements Due to Brain Changes
Lucy:  I was describing this to somebody on the phone who, 
um, a good friend of mine, this one that I work with in North 
Carolina who a few years ago he uh was also in an accident 
where he was almost killed with carbon monoxide poisoning 
so he had a year of or he had some time of trying, and when 
I was describing this over the phone he said, “Boy, it sounds 
like depression.” But the difference was it was like but it 
didn’t bother me . . . it didn’t bother me then, I mean maybe 
it is, I don’t know but it doesn’t well, the what I was saying 
that I didn’t care about stuff anymore. And the um um . . . the 
feeling is that oh, it would bother me that I don’t have any 
ambition but the truth of the matter is that it doesn’t bother 
me in the least.
Clinician:  And this concerns you that it doesn’t bother you?
Lucy:  No, actually, I think it’s kind of a benefit (laugh). You 
know what I mean, it’s like it’s kind of like a benefit being 
able to sit for two hours with nothing to do and that’s kind of 
nice. Because before you’d need to be reading something or 
you know to write you know. All right let’s get the show on 
the road you know it’s like . . .
Clinician:  Yeah.
Lucy:  It’s like I mean I think that that’s almost skipped all 
those years of meditating and now I’m enlightened (laugh) 
without having to do any of the years of meditating.
Box
27–3

487
Table 27–1.  Websites to Support People With Neurogenic Cognitive-Communicative 
Disorders and the People Who Care About Them
Name of Organization
Organization Website
Alzheimer’s Association
http://www.alz.org
Alzheimer’s Disease Education and 
Referral Center (part of the National 
Institute on Aging)
http://www.alzheimers.org
Alzheimer’s Disease International
http://www.alz.co.uk
American Brain Tumor Association
http://www.abta.org
American Stroke Association (part of the 
American Heart Association)
http://www.strokeassociation.org
Aphasia Access
http://www.aphasiaaccess.org
Aphasia Alliance
http://www.aphasiaalliance.org
Aphasia and Stroke Association of India
http://aphasiastrokeindia.com/
Aphasia Center of California
http://www.aphasiacenter.org
Aphasia Corner
http://www.aphasiacorner.com
Aphasia Help
http://www.aphasiahelp.org
Aphasia Hope Foundation
http://www.aphasiahope.org
Aphasia Institute
http://www.aphasia.ca
Aphasia Network
http://www.aphasianetwork.org/index.html
Aphasia New Zealand Charitable Trust
http://www.aphasia.org.nz/
Aphasia Now
http://www.aphasianow.org
Aphasia Recovery Connection
http://www.aphasiarecoveryconnection.org
Aphasia Toolbox
https://aphasiatoolbox.com/
Asocicion Ayuda Afasia
http://www.afasia.org/
Australian Aphasia Association
http://www.aphasia.org.au
Better Conversations with Aphasia:  
A Learning Resource
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/betterconversations/
aphasia
Brain Injury Association of America
http://www.nabis.org
Brain Trauma Foundation
http://www.braintrauma.org
British Aphasiology Society
http://www.bas.org.uk/
Commtap: Communication Activities
http://en.commtap.org
Communication Forum Scotland
http://www.communicationforumscotland​
.org.uk
continues

488
Table 27–1.  continued
Name of Organization
Organization Website
Connect: The Communication Disability 
Network
http://www.ukconnect.org/index.aspx
Dementia Advocacy and Support Network
http://www.dasninternational.org
Different Strokes: Support for Younger 
Stroke Survivors
http://www.differentstrokes.co.uk
Friendship and Aphasia
http://friendshipandaphasia.weebly.com/
index.html
Huntington’s Disease Society of America
http://www.hdsa.org
Internet Stroke Center
http://www.strokecenter.org/
Lewy Body Dementia Association
http://www.lbda.org
Music and Memory
http://www.musicandmemory.org
National Aphasia Association
http://www.naa.org
National Brain Tumor Society
http://www.braintumor.org
National Health Services
http://www.nhs.uk
National Institute for Health Research
http://www.crn.nihr.ac.uk/can-help/
patients-carers-public
National Parkinson Foundation
http://www.parkinson.org
National Stroke Association
http://www.stroke.org
Predicting Language Outcome and 
Recovery After Stroke
http://www.ucl.ac.uk/ploras
Science of Aphasia
http://www.soa-online.com/
Speakability
http://www.speakability.org.uk
Stroke Association
http://www.stroke.org.uk
Stroke Survivor
http://www.strokesurvivor.com/index.html
Tavistock Trust for Aphasia
http://www.aphasiatavistocktrust.org/
aphasia/default/index.asp
UCL Aphasia Research Group Blog
http://aphasiaresearch.wordpress.com/
Understanding Aphasia
http://onlinespeechpathologyprograms.net/
aphasia-speech-language-disorders
United Kingdom Acquired Brain Injury 
Forum
http://www.ukabif.org.uk
Notes
1.  Additional websites supporting clinical practice are also helpful for supporting information-sharing, 
counseling, and coaching efforts. See Table 2–2.
2.  The National Stroke Association’s Stroke Support Group Registry includes a listing of hundreds of 
support groups throughout the United States.

Counseling and Life Coaching   489
and Twitter links. Among the Aphasia 
Toolbox offerings are Online Communi-
cation Cafes, which are online videocon-
ferencing meetings enabling social inter-
action among adults with communication 
challenges.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Some SLPs have a natural aptitude 
for counseling and coaching. Others 
have to work harder at the related 
competencies.
a.	 With a partner, compare and 
contrast what you think are your 
natural predispositions toward 
counseling and coaching.
b.	 What you think you need to work 
on further in this regard?
	 3.	 Describe what you think would be the 
best outline of topics to be covered in 
a course on counseling and coaching 
for people with neurogenic communi-
cation disorders and the people who 
care about them.
	 4.	 Look up scope-of-practice documents 
for your national and regional or state 
certification as an SLP.
a.	 What do they say about the extent 
and limitations of your profes-
sional role in counseling and 
coaching?
b.	 Do you think the documents 
are appropriate in light of the 
services that people with acquired 
neurogenic cognitive-linguistic 
disorders typically need? Why or 
why not?
	 5.	 Compare and contrast the roles of neu-
ropsychologists, rehabilitation coun-
selors, social workers, and SLPs in 
supporting the counseling and coach-
ing needs of people with acquired neu-
rogenic cognitive-linguistic disorders.
	 6.	 Describe what you would consider 
your optimal means of collaborating 
with professionals mentioned in Item 5  
to support people with acquired neu-
rogenic cognitive-linguistic disorders.
	 7.	 Describe a time when you responded 
in a way that was not particularly 
empathetic to another person express-
ing grief, anxiety, or fear. Knowing 
what you know now, how might you 
have responded differently?
	 8.	 Describe a time when someone else 
responded to you in a way that was 
not particularly empathetic when you 
felt grief, anxiety, or fear.
a.	 What, specifically, do you wish 
that person had said or done?
b.	 How might you use your reflec-
tion about that incident in your 
preparation to become more 
empathetic with others?
	 9.	 With a partner or small group, share 
anecdotes about how you or oth-
ers have engaged in Pollyanna-type 
responses in personal or professional 
situations. If it were possible, how 
might those responses have been 
revised to be more empathetic?
10.	 Describe a way in which a clini-
cian might integrate the construct of 
locus of control in counseling or life 
coaching.
11.	 Imagine what it would feel like to 
suddenly lose your ability to commu-
nicate verbally. What support would 
you wish for most immediately?
12.	 Plateaus in treatment progress can 
be discouraging. In a role-play with 
a partner representing your “client,” 
practice what you might say to encour-
age him or her to continue working 

490   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
toward his or her rehabilitation and 
life participation goals.
13.	 How might you proactively address 
a person’s lack of awareness of defi-
cits when encouraging him or her to 
enroll in SLP treatment?
14.	 With a partner, practice role-playing 
responses to emotional lability during 
a one-on-one language treatment ses-
sion. Then discuss how effective you 
think your responses were and why.
15.	 Describe why referral to a mental 
health professional may not be the 
only and best option for addressing 
the counseling and coaching needs of 
a person with a neurogenic communi-
cation disorder.
16.	 Describe how an SLP might best col-
laborate with a mental health profes-
sional in addressing the counseling 
and coaching needs of a person with a 
neurogenic communication disorder.
17.	 Consider that many people are not 
aware of how SLPs may be helpful in 
fostering communication support for 
people who are dying and the people 
who love them. What might you do as 
an aphasiologist to promote SLP ser-
vices in such situations?
18.	 Write a to-do list of specific actions 
that would help an SLP not miss 
opportunities for counseling during 
intervention to address cognitive and 
linguistic challenges.
19.	 Disabilities and illness can improve 
some aspects of life for many people.
a.	 With a partner or small group, 
share how you have witnessed 
this in your own personal or 
professional experience.
b.	 How might your awareness of 
the positive aspects of acquired 
disabilities affect your role as a 
communication counselor?
20.	 Review at least 10 of the websites 
listed in Table 27–1.
a.	 Note special attributes of websites 
that you may find particularly 
helpful in terms of support and 
information sharing for people 
with neurogenic communication 
disorders and people who care 
about them.
b.	 If you are a Facebook user, “like” 
some pages or groups associated 
with clinical populations with 
which you work or are most likely 
to work and get familiar with 
what they have to offer.
c.	 With a partner or small group, 
discuss the merits and potential 
challenges of having clients with 
neurogenic disorders and their 
caregivers engage with specific 
Facebook pages or groups.
Additional teaching and learning materials 
are available on the companion website.

491
Chapter
28
Complementary and 
Integrative Approaches
In this chapter, we consider examples 
of intervention approaches that serve as 
alternatives or adjuvants to more tradi-
tional types of intervention for people 
with cognitive-communicative disorders. 
Even if you consider this area of practice 
to largely reflect pseudoscience, as some 
certainly do, it is still important for you to 
know about it. After reading and reflect-
ing on the content in this chapter, you will 
ideally be able to answer, in your own 
words, the following queries:
	 1.	 What are complementary and integra-
tive approaches to wellness?
	 2.	 How are complementary and integra-
tive approaches relevant to neurogenic 
disorders of language and cognition?
	 3.	 Why is it important for clinical apha-
siologists to learn about complemen-
tary and integrative approaches?
	 4.	 What is the status of the evidence base 
supporting alternative approaches to 
improving cognitive-communicative 
abilities?
	 5.	 Why are complementary and integra-
tive approaches increasing in popu-
larity?
	 6.	 How might SLPs support people con-
sidering complementary and alterna-
tive approaches to cognitive-commu-
nicative wellness?
	 7.	 What are some good resources for 
learning more about complementary 
and integrative approaches?
What Are Complementary and 
Integrative Approaches to Wellness?
The terms alternative, complementary, inte-
grative, and nontraditional have each been 
used in varied ways by varied authors and 
in institutions and agencies that support 
related practices. The term alternative sug-
gests approaches that are recommended 
in place of common Western medical ap- 
proaches (i.e., allopathic approaches, which 
most often target specific bodily systems or 
disease states). Generally, the term comple-
mentary highlights approaches that do not 
replace allopathic medical approaches but 
rather ones that are used in conjunction 
with them, also called adjunct or adjuvant 
approaches. The term integrative has two 
related connotations in complementary 
approaches to health. One connotation 
reflects a holistic health focus (e.g., inte-
gration of body and mind, which are seen 

492   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
as intertwined, inseparable entities); the 
other reflects the combination (integration) 
of complementary and allopathic medical 
approaches into mainstream health care 
and health promotion programs.
The term nontraditional is a term that 
is typically used in the Western world 
to refer to nonallopathic approaches. 
However, this is problematic because 
many such approaches (e.g., Chinese and 
Ayurvedic medicine) represent traditional 
approaches in the sense that they have 
been used in some cultures for thousands 
of years, much longer than most allo-
pathic approaches. For most people liv-
ing in Asia, for example, use of herbs for 
healing is literally traditional. Because of 
the cultural relativity and thus ambiguity 
of the term, many authors have suggested 
we avoid using the terms traditional and 
nontraditional altogether when discussing 
complementary approaches to health.
The terms medical and medicine also 
warrant revisiting in this context. Although 
some commonly refer to complementary 
or alternative medicine, the focus of many 
complementary approaches is on wellness, 
health, and prevention, in contrast to the 
common physically curative approaches 
of allopathic medicine. Of course, one 
might also consider whether the distinc-
tion of “Eastern” versus “Western” ap- 
proaches is appropriate, given the degree 
of transnational and multicultural influ-
ence on formal and informal approaches to 
wellness today. Complementary and inte-
grative approaches have taken on great 
import globally, as they reflect important 
philosophical viewpoints regarding well-
ness and holistic health.
Attention to such distinctions in ter-
minology is reflected in progressive name 
changes for what was founded as the 
U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
Office of Alternative Medicine in 1991. 
The NIH created that office in recogni-
tion of the need for an evidence base to 
support practices that were considered 
“nontraditional” in comparison to West-
ern medicine. The office was renamed the 
National Center for Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine in 1998, and then 
given its current name, the National Cen-
ter for Complementary and Integrative 
Health, in late 2014 (National Center for 
Complementary and Integrative Health).
Most complementary approaches to 
health in general may be categorized as 
mind-body practices or natural product 
use. Mind-body practices include mind-
fulness meditation or mindfulness-based 
stress reduction, hypnotherapy, guided 
imagery, biofeedback, massage, acupunc-
ture, herbal medicine, chiropractic, osteo-
pathic manipulation, prayer, yoga, reiki, 
qi gong, and tai chi.
Natural product use includes the use 
of herbs and nutritional supplements. 
Additional general complementary ap- 
proaches include traditional Chinese medi-
cine, homeopathy, naturopathy, and tradi-
tional healers (most of these having overlap 
in terms of how they are defined and meth-
ods used). Of course, there are numerous 
variations and complexities within each of 
the categories of practice mentioned.
Some natural products have been 
said to help slow cognitive decline or pre-
vent dementia. However, the evidence 
base for this to date is not very strong. 
Consumption of omega-3 fatty acids has 
been reported in observational studies to 
slow cognitive decline, but a Cochrane 
review of three randomized controlled 
trials (Sydenham, Dangour, & Lim, 2012) 
did not demonstrate a significant benefit 
in terms of cognitive functioning in older 
people who did not have dementia.
Ginkgo, a well-known supplement, 
has also been recommended for brain 

Complementary and Integrative Approaches   493
health and prevention of dementia in older 
adults (DeKosky et al., 2008; Mahadevan 
& Park, 2008). However, a 6-year trial in 
over 3,000 adults did not show consistent 
benefits in terms of cognitive stability of 
preventive indicators for stroke such as 
blood pressure maintenance and hyper-
tension (DeKosky et al., 2008). Additional 
examples of herbs that have been exam-
ined for possible effectiveness in treating 
people with neurogenic communication 
disorders are given in Table 28–1. Note 
that the fact that certain herbs have been 
studied does not at all mean that their use 
is recommended.
How Are Complementary and 
Integrative Approaches Relevant 
to Neurogenic Disorders of 
Language and Cognition?
It is difficult to characterize just which 
complementary and integrative approaches 
are most relevant to acquired disorders 
of cognition and language. Much of the 
research on such approaches carried out  
with people with stroke, TBI, and demen-
tia, for example, addresses overall health 
and well-being or specific aspects of 
health (e.g., insomnia, pain, or anxiety 
Table 28–1.  Examples of Herbs That Have Been Examined for Possible Effectiveness in 
Treating People With Neurogenic Communication Disorders
Herbal Treatment
Target Conditions or 
Symptoms Addressed 
in Published Reports
Corresponding 
Citations
Moxibustion, jihwangeumja, 
cheongshinhaeeo-tang, 
seonghyangjeongkisan, and 
cheongshindodam-tang (Korean 
herbs)
Aphasia
Jung, Kwon, Park, & 
Moon, 2012
Vinpocetine, derived from Vinca 
minor (lesser periwinkle plant)
Memory in dementia
Balestreri, Fontana, & 
Astengo, 1987; Hecht, 
2008
Sailuotiong, a Chinese medicine 
formula of panax ginseng, ginkgo 
biloba, and crocus sativus
Cognitive abilities in 
vascular dementia
Liang et al., 2014
Huperzine alpha, also called 
Huperzia serrata
Memory and cognition 
in people with 
Alzheimer’s disease
Hecht, 2008; Xing, Zhu, 
Zhang, & An, 2014; Xu, 
Gao, Weng, Du, & Xu, 
1995; Yue et al., 2012; 
Zhang et al., 2002)
Bacopa monniera, an Ayurvedic 
herb
Memory and mental 
illness
Hecht, 2008
Note.  This listing in no way constitutes a recommendation for use. These are merely examples of herbs 
that have been studied in the relevant research literature. Citations are provided for readers wishing 
to learn more about them.

494   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
relief), not specific aspects of cognition 
and language. Does this make it irrelevant 
to clinical aphasiologists? Certainly not, 
inasmuch as we are ideally team members 
helping to promote wellness; wellness is 
an essential concern in our work.
Let’s consider a particular goal of sev-
eral types of complementary approaches: 
stress reduction. We know that stress re- 
duction is important for the overall health 
and well-being of all people, including 
people with acquired neurogenic disor-
ders and the people who care about them. 
People with acquired neurogenic disor-
ders and their caregivers tend to experi-
ence more stress than people in the gen-
eral population. Also, a strong body of 
research supports the notion that stress 
reduction is important for overall cere-
brovascular health and stroke prevention, 
and for coping with challenges to life par-
ticipation (see Chiesa & Serretti, 2010, for 
a review). So, certainly it makes sense that 
we as professionals would promote stress 
reduction. Important questions, though, 
include:
• Is it within our scope of practice to 
recommend specific treatments for 
stress reduction?
• Is it within our scope of practice to 
carry out specific stress reduction 
treatments?
• Is there a sufficient evidence 
base tying stress reduction to 
improvements in cognitive and 
linguistic abilities in people with 
specific etiologies?
Promoting healthful living for the 
prevention of neurological disorders and 
for lessening their impacts on life par-
ticipation is a critical aspect of our role 
as advocates. Many authors have shown 
how participating in socially engaging 
and health-promoting activities can boost 
cognitive-linguistic intervention. Exam-
ples are exercise, volunteer work, singing, 
listening to and playing music, dancing, 
interaction with animals, playing games, 
cooking, and art- and craft-based activi-
ties (for wonderful examples, see Beard, 
2012; Brotons & Koger, 2000; Horowitz, 
2013; Hurkmans et al., 2012; LaFrance, 
Garcia, & Labreche, 2007; Luckowski, 
2014; Macauley, 2006; Mahendra & Arkin, 
2003, 2004; Schneider & Camp, 2003; and 
Stallings, 2010; also consider the general 
approaches to intervention in Chapter 25).  
All of these types of activities can be car-
ried out during or in addition to SLP 
treatments, in cotreatments with other 
professionals, and through caregiver and 
volunteer facilitation. Still, many of the 
methods associated with complementary 
approaches are more definitively outside 
of our scope of practice and not incorpo-
rated into most SLP educational programs. 
The latter are the focus of this chapter.
Why Is It Important for 
Clinical Aphasiologists to Learn 
About Complementary and 
Integrative Approaches?
In clinical practice environments world-
wide, there is increasing likelihood that 
we will play a consultative role in helping  
people with neurogenic communication  
disorders consider complementary options  
to direct behavioral intervention to im-
prove or slow declines in speech, language,  
and cognition. Popularity of such options 
is long-standing in Eastern regions and 
is increasing steadily in the West (Park, 

Complementary and Integrative Approaches   495
Braun, & Siegel, 2015; Shah, Engelhardt, & 
Ovbiagele, 2008). Many of the people we 
serve clinically are likely to be engaged in 
some form of complementary treatment 
or practice (Lundgren, 2004). Most clini-
cians in training to become SLPs have 
some experience with complementary 
and alternative modalities in their own 
self-care (Marshall & Laures-Gore, 2008). 
Some clinical SLPs advocate passion-
ately for the integration of commentary 
approaches to communication disorders 
within SLP curricula (Marshall & Basila-
kos, 2014).
Why Are Complementary 
and Integrative Approaches 
Increasing in Popularity?
Several trends seem to be working 
together to increase global interest in the 
search for complementary and integrative 
approaches to neurogenic communica-
tion disorders. These include frustration 
with current options, increasing aware-
ness, expanded funding for nonallopathic 
services, a growing evidence base, and 
aggressive commercial marketing.
Frustration With Current Options
A lack of steady improvement according 
to perceived cognitive-communicative 
needs (or, in the case of neurodegenerative 
conditions, the continued progression of 
symptoms) motivates many people with 
acquired neurological disorders and care-
givers to seek alternative solutions. Relat-
edly, the many limitations of medically 
based health care systems (discussed in 
Section IV) are leading many to consider 
new possibilities for treatments that don’t 
necessarily fit into the traditional frame-
works of health care or Western models of 
support for health and well-being.
Increasing Awareness
Due to increasing popular media expo-
sure, public education, and commercial 
promotion of alternative and complemen-
tary approaches, more people are made 
aware of potential treatment options.
Expanded Funding
Coverage for nonallopathic, preventive, 
and wellness-focused approaches through 
many national health care systems is on 
the rise.
Increasing Evidence
Despite the overall weaknesses summa-
rized in Box 28–1, the research base sup-
porting the use of some complementary 
approaches is ever-growing.
Aggressive Marketing
Vigorous marketing on the part of com-
panies selling goods and services, most of 
them unregulated, is reaching increasing 
numbers of people with neurogenic com-
munication disorders and their caregiv-
ers. As we discuss further in this chapter, 
what consumers are paying for in many 
cases is hope rather than actual demon-
strable benefits.

496   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
What Is the Status of the Evidence 
Base Supporting Alternative 
Approaches to Improving Cognitive-
Communicative Abilities?
A summary of research results from stud-
ies specifically addressing the effects of 
complementary and alternative types of 
intervention to address neurogenic cog-
nitive-communicative disorders is given 
in Table 28–2. The summary is illustrative 
and by no means exhaustive, especially in 
light of the blurred boundaries between 
what might be considered relevant to cog-
nition and communication in the context 
of the measures reported in many studies. 
Many published studies addressing alter-
native and complementary treatments for 
TBI and dementia, for example, do not 
include specific indices of cognitive and 
linguistic performance.
An additional challenge in summa-
rizing the state of research on comple-
mentary and integrative methods is that 
many of the studies are published in non-
English languages and so are not acces-
sible to a large proportion of the scientific 
and clinical readership. Liu, Zhang, Yan, 
and Liu (2015), for example, searched all 
systematic reviews on acupuncture and 
stroke using a combination of major Chi-
nese- and English-language databases and 
found that 90.7% (42 of a total of 49 pub-
lished from 2001 to 2014) were in Chinese.
Overall, there are tremendous weak-
nesses in the evidence base. Limitations of 
the existing research in this area are sum-
marized in Box 28–1. Such limitations are 
not uncommon in many areas of clinical 
research. Still, they have led some to cam-
paign against the use of taxpayer sup-
port for research on alternative and com-
plementary approaches (Mielczarek & 
Overall Weaknesses in Many Research 
Studies on Complementary and Integrative 
Approaches to Intervention
• Insufficient sample sizes
• Heterogeneity of samples studied
• Poor control of cognitive and linguistic measures
• Lack of control groups
• Lack of placebo or sham groups and conditions
• Lack of randomization
• Use of nonstandardized measures
• Use of subjective descriptions without objective measures
• Lack of overall detail in published reports 
• Failure to report and describe additional behavioral, 
pharmacologic, or nontraditional interventions being 
provided
• Failure to report dosage, intensity, and frequency of treatment
• Failure to address possible underlying neurobiological 
causes for reported effectiveness
Box
28–1

497
Table 28–2.  Summary of Studies Addressing the Effects of Complementary and 
Alternative Types of Intervention to Address Neurogenic Cognitive-Communicative 
Disorders
Study
Results
Aphasia
Mindfulness 
meditation
Orenstein, 
Basilakos, & 
Marshall, 2012
No significant improvements in 
language performance or divided 
attention in three people with aphasia
Acupuncture
Zhang, 1989
Subjective reports of improvements in 
language and speech in 75 people with 
aphasia
Acupuncture
Jianfie, Meifang, & 
Jia, 1988
Subjective reports of improvement in 
11 of 15 people with varied types of 
aphasia
Acupuncture
Chau, Fai Cheung, 
Jiang, Au-Yeung, 
& Li, 2010
Improved language performance and 
activation in Wernicke’s area in 7 
people with chronic aphasia
Progressive muscle 
relaxation
Marshall & Watts, 
1976
Improved object naming, object 
description, and repetition in 16 people 
with moderate to severe aphasia
Progressive muscle 
relaxation
Murray & Ray, 
2001
Improved syntax stimulation 
performance in a man with chronic 
“nonfluent” aphasia
Progressive 
relaxation, hypnosis, 
and imagery of 
objects to be named
Thompson, Hall, & 
Sison, 1986
Improved naming in 2 of 3 people with 
chronic Broca’s aphasia
Deep relaxation and 
visualization geared 
toward desensitization
Ince, 1968
Subjective report of improved language 
in a man with mild aphasia
EMG-based visual 
and auditory 
biofeedback for 
relaxation
McNeil, Prescott, 
& Lemme, 1976
Nonsignificant improvements in 
language performance in 3 people with 
aphasia and apraxia of speech and 1 
person with aphasia and no apraxia
Herbal medicine, 
acupuncture, and 
moxibustion (a 
mugwort application)
Jung et al., 2012
Greater gains in language abilities in 47 
people with aphasia who had combined 
herbal medicine tailored to individual 
symptoms, acupuncture, moxibustion, 
and speech-language therapy, 
compared to 30 people with aphasia 
who participated only in language 
treatment
continues

498
Study
Results
Vitamin B
Jianfie et al., 1988
Subjective reports of improvement in 5  
of 15 people with varied types of aphasia
Unilateral forced 
nostril breathing
Marshall, Laures-
Gore, DuBay, 
Williams, & Bryant, 
2015
Improved functional language abilities 
and no improvement in attention in 
3 people with aphasia
Hyperbaric oxygen 
therapy
Sarno, Rusk, 
Diller, & Sarno, 
1972
No significant changes in cognitive or 
linguistic functioning in 16 people with 
aphasia and 16 with RBI
Mild Cognitive Impairment
Breathing
Rapp & Marsh, 
2002
Improved word list recall and perceived 
memory abilities following breath work 
plus memory strategizing and support 
in 9 people with MCI
Transcutaneous 
electrical nerve 
stimulation
Luijpen, Swaab, 
Sergeant, Van Dijk, 
& Scherder, 2005
No improvement in memory in 56 adults 
with MCI
Dementia
Combined meditation, 
relaxation, imagery, 
and body awareness
Lantz, Buchalter, & 
McBee, 1997
Subjective reports of reduced agitation 
and increased duration of activity 
engagement in 8 “agitated” people with 
dementia
Progressive muscle 
relaxation
Suhr, Anderson, & 
Tranel, 1999
Decreased anxiety in 34 people with 
moderate AD and their caregivers, 
increased visual memory and recall, 
and reduced behavioral challenges in 
people with AD
Transcutaneous 
electrical nerve 
stimulation
Scherder, Bouma, 
& Steen, 1995
Improved verbal and visual short-term 
and long-term memory and verbal 
fluency in 16 people with early stage AD
Transcutaneous 
electrical nerve 
stimulation
Guo et al., 2001
Improved repetition, recall, verbal 
fluency, and orientation in 3 people 
with mild AD and 4 with severe AD, not 
maintained after 6 months
Huperzia serrata 
(Chinese herb)
Zhang et al., 2002
Greater improvements in cognition in 
100 people with AD compared to 102 in 
a placebo group
Vinpocetine 
(Hungarian herb)
Balestreri et al., 
1987
Improved memory and mental status in 
42 people with AD
Table 28–2.  continued

Complementary and Integrative Approaches   499
Study
Results
Vinpocetine 
(Hungarian herb)
Thal, Salmon, 
Lasker, Bower, & 
Klauber, 1989
No improvement in cognitive functions 
of 15 people with AD
Traumatic Brain Injury
Biofeedback
Thornton, 2002
Subjective reports of improved auditory 
memory in 4 people with TBI following 
EEG biofeedback regarding target 
levels of cortical electrical activity
Herbal therapy/
homeopathy
Chapman, 
Weintraub, 
Milburn, Pirozzi, & 
Woo, 1999
No improvement in cognitive-linguistic 
performance in 25 people with mild TBI 
who were given herbs targeting their 
unique symptoms
Note.  Results are simplified for the sake of this summary. For details, refer to the studies cited. Stud-
ies published only in non-English languages, which may make up the majority of work on this topic, 
are not included in this listing.
Table 28–2.  continued
Engler, 2012). Given that there is mounting 
evidence that some complementary meth-
ods may augment the effectiveness of our 
work, and the possibility that some meth-
ods now considered “alternative” may 
work their way into our everyday clinical 
practice, further research with improved 
methods is needed in this important 
arena. Although many approaches lack 
consensus on methodological appropri-
ateness and standardization of interven-
tion, several hold promise.
How Might SLPs Support People 
Considering Complementary and 
Alternative Approaches to Cognitive-
Communicative Wellness?
General guidelines for SLPs in the area of 
complementary and alternative approaches 
are summarized here.
Stay Within Your Scope of Practice
This is a vital principle in all of the work 
we do. If you are asked to provide herbal 
remedies, yoga techniques, or acupunc-
ture, for example, be sure that you make 
referrals, or simply acknowledge that 
such topics are beyond the boundaries of 
your expertise. Don’t practice in any area 
that is not within the scope of practice as 
defined by any licensing or regulatory 
agency related to your professional role.
Engage Only in Methods You Are 
Trained and Competent to Carry Out
Even if a certain approach might be 
defended as fitting within your scope of 
practice, if you have not had appropriate 
education and training to do it as a profes-
sional, then it is unethical to provide it.

500   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Emphasize Complementary 
Over Alternative Approaches to 
Direct Intervention for Speech, 
Language, and Cognition
As acknowledged throughout this book, 
there is a vast and growing evidence 
base supporting the work that we do to 
improve communication and life partici-
pation in people with neurogenic com-
munication disorders. We know that the 
potential benefits from SLP services can 
continue for years following onset. Con-
sider whether recommending alternative 
approaches instead of speech-language 
intervention may run counter to the evi-
dence base and thus be unethical. Keep in 
mind that in reported studies where ap- 
proaches such as acupuncture and herbal 
medicine have been studied as adjuncts 
versus alternatives to speech and language 
intervention in aphasia, the combined 
approaches have led to better results (Jung 
et al., 2012; Pang, Wu, & Liu, 2010).
Keep an Open, Nonjudgmental 
Attitude and Appreciate 
Multicultural Differences
Given our own cultural perspectives and 
life experiences, we may sometimes be 
shocked or amazed to learn what other 
people believe. As excellent clinicians, 
it’s important that we filter our biased 
responses about the options people might 
be considering and serve as vehicles for 
multicultural understanding.
Encourage Caution When Counseling 
People Considering Alternative 
and Complementary Approaches
Although we may not be expert in the 
mechanisms and methods associated with 
specific alternative and complementary 
approaches, we may from time to time be 
asked to weigh in on decisions being made 
about whether people with neurogenic 
communication disorders should pursue 
them. As long as we are clear about the 
limitations of our expertise as it relates to 
any type of treatment under discussion, it 
is important that we share what is known 
about the evidence base associated with 
particular types of intervention.
In my clinical practice in the United 
States, by far the most common inquiry 
I have had about alternative and comple-
mentary practice relates to whether or not 
hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) can 
help stroke and brain injury survivors 
and people with dementia and improve 
their cognitive or communicative abilities. 
HBOT is a method that has been touted by 
some, especially those marketing HBOT 
services and equipment, as holding prom-
ise for people with cognitive-linguistic 
deficits due to stroke and brain injury (as 
well as a host of other conditions).
HBOT involves immersing an indi-
vidual in a sealed tank while raising the 
atmospheric pressure so that oxygen is 
forced into his or her bodily tissues at a 
rate up to three times greater than under 
normal air pressure. HBOT may be effec-
tive for some conditions. For example, 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) has approved it for use in carbon 
monoxide poisoning, decompression sick-
ness, and thermal burns.
The rationale for HBOT use following 
stroke is that since stroke reduces the oxy-
gen supply to the brain, infusing the brain 
with more oxygen will be helpful and 
perhaps reduce the extent of permanent 
damage in acute stages following stroke. 
The rationale for use in vascular dementia 
is that patients’ brains are hypoperfused; 
HBOT might improve blood supply, sup-
porting better cognitive functioning.

Complementary and Integrative Approaches   501
According to the FDA (2013) the 
safety and effectiveness of HBOT have 
not been established for dementia, stroke, 
or brain injury, or for a host of other con-
ditions. In a Cochran Library systematic 
review of 11 studies of people in the acute 
state following stroke, Bennett et al. (2014) 
found little evidence of any functional 
gains compared to control groups. Most 
other studies not included in that review 
are case studies, and most share many 
of the problems listed in Box 28–1. The 
authors note that high dosages of oxygen 
“may increase oxidative stress through 
the production of oxygen free radical spe-
cies and is potentially toxic” (p. 5). They 
also caution that “HBOT is associated 
with some risk of adverse effects, includ-
ing damage to the ears, sinuses and lungs 
from the effects of pressure, temporary 
worsening of shortsightedness, claustro-
phobia and oxygen poisoning” (p. 5).
In another Cochrane Library system-
atic review of studies testing the effective-
ness of HBOT for people with vascular  
dementia (in which only one of many 
studies examined met criteria for the 
review), Xiao, Wang, Jiang, and Luo (2012) 
report that insufficient evidence is avail-
able to support the use of HBOT with that 
population. They also expressed concern 
regarding the lack of information reported 
concerning safety and possible adverse 
effects. What’s more, there is no peer-
reviewed empirical evidence to date that 
HBOT enhances any aspect of cognition 
or communication in any clinical group. 
Sarno, Rusk, Diller, and Sarno (1972)  
studied the effect of HBOT on language 
and cognitive abilities of people with 
aphasia due to stroke. They conclude that 
“results revealed a total lack of treatment 
effect” (p. 14).
Despite the evident lack of effective-
ness, people with acquired neurological 
conditions and their caregivers are com-
monly bombarded with commercial liter-
ature, online sales material, and telemar-
keting touting potential HBOT benefits 
related to cognitive-communicative abili-
ties, among other alleged benefits. They 
are encouraged to attend frequent HBOT 
sessions at treatment centers and also to 
purchase systems for home use. Agen-
cies providing HBOT are often staffed by 
physicians and other licensed profession-
als, which boosts the perception that the  
treatment must be appropriate relative 
to their needs. I personally know sev-
eral people who have been told directly 
by salespeople that HBOT will enhance 
their recovery of language and/or cog-
nitive abilities. This is the selling of hope 
at a very high cost — a cost not only in 
the financial sense but also in terms of  
possible foregoing of other treatments 
with greater potential benefit, as well as  
exposure to unwarranted risks.
The food supplement and herbal 
medicine market is another that merits 
healthy skepticism, even though some 
products in this category may be ben-
eficial. Natural supplements are largely 
unregulated globally and inconsistently 
regulated even in countries with strict 
federal guidelines for food and drug 
safety and effectiveness. People selling 
such products do not necessarily have 
consumers’ best interests at heart. DNA 
testing reveals that many herbal supple-
ments sold have questionable ingredients. 
The Office of the New York Attorney Gen-
eral (2015) delivered a disturbing report 
that 79% of herbal supplements sold at 
four major national retailers in 16 regions 
in the state of New York were found to 
lack the substance indicated on their labels 
(e.g., there was no ginseng at all in most 
supplements labeled as ginseng) and/or 
to contain ingredients not listed on the 
labels (e.g., rice, wheat, beans, and other 
botanical and nonbotanical fillers were 

502   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
found in the products without any indi-
cation of these as ingredients on the label).
An additional concern about herbs 
and nutritional supplements is the com-
mon yet false assumption that they cannot 
cause any harm. In fact, some have potent 
active ingredients and can lead to side 
effects if taken with certain prescription 
medications. Also, some have been found 
to contain toxic substances such as lead, 
mercury, and arsenic (Saper et al., 2008).
In sum, it is important that SLPs sup-
port people with acquired neurogenic 
impairments by advocating for judicious 
considerations of treatment alternatives. 
Let’s stay informed about such options 
and let the people we serve know about 
the evidence base supporting them (or, in 
the case of HBOT, not supporting them).
What Are Some Good 
Resources for Learning More 
About Complementary and 
Integrative Approaches?
Although many approaches lack consen-
sus on methodological appropriateness 
and standardization of intervention, sev-
eral hold promise. For those with par-
ticular interests in complementary and 
integrative approaches, a great deal of 
popular literature for laypeople concern-
ing these approaches is widely available. 
Of course, given the weak state of much 
of the research in this arena, and given the 
ulterior motives of many seeking financial 
gains through alternative and comple-
mentary approaches, it is important to 
digest critically whatever one reads in this 
increasingly popular and complex area.
There are wonderful additional re- 
sources in this domain that are specifically 
relevant to neurogenic disorders of cog-
nition and language. Laures and Shisler 
(2004) provide a review of the principles 
underlying some approaches to health 
and wellness that have been applied in the 
realm of clinical aphasiology, including 
acupuncture, hypnosis, imagery, progres-
sive muscle relaxation, and biofeedback. 
Murray and Ray (2001) summarize fea-
tures of relaxation therapy and acupunc-
ture as they have been applied to people 
with varied types of neurologic communi-
cation disorders, and also provide a con-
cise overview of other methods and the 
scientific rationale behind them, includ-
ing biofeedback, and transcutaneous elec-
trical nerve stimulation. Marshall et al. 
(2015) provide a fascinating description 
of unilateral forced nostril breathing (see 
Figure 28–1 for an illustration) and why 
it may be a helpful adjunct to language 
treatment following stroke. An in-depth 
description of acupuncture and associated 
biological responses that make it poten-
tially relevant to treatment of neurogenic 
cognitive-linguistic disorders is provided 
by Laures-Gore and Marshall (2008). 
Hecht (2008) offers a succinct review of 
herbal treatments used to address cogni-
tive disorders in people with Alzheimer’s 
disease and vascular dementia.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 Compare and contrast the terms alter-
native, complementary, integrative, and 
nontraditional as they might be used in 
the context of intervention for cogni-
tive-linguistic disorders.
	 3.	 How are complementary methods 
that promote stress reduction and 

Complementary and Integrative Approaches   503
relaxation related to clinical practice 
in aphasiology?
	 4.	 Is it possible to define clear boundar-
ies between what is and what is not 
in the SLP scope of practice relative to 
alternative and complementary meth-
ods for promoting life participation in 
people with neurogenic communica-
tion disorders?
a.	 If so, describe those boundaries.
b.	 If not, why not?
	 5.	 Marshall and Basilakos (2014) suggest 
that, as SLPs, we are more comfort-
able recommending complementary 
practices with which we have had 
personal experience.
a.	 In what might this be (or not be) 
the case for you?
b.	 Discuss with one or more 
colleagues how their own 
experience in complementary 
and integrative practices in their 
own self-care might influence 
their involvement in the types 
of practice mentioned in this 
chapter.
	 6.	 Do an online search for a few nutri-
tional supplements and mind-body 
treatments said to help improve cog-
nitive and linguistic abilities.
a.	 What sorts of misleading sales 
tactics do you notice?
A
B
Figure 28–1.  Positioning for unilateral forced nostril breathing. A. Shows a traditional place-
ment nostril occlusion while a simplified version (requiring less instruction for people with 
linguistic challenges) is shown in B. Photos courtesy of Dr. Rebecca Marshall, a pioneer in 
studying this approach in people with aphasia. Full-color versions of these figures can be 
found in the Color Insert.

504   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
b.	 How might you advise people 
with neurogenic communication 
disorders and their families to 
consider advertising for such 
products with skepticism?
	 7.	 Give specific examples of harm that 
may arise from using products and 
services that are not regulated and 
that have not been thoroughly stud-
ied in terms of safety and efficacy.
	 8.	 Given what is known about the lack of 
efficacy of HBOT for treatment of cog-
nitive and linguistic challenges, why 
do many people continue to use HBOT 
with hopes that it will lessen their com-
munication challenges associated with 
MCI, dementia, TBI, or stroke?
For additional learning and reflection 
activities, see the companion website.

Section VIII
Specific Treatment Approaches

506   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
In Section VI, we considered important 
principles and theories that underlie 
intervention for neurogenic cognitive-
linguistic disorders. In Section VII, 
we addressed many types of general 
approaches to treatment and the research 
base supporting them. In this section, we 
delve into a variety of what we will call 
“specific” treatment approaches. By “spe-
cific,” I mean that they have an actual title 
or name, they entail carrying out charac-
teristic activities, and there is a dedicated 
literature (be it large or small, strong or 
weak) that informs our consideration of 
using them.
The distinction between general and 
specific approaches is not always a clear 
one. Some approaches that do not have a 
very clearly defined set of steps to carry 
out, such as Constraint Induced Language 
Therapy (CILT), are described here as spe-
cific approaches; they could also be con-
sidered general. Some of those we classi-
fied in Section VII as general approaches, 
such as Spaced Retrieval Training (SRT), 
could be considered specific. As the excel-
lent clinician that you are (or are becom-
ing), your flexibility and creativity will 
help you organize your own learning, 
thoughts, and ideas about treatment ap- 
proaches in a way that makes sense to you.
Most of the approaches in this section 
were developed primarily for people with 
aphasia. This does not mean they are only 
relevant to aphasia. There is a great need 
for extending the evidence base to support 
applying some of the methods described 
in this section to people with other types 
of neurogenic cognitive-linguistic dis-
orders. Each chapter in this section has 
a theme based on the types of treatment 
goals most commonly associated with 
the treatment methods we will explore. 
In Chapter 29, we consider approaches 
for fostering compensatory strategies 
in communication. Chapter 30 includes 
approaches aimed at enhancing expres-
sive language in particular. Chapter 31 is 
devoted to methods for enhancing word 
finding and lexical processing. Treatment 
methods for improving syntax are dis-
cussed in Chapter 32. Finally, in Chapter 
33, we review methods to help with recov-
ery of writing and reading abilities. Not 
all treatment methods fit clearly within 
one chapter heading. For example, some 
verb-focused treatments are described in 
the chapter on naming treatments (31). 
However, working on verbs ideally helps 
improve grammatical processing and per-
formance, so they might also fit nicely in 
the list of methods geared toward syntax 
in Chapter 32.
In each of the methods reviewed 
here, we consider systematically what 
defines the method, who is most likely to 
benefit from it, the associated principles 
and rationale for the method, the specific 
steps or procedures entailed in carrying 
out the method, and the status of the evi-
dence base supporting (or not support-
ing) our use of the method. Methods used 
across different studies pertaining to any 
given approach tend to vary. Also, not all 
descriptions provided in the research lit-
erature are detailed enough to enable us to 
replicate exactly how a certain treatment 
protocol was carried out for a given study. 
As always, if you are seeking to adhere to 
treatment fidelity, it is important that you 
refer to the published work detailing the 
explicit steps you wish to replicate.

507
Chapter
29
Promoting Compensatory 
Strategies in Conversation
Recall that in Chapter 25 we reviewed 
many general approaches focused on 
helping people compensate for their lan-
guage impairments through alternative 
and augmentative means of communica-
tion and supported conversation. In this 
chapter, we review a set of more specific 
compensatory approaches: Promoting 
Aphasics’ Communicative Effectiveness 
(PACE), Communication Drawing Pro-
gram (CPD), Back to the Drawing Board 
(BDB), and Visual Action Therapy (VAT).
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, 
the following queries about each of these 
approaches:
	 1.	 What is it?
	 2.	 On what principles is it based?
	 3.	 How is it implemented?
	 4.	 What is its status in terms of evidence-
based practice?
What Is Promoting Aphasics’ 
Communicative Effectiveness (PACE)?
Promoting Aphasics’ Communicative 
Effectiveness (PACE) (Davis, 1980; Davis 
& Wilcox, 1985) is a method developed 
to foster pragmatic skills, according to its 
authors. It was introduced at a time when 
the treatment literature was focused much 
more on decontextualized impairment-
level goals and tasks, so its introduction 
played an important role in raising aware-
ness of ways to work on communication 
goals at the level of conversation.
Despite the development of addi-
tional methods focused on social com-
munication, life participation, functional 
communication, and discourse since that 
time, PACE remains an important treat-
ment method to this day. (Note that the 
use of “aphasics” in the name of this 
method is reflective of the era in which it 
was developed; were it today, the authors 
would probably have taken a person-cen-
tered approach by calling it something 
like Promoting Effective Communication 
in People with Aphasia. Still, the PACE 
acronym is widely used among aphasiolo-
gists and thus is likely here to stay.)
On What Principles Is PACE 
Treatment Based?
PACE is based on principles that differ-
entiate it from most other approaches in 
significant ways:

508   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Equal participation:  The client 
and the clinician take equal turns 
sending and receiving messages; 
during any given exchange, one is 
considered the sender and the other 
the receiver.
• New information:  The stimulus 
to be described is not seen by the 
receiver; this ensures that there is 
true, not simulated, information 
exchange.
• Free choice of modalities:  When 
in the role of sender, the client 
and clinician determine the 
communication mode that each will 
use to convey the message.
• Natural feedback:  Feedback 
consists simply of the clinician’s 
or client’s responses regarding 
whether each message was 
successfully sent or received; 
communicative success is 
considered a more natural form of 
feedback shared between clinician 
and client than declarations of 
linguistic accuracy (Davis, 2005).
The goal in PACE exchanges is successful 
communication, not accuracy of phonol-
ogy, morphology, syntax, and not nec-
essarily success through any particular 
mode of communication.
Consider how many communication 
treatment approaches entail the clinician 
playing the role of teacher or expert who 
already knows the answers to questions 
being asked or problems being addressed. 
That is, in many approaches, there is not 
equal participation, and new information 
is not exchanged. In this sense, PACE dif-
fers from many other approaches. The 
free choice of modalities may be espe-
cially helpful for focusing on alternatives 
to spoken language as a means of com-
munication. Thus, PACE may be consid-
ered a total communication approach, as 
described in Chapter 25.
How Is PACE Treatment 
Implemented?
Here is how the PACE approach is carried 
out.
• Obtain a set of stimulus cards 
(words and/or pictures).
• Place the deck of stimulus 
cards face-down on a table. It 
is important that you not know 
what is represented on the cards. 
Given what we know about the 
importance of ecological validity 
for maximizing carryover to  
real-world contexts, it is important 
that the stimuli be relevant to the 
client. Thus, the stimuli must be 
selected with his or her goals and 
interests in mind. This may be 
challenging, as stimulus selection is 
ideally done by someone other than 
the clinician so that the clinician has 
no idea what the stimuli are. If that 
isn’t possible, another option is to 
have so many cards prepared that 
you would not be likely to easily 
guess which one the person has 
selected.
• Face the client.
• Discuss with the client the goal of 
successful communication rather 
than linguistic accuracy. Adapt your 
means of expression as needed. 
Using supported communication 
strategies, give examples of how 
he or she might convey a concept 
through speaking, gesture, sign, 

Promoting Compensatory Strategies in Conversation   509
facial expressions, pantomime, 
writing, or drawing. Explain how 
you will take turns sending and 
receiving messages.
• Decide who will take the first turn 
as sender.
• The sender picks a card and hides it 
from the receiver’s view. A barrier 
may be used, or the card may be 
held under the table or placed face-
down on the table.
• The sender uses any modality he 
or she chooses to convey what is 
represented on the card.
• The receiver gives feedback about 
what was understood. In some 
cases, the sender simply says a 
correct word and the receiver 
merely repeats it and then both 
look at the card and affirm the 
communicative success. In 
other cases, the sender may use 
nonspeech modalities, and more 
guessing is required on the part of 
the receiver. This may be followed 
by repeated attempts and ongoing 
feedback.
• In the role of receiver, you 
may request the use of certain 
modalities and may also request 
different types of written or spoken 
expression, such as physical 
description of objects, object 
categories, or functional uses for 
objects depicted. Expand on the 
client’s utterance to acknowledge 
the successful components of 
communication initiated. Keep in 
mind that your feedback is to focus 
on effective communication, not 
on accuracy. In the role of sender, 
you may choose descriptions rather 
than naming, and you may choose 
varied modalities of expression.
• Keep taking equal turns until 
the sender has successfully 
communicated what is represented 
on the card.
• Reverse roles as sender and 
receiver.
To score PACE communication at- 
tempts, a scale from 0 to 5 may be applied. 
See the scoring summary in Table 29–1. 
Clinicians may wish to monitor or score 
other aspects of communicative attempts 
as well, such as how well the client 
responds as receiver.
If it is important to maintain treat-
ment fidelity in terms of the method 
as described by its authors, such as for 
a research study, the clinician should 
encourage the client to engage in any 
form of communication when in the role 
of sender (i.e., speaking, gesture, sign, 
facial expressions, pantomime, writing, or 
drawing). However, if treatment fidelity 
is not essential, liberties may be taken by 
focusing on the use of specific modalities 
or combinations of modalities. For exam-
ple, a person with severe anomia may have 
a goal of using written cues and gestures 
to facilitate expression; in this case, he or 
she may be asked to only use those strate-
gies and not to speak at all when sending 
messages. Another variation that may be 
implemented is to use stimuli other than 
picture and word cards. For example, real 
objects, video clips, and computer-gener-
ated images, words, or phrases may serve 
as the stimuli, as long as the clinician does 
not know their contents.
Difficulty of PACE tasks may be 
manipulated by using phrases or sen-
tences of varying complexity, pictures 
of complex scenes rather than simple 
objects, and low-frequency or less famil-
iar words and objects. Complexity (see the 

510   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
description of CATE in Chapter 24) may 
be emphasized strategically, and its effects 
on an individual’s performance and carry­
over may be monitored. Springer, Glinde-
mann, Huber, and Willmes (1991) reported 
that adding a semantic classification task 
to traditional PACE treatment enhanced 
the effectiveness of the approach when 
applied to four people with aphasia.
A benefit of PACE that I have per-
sonally found in clinical practice is the 
empowerment of family members and 
friends to aid in establishing collections of 
meaningful stimuli. Often significant oth-
ers want to help in meaningful ways, yet 
feel powerless to do so. Asking them to 
assemble pictures, objects, and words that 
represent real-world interests and every-
day experiences of the client gives them 
a meaningful role to play. Having others 
assemble the materials also helps preserve 
the principle of conveying new informa-
tion by assuring the clinician’s lack of 
prior knowledge of what the stimuli are.
PACE was developed for people with 
aphasia, primarily those with word-find-
ing challenges, but may be used with peo-
ple who have goals related to turn taking 
and other aspects of pragmatics, and goals 
related to any of myriad expressive and 
receptive linguistic abilities (Pulvermüller 
& Roth, 1991). PACE treatment may be eas-
ily adapted for use in communication part-
ner training (Newhoff, Bugbee, & Ferreira, 
1981) and group treatment (Elman, 2007a).
What Is the Status of PACE in 
Terms of Evidence-Based Practice?
Overall, outcomes research for PACE 
suggests that it enhances communica-
tive effectiveness in people with apha-
sia. Challenges in documented treatment 
efficacy to date include small numbers 
of participants within studies and varia-
tions in participant inclusion and exclu-
Table 29–1.  Summary of PACE Scoring Scale for Client as Sender
Response Description
Score
Message conveyed on first attempt
5
Message conveyed after general feedback (indicating the first attempt was 
not completely understood)
4
Message conveyed after specific feedback from the clinician
3
Message partially conveyed by the client, only after general and specific 
feedback have been attempted
2
Message not conveyed appropriately despite efforts by the client and 
clinician
1
Client does not attempt to convey the message
0
Unscorable response due to violation of one of the four principles
U
Source:  Adapted from Davis, 1980; Davis and Wilcox, 1985.

Promoting Compensatory Strategies in Conversation   511
sion criteria (e.g., type, severity, and etiol-
ogy of aphasia), treatment dosage, control 
for personal relevance and complexity of 
stimuli, and the type of feedback pro-
vided by the clinician to the client.
Means of indexing outcomes associ-
ated with the method have also varied 
across studies. Some, for example, have 
included indices of communication dur-
ing role-play, expressive language scores 
in aphasia batteries, storytelling, picture 
naming, and picture description abili-
ties. Li, Kitselman, Dusatko, and Spinelli 
(1988) reported that, although PACE 
treatment participants in their study did 
not improve in word finding, they did 
improve in effective circumlocutions and 
in providing multiple attempts at commu-
nicating content. Carlomagno, Losanno, 
Emanuelli, and Casadio (1991) reported 
that PACE participants improved their 
expression of relevant content and 
decreased irrelevant content in referential 
tasks; they also improved in storytelling 
but did not improve in picture descrip-
tion abilities. Kurland, Pulvermüller, 
Silva, Burke, and Andrianopoulos (2012) 
reported that two people with chronic 
aphasia and apraxia of speech improved 
in naming ability following PACE treat-
ment but made greater and more rapid 
gains during constraint-induced aphasia 
therapy (CIAT, discussed in Chapter 30).  
Avent, Edwards, Franco, Lucero, and 
Pekowsky (1995) and Kurland et al. (2012) 
emphasize that individuals respond dif-
ferently to PACE treatment; indexing 
progress for each person is important.
In sum, there has been little confor-
mity in treatment fidelity and outcomes 
assessment, and not all people with apha-
sia benefit equally from this approach. 
Still, benefits may be more far-reaching 
than documented to date if one takes into 
account the empowering nature of natu-
ral feedback and equal roles of sender 
and receiver entailed. Keep in mind that, 
although the turn-taking interaction in- 
herent in PACE simulates real conversa-
tion, its structure makes it such that it does 
not constitute actual conversation (Davis, 
2005). As always, in clinical practice, it is 
important to index the gains in terms of 
life participation goals for each person.
What Is the Communicative 
Drawing Program (CDP)?
The Communicative Drawing Program 
(CDP) focuses on the use of drawing as 
a compensatory means of communica-
tion (Helm-Estabrooks, Albert, & Nicho-
las, 2014). It is intended for people with 
severe aphasia who are limited in oral and 
written language expression. Is it based 
upon and similar to the Back to the Draw-
ing Board approach, the next approach 
described in this chapter.
On What Principles Is CDP Based?
An underlying principle of CDP is that 
drawing is intrinsically nonlinguistic and 
so may be useful even in people with 
severe aphasia (Farias, Davis, & Har-
rington, 2006). Some have argued that 
drawing exploits use of the intact right 
hemisphere (e.g., Farias et al., 2006) to 
facilitate word retrieval, although the 
assumptions underlying that argument 
have been contested (e.g., Gainotti, 2015). 
In any case, CDP was developed primar-
ily as a compensatory approach to com-
munication. Overall, the authors of the 

512   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
original work on CDP do not provide a 
strong theoretical basis other than the gen-
eral notion that drawing training through 
a methodical series of prescribed steps 
may enhance communication in people 
with severe aphasia.
How Is CDP Implemented?
CDP is carried out in 10 steps, which are 
spelled out in detail by Helm-Estabrooks 
et al. (2014). Steps are summarized here.
	 1.	 Have the client identify and recog-
nize categories of objects. This step is 
intended to ensure “semantic-concep-
tual knowledge” (Helm-Estabrooks 
et al., 2014, p. 392). Show a set of 10 
pictures, 5 of which belong to one 
semantic category (e.g., tools, vegeta-
bles, furniture) and the other 5 (foils) 
representing a diverse collection of 
other types of items. Don’t mention 
the name of the category to the client. 
Simply ask him or her to “circle the 
objects that belong together.” Do this 
until the client can select the five that 
go together for at least five different 
category sets.
	 2.	 Provide the client 12 color markers 
and ask him or her to color black-and-
white line-drawn objects. The objects 
should have clear target colors (e.g., 
banana, pea, carrot). This activity may 
be supplemented as needed with use 
of real objects or colored pictures to 
enhance “knowledge of object color 
properties” (p. 281). Do this until nine 
objects are colored correctly.
	 3.	 Have the client trace around the con-
tour of black-and-white line draw-
ings. The authors suggest that this 
step helps clients recognize items from 
their “outer configuration” (p. 281). 
Do this until he or she conforms to 
the basic shape without intersecting 
the lines in the drawings themselves.
	 4.	 Ask the person to copy the following 
geometric shapes: crescent, oval, star, 
octagon, cone, pyramid, cylinder, and 
cube. This is to help the client work on 
drawing images of the correct relative 
size and shape that also convey three-
dimensional aspects. If needed, color 
the objects to provide additional cues. 
Do this until the client can draw all 
eight shapes in proper proportion.
	 5.	 Provide pictures of objects with miss-
ing parts (such as a car missing a 
wheel, a cat missing an eye, or a horse 
missing a leg). Ask the person to fill in 
the missing parts using a black pen. 
This is to help foster attention to the 
features of objects. The specific num-
ber of items to be presented is not 
mentioned by the authors. When all 
items in the set of items you are using 
are complete and accurate, move on 
to the next step.
	 6.	 Show the individual a picture and 
then take it away. Ask him or her to 
draw the picture. This is to work on 
drawing from “stored representa-
tions” (p. 282). Do this for 10 different 
pictures. Work on each picture up to 
three times if needed. Continue until 
appropriate and recognizable objects 
are drawn 100% of the time, as judged 
by a person who does not know what 
the items to be represented are.
	 7.	 Name an object on which you have 
been working. Ask the client to draw 
it. Do this until the drawing is appro-
priate and recognizable 100% of the 
time as judged by a person who does 
not know what the items to be rep-
resented are. Do this for all 10 of the 
items used in the preceding step.

Promoting Compensatory Strategies in Conversation   513
	 8.	 Tell the individual a category name 
and ask that he or she draw an item in 
that category. Do this for 10 categories 
(e.g., tools, transportation, and furni-
ture). Do this until 10 appropriate and 
recognizable objects are drawn 100% 
of the time, as judged by a person 
who does not know what the items to 
be represented are.
	 9.	 Ask the person to draw as many 
items within a category as he or she  
can, without any examples presented. 
Work as needed on improvements that 
would make the drawings interpreta-
ble in terms of what they are meant to 
represent. Do this until 6 to 10 recog-
nizable drawings are completed.
10.	 Have the client draw one-, two-, and 
three-paneled cartoons representing 
a story or joke. First, instruct him or 
her to point out what is funny about a 
one-paneled cartoon. Second, ask him 
or her to remember the picture; take it 
away and then have him draw it from 
memory. If the picture drawn is not 
adequate, try a simpler version for 
practice. For two- and three-paneled 
cartoons, the individual must draw 
the panels in the correct order to con-
vey a logical sequence of events. To 
complete this step, a nonbiased judge 
must be able to identify all aspects 
of the picture that are necessary to 
understand the joke or story.
What Is the Status of the CDP in 
Terms of Evidence-Based Practice?
Several other authors have contributed 
to the evidence base underlying the use 
of drawing to support communication 
in people with aphasia (e.g., Lyon, 1995; 
Lyon & Helm-Estabrooks, 1987; Morgan 
& Helm-Estabrooks, 1987; Rao, 1995; 
Sacchett, 2002; Sacchett, Byng, Marshall, 
& Pound, 1999; Wallace, Purdy, & Skid-
more, 2014). Although studies employing 
drawing as part of a total communication 
approach abound, carefully controlled 
studies of CDP in particular are lacking. 
Benefits of CDP are said to be enhanced 
accuracy of drawing for conveying of con-
tent and thus enhanced communication 
(Helm-Estabrooks et al., 2014).
When considering drawing-focused 
approaches, it is important to take indi-
vidual preferences into account. Appreci-
ate that not all people who might benefit 
from such an approach enjoy drawing; 
some may not want to participate in these 
sorts of activities. Also, many in the tar-
get population do not have functional use 
of their dominant hand for drawing and 
may become frustrated, especially with 
the level of exactness (with high-accu-
racy criteria for moving from one step to 
another) required for this approach. Other 
limitations that might affect individual 
enjoyment as well as performance include 
visual acuity, visual attention, visuospa-
tial abilities, the ability to associate drawn 
objects with semantic representations and 
remember those associations, and the abil-
ity to generate drawings based on verbal 
names alone.
The focus on accuracy of drawing as 
opposed to the communicative content 
conveyed has been noted by some as a 
challenge with this approach. One need 
not be a good artist to convey a message. 
With people who have severe aphasia, 
conveying a message is likely to be far 
more important than drawing accurately 
(Sacchett, 2002; Sacchett et al., 1999). Relat-
edly, providing more detail than needed 
to convey a message results in inefficiency 
of communication.

514   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Sacchett et al. (1999) tested a similar 
approach entailing fewer steps with seven 
people with severe chronic aphasia. The 
aims, as stated, were to:
• Improve the ability to “draw 
generatively, in other words, to 
think of an idea, call up its visual 
representation and translate this 
into a drawing” (p. 269)
• “Promote ‘economic’ drawing” 
(p. 269) by focusing on the most 
important aspects to be conveyed 
and only drawing those
• Improve the ability of the person 
with aphasia to respond to feedback 
from a conversational partner
• Improve the conversational 
partner’s drawing interpretation 
skills
A salient distinction between the Sac-
chett et al. (1999) approach and CDP is the 
focus on the communicative effectiveness 
of drawing over accuracy. The authors 
reported that, in a 12-week program, rec-
ognizable generative drawings improved, 
and these improvements were maintained 
6 weeks following treatment. Caregiver 
interviews suggested generalization to 
spontaneous conversation. Generaliza-
tion is indeed an important factor to con-
sider, as many people with aphasia tend 
not to use drawings spontaneously in 
conversation even when they have been 
trained to do so (Lyon, 1995). Lyon (1995) 
draws attention to an aspect of the inter-
active nature of communicative drawing 
that is not captured in common language 
treatment outcomes measures: “Interact-
ing through common focus, reciprocal 
turn taking, and the shared experience of 
building a drawing together constitutes 
success, even if its value is simply mutual 
satisfaction” (p. 87).
What Is Back to the 
Drawing Board (BDB)?
Back to the Drawing Board (BDB) (Morgan 
& Helm-Estabrooks, 1987) is an approach 
much like CDP and was developed before 
the publication of CDP as a specific treat-
ment method. Like CDP, it is intended 
for use with people with severe aphasia.
On What Principles Is BDB 
Treatment Based?
Back to the Drawing Board is based on the 
same principles as described for the CDP. 
As with CDP, treatment goals may include 
answering questions; requesting assis-
tance, objects, or information; or sharing 
information, by way of drawing rather 
than speaking. Treatment outcomes may 
be indexed in terms of increased accuracy 
of drawings (Peach, 2008).
How Is BDB Implemented?
Morgan and Helm-Estabrooks (1987) 
provided instructions for guiding people 
with aphasia in a process of using sequen-
tial drawings to communicate humorous 
content. The steps are described here.
• Create or gather five uncaptioned 
humorous cartoon panels. Single 
panels should be used to illustrate 
a single event and multiple panels 
should be use to illustrate sequential 
events. Start with single panels.
• Show the client the first one-panel 
cartoon for a short time and then 
take it away. Ask him or her to 

Promoting Compensatory Strategies in Conversation   515
draw the cartoon from memory. 
The criterion for an acceptable 
drawing is the drawing must be 
recognizable and must convey the 
humorous aspect. If the result is 
satisfactory, move to the next step. 
If not, provide more instruction, 
demonstration, and practice by 
copying.
• Provide the second cartoon panel 
and give four trials of drawing from 
memory. The criteria for success are 
the same as for the previous step.
• Once the client successfully draws 
three of five single-cartoon panels 
from memory, introduce two-panel 
cartoons.
• Once the client successfully draws 
three of five two-cartoon panels 
from memory, introduce three-
panel cartoons.
The authors recommend that family 
members and friends be included in train-
ing, not only about drawing but about 
total communication and communication 
support in general. Communication part-
ners may be taught strategies for asking 
questions to extract information about 
the drawings, for example, asking the 
individual to point to the most important 
aspects of the drawings and encouraging 
multimodal expression. Progress is mea-
sured using the individual’s drawings of 
“accidents of living” (Morgan & Helm-
Estabrooks, 1987, p. 65). To do this, enact 
the following types of activities:
• Single events (e.g., dropping a 
pencil on the floor)
• Two-part events (e.g., shuffling 
cards and then dropping them)
• Three-part events (e.g., writing with 
a pencil, breaking the pencil, and 
sharpening it)
Then ask the client to draw what was 
just witnessed. Compare these drawings 
before and after treatment.
What Is the Status of BDB in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Research on the approach is limited. Mor-
gan and Helm-Estabrooks (1987) applied 
the approach with two people with severe 
aphasia. Independent judges assessed the 
accuracy of pre- and posttreatment draw-
ings according to:
• Whether the gist of the cartoon was 
conveyed
• Number of components to the 
sequence
• Number of objects named when 
described
• Accuracy of the gender of the 
people represented in the drawings
Both participants were said to improve in 
drawing accuracy as assessed by indepen-
dent judges.
Given the similarities between the 
CDP and BDB, the discussion of the 
strengths and weaknesses of the BDB over-
all is captured in the discussion of CDP. 
Like CDP, although BDB was designed for 
people with severe expressive language 
deficits, the treatment program could be 
used to facilitate communication in any 
person with aphasia as part of a total com-
munication approach.
What Is Visual Action Therapy?
Visual Action Therapy (VAT) is a gesture- 
based nonvocal approach, intended for 
people with global aphasia, to promote 

516   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
the use of symbolic gestures to com-
municate when language expression 
is severely impaired (Peach, 2008). It is 
geared toward fostering the use of sym-
bolic gestures for stimuli that are not 
visually present (Helm-Estabrooks et al., 
2014; Helm-Estabrooks, Fitzpatrick, & 
Barresi, 1982). VAT may be considered a 
compensatory approach because it is used 
to support an alternative modality for 
expressive communication. It could also 
be considered restitutive because studies 
have shown that stimulation provided in 
VAT enhances brain activity (Drummond, 
2006). VAT treatment goals might include 
the ability to pair gestures with commonly 
used items, and the use of meaningful 
gestures in spontaneous social interac-
tions and expression of wants and needs.
There are three types (also called 
phases) of VAT.
• Proximal Limb VAT (PL VAT) 
focuses on the proximal limbs 
(extremities closer to the torso, 
such as arms and legs) and relates 
to gross motor skills (e.g., hitting a 
desk with a gavel).
• Distal Limb VAT (DL VAT) involves 
the distal limbs (extremities farther 
away from the torso, such as fingers 
and toes) and relates to fine motor 
skills (e.g., dialing a telephone).
• Bucco-facial VAT (B/F VAT) 
incorporates facial gestures (e.g., 
drinking form a straw).
According to Helm-Estabrooks et al. 
(2014), people with severe deficits in 
expression but intact comprehension 
of speech and written language are the 
best candidates for DL VAT; people with 
severely restricted verbal output but rel-
atively good auditory skills are the best 
candidates for B/F VAT.
On What Principles Is VAT 
Treatment Based?
VAT is based on the principle that people 
with severe language impairments often 
retain symbolic abilities that underlie lan-
guage use (Gardner, Zurif, Berry, & Back-
man, 1976; Glass, Gazzaniga, & Premack, 
1973; Ramsberger & Helm-Estabrooks, 
1988). Helm-Estabrooks et al. (2014) offer 
a detailed description of the rationale that 
led to the approach.
How Is VAT Implemented?
The same stimuli are used for all three 
types of VAT: objects, line drawings of 
those objects, and pictures of those objects. 
Steps progress from matching objects and 
pictures to representing concepts through 
gestures without a corresponding physi-
cal object being present. The steps are 
described slightly differently between 
the original published description (Helm-
Estabrooks et al., 1982) and a more recent 
publication (Helm-Estabrooks et al., 2014). 
We consider them briefly here.
• Assemble 15 objects, line drawings 
of those objects, and pictures of 
those objects. Recommended PL 
VAT items are a flag, paint stick, 
gavel, saw, and iron. Recommended 
DL objects are a screwdriver, 
teaspoon, telephone, paintbrush, 
and tea bag. Suggested B/F items 
are a whistle, flower, lollipop, 
drinking straw, and lip balm. 
Contextual props may also be used 
(e.g., an actual drink for showing 
the use of a drinking straw or a 
teacup to show use of a tea bag).

Promoting Compensatory Strategies in Conversation   517
• Have the client match pictures to 
objects. First, have her place the 
objects on the pictures. Then have 
her place the pictures on the objects. 
Next, show the pictures and have 
her point to the corresponding 
object. Finally, present the 
objects and have her point to the 
corresponding pictures.
• As you show each object, have the 
client use gestures to demonstrate 
how each object is used.
• Present an object and a 
corresponding picture. Have the 
client demonstrate how the object is 
used.
• Show a group of objects. Gesture 
how one of them is used. Model 
gestures associated with each 
object.
• Model the same gestures again, this 
time asking the client to choose an 
object that goes with your gesture.
• Show one object at a time and have 
the client gesture its use.
• Model a gesture (pantomime) 
associated with each object, without 
the object in sight.
• Have the client request an object 
using only a gesture. Give her the 
item indicated.
VAT scoring is determined as follows:
• 1 point for correct performance 
without hesitation or delay
• .5 points for a self-corrected and/or 
delayed response
• 0 for any other performance
What Is the Status of VAT in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Little research has been published regard-
ing the effects of specific VAT protocols as 
described by Helm-Estabrooks et al. (1982) 
and Helm-Estabrooks et al. (2014). Rams-
berger and Helm-Estabrooks (1988) used 
the B/F aspect of the program with six 
people with aphasia and, in their terms, 
“bucco-facial apraxia.” They reported 
improvements not only in pantomime use 
but also in verbal repetition and auditory 
comprehension, as indexed via the PICA 
(Porch, 1967). Conlon and McNeil (1989) 
reported improvements according to 
PICA scores and gestural response scores 
in two people with global aphasia using 
VAT; they cautioned that generalization  
to spontaneous use and untrained items 
was not noted and that additional research 
is needed.
Raymer et al. (2006) did not imple-
ment the detailed protocol specified by 
Helm-Estabrooks and colleagues but sup-
ported the effectiveness of gesture paired 
with verbal training for nouns and verbs 
in people with aphasia. They noted no 
carryover to untrained words. Daumül-
ler and Goldenberg (2010) described a 
different modification of gesture-based 
treatment and measured significant im- 
provement in use of gestures that were 
practiced. Some carryover to untrained 
items was noted.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 For each of the approaches addressed 
in this chapter, describe why it would 
be considered to be restitutive, com-
pensatory, or both.
	 3.	 For each of the approaches in this 
chapter, make a list of materials you 
would want to have on hand so that 

518   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
you would be prepared to carry out 
the approach in actual treatment 
sessions.
	 4.	 With a partner, demonstrate a treat-
ment session using each approach in 
this chapter.
	 5.	 How would you summarize the sta-
tus of evidence-based practice for 
specific treatment methods intended 
to foster compensatory strategies in 
communication?
	 6.	 What do you see as the greatest 
research needs related to methods for 
fostering compensatory strategies in 
communication?
	 7.	 What strategies would you use to 
maximize transfer of treatment gains 
in compensatory strategy treatments 
to real-world use of communication?
For additional learning and reflection activ-
ities, see the companion website.

519
Chapter
30
Enhancing Overall 
Expressive Language
In Chapter 25, we reviewed several general 
approaches that help people with reduced 
expressive language engage in meaningful 
social interaction, especially through sup-
ported communication. In this chapter, we 
extend that discussion to specific approaches 
for improving expressive language abilities: 
Constraint Induced Language Therapy 
(CILT), script training, Melodic Intona-
tion Therapy (MIT), Voluntary Control of 
Involuntary Utterances (VCIU), Response 
Elaboration Training (RET), and Treatment 
for Aphasic Perseveration (TAP).
After reading and reflecting on the con-
tent in this chapter, you will ideally be able 
to answer, in your own words, the follow-
ing queries about each of these approaches:
	 1.	 What is it?
	 2.	 On what principles is it based?
	 3.	 How is it implemented?
	 4.	 What is its status in terms of evidence-
based practice?
What Is Constraint-Induced 
Language Therapy (CILT)?
Constraint-induced language therapy 
(CILT) or constraint-induced aphasia 
therapy (CIAT) is modeled on approaches 
to constraint-induced therapy in areas 
of practice outside of communication 
(i.e., treatments involving neuromotor 
control). In this approach, people are 
restricted in their use of compensatory 
modalities. They are encouraged to use 
the modalities that are the most impaired. 
For example, a person with limited oral 
language expression would be restricted 
from using gestures, drawing, and writ-
ing to communicate. Although it might 
be applicable for people with neurogenic 
cognitive-linguistic disorders other than 
aphasia, the approach has been developed 
to date primarily for people with aphasia.
On What Principles Is CILT Based?
CILT is a restitutive approach. As dis-
cussed in Chapter 24, Pulvermüller  
et al. (2001) introduced the notion that 
constraint-induced movement therapy 
(CIMT) for people with neuromotor chal-
lenges could be applied to people with 
acquired language disorders. They based 
their rationale on previous research show-
ing that when people with hemiparalysis 
or hemiparesis of the limbs were restricted 

520   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
in the use of their functional arm or leg, 
they demonstrated increased motor func-
tioning in their impaired limbs. Maximiz-
ing reliance on impaired systems seemed 
to stimulate impaired abilities. Thus, the 
underlying rationale for CILT is that it 
is important to encourage people with 
language disabilities to use the language 
modalities that are most impaired.
The primary principles of CILT are 
that:
• communication should be restricted 
to verbal expression (e.g., that 
nonverbal modality use should be 
discouraged), and
• practice should be intense.
How Is CILT Implemented?
One challenge with the state of CILT 
to date is that there is little consistency 
across studies in terms of the actual treat-
ment protocol implemented. Not only are 
the details about treatment intensity and 
duration lacking in some studies but so 
are the specific activities in which partici-
pants engaged. The focus has been more 
on what participants with aphasia were 
not allowed to do. That is, they have been 
instructed primarily not to use nonlin-
guistic means to communicate and not 
to use the stronger of oral versus written 
modalities of communication.
Typically, tasks during CILT have 
been focused on spoken language pro-
duction, often using a cueing hierarchy 
approach (see Chapter 31). Treatment 
intensity has generally been about 3 to 
4 hours per day for at least 5 days per 
week over 2 weeks or 10 consecutive  
days.
What Is the Status of CILT in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Maher et al. (2006) reported carryover of 
language gains in three of four people 
with aphasia treated with CILT. Interest-
ingly, they reported that a control group 
involved in PACE treatment also made 
similar gains, suggesting that perhaps 
the intensity of the treatment — not just 
the method — was important. Kirmess 
and Maher (2010) applied CILT to three 
people with acute aphasia in an inpatient 
rehabilitation context. They reported that 
the greatest improvements were seen in 
the impaired modalities treated.
Johnson et al. (2014) reported posi-
tive outcomes following CILT with four 
people with chronic Broca’s aphasia. They 
noted that a lack of statistical signifi-
cance in language battery test scores but 
improved use of language in natural con-
texts; they highlighted that indices used 
to measure treatment outcomes should 
be those that reflect the most life-affecting 
aspects of treatment.
As noted in Chapter 29, Kurland et 
al. (2012) found that treatment effects for 
CILT in addition to PACE treatment were 
greater than PACE treatment alone for two 
people with aphasia. Those authors also 
reported increased activation measured 
through functional MRI (fMRI) in per-
ilesional areas following CILT. Meinzer, 
Djundja, Barthel, Elbert, and Rochstroh 
(2005) reported maintenance of treatment 
effects 6 months posttreatment in a study 
of 27 people with aphasia.
Most of the research on CILT to date 
has been done with people who had 
severe Broca’s aphasia and apraxia of 
speech. Faroqi-Shah and Virion (2009) 
administered CILT to two people with 

Enhancing Overall Expressive Language   521
chronic agrammatic aphasia and reported 
minimal impacts on syntactic perfor-
mance. Research with people who have 
mild aphasia and/or more “fluent” forms 
of aphasia is needed (Cherney, Patterson, 
Raymer, Frymark, & Schooling, 2008). 
Also, few outcome measures have been 
used consistently across studies.
In a systematic review, Cherney and 
colleagues (2008) summarized evidence 
regarding the intensity of treatment for 
CILT for people with aphasia. Across 
10 studies, overall positive effects were 
noted. None included people with acute 
aphasia. Only five provided sufficient 
detail pertaining to intensity to qualify 
for systematic review according to level of 
treatment intensity. They reported “mod-
est evidence” (p. 1282) for greater effects 
from more intensive treatment and sug-
gested that treatment decisions be made 
“in conjunction with clinical expertise and 
the client’s individual values” (p. 1282). 
This is certainly a good mantra for all evi-
dence-based practice.
Other authors, too, have pointed out 
that the required intensity of CILT may 
have more to do with its demonstrated 
effectiveness in research studies to date 
than the notion of restricting nonverbal 
expression (Basso & Macis, 2011; Brady, 
Kelly, Godwin, & Enderby, 2012; Szaflar-
ski et al., 2008). Rose (2013) reviewed the 
theoretical accounts for multimodal treat-
ments for aphasia as well as CILT and 
concluded that “constraint treatments and 
multimodality treatments are equally effi-
cacious, and there is limited support for 
constraining client responses to the spo-
ken modality” (p. 227).
Overall, there is a need for more 
research on CILT, with larger numbers 
of people with varied types of aphasia at 
varied levels of time postonset. It will be 
important to control and describe more 
consistently what it is that is done in 
treatment while certain modality use is 
avoided and to consider methodically the 
factors that might affect how well a person 
may fare using CILT. It is also important 
to study more about the underlying neu-
ral mechanisms that support functional 
changes associated with CILT. Of course, 
contextualizing these studies in a life par-
ticipation perspective, not only attending 
to the impairment level, will be important.
Regardless of the effectiveness of 
CILT, it is important to note that, overall, 
there is no clear evidence that using sup-
ported communication across all modali-
ties impedes recovery of impaired modal-
ities. As we noted in Section VI, failing 
to attend to the communication needs of 
people with acquired language disorders 
as soon as possible is unethical.
What Is Script Training?
Script training is a method in which the 
client practices using personally relevant 
conversational scripts that are written in 
collaboration with an SLP. It is intended 
for people with aphasia who have limited 
expressive language. The goal is to pro-
duce relatively fluent speech and natural 
language production in socially meaning-
ful contexts.
On What Principles Is 
Script Training Based?
Script training is based on the assump-
tion that repetitive practice of preestab-
lished, personally relevant conversational 

522   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
text will decrease the amount of effort 
involved in speaking during conversa-
tion and increase spontaneous language 
generation (Bilda, 2011). Although script 
training may be considered impairment 
focused, it also fits within a social and life 
participation model because it entails use 
of trained scripts in actual real-life com-
municative contexts.
How Is Script Training 
Implemented?
The following steps are based on descrip-
tions from Cherney (2012); Lee, Kaye, and 
Cherney (2009); Manheim, Halper, and 
Cherney (2009); and Youmans, Holland, 
Muñoz, and Bourgeois (2005):
• Discuss the goals of script training 
with the client.
• Have her generate topics that are 
most relevant to her. The scripts 
may be monologues or dialogues, 
to be initiated by the client in actual 
communicative situations. Scripts 
may include, for example, personal 
stories, general conversational 
topics, content to provide 
information, and descriptions of 
personal interests (Holland, Halper, 
& Cherney, 2010). It might help for 
you to propose a few specific topics 
based on what you know about her 
interests and communication needs.
• Use supported communication 
strategies to collaborate with her 
in generating a written script for 
specific content she wants to be able 
to convey.
• Practice reading the script aloud 
with her, then have her read it 
alone, supporting her as needed.
• For homework, assign repeated 
reading aloud of the script several 
times a day.
• Have her practice using the script 
in contexts where the content is 
socially appropriate.
• Have her practice the script with 
new conversational partners.
Since the method makes use of mass prac-
tice, it makes sense to use technology to 
deliver the target script to be practiced. 
Script text may be programmed into a 
speech-generating device, smartphone, 
or tablet computer, using human voice 
recordings or digitized speech output.
What Is the Status of Script Training 
in Terms of Evidence-Based Practice?
Youmans et al. (2005) reported increased 
accuracy of production and good general-
ization to spontaneous use for two people 
with aphasia. The authors found that 5 to 
11 sessions per script led to mastery for 
both people; 2 or 3 additional sessions 
were provided for generalization practice 
with new conversational partners. Man-
heim et al. (2009) provided computer-
based script training for 20 people with 
chronic aphasia. Outcomes, as indexed 
according to the Burden of Stroke Scale 
(Doyle, McNeil, & Hula, 2003), indicated 
significantly reduced communication 
difficulty. Lee et al. (2009) reported that 
greater intensity of AphasiaScripts treat-
ment led to better treatment gains in 17 
people with aphasia, especially in people 
with more severe language impairment.
Goldberg, Haley, and Jacks (2012) 
provided script training delivered through 
a combination of in-person and online 
videoconferencing sessions for two peo-

Enhancing Overall Expressive Language   523
ple with aphasia. Treatment entailed work 
on two personally relevant scripts, three 
times per week for 3 weeks, for each script. 
The authors noted that both participants 
improved in terms of grammatical mor-
pheme production, rate of speech, syntax, 
and overall conversational success.
Holland et al. (2010) analyzed the 
contents of 100 short scripts that had been 
collaboratively developed by 33 people 
with aphasia and their SLPs. The most 
common category of monologue scripts 
was personal stories (68%), and the most 
common category of dialogue scripts was 
conversations with families (21%).
What Is Melodic Intonation 
Therapy (MIT)?
Melodic Intonation Therapy (MIT) is an 
intervention method based on facilitating 
spoken language through the exaggera-
tion of three elements of spoken language 
prosody: pitch, the tempo and rhythm 
of utterances, and stress for emphasis 
(Sparks, 2008). Speaking tasks are gradu-
ally increased in length and complexity 
as treatment progresses in a hierarchi-
cal fashion, starting with shorter, easier 
speaking tasks and ending in longer and 
more grammatically complex utterances. 
Tempo is slowed down so that the utter-
ance is lyrical in nature. Variation of 
spoken pitch is reduced and made more 
constant or monotonic. Stress is exagger-
ated for emphasis using pitch and volume 
changes (Sparks, 2008).
MIT is intended for people with 
severely limited oral expression, espe-
cially people with Broca’s aphasia (with 
or without apraxia of speech). The best 
candidates for treatment are said to be 
those with good auditory comprehension, 
the ability to self-monitor and self-correct, 
and willingness to participate actively 
(Helm-Estabrooks, Albert, & Nicholas, 
2014; Helm-Estabrooks, Nicholas, & Mor-
gan, 1989; Norton, Zipse, Marchina, & 
Schlaug, 2009; Schlaug, Marchina, & Nor-
ton, 2008; Sparks, 2008; Sparks & Holland, 
1976). The goal is to draw on the prosodic 
features of language to facilitate verbal 
output. MIT targets speech output at the 
impairment level.
On What Principles Is MIT Based?
MIT was developed based on the hypoth-
esis that “functions associated with the 
intact right hemisphere might be tapped 
to improve the language functions of a 
damaged left hemisphere” (Helm-Esta-
brooks et al., 1989, p. 1). According to 
Albert, Sparks, and Helm (1973), MIT 
takes advantage of three principles:
• The right hemisphere mediates 
music and speech prosody in most 
people.
• The right hemisphere is typically 
preserved in individuals with 
aphasia such that singing abilities 
are spared in most individuals with 
left hemisphere lesions alone.
• Preserved musical and prosodic 
capabilities can be used to facilitate 
language production in people with 
aphasia.
Initially, utterances presented melodi-
cally, are a way for individuals to compen-
sate for their lack of speech. As treatment 
steps progress, the underlying melody 
fades, and more typical speech patterns 
and prosody are ideally elicited. MIT is res-
titutive in terms of the goal to foster brain 

524   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
changes to enhance speech output and 
prosody. It may also be considered com-
pensatory in that a person may learn to use 
melody and rhythmic patterns to facilitate 
his or her own speech (Albert et al., 1973).
How Is MIT Implemented?
The original method, developed by Albert 
and colleagues (1973), is composed of 
clear steps organized in a hierarchy of 
increasing difficulty. Difficulty refers to 
an increased phrase length with each 
level and removal of melodic intonation 
and rhythmic tapping within later levels 
(Schlaug, Altenmüüller, & Thaut, 2010; 
Schlaug, Norton, Marchina, Zipse, & Wan, 
2010). Sparks (2008) summarized addi-
tional suggestions:
• Pausing for 6 seconds between 
presenting a target stimulus and 
having the person respond, and 
between the completion of one 
targeted verbal item and the next to 
enable processing time
• Avoiding excessive reinforcement 
for good responses
• Avoiding incorporation of melodies 
similar to actual songs, which might 
stimulate memories of song lyrics
The recommended frequency of 
intervention is two 30-minute sessions 
daily, 5 days per week. The recommended 
criterion for progression from one level 
to the next is 90% or better accuracy for 
10 consecutive therapy sessions (Sparks, 
2008). If a failure occurs on a step, even 
when a trial is repeated from the previous 
step, then that utterance is to be discontin-
ued (Sparks, Helm, & Albert, 1974).
The specific steps in MIT are de- 
scribed variably by the original authors. 
They are summarized here in an attempt 
to provide practical guidance for carrying 
out the approach. If you are interested in 
delving further into specific processes and 
scoring procedures, I recommend review-
ing the detailed instructions and scoring 
procedures provided by Helm-Estabrooks 
et al. (2014) and Sparks (2008).
In the instructions, reference to 
intoning means that instead of speaking, 
you sing the words in a melodious pattern 
that exaggerates the natural pitches corre-
sponding to how a target sentence might 
be said. The term sprechesang, literally (in 
German) “spoken song,” refers to a blend 
of speaking and singing. Sparks (2008) 
described it as being similar to intoning in 
terms of the exaggerated tempo, rhythm, 
and stress but having a more constant 
pitch: “The utterance is lyrical but spoken 
rather than sung,” he says (p. 842).
Level I
• Hum a melodic pattern twice 
holding the left hand of the client. 
Together, make hand-tapping 
movements in time with the 
humming, emphasizing rhythm, 
tempo, and stress.
• Motion for the client to join with 
you in humming the same melodic 
pattern. Continue repeating the 
same humming pattern.
• Gradually fade out your humming, 
while continuing the hand tapping. 
Use gesture to encourage the client 
to continue humming. Continue to 
do this until her or she hums in a 
way that matches what you have 
modeled.

Enhancing Overall Expressive Language   525
Level II
Step 1
• Think of a sentence that would be 
meaningful for the client to say. 
Examples might be: “I am hungry,” 
“I need help,” “I love you,” or 
“How are you?” Consider the 
intonation pattern with which the 
target sentence would be naturally 
said.
• Hum that intonation pattern while 
holding the client’s hand, tapping 
in rhythm to the humming.
• Intone the words of the sentence 
instead of humming, with the same 
melody, stress, and rhythm.
• Motion for the client to join with 
you; intone the sentence together. 
If he or she cannot do this, wait 
for a few seconds, then move on to 
another sentence and start again at 
Level II, Step 1.
Step 2
• Intone the same sentence along 
with tapping hands.
• Continue hand tapping but fade 
your intoning, and gesture to the 
client to continue intoning the 
sentence. If he or she cannot do this, 
wait for a few seconds, then move 
on to another sentence and begin at 
the start of Level II, Step 1 again.
Step 3
• Signal for the client to listen to you.
• Present the same intoned sentence 
again, accompanied by hand 
tapping with him or her.
• Signal the client to repeat the 
sentence while you continue hand 
tapping, but stop intoning.
• If the client has trouble initiating 
the sentence, provide a phonemic 
cue.
• If the client cannot do this, wait 
for a few seconds, then move on to 
another sentence and begin at the 
start of Level II, Step 1 again.
Step 4
• Without hand tapping, intone the 
question, “What did you say?”
• Signal to the client to answer with 
the same intoned utterance.
• Provide hand tapping and a 
phonemic cue if he or she is having 
trouble.
Level III
Step 1
• Present the intoned sentence again 
with hand tapping and gesture for 
the client to do it in unison with 
you.
• Fade your intoning as the client 
continues, only joining in again if 
needed.
Step 2
• Intone the sentence again with hand 
tapping.
• Give a hand signal to the client to 
request that he or she delay the 
response for a second or two.
• Gesture for the client to intone the 
sentence alone.

526   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Step 3
• Intone a question to elicit a 
response that is relevant to the 
sentence on which you’ve been 
working. The example that Sparks 
(2008) gives is: if the target sentence 
in Step 2 was, “I want some pie,” 
then you might intone, “What kind 
of pie” (p. 846).
• If he or she does not respond 
accurately, back up to Level III, 
Step 2.
Level IV
Step 1
• Signal for the client to listen while 
you intone the sentence.
• Present the sentence twice in 
sprechesang while hand tapping 
with the client.
• Gesture for the client to join you 
in unison sprechesang while hand 
tapping together.
• If he or she does not join in, model 
it again, and again gesture for him 
or her to join in.
Step 2
• Signal for the client to listen and not 
join in while you present the same 
sentence again in sprechesang with 
hand tapping.
• Wait for 2 or 3 seconds and gesture 
for the client to repeat the sentence 
in sprechesang with hand tapping.
• If he or she can’t or doesn’t do it, go 
back to Level IV, Step 1.
Step 3
• Signal for the client to listen, then 
present the same sentence using 
typical speech prosody and no hand 
tapping.
• Signal for the client to repeat the 
sentence using typical speech 
prosody.
Step 4
• Ask questions relevant to the 
sentence just spoken in Step 3. 
For example, if the sentence was 
“I want to eat” then you might 
ask, “What do you want to eat?” 
“What’s your favorite food?”  
and “Where would you go to get 
that?”
Helm-Estabrooks et al. (2014) sug-
gested that optimal treatment duration 
is no more than 8 weeks, although there 
is a great deal of variation in duration 
and intensity of treatment in the related 
research literature. Outcomes indices 
directly tied to treatment may include 
scoring of responses for each level, rep-
etition accuracy, and length, informa-
tiveness, and accuracy of responses to 
questions in Level IV. Additional metrics 
reported in evaluating MIT outcomes 
include mean length of utterance, infor-
mation content units, confrontational 
naming accuracy, effectiveness of commu-
nication with a partner, and self-initiation 
of MIT strategies.
What Is the Status of MIT in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Many of the early articles on MIT are 
qualitative and descriptive in nature, 
mainly focusing on the theory of right 
brain involvement in singing and the cor-
responding preserved tonal and musical 
abilities of many individuals with apha-

Enhancing Overall Expressive Language   527
sia. Most studies addressing treatment 
outcomes are case studies or single-subject  
designs. In a randomized, controlled  
single-blind study conducted by board-
certified music therapists (Conklyn, 
Novak, Boissy, Bethoux, & Chemali, 2012) 
with 30 people with aphasia (16 in an MIT 
treatment group and 14 in the control 
group), the treatment group showed sig-
nificant improvements compared to the 
control group.
Albert et al. (1973) reported on results 
of MIT for three people with aphasia 
who had experienced no resolution of 
symptoms after months of aphasia ther-
apy. Two of those people had nonfluent 
aphasia and one had global aphasia, all 
poststroke. After 1 to 2 months of MIT 
treatment, each patient demonstrated 
increased expressive language abilities in 
propositional speech, including the abil-
ity to answer questions and converse with 
peers (Albert et al., 1973).
Some studies to date have helped 
to identify the best candidates for MIT. 
Sparks et al. (1974) conducted a study 
involving eight participants and ana-
lyzed results in terms of how well they 
responded to MIT. The four participants 
grouped into the best recovery group 
commenced MIT with limited stereotypi-
cal jargon, paraphasias, and agramma-
tism. The two grouped in the moderate 
recovery group entered the program with 
almost no meaningful speech and had no 
stereotypic responses. The last two, who 
showed no significant recovery, had little 
verbal output prior to MIT and demon-
strated overall poor motivation. Naeser 
and Helm-Estabrooks (1985) reported that 
those who responded best to treatment 
according to standardized language mea-
sures had lesions in Broca’s area but not 
in the temporal lobe or right hemisphere. 
Those with poor responses had bilateral 
lesions involving Wernicke’s area.
Additional studies have addressed 
neurological evidence for the mecha-
nisms of recovering associated with MIT. 
Schlaug et al. (2008) reported significantly 
more fMRI activity in the right hemisphere 
following MIT treatment compared to a 
control treatment based on speech repeti-
tion. Belin et al. (1996) measured cerebral 
blood flow in seven people with apha-
sia who had completed MIT. Blood flow 
was measured via PET while the partici-
pants listened to and repeated words with 
exaggerated melody and rhythm. Results 
indicated activation of Broca’s area and 
the left prefrontal cortex. This was in con-
trast to abnormal activation when words 
were presented without such emphases. 
Importantly, their findings of left hemi-
sphere reactivation called into question 
the notion that MIT leads to right hemi-
sphere compensation.
The focus of still other studies on MIT 
has been on discerning the elements of the 
overall treatment that may account for its 
effectiveness for some people. Dunham 
and Newhoff (1979) described the case of 
a man with aphasia who had made little 
progress during 19 months of language 
treatment prior to initiation of MIT. After 
5 months of treatment using hand tap-
ping as a prosodic cue, he was able to use 
four- to five-word utterances to respond 
to questions or refer to picture stimuli. In 
contrast, Hough (2010) described the case 
of a man with chronic aphasia who ben-
efited from a focus on melodic cues with-
out hand tapping and with verbal stimuli 
incorporating his own automatic and per-
sonally relevant spontaneous utterances.
Boucher, Garcia, Fleurant, and Para-
dis (2001) suggested that melodic con-
tour is not as important as rhythm and 
pacing. They studied the comparative 
effectiveness of modifying tones versus 
rhythm and pacing on repetition abilities 
in two people with chronic aphasia. They 

528   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
reported that an emphasis on tonal con-
ditions during treatment did not facilitate 
repetition gains; the emphasis on rhythm 
and pacing of words did. Stahl, Henseler, 
Turner, Geyer, and Kotz (2013) compared 
singing versus rhythmic speech in seven 
people with Broca’s aphasia and eight 
with global aphasia. They concluded that 
both may be effective in eliciting formu-
laic expressions in people with “nonflu-
ent” aphasia.
Laughlin, Naeser, and Gordon (1979) 
reported that syllable duration is an 
important parameter in MIT administra-
tion. They evaluated syllable duration 
during MIT to determine which of three 
syllable durations was most effective for 
increasing correct phrase productions. 
Five people with aphasia were presented 
with natural nonintoned phrases spoken 
at less than 1 second per syllable and 
modified MIT intoned phrases spoken at 
1.5 seconds per syllable and 2.0 seconds 
per syllable. All participants had the great-
est number of correct phrase productions 
when presented with the longest syllable 
duration. Regular nonintoned speech led 
to the greatest number of response failures.
Several researchers have tested 
modified versions of MIT. Goldfarb and 
Bader (1979) adapted MIT for a home-
based training program described in a 
case study of a man with global apha-
sia. MIT was administered twice per 
week in a clinical setting and up to five 
times per week in the home via a spouse 
trained to implement the method. Target 
sentences corresponded to daily needs. 
After 23 therapy sessions, the participant 
obtained criterion in all levels of difficulty. 
Improvement was noted in imitation of 
trained sentences, as well as in responses 
to questions.
McKelvey and Weissling (2013) ap- 
plied a modified version of MIT (using 
more natural intonation patterns than the 
original prescribed patterns and using 
complete phrases from the start of treat-
ment) with 16 people who had acute rather 
than chronic aphasia. They compared the 
MIT results for untrained repetitions and 
responses to those of a control group of 
14 people with acute aphasia and found 
improvements after only one treatment 
session. In addition to the many modified 
approaches for English speakers, MIT has 
been adapted for use in several other lan-
guages, including Persian (Bonakdarpour, 
Eftekharzadeh, & Ashayeri, 2003), French 
(Belin et al., 1996), Romanian (Popovici & 
Miha˘ilescu, 1992), and Japanese (Seki & 
Sugishita, 1983).
Vines, Norton, and Schlaug (2011) 
provided transcranial direct current stim-
ulation (tDCS; see Chapter 24) along with 
MIT treatment to six people with severe 
“nonfluent” aphasia. They showed sig-
nificant gains in “fluency” measures com-
pared to when they were engaged in MIT 
with a sham treatment made to look and 
feel like tDCS.
In sum, reported treatment outcomes 
are generally positive but the overall qual-
ity of the supportive research is not strong 
(Hurkmans et al., 2012). A challenge in 
summarizing and interpreting the evi-
dence base is the lack of treatment fidelity 
across many studies and the great vari-
ability in treatment outcomes measures. 
A great deal remains to be learned about 
the neurological mechanisms underlying 
MIT effects and the effectiveness of MIT 
relative to such factors as time poststroke, 
cerebral dominance, treatment intensity 
and duration, and participants’ and clini-
cians’ musical backgrounds. Differences 
in outcomes between speakers of tonal 
and nontonal languages (see Chapter 12) 
are also important to study.
As Sparks and Holland (1976) point 
out, a weakness of MIT is that the main 
areas targeted are accurate progression 

Enhancing Overall Expressive Language   529
through the prescribed tasks and a focus 
on linguistic form rather than true com-
munication. Measures of social validation 
and generalization to naturalistic commu-
nication (effects beyond the impairment 
level) are needed. It is important to note 
that any elicitation method that leads to 
speech of any kind can be encouraging 
to individuals with severe aphasia and 
apraxia of speech. It can also be hearten-
ing to those who care about them. Thus, 
even in cases where the sung, intoned, 
or spoken output does not convey literal 
meaning, there may be some emotional 
and relational benefit to occasionally 
helping a person demonstrate at least 
some spoken production through the use 
of alternative patterns of elicitation such 
as those recommended in MIT.
What Is Voluntary Control of 
Involuntary Utterances (VCIU)?
Voluntary Control of Involuntary Utter-
ances (VCIU) is a treatment approach 
designed to improve expressive, propo-
sitional communication in people with 
severe nonfluent aphasia whose speech 
is limited to automatic production of few 
words (Helm & Barresi, 1980; Helm-Esta-
brooks et al., 2014). The purpose is to stim-
ulate the use of propositional language in 
individuals who mainly use involuntary 
utterances but who are able to read and 
comprehend at least one word at a time. 
The clinician uses the client’s current 
automatic utterances as a starting point 
for therapy. Goda (1962) and Vignolo 
(1964) suggested that clinicians could 
effectively use correct automatic or invol-
untary utterances to facilitate production 
of voluntary utterances. Even inappropri-
ate utterances used by individuals with 
aphasia can give the clinician information 
about the sounds and words that the cli-
ent is capable of producing. An inherent 
benefit is that using the person’s sponta-
neous productions may help to increase 
the likelihood that treatment materials are 
relevant to the individual.
On What Principles Is VCIU 
Treatment Based?
The assumption behind VCIU is that 
spontaneously produced, automatic 
speech can be used to facilitate the pro-
duction and intentional use of real words 
in conversation (Helm & Barresi, 1980; 
Helm-Estabrooks et al., 2014). A suppo-
sition that complements the approach is 
that using words uniquely tailored to each 
individual, with stimuli based on actual 
prior productions, will help ensure per-
sonal relevance.
How Is VCIU Implemented?
The following are the basic steps for car-
rying out VCIU.
• Create a list of all of the words 
that the client is known to have 
produced spontaneously and write 
each on a separate card.
• Ask the client to read one card at a 
time aloud. For each card, if he or 
she reads it correctly, keep the card; 
if not, discard it.
• Present pictures of the target words 
and ask the client to name each one. 
If he or she cannot name it, show 
the corresponding written word 
and ask him or her to read it aloud.
• Any time the client produces a 
different real word, discard the 

530   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
former target word and replace it 
with the new word.
• Provide the target word card to the 
client to practice at home.
• Through supported 
communication, encourage 
progression from oral reading and 
confrontation naming to use in 
natural conversation.
Family members and friends can be 
involved in the VCIU approach by iden-
tifying new target words (based on utter-
ances they hear the client say outside of 
the clinical setting) and by practicing vol-
untary use of target words in meaningful 
social contexts.
What Is the Status of VCIU in 
Terms of Evidence-Based Practice?
Very limited research has been done on 
the efficacy of VCIU. Helm and Barresi 
(1980) reported that three participants 
with limited automatic speech but rela-
tively intact reading and auditory com-
prehension skills showed improvement 
in confrontation naming. One demon-
strated significant improvement in the 
number of words used in natural conver-
sation. A great deal more research must be 
done to support the evidence base for this 
approach.
What Is Response Elaboration 
Training (RET)?
Response Elaboration Training (RET) 
was developed by Kearns (1985) as 
a means of increasing the length and 
improving the information content of 
oral language of people with Broca’s or 
“nonfluent” aphasia. In contrast to more 
formalized methods, during RET, the cli-
ent is seen as the primary communicator, 
and client-initiated topics are encouraged. 
A forward-chaining technique is imple-
mented. That is, the clinician responds 
directly to anything the client says and 
models and reinforces longer utterances 
based on client-initiated utterances. Suc-
cessful communication of novel ideas 
is encouraged rather than accuracy of 
production.
On What Principles Is RET Based?
RET is considered an interactive loose 
training program geared toward length-
ening of utterances and increasing variety 
in linguistic formulations. Loose training 
programs are those that reduce clinician 
control over stimuli, responses, and feed-
back during treatment (Gaddie, Kearns, & 
Yedor, 1991).
How Is RET Implemented?
In RET, people with aphasia are shown 
picture stimuli. Instead of having them 
describe the pictures, the clinician encour-
ages them to elaborate on whatever 
thoughts they associate with the picture. 
The following steps are based on the origi-
nal description by Kearns (1985).
• Show a stimulus picture depicting 
an everyday activity and elicit an 
initial verbal response to the picture. 
Encourage the client to elaborate on 
whatever he or she is reminded of 
when looking at the picture. Avoid 

Enhancing Overall Expressive Language   531
having him or her describe the 
picture or name items depicted.
• Respond to the client’s initial 
response with your own comments, 
and encourage him or her to 
expand on the initial response. 
Continue to make additional 
comments in response to his or her 
comments as appropriate.
• Ask Wh- questions regarding his or 
her own responses.
• Model sentences that combine 
his or her initial and subsequent 
responses. Ask the client to repeat 
your combined sentences.
• Do not directly correct the client’s 
responses; instead, provide natural 
feedback through conversational 
modeling.
What Is the Status of RET in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Research studies to date, primarily case 
studies and single-participant studies, 
have shown increases in the amount of 
verbal information provided by people 
with Broca’s aphasia in response to pic-
ture stimuli (Gaddie et al., 1991; Kearns, 
1985; Kearns & Scher, 1989; Kearns & 
Yedor, 1991). Treatment outcomes have 
been indexed in terms of number of 
words, length of utterances, sentence 
completeness, and grammatical accuracy. 
RET effects have been shown to general-
ize to other conversational partners, pic-
ture stimuli, and social settings (Gaddie  
et al., 1991; Kearns & Yedor, 1991).
Conley and Coelho (2003) reported 
improved naming in a woman with chronic 
Broca’s aphasia following a program of 
combined RET and Semantic Feature Anal-
ysis treatment, with greater maintenance of 
trained than untrained words and high- ver-
sus low-familiarity words.
Wambaugh and colleagues have 
demonstrated that people with concomi-
tant aphasia and severe apraxia of speech 
can also achieve positive treatment gains 
when the essential elements of RET are 
implemented, alone or in combination 
with other methods (Wambaugh, Nessler, 
& Wright, 2013; Wambaugh, Wright, &  
Nessler, 2012; Wambaugh, Wright, Ness­
ler, & Mauszycki, 2014). Kearns and 
Elman (2008) described how RET may be 
applied in group settings. Limitations of 
RET studies to date are the lack of con-
sistent metrics used to demonstrate out-
comes, small sample sizes, and a lack of 
randomization and control groups.
What Is Treatment for Aphasic 
Perseveration (TAP)?
Treatment of Aphasic Perseveration 
(TAP) is an approach originally designed 
by Helm-Estabrooks, Emery, and Albert 
(1987) for people with aphasia, who tend 
to perseverate on speech sounds, words, 
and utterances they have already said. As 
we discussed in Chapter 10, people with 
neurogenic communication disorders 
tend to perseverate in a variety ways. Gen-
eral categories of perseveration are recur-
rent, continuous, and stuck-in-set perse-
veration (Albert, 1989; Sandson & Albert,  
1984). As summarized in Chapter 10, 
recurrent perseveration, common in apha-
sia, may be semantic, lexical, or phonemic. 
If a reminder would be helpful, examples 
of each type are shown in Box 10–1. TAP is 
an impairment-level approach. The goals 
are to reduce perseverations and enhance 
naming. Optimal candidates for TAP are 
people with aphasia who have at least 

532   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
moderately intact comprehension, good 
memory, and moderate to severe recur-
rent perseveration.
On What Principles Is TAP Based?
Given how pervasive recurrent perse-
veration is in chronic aphasia, and given 
how it tends to persist regardless of time 
postonset (Basso, 2004; Helm-Estabrooks, 
Ramage, Bayles, & Cruz, 1998), address-
ing it head-on may be especially helpful 
for many people with aphasia. The under-
lying principle is that by helping people 
become aware of their perseverations, we 
may help them suppress them (Helm-
Estabrooks et al., 2014).
How Is TAP Implemented?
The following are summarized according 
to the treatment steps described by Helm-
Estabrooks et al. (2014) and the original 
program detailed by Helm-Estabrooks  
et al. (1987).
• Establish a baseline by 
calculating the percentage of 
words perseverated during the 
confrontation naming portion of 
the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia 
Examination-3 (BDAE-3; Goodglass 
et al., 2001) and interpreting the 
percentage as follows.
	 Minimal:  0% to 5%
	 Mild:  5% to 19%
	 Moderate:  20% to 49%
	 Severe:  49% and higher
• Explain to the client what 
perseveration is and give 
examples. Ask that he or she pay 
particular attention to his or her 
perseverations to try to avoid them. 
Of course, do this with a gentle and 
friendly, not corrective, tone.
• Engage in a confrontation naming 
activity, with 5-second intervals 
between items. Arrange the 
stimuli according to the severity 
of perseveration the person has 
exhibited on the confrontation 
naming task. The intent is to 
start where he or she will have 
the greatest success and then to 
move to more difficult items in 
a hierarchical fashion. Although 
the earlier descriptions of TAP 
recommended use of preestablished 
picture sets, more recent version 
have acknowledged that it is 
important to use pictures that are 
most personally relevant to each 
individual’s daily use of language.
• Continue to draw attention to 
moments of perseveration. Write 
the incorrect utterance that was 
spoken and then rip it up in front of 
the client. If he or she perseverates 
on the same word again, point to 
the ripped paper as a reminder.
	 As you have the client name one 
picture at a time, track:
	 The number of items (pictures) 
named correctly (providing up to 
three cues for each)
	 The number and type of words 
on which the person perseverates 
(regardless of the number of 
times he or she perseverated on 
each word)
Helm-Estabrooks et al. (2014) provide 
scoring sheets for this purpose.
• Cues may be gestures, drawings, 
spoken descriptions, graphic 
cues (initial letters, syllables, or 
the whole word), phonemic cues, 

Enhancing Overall Expressive Language   533
requests for repetition, or requests 
to speak or sing the word in unison.
• If you choose to work on sets of 
words within semantic categories 
(e.g., kitchen items, foods, 
transportation, letters, numbers), 
it may help to mention that the 
category is about to change, 
to avoid stuck-in-set types of 
perseverations based on the task.
It is important to test for treatment effects 
not only with trained but also untrained 
items.
What Is the Status of TAP in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Helm-Estabrooks et al. (1987) reported 
results of a single-case design study with 
alternating types of treatment for three 
people with aphasia. They reported sub-
stantial reduction in perseverations for 
all three participants. They did not report 
results according to generalization to 
untrained naming stimuli or tasks. No 
other empirical reports on the effective-
ness of the approach appear to have been 
published to date. Thus, the evidence base 
is weak. Given the pervasiveness of per-
severation in acute and chronic aphasia, 
further research on treatment methods to 
address it is important. Contextualizing 
such research in a life participation frame-
work will be important.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 For each of the approaches addressed 
in this chapter, describe why it would 
be considered to be restitutive, com-
pensatory, or both.
	 3.	 For each of the approaches in this 
chapter, make a list of materials you 
would want to have on hand so that 
you would be prepared to carry out the 
approach in actual treatment sessions.
	 4.	 With a partner, demonstrate a treat-
ment session using each approach in 
this chapter.
	 5.	 How would you summarize the sta-
tus of evidence-based practice for spe-
cific treatment methods intended to 
enhance expressive language across 
modalities?
	 6.	 What do you see as the greatest 
research needs related to methods for 
enhancing expressive language across 
modalities?
	 7.	 What strategies would you use 
to maximize transfer of treatment 
gains made through expressive lan-
guage treatment to real-world use of 
communication?
For additional learning and reflection activ-
ities, see the companion website.


535
Chapter
31
Improving Word Finding 
and Lexical Processing
As you know, one of the most pervasive 
and persistent problems of people with 
neurogenic communication disorders, no 
matter what the etiology, is difficulty with 
word finding. This makes it especially 
important to have a solid repertoire of 
methods to target word finding in partic-
ular. In Chapter 25, we reviewed several 
approaches that may enhance word find-
ing as part of general social and stimula-
tion-based methods. In this chapter, we 
consider specific approaches for improv-
ing word finding and lexical process-
ing: cueing hierarchies for the treatment 
of anomia, Semantic Feature Analysis 
(SFA), Phonological Components Analy-
sis (PCA), Verb Network Strengthening 
Treatment (VNest), and Verb as Core.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, 
the following queries about each of these 
approaches:
	 1.	 What is it?
	 2.	 On what principles is it based?
	 3.	 How is it implemented?
	 4.	 What is its status in terms of evidence-
based practice?
What Are Cueing Hierarchies 
for the Treatment of Anomia?
Numerous aphasiologists have writ-
ten about cueing hierarchy approaches 
for treating people with anomia, as well 
as for just about any impairment-level 
focus in treatment. Cueing strategies are 
commonly used in intervention with 
people who have neurogenic language 
disorders. That is, we frequently provide 
cues to our clients to support their com-
munication. This has long been the case, 
and cueing strategies were in use before 
anyone decided to specify this particular 
approach (Nickels & Best, 1996). Also, 
most cognitive-linguistic treatment pro-
grams developed since the description 
of this particular approach involve cue-
ing. Linebaugh, though, is known as the 
key pioneer in naming this particular 
approach and articulating the principles 
behind it (Linebaugh, 1983; Linebaugh 
& Lehner, 1977; Linebaugh, Shisler, & 
Lehner, 2005). What is unique about cue-
ing hierarchy approaches to anomia was 
the formalization, in the late 1970s and 
early 1980s, of the principles of:

536   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Organizing cues in a hierarchical 
way to enhance naming abilities in 
people with naming deficits
• Basing the hierarchy of cues on 
the naming performance of each 
individual person treated
• Systematically presenting cues to 
optimize naming responses
• Making use of a person’s 
communicative strengths (e.g., 
writing, auditory comprehension) 
to facilitate word retrieval
On What Principles Are 
Cueing Hierarchies for the 
Treatment of Anomia Based?
Linebaugh’s principles for a cueing hier-
archy approach to anomia are to:
• Elicit correct naming with the least 
amount of cueing possible; that 
is, using the most powerful cues 
in terms of their ability to elicit a 
correct response
• Reduce cueing from the clinician as 
soon as the cues are not needed
• Help the client generate self-cueing 
strategies to enhance naming 
(Linebaugh, 1983; Linebaugh & 
Lehner, 1977)
All cues are said to have stimulus 
power. The stimulus power of a given cue 
refers to the likelihood of that particular 
cue eliciting a target word. So, by defi-
nition, cueing hierarchies are organized 
according to stimulus power. The stimu-
lus power for a given task and the overall 
hierarchy of cues established for that task 
vary across individuals with anomia (a 
highly heterogeneous population, given 
that anomia is one of the most pervasive 
impairments among people with any type 
of neurogenic cognitive-linguistic disor-
der). Cueing hierarchy approaches are 
generally considered impairment-based 
stimulation methods but may also be con-
sidered compensatory in that the client 
ideally learns to implement strategies to 
improve his or her own naming abilities 
when he or she has difficulty retrieving  
a word.
How Is Cueing Hierarchy 
Treatment Implemented?
Since numerous authors have developed 
treatment approaches based on the basic 
principles described above, there is not 
just one means of carrying out treatment 
in this category. However, there are com-
mon steps that reflect the approach as it 
was originally described. In the clinical 
context, we use certain stimulus types or 
tasks, in a progression of increasing dif-
ficulty, to move from one level to the next 
as the client reaches a certain level of per-
formance with each task.
• Engage in naming assessment using 
a standardized assessment battery, 
as well as by using a set of picture 
stimuli that are personally relevant 
to the individual with whom you 
are working. Whenever the client 
is unable to name an item, provide 
a cue. Cues, for example, may be 
initial phonemes, the printed first 
letter, the printed word, a rhyming 
word, an object description, a 
sentence completion task, a gesture 
showing how an object to be named 
is used, or a verbal description 
of the item. As you do this, keep 
careful notes regarding which cues 
led to the correct production of the 
word.

Improving Word Finding and Lexical Processing   537
• Based on the data you collect 
during the naming assessment, 
order the cues, or therapeutic 
stimulus types, or tasks, along 
a continuum according to their 
effectiveness in stimulating correct 
word retrieval performance.
• Engage in confrontation naming 
tasks using pictures and objects, 
first providing cues with the 
greatest stimulus power and 
progressively using cues with less 
stimulus power. Coach the client 
about the importance of his or her 
initiating the very types of cues that 
you are providing.
• Engage in generative naming tasks, 
having the client come up with 
words that fit in certain categories. 
Continue the same approach to 
cueing, gradually reducing the 
strength of your cues.
• Progress to generalization tasks 
such as picture descriptions, 
prepared monologues, story 
retelling, and role-playing.
What Is the Status of Cueing 
Hierarchies for the Treatment 
of Anomia in Terms of 
Evidence-Based Practice?
As mentioned earlier, numerous stud-
ies have incorporated the use of cueing 
hierarchies; it is beyond the scope of this 
chapter to summarize them. Instead, let’s 
consider key findings that have emerged 
in over 40 years of research on this topic. 
Representative studies supporting these 
findings are cited here; the list of studies 
noted is far from comprehensive.
• When we work on naming as 
described above, people get better 
at naming the items practiced 
(Conroy, Snell, Sage, & Lambon 
Ralph, 2012; Freed, Celery, & 
Marshall, 2004; Lowell, Beeson, & 
Holland, 1995).
• Sometimes people get better at 
naming items we did not use in the 
training, but mostly they get better 
at the words used in treatment. 
Transfer of gains to untrained words 
is typically weak. This finding high- 
lights the importance of the using 
words that are personally relevant 
to the individual. Complementing 
this finding, there is evidence that 
people achieve greater carryover to 
real-word contexts when personally 
relevant words are used in treatment 
(Freed & Marshall, 1995; Freed, 
Marshall, & Nippold, 1995; Freed  
et al., 2004; Marshall, Karow,  
Freed, & Babcock, 2002).
• Generalization from naming 
practice to natural conversation 
using only a cueing hierarchy 
approach is limited (Marshall & 
Freed, 2006; Wambaugh, Doyle, 
Martinez, & Kalinyak-Fliszar, 2002).
Treatment programs developed more 
recently tend to incorporate more inten-
tionally meaningful interaction about 
words, thus further strengthening seman-
tic networks. For example, SFA, VNeST, 
and Verb as Core (described later in this 
chapter) have generally led to more posi-
tive results than the types of tasks used in 
traditional cueing hierarchy approaches.
Also, findings that treating atypi-
cal exemplars of words leads to better 
functional gains (recall our discussion of 
CATE in Chapter 24) have been used to 
challenge the notion that we should prog-
ress hierarchically through naming treat-
ments, from easy to difficult levels (e.g., 
using cues with high stimulus power 

538   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
before cues with less stimulus power). It 
is important that we harness the strengths 
of complexity to increase carryover to un- 
trained words, a point that we consider 
further in the context of our next approach.
What Is Semantic Feature 
Analysis (SFA)?
Semantic Feature Analysis (SFA) is a treat-
ment approach targeting word-finding 
abilities, so it is especially designed for 
people with dysnomia, including but not 
limited to people with anomic aphasia. It 
is based on earlier approaches developed 
for TBI survivors (Haarbauer-Krupa, Moser, 
Smith, Sullivan, & Szekeres, 1985; Massaro 
& Tompkins, 1992). The goal is to enhance 
naming abilities by improving access to 
semantic networks (Boyle & Coelho, 1995; 
Coelho, McHugh, & Boyle, 2000).
On What Principles Is SFA 
Treatment Based?
SFA is a treatment method to enhance 
word retrieval. It is based on the spread-
ing activation theory of semantic process-
ing (Collins & Loftus, 1975). By activating  
the semantic network surrounding a 
target word, the target word may be 
activated above its threshold, thereby 
facilitating retrieval. When the sematic 
network involved in representing a cer-
tain concept is activated, an individual 
is more likely to be able to produce the 
target word (Boyle & Coelho, 1995; Wam-
baugh & Ferguson, 2007). Even access to 
nontarget words may be facilitated by 
enhancing semantic activation of related 
concepts. SFA is a restitutive approach in 
that it has been shown to enhance recruit-
ment of activation of left hemisphere 
areas (Marcotte et al., 2012). One of the 
long-term aims of SFA treatment is to 
help people with dysnomia learn to cue 
themselves independently and in natural 
everyday conversational contexts to pro-
duce target words. In that sense, it is also 
a compensatory approach.
How Is SFA Treatment 
Implemented?
To carry out SFA treatment, use the basic 
steps listed below for the baseline phase 
and target selection, the semantic feature 
analysis chart method, and the graphemic 
organizer method, all adapted from Boyle 
(2004) and Coelho et al. (2000). The chart 
and graphic organizer may be printed on 
paper. If laminated versions are used, a 
dry erase marker may be used to mark 
responses and they can be reused.
Baseline Phase and Target Selection
• Select words that are most 
relevant and ecologically valid for 
the individual you are treating. 
Basic general categories may be 
used, such as names of furniture, 
modes of transportation, or foods. 
However, if a person has particular 
interests in specific categories for 
which increased word finding 
would be helpful, it is good to 
explore those, too. Examples might 
be woodworking tools, spices 
used in Indian cooking, stringed 
instruments, and breeds of dogs.
• Obtain a corresponding image for 
each target word.

Improving Word Finding and Lexical Processing   539
• Obtain baseline scores in a 
confrontation naming task. Show 
each image, one at a time. Retain 
those named correctly the first time 
as “easy” stimuli. Retain those not 
named even after three consecutive 
sessions as “target” words. Coelho 
et al. (2000) reported that using 
as few as 10 target words led to 
generalization to untrained words. 
Add a few easy words (determined 
at baseline); Coelho et al. (2000) 
suggested about five per session, to 
promote a sense of success and thus 
boost motivation.
Semantic Feature Analysis 
Chart Method
• Select one image at a time; put it at the 
center of an SFA chart (Figure 31–1).
Target
(picture	to	
be	named)
GROUP
It’s	a…
What	group	is	it	in?	
What’s	the	category?
USE
What	can	we	do	
with	it?
It’s	used	to…
What’s	this	for?
ACTION
What	does	it	do?
We	use	it	to…
What’s	it	used	for?
PROPERTIES
How	would	you	
describe	it?
It	has…
LOCATION
This	is	found…
Where	you	we	see	
one	of	these?
ASSOCIATION
What	does	this	
remind	you	of?
When	you	see	this	
you	think	of…
TARGET
Image	to	be	named
Figure 31–1.  Semantic feature analysis chart. Source: Adapted from Coelho 
et al., 2000.

540   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Ask the client to name the word 
corresponding to the image (the 
target word).
• Acknowledge the accuracy (or lack 
of accuracy) of the response.
• Regardless of naming accuracy, use 
the SFA chart to prompt the client 
to produce words semantically 
related to the target word. Have 
him or her list the categories into 
which it fits (group), its use, actions 
that are taken with it or that it 
takes, properties, location, and 
association. For example, if the 
target word is toaster, the responses 
below may be evoked:
	 Group:  kitchen appliances, 
things used to make breakfast, 
electrical gizmos
	 Use:  to make toast, to heat and 
brown bread, to warm pastries
	 Action:  heats and browns bread 
and pastries
	 Properties:  electrical, made of 
metal (and sometimes plastic, 
too), gets too hot to touch, has a 
cord
	 Location:  found in the kitchen, 
on the kitchen counter
	 Association:  reminds me of . . . 
when my grandmother had  
me stay overnight and made 
toast with her fresh-baked  
bread; wonderful aromas in the 
kitchen; a fire I set by accident 
when I was little; the toaster 
pastries my mom gave us for 
breakfast when our dad was out 
of town
• Write the client’s correct responses 
in the box corresponding to each 
type of feature. More than one 
response in each box is fine. You 
may help him or her by saying 
aloud your own associations and 
writing them down, providing 
auditory and visual input. Even 
if he or she says the correct target 
word, continue to fill out the SFA 
chart.
Graphemic Organizer Method
• Use a graphic organizer (Table 31–1) 
to lead the client in considering 
semantic features of the target 
word and distinguishing it from 
other words or concepts in the 
same category. In the top row, write 
the names of four objects within a 
certain semantic category. In the 
far-left column, write features that 
may or may not apply to any of the 
objects in that category.
• Have the client indicate whether 
a certain feature fits an object 
(marked by +) or not (marked with 
a −). Note that responses are not 
necessarily absolutely correct or 
incorrect. For example, note the 
“+/−” designation for whether a 
chair is soft or not in Chart A of 
Table 31–1. If the client suggests 
that a certain feature may or 
may not apply, and this is true, 
then this can be acknowledged 
in the conversation and marked 
accordingly. If the client is able to 
write, have him or her complete the 
chart, one row at a time, with a +, 
−, or +/− in each cell. Otherwise, 
have the client tell you what to 
write. Having the client write 
may improve performance if the 
person has concomitant apraxia of 
speech (Hashimoto & Frome, 2011; 
Kiran, 2008). If he or she is unsure, 

Improving Word Finding and Lexical Processing   541
a question mark may be entered. 
Support the activity through 
discussion, questions, answers, and 
encouraging feedback.
• Once the chart is completed, 
support the client in decisions to 
change any question marks to a + or 
−. Also, discuss any item for which 
you do not agree with the response. 
If the client provides a convincing 
argument for that response, there is 
no need to change it.
• Discuss which items within the 
category are most alike (share the 
most features), which rows have the 
most similar responses, which cells 
have mixed responses and why, and 
which responses (if any) require 
further verification.
I find it helpful to keep laminated ver-
sions of semantic feature analysis charts 
and graphemic organizers on hand, along 
with erasable markers, so that the charts 
can be wiped clear and used repeatedly. 
Dry erase boards can also be used. As 
progress is made with the most relevant 
words, continue to add words in order of 
their personal relevance. Complexity (see 
the description of CATE in Chapter 24) 
Table 31–1.  Graphic Organizer Examples:  Furniture and Appliances
Furniture
Chair
Table
Desk
Bed
It’s made to sit on
+
−
−
+/−
It’s soft
+/−
−
−
+
We have one in the kitchen
+
+
−
−
We have one in the bedroom
+
+
−
+
We have one in the office
+
−
+
−
Is usually made of wood
+/−
+
+
+/−
Appliances
Toaster
Oven
Paper 
Shredder
Blender
Usually found in a kitchen
+
+
−
+
Usually found in an office
−
−
+
−
Usually found in a bedroom
−
−
−
−
Has blades
−
−
+
+
Warms things
+
+
−
−
Has an electric plug
+
+
+
+

542   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
may be manipulated strategically and its 
effects on an individual’s performance 
and carryover may be monitored. For 
example, it may also be advantageous to 
work on atypical exemplars of categories 
(e.g., albatross rather than robin for bird; 
duodenum rather than nose for body parts, 
etc.) to enhance carryover to other words 
(Kiran, 2008; Wambaugh, Mauszycki, 
Cameron, Wright, & Nessler, 2013).
The number of features listed and 
analyzed per target word list may also 
be manipulated. Hashimoto and Frome 
(2011) found significant improvements in 
naming for a person with aphasia, 7 years 
postonset, when using only three features 
per target word. Although designed to 
enhance object naming, SFA has been used 
successfully to enhance naming of actions 
(verbs), too; generalization to untreated 
verbs has been less robust (Carragher, 
Sage, & Conroy, 2013; Peach & Reuter, 
2010; Wambaugh et al., 2002; Wambaugh, 
Mauszycki, & Wright, 2014).
Another modification is to adapt SFA 
to discourse-level tasks, such as picture 
description and procedural descriptions. 
Peach and Reuter (2010) found that by car-
rying out SFA at a discourse level, treat-
ment effects found in connected speech 
and naming generalized significantly to 
untrained action and object names. SFA 
has been shown to be successfully adapted 
in group treatment formats (Antonucci, 
2009; Falconer & Antonucci, 2012); use 
in group treatment contexts may actu-
ally facilitate carryover to the discourse 
level. Versions of SFA treatment have been 
developed for computerized practice and 
mobile apps (Higgins, Kearns, & Franklin, 
2012; Tactus Therapy, 2015). Availability 
of computerized exercises and feedback 
bode well for enhanced practice intensity, 
which may boost treatment effects.
What Is the Status of SFA in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Most SFA studies to date entail single-
subject, multiple-baseline, pre- and post-
treatment designs, and case studies. 
Significant improvements in naming of 
objects and actions have been reported 
for people with dysnomia associated with 
stroke and TBI (Boyle, 2001, 2004; Boyle 
& Coelho, 1995; Coelho et al., 2000; Davis 
& Stanton, 2005; Hashimoto & Frome, 
2011; Maddy, Capilouto, & McComas, 
2014; Marcotte & Ansaldo, 2010; Massaro  
& Tompkins, 1992; Peach & Reuter, 2010; 
Rider, Wright, Marshall, & Page, 2008). 
Improvements have been noted from  
4 months postonset (e.g., Peach & Reuter, 
2010) to over 10 years postonset (e.g., Rider 
et al., 2008) of aphasia. Positive effects 
have also been noted in a person with PPA 
(Marcotte & Ansaldo, 2010).
Improvements are generally noted 
for trained items. Most SFA studies have 
concentrated on single-word training, 
with inconsistent generalization of im- 
proved lexical retrieval to discourse. 
Even within studies, certain individuals 
tend to respond better to SFA than others; 
also, individuals demonstrate differences 
in the amount of carryover to naming of 
untrained items (Wambaugh et al., 2013).
Treatment fidelity throughout the 
SFA literature is not strong. This is often 
by design; several modifications of SFA 
have been methodically studied, as noted 
earlier. Additionally, SFA research stud-
ies vary in terms of inclusion/exclusion 
criteria of participants, such as those per-
taining to type of aphasia, etiology of dys-
nomia, site of lesion, and time postonset. 
They also vary according to measures of 
improvement and whether these include 

Improving Word Finding and Lexical Processing   543
discourse-level indices (such as correct 
information units), confrontation naming, 
and/or generalization to untrained words 
before and after treatment. There is also 
great variability in the duration of time 
passed between completion of treatment 
and follow-up outcomes assessment.
What Is Phonological 
Components Analysis (PCA)?
Phonological Components Analysis (PCA) 
is an impairment-focused approach for 
the remediation of naming deficits in 
people with aphasia. It is based on the 
SFA approach; instead of focusing interac-
tively on semantic aspects of target words, 
the clinician and client focus on the pho-
nological aspects of words.
On What Principles Is PCA 
Treatment Based?
Phonological cues and contexts are known 
to facilitate naming (Martin, Fink, & Laine, 
2004; Martin, Fink, Renvall, & Laine, 2006). 
Having the client generate his or her own 
responses regarding prompts about the 
phonological aspects of words is thought 
to stimulate deeper processing than mere 
practice with clinician-generated cues, 
ideally leading to longer-lasting treatment 
effects (Hickin, Best, Herbert, Howard, & 
Osborne, 2002; Leonard et al., 2015; Leon-
ard, Rochon, & Laird, 2008). Use of picture 
cues incorporates a semantic aspect to the 
naming task, such that phonological acti-
vation may interact with semantic acti-
vation to facilitate naming. Ideally, PCA 
leads the client to independently generate 
phonological cues when having difficulty 
coming up with a word.
How Is PCA Treatment 
Implemented?
The following steps are summarized based 
on Leonard et al. (2008).
• Use a confrontation naming task 
to determine words the client 
has difficulty naming. Of those, 
have the client select a set of 
pictures representing words that 
he finds relevant to his typical 
conversational needs.
• As with SFA, place a picture at the 
center of a chart and ask the person 
to name it. See Figure 31–2 for an 
example of a PCA chart. Whether 
or not he can name it, ask him to 
identify five components related 
to the word that correspond to 
whatever is depicted. You may elicit 
this by showing categories on the 
chart and by asking questions.
1.	 What does it rhyme with? Can 
you think of a word that rhymes 
with this?
2.	 What’s the first sound? What 
sound does it start with?
3.	 What other word starts with this 
sound? Can you think of another 
word that begins with the same 
sound?
4.	 What’s the last sound in the word? 
What sound does it end with?
5.	 How many syllables (or beats) 
are in the word?
• Regardless of whether he can name 
the word or provide responses to the 
questions, review each component.

544   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• For each component, if he  
cannot provide a response 
spontaneously, ask him to choose 
one from a list of up to three 
possible responses. Show the 
printed options on a card and  
read them aloud.
• If he cannot provide a correct 
response given a choice, say the 
correct response and ask him to 
repeat it.
• After reviewing the phonological 
components, ask the client to say 
the word that goes with the picture. 
If he is unable to do so, say the 
word and ask him to repeat it.
Leonard et al. (2008) provided treatment 
three times per week for about 1 hour at 
a time, with treatment discontinued after 
15 sessions (or earlier for those not scoring 
above 40% accuracy).
Target
(picture	to	
be	named)
Rhymes	with…
First sound
First	sound	associate
Final	sound
Number	of	syllables
TARGET
Image	to	be	named
Figure 31–2.  PCA chart.

Improving Word Finding and Lexical Processing   545
What Is the Status of PCA in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Studies to date have entailed case series. 
Leonard et al. (2008) administered PCA 
to 10 people with varied types of apha-
sia, all having difficulty with naming; 
7 demonstrated significantly improved 
naming and maintained improvements 
when tested 4 weeks after the comple-
tion of treatment, with some but minimal 
generalization to untreated words. Those 
who were able to repeat words tended to 
perform better. Leonard et al. (2015) tested 
a modified version of PCA that entailed 
clinician-generated cues. They compared 
results with the approach in which clients 
generated the cues. Five people with apha-
sia demonstrated gains in word-finding  
abilities in PCA regardless of whether 
cues were generated by the clinician or the 
client. All maintained gains after 4 weeks, 
and four of five maintained their abilities 
at 8 weeks posttreatment. According to 
Leonard et al. (2015), ensuring more active 
engagement of a person with aphasia, by 
having him select the phonological attri-
butes of words to be targeted, may help to 
enhance treatment effects; this remains to 
be substantially demonstrated.
Leonard et al. (2015) and Rochon et al.  
(2010) studied fMRI data to elucidate 
potential aspects of neurological changes 
associated with PCA treatment; results 
are not conclusive due to methodological 
variability and small numbers of partici-
pants. Further research with many more 
people with aphasia is needed to deter-
mine what client strengths and weaknesses 
may lead to the best treatment gains using 
PCA. Also, evidence regarding carryover 
of treatment effects to word finding in 
natural conversation is needed.
What Is Verb Network  
Strengthening Treatment (VNeST)?
Verb Network Strengthening Treatment 
(VNeST) was developed to improve verb 
retrieval through enhanced activation of 
semantic and grammatical or relational 
aspects of verbs (the verb network). The 
goal is to help the client generalize the 
ability to produce verbs within sentences 
and ideally to carry this over to discourse 
contexts. The approach was developed to 
address challenges with the single-word 
focus of SFA, which has been used to treat 
dysnomia for nouns and verbs. Although 
VNeST is described by some as a method 
focused on verb retrieval, it is discussed in 
the literature as a method for enhancing 
word retrieval in general; nouns as well 
as verbs are the focus of treatment stimuli 
and activities.
On What Principles Is VNeST Based?
Since the meaning of verbs is tied to the-
matic roles, which entail grammatical 
relationships with other words, the ratio-
nale is to use thematically related words 
to enhance production at the sentence 
level. The thematic roles of verbs are 
emphasized. Thematic roles are defined 
as the related agent (subject) and patient 
(object) of a given verb in a given gram-
matical context.
A single verb can be associated with 
many different agents and patients. These 
associations have been shown to elicit 
priming effects of verbs on agents and 
patients that are typically associated with 
those verbs (McRae, Hare, Elman, & Fer-
retti, 2005). For example, the word celebrate 

546   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
may prime bride and winner as agents and 
wedding and success as patients. This is 
important in that priming is a vital result 
of semantic activation.
In VNeST, the client is led to associ-
ate multiple possible agents and patients 
with each target verb (Edmonds & Babb, 
2011; Edmonds, Mammino, & Ojeda, 2014; 
Edmonds, Nadeau, & Kiran, 2009). Re- 
peated activation and use of neural net-
works associated with verbs is thought 
to strengthen access to verbs as well as to 
associated nouns that may serve as agents 
and patients. Throughout, encouraging 
divergent combinations of words, and 
reflections on their semantic associations, 
evokes multiple schemas that are not con-
strained by preselected pictures.
How Is VNeST Implemented?
To carry out VNeST, use the basic steps 
listed below, adapted from Edmonds et al. 
(2009) and Edmonds et al. (2014).
Baseline
• First, establish a baseline for object 
and action naming. Edmonds et 
al. (2009) did this using the Boston 
Naming Test (Goodglass & Kaplan, 
2001) and the Northwestern Verb 
Production Battery (Thompson, 
2002). Edmonds et al. (2014) did 
this by presenting picture cards 
showing actions and possible 
agents and patients of those actions. 
Baseline indices of spontaneous 
speech and discourse will also 
be helpful for indexing potential 
treatment effects following 
treatment.
Stimulus Selection and Creation
• Select or create about 10 verb 
cards for which the client has low 
accuracy of naming; for each, 
select or create three or four cards 
showing possible associated agents 
and three or four cards showing 
possible associated patients. The 
selection of words to be used 
as verbs, patients, and agents 
may also be made based on the 
client’s interests, word difficulty 
(familiarity or frequency of usage, 
phonological composition, length, 
etc.), or the severity of his or 
her dysnomia. Some verbs have 
more thematic meanings than 
others; focusing on verbs with 
multiple thematic meanings may 
help lead to broader activation of 
and practice with the nouns and 
verbs incorporated into treatment, 
thus enhancing the likelihood of 
generalization to more words. For 
example, the word play could be 
thematically related to toddler, 
musician, athlete, and other agents, 
as well as to game, trumpet, 
football, and other patients.
• Write each of the following words, 
each on a separate wh- card: who, 
what, where, when, and why.
Generation of Agent-Patient Pairs
• Show the client a target verb 
card. Instruct the client to make a 
sentence using that verb, including 
an agent and patient. If he or she 
is unable to do so, ask the client to 
select an agent to go with that verb. 
For example, if the verb is kick, a 
prompt might be, “Who can kick?” 

Improving Word Finding and Lexical Processing   547
He or she might say “soccer player” 
or “horse.” Another prompt might 
be, “What can a horse kick?” If he 
or she still has difficulty producing 
a sentence, show him or her the 
associated agent and patient cards. 
Have the client say a sentence while 
pointing to the agent, action, and 
patient cards.
• Lay the who and what cards on a 
table. Ask who can carry out the 
action associated with that verb. 
Have the client put the agent cards 
under the who card and the patient 
cards under the what card. Have the 
client read the word pairs aloud.
• Have the client generate his or her 
own words to make a sentence 
using the verb. Sentences need 
not be complete. Encourage use 
of specific words, such as beaver 
instead of animal, professor instead 
of woman, and so on. If the client 
cannot independently generate an 
agent and patient, ask him or her 
to choose possible words from a set 
of appropriate agent and patient 
words and foil words (word that do 
not fit semantically with the verb).
Wh- Questions About 
Agent-Patient Pairs
• Have the client choose an agent-
patient pair. Ask wh- questions 
about the pair, pointing to and 
saying aloud, in context, the words 
on the wh- cards. For example:
	 Who kicks balls?
	 What does a monster eat?
	 Where does a magician perform?
	 When does a gardener plant 
rutabagas?
	 Why does a criminal rob a bank?
	
In this context, engage in natural 
conversation related to the target 
words.
• Choose another agent-patient pair 
and ask wh- questions incorporating 
those words.
Semantic Judgments
• Remove the cards from the table.
• Read 12 sentences that contain the 
target verb, some that makes sense 
and some that do not. For each, 
ask the client whether the sentence 
makes sense. Examples might be:
	 The toddler kicked the ball.
	 The gerbil kicked the coyote.
	 The warrior kicked the enemy.
	 The donkey kicked the farmer.
	 The pencil kicked the bottle.
Generation of  
Agent-Patient Pairs Again
• Without referring to the cards, ask 
the client to name three verbs and 
the agents and patients that go with 
each.
• Have the client produce a sentence 
using the words he or she 
generates.
• Give feedback and encouragement 
as appropriate.
Although the treatment protocol as de- 
scribed does not include explicit train-
ing to enhance carryover to naturalistic 
conversations, it would be important to 
do so when using this approach. Also, 
Edmonds et al. (2014) suggested that inte-
grating means of explicitly eliciting more 
production of the action words, not just 
the agents and patients, may help to better 
strengthen verb retrieval.

548   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
What Is the Status of VNeST in 
Terms of Evidence-Based Practice?
There are few published studies to date 
documenting treatment outcomes asso-
ciated with VNeST. All have small num-
bers of participants; they entail single-
case designs and one small-group study. 
Results of a study with four participants 
(Edmonds et al., 2009) showed generaliza-
tion to untrained stimuli immediately fol-
lowing treatment and 1 month after study. 
This included improvements in single-
word noun production. Three of the four 
participants showed improvement in the 
ability to produce sentences with subjects, 
verbs, and objects relating to the relevant 
thematic vocabulary.
Edmonds and Babb (2011), applying 
the method with two people with aphasia, 
reported significant gains for one partici-
pant but not another, at least not accord-
ing to the targeted indices. For the par-
ticipant with greater gains, they reported 
reduced neologisms, fewer verb errors, 
and generalization to untrained verbs. 
They interpreted these gains to suggest 
that activation of verb networks has 
widespread effects in terms of semantic, 
phonological, and lexical aspects of lexical 
retrieval. Edmonds et al. (2014) reported 
improvements in lexical retrieval in sen-
tence contexts but mixed results at the 
discourse level.
There has not been a high degree 
of treatment fidelity in terms of dosage, 
means of word selection, or numbers of 
items used across studies to date. Indices 
used for outcomes assessment have varied 
(e.g., percentage of complete utterances, 
overall informativeness, posttreatment 
object and action naming, communica-
tion partner perceptions); outcomes indi-
ces have also varied in terms of how long 
post-retreatment maintenance of effects 
was assessed. Also, eclectic groups of 
participants, with a wide range of dys-
nomia severity, aphasia types, and ages, 
have been included, making it difficult 
to make conclusions regarding just what 
types of individuals may benefit from 
this approach. Some participants in stud-
ies to date may have had difficulty with 
sentence construction due to grammati-
cal or cognitive deficits rather than verb 
retrieval; this might have obscured mea-
sures of positive overall effects.
Overall, it appears that not all peo-
ple with dysnomia benefit equally from 
this approach, but that it holds promise 
for some individuals. Still, the theoretical 
rationale and evidence to date are compel-
ling. More studies with larger numbers 
of participants, assessment of long-term 
benefits, and carryover to natural conver-
sation in a real-world context are needed. 
Of course, in clinical practice, it is impor-
tant to index gains in terms of life partici-
pation goals for each individual.
What Is Verb as Core (VAC)?
Verb as Core (VAC), also known as ver-
bal cueing, is another treatment approach 
focused on verbs. Like VNeST, VAC was 
developed in recognition of the fact that 
verbs carry the greatest meaning about 
events conveyed in a sentence (Fink, Mar-
tin, Schwartz, Saffron, & Myers, 1992). In 
fact, the early research that led to the Verb 
as Core approach, and clinical studies of 
Verb as Core, appear to have greatly influ-
enced the development of VNeST.
The treatment is intended to improve 
expressive verb use and verb understand-
ing as well as language performance 
in general in people with agrammatic 
aphasia. The approach involves auditory 
and visual processing of sentences with 

Improving Word Finding and Lexical Processing   549
a focus on verbs, and practice through 
spoken and written language (Fink et al., 
1992; Loverso, Prescott, & Selinger, 1988). 
Tasks include saying, copying, writing, 
and repeating the subject (agent) and 
object (patient) for each verb and answer-
ing wh- questions.
On What Principles Is VAC 
Treatment Based?
Verb as Core is based on the principle that 
verbs carry critical meaning for communi-
cation and literally serve as the “core” of 
all sentences. People with agrammatism 
have particular challenges with access-
ing verbs, yet impairment-level treatment 
approaches tend to focus much more on 
nouns than they do on verbs.
How Is VAC Treatment 
Implemented?
Treatment is carried out methodically, 
beginning with a baseline assessment. 
The treatment steps are summarized here, 
according to guidance provided by Lov-
erso et al. (1988).
• Collect baseline data for each of two 
levels.
	 For Level I, present verbs; for 
each verb, ask “who” and “what” 
questions to elicit a subject-verb 
(agent-patient) response. First, 
give a subject-verb pair and ask 
the person to say it and write 
it. Second, give a set of four 
possible subjects and have the 
person select which one of the 
subjects goes with the verb.
	 For Level II, add questions 
with “what,” “when,” “how,” 
“where,” and “why” to elicit 
subject-action-object responses. 
First, give a subject-verb-object 
combination and have the person 
say it and write it. Second, give 
a set of four possible subjects 
and have the person select a 
subject that goes with the verb 
and object. Start treatment at a 
level for which the individual’s 
performance is about 60% 
accurate.
• Initiate treatment from one level/
sublevel to the next, using words 
that are relevant in terms of 
the individual’s everyday use 
of language. The criterion for 
progressing from one level or 
sublevel to the next is 90% accuracy 
across three consecutive sessions.
What Is the Status of VAC in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Treatment studies have indicated improve-
ment in performance on language bat-
tery scores (Loverso et al., 1988; Loverso, 
Selinger, & Prescott, 1979) and improved 
ability to generate agents and patients for 
trained and untrained verbs (Prescott, 
Selinger, & Loverso, 1982) in small num-
bers of people with aphasia. Loverso et al.  
(1979) reported that language gains were 
preserved for at least 1 month follow-
ing treatment. Katz (2001) implemented 
a computerized VAC treatment pro-
gram with one person with aphasia and 
reported improvements in language bat-
tery scores. Few treatment studies have 
incorporated the approach as originally 
detailed. The influence of VAC on abili-
ties to use verbs in the context of a variety 
of complex sentence types has not been 
studied methodically. The published 

550   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
work on this method does not address 
carryover of improvements into natural 
conversation.
The authors of VAC do not specify 
the means of selecting verbal stimuli for 
the approach or the number of items to be 
presented across sessions. In any case, as 
always, it is important to select verbal stim-
uli most relevant to the individual, given 
that we know there is a greater likelihood 
of carryover for trained versus untrained 
words across lexically oriented methods.
Although further research could be 
carried out on the approach, aphasiolo-
gists studying verb-focused treatment 
have tended to delve further into other 
approaches on verb naming (e.g., cueing 
hierarchy approaches for verb naming 
and VNeST) and on grammatical expres-
sion and reception (e.g., Treatment of 
Underlying Forms and Mapping Therapy; 
see Chapter 32) in people agrammatic 
with aphasia.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 For each of the approaches addressed 
in this chapter, describe why it would 
be considered to be restitutive, com-
pensatory, or both.
	 3.	 For each of the approaches in this 
chapter, make a list of materials you 
would want to have on hand so that 
you would be prepared to carry out 
the approach in actual treatment 
sessions.
	 4.	 With a partner, demonstrate a treat-
ment session using each approach in 
this chapter.
	 5.	 How would you summarize the sta-
tus of evidence-based practice for 
specific treatment methods intended 
to enhance word finding and lexical 
processing?
	 6.	 What do you see as the greatest 
research needs related to methods for 
enhancing word finding and lexical 
processing?
	 7.	 What strategies would you use to 
maximize transfer of treatment gains 
made through word finding and 
lexical processing treatments to real-
world use of communication?
Additional teaching and learning materials 
are available on the companion website.

551
Chapter
32
Improving Syntax
In this chapter, we review three impair-
ment-based approaches focused on reduc-
ing syntactic deficits: Treatment of Under-
lying Forms (TUF), Mapping Therapy, 
and the Sentence Production Program 
for Aphasia (SPPA, an updated version 
of the Language Program for Syntax 
Stimulation). Recall that two approaches 
reviewed as lexical approaches in Chap-
ter  31, VNeST and Verb as Core, may 
also be considered syntactic approaches 
because they entail work with verbs in the 
context of phrases and sentences.
Syntactic approaches are intended 
for those with grammatical processing 
impairments, that is, people with agram-
matism. This is stating the obvious per-
haps, but it is an important point in terms 
of the overall purpose of the approaches 
reviewed here. Although people with 
acquired neurogenic disorders other than 
aphasia may have difficulty with syn-
tax, the target population for which the 
approaches described in this chapter have 
been developed is people with aphasia.
One limitation of research on specific 
syntactic treatment approaches to date is 
the lack of agreement on the very nature 
of agrammatism, limiting the extent of the 
theoretical basis for specific methods in 
terms of who might benefit most. Recall 
from Chapter 10 that some aphasiologists 
theorize that people with agrammatism 
lack the basic syntactic representation 
rules for grammar. Others suggest that 
people with agrammatic aphasia have dif-
ficulty mapping syntactic structures to 
their thematic roles. Still others consider 
agrammatism to be due largely to short-
term and working memory deficits, which 
are not necessarily limited to linguistic 
processing. Further complicating matters, 
morphological problems may contribute 
to syntactic processing problems, such that 
these are a potential confound in studies 
of people with agrammatism (Dickey & 
Thompson, 2007). Fortunately, research 
aphasiologists are continuing to strengthen 
the theory base and the evidence base for 
treatment efficacy regarding syntactic 
approaches. Some are tackling issues of 
individual differences that will help us 
better understand who will benefit most 
from specific aspects of syntactically focus- 
ed approaches.
After reading and reflecting on the 
content in this chapter, you will ideally 
be able to answer, in your own words, the 
following queries about TUF, Mapping 
Therapy, and SPPA:
	 1.	 What is it?
	 2.	 On what principles is it based?
	 3.	 How is it implemented?
	 4.	 What is its status in terms of evidence-
based practice?

552   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
What Is Treatment of 
Underlying Forms (TUF)?
Treatment of Underlying Forms (TUF) is 
an approach to help people with agram-
matism (typically with Broca’s aphasia) 
improve comprehension and expression 
of sentence structure. The focus is on 
developing metalinguistic awareness of 
the underlying, abstract properties of lan-
guage, such as the role of verbs, verb argu-
ments, and phrase movement. Practice is 
encouraged with increasingly complex 
sentence structures. The ultimate goals are 
to generalize treatment effects in terms of 
reduced agrammatic speech and improved 
comprehension for sentences not used in 
treatment and in spontaneous language 
use (Thompson & Shapiro, 2005).
On What Principles Is TUF Based?
TUF is based primarily on government 
binding theory, a component of Chom-
sky’s derivational linguistic theory 
(Chomsky, 1986). The clinician need not 
be a master of linguistic theory to carry 
out this approach. For a review of the rel-
evant grammatical theory, see Shapiro’s 
(1997) tutorial article on syntax. Here, 
let’s address the basic constructs that are 
important to understand in considering 
TUF (as well as Mapping Therapy, the 
next approach we are considering).
As we noted in the discussion of 
VNeST, lexical information associated 
with verbs is represented within sen-
tences, not just in verbs in and of them-
selves. Within the context of sentences, 
verbs carry a great deal of the informa-
tion, beyond just their own meaning as 
individual words. The association of a 
verb with its context within a sentence is 
called argument structure.
Arguments are typically noun phrases 
assigned a thematic role (agent, theme, 
and goal) that fill participant, object, and/
or indirect object positions. In the sen-
tence, “Pierre sang an aria,” Pierre (the 
agent, or the subject) and aria (the theme, 
also called the patient or object) are the 
arguments of the verb sang. When we 
develop language, we learn the argument 
structure of verbs. We learn, for example, 
that for singing to occur, there must be 
someone singing (an agent). We learn, 
too, that singing may have an object (a 
song, a lullaby, an aria, etc.) or that it may 
occur without any object (as in, “Rahaida 
sings”).
Phrase movement, changes in word 
order that are reflected in syntactic changes, 
is another important aspect of using 
words in sentence contexts. Word order is 
an important aspect of syntax and is vital 
to the constraints of phrase movement in 
various languages. Phrase movement is 
what makes sentences complex.
In English, active sentence structures 
(which have a subject-verb-object word 
order, as in “Latisha planted nasturtiums”) 
are known as canonical sentences. Non-
canonical sentences entail phrase move-
ment. Phrase movement occurs in passive 
sentence structures (object-verb-subject, 
as in “The nastrutiums were planted by 
Latisha”) and in sentences with embed-
ded clauses (object relative and subject 
relative sentences). An example of an 
object relative sentence is, “I know who 
the cat scratched.” An example of a sub-
ject relative sentence is, “It was my aunt 
who bought this dress.”
A first step in TUF is to help the client 
establish knowledge of word and argu-
ment relations in noncanonical sentences. 
These result from a change in order of 

Improving Syntax   553
elements within a sentence, for example, 
movement of who or what did something 
or had something done to it (as in object 
cleft sentences) and noun phrase move-
ment (as in passive sentences). In the 
example sentence above, “I know who the 
cat scratched,” the underlying meaning is 
that the cat (the agent) scratched (the verb) 
someone (the theme), and that I know who 
was scratched (again, the theme).
How Is TUF Implemented?
The order and nature of steps are con-
veyed differently across the various pub-
lished descriptions of TUF. Still, some 
commonalities are noted, and these are 
summarized here to provide practical 
guidance. Some accounts of the proce-
dures entailed in TUF are specific to cer-
tain types of sentence structure. Given 
that more generalization tends to occur 
with training focused on more complex 
sentence structures, and given that train-
ing with more diverse sentence types may 
lead to greater gains than just focusing 
on single sentence types, this summary 
includes references to a variety of sen-
tence structures. More sentence types can 
be added, and it is possible to work on 
specific sentence types if there is a clini-
cally important reason to do so.
Ensuring Metalinguistic Awareness
The first phase of TUF entails getting a 
person with aphasia to develop meta-
linguistic awareness of verbs, verb argu-
ments, and the difference between canoni-
cal and noncanonical sentence structure. 
Thompson (2008) refers to this as “the-
matic role training.”
• If the person is not aware of basic 
metalinguistic terms, engage in 
brief tutoring. For example, explain 
that:
	 The agent is the one doing the 
action (sometimes called the 
subject).
	 The theme is the one having the 
action done to it (sometimes 
called a patient or an object).
	 The verb is the action in the 
sentence.
• Use word cards to talk about 
the agent, verb, and theme in a 
canonical sentence. For example, to 
develop metalinguistic awareness 
of passive sentence structure, do the 
following:
	 Lay down three word cards in 
the following order: dog, chased, 
cat.
	 Show a picture of a dog chasing a 
cat.
	 Say, “The dog chased the cat.”
	 Point out, on the word cards, 
which is the agent, theme, 
and verb, and reiterate the 
sentence, pointing to the relevant 
components of the picture. Add 
comments such as:
n	 Let’s look at this word chased. 
It’s the verb. It tells us what 
the action is.
n	 Notice this word dog. The dog 
is the one doing the chasing.
n	 This word, cat, tells us who got 
chased.
	 Change the order of the word 
cards to: cat chased dog.
	 Say, “The cat was chased by the 
dog.”
	 Put the cards back in canonical 
order and have the client say the 
sentence in the active (canonical) 
form.

554   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
	 Change the card order again (or 
have the client do so) and ask 
him or her to say the sentence in 
its passive (noncanonical) form.
	 Review both forms again, 
discussing which cards represent 
the action, theme, and verb.
• Depending on how well the client 
grasps this, you might practice 
with a few sets of cards and 
corresponding pictures (e.g., “The 
lion bit the trainer” and “The 
trainer was bitten by the lion”).
• Extend this same sort of 
explanation and practice with other 
types of sentences. For example, to 
develop metalinguistic awareness 
of subject relative sentence 
structure, do the following:
	 Lay down three word cards in the 
following order: dog, chased, cat.
	 Say, “The dog chased the cat.”
	 Ask the client to point out on the 
word cards which is the agent, 
theme, and verb, and reiterate the 
sentence, pointing to the relevant 
components of the picture.
	 Lay out additional word cards: 
who and it was.
	 Say, “It was the dog who chased 
the cat,” while pointing to the 
corresponding word cards.
	 Show a picture of a lion biting a 
trainer.
	 Ask the client to make a sentence 
just like the last one (“It was the 
tiger who bit the trainer”).
Creating Noncanonical Sentences
The second phase entails having the client 
practice complex noncanonical sentences. 
Thompson (2008) calls this phase “sen-
tence building.”
• Say a noncanonical sentence.
• Show an image and have the client 
say a sentence using that same 
form but pertaining to the image. 
For example, say, “The cake was 
dropped by the man who fell 
down.” Then show an image of a 
man lying on the floor, holding a 
cake. Provide the following word 
cards: cake, dropped, man, fell.
• Ask the client to put them in order  
and use a similar sentence structure.
Thematic Role Training
The third phase entails practice with the 
previous structures, modeled in new com-
binations of words.
• For example, to work further on 
subject relative sentences, you 
might show a picture of a boy who 
has fallen off a bike. Ask the client 
to make up a sentence of a similar 
structure as the previous one (in the 
practice phase). A possible target 
sentence might be, “The boy who 
rode the bike crashed.”
• Work further on other types of 
sentences. Present a spoken model 
of the target sentence structure. For 
example:
	 Say a simple passive sentence 
while showing an image 
illustrating the sentence (e.g., 
“The juice was drunk by the 
toddler”).
	 Ask the client to produce a 
similar sentence corresponding 
to a different image (e.g., “The 
bird was chased by the cat”).
	 Whether or not the client’s 
production was accurate, line up 
word or phrase cards to make  

Improving Syntax   555
up the canonical (active) form  
of the sentence, “The cat chased 
the bird.”
	 Ask him or her to identify the 
verb (chased), the subject (cat), 
and the object (bird) of the 
sentence.
	 Rearrange the cards to complete 
the target, noncanonical, sentence 
(“The bird was chased by the 
cat”).
	 Have the client read the sentence 
aloud.
	 Remove the cards and have the 
client provide the same sentence 
or one with a similar structure.
Practice
• Shuffle sets of word cards that 
include semantically plausible 
combinations of subjects, verbs, 
and objects, plus the it was and who 
cards. Have the client lay them 
out and make sentences of varied 
syntactic forms with them.
As noted earlier, several modifications 
of the nature and order of procedures for 
TUF have been implemented. Murray, 
Timberlake, and Eberle (2007) reported 
positive results for a person with Bro-
ca’s aphasia using an adaptation of TUF 
focused on written as opposed to spo-
ken language. A computerized version of 
TUF called Sentactics (Thompson, Choy, 
Holland, & Cole, 2010) has been devel-
oped and tested. Results are promising. 
This may be especially beneficial for use 
by SLPs who do not have extensive back-
ground in theoretical linguistics and for 
those who do not have time to assemble 
materials required for carrying out this 
approach.
What Is the Status of TUF in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Improvement has been demonstrated in 
terms of trained as well as untrained wh- 
structures and noun phrase movement 
structures in people with agrammatism 
(Ballard & Thompson, 1999; Jacobs & 
Thompson, 2000; Thompson, Ballard, & 
Shapiro, 1998; Thompson, Shapiro, Kiran, 
& Sobecks, 2003; Thompson & Shapiro, 
2005). Overall, generalization of treatment 
effects appears to be limited primarily to 
the specific structures treated or to less 
complex structures. Importantly, training 
of structures that are more complex has 
been shown to lead to more wide-ranging 
effects than training on simpler structures 
(Thompson & Shapiro, 2005). In other 
words, treatment involving complex sen-
tence forms leads to improvements more 
efficiently than treatment through a hier-
archy of simple to complex sentences. 
This is an important extension of CATE 
(see Chapter 23) as it pertains to syntax 
(Thompson et al., 2003).
Thompson and Shapiro (2005) re- 
ported fMRI findings of neural correlates 
of functional changes associated with 
TUF; they indicated that the right hemi-
sphere area homologous to left hemisphere 
Broca’s area had increased activation in 
people who were treated with TUF, com-
pared to those of a control group. Most TUF 
studies to date entail single-case designs.
Ballard and Thompson (1999) sug-
gested that participants who did not 
achieve generalization in their study may 
have been limited due to the severity of 
their aphasia and/or concomitant cogni-
tive deficits. Given that metalinguistic 
knowledge is the focus, those with prior 
interest in and familiarity with gram-
mar and linguistics may benefit from  

556   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
this approach the most (Thompson & Sha-
piro, 2005).
Treatment fidelity has not been con-
sistent across studies, in terms of dosage 
or targeted sentence structures. Also, indi-
ces used for outcomes assessment vary 
(e.g., mean length of utterance, propor-
tion of grammatical sentences, production 
of verbs relative to nouns, correctness of 
judgments about sentence anomalies). 
Participants with mild to moderate agram-
matism have been included in most stud-
ies; people with more severe forms have 
been studied far less. More studies with 
larger numbers of participants and assess-
ments of long-term benefits and carryover 
to natural conversation in real-world con-
text are needed. Also, additional outcomes 
research pertaining to computerized prac-
tice based on TUF will be important.
What Is Mapping Therapy?
Mapping Therapy is a treatment method, 
rooted in linguistic theory, that is designed 
to treat deficits in thematic role assign-
ment in people with agrammatism. As 
noted earlier, challenges with role assign-
ment involve assigning roles to agents, 
patients/themes, and goals within the 
semantic structure of a sentence.
On What Principles Is 
Mapping Therapy Based?
People with agrammatism tend to have 
difficulty mapping relations between 
assigned thematic roles for words and the 
surface syntax by which words are com-
bined to form sentences (Thompson et al.,  
2003). Mapping Therapy is focused on 
taking apart and reorganizing the struc-
ture of sentences. The overall treatment 
goal is increased competence in compre-
hending and producing more complex, 
noncanonical sentences. The goal for 
production is correct syntactic structure. 
Treatment involves analyzing grammati-
cal roles of nouns and verbs (e.g., nouns 
as subjects, objects, etc.) and identifying 
semantic/thematic roles in sentences 
(e.g., agent, patient/theme, etc.; Jacobs & 
Thompson, 2000).
How Is Mapping Therapy 
Implemented?
Each step in this treatment method tar-
gets the relationships between nouns and 
verbs and/or between semantics and 
syntax. Treatment progresses as the client 
successfully masters analysis of canonical 
sentence structures (typical subject-verb-
object structure) and becomes increasingly  
competent in comprehending more com-
plex, noncanonical sentences. Throughout  
treatment, sentences are made longer and 
more complex by adding direct objects, 
modifiers, and prepositional phrases 
(Fink, Martin, Schwartz, Saffron, & Myers, 
1992; Schwartz, Saffran, Fink, Myers, & 
Martin, 1994). The following steps are 
adapted from a description of the ap- 
proach by Schwartz et al. (1994).
• Present a printed sentence. Have 
the client read it. Support him or 
her in reading it (e.g., pointing to 
words as they are spoken), and also 
read it aloud with him or her.
• Ask probe questions. For example, 
ask which word is the verb, which 
is the agent, and which is the 
patient/theme. Mix up the order 
in which you ask these probe 
questions for each sentence.

Improving Syntax   557
• Instruct the client to underline 
critical words on the printed 
sentence. For example, ask that he 
or she underline the adjective in an 
object position, adjective in subject  
position, subject noun phrase,  
object noun phrase, cleft subject, 
cleft object, object relative embedded 
in an object noun phrase, object 
relative embedded in a subject 
noun phrase, or a subject relative 
embedded in a subject noun phrase.
• Following each probe, provide 
immediate feedback by affirming 
the correct underlined words if 
the response was correct. If the 
response was incorrect, underline 
the correct words.
• When the client makes an error, 
encourage him or her to analyze 
the error and determine why it 
is an error. If the person cannot 
determine why his or her response 
was wrong, provide an explanation.
Byng, Nickels, and Black (1994) sug-
gested using color and spatially coded 
templates to strengthen the association 
between thematic roles and word order. 
Each stimulus sentence may be printed 
on a card with the syntactic class of items 
(e.g., noun phrase, verb, object, etc.) un-
derlined with corresponding colors.
What Is the Status of 
Mapping Therapy in Terms of 
Evidence-Based Practice?
Results of studies with single-subject 
designs and studies with small samples of 
people with aphasia have demonstrated 
that the approach improves production 
of semantically reversible, canonical sen-
tences (Byng et al., 1994; Nickels, Byng, & 
Black, 1991; Schwartz et al., 1994). Overall, 
participants showed fewer gains, if any, in 
comprehension. Fink, Swartz, and Meyers 
(1998) implemented Mapping Therapy 
using only transitive verbs to promote 
the comprehension of all semantically 
reversible sentence types. They reported 
generalization to all sentence types, pos-
sibly because mapping the subject noun 
to the role of the agent helps identify the 
semantic relationship between the two.
Rochon, Laird, Bose, and Scofield 
(2005) tested a version of Mapping Ther-
apy focused on the production of canoni-
cal and noncanonical reversible sentences 
with three people with nonfluent aphasia. 
Participants generalized trained sentence 
structures across two tasks that required 
producing constrained sentences. They 
made slight improvements in narrative 
tasks. Sentence comprehension abilities, 
however, did not improve significantly.
Kiran et al. (2012) developed and 
tested a new approach based on Mapping 
Therapy. In addition to assigning thematic 
roles and syntactic categories to written 
words, participants manipulated objects 
to enact thematic roles conveyed in sen-
tences and also engaged in sentence-pic-
ture matching. Overall, sentence com-
prehension improved. Importantly, some 
generalization of skills was noted in less 
complex sentence structures when more 
complex sentence structures were trained. 
This is consistent with other studies sug-
gesting that it may be especially helpful 
to tune into CATE (see Chapter 23) in con-
sidering this and other approaches aimed 
at grammatical abilities.
Further research on Mapping Ther-
apy, including studies with larger sample 
sizes and control groups, studies control-
ling for treatment intensity, and studies 
addressing carryover of treatment effects 
to naturalistic contexts, is needed. Indi-
vidual differences related to memory, 

558   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
attention, and interest in the approach 
may affect effectiveness, so should also 
be studied.
As with all approaches, it is impor-
tant to individualize the nature of the 
verbal stimuli used. It is also important 
to support discussion about what might 
seem like challenging intellectual mate-
rial about grammar (even to some SLPs). 
People who had limited knowledge about  
grammar before the onset of aphasia might 
not be appropriate candidates. Another 
limitation for some could be the inability 
to generalize mapping abilities to spon-
taneous comprehension and production 
during conversation and in writing.
What Is the Sentence Production 
Program for Aphasia (SPAA)?
The Sentence Production Program for 
Aphasia (SPPA; Helm-Estabrooks & 
Nicholas, 2000) is a stimulation approach 
(described Chapter 25) designed to en- 
hance sentence production in people 
with agrammatism. It is based on an ear-
lier treatment program called the Lan-
guage Program for Syntax Stimulation 
(HELPSS). SPPA is a commercially avail-
able, packaged program. The revision 
from HELPSS to SPPA entailed a reduced 
number of sentence types (11 to 8), editing 
for a gender bias toward males, and addi-
tion of wh- questions.
On What Principles Is  
SPPA Treatment Based?
The rationale behind the SPPA and 
HELPSS approaches is that people with 
agrammatism are limited in grammati-
cal performance because of impaired or 
inconsistent access to grammatical knowl-
edge, not a loss of grammatical knowledge 
(Gleason, Goodglass, Green, Ackerman, 
& Hyde, 1975; Goodglass, Gleason, Bern-
holtz, & Hyde, 1972; Kolk & Heeschen, 
1990; Linebarger, McCall, & Berndt, 2004). 
In contrast to TUF and Mapping Therapy, 
SPPA is not based so much on linguistic 
theory as on the notion that repeated and 
methodical stimulation of certain mor-
phosyntactic forms will lead to improve-
ments in the use of those forms.
The primary goal of SPPA is to 
increase the variety and complexity of 
spoken utterances through sentence com-
pletion tasks tied to brief “stories” repre-
sented in supportive pictures.
How Is SPPA Implemented?
The method involves a hierarchy of eight 
sentence types, each with two controlled 
levels of grammatical complexity. The 
sentence types are shown in Table 32–1.
Given that SPPA entails a specific 
set of pictures and verbal prompts in a 
Table 32–1.  Sentence Types for SPAA
Type 1:  Imperative Intransitive
Type 2:  Imperative Transitive
Type 3:  Wh- Interrogative — What and 
Who
Type 4:  Wh- Interrogative — Where and 
When
Type 5:  Declarative Transitive
Type 6:  Declarative Intransitive
Type 7:  Comparative
Type 8: Yes-No Questions

Improving Syntax   559
published stimulus book, you will need 
to have access to the commercialized pro-
gram to actually administer the treatment.
• For each sentence type, at the first 
level (A), ask the client to repeat 
the target sentence that you present 
in a story format, along with an 
accompanying picture. Helm-
Estabrooks and Nicholas (2000) 
provided this example:
Clinician:  Nick’s school bus 
arrives in 15 minutes and Nick 
is still asleep, so his mother tells 
him, “Wake up!” What does his 
mother say?
Client:  Wake up! (p. 5)
• For the next level (B), ask the 
client to complete your “story” 
by answering a question. Helm-
Estabrooks and Nicholas (2000) 
provided this example:
Clinician:  Nick’s school bus 
arrives in 15 minutes and Nick 
is still asleep. So what does his 
mother tell him?
Client:  Wake up! (p. 5)
• Present items for Levels A and B 
consecutively for each sentence. 
Once a set criterion level has been 
met for Level A, present the items 
in Level B alone.
• Once a set criterion level has been 
met for Level B, move on to the next 
sentence type.
• Continue until the client can 
produce all sentence types at 
Level B.
Scoring sheets are provided in the com-
mercialized program. Scores given are as 
follows:
• 1 = Fully correct response
• .5 = Partially correct response 
(only one word produced or word 
produced in error)
• 0 = Incorrect response (two or more 
erroneous words or words omitted)
• NA = Not administered (item not 
presented because the criterion was 
not met for the previous level)
Charts are provided for summarizing 
scores before, during, and after treatment.
What Is the Status of SPPA 
and HELPSS in Terms of 
Evidence-Based Practice?
To date, the only published studies on this 
approach are based on HELPSS and not 
SPPA. All are case studies or single-subject  
design studies with one to six participants. 
Helm-Estabrooks and Ramsberger (1986) 
reported results for six people with Bro-
ca’s aphasia who received HELPSS treat-
ment for approximately 80 sessions each. 
They noted significant improvements in 
terms of the number of correct sentence 
construction types and grammatical mor-
phemes produced in narratives. They also 
reported that treatment via telephone was 
effective for one male studied over three 
half-hour sessions per week for approxi-
mately 7 months.
Fink et al. (1995) reported evidence of 
generalization to a novel sentence elicita-
tion task (involving an untrained struc-
ture) for four nonfluent people treated 
with probe questions and pictures used 
in HELPSS. In another study based on 
HELPSS, Doyle, Goldstein, and Bourgeois 
(1987) showed improvements in general-
ization of similar sentence constructions 
in people with Broca’s aphasia but not 

560   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
generalization to novel sentences or to 
natural conversation.
Studies of the generalization of SPPA 
and HELPSS to other tasks and spontane-
ous usage are problematic in that some 
limit the types of sentences elicited. Also, 
cognitive and linguistic demands across 
tasks used to demonstrate generalization 
vary across studies (Fink et al., 1995). The 
generalization of trained and untrained 
sentence types to everyday communica-
tion using SPPA and HELPSS has not been 
thoroughly investigated.
Research is needed to demonstrate 
the efficacy SPPA overall, with attention 
to treatment dosage, carryover of gains to 
untrained sentences and sentence types, 
carryover to natural conversation, and 
maintenance of any benefits. Also, given 
evidence (based on other methods for 
syntax treatment) that training with more 
complex syntactic structures may lead to 
gains in untrained simpler structures (e.g., 
Dickey & Thompson, 2007; Thompson 
et al., 2010, 2003), it will be important to 
test the assumption that it is best to prog-
ress from simple to complex structures in 
SPPA treatment.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 For each of the approaches addressed 
in this chapter, describe why it would 
be considered to be restitutive, com-
pensatory, or both.
	 3.	 For each of the approaches in this 
chapter, make a list of materials you 
would want to have on hand so that 
you would be prepared to carry out 
the approach in actual treatment 
sessions.
	 4.	 With a partner, demonstrate a treat-
ment session using each approach in 
this chapter.
	 5.	 How would you summarize the sta-
tus of evidence-based practice for 
specific treatment methods intended 
to improve syntax?
	 6.	 What do you see as the greatest 
research needs related to methods for 
improving syntax?
	 7.	 What strategies would you use to 
maximize transfer of treatment gains 
made through syntactic treatments to 
real-world use of communication?
	 8.	 Imagine that you were asked to pro-
vide an in-service for practicing SLPs 
to help them understand the theories 
underlying syntactic approaches to 
language treatment.
a.	 What are the most clinically 
relevant concepts on which you 
would focus?
b.	 What terminology would be most 
important for your participants to 
know?
More materials to foster teaching and 
learning on this chapter’s content may be 
found on the companion website.

561
Chapter
33
Improving Reading and Writing
Recall that reading and writing abilities 
tend to be similar in severity to listen-
ing and speaking abilities in people with 
aphasia. Still, there are some who have 
disproportionate challenges with reading 
and/or writing. Functional use of both 
involves interactive cognitive, linguistic, 
and perceptual (and in the case of writing, 
motor) processes (Beeson & Henry, 2008). 
Many of the approaches we have discussed 
in the previous four chapters and in Sec-
tion VI include use of reading and writing 
as modalities in the method, and as overall 
potential modalities for communication.
In this chapter, we focus on exam-
ples of treatment approaches that target 
reading and/or writing specifically, at 
the impairment level: Copy and Recall 
Treatment (CART), Anagram and Copy 
Treatment (ACT), the Problem-Solving 
Approach, Multiple Oral Rereading 
(MOR), and Oral Reading for Language 
in Aphasia (ORLA). Before delving into 
specific writing- and reading-focused 
programs, it is a good idea to review the 
psycholinguistic and cognitive neuropsy-
chological theories and principles that 
support impairment-oriented treatment 
of reading and writing. After reading and 
reflecting on the content in this chapter, 
you will ideally be able to answer, in your 
own words, the following queries about 
CART, ACT, MOR, and ORLA:
	 1.	 What is it?
	 2.	 On what principles is it based?
	 3.	 How is it implemented?
	 4.	 What is its status in terms of evidence-
based practice?
What Are Basic Principles That 
Underlie Most Writing- and 
Reading-Focused Programs 
for People With Aphasia?
Most approaches developed specifically 
to help foster reading and writing abili-
ties are based on psycholinguistic mod-
els of language processing, such as those 
discussed in Chapter 4 and illustrated in 
Figure 4–2. If you check out the original 
work cited in the descriptions of each of 
the approaches described in this chapter, 
you will find many well-conceived sche-
matic (mostly box-and-arrow) illustra-
tions of writing and reading processes 
that help us consider the possible levels 
of breakdown when a person has trouble 
writing or reading.
A process analysis approach to as- 
sessment, explored in detail in Chapter 19,  
is essential to determining what, spe-
cifically, affects an individual’s ability to 
read and/or write. The selective disrup-
tion of any of the component processes  

562   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
involved in reading or writing can lead to 
a form of dyslexia or dysgraphia, respec-
tively. Many of the assessment tools 
described in Chapter 20 help us to discern 
whether an individuals’ dysgraphia and/
or dyslexia lies at the deep, phonological, 
or surface level. Without a solid grasp on 
why a person is having trouble writing 
or reading, we cannot tailor a treatment 
program to his or her specific writing or 
reading needs at the impairment level.
Writing- and reading-specific ap- 
proaches meant to enhance communica-
tion require that the client have a preserved 
semantic system (Wright, Marshall, Wil-
son, & Page, 2008). This is important to 
consider because a person can write a word 
without necessarily being aware of what it 
means. Writing may be accomplished via 
phonological spelling, that is, segmenting 
auditory input into its component sounds, 
translating phonemes into corresponding 
graphemes, and then converting graph-
emes to letters, bypassing semantic repre-
sentations that are essential to conveying 
meaningful content through writing (Bee-
son & Henry, 2008; Raymer, Cudworth, & 
Haley, 2003; Raymer et al., 2003).
The goal of writing-specific treatment 
is to help a person independently and 
effectively communicate information (con-
vey requests and protests, ask and answer 
questions, and relay personal informa-
tion) through writing. The goal of reading- 
specific treatment is to help a person inde-
pendently and effectively comprehend 
information in the written modality. As 
for all types of communication interven-
tion, goals for both should be couched in 
the context in which a person will imme-
diately or eventually incorporate the ben-
efits of treatment.
As you know, many people with 
dysgraphia due to stroke or brain injury 
have paralysis or paresis of the dominant 
hand. Be sure to provide encouragement 
that it’s okay for handwriting or print-
ing not to look anywhere close to perfect. 
Also, if you are used to having two func-
tional hands, it is easy to forget how hard 
it can be to stabilize a paper while writing. 
Using a clipboard and helping by hold-
ing onto a corner of the paper as the client 
writes can be helpful.
Here are two additional important 
points to keep in mind when considering 
reading and writing treatments:
• Verbal stimuli used within all 
reading and writing approaches 
should be personalized to each 
individual.
• Not all people with an acquired 
neurogenic language disorder were 
literate prior to onset; working on 
reading and writing may not be 
an appropriate goal for them. This 
may seem obvious, but many SLPs 
neglect to consider this important 
fact in treatment planning.
What Is Copy and Recall Treatment?
Copy and Recall Treatment (CART) is an 
impairment-focused stimulation method 
that entails repeated writing practice 
through a progression of singe-word writ-
ing tasks (Beeson, Rising, & Volk, 2003). 
Because it involves progressively taking 
away written examples, it has also been 
called delayed-copy treatment (Rapp & 
Kane, 2002). Good candidates for CART 
have good visual recognition abilities and 
the ability to write letters (graphomotor 
abilities).

Improving Reading and Writing   563
On What Principles Is CART Based?
The rationale for CART is that repeated 
attempts to accurately spell target words 
assist in activating the words’ graphemic 
representations.
How Is CART Implemented?
Steps for carrying out CART described 
here are based primarily on Beeson et al. 
(2003).
• Assemble a set of cards with 
personally relevant line drawings 
printed on each. Provide a paper 
and pencil or pen to the client.
• Turn over one card at a time. Say 
the word that corresponds to the 
item depicted. Then ask the client to 
write the word.
• If he or she writes the word 
correctly, move on to the next card. 
If not, write the word or show a 
printed version of the word already 
prepared. Ask the client to copy 
the word three times. Depending 
on his or her responsiveness, you 
might cue the client to write it again 
as needed until three versions are 
complete.
• Once the word is written three 
times, take away all of the examples 
of the written word. Show the 
drawing again and ask the client 
to write the word three times. 
Give feedback after each attempt, 
and then cover that written word 
before the next attempt. If he or she 
cannot write the word without a 
model, start the process again with 
a different picture. If possible, come 
back to that picture with which he 
or she had difficulty during the 
same session.
• Provide CART homework to be 
done 6 days per week. For each day, 
the client is to (a) label pictures, 
copying the same written word 20 
times for each picture, and then (b) 
write the word on a separate “test” 
page on which only the picture 
is shown, without looking at any 
written model.
• As treatment progresses, include 
old and new words in the 
homework. Present mastered words 
less frequently.
Helm-Estabrooks, Albert, and Nicholas 
(2014) suggested a means of establishing 
a hierarchy for target words: Consider 
short before long words, and words with 
regular spelling before irregular words. 
Of course, since pictures are involved, it’s 
important that words be imageable (i.e., 
concrete, or easy to picture in our minds).
What Is the Status of CART in 
Terms of Evidence-Based Practice?
Research on CART is based primarily 
on case studies and single-case design 
experiments. Beeson et al. (2003) reported 
results of 8 months of CART treatment for 
eight participants with dysgraphia due 
to stroke. Half showed improvement in 
terms of the outcomes measured.
Wright et al. (2008) applied a version 
of CART in which a written cueing hier-
archy was specified with two people with 
aphasia. Both participants improved for 
target written words. One generalized to 

564   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
other words but one did not. The authors 
highlighted that individual differences 
are an important consideration in predict-
ing responsiveness to treatment.
Repetitive spelling, a key element 
of this approach, has been found to be 
an essential aspect of what makes the 
approach effective. Mortley, Enderby, and 
Petheram (2001) reported improved spell-
ing for a person with severe dysgraphia 
but good oral spelling using a repetitive 
spelling exercise by typing via computer. 
Authors of modified versions of CART 
that included spoken word repetition 
of target words suggested that adding a 
speaking component may enhance effec-
tiveness (Ball, de Riesthal, Breeding, & 
Mendoza, 2011).
Raymer et al. (2003) reported results 
of a case series in which they implemented 
an adapted CART approach incorporating 
real words and nonwords for participants 
with dysgraphia. Spelling for trained 
words improved. Generalization was 
limited to two of four word sets. Interest-
ingly, if the untrained words had a similar 
spelling to the trained words, especially at 
the beginnings of the words, generaliza-
tion was better.
Keep in mind that the type of feed-
back we provide to our clients may shape 
their degree of success when they engage 
in CART, and the degree of improve-
ment may not correspond to their sense 
of enjoyment of the approach. Raymer, 
Strobel, Thomason, and Reff (2010) im-
plemented adapted versions of CART in 
which participants were given overt feed-
back about their errors versus when errors 
were not overtly corrected. Although the 
participants said the errorless approach 
was preferred and less frustrating, three 
of four actually made greater gains in the 
approach in which errors were overtly 
addressed by the clinician.
Clausen and Beeson (2003) showed 
how group treatment may be useful in 
enhancing the effects of CART following 
individualized CART treatment. They had 
four people with Broca’s aphasia engage 
in weekly group sessions and daily home-
work. Once words were mastered in the 
group context, person-to-person interac-
tions were set up with unfamiliar com-
munication partners. The authors com-
mented that the psychosocial benefit was 
apparent. All participants used written 
communication effectively with an unfa-
miliar person but performed better in the 
group context.
Beeson, Higginson, and Rising (2013) 
described the incorporation of smart-
phone text messaging into a modified 
version of CART for a person with Bro-
ca’s aphasia. Although his handwritten 
and spoken naming improved more than 
his text messaging abilities, his functional 
abilities in texting increased and were 
maintained 2 years after the treatment. 
Given enhanced features of predictive 
words and autocorrect features in ever-
evolving smartphone technology, texting 
may be an increasingly important compo-
nent of writing-related treatment.
Helm-Estabrooks et al. (2014) recom-
mended a version of CART combined 
with Anagram and Copy Treatment (the 
next approach we review). They also sug-
gested a scoring system that gives credit 
for partial correctness rather than the 
correct/incorrect scoring system used in 
the original approach. Orjada and Bee-
son (2005) described the benefits of CART 
combined with an oral rereading method 
(summarized later, under reading treat-
ments) for a person with reading and 
spelling deficits due to stroke.
Overall, be mindful that just copying 
words is not sufficient for making seman-
tic-orthographic links. It is important to 

Improving Reading and Writing   565
activate the associated word meaning 
(Beeson, Hirsch, & Rewega, 2002). Some 
people may not be compliant with follow-
ing through on homework assignments. 
It may be helpful to get friends or family 
members involved in providing remind-
ers and motivation regarding homework.
What Is Anagram and 
Copy Treatment?
Anagram and Copy Treatment (ACT) is 
an approach for people with dyslexia who 
especially have difficulty at the level of the 
graphemic output lexicon and graphemic 
buffer (Aliminosa, McCloskey, Goodman-
Schulman, & Sokol, 1993; Beeson, 1999; 
Hillis, 1989). It may be especially useful 
for those who have limited oral language 
and speech output (e.g., people with 
Broca’s aphasia and apraxia of speech) 
because writing is an important compen-
satory mode of communication. As with 
CART, good candidates for ACT have 
good visual recognition and graphomotor 
ability (the physical ability to write). ACT 
is based on the use of anagrams, which 
are scrambled sequences of letters.
On What Principle Is ACT Based?
The ACT approach is based on the notion 
that repeated recall and practice strength-
ens the graphemic representation of 
words. Manipulating anagram letters is 
easier than writing letters because the 
individual need not select letters from 
memory and can rearrange letters in vari-
ous ways before deciding on a correct 
arrangement.
How Is ACT Implemented?
The following steps are summarized from 
Beeson (1999).
• Develop a set of words that would 
be highly relevant and useful to the 
client.
• Progressing from easy to more difficult 
	
words, show an anagram and then 
ask the client to arrange the letters 
in the right order to spell the word.
• Once the letters are arranged 
successfully to spell the word, have 
the client copy the word. If she 
cannot arrange the letters correctly, 
do so for her and then have her 
copy the word in her own writing.
• Make the task more difficult by 
adding two foil letters (letters that 
are not in the target word) (a vowel 
and a consonant) and begin the 
sequence again.
• Have the client write the word from 
memory. Repeat this until she spells 
the word correctly three times.
• Assign daily homework. Have the 
client repeatedly copy words using 
pictures that are labeled with each 
target word for 30 minutes per day. 
Also, have her copy target words as 
with CART.
• As treatment progresses, shift from 
your own selection of target words 
to the client’s selection of words.
What Is the Status of ACT in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Research on ACT to date consists of case 
series and single-case designs. Overall, 
writing for trained words has improved, 

566   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
but there has been minimal carryover to 
untrained words (Beeson, 1999). Positive 
results for a person with severe global 
aphasia, as characterized by a reduced 
need for self-correction and time to 
respond, were reported by Greenwald 
(2004). Beeson et al. (2002) combined 
the ACT and CART approaches for two 
people with Broca’s aphasia (one moder-
ate and one severe) and one with global 
aphasia. After 9 weeks of sessions once or 
twice per week plus daily homework, all 
three could spell all of the target words. 
However, there was still minimal gener-
alization to untrained words.
Helm-Estabrooks et al. (2014) sug-
gested a scoring system that is more 
sensitive than the correct/incorrect scor-
ing typical of most of the studies on ACT 
and CART. By giving partial credit for 
the degree of effectiveness at a spelling 
attempt, we might better capture the com-
municative effectiveness of writing.
What Is the  
Problem-Solving Approach?
The Problem-Solving Approach entails 
teaching the client with dysgraphia to 
implement strategies that help facilitate 
spelling. Strategies may include writing 
partially correct responses, self-correction, 
making sound-to-letter correspondences, 
and using an electronic speller or tablet/
smartphone app to obtain alternatives 
when the client is unsure about a spelling 
(Beeson, Rewega, Vail, & Rapcsak, 2000).
On What Principles Is the  
Problem-Solving Approach Based?
The Problem-Solving Approach is based on 
the notion that having the client with dys-
graphia learn to evaluate her own writing 
problems (spelling in particular) and inde-
pendently implement those strategies will 
improve her writing abilities. A focus on 
phoneme-to-grapheme conversion ideal- 
ly helps the individual improve spelling 
through repeated stimulation and correc-
tive feedback.
How Is the Problem-Solving 
Approach Implemented?
Treatment sessions are geared toward 
discussion and demonstration of strate-
gies that a client may use independently 
to improve spelling. Most of the work is 
done by the client through homework, 
which is then reviewed interactively dur-
ing treatment with feedback from the cli-
nician. The following steps are based on 
Beeson et al. (2000).
• Ask the client to write about 
something, perhaps something 
about what has happened in his 
day. When he comes upon a word 
for which he is unsure of the 
spelling, suggest that he write it  
just as it sounds, and then decide 
if it is correct. If he is still unsure, 
ask him to try correcting it. Have 
him look it up using an electronic 
speller, computer, or smartphone 
app.
• Have the client keep a notebook 
and write in it each day, continuing 
to practice the writing, spell-
checking, and self-correction 
strategies. Encourage the client to 
select topics independently. If he 
has difficulty with that, it may be 
helpful to assign topics at first.
• Have the client make a list of the 
words that were difficult to spell.

Improving Reading and Writing   567
• Review the homework content 
during treatment sessions. Discuss 
and provide feedback about 
strategy use.
What Is the Status of the  
Problem-Solving Approach in Terms 
of Evidence-Based Practice?
Beeson et al. (2000) reported signifi-
cant improvements in spelling when the 
Problem-Solving Approach was used 
for 10 weeks with each of two people 
who had spelling impairments following 
stroke.
What Is Multiple Oral Rereading?
Multiple Oral Rereading (MOR) involves 
repeated reading aloud of the same text 
to facilitate whole-word rather than let-
ter-by-letter reading. It is a restitutive, 
stimulation approach designed for people 
with aphasia who have acquired read-
ing impairments (alexia with or without 
agraphia), especially those with difficulty 
accessing the graphemic input lexicon 
but retaining orthographic knowledge 
(Beeson & Hillis, 2001; Beeson & Insalaco, 
1998; Beeson, Magloire, & Robey, 2005).
On What Principles Is  
MOR Treatment Based?
Many people with aphasia acquire a let-
ter-by-letter approach to reading (Beeson, 
1999). This makes it especially difficult to 
read longer words. MOR is intended to 
improve access to the graphemic input 
lexicon either directly or through compen-
satory processes (Beeson & Hillis, 2001). 
The clues provided by sentence contexts 
and increasing familiarity with the text 
may be part of what makes the treatment 
effective. Repetition is fundamental to the 
method, so completion of daily home-
work is an essential component.
How Is MOR Implemented?
The steps described here are based on those 
originally described by Beeson (1998).
• In the initial session, determine the 
person’s reading rate and accuracy 
for paragraph-level text. Choose 
reading material that is of interest 
to the client. Choose a portion of 
text that is at an appropriate level 
of difficulty for the client and have 
him read it aloud. Score his reading 
rate in words per minute, and note 
reading errors. Also note any self-
corrected errors.
• Ask the client to reread the text. 
Support his reading as appropriate 
and correct errors as he proceeds. 
Rereading the passage helps 
increase his familiarity with the 
text, which should help enhance his 
accuracy.
• Provide the written text as 
homework. Thirty minutes of 
repeated reading of the same text 
one or twice a day is recommended.
• Have the client keep a log of daily 
practice is recommended.
• In subsequent treatment sessions, 
review the log and discuss progress 
with homework. Then assess 
reading rate and accuracy with the 
text he has been practicing. Plot 
these data graphically.

568   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
• Set a target reading rate, based 
on what seems realistic given his 
current level. When he attains that 
rate with the same passage, move 
on to a new passage.
What Is the Status of MOR in 
Terms of Evidence-Based Practice?
Several descriptive case studies and single- 
case series results have demonstrated that 
MOR is effective in increasing reading rate 
and oral reading accuracy (Beeson, 1998; 
Beeson & Insalaco, 1998; Beeson et al., 
2005; Cherney, 2004; Tuomainen & Laine, 
1991). Most studies on MOR have not 
included control groups. MOR has also 
been shown to demonstrate carryover 
to new, unpracticed text in some studies 
(e.g., Beeson & Insalaco, 1998). However, 
there is less evidence to support the use 
of MOR for facilitating reading compre-
hension (Lacey, Lott, Sperling, Snider, & 
Friedman, 2007).
Lacey, Lott, Snider, Sperling, and 
Friedman (2010) noted that specific words 
that are practiced are the words most 
likely to be read correctly in subsequent 
readings. They suggested that includ-
ing difficult words in the context of pas-
sages rather than in isolation may help 
improve reading abilities. As noted with 
other approaches requiring homework, 
the client’s motivation and willingness to 
practice independently or with a partner 
at home is essential to improvement. Also, 
rereading of erroneous words will likely 
not facilitate correct word reading in the 
future, so some form of feedback from a 
partner during practice sessions may be 
helpful.
In a review of treatment methods for 
acquired alexia, Starrfelt, Ólafsdóttir, and 
Arendt (2013) questioned the veracity of 
the diagnosis of alexia in some studies on 
reading treatments, including MOR, and 
pointed out the diversity of people who 
have been studied in terms of the type 
and severity of alexia, and the number 
and type of concomitant deficits.
The fact that MOR is often combined 
with other treatment approaches (for 
reading or for other aspects of language) 
makes it difficult to discern the specific 
effects of MOR in several studies (Beeson, 
Rising, Kim, & Rapcsak, 2010; Lacey et al., 
2010; Mayer & Murray, 2002). This is not 
necessarily problematic in terms of actual 
associated outcomes, as a combination 
of approaches, some emphasizing more 
comprehension-based foci, and especially 
those incorporating more semantic pro-
cessing and stimulation across modalities, 
is likely advantageous.
Kendall et al. (2003) pointed out that 
methods that focus more on indirect-route 
processing, that is, on phonological pro-
cessing, may be more helpful for people 
who have phonological or deep alexia. 
They demonstrated that a phonological 
approach may help people with acquired 
alexia improve their rate and accuracy of 
reading aloud, including generalization 
to untrained passages, and also enhance 
their comprehension. They also demon-
strated maintenance of treatment effects 
following completion of a phonologically 
based program (Kendall et al., 2003).
What Is Oral Reading for 
Language in Aphasia?
Oral Reading for Language in Aphasia 
(ORLA) is a treatment method for people 
with dyslexia associated with any form 
and severity level of aphasia. The intent is 

Improving Reading and Writing   569
to foster recovery or relearning of reading 
comprehension through practice using 
the phonological and semantic routes and 
associated feedback (Cherney, 1995, 2004; 
Cherney, Merbitz, & Grip, 1986). Through 
a hierarchical ordering of material (easy 
to difficult, and increasing in length), the 
clinician guides the client in reading in 
unison and then independently.
On What Principles Is ORLA 
Treatment Based?
ORLA is a stimulation approach based 
on neuropsychological models of read-
ing. Repetitive stimulation is intended 
to strengthen phonological and seman-
tic routes for reading. By incorporating 
connected speech rather than individual 
words, it is said to permit more natural 
prosody when clients read aloud. Using 
text-level stimuli permits practice with 
varied grammatical forms in meaningful 
contexts. Newer computerized and online 
versions of ORLA integrate additional 
principles related to feedback and aux-
iliary forms of practice to help integrate 
semantic and phonological processing 
across modalities.
How Is ORLA Treatment 
Implemented?
The levels of stimulus types and the steps 
that follow are based on details provided 
by Cherney and colleagues (Cherney, 
1995, 2004; Cherney et al., 1986).
• Assemble materials according to 
each of four levels based on length 
and reading level.
	 For Level 1, use simple three- to 
five-word sentences at a first-
grade reading level.
	 For Level 2, use 8- to 12-word 
sentences or combinations of two 
brief sentences. A third-grade 
level is recommended.
	 For Level 3, use 15- to 30-word 
sentence combinations, separated 
into sets of two or three 
sentences. A sixth-grade level is 
recommended.
	 For Level 4, use simple 
paragraphs of 50 to 100 words at 
a sixth-grade reading level.
• Have the client read the material 
in unison with you. Then have him 
read it again alone.
	 Do not correct errors; rather, 
focus on correct modeling.
What Is the Status of ORLA in 
Terms of Evidence-Based Practice?
Most studies of ORLA to date involve case 
series and case studies. Cherney (2010b) 
also carried out a comparative study 
using the traditional version of ORLA and 
reported that 25 individuals improved in 
overall aphasia language battery scores 
compared to a no-treatment phase. ORLA 
has been shown to lead to improvements 
not only in reading but also to improve-
ments in other modalities (speaking, 
writing, and auditory comprehension) in 
people with varied forms of “fluent” and 
“nonfluent” aphasia (Cherney, 1995, 2004; 
Cherney et al., 1986).
Cherney (2010a, 2010b) developed 
and tested computerized versions of 
ORLA based on the original program 
and compared results to ORLA treatment 
given by a clinician in person. Twenty-five 

570   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
participants improved their overall apha-
sia severity level following both forms 
of treatment; gains were greater in the 
clinician-administered version. Reason-
ing that a lack of visual feedback from the 
face and articulators of the clinician may 
have led to poorer results in the comput-
erized version, Cherney and colleagues 
developed another version of ORLA, the 
ORLA Virtual Therapist (VT) program.
In ORLA VT, an animated clinician 
with a digitized female voice reads along 
with the client, with words highlighted 
on the screen as they are read. She then 
fades her reading at the end of the sen-
tences, and then the client reads the mate-
rial alone. Additional steps are imple-
mented, including pointing to specific 
content and function words, and reading 
single words aloud. Performance data are 
tracked for later review by the clinician. 
Recent versions of ORLA VT have been 
implemented using Internet-based pro-
tocols (Cherney & van Vuuren, 2012; van 
Vuuren & Cherney, 2014).
In ongoing research on ORLA and its 
varied modifications, it will be important 
to assess treatment outcomes in terms of 
real-life use of reading according to indi-
vidualized life participation goals. It will 
also be important to have researchers who 
are not involved in the initial design of 
ORLA methods independently test it and 
its variations.
Learning and Reflection Activities
	 1.	 List and define any terms in this chap-
ter that are new to you or that you 
have not yet mastered.
	 2.	 For each of the approaches addressed 
in this chapter, describe why it would 
be considered to be restitutive, com-
pensatory, or both.
	 3.	 For each of the approaches in this 
chapter, make a list of materials you 
would want to have on hand so that 
you would be prepared to carry out 
the approach in actual treatment 
sessions.
	 4.	 With a partner, demonstrate a treat-
ment session using each approach in 
this chapter.
	 5.	 How would you summarize the sta-
tus of evidence-based practice for 
specific treatment methods intended 
to improve writing and reading?
	 6.	 What do you see as the greatest 
research needs related to methods for 
improving writing and reading?
	 7.	 Imagine that you were asked to pro-
vide an in-service for practicing SLPs 
to help them understand the theo-
ries underlying impairment-focused 
stimulation approaches for improving 
reading and writing.
a.	 What are the most clinically 
relevant concepts on which you 
would focus?
b.	 What diagrams would be help-
ful to use in helping clinicians 
consider the levels of breakdown 
that might occur in carried forms 
of dyslexia and dysgraphia?
	 8.	 What strategies would you use to 
maximize transfer of treatment gains 
made through writing and read-
ing treatment to real-world use of 
communication?
See the companion website for additional 
learning and teaching materials.

571
Please note that the terms in this glossary are defined in light of the context in which 
they are used in this book and may not apply to all uses of each term in other contexts. 
Definitions of aphasia subtypes are given only in terms of classical anatomical models, 
not according to associated symptoms, which are discussed in Chapter 10.
Acceleration-deceleration injury.  An injury 
in which the neurological insult is due 
to a moving object hitting a nonmov-
ing object; in the case of TBI, one of the 
objects is a person’s head.
Achromatopsia.  A color perception deficit.
Activity.  Execution of tasks, in the context 
of the WHO ICF (WHO, 2001) domain of 
functioning and disability.
Activity limitations.  A component of 
health and disability added following a 
1999 modification to the WHO ICIDH 
(WHO, 1999), which is defined as “dif-
ficulties an individual may have in the 
performance of life activities” (p. 16).
Additive conjunctives.  Words introducing 
added information (e.g., furthermore, in 
addition, in contrast).
Adjunct or adjuvant approaches.  Treatment 
approaches used in conjunction with 
allopathic medical approaches; some-
times termed complementary treatment 
approaches.
Adult day care center.  A facility in which 
people with disabilities may stay during 
the day, so that they are not left alone at 
home and to provide respite to caregivers.
Advance directives.  Documentation of a 
person’s wishes for medical care in case 
he or she becomes unable to convey 
them; includes living will and durable 
power of attorney.
Age-related identity threat.  The implicit or 
explicit belief that one will fail because 
one is “old.”
Agent.  A thematic role corresponding to the 
subject of a sentence.
Agnosia.  Inability to recognize or interpret 
sensory input.
Agrammatism.  A deficit in formulating and 
processing syntax.
AIDS dementia complex.  A cognitive im- 
pairment associated with HIV itself or 
a related opportunistic infection; some-
times referred to as HIV/AIDS-associ-
ated dementia or HIV/AIDS-associated 
encephalopathy.
Albert test.  See line cancellation task.
Alertness.   Psychophysiological state of 
readiness to react to sensory stimuli.
Allocentric neglect.  A form of neglect in 
which the neglected area is relative to the 
individual’s subjective frame of reference 
at any given moment.
Allopathic approaches.  Treatment approaches 
that most often target specific bodily sys-
tems or disease states; common in West-
ern medical practice.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD).  The most com-
mon form of dementia, associated with 
Glossary

572   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
neurofibrillary tangles, neuritic plaques, 
cortical atrophy, and ventricular dila-
tion; also referred to as dementia of the 
Alzheimer’s type, or DAT.
Amusia.  An impairment of processing, 
remembering, and recognizing music.
Anagram.  A scrambled sequence of let-
ters that, when ordered properly, form a 
word.
Anagram and Copy Treatment (ACT).  ​An 
approach for people with dyslexia based 
on the notion that repeated recall and 
practice strengthens the graphemic rep-
resentation of words.
Anastomosis.  A protective feature allowing 
collateral circulation of blood to the brain 
in case the primary channels of blood 
flow become blocked.
Aneurysm.  A bulging out at a weakened 
spot along an arterial wall.
Angioplasty.  A procedure entailing inser-
tion of a catheter into the arteries and use 
of a balloon-like tip to expand the arterial 
walls.
Angular injury.  See rotational injury.
Annual deductible.  A certain amount that a 
person with medical insurance must pay 
out of pocket each year before insurance 
starts to cover their health care costs.
Anomia.  See dysnomia.
Anomic aphasia.  An aphasia syndrome 
in which word-finding difficulty is the 
primary deficit (associated with varied 
lesion sites).
Anosognosia.  A lack of awareness of an ill-
ness or deficit.
Antioxidants.  A category of natural and 
human-made substances that counter-
act the damaging effects of oxidation on 
bodily tissue.
Aperceptive agnosia.  Inability to recognize 
an object; may be visual, tactile, olfactory, 
auditory, or gustatory.
Aphasia.  An acquired language disorder, 
caused by brain injury (e.g., stroke, trau-
matic brain injury, neoplasm, surgical 
ablation of brain tissue, infections, and 
metabolic problems) affecting all modal-
ities of language (speaking, listening, 
reading, and writing); it is not the result 
of an intellectual, sensory, motor, or psy-
chiatric problem.
Aphasia Couples Therapy (ACT).  A specific 
treatment approach for couples, includ-
ing education to facilitate understanding 
about aphasia, training and practice in 
supported communication, and mutual 
sharing of evaluations of quality of com-
munication and strategy implementation.
Aphasia mentoring program.  A program in 
which people with aphasia serve as men-
tors to students in clinical education pro-
grams in the health sciences.
Aphasiologist.  Literally, a person who stud-
ies aphasia; an aphasia expert; in a nonlit-
eral sense, commonly used to refer to an 
expert in aphasia and other acquired neu-
rogenic cognitive-linguistic disorders.
Aphasiology.  Literally, the study of apha-
sia; often used to refer to the study of 
acquired neurogenic cognitive-linguistic 
disorders in general.
Apraxia of speech (AoS).  An impairment in 
motor programming and sequencing of 
movements of the articulators for inten-
tional or volitional speech.
Argument structure.  The association of a 
verb with its context within a sentence.
Arousal.  Psychophysiological state of reac-
tivity to sensory stimuli.
Arteriography.  See cerebral angiography.
Arteriovenous malformation (AVM).  An 
atypically developed artery or vein (most 
commonly arising during embryonic 
or fetal development); typically less 
adaptable to changes in blood pressure 
than normal formations, increasing the 
chance of rupture.
Arteriosclerosis.  See atherosclerosis.
Associative agnosia.  A failure to associate 
meaning to what is seen (e.g., an object’s 
relevance and function).
Astrocytoma.  A common form of glial 
tumor that is benign and slow growing.
Ataxia.  A problem of muscle coordination 
that may affect speaking and voluntary 
movements of the eyes and limbs, often 
associated with cerebellar lesions.

Glossary   573
Atherosclerosis.  A buildup of lipids (fatty 
acids and cholesterol) and cellular debris 
within the arteries; the primary cause of 
stroke.
Athetosis.  A type of dyskinesia involving 
involuntary slow writhing movements.
Attention Process Training (APT).  A treat-
ment program for TBI survivors designed 
to enhance focused, sustained, selective, 
alternating, and divided attention.
Attention switching.  Shifting of cognitive  
focus from one task or stimulus to another 
(also called alternating attention; also see 
divided attention).
Auditory agnosia.  Impairment in recogni-
tion or interpretation of auditory input 
(includes auditory sound agnosia and 
auditory verbal agnosia).
Auditory sound agnosia.  Impairment in 
recognition or interpretation of nonver-
bal sounds.
Auditory verbal agnosia.   Impairment in 
recognition or interpretation of spoken 
words; in the absence of auditory sound 
agnosia, also called pure word deafness.
Autobiographical memory.  Memory about 
important aspects of one’s past.
Autopagnosia.  A type of visual agnosia in- 
volving a deficit in recognizing body parts.
Back to the Drawing Board.  A treatment 
program that focuses on the use of draw-
ing as a means of compensatory com-
munication for individuals with severe 
aphasia.
Bacterial infection.   Infection by single-
celled microscopic organisms that may 
cause inflammation.
Ballismus.  A type of dyskinesia involving 
involuntary jerking, flinging movements, 
especially of the arms and legs.
Basal rule.  See floor rule.
Beneficence.  A moral principle of acting for 
others’ good.
Bilateral quadrantopsia.  A visual field 
deficit affecting the same quadrant of the 
visual field in each eye, resulting from a 
lesion of the optic tract fibers projecting 
to the visual cortex above (resulting in 
lower quadrantopsia) or below (resulting 
in upper quadrantopsia) the calcarine fis-
sure on the one side of the brain.
Binocular visual field.  The field of view 
that is seen with both eyes jointly.
Biological age.  An index of the functioning 
of one’s bodily organs over time.
Biopsy.  Clinical examination of tissue 
removed from the body.
Biopsychosocial framework.  A means of 
conceptualizing health-related condi-
tions and well-being that highlights the 
complex interaction of multiple factors 
that constitute disabilities and disease.
Biopsychosocial models of aging.  Models 
that emphasize the complex interactions 
among biological, psychological, and 
sociological factors that influence how 
people age.
Bitemporal (heteronymous) hemianopsia. ​
A visual field deficit affecting the tem-
poral halves of both visual fields (right 
side of one visual field and left side of 
the other), resulting from a lesion of the 
decussating fibers in the optic chiasm 
(sparing the ipsilateral fibers).
Blast injury.  A type of traumatic brain in- 
jury resulting from rapid phases of over- 
and underpressurization of air compared 
to normal atmospheric pressure; most 
frequently associated with exposure to 
war-related explosives.
Blood oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) effect. ​
An fMRI method used to index the rela-
tive flow of oxygenated blood to a brain 
region, interpreted as activation of that 
region at a given point in time.
Body functions.  The physiological and 
psychological aspects of the body, in the 
context of the WHO ICF (WHO, 2001) 
domain of functioning and disability.
Body structures.  Anatomical parts, in the 
context of the WHO ICF (WHO, 2001) 
domain of functioning and disability.
Bradykinesia.  A condition of excess muscle 
tone that results in slowed movements 
with reduced range of motion; it may 
lead to problems manipulating and con-
trolling objects and writing; it may cause 
reduced facial expression.

574   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Brain attack.  Stroke (a term used in public 
education campaigns to draw parallels 
between lifestyle risks associated with 
stroke and heart attack).
The Breakfast Club.  A social approach 
used in a long-term care context in which 
social participation of people with de- 
mentia is encouraged during a multi-
sensory activity; includes adaptations to 
individual preferences, needs, strengths, 
and challenges.
Broca’s aphasia.  A classic aphasia type 
associated with a lesion in the inferior, 
posterior portion of the frontal lobe (cor-
responding to Brodmann’s areas 44, 45).
Calcarine fissure.  A prominent sulcus on 
the medial surface of each hemisphere 
of the brain; demarcates the upper and 
lower quadrants of visual fields repre-
sented in the primary visual cortex.
Canonical sentences.  Sentences that have 
a standard word order in any given lan-
guage; in English, active sentence struc-
tures with a subject-verb-object word 
order are considered canonical.
Capacity.  Within a legal framework, what 
a person can do when appropriate sup-
ports are in place in his or her environ-
ment; typically referred to in the context 
of decision making.
Capitation.  A funding scheme in which 
there is a fixed sum based on the num-
ber of people enrolled in a contracted 
health care plan, regardless of how many 
of those people actually receive services 
and regardless of which services are 
provided.
Case rate.  An insurance funding scheme in 
which the provider receives a set amount 
for treating a patient based on his or her 
diagnosis, regardless of which specific 
services he or she is provided.
Cataracts.  The accumulation of fibrous 
proteins on the lens of the eye, resulting 
in degradation of image quality.
Catastrophic reaction.  Extreme frustration 
that may be experienced when struggling 
to communicate.
Causal conjunctives.  Words specifying a 
cause, reason, or result (e.g., otherwise, 
because).
Ceiling rule.  The designation in a stan-
dardized assessment of how many times 
a person may get consecutive items or a 
number of items within a subtest wrong 
before the test administrator stops or 
moves on to the next section or subtest.
Cerebral angiography.  A neuroimaging tech-
nique that involves injecting a contrast 
medium into the bloodstream and taking 
X-rays to show the contrast as it courses 
through arteries, capillaries, and veins; 
helps determine the extent of vascular 
problems within cerebral blood vessels; 
allows visualization of the arterial blood 
supply to the cortex and the degree of col-
lateral circulation in cases of occlusion.
Cerebrovascular accident (CVA).  Synony-
mous with stroke; the term CVA has fallen 
out of favor, largely because the word 
accident suggests that strokes are caused 
by happenstance rather than being asso-
ciated with known risk factors.
Chorea.  A type of dyskinesia involving invol-
untary rapid, repetitive, jerky movements.
Chronological age.  An index of how long a 
person has lived since birth.
Circle of Willis.  An anastomosis at the base 
of the brain; the major arterial network 
supplying blood to the brain.
Circumlocution.  Word or words other than 
the intended word; used to express the 
meaning of an intended word.
Closed-class words.  Function words belong-
ing to a relatively small part of the lexicon 
in a given language compared to open-
class words; new words in this category 
are rarely added to a language.
Closed head injury (CHI).   A traumatic 
brain injury in which the skull is not  
fractured.
Cloze sentence or phrase.  A portion of spo-
ken discourse or written text in which 
certain words are removed; typically 
used in tasks that require a respondent to 
fill in the missing word or words.

Glossary   575
Cochrane Collaboration.  An international 
network of scholars, professionals, and 
consumers established to help consider 
the evidence base that supports any area 
of health-related intervention.
Codeswitching.  The act of taking into ac- 
count the individual or individuals with 
whom one is speaking; the adaptation of 
what is being expressed, how it is being 
expressed, and in what dialect or lan-
guage it is expressed, based on the imme-
diate social context.
Cognitive age.  An index of how one’s intel-
ligence, memory, and learning abilities 
change over time.
Cognitive effort.  The intensity of informa-
tion processing allocated to a given men-
tal task (also called mental effort).
Cognitive-linguistic disorders associated 
with traumatic brain injury.  Any of a 
constellation of communication problems 
resulting from TBI.
Cognitive neuropsychological frameworks. ​
Frameworks for conceptualizing apha-
sia that are based on models of mental 
representation and types and stages of 
information processing; in these models, 
aphasia may be seen as a disruption in 
the processing required for any given lin-
guistic task or set of tasks.
Cognitive resources hypothesis.  A theory 
that the communication deficits of people 
with RHS are highly dependent on the 
degree of attention and working memory 
demands of a given communicative task; 
may applied to other types of syndromes 
as well.
Collateral sprouting.  A type of neuronal 
regeneration; an increase in axonal recep-
tivity per neuron to other neurons through 
the growth of new axonal branches.
Communication Partner Scheme.  A pro-
gram involving trained volunteers engag-
ing with people with aphasia in meaning-
ful home-based interactions.
Communicative Drawing Program (CDP). ​
A treatment for people with severe apha-
sia who are limited in oral and written 
language expression that focuses on the 
use of drawing as a compensatory means 
of communication.
Community-based rehabilitation (CBR). ​
Means of enhancing quality of life for people 
with disabilities and those who care about 
them, focusing on meeting basic needs 
and ensuring inclusion and participa-
tion; implemented through the combined  
efforts of people with disabilities, families,  
community members, and government 
and nongovernment health, education, 
vocational, social, and other services.
Complexity account of treatment efficacy 
(CATE).  The theory that treatment gains 
made when using more complex (as 
opposed to simpler) stimuli and tasks 
enhance generalization to less complex 
stimuli and tasks; associated with greater 
recruitment of intact neural networks 
and enhanced neural interconnections 
during complex tasks and when process-
ing complex stimuli.
Computerized axial tomography (CAT or 
CT).  A neuroimaging technique entail-
ing measurement of energy transmission 
through tissue, allowing for visualiza-
tion of gross brain structures; also called 
X-ray computed tomography.
Concrete-abstract framework.  A historic 
framework for conceptualizing apha-
sia, suggesting that aphasia reflects a 
loss of “abstract attitude,” or the ability 
to express and comprehend thoughts 
that cannot be captured through sen-
sory experience with objects and actions 
that are physically present (Goldstein & 
Scheerer, 1941).
Concurrent validity.  A type of criterion 
validity that is measured by calculat-
ing the correlation between scores from 
one test with scores on another that is 
intended to assess a similar construct.
Concussion.  Mild traumatic brain injury of 
which the survivor may or may not be 
aware; may or may not result in loss of 
consciousness; may have short-term or 
lasting effects.

576   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Conduction aphasia.  A classic aphasia type 
associated with a lesion in the arcuate  
fasciculus within the supramarginal gyrus  
(corresponding to Brodmann’s area 40).
Conduit d’approche.  Language output char-
acterized by repeated attempts to articu-
late a verbal stimulus.
Cone.  A type of photoreceptor, located in 
the retina, that is functional in bright light 
and responsible for central discrimina-
tive vision and color detection.
Confabulation.  Unintentional misrepresen-
tation of the truth.
Confounding factor.  Any characteristic of 
a person’s abilities or any aspect of an 
assessment tool, procedure, or situation 
that could lead to invalid assessment 
results.
Connectionist models.  Conceptual schemes 
that associate neuroanatomical structures 
and functions with various aspects of 
information processing.
Conservatorship.  In a legal framework, 
oversight of the things a person owns, 
in full or in part; may be temporary or 
permanent.
Constraint-induced aphasia therapy (CIAT) 
or constraint-induced language therapy 
(CILT).  A treatment approach restricting 
the use of compensatory communication 
modalities and encouraging the use of 
communication modalities that are the 
most impaired.
Construct validity.  The degree to which a 
means of assessment captures what it is 
intended to assess.
Constructional apraxia.  A term sometimes 
used to refer to a visuo­constructive dis-
ability, although it is less accurate in a 
literal sense.
Content validity.  A type of validity refer-
ring to the degree to which the items on 
a test or scale tap into the construct to be 
assessed.
Content words.  Nouns, verbs, adjectives, 
and adverbs.
Contextual factors.  A domain of health 
conditions in the WHO ICF (WHO, 2001), 
including personal and environmen-
tal factors that should be analyzed and 
addressed regarding each individual’s 
health conditions.
Continuing care retirement communities 
(CCRCs).  Facilities that offer several lev-
els of health care in one location.
Contrecoup injury.  Injury to the brain lo- 
cated opposite the site of impact between 
the head and an object.
Convergent validity.  A type of construct 
validity; the degree to which one means 
of assessment yields results similar to that 
of another means of assessment that is 
intended to measure the same construct.
Conversational coaching.  A means of edu-
cating people with aphasia and conver-
sational partners to use strategies that 
improve their communicative interactions.
Copay.  A portion of health care costs indi-
viduals pay out of pocket for various ser-
vices, prescription medications, medical 
equipment, etc.
Copy and Recall Treatment (CART).  An 
impairment-focused stimulation method 
that entails repeated writing practice 
through a progression of single-word 
writing tasks.
Correct information unit (CIU).  A stan-
dardized, rule-based scoring system for 
indexing informativeness in discourse 
analysis.
Cortical reorganization.  Modification of 
brain-behavior relationships following 
brain injury; the phenomenon of areas 
of brain tissue that were not centrally 
involved in certain functions prior to 
injury taking over those functions.
Cortical stimulation brain mapping.   See 
electrocorticography.
Counseling.   A professional, goal-based, 
interpersonal process for fostering men-
tal health and wellness by encourag-
ing changes in thinking, feeling, and 
behaving.
Coup injury.  Injury to the brain located at 
the site of impact between the head and 
an object.

Glossary   577
Creutzfelt-Jacob disease.   A rare, rapidly 
progressive, degenerative viral disease, 
entailing a common bodily protein (prion), 
that forms into misshapen configurations 
that destroy brain cells; may be heredi-
tary or infectious.
Criterion-referenced measures.  Indices used 
to gauge a person’s own ability without 
direct comparison to others; also called 
domain-referenced measures.
Criterion validity.  The degree to which 
an individual’s performance on a cer-
tain measure is predictive of a certain 
outcome.
Crossed aphasia.  Rare occurrence of apha-
sia (of any type) due to damage to the 
right instead of the left hemisphere in a 
person who is right-handed.
Cueing hierarchy approaches to anomia. ​
A treatment approach that formalized 
principles of cueing to aid in naming in 
anomia; cues are provided in a hierarchy 
based on their ability to elicit correct pro-
duction of a target word.
Declarative memory.  Long-term factual or  
semantic knowledge that can be con-
sciously recalled or recognized.
Decubitus ulcer.  Breakdown of skin integ-
rity resulting from pressure (usually from 
lying down or sitting for long periods of 
time); also called bed sore.
Deep dyslexia.  An impairment in higher-
level interpretation and understanding 
of written words.
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).  The 
third most common form of demen-
tia, characterized by abnormal protein 
(alpha-synuclein) deposits that are also 
commonly found in people with AD and 
in people with dementia associated with 
Parkinson’s disease.
Dendritic branching.  A type of neuronal 
regeneration in which dendritic connec-
tions increase, thus expanding the number 
of synapses that can be made per neuron.
Derivational linguistic theory.  A linguistic 
theory based on the notion that linguis-
tic structures are generated through a 
series of operations on base structures 
(e.g., a surface structure based on a cor-
responding deep structure or a com- 
plex word based on its simpler compo-
nents); developed by Chomsky (1986)  
as part of his theory of transforma- 
tional grammar.
Diabetes mellitus (DM).  A chronic disor-
der of carbohydrate metabolism caused 
by abnormal insulin function or insulin 
deficiency, typically resulting in elevat- 
ed or poorly controlled blood glucose 
levels.
Diabetic encephalopathy.  Any type of brain 
disorder caused by diabetes.
Diaschisis.  A phenomenon in which func-
tions associated with brain structures that 
are remote from the injured area become 
impaired due to disruptions in neuronal 
pathways.
Differential diagnosis.  Process of discern-
ing which disorder, disease, or disability 
labels apply or do not apply to an indi-
vidual according to an evaluation of his 
or her body structure and function.
Diffuse.   In the context of brain injury, 
involving multiple areas of the brain at 
once.
Diffusion MRI.  A neuroimaging technique 
involving the detection and mapping of 
the diffusion of water molecules within 
myelinated fiber tracks, allowing for 
visualization of connections among var-
ied brain regions, and pathologies in 
association fibers in the brain; also called 
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).  See diffu-
sion MRI.
Direct injury.  See translational injury.
Disability.  A level of the International Clas-
sification of Impairment, Disabilities and 
Handicaps (ICIDH; WHO, 1980), defined 
as “consequences of impairment in terms 
of functional performance and activity by 
the individual” (p. 14); a domain of health 
conditions in the WHO ICF (WHO, 2001), 
consisting of impairment, activity limita-
tions, and participation restrictions.

578   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Discourse.  The use of spoken or written 
language in interaction with others.
Discourse coherence.  The tying together 
of semantic content in a logical way to 
express ideas effectively and efficiently.
Discourse cohesion.  The tying together of 
lexical and grammatical relationships 
within and across phrases and sentences 
in discourse.
Discovery phase.  Phase I of Robey and 
Schultz (1998) five-phase outcome re- 
search model, in which investigators 
develop hypotheses about treatment, 
estimate the optimal treatment intensity, 
and specify the population to benefit 
from treatment.
Discriminant validity.  A type of construct 
validity, quantified by measuring a test’s 
lack of relationship with measures of con-
structs that differ from the construct to be 
measured.
Disfluent.  Characteristic of spoken lan-
guage with fewer units of verbal pro-
duction (e.g., phonemes, words, content 
information units) conveyed per unit of 
time compared to a standard of “normal” 
fluent speech.
Dissociation syndrome.  A symptom con-
stellation in which some abilities remain 
relatively intact while others are rela-
tively impaired.
Divided attention.  Attention to multiple 
tasks at the same time; considered by many  
to be more aptly called attention switching.
Domain-referenced measures.  See criterion-
referenced measures.
Durable power of attorney for health care. ​
An advanced directive; a document used 
to appoint a trusted person to make 
health care decisions if a person becomes 
incapacitated.
Dynamic assessment.  Evaluation that al- 
lows tailoring of assessment materials to 
the interests, ability level, and cultural 
and linguistic background of the person 
being assessed.
Dysarthria.  An impairment of neuromus-
cular innervation of the muscles involved 
in speech, resulting in slow, weak, and 
poorly coordinated speech production.
Dysgraphia.  A writing disorder.
Dyslexia.  A reading disorder.
Dysnomia.  A problem with word finding; 
often used interchangeably with anomia, 
although the prefix dys- suggests a milder 
form.
Dysphasia.  Sometimes used instead of the 
term aphasia (the dys- prefix indicates a 
degree of impaired language rather than 
the complete loss of language).
Dysprosodia.  See dysprosody.
Dysprosody.  Deficit in the intonation, 
stress, or rhythm of speech.
Dysthymic disorder.   A chronic state of 
depression for most of the time over 
a period of at least 2 years; included in 
the category of persistent depressive 
disorder.
Ecological validity.  The degree to which 
a test, or any specific stimulus or set of  
stimuli within a test, represents actual  
real-word types of stimuli that would  
be encountered in the everyday life of  
the person being tested.
Edema.  Swelling caused by excess fluid.
Effect size.  A statistical measure of the 
degree of likelihood that a treatment will 
be beneficial or harmful.
Effectiveness.  The likelihood of benefit of 
treatment for an individual under aver-
age conditions (based on studies of effica-
cious treatment).
Effectiveness and efficiency test phase. ​
Phase V of Robey and Schultz (1998) five-
phase outcome research model, in which 
time allocation and cost are studied 
along with satisfaction and quality-of-life 
indices in large samples of individuals 
treated as well as significant others and 
caregivers.
Effectiveness test phase.  Phase IV of Robey 
and Schultz (1998) five-phase outcome 
research model, in which the effects of 
a treatment already studied in Phase 
III are studied under average clinical 
conditions.

Glossary   579
Efficacy.  The likelihood of benefit from a 
given treatment for a defined population 
under ideal conditions (applicable to a 
population, not to an individual).
Efficacy test phase.  Phase III of Robey 
and Schultz (1998) five-phase outcome 
research model, which involves testing of 
a treatment method developed through 
Phases I and II with large samples of peo-
ple who represent the target population 
in a randomized control trial.
Efficiency.  An index of productivity, mea-
sured by how much can be gained  
with a minimum of expense, time, and 
effort.
Egocentric neglect.  A form of inattention in 
which the neglected area corresponds to 
the individual’s bodily midline.
Elderspeak.  The demeaning adaptation of 
language to a person because of his or 
her age.
Electrocorticography.  A neurodiagnostic 
method involving the intracranial use 
of EEG; also called cortical stimulation 
brain mapping.
Electroencephalography (EEG).  A neu­ro-
diagnostic method that involves studying 
brain waves reflecting electrical potential 
differences between two or more points 
on the scalp.
Ellipsis.  A grammatical cohesive device in 
which information previously stated in 
discourse is left out because it is assumed 
the listener knows it.
Embolic stroke.  A type of occlusive stroke 
in which a blockage (typically a blood clot 
or a piece of atherosclerotic plaque) trav-
els from elsewhere in the bloodstream to 
the point where it blocks an artery.
Embolism.  Arterial blockage in an embolic 
stroke.
Emotional lability.  The tendency to cry, 
swear, and otherwise openly emote, in a 
way that is uncharacteristic of how a per-
son typically responded prior to a stroke 
or brain injury.
Encephalopathies.  Infections that affect the 
cortex.
Endarterectomy.  The removal of athero-
sclerotic plaque from arterial walls, most 
often the carotid artery.
Environmental factors.  Factors outside of 
an individual person that affect his or her 
health; include physical surroundings, 
services, social context, and the affect and 
attitudes of relevant people.
Environmental systems approaches.  ​Treat-
ment approaches whose proponents  
recognize the dynamic aspects of indi-
viduals relative to their communication 
needs and their sociocultural systems in 
everyday activities; includes attention 
to family, work environment, and social 
circles.
Episodic memory.  Declarative recollection 
of personal experiences.
Errorless learning method.  Treatment meth-
ods in which individuals are encouraged 
and praised for successes and not cor-
rected or given negative feedback when 
they do not perform a task correctly.
Equal participation.  In the PACE treatment 
method, the principle that the client and 
the clinician take equal turns sending and 
receiving messages.
Equal protection of the laws.  The principle 
that people with disabilities have the 
same opportunities as everyone to par-
ticipate in society.
Event-related potentials (ERPs).  A neuro-
diagnostic method involving the use of 
EEG during specific cognitive, linguistic, 
or behavioral tasks, and during any type 
of somatosensory, olfactory, visual, or 
auditory stimulation; also called evoked 
potentials.
Evoked potentials.  See event-related po- 
tentials.
Executive function deficits.  Challenges with 
self-regulation, reasoning, making judg-
ments and decisions, goal setting, plan-
ning, strategizing, being aware of strengths 
and weaknesses, organizing, sequencing, 
allocating attention, and inhibiting in 
appropriate behaviors.
Explicit memory.  See declarative memory.

580   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Expressive aphasia.  A type of aphasia in 
which people have greater difficulty pro-
ducing than understanding language; 
often used interchangeably with the term 
nonfluent aphasia.
External locus of control.  A category of 
locus of control; includes a sense that 
other forces, such as God, luck, fate, and 
other people (family, friends, profession-
als, etc.) determine what happens.
Face validity.  The degree to which a test or 
measure is judged by others to be valid.
Fee-for-service.  A health insurance funding 
scheme in which there is a rate paid for 
a specific diagnostic or intervention ser-
vice, which may be based on units of time 
or numbers of visits/sessions regardless 
of duration.
Fiber tracking.  See tractography.
Figurative language.  Expressions that require 
abstraction to infer meaning that cannot be 
gained through literal interpretation.
First-in/last-out model of cognitive loss. ​
The theory that the functional abilities 
learned earliest in life are those most likely  
to be preserved in people with dementia.
Floor rule.  A rule in a standardized assess-
ment that indicates when certain items or 
groups of items may be skipped because 
the test taker gets so many correct that 
those items are apparently too easy; also 
called basal rule.
Fluent aphasia.  Any type of aphasia in 
which spoken language production in 
terms of morphemes or words per unit 
of time (regardless of meaningful content 
expressed) is normal or excessive; often 
used interchangeably with the term recep-
tive aphasia.
Focal.  In the context of brain injury, con-
fined to one or more specific areas of the 
brain.
FOCUSED.  A set of strategies for enhanc-
ing communication with people who 
have dementia.
Focused attention.  Dedicated concentration 
on a specific aspect of a task or stimulus; 
also called selective attention.
Forward-chaining.  A language inter­vention 
method in which the clinician models 
and reinforces longer utterances based 
on utterances initiated by the client.
Free choice of modalities.  In the PACE treat-
ment method, the principle that, when in 
the role of sender, the client and clinician 
each determine the communication mode 
used to convey a message.
Frontal lobe syndrome (FLS).  A constella-
tion of symptoms associated with left and 
right orbital frontal lobe injury, includ-
ing executive function and pragmatic 
deficits.
Frontotemporal dementia.  A type of de- 
mentia caused by atrophy of the anterior 
frontal and temporal lobes; also called 
Pick’s disease.
Function words.  Prepositions, pronouns, 
determiners, conjunctions, and auxiliary 
verbs.
Functional Communication Measures (FCMs). ​
A 7-point scoring system that SLPs may 
use similarly to the way Functional Inde-
pendence Measures are used in medical 
and rehabilitation contexts, with greater 
relevance to language, cognition, and 
swallowing.
Functional Independence Measures (FIMs). ​
A 7-point scoring system to track and 
report treatment outcomes for services 
to be reimbursed by the U.S. government 
in a uniform data set format; addresses 
18 abilities representing six domains 
(self-care, sphincter control, mobility, 
locomotion, communication, and social 
cognition).
Functional MRI (fMRI).  A neuroimag-
ing technique involving the indexing of 
dynamic changes in blood flow as indi-
cated by varying levels of oxygen in the 
brain; allows for the quantification of 
hemodynamic changes associated with 
active metabolism during ongoing neu-
ronal activity.
Functioning.  A domain of health in the WHO 
ICF (WHO, 2001), consisting of body 
functions, activities, and participation.

Glossary   581
General slowing hypothesis.  The notion 
that cognitive processing at all levels 
slows as we age.
Glioblastoma multiforme.  A fast-growing 
and malignant form of glial tumor.
Glioma.  A tumor caused by uncontrolled 
growth of glial cells; the most common 
form of brain tumor.
Global aphasia.  A classic aphasia type 
associated with multiple areas of brain 
damage, typically in the frontal, parietal, 
and temporal areas of the brain.
Global paraphasia.  See semantic paraphasia.
Grammaticality judgment.  A task in which 
individuals are asked to make decisions 
about whether sentence constructions are 
correct or incorrect.
Graphomotor ability.  The physical ability 
to write.
Guardianship.  Full or limited, temporary 
or permanent oversight of an individual.
Handicap.  A level of the International Clas-
sification of Impairment, Disabilities and 
Handicaps (ICIDH; WHO, 1980), defined 
as “disadvantages experienced by the 
individual as a result of impairments and 
disabilities” (p. 14).
Health insurance plans.  Contracted arrange-
ments that enable individuals to receive 
health care at a set or reduced rate.
Health maintenance organizations (HMOs). ​
Agencies that provide health care ser-
vices through contracts with clinical pro-
fessionals rather than having patients see 
separate, independent providers.
Hematoma.  The accumulation of blood 
outside of a blood vessel, caused by 
hemorrhage.
Hemianopia.  Synonymous with hemianopsia.
Hemianopsia.  Loss of one half of a visual 
field.
Hemispheric Asymmetry Reduction in Older 
Adults (HAROLD).  A phenomenon in 
which some older individuals demon-
strate greater activation of bilateral brain 
regions while completing complex cogni-
tive tasks that tend to involve primarily 
one hemisphere in younger people.
Hemispheric specialization.  The notion 
that each side of the brain houses specific 
abilities.
Hemorrhagic stroke.  A type of stroke that 
occurs when a blood vessel ruptures.
Holistic health.  A focus on the inte­gration 
of body and mind, which are seen as 
intertwined, inseparable entities.
Homonymous hemianopsia.  A visual field 
deficit affecting the same visual field  
in each eye (i.e., the temporal half of  
one field and the nasal half of the  
other), resulting from a lesion of the  
optic tract (after the fibers have passed 
through the optic chiasm) on one side of 
the brain.
Human immunodeficiency virus/acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/AIDS). ​
A virus (HIV) targeting the human im- 
mune system causing AIDS by substan-
tially invading immune cells.
Huntington’s disease.  A hereditary condition 
characterized by chorea and psychiatric 
and cognitive-linguistic problems.
Hyperaffectivity.  A heightened affective 
response; may be evidenced as exuber-
ance and excessive talking.
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBO).  A treat-
ment method that involves immersing an 
individual in a sealed tank while oxygen 
is forced into his or her bodily tissues.
Hypermetropia.  Reduced near-visual acu-
ity, associated with a change in the shape 
of the lens.
Hypoaffectivity.  A restricted affective 
response; may be demonstrated as flat 
expression of emotion conveyed by 
reduced prosody and a lack of conversa-
tional or social initiative.
Hypoperfusion.  Decreased blood flow 
within an organ (e.g., a part of the brain).
Ideational apraxia.  A problem generating 
a motor plan to carry out a purposeful 
movement.
Ideograms.  Graphemes that represent con-
cepts or ideas.
Ideographic scripts.  Written languages, 
such as Chinese, Korean, and Japanese, 

582   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
in which meaning is conveyed through 
ideograms (symbolic representations) 
rather than through letters that corre-
spond to speech sounds.
Ideomotor apraxia.  A problem executing 
a motor plan to carry out purposeful 
movement.
Imageable.  Easy to picture mentally.
Impairment.  A level of the International 
Classification of Impairment, Disabilities 
and Handicaps (ICIDH; WHO, 1980), 
“concerned with abnormalities of body 
structure and appearance and with organ 
or system function, resulting from any 
cause” (p. 14).
Implicit memory.  Long-term recollection 
that does not require conscious recall to 
be activated (e.g., how to steer a car or 
walk).
Infarct or infarction.  An area of dead tissue.
Inferencing.  In the context of communica-
tion, the act of making a logical conclu-
sion about intended meaning based on 
what has been communicated.
Information exchange.  Indices used during 
discourse analysis that pertain to dyads 
or groups during interaction, not just to 
the individual with a communication dis-
order (e.g., use of eye contact, turn-taking 
behaviors).
Inhibition theories.  Theories based on the 
rationale that people have greater chal-
lenges inhibiting irrelevant information 
and focusing attention to a particular task 
in the face of multiple competing stimuli 
or task requirements (often applied in 
studies of aging, TBI, RBI, and executive 
function deficits).
Inhibitory deficit theories.  Theories of aging 
based on the rationale that older people 
have greater challenges than younger 
people with inhibiting irrelevant infor-
mation and focusing attention on a par-
ticular task in the face of multiple com-
peting stimuli or task requirements.
Insurance intermediary.  A professional in- 
surance company that ensures that Medi-
care and Medicaid policies are obeyed 
and that funds are distributed as govern-
ment regulations dictate.
Interdisciplinary team.  A team in which 
there is synergy across team members 
and a high degree of collaborative deci-
sion making and consultation in clinical 
practice.
Inter-examiner reliability.  A type of reli-
ability referring to the consistency of 
assessment results obtained by two dif-
ferent assessors.
Internal consistency.  See internal reliability.
Internal locus of control.  The sense of hav-
ing the power and the ability to do some-
thing about one’s own situation.
Internal reliability.  A type of reliability 
referring to the consistency with which 
assessment results are obtained across 
items or components of items within a 
test; also called internal consistency.
International Classification of Diseases–
Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM).  
​A system of classification and coding for 
diseases, conditions, and symptoms.
International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability, and Health (ICF).  A system 
for classifying disabilities that takes into 
consideration not just medical or organic 
aspects of health-related challenges, but 
also the complex consequences of having 
those challenges.
Interstimulus intervals (ISIs).  The amount of  
time between presentations of cognitive-
linguistic stimuli.
Intoning.  In Melodic Intonation Therapy, sing-
ing words in a melodious pattern that exag-
gerates the natural pitches corresponding 
to how target words, phrases, or sentences 
might be said in natural conversation.
Intracerebral hemorrhage.  Leakage of blood 
that occurs within brain tissue.
Intraexaminer reliability.  The degree of 
consistency of results obtained by the 
same assessor.
Intrahemispheric specialization. The notion  
that specific structures within each hemi-
sphere are associated with specific abilities.
Ischemic.  Characteristic of restricted blood 
supply.
Ischemic penumbra.  An area of reduced 
blood flow in neural tissue surrounding 
an infarct.

Glossary   583
Ishihara plates.  A common tool for color 
vision screening, consisting of images 
or shapes comprised of small dots in 
primary colors superimposed on a back-
ground of dots in a secondary color.
Jargon aphasia.  A type of aphasia charac-
terized by the tendency to produce non-
words; sometimes used to describe Wer-
nicke’s aphasia.
Justice.  A moral principle; making deci-
sions and sharing resources fairly.
Korsakoff’s syndrome.  A condition of grad-
ual cognitive decline due to cortical atro-
phy caused by chronic alcohol abuse.
Language of confusion.  Conversational con-
tent associated with transient confusional 
states.
Language of generalized intellectual impair-
ment.  Language problems resulting from 
cognitive impairment, typically applied 
in the context of language disorders 
associated with neurodegenerative con-
ditions such as dementia.
Lateral geniculate body of the thalamus.  
A relay center for the visual pathway in 
the thalamus.
Legibility.  The ease or difficulty of identify-
ing individual printed letters, numbers, 
or characters.
Lexical decision task.  An experimental con-
dition in which a person is asked to make 
a judgment about words (e.g., word ver-
sus nonword discrimination or whether a 
word has been shown before).
Lexical perseveration.  A type of recurrent 
perseveration involving persistence in 
using the same word used in a previous 
response instead of an appropriate word.
Life coaching (or wellness coaching).  A 
professional means of empowering 
people to develop a clear vision of what 
is most important to them, strive for 
wellness, and maximize their personal 
potential.
Life Participation Approach to Aphasia 
(LPAA).  ​A social treatment approach 
that puts the holistic life concerns of 
people with aphasia and those who are 
important to them at the center of deci-
sion making and intervention.
Life-Span Model of Postformal Cognitive 
Development.  A model of aging entail-
ing seven stages, in which only the first 
occurs before adulthood.
Limb apraxia.  A deficit in motor program-
ming of the arm, elbow, wrist, hand, or 
fingers for volitional movement.
Line bisection task.  A screening task for 
visual neglect; entails asking a person to 
mark the midpoint of a straight line.
Line cancellation task.  A screening task for 
visual neglect; entails presenting a series 
of lines in varied orientations on a page 
and asking the individual to mark each 
line to create a cross or plus sign; also 
called the Albert test (Albert, 1973).
Literal paraphasia.  See phonemic paraphasia
Living will.  An advanced directive detail-
ing people’s wishes in case they have a 
terminal condition, are near death, and 
cannot make their own decisions about 
potential life-prolonging treatments.
Living with Aphasia. Framework for Out-
come Measurement (A-FROM).  A means 
of conceptualizing the outcomes of inter-
vention for people with aphasia based 
largely on the ICF.
Locked-in syndrome.  A condition caused by 
a brainstem-level stroke or injury, result-
ing in complete paralysis of the body’s 
voluntary muscles (with the exception of 
certain types of eye movement).
Locus of control.  A person’s own view of  
what and/or who has shaped the events 
in his or her life and of what and/or 
who has the power to shape his or her 
circumstances.
Logorrhea.  Spoken language that is overly 
abundant in light of a given communica-
tive context; also called press of speech.
Long-term memory.  System of information 
storage that typically may be maintained 
over time whether or not it is actively 
processed.
Long-term potentiation (LTP).  A mech­anism 
of brain change following brain injury in 
which the efficiency of transmission at the 
synaptic level is increased in surviving 
neurons, thus compensating for reduced 
transmission from damaged neurons.

584   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Loose training program.  A training pro-
gram in which the clinician exerts mini-
mal control over stimuli, responses, and 
feedback during treatment.
Knowledge of performance.  A person’s per-
ception of how accurately he or she has 
accomplished a task.
Knowledge of response.  A person’s percep-
tion of what he or she did correctly or 
incorrectly during a given task.
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA). ​
A neuroimaging technique involving the 
use of MRI methods to image vascular 
functions in the arterial system.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).  A neu-
roimaging technique that makes use of an 
applied magnetic field around the head 
and brief and repeated bursts of radio-
frequency (RF) wave exposure, allowing 
visualization of brain structures.
Magnetoencephalography (MEG).  A neu-
rodiagnostic method involving record-
ing of ERPs in the brain in response to 
specific tasks, then mapping those ERPs 
onto magnetic resonance images to reflect 
cortical mapping of task-induced brain 
functioning.
Main event index.  A discourse analysis met-
ric indicating a person’s ability to iden-
tify relationships and causal connections 
between ideas in narrative discourse.
Malingering.  Feigning or exaggerating 
medical or psychological symptoms, 
typically for personal gain.
Managed care.  A term used to capture the 
combined goals of controlling health care 
costs, coordinating care, and overseeing 
access to care, quality of services, and 
outcomes assessment.
Mapping Therapy.  A treatment method, 
rooted in linguistic theory, designed to 
treat deficits in thematic role assignment 
in people with agrammatism.
MCI due to Alzheimer’s disease (MCI due 
to AD).  A condition of cognitive decline 
that is not typical of normal aging and 
occurs prior to the onset of Alzheimer’s 
disease.
Medicaid.  The U.S. federal and state health 
insurance program for people with lim-
ited income and financial resources, 
including older people and people with 
disabilities.
Medicare.  The U.S. federal and state health 
insurance program for people who are 
65 years old or older and for people with 
disabilities and end-stage renal disease.
Medicare Part A.  Component of Medicare 
that addresses inpatient care in skilled 
nursing, hospital acute care, rehabilita-
tion hospital, and home health settings.
Medicare Part B.  Portion of Medicare that 
addresses outpatient rehabilitation and 
long-term care.
Medicare Part D.  Portion of Medicare 
that addresses the costs of prescription 
medication.
Melodic Intonation Therapy (MIT).  A treat-
ment method based on facilitating spo-
ken language through the exaggeration 
of three elements of spoken language 
prosody: pitch, tempo/rhythm, and em- 
phatic stress.
Memory books and wallets.  Collections of 
pictures, phrases, and words asso­ciated 
with familiar people, places, and events 
that a person may have difficulty remem-
bering, designed to enhance communica-
tive interaction and social engagement.
Meningioma.  A benign tumor that arises 
from the meninges.
Meningitis.  An inflammation of the menin-
ges surrounding the brain; called menin-
goencephalitis when it is caused by an 
infection.
Mental effort.  See cognitive effort.
Microgenetic framework.  A framework for 
conceptualizing aphasia proposed by 
Brown (1972, 1977; Brown & Raleigh, 
1979), in which impaired language abili-
ties reflect the reverse order of progres-
sion of evolutionary development of the 
brain; the theory that limbic structures, 
phylogenetically older components of the 
brain, mediate basic and early stages of 
language processing while more recently 

Glossary   585
evolved structures mediate higher corti-
cal functions of language and cognition.
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI).  A condi-
tion of cognitive decline that is not typi-
cal of normal aging.
Minimum terminal units, or T-units.  ​Units 
used for discourse analysis, defined as 
“one main clause plus any subordinate 
clauses or nonclausal structures attached 
to or embedded in the main clause” 
(Shadden, 1998, p. 22).
Mixed transcortical aphasia.  An aphasia 
type in which there is no clear agreement 
about a classic associated site of lesion, 
although it may be associated with com-
bined multifocal lesions in the frontal 
and temporal watershed regions; similar 
to global aphasia, with the exception of 
intact repetition ability.
Monocular visual field.  The field of view 
that is seen with one eye independently 
of the other.
Montessori approaches.  Intervention meth-
ods, initially developed for use with 
children in educational environments, 
adapted for use with adults who have 
dementia; goals include enhanced ac-
tivation of intact intellectual and com-
municative activities and improved 
compensatory strategies through various 
activities.
Motivational Theory of Life-Span Develop-
ment.  A model of aging that focuses on 
adults’ highly individualized abilities to 
choose, adapt to, and pursue life changes 
and opportunities.
MRI diffusion weighted imaging (DWI).  ​A 
neuroimaging technique that involves 
indexing the rate of water diffusion 
within voxels (specific units of magnetic 
resonance images), allowing for the visu-
alization of acute infarctions.
Multidimensional frameworks.   Frame-
works for conceptualizing aphasia char-
acterized by the view that there are var-
ied forms, subtypes, or syndromes of 
aphasia, each corresponding to a typical 
site of lesion.
Multidisciplinary team.  A team in which 
each team member represents his or 
her own expertise and also ideally con-
fers with other team members regularly 
about discipline-specific as well as gen-
eral rehabilitation goals.
Multi-infarct dementia.  A case of vascular 
dementia where there is evidence of mul-
tiple focal lesions.
Multiple Oral Rereading (MOR).  A restitu-
tive, stimulation approach designed for 
people with aphasia who have acquired 
reading impairments; involves repeated 
reading aloud of the same text.
Myopia.  Reduced far visual acuity, associ-
ated with a change in the shape of the 
lens.
Nasal.  Medial, toward the nose.
Natural feedback.  In the PACE treatment 
method, the principle that feedback 
about communicative effectiveness con-
sists simply of the clinician’s or client’s 
responses regarding whether a message 
was successfully sent or received.
Necrosis.  Tissue death.
Neglect.  Inattention to or lack of conscious 
awareness of sensory information that is  
not due to a sensory deficit; may be visual,  
tactile, olfactory, auditory, or gustatory.
Neologisms.   Nonwords; literally, “new 
words.”
Neologistic paraphasia.  Substitution of a 
neologism for a real word.
Neoplasm.  Tumors; literally “new growth.”
Neuritic plaque.  Buildup of beta amyloid 
protein in nerve cells.
Neurodegenerative disease.  Any neurogenic 
condition that progressively gets worse 
over time.
Neurofibrillary tangles.  Abnormal fibrous 
structures within neurons, composed of 
twisted tau (a protein).
Neurolinguistic frameworks.  A subset of 
cognitive neuropsychological frame-
works for conceptualizing aphasia that 
incorporate connectionist models.
Neuronal regeneration.  A mechanism of 
brain change following brain injury in 

586   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
which the ability of some components of 
injured neurons is restored; see dendritic 
branching and collateral sprouting.
Neuroplasticity.  The ability of the nervous 
system to change and adapt to internal or 
external influences.
New information.  In the PACE treatment 
method, the principle that the stimulus 
to be described should not be seen in 
advance by the receiver, thus ensuring 
true, not simulated, information exchange.
Noise buildup.  A phenomenon in which an 
individual experiences increased diffi-
culty with cognitive-linguistic tasks over 
time.
Noncanonical sentences.  Sentences that 
have a nonstandard word order in any 
given language; in English, non­canonical 
sentences, such as passives and sentences 
with embedded clauses, entail phrase 
movement.
Nonfluent aphasias.  Types of aphasia in 
which spoken language is restricted, 
characterized by fewer units of verbal 
production (e.g., phonemes, words, con-
tent information units) conveyed per 
unit of time compared to a standard 
of “normal” fluent speech; often used 
interchangeably with the term expressive 
aphasia.
Nonmaleficence.  A moral principle of 
avoiding doing harm to others.
Norm-referenced measures.  Indices in 
which results are compared to a sample 
of a population with similar traits.
Occlusive stroke.  A type of stroke entailing 
blockage of all or a portion of an artery.
Ocular motor deficits.  Problems with the 
neuromuscular system responsible for 
controlling eye movements.
Open-class words.  Category of words that 
continue to be added to languages and 
evolve in terms of the ways they are used 
and combined with other words; content 
words (e.g., nouns and verbs).
Open head injury (OHI).  A type of trau-
matic brain injury involving breakage or 
penetration of the skull.
Opportunistic infections.  Infections in 
which viruses and/or bacteria selectively 
take advantage of compromised immune 
systems after an initial infection; also 
called secondary infections.
Optic aphasia.  An impairment in nam-
ing an object presented visually, despite 
one’s ability to recognize or describe that 
object.
Optic chiasm.  The x-shaped structure hous-
ing the optic nerve fibers at the base of 
the brain, where some of the optic nerves 
from each eye decussate.
Optic nerve.  Cranial nerve II, which trans-
mits visual information to the brain.
Optic radiations.  Optic nerve fibers arising 
from the thalamus and extending to the 
primary visual cortex.
Optic tract.  A continuation of the optic 
nerve fibers that travel through the inter-
nal capsule.
Optimizing phase.  Phase II of Robey 
and Schultz (1998) five-phase outcome 
research model, in which hypotheses 
are refined, a rationale for the treat-
ment method is specified, the selection 
criteria for participants are explicitly 
detailed, and the treatment protocol is 
standardized.
Oral Reading for Language in Aphasia 
(ORLA).  A treatment method for people 
with dyslexia, with the intent to foster 
recovery or relearning of reading com-
prehension through practice using pho-
nological and semantic routes and associ-
ated feedback.
Out of pocket.  Payment provided by an 
individual client.
Outcome.  An index of change that occurs 
as a result of time, intervention, or both; 
encompasses efficacy, effectiveness, and 
efficiency.
Paraphasia.  Substitution of an unintended 
word or nonword for an intended word.
Parkinson’s-associated dementia.  A form 
of dementia that entails Lewy bodies and 
co-occurs with Parkinson’s disease; some 
cases may also involve neuritic plaques 

Glossary   587
and neurofibrillary tangles typically asso- 
ciated with AD.
Participation restrictions.  A component 
of health and disability added following 
a 1999 modification to the WHO ICIDH 
(WHO, 1999), defined as “problems an 
individual may have in the manner or 
extent of involvement in life situations” 
(p. 16).
Pathologic lability.  See emotional lability.
Patient.  A thematic role corresponding to 
the object of a sentence.
Penumbra.  The area of tissue surrounding 
an infarct.
Per diem.  Daily.
Per diem funding scheme.  Health care fund-
ing arrangement in which the third-party 
payer provides a set rate on a daily basis for 
a given patient’s care, regardless of which 
specific services he or she is provided.
Performance.  What a person actually does 
in his or her current context.
Perfusion weighted imaging (PWI).  A neu-
roimaging technique that involves index-
ing microscopic levels of blood flow, 
allowing for the detection of acute is- 
chemia and the study of blood flow in 
and around brain tumors.
Persistent depressive disorder.  A compo-
nent of chronic major depressive disor-
der; depression continuing for 2 or more 
weeks.
Personal factors.  Characteristics of an indi-
vidual outside of his or her health con-
dition, including age, race, education, 
profession, habits, beliefs, attitudes, per-
spectives, and life experience.
Phonemic paraphasia.  Substitution of one 
or more sounds in an intended word; also 
called literal paraphasia.
Phonemic perseveration.  A type of recur-
rent perseveration involving persistence 
in incorporating phonemic features of 
previous verbal responses into attempts 
to say target words.
Phonological components analysis (PCA). ​
An impairment-focused approach for the 
remediation of naming deficits in people 
with aphasia, with a focus on the phono-
logical aspects of target words.
Phrase movement.  Changes in word order 
that are reflected in syntactic changes.
Positron emission computed tomography  
(PET).  A neuroimaging technique in- 
volving the detection of radioisotopes 
(often radioactive oxygen) that have been 
injected into the bloodstream as they 
travel through the brain, allowing for the 
visualization of regional cerebral blood 
flow (rCBF).
Pragmatics.  The social use of language.
Predictive validity.  A type of criterion 
validity measured by calculating the cor-
relation between test results and later 
performance in a relevant area.
Press of speech.  See logorrhea.
Primary aging.  Changes associated with 
“normal” aging.
Primary progressive aphasia (PPA).  The 
ongoing loss of language abilities in the 
face of relatively preserved cognitive abili-
ties, caused by neuro­degenerative disease.
Primary tumors.  A tumor at the site where 
tumor progression began.
Problem-solving approach.  A treatment 
approach that entails teaching a client 
with dysgraphia to implement strategies 
that help facilitate spelling.
Procedural memory.  Implicit (nondeclara-
tive) recollection of how to carry out spe-
cific activities or actions.
Promoting Aphasics’ Communicative 
Effectiveness (PACE).  An intervention 
method developed to foster pragmatic 
skills during conversation in which new 
information is conveyed and in which 
the client and clinician exchange roles as 
sender and receiver.
Propositional complexity index (PCI).  A met-
ric used in discourse analysis to index 
semantic complexity; the number of 
propositions in a sample divided by the 
number of T-units.
Propositional language framework.  A means 
of conceptualizing aphasia as an inability 
to make propositions (Jackson, 1878).

588   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Propositions.  Intentional, meaningful ex- 
pressions (written, oral, or signed) meant 
to convey informational content.
Prosody.  The intonation, stress, and rhythm 
of speech.
Prosopagnosia.  Impairment in the ability 
to recognize faces.
Prospective memory.  Recollection of infor-
mation pertinent to future events (e.g., 
having to return a library book or turn 
off an oven after use).
Pseudobulbar affect (PBA).  See emotional 
lability.
Pseudodementia.  See transient confusional 
state.
Psycholinguistic frameworks.  Frameworks 
for conceptualizing aphasia focused 
on information processing components;  
stages of processing are typically con-
ceptualized within boxes in flowcharts 
with arrows showing the order of process-
ing stages and interconnections among 
components.
Psychological age.  An index of how one’s 
personality changes over time.
Randomized control trial.  A trial in which 
participants who meet explicit selection 
criteria are assigned randomly to treat-
ment and control groups, often con-
ducted across multiple sites.
Readability.  The degree of ease or diffi­
culty of comprehending written text.
Receptive aphasia.  Type of aphasia in which 
people have greater difficulty under-
standing than producing language; often 
used interchangeably with the term fluent 
aphasia.
Reciprocal scaffolding.  A treatment method 
in which a person with a neurogenic lan-
guage disorder serves as an expert or 
teacher in an interaction with a person 
(called a novice, learner, or apprentice).
Recurrent preservation.  Recurrence of a 
response, in the context of an established 
set of responses.
Register.  The level of formality/informal-
ity, or the degree of highly specialized 
jargon used within specific professional 
or social groups.
Reliability.  A psychometric property refer-
ring to the consistency with which some-
thing is measured or evaluated.
Reperfusion.  Pharmacological restoration 
of blood flow to an organ or tissue.
Reserve capacity.  The difference between 
a person’s maximal performance ability 
and his or her actual performance.
Resource allocation.  The distribution of 
cognitive effort to various aspects of a 
task, often aligned with perceived task 
demands.
Resource capacity theories.  A set of theo-
ries that attribute cognitive and linguistic 
deficits to a reduction in overall cognitive 
capacity, not the ability to accomplish 
individual simple tasks.
Respect for people.   A moral principle; 
respect for choices that others make or 
would make for themselves.
Response Elaboration Training (RET).  A 
treatment approach that focuses on in-
creasing the length and improving the in- 
formation content of oral language of peo-
ple with Broca’s or “nonfluent” aphasia.
Restitutive approach.  See restorative ap- 
proach.
Restorative approach.  A treatment approach 
aimed at fostering brain-based recovery; 
sometimes called a restitutive or stimula-
tion approach.
Retina.  The inside layer of the eyeball con-
taining photoreceptors.
Reversible passive.  A type of passive clause 
or sentence in which the subject (agent) or 
object (theme) could be used interchange-
ably and still be semantically plausible.
Right brain syndrome (RBS).   See right 
hemisphere syndrome.
Right ear advantage.  The phenomenon in 
which listeners who are left brain domi-
nant for language process linguistic 
stimuli with greater efficiency when the 
information is presented to the right as 
compared to the left ear.
Right hemisphere syndrome (RHS).  Any com-
bination of a constellation of symptoms 
associated with right brain injury (RBI, also 
called right hemisphere damage, RHD).

Glossary   589
Rod.  A type of photoreceptor, located in 
the retina, important for low-light and 
peripheral vision.
Rotational injury.  A type of closed-head 
injury resulting from a spinning motion 
of the head, which causes the brain to 
rotate in relation to the skull; also called 
angular injury.
Savvy Caregiver Program (SCP).  A pack-
aged program focused on mediating 
caregiver stress through improved inter-
actions with people who have dementia.
Sclera.  The outer coating of the eyeball.
Scotoma.  A blind area within the visual 
field for a specific eye, resulting from a 
lesion within a specific set of fibers within 
the optic nerve on one side.
Screening.  A brief evaluation of whether a 
person has a problem that may benefit 
from further professional attention and, if 
so, what the problem might be and what 
type of services might help.
Script training.  A treatment approach in 
which the client practices using person-
ally relevant conversational scripts writ-
ten in collaboration with an SLP, with the 
goal of producing relatively fluent speech 
and natural language in socially mean-
ingful contexts.
Secondary aging.  Impairment-based changes 
associated with aging.
Secondary or metastatic tumors.  ​Tumors 
arising from an initial neoplasm that 
spread to additional parts of the body via 
the blood supply or lymphatic system, 
most commonly subsequent to breast, 
lung, and skin cancers.
Selective attention.  See focused attention.
Semantic Feature Analysis (SFA).  A treat-
ment approach targeting word-finding 
abilities, involving focused associations 
with the meanings of words.
Semantic memory.  Recollection of factual 
information.
Semantic paraphasia.  Substitution of a real 
word for an intended word; also called 
verbal or global paraphasia.
Semantic perseveration.  A type of recur-
rent perseveration; persistence in using 
words of a similar category as a previous 
response instead of a word from the cur-
rent appropriate semantic category.
Sensitivity.  A statistical measure of test 
performance, reflecting the proportion 
of people who actually have an impair-
ment that a test identifies as having that 
impairment.
Sensory stimulation.  A category of passive 
and/or interactive methods purported 
to enhance recovery in stroke and brain 
injury and to slow decline in neurode-
generative conditions through exposure 
to touch, vibration, light, scent, sound, or 
taste.
Sentence Production Program for Apha-
sia (SPPA).  A stimulation approach to 
enhance sentence production in people 
with agrammatism.
Short-term memory.  A system for holding 
memory during active maintenance and/
or rehearsal.
Signal degradation theories.  Theories pur-
porting that language comprehension 
and production deficits are attributable 
to deficits in auditory and/or visual 
processing.
Single photo emission computerized 
tomography (SPECT).  A neuroimaging 
technique involving the use of intrave-
nously injected radioisotopes (with  
effects lasting longer than in PET),  
allowing for the detection of diffuse and 
focal brain injury and the differentia- 
tion of stroke from other types of brain 
pathology, such as neurodegenerative 
disease.
Skilled nursing facilities (SNFs).  Facilities 
that offer health services in a residential 
setting; often include rehabilitation and 
long-term care services.
Skilled services.  Intensive medical or reha-
bilitation services typically not available 
for extended periods of time; care that 
requires a certain level of clinical pro-
vider credentials.
Social age.  An index of aging according 
to one’s social roles and according to 
changes in one’s environment.

590   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Social cognition deficit hypothesis.  A theory 
that difficulties with empathy, under-
standing, and responding to others’ per-
spectives in people with RBI are attrib-
utable to right hemisphere networks 
important for critical aspects of relating 
to others.
Social frameworks.  Means of consider-
ing the nature of language disorders 
focused on everyday interpersonal con-
texts of real-life communication and 
participation.
Sodium amytal infusion.  A form of angi-
ography entailing injection of amobar-
bital (an anesthetic), diluted with saline 
solution, into the carotid artery to enable 
determination of hemispheric dominance 
for language; also called the Wada test.
Source memory.  Recollection of how, when, 
and/or where a memory was first made.
Spaced retrieval training (SRT).  “A method 
of learning and retaining information by 
recalling the information over increas-
ingly longer periods of time” (Camp, 
Foss, O’Hanlon, & Stevens, 1996, p. 196), 
with a goal of enhancing the accessibility 
to stored representations by repeatedly 
activating them and making a person 
aware of them.
Specific language impairment.  A develop-
mental condition characterized by lan-
guage deficits in the face of relatively 
age-appropriate cognitive abilities in 
children.
Specificity.  A statistical measure of test 
performance, reflecting the proportion 
of individuals a test identifies as unim-
paired who actually are unimpaired.
Speech acts.  Intended purpose underly-
ing a specific communicative intent in 
discourse.
SpeechBite.  A free, online, searchable data-
base of intervention studies related to 
speech-language pathology, along with 
ratings of research quality for each study.
Speed of processing.  Mental efficiency; the 
rapidity with which a cognitive task may 
be accomplished.
Speed of processing theories.  Theories based 
on the notion that cognitive processing at 
all levels slows as we age due to reduced 
efficiency of neural transmission.
Spontaneous recovery.  The natural pattern 
of improvement in functioning after an 
injury to the brain.
Sprechesang.  In Melodic Intonation Ther-
apy, a blend of speaking and singing; lit-
erally “spoken song” in German.
Standardized assessments.  Assessments that 
have normative data and entail explicit 
instructions for test administration and 
scoring, enabling comparisons of indi-
vidual results to group results.
Statutory surrogacy.  Legal designation of 
a person to make decisions for an adult 
who is deemed incompetent.
Stereotypy.  Language output characterized 
by the production of the same word or set 
of words or nonwords regardless of the 
meaning intended.
Stimulation-facilitation approach to lan-
guage treatment or Schuell’s stimulation 
approach.  A set of strategies and prin-
ciples for “strong, controlled and inten-
sive auditory stimulation of the impaired 
auditory symbol system” (Coelho, Duffy, 
& Sinotte, 2008, p. 439) in people with 
aphasia.
Stimulus power.  The likelihood of a par-
ticular cue eliciting a target word.
Story completeness.  A component of the 
story goodness index involving indexing 
of critical components in the story.
Story goodness index.  A measure of orga-
nization and completeness of discourse 
production.
Story grammar.  A component of the story 
goodness index that involves indexing 
the organizational structure of the story.
Stroke.  A temporary or permanent disrup-
tion in blood supply to the brain.
Stuck-in-set perseveration. Persistence  
in carrying out a task recently perform-
ed or saying a word previously spo-
ken when the task or word is no longer 
appropriate.

Glossary   591
Subarachnoid hemorrhage. Leakage of  
blood that occurs on the surface of the 
brain, between the pia and arachnoid 
mater; typically results in subarachnoid 
hematoma.
Subcortical aphasia.  Any form of aphasia 
associated with a lesion below the cortex.
Subdural hematoma.  A hematoma formed 
between the arachnoid mater and the 
dura mater.
Sundowning or sundowner’s syndrome. ​
A phenomenon in which problematic 
behaviors seen in people with demen-
tia — including depression, anxiety, agi-
tation, and wandering — worsen in the 
evening hours.
Supported communication.  A philosophy 
and set of tenets and strategies imple-
mented throughout social intervention 
with people who have communica-
tion disorders, involving anything that 
improves access to or participation in 
communication, events, or activities.
Suppression deficit hypothesis.  A theory 
suggesting that people with RHS are typ-
ically able to generate multiple interpre-
tations of words, sentences, and stories 
but are challenged in selecting the most 
plausible interpretation.
Surface dyslexia.  A form of dyslexia involv-
ing an impairment in visual decoding of 
graphemes.
Telegraphic speech.  Spoken language pro-
duction characterized by the use of pri-
marily open class words and omission of 
function words.
Telepractice.  The application of technology 
to deliver health, counseling, consulting, 
assessment, or rehabilitative services at a 
distance.
Temporal.  In the context of visual field defi-
cits, lateral, toward the temples.
Temporal conjunctives.  Words referring to 
time (e.g., afterward, beforehand, then, 
simultaneously).
Test-retest reliability.  A type of reliability 
referring to the consistency with which 
the same result is achieved when a test is 
administered to the same person at two 
different times.
Thematic roles.  The role that a noun phrase 
plays in relation to the action or state 
described by the verb in the sentence; 
defined as the related agent (subject) and 
patient (object) of a given verb in a given 
grammatical context.
Theory of mind.  The ability to interpret, 
infer, and predict the thoughts, beliefs, 
feelings, and intentions of others and to 
differentiate the thoughts and percep-
tions of others from one’s own.
Therapist drift.  The tendency for clinicians 
to vary a treatment protocol according to 
their own predilections and in response 
to behaviors of the individual being 
treated.
Third-party payer.  The agency that manages 
reimbursement for health care services.
Thought process framework.  A historic 
means of conceptualizing aphasia sug-
gesting that unintended words thought 
and spoken by people with aphasia inter-
fere with their thinking abilities.
Thrombotic stroke.  A type of occlusive 
stroke in which an arterial blockage 
accumulates in the same area of an artery 
where the blockage eventually occurs.
Thrombolytic drug.  A pharmacologic agent 
that dissolves blood clots.
Thrombus.  A clot that blocks an artery in a 
thrombotic stroke.
Tissue plasminogen activator, or tPA.  ​The 
most common thrombolytic drug admin-
istered following an occlusive stroke.
Tonal languages.   Languages in which 
changes in tones (or pitch and pitch con-
tours) change the literal meaning of a 
word.
Total communication approaches.  Treat-
ment approaches that encourage any 
means of communication to convey and 
receive information, involving any and 
all language modalities.
Toxemia.   The poisoning, irritation, or 
inflammation of nervous system tissue 
through exposure to harmful substances.

592   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Tractography.  A DTI technique involving 
visualization of the course and nature 
of nerve fiber bundles in the brain; also 
called fiber tracking.
Transcranial direct current stimulation 
(tDCS).  A technique that involves deliv-
ering pulses of low-level electrical cur-
rent through the scalp to stimulate the 
brain.
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS; 
also called repetitive TMS, or rTMS).  ​A 
technique involving magnetic coils plac-
ed on the scalp to stimulate or inhibit  
activation of targeted brain regions be-
neath the scalp via low-frequency mag-
netic pulses.
Transcortical motor aphasia.  A classical 
aphasia subtype associated with a lesion 
in the anterior watershed area of the left 
frontal lobe, extending to the prefrontal 
areas.
Transcortical sensory aphasia.  A classic 
aphasia type associated with a lesion in 
the area surrounding Wernicke’s area, 
excluding Wernicke’s area itself, namely 
the angular gyrus (Brodmann’s area 39) 
and the posterior portion of the middle 
temporal gyrus (Brodmann’s area 37).
Transdisciplinary team.  A team in which 
members are trained to work across dis-
ciplinary areas and in which the lines 
typically demarcating each professional’s 
scope of practice are blurred.
Transient confusional state.  Dementia-
like symptoms noted in the absence of 
true dementia (e.g., in cases of depres-
sion, dietary imbalance, drug effects, and 
postsurgical states); sometimes called 
pseudodementia.
Transient ischemic attack (TIA).  A tempo-
rary blockage of the blood supply to any 
area of the brain; a common lay term is 
“mini-stroke.”
Translational injury.  A type of closed head 
injury in which the object-head contact is 
at a relatively perpendicular angle to one 
of the main axes of the head, causing the 
brain to hit the side of the skull opposite 
the site of contact.
Transmission deficit theories.  A theory that 
attributes declining cognitive and lin-
guistic functioning to reduced efficiency 
of neuronal transmission.
Traumatic brain injury (TBI).  Brain dam-
age caused by sudden trauma.
Treatment dosage.  Intensity of treatment 
over a specified period of time.
Treatment fidelity.  The degree to which an 
intervention method is administered in a 
reliable way or in accordance with a spe-
cific protocol.
Treatment intensity.  The consideration of 
the number, frequency, and duration of 
treatment sessions.
Treatment of Aphasic Perseveration (TAP). ​
A treatment approach for people with 
aphasia who tend to perseverate on 
speech sounds, words, and utterances 
they have already said.
Treatment of Underlying Forms (TUF).  A 
treatment approach to help people with 
agrammatism improve comprehension 
and expression of sentence structure.
Tumor.  See neoplasm.
Type-token ratio.  A metric examining vari-
ation in semantic (lexical) or syntactic 
performance within spoken or written 
discourse.
T1-weighted image.  A magnetic resonance 
image that is sensitive to lipids, thus 
enabling gray versus white matter con-
trast and good anatomic resolution, but 
reducing visualization of edema and 
infarcts relative to T2-weighted images.
T2-weighted image.  A magnetic resonance 
image that is sensitive to water molecule 
contrasts, thus providing enhanced visu-
alization of pathologies such as edema 
and ischemia.
Unidimensional frameworks.  Means of 
conceptualizing aphasia in which every 
level of language (phonology, morphol-
ogy, syntax, semantics, and pragmatics) 
and aspect of language use (production, 

Glossary   593
comprehension) is included in one cohe-
sive set of linguistic abilities.
Uniform data set.  A data set with a con-
sistent scoring system and format that 
would easily be understood by others.
Unskilled services.  Health care services 
that do not require the skills of a trained 
clinician to carry out; may include over-
sight of rote exercises or repetitive drills 
and practice.
Validity.  The degree to which a means of 
measurement actually measures what it 
intended to measure.
Vascular dementia.  Dementia caused by 
problems of blood supply to the brain 
(e.g., one or more strokes or TIAs); also 
called ischemic dementia.
Verbal paraphasia.  See semantic paraphasia.
Verbal perseveration.  Persistence in saying 
a word spoken previously, often not the 
word intended at the moment; a type of 
stuck-in-set perseveration.
Verb as Core (VAC).  A treatment approach 
intended to improve expressive verb use 
and verb understanding as well as lan-
guage performance in general in people 
with agrammatic aphasia.
Verb Network Strengthening Treatment 
(VNeST).  A treatment method devel-
oped to improve verb retrieval through 
enhanced activation of semantic and 
grammatical or relational aspects of 
verbs, with a goal of helping the client 
generalize the ability to produce verbs 
within sentences and ideally to carry this 
over to discourse contexts.
Virus.  Invasive microscopic organisms that 
take over a host’s cells to genetically 
replicate themselves; typically harmful 
organisms that may cause inflammation 
in the brain.
Visual Action Therapy (VAT).  A gesture-
based nonvocal method to promote the 
use of symbolic gestures in people with 
global aphasia.
Visual agnosia.  Impairment in recognition 
or interpretation of visual stimuli, not 
attributable to sensory deficits (includes 
visual object agnosia and prosopagnosia).
Visual attention deficits.  Lack of aware-
ness of information registered in the 
visual cortex.
Visual field.  The entire space from which 
one takes in visual information at any 
given moment.
Visual integration deficits.  Problems with 
making sense of visual information that 
is physically seen and also attended to; 
sometimes referred to as visual interpre-
tation deficits.
Visual neglect.  A visual attention deficit 
in which individuals are able to see the 
visual world, but they do not or are not 
able to attend to a portion of the visual 
space, such that they do not know that 
they see it.
Visual object agnosia.  A type of visual ag- 
nosia involving a deficit in recognizing 
real, photographed, or drawn objects.
Visual scene displays.  Images of scenes 
that are “contextually rich pictures that 
depict situations, places, or experiences 
that clearly represent relationships and 
interactions with important people or 
objects” (King, Simmons-Mackie, & Beu-
kelman, 2013, p. 87) used in alternative 
and augmentative communication.
Visual sensory deficits.  Problems with reg-
istering visual information in the brain; 
may be due to any problem or combina-
tion of problems from the eye to the pri-
mary visual cortex.
Visuoconstructive deficits.  Problems with 
being able to process two- or three-
dimensional relationships in space.
Voluntary Control of Involuntary Utter-
ances (VCIU).  A treatment approach de- 
signed to improve expressive, propo-
sitional communication in people with 
severe nonfluent aphasia whose speech 
is limited to automatic production of few 
words.
Wada test.  See sodium amytal infusion.
Wellness coaching.  See life coaching.

594   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Wernicke’s aphasia.  A classic aphasia syn-
drome associated with a lesion in Wer-
nicke’s area in the superior temporal lobe 
(corresponding to Brodmann’s area 22).
Working memory.  System for temporary 
storage of information while it is being 
processed.
Working memory theories.  A set of theories 
that link changes in cognitive and lin-
guistic abilities to a reduction in in work-
ing memory capacity.

595
References
Abdelkhalek, N., Hussein, A., Gibbs, T., & 
Hamdy, H. (2010). Using team-based learn-
ing to prepare medical students for future 
problem-based learning. Medical Teacher, 
32(2), 123–129. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/​
01421590903548539
Academy of Neurologic Communication Dis-
orders and Sciences. (n.d.). ANCDS board 
certification. Retrieved from http://www​
.ancds​.org/board-certification-process
Academy of Neurologic Communication Sci-
ences and Disorders. (2014). Position statement 
of the Academy of Neurologic Communication 
Disorders and Sciences on clinical doctorate pro-
grams in speech-language pathology. Retrieved 
from http://www.ancds.org/assets/docs/
ancds_clin_doc_position_statement.pdf
Adamovich, B. B., & Henderson, J. A. (1992). 
Scales of cognitive ability for traumatic brain 
injury (SCATBI). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Adamovich, B. B., Henderson, J. A., & Auer-
bach, S. (1985). Cognitive rehabilitation of closed 
head injured patients: A dynamic approach. San 
Diego, CA: College-Hill Press.
Adshead, F., Cody, D. D., & Pitt, B. (1992). 
BASDEC: A novel screening instrument for 
depression in elderly medical inpatients. 
British Medical Journal, 397. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1136/bmj.305.6850.397
Alarcon, N. B., & Rogers, M. A. (2006). Sup-
ported communication for intervention for 
aphasia. Rockville, MD: American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association.
Albert, M. L. (1973). A simple test of visual 
neglect. Neurology, 23(6), 658–664. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.23.6.658
Albert, M. L. (1989). Experimental approaches 
to aphasia therapy. Journal of Neurolinguis-
tics, 4(3–4), 427–434. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1016/0911-6044(89)90031-6
Albert, M. L., Bachman, D. L., Morgan, A., & 
Helm-Estabrooks, N. (1988). Pharmacother-
apy for aphasia. Neurology, 38(6), 877–879. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.38.6.877
Albert, M., DeKosky, S., Dickson, D., Dubois, 
B., Feldman, H. H., Fox, N., . . . Phelps, C. 
(2011). The diagnosis of mild cognitive im- 
pairment due to Alzheimer’s disease: Rec-
ommendations from the National Institute 
on Aging-Alzheimer’s Association work-
groups on diagnostic guidelines for Alzheim-
er’s disease. Alzheimer’s & Dementia: The Jour-
nal of the Alzheimer’s Association, 7(3), 270–279. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.008
Albert, M. L., Sparks, R. W., & Helm, N. A. 
(1973). Melodic intonation therapy for 
aphasia. Archives of Neurology, 29(2), 130–
131. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archneur​
.1973.00490260074018.
Alexander, M. P., Naeser, M. A., & Palumbo, 
C. L. (1987). Correlations of subcortical 
CT lesion sites and aphasia profiles. Brain, 
110(4), 961–988. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
brain/110.4.961
Aliminosa, D., McCloskey, M., Goodman-
Schulman, R., & Sokol, S. M. (1993). Reme-
diation of acquired dysgraphia as a tech-
nique for testing interpretations of deficits. 
Aphasiology, 7(1), 55–69. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/02687039308249499
Allen, L., Mehta, S., McClure, J. A., & Teasell, 
R. (2012). Therapeutic interventions for 

596   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
aphasia initiated more than six months post 
stroke: A review of the evidence. Topics in 
Stroke Rehabilitation, 19(6), 523–535. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1310/tsr1906-523
Allen-Burge, R., Burgio, L. D., Bourgeois, 
M. S., Sims, R., & Nunnikhoven, J. (2001). 
Increasing communication among nursing 
home residents. Journal of Clinical Geropsy-
chology, 7(3), 213–230.http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1023/A:1011343212424
Alm, N., Astell, A., Ellis, M., Dye, R., Gowans, 
G., & Campbell, J. (2004). A cognitive pros-
thesis and communication support for peo-
ple with dementia. Neuropsychological Reha-
bilitation, 14(1–2), 117–134. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/09602010343000147
Alzheimer’s Association. (2013). 2013 Alzheim-
er’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’s & 
Dementia, 9(2), 208–245. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1016/j.jalz.2013.02.003
Alzheimer’s Disease International. (2010). 
World Alzheimer’s report 2010: The global im- 
pact of dementia. Retrieved from http://www 
.alz.co.uk/research/files/WorldAlzheimer​
Report2010.pdf
American Heart Association and American 
Stroke Association. (n.d.). June is national 
aphasia awareness month. Retrieved from 
http://www.strokeassociation.org
American Occupational Therapy Association 
(AOTA), American Physical Therapy Associ-
ation (APTA), & American Speech-Language-
Hearing Association (ASHA). (2014). Con-
sensus statement on clinical judgment in health 
care settings. Retrieved from http://www​ 
.asha.org/uploadedFiles/AOTA-APTA-
ASHA-Consensus-Statement.pdf
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diag-
nostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 
(4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diag-
nostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 
(5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Associa-
tion. (n.d.). National outcomes measurement 
system (NOMS). Retrieved from http://www​ 
.asha.org/NOMS/
American Speech-Language-Hearing Asso-
ciation. (1988). Prevention of communication 
disorders (position statement). Retrieved from 
http://www.asha.org/policy/PS1988-002​
28.htm
American Speech-Language-Hearing Asso-
ciation. (2005). The roles of speech-language 
pathologists working with individuals with 
dementia (position statement). Retrieved from 
http://www.asha.org/policy
American Speech-Language-Hearing Associa-
tion. (2013). At a glance: Aphasia, TBI and 
older Americans. The ASHA Leader, 18, 26. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/leader.AAG​.18​
092013.26
American Speech-Language-Hearing Asso-
ciation (ASHA). (2014a). 2014 standards and 
implementation procedures for the Certifica-
tion of Clinical Competence in speech-language 
pathology. Retrieved from http://www​
.asha.org/Certification/2014-Speech-Lan​
guage-Pathology-Certification-Standards/
American Speech-Language-Hearing Associa-
tion. (2014b). Supply and demand resource list 
for speech-language pathologists. Retrieved 
from http://www.asha.org/uploadedFiles/​ 
Supply-Demand-SLP.pdf
American Speech-Language-Hearing Associa-
tion and Council of Academic Programs in 
Communication Sciences and Disorders. 
(2010). Joint ASHA–CAPCSD research doc-
toral survey report, 2007–2008 academic year. 
Retrieved from http://www.asha.org and 
http://www.capcsd.org
American Stroke Association. (n.d.). Stroke 
warning signs and symptoms. Retrieved from 
http://www.strokeassociation.org/STROKE​
ORG/WarningSigns/Stroke-Warning-
Signs-and-Symptoms_UCM_308528_Sub​
HomePage.jsp
American Telemedicine Association. (2010). 
A blueprint for telerehabilitation guidelines. 
Retrieved from http://www.americantele​ 
med.org/docs/default-source/standards/ 
a-blueprint-for-telerehabilitation-guide​
lines.pdf?sfvrsn=4
Anderson, J. M., Gilmore, R., Roper, S., Cros-
son, B., Bauer, R. M., Nadeau, S., . . . Heil-
man, K. M. (1991). Conduction aphasia and 
the arcuate fasciculus: A reexamination of 
the Wernicke-Geschwind model. Brain and 

References   597
Language, 70(1), 1–12. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1006/brln.1999.2135
Andrews, K., Murphy, L., Munday, R., & 
Littlewood, C. (1996). Misdiagnosis of the 
vegetative state: Retrospective study in a 
rehabilitation unit. BMJ (Clinical Research 
ed.), 313(7048), 13–16. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1136/bmj.313.7048.13
Antonucci, S. M. (2009). Use of semantic fea-
ture analysis in group aphasia treatment. 
Aphasiology, 23(7–8), 854–866. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687030802634405
Anvekar, B. (2012, September 24). Neuroradiol-
ogy cases: Ischemic stroke and vascular terri-
tories of brain. Retrieved from http://www​
.neuroradiologycases.com/2012/09/isch​
emic-stroke-and-vascular.html
Armstrong, E. (2000). Aphasia discourse anal-
ysis: The story so far. Aphasiology, 14(9), 
875–892. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687​
030050127685
Armstrong, E. (2001). Connecting lexical pat-
terns of verb usage with discourse meanings 
in aphasia. Aphasiology, 15(10/11), 1029–
1045. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/026870401​
43000375
Arnold, J. L., Halpern, P., Tsai, M.-C., & Smith-
line, H. (2004). Mass casualty terrorist 
bombings: A comparison of outcomes by 
bombing type. Annals of Emergency Medi-
cine, 43(2), 263–273.http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1016/S0196-0644(03)00723-6
Arthanat, S., Nochajski, S. M., & Stone, J. 
(2004). The international classification of 
functioning, disability and health and its 
application to cognitive disorders. Disabil-
ity and Rehabilitation, 26(4), 235–245. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/09638280310001644 
889
Arvanitakis, Z., Wilson, R. S., Bienias, J. L., 
Evans, D. A., & Bennett, D. A. (2004). Diabe-
tes mellitus and risk of Alzheimer disease 
and decline in cognitive function. Archives 
of Neurology, 61(5), 661–666. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1001/archneur.61.5.661.
ASHA Academic Affairs Board. (2012). Aca-
demic affairs board report to the ASHA board 
of directors on the clinical doctorate in speech-
language pathology. Retrieved from http://
www.asha.org/uploadedFiles/2012-Re​
port-SLP-Clinical-Doctorate.pdf
ASHA Ad Hoc Committee on the Feasibility 
of Standards for the Clinical Doctorate in 
Speech-Language Pathology. (2013). Report 
of the Ad Hoc Committee on the Feasibility of 
Standards for the Clinical Doctorate in Speech-
Language Pathology. Retrieved from http://
www.asha.org/uploadedFiles/Report-
Ad-Hoc-Committee-on-Feasibility-of-Stan​
dards-for-the-Clinical-Doctorate-in-SLP 
.pdf
ASHA Ad Hoc Committee on Guidelines for 
the Clinical Doctorate in Speech-Language 
Pathology. (2015). Guidelines for the Clini-
cal Doctorate in Speech-Language Pathology. 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Asso-
ciation. Retrieved from http://www.asha​
.org/uploadedFiles/ASHA/About/gov​
ernance/Resolutions_and_Motions/2015/
BOD-22-2015-Ad-Hoc-Committee-Report-
on-the-Guidelines-for-the-Clinical-Doctor​
ate-in-SLP.pdf#search=%22Ad%22
Aström, M., Asplund, K., & Aström, T. (1992). 
Psychosocial function and life satisfaction 
after stroke. Stroke, 23(4), 527–531. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1161/01.STR.23.4.527
Australian Aphasia Association Inc. (2010). 
Aphasia facts and ﬁgures. Retrieved from 
http://www.aphasia.org.au
Avent, J., & Austermann, S. (2003). Reciprocal 
scaffolding: A context for communication 
treatment in aphasia. Aphasiology, 17(4), 
397–404. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0268​
7030244000743
Avent, J., Patterson, J., Lu, A., & Small, K. 
(2009). Reciprocal scaffolding treatment: 
A person with aphasia as clinical teacher. 
Aphasiology, 23(1), 110–119. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687030802240211
Avent, J. R., Edwards, D. J., Franco, C. R., Lucero, 
C. J., & Pekowsky, J. I. (1995). A verbal and 
non-verbal treatment comparison study in 
aphasia. Aphasiology, 9(3), 295–303. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687039508248206
Babbitt, E. M., & Cherney, L. R. (2010). Commu-
nication confidence in persons with aphasia. 
Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation, 17(3), 214–223. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1310/tsr1703-214

598   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Bach, L. J., & David, A. S. (2006). Self-awareness  
after acquired and traumatic brain injury. 
Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 16(4), 397–
414. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0960​2010​
500412830
Baddeley, A., Emslie, H., & Nimmo-Smith, I. 
(1992). The Speed and Capacity of Language 
Processing (SCOLP) Test. Bury St. Edmunds, 
UK: Thames Valley Test Co.
Baddeley, A. D., Emslie, H., & Nimmo-Smith, I. 
(1994). Doors and people: A test of visual and ver-
bal recall and recognition. Bury St. Edmunds,  
UK: Thames Valley Test Co.
Baines, K. A., Heeringa, H. M., & Martin, A. W. 
(1999). Assessment of Language-Related Func-
tional Activities (ALFA). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Baken, D. (2003). The development of a multidi-
mensional sense of control index and its use in 
analyzing the role of control in the relationship 
between SES and health (Doctoral thesis). 
Auckland, NZ: Massey University.
Baken, D., & Stephens, C. (2005). More dimen-
sions for the multidimensional health locus 
of control: Confirmatory factor analysis of 
competing models of the structure of con-
trol beliefs. Journal of Health Psychology, 
10(5), 643–656. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/​
1359105305055310
Baker, E. (2012). Optimal intervention inten-
sity. International Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 14(5), 401–409. http://dx.doi.org/​ 
10.3109/17549507.2012.700323
Bakshi, R. (2001). A 39-year-old woman with head-
aches, seizures, and aphasia. Retrieved from 
http://www.medscape.com/view​article/ 
405339
Baldo, J., Shimamura, A. P., & Delis, D. C. 
(2001). Verbal and design fluency in patients 
with frontal lobe lesions. Journal of Interna-
tional Neuropsychological Society, 7, 586–596. 
Retrieved from http://socrates.berkeley 
.edu/~shimlab/2001_Baldo_Fluency-JINS 
.pdf
Balestreri, R., Fontana, L., & Astengo, F. (1987). 
A double-blind placebo controlled evalua-
tion of the safety and efficacy of vinpocetine 
in the treatment of patients with chronic 
vascular senile cerebral dysfunction. Jour-
nal of the American Geriatrics Society, 35(5), 
425–430. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-​
5415.1987.tb04664.x
Ball, A. L., de Riesthal, M., Breeding, V. E., & 
Mendoza, D. E. (2011). Modified ACT and 
CART in severe aphasia. Aphasiology, 25(6–
7), 836–848. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/026
87038.2010.544320
Ball, M. J. (1992). The clinician’s guide to linguis-
tic profiling of language impairment. Kibworth, 
UK: Far Communications.
Ballard, K. J., & Thompson, C. K. (1999). Treat-
ment and generalization of complex sen-
tence production in agrammatism. Journal 
of Speech, Language & Hearing Research, 42, 
670–707. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/jslhr​
.4203.690
Barkley, E. F., Major, C. H., & Cross, K. P. (2014). 
Collaborative learning techniques: A handbook 
for college faculty. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass & Pfeiffer Imprints.
Barkley, R. (2011). Barkley Deficits in Executive 
Functioning Scale (BDEFS for adults). New 
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Barron, T., & Amerena, P. (2007). Disability and 
inclusive development. London, UK: Leonard 
Cheshire International.
Bartlett, C. L., & Pashek, G. V. (1994). Taxo-
nomic theory and practical implications 
in aphasia classification. Aphasiology, 8(2), 
103–126. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687​
039408248645
Bartolo, A., Cubelli, R., & Sala, S. D. (2008). 
Cognitive approach to the assessment of 
limb apraxia. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 
22(1), 27–45.http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13​
854040601139310
Barton, C. D., Mallik, H., Orr, W. B., & Janof-
sky, J. S. (1996). Clinicians’ judgement of 
capacity of nursing home patients to give 
informed consent. Psychiatric Services, 47(9), 
956–960. http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/ps.47​
.9.956
Barton, J., Grudzen, M., & Zielske, R. (2003). 
Vital connections in long-term care: Spiritual 
resources for staff and residents. Baltimore, 
MD: Health Professions Press.
Basilakos, A., Rorden, C., Bonilha, L., Moser, 
D., & Fridriksson, J. (2015). Patterns of post-
stroke brain damage that predict speech 

References   599
production errors in apraxia of speech and 
aphasia dissociate. Stroke, 46(6), 1561–1566. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/STROKE​AHA​
.115.009211
Basso, A. (2004). Perseveration or the tower 
of Babel. Seminars in Speech and Language, 
25(4), 375–389. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/​
s-2004-837249
Basso, A., & Macis, M. (2011). Therapy efficacy 
in chronic aphasia. Behavioural Neurology, 
24(4), 317–325. http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/
BEN-2011-0342
Bastiaanse, R., Edwards, S., & Rispens, J. (2002). 
Verb and Sentence Test (VAST). Bury St. 
Edmunds, UK: Thames Valley Test Co.
Bates, E. (1976). Language and context: The 
acquisition of pragmatics. New York, NY: 
Academic Press.
Bates, E., Wulfeck, B., & MacWhinney, B. 
(1991). Cross-linguistic studies in aphasia: 
An overview. Brain and Language, 41(2), 
123–148. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/​0093- 
934X(91)90149-U
Battle, D. E. (2012). Communication disorders in 
multicultural and international populations. St. 
Louis, MO.: Elsevier/Mosby. Retrieved from 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ 
book/9780323066990
Bay, E. (1964). Principles of classification and 
their influence on our concepts of aphasia. 
In A. V. S. de Reuck & M. O’Connor (Eds.), 
Disorders of Language (pp. 122–142). Hobo-
ken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Bayles, K. A., & Tomoeda, C. K. (1993). Ari-
zona Battery for Communication Disorders of 
Dementia (ABCD). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Bayles, K. A., & Tomoeda, C. K. (1994). The 
Functional Linguistic Communication Inven-
tory: Test manual. Tucson, AZ: Canyonlands.
Bayles, K. A., & Tomoeda, C. K. (1997). Improv-
ing function in dementia and other cognitive- 
linguistic disorders. Tucson, AZ: Canyonlands.
Bayles, K. A., & Tomoeda, C. K. (2007). Cognitive- 
communication disorders of dementia. San Diego, 
CA: Plural.
Beard, R. L. (2012). Art therapies and dementia 
care: A systematic review. Dementia, 11(5), 
633–656. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/​1471​
301211421090
Beaumont, J. G., Marjoribanks, J., Flury, S., 
& Lintern, T. (2002). PACST: Putney Audi-
tory Comprehension Screening Test. Bury St. 
Edmunds, UK: Thames Valley Test Co.
Beeson, P. M. (1998). Treatment for letter-by- 
letter reading: A case study. In N. Helm-
Estabrooks & A. L. Holland (Eds.), Approaches 
to the treatment of aphasia (pp. 153–177). San 
Diego, CA: Singular.
Beeson, P. M. (1999). Treating acquired writ-
ing impairment: Strengthening graphe-
mic representations. Aphasiology, 13(9–11), 
767–785. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​02687​
0399401867
Beeson, P. M., & Henry, M. L. (2008). Compre-
hension and production of written words. 
In R. Chapey (Ed.), Language intervention 
strategies in aphasia and related neurogenic 
communication disorders (5th ed., pp. 654–
688). New York, NY: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins.
Beeson, P. M., Higginson, K., & Rising, K. 
(2013). Writing treatment for aphasia: 
A texting approach. Journal of Speech, Lan-
guage, and Hearing Research: JSLHR, 56(3), 
945–955. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/​10​
92-4388(2012/11-0360)
Beeson, P. M., & Hillis, A. E. (2001). Compre-
hension and production of written words. 
In R. Chapey (Ed.), Language intervention 
strategies in aphasia and related neurogenic 
communication disorders (4th ed., pp. 572–
604). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott, Williams 
& Wilkins.
Beeson, P. M., Hirsch, F. M., & Rewega, M. 
A. (2002). Successful single-word writing 
treatment: Experimental analyses of four 
cases. Aphasiology, 16(4–6), 473–491. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030244000167
Beeson, P. M., & Insalaco, D. (1998). Acquired 
alexia: Lessons from successful treatment. 
Journal of the International Neuropsychological 
Society, 4(6), 621–635. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1017/S1355617798466116
Beeson, P. M., Magloire, J. G., & Robey, R. R. 
(2005). Letter-by-letter reading: Natural 
recovery and response to treatment. Behav-
ioural Neurology, 16(4), 191–202. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1155/2005/413962

600   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Beeson, P. M., Rewega, M. A., Vail, S., & Rapc-
sak, S. Z. (2000). Problem-solving approach 
to agraphia treatment: Interactive use of 
lexical and sublexical spelling routes. Apha-
siology, 14(5–6), 551–565. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1080/026870300401315
Beeson, P. M., Rising, K., Kim, E. S., & Rap­
csak, S. Z. (2010). A treatment sequence for 
phonological alexia/agraphia. Journal of 
Speech, Language & Hearing Research, 53(2), 
450–468. http://dx.doi.org/0.1044/1092-​ 
4388(2009/08-0229)
Beeson, P. M., Rising, K., & Volk, J. (2003). 
Writing treatment for severe aphasia: Who 
benefits? Journal of Speech, Language & Hear-
ing Research, 46(5), 1038–1060.
Belanger, H. G., Kretzmer, T., Yoash-Gantz, R., 
Pickett, T., & Tupler, L. A. (2009). Cogni-
tive sequelae of blast-related versus other 
mechanisms of brain trauma. Journal of 
the International Neuropsychological Society: 
JINS, 15(1), 1–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S1355617708090036
Belin, P., Van Eeckhout, P., Zilbovicius, M., 
Remy, P., François, C., Guillaume, S., . . . 
Samson, Y. (1996). Recovery from nonfluent 
aphasia after melodic intonation therapy: 
A PET study. Neurology, 47(6), 1504–1511. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.47.6.1504
Bell, R., Buchner, A., & Mund, I. (2008). Age-
related differences in irrelevant-speech 
effects. Psychology and Aging, 23(2), 377–391. 
http://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/​0882-​ 
7974.23.2.377
Bendapudi, N. M., Berry, L. L., Frey, K. A., Par-
ish, J. T., & Rayburn, W. L. (2006). Patients’ 
perspectives on ideal physician behaviors. 
Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 81(3), 338–344. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4065/81.3.338
Benedict, R. H. B. (1997). Brief Visuospatial Mem-
ory Test-Revised: Professional manual. Lutz, 
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Bennett, H. E., Thomas, S. A., Austen, R., Mor-
ris, A. M., & Lincoln, N. B. (2006). Valida-
tion of screening measures for assessing 
mood in stroke patients. British Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 45(3), 367–376. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1348/014466505X58277
Bennett, M. H., Weibel, S., Wasiak, J., Schnabel, 
A., French, C., & Kranke, P. (2014). Hyper-
baric oxygen therapy for acute ischaemic 
stroke. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews, 11, CD004954. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1002/14651858.CD004954.pub2
Benson, D. F. (1979). Aphasia, alexia, and agraphia. 
New York, NY: Churchill Livingstone.
Benton, A. L., & Benton Sivan, A. (1992). Ben-
ton Visual Retention Test. San Antonio, TX: 
The Psychological Corporation.
Benton, A. L., Hamsher, K. D., & Sivan, A. B. 
(1994). Multilingual Aphasia Examination: 
Manual of instructions (3rd ed.). San Anto-
nia, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Benton, A., & Tranel, D. (1993). Visuopercep-
tual, visuospatial, and visuoconstructive 
disorders. In K. M. Heilman & E. Valen-
stein (Eds.), Clinical neuropsychology (pp. 
165–213). New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press.
Berman, M., & Fenaughty, A. (2005). Technol-
ogy and managed care: Patient benefits of 
telemedicine in a rural health care network. 
Health Economics, 14(6), 559–573. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/hec.952
Berthier, M. L. (2005). Poststroke aphasia: Epi-
demiology, pathophysiology and treatment. 
Drugs & Aging, 22(2), 163–182. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.2165/00002512-200522020-00006
Berthier, M. L., Pulvermüller, F., Dávila, G., 
Casares, N. G., & Gutiérrez, A. (2011). Drug 
therapy of post-stroke aphasia: A review of 
current evidence. Neuropsychology Review, 
21(3), 302–317. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s11065-011-9177-7
Beukelman, D. R., Fager, S., Ball, L., & Dietz, A. 
(2007). AAC for adults with acquired neu-
rological conditions: A review. AAC: Aug-
mentative and Alternative Communication, 
23(3), 230–242. http://dx.doi.org/10​.1080/​
07434610701553668
Beukelman, D. R., Garrett, K. L., & Yorkston, K. 
M. (2007). Augmentative communication strat-
egies for adults with acute or chronic medical 
conditions. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.
Beukelman, D. R., & Mirenda, P. (2013). Aug-
mentative and alternative communication: Sup-

References   601
porting children and adults with complex com-
munication needs (4th ed.). Baltimore, MD: 
Paul H. Brookes.
Beveridge, M. E. L., & Bak, T. H. (2011). The lan-
guages of aphasia research: Bias and diver-
sity. Aphasiology, 25(12), 1451–1468. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2011.624165
Bhatnagar, S. C. (2013). Neuroscience for the study 
of communicative disorders (4th ed.). Philadel-
phia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Bhatnagar, S. C., & Andy, O. (1983). Language 
in the non-dominant right hemisphere. 
Archives of Neurology, 40, 728–731. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/​
02395-6
Bhatnagar, S. C., Mandybur, G. T., Bucking-
ham, H. W., & Andy, O. J. (2000). Language 
representation in the human brain: Evi-
dence from cortical mapping. Brain and Lan-
guage, 74(2), 238–259. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1006/brln.2000.2339
Bilda, K. (2011). Video-based conversational 
script training for aphasia: A therapy study. 
Aphasiology, 25(2), 191–201. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687031003798254
Bingham, S. L. (2012). Refusal of treatment and 
decision-making capacity. Nursing Ethics, 
19(1), 167–172. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/ 
0969733011431925
Björklund, F., Bäckström, M., & Jørgensen, Ø. 
(2011). In-group ratings are affected by who 
asks and how: Interactive effects of experi-
menter group-membership and response 
format. Journal of Social Psychology, 151(5), 
625–634. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00224
545.2010.522623
Blake, M. L. (2005). Right hemisphere syn-
drome. In L. L. LaPointe (Ed.), Aphasia and 
related neurogenic language disorders (pp. 213– 
224). New York, NY: Thieme.
Blake, M. L. (2006). Clinical relevance of dis-
course characteristics after right hemisphere 
brain damage. American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, 15(3), 255–267. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2006/024)
Blake, M. L., Duffy, J. R., Myers, P. S., & Tomp-
kins, C. A. (2002). Prevalence and patterns 
of right hemisphere cognitive/communi-
cative deficits: Retrospective data from an 
inpatient rehabilitation unit. Aphasiology, 
16, 5370548. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​02​
687030244000194
Blake, M. L., Frymark, T., & Venedictov, R. 
(2013). An evidence-based systematic review 
on communication treatments for individu-
als with right hemisphere brain damage. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathol-
ogy, 22(1), 146–160. http://dx.doi.org/10​ 
.1044/1058-0360(2012/12-0021)
Blomert, L., Kean, M.-L., Koster, C., & Schok-
ker, J. (1994). Amsterdam-Nijmegen Every-
day Language Test: Construction, reliability 
and validity. Aphasiology, 8(4), 381. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687039408248666
Bloom, B. S. (1956). Taxonomy of educational 
objectives: The classification of educational goals. 
New York, NY: Longmans, Green.
Bloom, L., & Lahey, M. (1978). Language devel-
opment and language disorders. New York, 
NY: Wiley.
Bloom, R. L., Obler, L. K., DeSanti, S., & Ehrlich, 
J. S. (1994). Discourse analyses and applications: 
Studies in adult clinical populations. Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Boczko, F. (1994). The Breakfast Club: A multi-
modal language stimulation program for 
nursing home residents with Alzheimer’s 
disease. American Journal of Alzheimer’s Dis-
ease and Other Dementias, 9(4), 35–38. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/153331759400900407
Boles, L. (2004). The ICF language of numeric 
adjectives. Advances in Speech Language Pa- 
thology, 6(1), 71–73. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.3109/09638288.2010.529235
Boles, L. (2009). Aphasia couples therapy (ACT) 
workbook. San Diego, CA: Plural.
Bollinger, R. L., Musson, N. D., & Holland, A. 
L. (1993). A study of group communica-
tion intervention with chronically aphasic 
persons. Aphasiology, 7(3), 301–313. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687039308249512
Bonakdarpour, B., Eftekharzadeh, A., & Asha­
yeri, H. (2003). Melodic intonation therapy 
in Persian aphasic patients. Aphasiology, 
17(1), 75–95. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
729254891

602   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Booth, S., & Swabey, D. (1999). Group train-
ing in communication skills for carers of 
adults with aphasia. International Journal 
of Language & Communication Disorders, 
34(3), 291–309. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
136828299247423
Boswell, S. (2011). Court access for people 
with aphasia. The ASHA Leader, 16, 1–7. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/leader.FTR6​
.16022011.1
Boucher, V., Garcia, L. J., Fleurant, J., & Para-
dis, J. (2001). Variable efficacy of rhythm 
and tone in melody-based interventions: 
Implications for the assumption of a right-
hemisphere facilitation in non-fluent apha-
sia. Aphasiology, 15(2), 131–149. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687040042000098
Bourgeois, M. S. (1990). Enhancing conversa-
tion skills in patients with Alzheimer’s dis-
ease using a prosthetic memory aid. Journal 
of Applied Behavior Analysis, 23(1), 29–42. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1901/jaba.1990.23-29
Bourgeois, M. S. (1992). Evaluating memory 
wallets in conversations with persons with 
dementia. Journal of Speech and Hearing 
Research, 35(6), 1344–1357. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/jshr.3506.1344
Bourgeois, M. S. (1993). Effects of memory aids 
on the dyadic conversations of individuals 
with dementia. Journal of Applied Behavior 
Analysis, 26(1), 77–87. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1901/jaba.1993.26-77
Bourgeois, M. S., Burgio, L. D., Schulz, R., 
Beach, S., & Palmer, B. (1997). Modifying 
repetitive verbalizations of community-
dwelling patients with AD. The Gerontolo-
gist, 37(1), 30–39. http://dx.doi.org/10​.10​
93/geront/37.1.30
Bourgeois, M. S., & Hickey, E. M. (2009). 
Dementia: From diagnosis to management — a 
functional approach. New York, NY: Psycho-
logical Press.
Bourgeois, M. S., & Mason, L. A. (1996). Mem-
ory wallet intervention in an adult day- 
care setting. Behavioral Interventions: Theory 
and Practice in Residential and Community-
Based Clinical Programs, 11(1), 3–18. http://dx 
.doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-078X(199601)​
11:1<3::AID-BRT150>3.0.CO;2-0
Bouzat, P., Francony, G., Thomas, S., Valable, 
S., Mauconduit, F., Fevre, M.-C., . . . Payen, 
J.-F. (2011). Reduced brain edema and func-
tional deficits after treatment of diffuse 
traumatic brain injury by carbamylated 
erythropoietin derivative. Critical Care Med-
icine, 39(9), 2099–2105. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1097/CCM.0b013e31821cb7b2
Bowman, S. M., Aitken, M. E., Helmkamp, J. 
C., Maham, S. A., & Graham, C. J. (2009). 
Impact of helmets on injuries to riders of 
all-terrain vehicles. Injury Prevention, 15(1), 
3–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ip.2008.01​
9372
Bowers, D., Blonder, L. X., & Heilman, K. M. 
(1999). Florida Affect Battery. Gainesville, FL: 
University of Florida, Cognitive Neurosci-
ence Laboratory.
Boyle, M. (2001). Semantic feature analysis: 
The evidence for treating lexical impair-
ments in aphasia. SIG, 2 Perspectives on Neu-
rophysiology and Neurogenic Speech and Lan-
guage Disorders, 11(2), 23–28. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/nnsld11.2.23
Boyle, M. (2004). Semantic feature analysis 
treatment for anomia in two fluent apha-
sia syndromes. American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, 13(3), 236–249. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2004/025)
Boyle, M., & Coelho, C. A. (1995). Application 
of semantic feature analysis as a treatment 
for aphasic dysnomia. American Journal of 
Speech-Language Pathology, 4, 94–138. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360.0404.94
Braak, H., & Braak, E. (1991). Neuropathologi-
cal stageing of Alzheimer-related changes. 
Acta Neuropathologica, 82(4), 239–259. http://​ 
dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00308809
Bradley, D. C., Garret, M. E., & Zurif, E. B. 
(1980). Syntactic deficits in Broca’s aphasia. 
In D. Caplan (Ed.), Biological studies of men-
tal processes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Brady, M. C., Kelly, H., Godwin, J., & Enderby, 
P. (2012). Speech and language therapy for 
aphasia following stroke. Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews, 5, CD000425. http://dx 
.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000425​.pub3
Brady Wagner, L. C. (2003). Clinical ethics 
in the context of language and cognitive 

References   603
impairment: Rights and protections. Semi-
nars in Speech and Language, 24(4), 275–284. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-2004-815581
BrainLine. (2015). Blast injuries and the brain. 
Retrieved from http://www.brainlinemili-
tary.org/content/2010/12/blast-injuries-
and-the-brain.html
Braver, T. S., & Barch, D. M. (2006). Extracting 
core components of cognitive control. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 10(12), 529–532. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.10.006
Brennan, A. D., Worrall, L. E., & McKenna, K. 
T. (2005). The relationship between specific 
features of aphasia-friendly written mate-
rial and comprehension of written material 
for people with aphasia: An exploratory 
study. Aphasiology, 19(8), 693–711. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030444000958
Brennan, D. M., Georgeadis, A. C., Baron, 
C. R., & Barker, L. M. (2004). The effect of 
videoconference-based telerehabilitation 
on story retelling performance by brain-
injured subjects and its implications for 
remote speech-language therapy. Telemedi-
cine Journal and E-Health, 10(2), 147–154. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2004.10.147
Brickenkamp, R., & Zillmer, E. (1998). The d2 
Test of Attention. Toronto, Canada: Hogrefe 
& Huber.
Brodaty, H., Pond, D., Kemp, N. M., Luscombe, 
G., Harding, L., Berman, K., & Huppert, 
F. A. (2002). The GPCOG: A new screen-
ing test for dementia designed for general 
practice. Journal of the American Geriatrics 
Society, 50(3), 530–534. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1046/j.1532-5415.2002.50122.x
Brody, H. (2005). Shared decision making and 
determining decision-making capacity. Pri-
mary Care, 32(3), 645–658. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.pop.2005.06.004
Brookfield, S. D. (2012). Teaching for critical 
thinking: Tools and techniques to help students 
question their assumptions. San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Brookshire, R. H. (1983). Subject description 
and generality of results in experiments 
with aphasic adults. Journal of Speech and 
Hearing Disorders, 48(4), 342–346. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1044/jshd.4804.342
Brookshire, R. H., & Nicholas, L. E. (1984). 
Comprehension of directly and indirectly 
stated main ideas and details in discourse 
by brain-damaged and non-brain-damaged 
listeners. Brain and Language, 21(1), 21–36.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0093-934X(84)​
90033-6
Brookshire, R. H., & Nicholas, L. E. (1997). Dis-
course Comprehension Test: Test manual. Min-
neapolis, MN: BRK.
Brotons, M., & Koger, S. M. (2000). The impact 
of music therapy on language function-
ing in dementia. Journal of Music Therapy, 
37(3), 183–195. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
jmt/37.3.183
Broussard, T. G. (2015). Stroke diary: A primer 
for aphasia therapy. North Charleston, SC: 
CreateSpace.
Brown, J. W. (1972). Aphasia, apraxia, and agno-
sia: Clinical and theoretical aspects. Spring-
field, IL: Charles C Thomas.
Brown, J. W. (1977). Mind, brain and conscious-
ness. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Brown, J. W., & Raleigh, M. (1979). Language 
representation in the brain. In H. Steklis 
(Ed.), Neurobiology of social communication 
in primates. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Brown, K., Worrall, L., Davidson, B., & Howe, T. 
(2010). Snapshots of success: An insider per-
spective on living successfully with apha-
sia. Aphasiology, 24(10), 1267–1295. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687031003755429
Brown, L., Sherbenou, R. J., & Johnson, S. K. 
(2010). Test of Nonverbal Intelligence TONI-4. 
Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Brown, N. A. (2005). Information on telemedi-
cine. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 11, 
117–126. http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/​1357​
633053688714
Brownell, H., & Gardner, H. (1988). Neuro-
psychological insights into humour. In J. 
Durant & J. Miller (Eds.), Laughing matters: 
A serious look at humour (pp. 17–34). New 
York, NY: Wiley.
Brownell, H., & Martino, G. (1998). Deficits in 
inference and social cognition: The effects 
of right hemisphere brain damage on dis-
course. In M. Beeman & C. Chiarello (Eds.), 
Right hemisphere language comprehension: 

604   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Perspectives from cognitive neuroscience (pp. 
309–328). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Brumfitt, S. (1995). Psychotherapy in aphasia. 
In C. Code & D. Müller (Eds.), Treatment of 
Aphasia: From theory to practice. London, UK: 
Whurr.
Brumfitt, S. (2009). Psychological wellbeing and 
acquired communication impairment. Hobo-
ken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.
Brumfitt, S., & Sheeran, P. (1999). The visual 
assessment of self-esteem scale. Oxford, UK: 
Winslow Press.
Bryan, K. (1994). The Right Hemisphere Language 
Battery (2nd ed.). London, UK: Whurr.
Buchsbaum, B. R., Baldo, J., Okada, K., Ber-
man, K. F., Dronkers, N., D’Esposito, M., 
& Hickok, G. (2011). Conduction aphasia, 
sensory-motor integration, and phonologi-
cal short-term memory: An aggregate anal-
ysis of lesion and fMRI data. Brain and Lan-
guage, 119(3), 119–128. http://dx.doi.org/​ 
10.1016/j.bandl.2010.12.001
Burgio, L. D., Allen-Burge, R., Roth, D. L., 
Bourgeois, M. S., Dijkstra, K., Gerstle, J., . . . 
Bankester, L. (2001). Come talk with me: 
Improving communication between nurs-
ing assistants and nursing home residents 
during care routines. The Gerontologist, 
41(4), 449–460. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/
geront/41.4.449
Burke, D. M. (2013). Development of a core set for 
aphasia using the International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health (Master’s 
thesis). Saint Louis University, Saint Louis, 
MO.
Burke, D. M., MacKay, D. G., & James, L. E. 
(2000). Theoretical approaches to language 
and aging. In T. J. Perfect & E. A. Maylor 
(Eds.), Models of cognitive aging (pp. 204–237). 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Burke, D. M., & Shafto, M. A. (2008). Lan-
guage and aging. In F. I. M. Craik & T. A. 
Salthouse (Eds.), The handbook of aging and 
cognition (3rd ed., pp. 373–444). New York, 
NY: Psychology Press.
Burns, M. S. (1997). Burns Brief Inventory Of 
Communication And Cognition: Right hemi-
sphere inventory. San Antonio, TX: Pearson.
Burns, M. S. (2004). Clinical management of 
agnosia. Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation, 11(1), 
1–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1310/N13K-​YK 
YQ-3XX1-NFAV
Butler, K. M., & Zacks, R. T. (2006). Age deficits 
in the control of prepotent responses: Evi-
dence for an inhibitory decline. Psychology 
and Aging, 21(3), 638–643. http://psycnet​
.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0882-7974.21.3.638
Butt, P., & Bucks, R. S. (2004). BNVR: The 
Butt Non-Verbal Reasoning Test. Oxon, UK: 
Speechmark.
Byng, S., Kay, J., Edmundson, A., & Scott, C. 
(1990). Aphasia tests reconsidered. Aphasiol-
ogy, 4(1), 67–91. http://dx.doi.org/10​.1080/​ 
02687039008249055
Byng, S., Nickels, L., & Black, M. (1994). Rep-
licating therapy for mapping deficits in 
agrammatism: Remapping the deficit? Apha-
siology, 8(4), 315–341. http://dx.doi.org/10​ 
.1080/02687039408248663
Byng, S., Pound, C., & Parr, S. (2000). Living 
with aphasia: A framework for therapy inter-
ventions. In I. Papathanasiou (Ed.), Acquired 
neurogenic communication disorders: A clinical 
perspective (pp. 49–75). London, UK: Whurr.
Byrne, K., & Orange, J. (2005). Conceptualizing 
communication enhancement in dementia 
for family caregivers using the WHO-ICF 
framework. Advances in Speech-Language 
Pathology, 7(4), 187–202. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/14417040500337062
Cabeza, R. (2002). Hemispheric asymmetry 
reduction in older adults: The HAROLD 
model. Psychology and Aging, 17(1), 85–100. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/​0882-7974​.17​
.1.85
Cahana-Amitay, D., Albert, M. L., & Oveis, A. 
(2014). Psycholinguistics of aphasia phar-
macotherapy: Asking the right questions. 
Aphasiology, 28(2), 133–154. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687038.2013.818099
Cahana-Amitay, D., Albert, M. L., Pyun, S.-B., 
Westwood, A., Jenkins, T., Wolford, S., & 
Finley, M. (2011). Language as a stressor in 
aphasia. Aphasiology, 25(5), 593–614. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2010.541 
469

References   605
Cahana-Amitay, D., Oveis, A., & Sayers, J. (2013). 
Feeling anxious can affect language perfor-
mance in chronic aphasia: A case report. 
Procedia — Social and Behavioral Sciences, 94, 
149–150. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sbs 
pro.2013.09.073
Cameron, R. M., Wambaugh, J. L., & Mau­
szycki, S. C. (2010). Individual variability 
on discourse measures over repeated sam-
pling times in persons with aphasia. Apha-
siology, 24(6–8), 671–684. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/02687030903443813
Camp, C. J. (2001). From efficacy to effective-
ness to diffusion: Making the transitions in 
dementia intervention research. Neuropsy-
chological Rehabilitation, 11(3/4), 495–517. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/096020100420 
00079
Camp, C. J. (2010). Origins of Montessori pro-
gramming for dementia. Non-Pharmacologi-
cal Therapies in Dementia, 1(2), 163–174.
Camp, C. J., Foss, J. W., O’Hanlon, A. M., & 
Stevens, A. B. (1996). Memory interventions 
for persons with dementia. Applied Cognitive 
Psychology, 10(3), 193–210. http://dx.doi​ 
.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-0720(199606) 
10:3<193::AID-ACP374>3.0.CO;2-4
Camp, C. J., Judge, K. S., Bye, C. A., Fox, K. 
M., Bowden, J., Bell, M., . . . Mattern, J. M. 
(1997). An intergenerational program for 
persons with dementia using Montessori 
Methods. The Gerontologist, 37(5), 688–692. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/geront/37.5.688
CAPCSD Research Doctoral Student Survey 
Committee. (2009). 2009 CAPCSD survey of 
research doctoral students. Council of Aca-
demic Programs in Communication Sciences 
and Disorders. Retrieved from http://cap​
csd.org/documents/2009%20Doctoral%20
Survey%20Results%20final.LSmall.pdf
Capilouto, G., Wright, H. H., & Wagovich, S. A. 
(2005). CIU and main event analyses of the 
structured discourse of older and younger 
adults. Journal of Communication Disorders, 
38, 431–444. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j​
.jcomdis.2005.03.005
Capilouto, G. J., Wright, H. H., & Wagovich, 
S. A. (2006). Reliability of main event mea-
surement in the discourse of individuals 
with aphasia. Aphasiology, 20(2–4), 205–216. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0268703050047​
3122
Caplan, D., DeDe, G., Waters, G., Michaud, J., 
& Tripodis, Y. (2011). Effects of age, speed 
of processing, and working memory on 
comprehension of sentences with relative 
clauses. Psychology and Aging, 26(2), 439–
450. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0021837
Caplan, D., Waters, G., & Alpert, N. (2003). 
Effects of age and speed of processing on 
rCBF correlates of syntactic processing in 
sentence comprehension. HBM Human 
Brain Mapping, 19(2), 112–131. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1002/hbm.10107
Caporael, L. R. (1981). The paralanguage of 
caregiving: Baby talk to the institutional-
ized aged. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 40(5), 876–884. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1037/0022-3514.40.5.876
Carlomagno, S., Losanno, N., Emanuelli, S., 
& Casadio, P. (1991). Expressive language 
recovery or improved communicative skills: 
Effects of P.A.C.E. therapy on aphasics’ ref-
erential communication and story retelling. 
Aphasiology, 5(4–5), 419–424. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687039108248544
Carragher, M., Sage, K., & Conroy, P. (2013). 
The effects of verb retrieval therapy for peo-
ple with non-fluent aphasia: Evidence from 
assessment tasks and conversation. Neuro-
psychological Rehabilitation, 23(6), 846–887. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09602011.2013​
.832335
Carrera, E., & Tononi, G. (2014). Diaschisis: Past, 
present, future. Brain, 137(9), 2408–2422. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu101
Carvalho, I. P., Pais, V. G., Almeida, S. S., 
Ribeiro-Silva, R., Figueiredo-Braga, M., 
Teles, A., . . . Mota-Cardoso, R. (2011). Learn-
ing clinical communication skills: Out-
comes of a program for professional prac-
titioners. Patient Education and Counseling, 
84(1), 84–89. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j​
.pec​.2010.05.010
Cason, J., & Brannon, J. A. (2011). Telehealth reg-
ulatory and legal considerations: Frequently  

606   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
asked questions. International Journal of 
Telerehabilitation, 3(2), 15–18. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.5195/ijt.2011.6077
Ceccaldi, M., Soubrouillard, C., Poncet, M., & 
Lecours, A. R. (1996). A case reported by 
Sérieux: The first description of a “primary 
progressive word deafness.” In C. Code, C. 
W. Wallesch, Y. Joanette, & A. R. Lecours 
(Eds.), Classic cases in neuropsychology (pp. 
45–52). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(2003). National center for injury prevention 
and control. Atlanta, GA: Author.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
(2014). About HIV/AIDS. Retrieved from 
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/basics/whatis​
hiv.html
Cernak, I., & Noble-Haeusslein, L. J. (2010). 
Traumatic brain injury: An overview of 
pathobiology with emphasis on military 
populations. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow 
and Metabolism: Official Journal of the Interna-
tional Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metab-
olism, 30(2), 255–266. http://dx.doi.org/​ 
10.1038/jcbfm.2009.203
Chabon, S. S., & Cohn, E. R. (2011). The commu-
nication disorders casebook: Learning by example. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Chan, R. C. K. (2000). Attentional deficits in 
patients with closed head injury: A further 
study to the discriminative validity of the 
test of everyday attention. Brain Injury, 14(3), 
227–236. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0269​ 
90500120709
Chang, W. D., & Bourgeois, M. (2015). Effects 
of visual stimuli on decision-making capacity of 
people with dementia for end-of-life care. Man-
uscript in preparation.
Chapey, R. (2008). Cognitive stimulation: 
Stimulation of recognition/comprehension, 
memory, and convergent, divergent, and 
evaluative thinking. In R. Chapey (Ed.), 
Language intervention strategies in aphasia 
and related neurogenic communication disor-
ders (4th ed., pp. 469–506). Baltimore, MD: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Chapey, R., Duchan, J. F., Elman, R. J., Gar-
cia, L. J., Kagan, A., Lyon, J., & Simmons-
Mackie, N. (2008). Life participation approach 
to aphasia: A statement of values for the future. 
Retrieved from http://www.asha.org/pub​
lic/speech/disorders/LPAA/
Chapman, E. H., Weintraub, R. J., Milburn, 
M. A., Pirozzi, T. O., & Woo, E. (1999). 
Homeopathic treatment of mild traumatic 
brain injury: A randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled clinical trial. The Jour-
nal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 14(6), 
521–542. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/​0000​
1199-199912000-00002
Chau, A. C. M., Fai Cheung, R. T., Jiang, X., 
Au-Yeung, P. K. M., & Li, L. S. W. (2010). 
An fMRI study showing the effect of acu-
puncture in chronic stage stroke patients 
with aphasia. Journal of Acupuncture and 
Meridian Studies, 3(1), 53–57. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/S2005-2901(10)60009-X
Chaumet, G., Quera-Salva, M.-A., MacLeod, 
A., Hartley, S., Taillard, J., Sagaspe, P., 
. . . Philip, P. (2008). Is there a link between 
alertness and fatigue in patients with trau-
matic brain injury? Neurology, 71(20), 1609–
1613. http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl​.00​
00334753.49193.48
Cherney, L. R. (1995). Efficacy of oral reading in 
the treatment of two patients with chronic 
Broca’s aphasia. Topics in Stroke Rehabilita-
tion, 2(1), 57–67. Retrieved from http://apha​
siology.pitt.edu/archive/00001548/01/
febbd133559427488af4c348fc0e.pdf
Cherney, L. R. (1998). Pragmatics and dis-
course: An introduction. In L. R. Cherney, 
C. A. Coelho, & B. B. Shadden (Eds.), Ana-
lyzing discourse in communicatively impaired 
adults (pp. 1–8). Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen.
Cherney, L. R. (2004). Aphasia, alexia, and 
oral reading. Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation, 
11(1), 22–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1310/
VUPX-WDX7-J1EU-00TB
Cherney, L. R. (2010a). Oral reading for lan-
guage in aphasia: Impact of aphasia sever-
ity on cross-modal outcomes in chronic 
nonfluent aphasia. Seminars in Speech and 
Language, 31(1), 42–51. http://dx.doi.org/10​ 
.1055/s-0029-1244952
Cherney, L. R. (2010b). Oral reading for lan-
guage in aphasia (ORLA): Evaluating the 
efficacy of computer-delivered therapy in 

References   607
chronic nonfluent aphasia. Topics in Stroke 
Rehabilitation, 17(6), 423–431. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1310/tsr1706-423
Cherney, L. R. (2012). Aphasia treatment: 
Intensity, dose parameters, and script train-
ing. International Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 14(5), 424–431. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.3109/17549507.2012.686629
Cherney, L. R., Coelho, C. A., & Shadden, B. 
B. (1998). Analyzing discourse in communi-
catively impaired adults. Gaithersburg, MD: 
Aspen.
Cherney, L. R., Gardner, P., Logemann, J. A., 
Newman, L. A., O’Neil-Pirozzi, T., Roth, C. 
R., . . . Disorders Clinical Trails Research 
Group. (2010). The role of speech-language 
pathology and audiology in the optimal 
management of the service member return-
ing from Iraq or Afghanistan with a blast-
related head injury: Position of the Com-
munication Sciences and Disorders Clinical 
Trials Research Group. The Journal of Head 
Trauma Rehabilitation, 25(3), 219–224. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1097/HTR.0b013e3181dc82c1
Cherney, L. R., Halper, A. S., Holland, A. L., & 
Cole, R. (2008). Computerized script train-
ing for aphasia: Preliminary results. Ameri-
can Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 
17(1), 19–34. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/​
1058-​0360(2008/003)
Cherney, L. R., Merbitz, C. T., & Grip, J. C. 
(1986). Efficacy of oral reading in aphasia 
treatment outcome. Rehabilitation Literature, 
47(5–6), 112–118.
Cherney, L. R., Patterson, J. P., Raymer, A., Fry-
mark, T., & Schooling, T. (2008). Evidence-
based systematic review: Effects of inten-
sity of treatment and constraint-induced 
language therapy for individuals with 
stroke-induced aphasia. Journal of Speech, 
Language, and Hearing Research, 51(5), 1282–
1299. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1092-43 
88(2008/07-0206)
Cherney, L. R., & van Vuuren, S. (2012). 
Telerehabilitation, virtual therapists, and 
acquired neurologic speech and language 
disorders. Seminars in Speech and Language, 
33(3), 243–257. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/​
s-0032-1320044
Cherry, K. E., & Simmons-D’Gerolamo, S. S. 
(2005). Long-term effectiveness of spaced-
retrieval memory training for older adults 
with probable Alzheimer’s disease. Experi-
mental Aging Research, 31(3), 261–289. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/03610730590948186
Chiesa, A., & Serretti, A. (2010). A systematic 
review of neurobiological and clinical fea-
tures of mindfulness meditations. Psycho-
logical Medicine, 40(8), 1239–1252. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0033291709991747
Chomsky, N. (1986). Knowledge of language: 
Its nature, origins, and use. New York, NY: 
Praeger.
Cho-Reyes, S., & Thompson, C. K. (2012). Verb 
and sentence production and comprehen-
sion in aphasia: Northwestern Assessment 
of Verbs and Sentences (NAVS). Aphasiol-
ogy, 26(10), 1250–1277. http://dx.doi.org/10 
.1080/02687038.2012.693584
Christensen, H., Anstey, K. J., Leach, L. S., & 
Mackinnon, A. J. (2008). Intelligence, edu-
cation, and the brain reserve hypothesis. In 
F. I. M. Craik & T. A. Salthouse (Eds.), The 
handbook of aging and cognition. New York, 
NY: Psychology Press.
Chung, J., & Lai, C. (2009). Snoezelen for 
dementia. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews, 4, CD03152. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1002/14651858.CD003152
Cicerone, K. D., Dahlberg, C., Malec, J. F., Lan-
genbahn, D. M., Felicetti, T., Kneipp, S., . . . 
Cantonese, J. (2005). Evidence-based cogni-
tive rehabilitation: Updated review of the 
literature from 1998 through 2002. Archives 
of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 86(8), 
1681–1692. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ap​
mr.2005.03.024
Cifu, D. X., Cohen, S. I., Lew, H. L., Jaffee, M., 
& Sigford, B. (2010). The history and evolu-
tion of traumatic brain injury rehabilitation 
in military service members and veterans. 
American Journal of Physical Medicine & Reha-
bilitation, 89(8), 688–694. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1097/PHM.0b013e3181e722ad
Clark, W., Mortensen, L., & Christie, J. (1986). 
Mount Wilga High Level Language Test. Syd-
ney, Australia: Mt. Wilga Rehabilitation 
Centre.

608   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Clausen, N. S., & Beeson, P. M. (2003). Con-
versational use of writing in severe aphasia: 
A group treatment approach. Aphasiology, 
17(6/7), 625. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
02687030344000003
Cobley, C. S., Thomas, S. A., Lincoln, N. B., 
& Walker, M. F. (2012). The assessment of 
low mood in stroke patients with aphasia: 
Reliability and validity of the 10-item hos-
pital version of the stroke aphasic depres-
sion questionnaire (SADQH-10). Clinical 
Rehabilitation, 26(4), 372–381. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1177/0269215511422388
Code, C. (2012). Apportioning time for aphasia 
rehabilitation. Aphasiology, 26(5), 729–735. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2012​
.676892
Code, C., Mackie, N., Armstrong, E., Stiegler, 
L., Armstrong, J., Bushby, E., . . . Webber, 
A. (2001). The public awareness of aphasia: 
An international survey. International Jour-
nal of Language & Communication Disorders, 
36, 1–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/​1368​
2820109177849
Code, C., & Müller, D. J. (1992). The Code-Müller  
protocols: Assessing perceptions of psychosocial 
adjustment to brain damage. Kibworth, UK: 
Far Communications.
Code, C., Müller, D. J., & Herrmann, M. (1999). 
Perceptions of psychosocial adjustment to 
aphasia: Applications of the Code-Müller 
protocols. Seminars in Speech and Language, 
20(1), 51–62; quiz 63. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1055/s-2008-1064008
Code, C., & Petheram, B. (2011). Delivering 
for aphasia. International Journal of Speech- 
Language Pathology, 13(1), 3–10. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.3109/17549507.2010.520090
Coelho, C. A., Duffy, J. R., & Sinotte, M. P. 
(2008). Schuell’s stimulation approach to 
rehabilitation. In R. Chapey (Ed.), Language 
intervention strategies in aphasia and related 
neurogenic communication disorders (5th ed., 
pp. 403–449). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins.
Coelho, C. A., Grela, B., Corso, M., Gamble, A., 
& Feinn, R. (2005). Microlinguistic deficits 
in the narrative discourse of adults with 
traumatic brain injury. Brain Injury, 19(13), 
1139–1145. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​02​
699050500110678
Coelho, C. A., Liles, B. Z., & Duffy, R. J. (1995). 
Impairments of discourse abilities and 
executive functions in traumatically brain-
injured adults. Brain Injury, 9(5), 471–477. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/02699059​509​
008206
Coelho, C. A., McHugh, R. E., & Boyle, M. 
(2000). Semantic feature analysis as a treat-
ment for aphasic dysnomia: A replication. 
Aphasiology, 14(2), 133–142. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/026870300401513
Coelho, C., Ylvisaker, M., & Turkstra, L. S. 
(2005). Nonstandardized assessment ap- 
proaches for individuals with traumatic 
brain injuries. Seminars in Speech and Lan-
guage, 26(4), 223–241. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1055/​s-2005-922102
Coelho, C., Youse, K., & Le, K. (2002). Conver-
sational discourse in closed-head-injured 
and non-brain-injured adults. Aphasiol-
ogy, 16(4–6), 659–672. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1080/​02687030244000275
Cohen, L., Remy, P., Leroy, A., Geny, C., & 
Degos, J. D. (1991). Minor hemisphere syn-
drome following left hemispheric lesion in 
a right handed patient. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 54(9), 842–843. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.54.9.842
Cohn, E. R. (2012). Tele-ethics in telepractice 
for communication disorders. SIG, 18 Per-
spectives on Telepractice2, 3–15. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1044/tele2.1.3
Cohn, E. R., Brannon, J. A., & Cason, J. (2011). 
Resolving barriers to licensure portability 
for telerehabilitation professionals. Interna-
tional Journal of Telerehabilitation, 3(2), 31–34. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5195/ijt.2011.6078
Cohn, E. R., & Watzlaf, V. J. M. (2011). Privacy 
and Internet-based telepractice. SIG, 18 
Perspectives on Telepractice, 1, 26–37. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/tele1.1.26
Colaço, D., Mineiro, A., Leal, G., & Castro-
Caldas, A. (2010). Revisiting “The influence 
of literacy in paraphasias of aphasic speak-
ers.” Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 24(11), 
890–905. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/026992
06.2010.511406

References   609
Coker, L. H., & Shumaker, S. A. (2003). Type 2 
diabetes mellitus and cognition: An under-
studied issue in women’s health. Journal of 
Psychosomatic Research, 54(2), 129–39. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3999(02)00523-8
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spread-
ing-activation theory of semantic processing. 
Psychological Review, 82(6), 407–428. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.82.6.407
Collins, M. (1986). Diagnosis and treatment of 
global aphasia. San Diego, CA: College-Hill 
Press.
Comité Permanent de Liaison des Orthoph-
onistes-Logopèdes de L’union Européenne.  
(2007). Revision of the minimum standards for 
education. Retrieved from http://cplol​.eu/
images/Documents/education/Revised​
_Min_Standards_2007_la.pdf
Conklyn, D., Novak, E., Boissy, A., Bethoux, 
F., & Chemali, K. (2012). The effects of 
modified melodic intonation therapy on 
nonfluent aphasia: A pilot study. Journal of 
Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 55(5), 
1463–1471. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/​10​
92-4388(2012/11-0105)
Conley, A., & Coelho, C. A. (2003). Treatment 
of word retrieval impairment in chronic 
Broca’s aphasia. Aphasiology, 17(3), 407–428. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/729255460
Conlon, C. P., & McNeil, M. K. (1989). The 
efficacy of treatment for two globally aphasic 
adults using visual action therapy (Vol. 19, 
pp. 185–195). Lake Tahoe, NV: Pro-Ed. Re- 
trieved from http://aphasiology.pitt.edu/​
archive/00000114/
Connolly, G. K. (1998). Legibility and readabil-
ity of small print: Effects of font, observer age 
and spatial vision. University of Calgary. 
Retrieved from http://prism.ucalgary.ca//
handle/1880/26040
Connor, L. T., Obler, L. K., Tocco, M., Fitzpat-
rick, P. M., & Albert, M. L. (2001). Effect of 
socioeconomic status on aphasia severity 
and recovery. Brain and Language, 78(2), 
254–257. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/brln​
.2001.2459
Connor, L.T., Spiro, A., Obler, L. K., & Albert, 
M. L. (2004). Change in object naming 
ability during adulthood. The Journals of 
Gerontology, 59(5), 203–209. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1093/geronb/59.5.P203
Conroy, P. J., Snell, C., Sage, K. E., & Lambon 
Ralph, M. A. (2012). Using phonemic cue-
ing of spontaneous naming to predict item 
responsiveness to therapy for anomia in 
aphasia. Archives of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, 93(1, Suppl.), S53–S60. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2011.07.205
Cooke, S. F., & Bliss, T. V. P. (2005). Long-term 
potentiation and cognitive drug discovery. 
Current Opinion in Investigational Drugs 
(London, England: 2000), 6(1), 25–34.
Coppens, P., Parente, M., & Lecours, A. (1998). 
Aphasia in illiterate individuals. In P. Cop-
pens, Y. Lebrun, & A. Basso (Eds.), Aphasia 
in atypical populations (pp. 175–202). Mah-
wah, NJ: Psychology Press.
Corless, I. B., Michel, T. H., Nicholas, M., Jame-
son, D., Purtilo, R., & Dirkes, A. M. A. (2009). 
Educating health professions students 
about the issues involved in communicat-
ing effectively: A novel approach. Journal of 
Nursing Education, 48(7), 367–373. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3928/01484834-20090615-03
Côté, H., Payer, M., Giroux, F., & Joanette, Y. 
(2007). Towards a description of clinical 
communication impairment profiles fol-
lowing right-hemisphere damage. Aphasi-
ology, 21(6–8), 739–749. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/02687030701192331
Côté, I., & Lafance, R. (2012). Le Théâtre Apha-
sique: Dossier de Presse. Retrieved from 
http://theatreaphasique.org/pdf/dossier_
de_presse_eng.pdf
Council of Academic Programs in Communi-
cation Sciences and Disorders. (2002). Cri-
sis in the discipline: A plan for reshaping our 
future. Retrieved from http://www.capcsd​
.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Joint​
AdHocCmteFinalReport.pdf
Council for Clinical Certification in Audiol-
ogy and Speech-Language Pathology of the 
American Speech-Language-Hearing Asso-
ciation. (2013). 2014 standards for the certifi-
cate of clinical competence in speech-language 
pathology. Retrieved from http://www.asha​
.org/Certification/2014-Speech-Language-
Pathology-Certification-Standards/

610   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Courtney, A. C., & Courtney, M. W. (2009). A tho-
racic mechanism of mild traumatic brain 
injury due to blast pressure waves. Medical 
Hypotheses, 72(1), 76–83. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.mehy.2008.08.015
Covey, S. R. (2013). The 7 habits of highly effec-
tive people: Powerful lessons in personal change 
(Anniversary ed.). New York, NY: Simon & 
Schuster.
Cowl, A. L., & Gaugler, J. E. (2014). Efficacy 
of creative arts therapy in treatment of 
Alzheimer’s disease and dementia: A sys-
tematic literature review. Activities, Adapta-
tion & Aging, 38(4), 281–331. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/01924788.2014.966547
Crary, M. A., Haak, N. J., & Malinsky, A. E. 
(1989). Acute aphasia screening protocol. Apha-
siology, 3, 611–618. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1080/02687038908249027
Craver, C. F., & Small, S. L. (1997). Subcorti-
cal aphasia and the problem of attributing 
functional responsibility to parts of distrib-
uted brain processes. Brain and Language, 
58(3), 427–435. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/
brln.1997.1809
Croot, K. (2002). Diagnosis of AOS: Definition 
and criteria. Seminars in Speech and Language, 
23(4), 267–280. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/ 
s-2002-35800
Cross, K. P. (1981). Adults as learners. San Fran-
cisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Crosson, B., McGregor, K., Gopinath, K. S., 
Conway, T. W., Benjamin, M., Chang, Y.-L., 
. . . White, K. D. (2007). Functional MRI of 
language in aphasia: A review of the lit-
erature and the methodological challenges. 
Neuropsychology Review, 17(2), 157–177. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11065-007-9024-z
Cruice, M., Worrall, L., & Hickson, L. (2005). 
Personal factors, communication and 
vision predict social participation in older 
adults. Advances in Speech Language Pathol-
ogy, 7(4), 220–232.http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1080/14417040500337088
Cuddy, A. J. C., Fiske, S. T., Kwan, V. S. Y., 
Glick, P., Demoulin, S., Leyens, J.-P., . . . 
Ziegler, R. (2009). Stereotype content model 
across cultures: Towards universal similari-
ties and some differences. BJSO British Jour-
nal of Social Psychology, 48(1), 1–33. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1348/014466608X314935
Cunningham, R., Farrow, V., Davies, C., & 
Lincoln, N. (1995). Reliability of the assess-
ment of communicative effectiveness in 
severe aphasia. European Journal of Disorders 
of Communication: The Journal of the College 
of Speech and Language Therapists, London, 
30(1), 1–16. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/​1368​
2829509031319
Cutter, M., & Polovoy, C. (2014). Under pressure. 
The ASHA Leader, 19(6), 36–44. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/leader.FTR1.19062014.36
Dabul, B. (2000). Apraxia Battery for Adults 
(ABA-2). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Dahmen, N. S., & Cozma, R. (2009). Media 
takes: On aging. New York, NY: Interna-
tional Longevity Center-USA.
Dalemans, R. J. P., De Witte, L. P., Beurskens, 
A. J. H. M., Van Den Heuvel, W. J. A., & 
Wade, D. T. (2010). An investigation into 
the social participation of stroke survi-
vors with aphasia. Disability & Rehabilita-
tion, 32(20), 1678–1685. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.3109/09638281003649938
Dalsgaard, N. J. (2002). Prion diseases. An 
overview. Acta Pathologica, Microbiologica 
Et Immunologica Scandinavica, 110(1), 3–13. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0463​.2002​
.100102.x
Damasio, A. R. (1998). Signs of aphasia. In M. 
Sarno (Ed.), Acquired aphasia (3rd ed., pp. 
25–41). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Damasio, H. (2008). Neural basis of language 
disorders. In R. Chapey (Ed.), Language 
intervention strategies in adult and related neu-
rogenic communication disorders (5th ed., pp. 
20–41). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins.
Damico, J. S., & Simmons-Mackie, N. (2003). 
Qualitative research and speech-language 
pathology: A tutorial for the clinical realm. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathol-
ogy, 12(2), 131–143. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1044/1058-0360(2003/060)
Darley, F. L. (1982). Aphasia. Philadelphia, PA: 
W. B. Saunders.

References   611
Daumüller, M., & Goldenberg, G. (2010). 
Therapy to improve gestural expression in 
aphasia: A controlled clinical trial. Clinical 
Rehabilitation, 24(1), 55–65. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1177/0269215509343327
Davidson, B., Worrall, L., & Hickson, L. (2003). 
Identifying the communication activities of 
older people with aphasia: Evidence from 
naturalistic observation. Aphasiology, 17(3), 
243–264. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/7292​
55457
Davie, G. L., Hutcheson, K. A., Barringer, D. 
A., Weinbers, J. S., & Lewin, J. S. (2009). 
Aphasia in patients after brain tumor resec-
tion. Aphasiology, 23(9), 1196–1206. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030802436900
Davis, G. (1986). Pragmatics and treatment. In 
R. Chapey (Ed.), Language intervention strat-
egies in adult aphasia (2nd ed., pp. 251–265). 
Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins.
Davis, G. A. (1980). A critical look at PACE 
therapy [Clinical aphasiology paper]. Re- 
trieved from http://aphasiology.pitt.edu/
archive/00000567/
Davis, G. A. (2005). PACE revisited. Aphasiology, 
19(1), 21–38. http://dx.doi.org/10​.10​80/​ 
02687030444000598
Davis, G. A., & Wilcox, M. J. (1985). Adult 
aphasia rehabilitation: Applied pragmatics. San 
Diego, CA: College-Hill Press.
Davis, L. A., & Stanton, S. T. (2005). Semantic 
feature analysis as a functional therapy tool. 
Contemporary Issues in Communication Sci-
ences and Disorders, 32, 85–92. Retrieved from 
http://www.asha.org/uploadedFiles/ 
asha/publications/cicsd/2005FSemantic 
FeatureAnalysis.pdf
de Aguiar, V., Paolazzi, C. L., & Miceli, G. 
(2015). tDCS in post-stroke aphasia: The role 
of stimulation parameters, behavioral treat-
ment and patient characteristics. Cortex, 
63, 296–316. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
cortex.2014.08.015
Deal, M. (2003). Disabled people’s attitudes 
toward other impairment groups: A hier-
archy of impairments. Disability & Society, 
18(7), 897–910. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
0968759032000127317
de Boissezon, X., Démonet, J.-F., Puel, M., 
Marie, N., Raboyeau, G., Albucher, J.-F., 
. . . Cardebat, D. (2005). Subcortical apha-
sia: A longitudinal PET study. Stroke, 36(7), 
1467–1473. http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/01​
.STR.0000169947.08972.4f
de Boissezon, X., Peran, P., de Boysson, C., & 
Démonet, J. (2007). Pharmacotherapy of 
aphasia: Myth or reality? Brain and Lan-
guage, 102(1), 114–125. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1016/j.bandl.2006.07.004
Decker, S. E., & Martino, S. (2013). Unintended 
effects of training on clinicians’ interest, 
confidence, and commitment in using moti-
vational interviewing. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence, 132(3), 681–687. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.04.022
DeDe, G. (2013). Effects of verb bias and syn-
tactic ambiguity on reading in people with 
aphasia. Aphasiology, 27(10–12), 1408–1425. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2013​
.843151
DeKosky, S. T., Williamson, J. D., Fitzpatrick, 
A. L., Kronmal, R. A., Ives, D. G., Saxton, J. 
A., . . . Furberg, C. D. (2008). Ginkgo biloba 
for prevention of dementia: A random-
ized controlled trial. JAMA: The Journal of 
the American Medical Association, 300(19), 
2253–2262. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama​
.2008.683
D’Elia, L. F., Satz, P., Uchiyama, C. L., & White, 
T. (1996). Color Trails Test: Professional man-
ual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment 
Resources.
Delis, D. C., Kaplan, E., & Kramer, J. H. (2001). 
Delis-Kaplan executive function system. San 
Antonio, TX: Psychological Corp.
Delis, D. C., Kramer, J. H., Kaplan, E., & Ober, 
B. A. (2000). California Verbal Learning Test 
(2nd ed.). San Antonio, TX: Psychological 
Corporation.
Dell, G. S., & O’Seaghdha, P. G. (1992). Stages 
of lexical access in language production. 
Cognition, 42(1–3), 1–3. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1016/0010-0277(92)90046-K
Dell, G. S., Schwartz, M. F., Nozari, N., Faseyitan, 
O., & Branch Coslett, H. (2013). Voxel-based 
lesion-parameter mapping: Identifying  

612   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
the neural correlates of a computational 
model of word production. COGNIT Cog-
nition, 128(3), 380–396. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1016/j.cognition.2013.05.007
Demorest, M. E., & Erdman, S. A. (1986). Scale 
composition and item analysis of the com-
munication profile for the hearing impaired. 
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 29(4), 
515–535. http://dx.doi.org/​10.1044/jshr 
.2904.535
Dennis, N. A., & Cabeza, R. (2008). Neuroim-
aging of healthy cognitive aging. In F. I. M. 
Craik & T. A. Salthouse (Eds.), The handbook 
of aging and cognition (3rd ed., pp. 1–54). 
New York, NY: Psychology Press.
DePalma, R. G., Burris, D. G., Champion, H. 
R., & Hodgson, M. J. (2005). Blast injuries. 
The New England Journal of Medicine, 352(13), 
1335–1342. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NE​
JMra042083
Department of Veterans Affairs. (2009). VA/
DoD clinical practice guideline for manage-
ment of concussion/mild traumatic brain 
injury. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and 
Development, 46(6), CP1–68. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1682/JRRD.2009.06.0076
Dickey, M. W., & Thompson, C. K. (2007). The 
relation between syntactic and morphologi-
cal recovery in agrammatic aphasia: A case 
study. Aphasiology, 21(6–8), 604–616. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030701192059
Dietz, A., Thiessen, A., Griffith, J., Peterson, A., 
Sawyer, E., & Mckelvey, M. (2013). The rene-
gotiation of social roles in chronic aphasia: 
Finding a voice through AAC. Aphasiology, 
27(3), 309–325. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
02687038.2012.725241
Dijkstra, K., Bourgeois, M. S., Allen, R. S., & 
Burgio, L. D. (2004). Conversational coher-
ence: discourse analysis of older adults 
with and without dementia. Journal of Neu-
rolinguistics, 17(4), 263–283. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/S0911-6044(03)00048-4
DiLollo, A., & Favreau, C. (2010). Person- 
centered care and speech and language ther-
apy. Seminars in Speech and Language, 31(2), 
90–97. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0030- 
125​2110
Dilworth-Anderson, P., Pierre, G., & Hilliard, 
T. S. (2012). Social justice, health disparities, 
and culture in the care of the elderly. Jour-
nal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 40(1), 26–32. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-720X​.2012​
.00642.x
Donkin, J. J., & Vink, R. (2010). Mechanisms 
of cerebral edema in traumatic brain injury: 
Therapeutic developments. Current Opinion 
in Neurology, 23(3), 293–299. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1097/WCO.0b013e328337f451
Doolittle, G. C., Yaezel, A., Otto, F., & Clemens, 
C. (1998). Hospice care using home-based 
telemedicine systems. Journal of Telemedi-
cine and Telecare, 4(Suppl. 1), 58–59. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1258/1357633981931470
Douglas, J. M., O’Flaherty, C. A., & Snow, P. C. 
(2000). Measuring perception of communi-
cative ability: The development and evalu-
ation of the La Trobe communication ques-
tionnaire. Aphasiology, 14(3), 251–268. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/026870300401469
Doyle, P., McNeil, M., & Hula, W. (2003). The 
burden of stroke scale (BOSS): Validating 
patient-reported communication difficulty 
and associated psychological distress in 
stroke survivors. Aphasiology, 17(3), 291–304.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/729255459
Doyle, P., McNeil, M., Park, G., Goda, A., 
Rubenstein, E., Spencer, K., . . . Szwarc, L. 
(2000). Linguistic validation of four parallel 
forms of a story retelling procedure. Apha-
siology, 14(5–6), 537–549. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/026870300401306
Doyle, P. J., Goldstein, H., & Bourgeois, M. 
S. (1987). Experimental analysis of syntax 
training in Broca’s aphasia: A generaliza-
tion and social validation study. Journal of 
Speech and Hearing Disorders, 52(2), 143–155. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/jshd.5202.143
Dronkers, N. F. (1996). A new brain region for 
coordinating speech articulation. Nature, 
384(6605), 159–161. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1038/384159a0
Dronkers, N. F., Plaisant, O., Iba-Zizen, M., 
& Cabanis, E. (2007). Paul Broca’s historic 
cases: High resolution MR imaging of the 
brains of Leborgne and Lelong. Brain: A Jour-

References   613
nal of Neurology, 130, 1432–1441. http://dx​ 
.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awm042
Dronkers, N. F., Wilkins, D. P., Van Valin, R. D., 
Jr., Redfern, B. B., & Jaeger, J. J. (2004). Lesion 
analysis of the brain areas involved in lan-
guage comprehension. Cognition, 92(1–2), 
145–177. http://dx.doi.org/​10.1016/j.cog​ 
nition.2003.11.002
Drummond, S. S. (1993). Dysarthria Examina-
tion Battery. Tucson, AZ: Communication 
Skill Builders.
Drummond, S. S. (2006). Neurogenic communi-
cation disorders: Aphasia in cognitive-commu-
nication disorders (pp. 200–213). Springfield, 
IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Duff, M. C., Mutlu, B., Byom, L., & Turkstra, 
L. S. (2012). Beyond utterances: Distributed 
cognition as a framework for studying dis-
course in adults with acquired brain injury. 
Seminars in Speech and Langauge, 33(1), 44–54. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0031-1301162
Duffau, H. (2005). The anatomo-functional 
connectivity of language revisited: New 
insights provided by electrostimulation and 
tractography. Neuropyschologia, 46, 927–934.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsycho​
logia.2007.10.025
Duffy, J. R. (1974). Comparison of brain injured 
and non-brain injured subjects on an objective 
test of manual apraxia (Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation). University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT.
Duffy, J. R. (2013). Motor speech disorders: Sub-
strates, differential diagnosis, and management 
(3rd ed.). St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby.
Duffy, J. R. (2014). The values of board certifica-
tion. Newsletter of the Academy of Neurologic 
Communication Disorders and Sciences, 12(1), 2.
Duffy, J. R., Fossett, T. R. D., & Thomas, J. E. 
(2011). Clinical practice in acute care hospi-
tal settings. In L. L. Lapointe (Ed.), Aphasia 
and related neurogenic language disorders (4th 
ed.). New York, NY: Thieme.
Duffy, J. R., Werven, G. W., & Aronson, A. E. 
(1997). Telemedicine and the diagnosis of 
speech and language disorders. Mayo Clinic 
Proceedings, 72(12), 1116–1122. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.4065/72.12.1116
Dunham, M. J., & Newhoff, M. (1979). Melodic 
intonation therapy: Rewriting the song. 
Clinical Aphasiology, 9, 286–294. Retrieved 
from http://aphasiology.pitt.edu/archive/​
00000402/01/09-33.pdf
Dunkle, R. E., & Hooper, C. R. (1983). Using 
language to help depressed elderly aphasic 
persons. Social Casework: The Journal of Con-
temporary Social Work, 64, 539–545.
Dunn, K. E. (2011). Cognition and aging: Pri-
mary and tertiary aging factors. In M. A. 
Toner, B. B. Shadden, & M. B. Gluth (Eds.), 
Aging and communication (2nd ed., pp. 145–
168). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, D. M. (2007). Peabody 
Picture Vocabulary Test-4 (PPVT-4) (4th ed.). 
Minneapolis, MN: Pearson Assessments.
Eadie, T., Yorkston, K. M., Klasner, E. R., Dud-
geon, B. J., Deitz, J. C., Baylor, C. R., . . . 
Amtmann, D. (2006). Measuring communi-
cative participation: A review of self-report 
instruments in speech-language pathology. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathol-
ogy, 15(4), 307–320. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1044/1058-0360(2006/030)
Ebert, K. D., & Kohnert, K. (2010). Common fac-
tors in speech-language treatment: An explor-
atory study of effective clinicians. Journal of 
Communication Disorders, 43(2), 133–147. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2009.12.002
Edgeworth, J. A., Robertson, I. H., & McMil-
lan, T. M. (1998). The Balloons Test. Bury St 
Edmunds, UK: Thames Valley Test Co.
Edmonds, L. A., & Babb, M. (2011). Effect of 
verb network strengthening treatment in 
moderate-to-severe aphasia. American Jour-
nal of Speech-Language Pathology, 20(2), 131–
145. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360​
(2011/10-0036)
Edmonds, L. A., Mammino, K., & Ojeda, J. 
(2014). Effect of verb network strengthening 
treatment (VNeST) in persons with aphasia: 
Extension and replication of previous find-
ings. American Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 23(2), S312–S329. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/2014_AJSLP-13-0098
Edmonds, L. A., Nadeau, S. E., & Kiran, S. 
(2009). Effect of verb network strengthening 

614   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
treatment (VNeST) on lexical retrieval of 
content words in sentences in persons with 
aphasia. Aphasiology, 23(3), 402–424. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030802291339
Edmonds, L. J. (2005). Disabled people and devel-
opment. Manila, Philippines: Asian Devel-
opment Bank.
Educational Testing Service. (2014). The Praxis 
series for test takers: Speech language pathol-
ogy. Retrieved from https://www.ets.org/
praxis/prepare/materials/5330
Edwards, S., & Bastiaanse, R. (2007). Assess-
ment of aphasia in a multi-lingual world. 
In M. J. Ball & J. S. Damico (Eds.), Clinical 
aphasiology: Future directions (pp. 245–258). 
New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Ehlhardt, L. A., Sohlberg, M. M., Kennedy, 
M., Coelho, C., Ylvisaker, M., Turkstra, L. 
S., & Yorkston, K. (2008). Evidence-based 
practice guidelines for instructing indi-
viduals with neurogenic memory impair-
ments: What have we learned in the past 
20 years? Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 
18(3), 300–342. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
09602010701733190
Eikelenboom, P., Bate, C., Van Gool, W. A., 
Hoozemans, J. J. M., Rozemuller, J. M., 
Veerhuis, R., & Williams, A. (2002). Neuro-
inflammation in Alzheimer’s disease and 
prion disease. Glial Physiology and Patho-
physiology, 40(2), 232–239. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1002/glia.10146
Elder, G. A., & Cristian, A. (2009). Blast-related 
mild traumatic brain injury: Mechanisms of 
injury and impact on clinical care. Mount 
Sinai Journal of Medicine, 76(2), 111–118. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/msj.20098
Ellmo, W., Graser, J., Krchnavek, B., Hauck, K., 
& Calabrese, D. (1995). Measure of cognitive-
linguistic abilities (MCLA). Vero Beach, FL: 
Speech Bin.
Elman, R. J. (2007a). Group treatment of neuro-
genic communication disorders: The expert cli-
nician’s approach. Boston, MA: Butterworth-​ 
Heinemann.
Elman, R. J. (2007b). The importance of apha-
sia group treatment for rebuilding commu-
nity and health. Topics in Language Disor-
ders, 4, 300. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01​
.TLD.0000299884.31864.99
Elman, R. J., & Bernstein-Ellis, E. (1999). The 
efficacy of group communication treatment 
in adults with chronic aphasia. Journal of 
Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 42(2), 
411–419. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/jslhr​
.4202.411
Elman, R. J., Ogar, J., & Elman, S. H. (2000). 
Aphasia: Awareness, advocacy, and activ-
ism. Aphasiology, 14(5/6), 455–459. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/026870300401234
Enderby, P. (2012). How much therapy is 
enough? The impossible question! Interna-
tional Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 
14(5), 432–437. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/
17549507.2012.686118
Enderby, P., & Petheram, B. (2002). Has apha-
sia therapy been swallowed up? Clinical 
Rehabilitation, 16(6), 604–608. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1191/0269215502cr505oa
Enderby, P. M. (1983). Frenchay dysarthria as- 
sessment. San Diego, CA: College-Hill Press.
Enderby, P. M., & John, A. (2015). Therapy out-
come measures for rehabilitation professionals. 
Guildford, UK: J&R Press.
Enderby, P. M., & Palmer, R. (2008). Frenchay 
Dysarthria Assessment–Second Edition (FDA-
2). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Enderby, P. M., Wood, V., & Wade, D. T. (2006). 
Frenchay Aphasia Screening Test (2nd ed.). 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Falchook, A. D., Heilman, K. M., Finney, G. 
R., Gonzalez-Rothi, L. J., & Nadeau, S. E. 
(2014). Neuroplasticity, neurotransmitters 
and new directions for treatment of anomia 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Aphasiology, 28(2), 
219–235. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687
038.2013.793283
Falconer, C., & Antonucci, S. M. (2012). Use 
of semantic feature analysis in group dis-
course treatment for aphasia: Extension 
and expansion. Aphasiology, 26(1), 64–82. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2011​
.602390
Fama, M. E., & Turkeltaub, P. E. (2014). Treat-
ment of poststroke aphasia: Current prac-
tice and new directions. Seminars in Neurol-

References   615
ogy, 34(5), 504–513. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1055/s-0034-1396004
Farias, D., Davis, C., & Harrington, G. (2006). 
Drawing: Its contribution to naming in 
aphasia. Brain and Language, 97(1), 53–63. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl​.2005​
.07.074
Faroqi-Shah, Y., & Virion, C. R. (2009). Constraint-
induced language therapy for agramma-
tism: Role of grammaticality constraints. 
Aphasiology, 23(7/8), 977–988. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687030802642036
Fastenau, P. S., Denburg, N. L., & Mauer, B. 
A. (1998). Parallel short forms for the Bos-
ton Naming Test: Psychometric properties 
and norms for older adults. Journal of Clini-
cal and Experimental Neuropsychology, 20(6), 
828–834. http://dx.doi.org/10.1076/jcen​
.20.6.828.1105
Faul, M., Xu, L., Wald, M. M., & Coronado, V. 
G. (2010). Traumatic brain injury in the United 
States: Emergency department visits, hospital-
izations, and deaths, 2002–2006. Retrieved 
from http://purl.fdlp.gov/GPO/gpo41911
Federal Interagency Forum on Aging-Related 
Statistics. (2010). Older Americans 2010: Key 
indicators of well-being. Washington, DC: 
Author. Retrieved from http://www.aging​
stats.gov/agingstatsdotnet/main_site/
default.aspx
Federmeier, K. D., Van Petten, C., Schwartz, 
T. J., & Kutas, M. (2003). Sounds, words, 
sentences: Age-related changes across lev-
els of language processing. Psychology and 
Aging, 18(4), 858–872. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1037/0882-7974.18.4.858
Fedorenko, E., Duncan, J., & Kanwisher, N. 
(2012). Language-selective and domain-
general regions lie side by side within Bro-
ca’s area. Current Biology, 22(21), 2059–2062. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2012​.09.011
Fedorenko, E., Fillmore, P., Smith, K., Bonilha, 
L., & Fridriksson, J. (2015). The superior pre-
central gyrus of the insula does not appear 
to be functionally specialized for articu-
lation. Journal of Neurophysiology, 113(7), 
2376–2382. http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/jn​
.00214.2014
Feeney, M. P., & Hallowell, B. (2000). Practice 
and list effects on the synthetic sentence 
identification test in young and elderly lis-
teners. Journal of Speech, Language & Hear-
ing Research, 43(5), 1160–1167. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/jslhr.4305.1160
Ferguson, A., Duffield, G., & Worrall, L. 
(2010). Legal decision-making by people 
with aphasia: Critical incidents for speech 
pathologists. JLCD International Journal of 
Language & Communication Disorders, 45(2), 
244–258. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/1368​28​
20902936714
Ferguson, A., Worrall, L., McPhee, J., Buskell, 
R., Armstrong, E., & Togher, L. (2003). Tes-
tamentary capacity and aphasia: A descrip-
tive case report with implications for clinical 
practice. Aphasiology, 17(10), 965–980. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030344000337
Fernandes, F. D. M., de Andrade, C. R., Befi-
Lopes, D. M., Wertzner, H. F., & Limongi, S. 
C. (2010). Emerging issues concerning the 
education of speech and language patholo-
gists and audiologists in Brazil and South 
America. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 
62(5), 223–227. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/​
000314784
Finestone, H., & Blackmer, J. (2007). Refusal to 
eat, capacity, and ethics in stroke patients:  
A report of 3 cases. Archives of Physical Med-
icine and Rehabilitation, 88(11), 1474–1477. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2007.​07​
.018
Finger, S., Tyler, K. L., & Boller, F. (2010). His-
tory of neurology (Vol. 95). Edinburgh, UK: 
Elsevier.
Fink, L. D. (2003). A self-directed guide to design-
ing courses for significant learning. San Fran-
cisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Fink, R. B., Martin, N., Schwartz, M. F., Saf-
fron, E. M., & Myers, J. L. (1992). Facili-
tation of verb retrieval skills in aphasia: 
A comparison of two approaches. In M. L. 
Lemme (Ed.), Clinical Aphasiology (Vol. 21, 
pp. 263–275). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Fink, R. B., Schwartz, M. F., & Myers, J. L. 
(1998). Investigations of the sentence query 
approach to mapping therapy. Brain and 

616   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Language, 65(1), 203–207. http://dx.doi​
.org/​10.1006/brln.1998.2011
Fink, R. B., Schwartz, M. F., Rochon, E., 
Myers, J. L., Socolof, G. S., & Bluestone, 
R. (1995). Syntax stimulation revisited: 
An analysis of generalization of treatment 
effects. American Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 4, 99–104. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1044/1058-0360.0404.99
Fischer, R. S., Alexander, M. P., Gabriel, C., 
Gould, E., & Milione, J. (1991). Reversed 
lateralization of cognitive functions in 
right handers. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 
114(Pt. 1A), 245–261.
Fiske, S. T. (2008). Social cognition and the nor-
mality of prejudgment. In J. F. Dovidio, P. 
Glick, & L. A. Rudman (Eds.), On the nature 
of prejudice: Fifty years after Allport (pp. 36– 
53). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Fitch-West, J., Ross-Swain, D., & Sands, E. S. 
(1998). BEST-2: Bedside Evaluation Screening 
Test (2nd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Flinker, A., Korzeniewska, A., Shestyuk, A. Y., 
Franaszczuk, P. J., Dronkers, N. F., Knight, 
R. T., & Crone, N. E. (2015). Redefining the 
role of Broca’s area in speech. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(9), 
2871–2875. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas​
.1414491112
Flynn, L., Cumberland, A., & Marshall, J. 
(2009). Public knowledge about aphasia: 
A survey with comparative data. Aphasi-
ology, 23(3), 393–401. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/02687030701828942
Foerch, C., Hessen, A. S., Misselwitz, B., Sitzer, 
M., Berger, K., Neumann-Haefelin, T., & 
Steinmetz, H. (2005). Difference in recog-
nition of right and left hemispheric stroke. 
Lancet, 366(9483), 392–393. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(05)67024-9
Folstein, M. F., Folstein, S. E., White, T., & 
Messer, M. A. (2010). Mini-Mental State 
Examination, 2nd edition (MMSE-2) standard 
kit. Lutz, FL: PAR, Psychological Assess-
ment Resources.
Foster, A., O’Halloran, R., Rose, M., & Worrall, 
L. (2014). “Communication is taking a back 
seat”: Speech pathologists’ perceptions of 
aphasia management in acute hospital set-
tings. Aphasiology, 1–24. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/02687038.2014.985185
Foster, A., Worrall, L., Rose, M., & O’Halloran, 
R. (2015). “That doesn’t translate”: The 
role of evidence-based practice in disem-
powering speech pathologists in acute 
aphasia management. International Journal 
of Language and Communication Disorders, 
50(4), 547–563. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/​
1460-6984.12155
Foundas, A. L. (2013). Limb apraxia: A dis-
order of goal-directed actions. In A. Chat-
terjee & B. Coslett (Eds.), The roots of cog-
nitive neuroscience: Behavioral neurology and 
neuropsychology (pp. 187–220). Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press.
Fourie, R. J. (2009). Qualitative study of the 
therapeutic relationship in speech and lan-
guage therapy: Perspectives of adults with 
acquired communication and swallowing 
disorders. International Journal of Language 
& Communication Disorders, 44(6), 979–999. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1368282080253​
5285
Fox, L., Poulsen, S., Clark Bawden, K., & 
Packard, D. (2004). Critical elements and 
outcomes of a residential family-based 
intervention for aphasia caregivers. Aphasi-
ology, 18(12), 1177–1199. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/02687030444000525
Franzen, M. D. (2003). Reliability and validity in 
neuropsychological assessment (3rd ed.). New 
York, NY: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.
Frattali, C. M., Holland, A. L., Thompson, C. 
K., Wohl, C., & Ferketic, M. M. (2004). Func-
tional assessment of communication skills for 
adults (ASHA FACS). Rockville, MD: Ameri-
can Speech-Language-Hearing Association.
Freed, D., Celery, K., & Marshall, R. (2004). 
Effectiveness of personalised and phono-
logical cueing on long-term naming perfor-
mance by aphasic subjects: A clinical inves-
tigation. Aphasiology, 18(8), 743–757. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030444000246
Freed, D. B., & Marshall, R. C. (1995). The effect 
of personalized cueing on long-term naming 
of realistic visual stimuli. American Journal of 
Speech-Language Pathology, 4(4), 105. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360.0404.105

References   617
Freed, D. B., Marshall, R. C., & Nippold, M. 
A. (1995). Comparison of personalized cue-
ing and provided cueing on the facilita-
tion of verbal labeling by aphasic subjects. 
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 38(5), 
1081–1090. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/jshr​
.3805.1081
French, J., & Gronseth, G. (2008). Lost in a jun-
gle of evidence: We need a compass. Neurol-
ogy, 71(20), 1634–1638. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1212/01.wnl.0000336533.19610.1b
Fridriksson, J., Bonilha, L., Baker, J. M., Moser, 
D., & Rorden, C. (2010). Activity in preserved 
left hemisphere regions predicts anomia 
severity in aphasia. Cerebral Cortex, 20(5), 
1013–1019. http://dx.doi.org/​10​.1093/ 
cercor/bhp160
Fridriksson, J., Fillmore, P., Guo, D., & Rorden, 
C. (2014). Chronic Broca’s aphasia is caused 
by damage to Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas. 
Cerebral Cortex. Retrieved from http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu152
Fridriksson, J., Holland, A. L., Beeson, P. M., & 
Morrow, L. A. (2005). Spaced retrieval treat-
ment of anomia. Aphasiology, 19(2), 99–109. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0268703044400​
0660
Fridriksson, J., Hubbard, H. I., & Hudspeth, S. 
G. (2012). Transcranial brain stimulation to 
treat aphasia: A clinical perspective. Semi-
nars in Speech and Language, 33(3), 188–202. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0032-1320039
Friedman, E. M., & Ryff, C. D. (2012). Theoretical 
perspectives: A biopsychosocial approach 
to positive aging. In S. K. Whitbourne & M. 
J. Sliwinski (Eds.), The Wiley-Blackwell hand-
book of adulthood and aging. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1111/b.9781444331479.2012.00003.x
Friedmann, N. (1994). Morphology in agramma-
tism: A dissociation between tense and agree-
ment (Unpublished master’s thesis). Tel 
Aviv University, Israel: Department of Cog-
nitive Psychology.
Friedmann, N. (2001). Agrammatism and 
the psychological reality of the syntactic 
tree. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 30, 
71–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/​A:1005​
256224207
Friedmann, N., & Grodzinsky, Y. (1997). Tense 
and agreement in agrammatic production: 
Pruning the syntactic tree. Brain and Lan-
guage, 56, 397–425. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1006/brln.1997.1795
Fritsch, G. T., & Hitzig, E. (1870). On the elec-
trical excitability of the cerebrum. In G. 
Von Bonin (Trans. & Ed.), Some papers on 
the cerebral cortex. Springfield, IL: Charles C 
Thomas.
Gaddie, A., Kearns, K. P., & Yedor, K. (1991). 
A qualitative analysis of response elabora-
tion training effects. Clinical Aphasiology, 
19, 171–183. Retrieved from http://aphasi​
ology.pitt.edu/archive/00000113/01/19-17​
.pdf
Gainotti, G. (2015). Contrasting opinions on the 
role of the right hemisphere in the recovery 
of language: A critical survey. Aphasiology, 
29(9), 1020–1037. http://dx.doi.org/10.108
0/02687038.2015.1027170
Galarneau, M. R., Woodruff, S. I., Dye, J. L., 
Mohrle, C. R., & Wade, A. L. (2008). Trau-
matic brain injury during operation Iraqi 
freedom: Findings from the United States 
Navy–Marine Corps Combat Trauma Reg-
istry. Journal of Neurosurgery, 108(5), 950–
957. http://dx.doi.org/10.3171/JNS/2008/​
108/5/0950
Galling, M. A., Goorah, N., Berthier, M. L., 
& Sage, K. (2014). A clinical study of the 
combined use of bromocriptine and speech 
and language therapy in the treatment of 
a person with aphasia. Aphasiology, 28(2), 
171–187. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687
038.2013.838616
Ganti, L., Bodhit, A. N., Daneshvar, Y., Patel, 
P. S., Pulvino, C., Hatchitt, K., . . . Tyndall, J. 
A. (2013). Impact of helmet use in traumatic 
brain injuries associated with recreational 
vehicles. Advances in Preventive Medicine, 
2013, 1–6. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1155/2013/450195
Gao, B., Jiang, S., Wang, X., & Chen, J. (2000). 
The role of pre-injury IQ in the determination 
of intellectual impairment from traumatic 
head injury. The Journal of Neuropsychiatry 
and Clinical Neurosciences, 12(3), 385–388. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/jnp.12.3.385

618   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Gardner, H., Zurif, E. B., Berry, T., & Backman, 
E. (1976). Visual communication in apha-
sia. Neuropsychologia, 14(3), 275–292. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0028-3932(76)90023-3
Garrett, K. L., & Huth, C. (2002). The impact of 
graphic contextual information and instruc-
tion on the conversational behaviours of a 
person with severe aphasia. Aphasiology, 
16(4–6), 523–536. http://dx.doi.org/10​.10​
80/02687030244000149
Garrett, K. L., & Kimelman, M. D. Z. (2000). 
AAC & aphasia: Cognitive-linguistic con-
siderations. In D. R. Beukelman, K. M. 
Yorkston, & J. Reichle (Eds.), Augmentative 
and alternative communication for adults with 
acquired neurologic disorders (pp. 339–374). 
Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
Garrett, K. L., & Lasker, J. P. (2013). Adults 
with severe aphasia and apraxia of speech. 
In D. Beukelman & P. Mirenda (Eds.), Aug-
mentative and alternative communication: Sup-
porting children and adults with complex com-
munication needs (pp. 404–446). Baltimore, 
MD: Paul H. Brookes.
Gasparova, Z., Stara, V., & Stolc, S. (2014). 
Effect of antioxidants on functional recov-
ery after in vitro-induced ischemia and 
long-term potentiation recorded in the 
pyramidal layer of the CA1 area of rat hip-
pocampus. General Physiology and Biophys-
ics, 33(1), 43–52.
Gatehouse, S., & Noble, W. (2004). The speech, 
spatial and qualities of hearing scale (SSQ). 
International Journal of Audiology, 43(2), 
85–99. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​14992​02​
0400050014
Gawande, A. (2014). Being mortal: Medicine and 
what matters in the end. New York, NY: Met-
ropolitan Books.
Gearing, R. E., El-Bassel, N., Ghesquiere, A., 
Baldwin, S., Gillies, J., & Ngeow, E. (2011). 
Major ingredients of fidelity: A review and 
scientific guide to improving quality of 
intervention research implementation. Clin-
ical Psychology Review, 31(1), 79–88. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2010.09.007
George, M. S., Mercer, J. S., Walker, R., & Manly, 
T. (2008). A demonstration of endogenous 
modulation of unilateral spatial neglect: The 
impact of apparent time-pressure on spatial 
bias. Journal of the International Neuropsy-
chological Society: JINS, 14(1), 33–41. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1355​61770808003X
Georgeadis, A. C., Brennan, D. M., Barker, L. 
M., & Baron, C. R. (2004). Telerehabilitation 
and its effect on story retelling by adults 
with neurogenic communication disorders. 
Aphasiology, 18(5–7), 639–652. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687030444000075
Georgiadis, A. L., Al-Kawi, A., Janjua, N., Kir-
mani, J. F., Ezzeddine, M. A., & Qureshi, A. 
I. (2007). Cerebral angiography can dem­
onstrate changes in collateral flow dur-
ing induced hypertension. Radiology Case 
Reports, 2(37). Retrieved from http://dx.doi​
.org/10.2484/rcr.2007.v2i4.37
Gerber, S., & Gurland, G. B. (1989). Applied 
pragmatics in the assessment of aphasia. 
Seminars in Speech and Language, 10(4), 
263–281. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/​s-2008- 
1064268
Gerdner, L. A., & Schoenfelder, D. P. (2010). 
Evidence-based guideline: Individualized 
music for elders with dementia. Journal of 
Gerontological Nursing, 36(6), 7–15. http://
dx.doi.org/10.5498/wjp.v2.i2.26
German, D. (2016). TAWF-2: Test of Adolescent/
Adult Word Finding (2nd ed.). Austin, TX: 
Pro-Ed.
Geschwind, N., & Levitsky, W. (1968). Human 
brain: Left-right asymmetries in tempo-
ral speech region. Science, 161(4), 186–187. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.161​.38​
37.186
Gilbey, A., & Tani, K. (2015). Companion ani-
mals and loneliness: A systematic review 
of quantitative studies. Anthrozoös, 28(2), 
181–197. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08927
936.2015.11435396
Gill, S. K., & Leff, A. P. (2014). Dopaminergic 
therapy in aphasia. Aphasiology, 28(2), 155–
170. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2
013.802286
Gingrich, L., Hurwitz, R., Lee, J., Carpenter, J., 
& Cherney, L. R. (2013, November). Quan-
tifying naming & oral reading performance in 
aphasia: The NORLA-6 scale. Paper presented 
at the Annual Convention of the American 

References   619
Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 
Chicago, IL.
Giza, C. C., Kutcher, J. S., Ashwal, S., Barth, 
J., Getchius, T. S. D., Gioia, G. A., . . . Zaf-
onte, R. (2013). Summary of evidence-
based guideline update: Evaluation and 
management of concussion in sports. Neu-
rology, 80(24), 2250–2257. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e31828d57dd
GLADD. (2014a). An ally’s guide to terminol-
ogy: Talking about LGBT people and equality. 
Retrieved from http://www.glaad.org/
sites/default/files/allys-guide-to-termi​
nology_1.pdf
GLADD. (2014b). Talking about: Overall ap- 
proaches for LGBT equality. Retrieved from 
http://www.lgbtmap.org/file/talking-
about-overall-approaches-for-lgbt-issues​
.pdf
Glass, A. V., Gazzaniga, M. S., & Premack, 
D. (1973). Artificial language training in 
global aphasics. Neuropsychologia, 11(1), 
95–103. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/​0028-​ 
3932(73)90069-9
Gleason, J. B., Goodglass, H., Green, E., Acker-
man, N., & Hyde, M. R. (1975). The retrieval 
of syntax in Broca’s aphasia. Brain and Lan-
guage, 2, 451–471. http://dx.doi.org/​10​.10​
16/S0093-934X(75)80083-6
Glisky, E. L. (2007). Changes in cognitive func-
tion in human aging. In D. R. Riddle (Ed.), 
Brain aging: Models, methods, and mechanisms 
(pp. 3–20). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Global Ministerial Forum on Research for 
Health. (2008, November 17–19). The Ba- 
mako call to action on research for health: 
Straightening research for health, devel-
opment, and equity. The Lancet, 372(9653), 
1855. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-67 
36(08)61789-4
Glykas, M., & Chytas, P. (2004). Technology 
assisted speech and language therapy. 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, 
73(6), 529–541. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j​
.ijmedinf.2004.03.005
Goda, S. (1962). Spontaneous speech, a pri-
mary source of therapy material. Journal of 
Speech and Hearing Disorders, 27(2), 190–192. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/jshd.2702.190
Gold, M., VanDam, D., & Silliman, E. R. (2000). 
An open-label trial of bromocriptine in 
nonfluent aphasia: A qualitative analysis of 
word storage and retrieval. Brain and Lan-
guage, 74(2), 141–156. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1006/brln.2000.2332
Goldberg, E., Podell, K., Bilder, R., & Jaeger, 
J. (2000). The Executive Control Battery. Mel-
bourne, Australia: Psych Press.
Goldberg, S., Haley, K. L., & Jacks, A. (2012). 
Script training and generalization for peo-
ple with aphasia. American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, 21(3), 222–238. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2012/11-
0056)
Golden, C. J., & Freshwater, S. M. (2002). Stroop 
Color and Word Test: A manual for clinical and 
experimental uses. Chicago, IL: Stoelting.
Goldfarb, R., & Bader, E. (1979). Espousing 
melodic intonation therapy in aphasia 
rehabilitation: A case study. International 
Journal of Rehabilitation Research, 2(3), 333–
342. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00004356-
197909000-00002
Goldstein, K. (1948). Language and language dis-
turbances. New York, NY: Grune & Stratton.
Goldstein, K., & Scheerer, M. (1941). Abstract 
and concrete behavior an experimental 
study with special tests. Psychological Mono-
graph, 53(2), 1–151. http://dx.doi.org/10.​
1037/​h0093487
Golper, L. A. C., Wertz, R. T., Frattali, C., 
Yorkston, K., Myers, P., Katz, R., . . . Wam-
baugh, J. (2001). Evidence-based practice 
guidelines for the management of communica-
tion disorders in neurologically impaired indi-
viduals: Project introduction. Retrieved from 
http://www.ancds.org/assets/docs/EBP/
practiceguidelines.pdf
Gómez Taibo, M. L., Parga Amado, P., Canosa 
Domínguez, N., Vieiro Iglesias, P., & García 
Real, T. (2014). Conversations about self-
identity in Alzheimer disease: Augmenta-
tive and alternative communication mem-
ory books as an aid. Revista de Logopedia, 
Foniatría Y Audiología, 34(2), 60–67. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rlfa.2013.04.008
Gondusky, J. S., & Reiter, M. P. (2005). Protecting  
military convoys in Iraq: An examination of 

620   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
battle injuries sustained by a mechanized 
battalion during Operation Iraqi Freedom 
II. Military Medicine, 170(6), 546–549. http://
dx.doi.org/10.7205/MIL​MED.170.6.546
González-Fernández, M., Davis, C., Molito-
ris, J. J., Newhart, M., Leigh, R., & Hillis, 
A. E. (2011). Formal education, socioeco-
nomic status, and the severity of aphasia 
after stroke. Archives of Physical Medicine 
and Rehabilitation, 92(11), 1809–1813. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2011.05.026
Gonzalez Rothi, L. J., & Heilman, K. M. (2014). 
Apraxia: The neuropsychology of action. Hobo-
ken, NJ: Taylor and Francis. Retrieved from 
http://public.eblib.com/choice/publicfull​
record.aspx?p=1702281
Goodglass, H. (1962). Redefining the concept 
of agrammatism in aphasia. In C. L. Cro-
atto & C. Croatto (Eds.), Proceedings of the 
Twelfth International Speech and Voice Ther-
apy Conference (pp. 108–115). Padua, Italy: 
International Association of Logopedics 
and Phoniatrics.
Goodglass, H. (1968). Studies on the grammar 
of aphasics. In N. S. Rosenberg & K. Joplin 
(Eds.), Development in applied psycholinguis-
tic research. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Goodglass, H. (1993). Understanding aphasia. 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Goodglass, H., Gleason, J. B., Bernholtz, N. 
A., & Hyde, M. R. (1972). Some linguistic 
structures in the speech of a Broca’s apha-
sic. Cortex, 8(2), 191–212. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1016/S0010-9452(72)80018-2
Goodglass, H., & Kaplan, E. (2001). Boston 
Naming Test. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins.
Goodglass, H., Kaplan, E., & Barresi, B. (2000). 
Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination–
Third edition (BDAE-3). Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Goodman, R. A., & Caramazza, A. (1985). 
The Johns Hopkins University Dysgraphia 
Battery. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins  
University.
Gosnell, J., Costello, J., & Shane, H. (2011). 
Using a clinical approach to answer, “What 
communication apps should we use?” Per-
spectives on Augmentative and Alternative 
Communication, 20(3), 87. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1044/aac20.3.87
Gosseries, O., Vanhaudenhuyse, A., Bruno, 
M.-A., Demertzi, A., Schnakers, C., Boly, M. 
M., . . . Laureys, S. (2011). Disorders of con-
sciousness: Coma, vegetative and minimally 
conscious states. In D. Cvetkovic & I. Cosic 
(Eds.), States of consciousness (pp. 29–55). 
Berlin, Germany: Springer. Retrieved from  
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.10​
07/978-3-642-18047-7_2
Granachar, R. P. (2003). Behavioral assessment 
following traumatic brain injury. In R. P. 
Granachar (Ed.), Traumatic brain injury: 
Methods for clinical and forensic neuropsychi-
atric assessment (pp. 233–234). Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press LLC.
Greenwald, M. (2004). “Blocking” lexical com-
petitors in severe global agraphia: A treat-
ment of reading and spelling. Neurocase, 
10(2), 156–174. http://dx.doi.org/10​.1080/​
13554790409609946
Greenwood, C. E. (2003). Dietary carbohy-
drate, glucose regulation, and cognitive 
performance in elderly persons. Nutrition 
Reviews, 61(5), S68–S74. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1301/nr.2003.may.S68-S74
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In 
P. Cole & J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and 
semantics: Vol. 3. Speech acts (pp. 41–58). 
New York, NY: Academic Press.
Griffith, R., & Tengnah, C. (2007). Mental 
capacity act of 2005. British Journal of Com-
munity Nursing, 13(6), 284–288. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.12968/bjcn.2008.13.6.29463
Gronseth, G., & French, J. (2008). Practice 
parameters and technology assessments: 
What they are, what they are not, and why 
you should care. Neurology, 71(20), 1639–
1643. http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl​
.0000336535.27773.c0
Gronwall, D. M. (1977). Paced auditory serial 
addition test. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 
44(2), 367–373. http://dx.doi.org/10.2466/
pms.1977.44.2.367
Gruber-Baldini, A., Ye, J., Anderson, K., & 
Shulman, L. (2009). Effects of optimism/
pessimism and locus of control on disabil-
ity and quality of life in Parkinson’s dis-

References   621
ease. Parkinsonism & Related Disorders, 15(9), 
665–669. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.park​
reldis.2009.03.005
Guo, Y., Shi, X., Uchiyama, H., Hasegawa, A., 
Nakagawa, Y., Tanaka, M., & Fukumoto, 
I. (2001). A study on the rehabilitation of 
cognitive function and short-term memory 
in patients with Alzheimer’s disease using 
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimula-
tion. Frontiers of Medical and Biological Engi-
neering, 11(4), 237–247. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1163/156855701321138905
Guskiewicz, K. M., Marshall, S. W., Bailes, J., 
McCrea, M., Cantu, R. C., Randolph, C., & 
Jordan, B. D. (2005). Association between 
recurrent concussion and late-life cognitive 
impairment in retired professional football 
players: Neurosurgery, 719–726. http://dx​ 
.doi.org/10.1227/01.NEU.0000​175725​.757​
80.DD
Haarbauer-Krupa, J., Moser, L., Smith, G., Sul-
livan, D. M., & Szekeres, S. F. (1985). Cog-
nitive rehabilitation therapy: Middle stages 
of recovery. In M. Ylvisaker (Ed.), Head 
injury rehabilitation: Children and adolescents 
(pp. 287–310). San Diego, CA: College-Hill 
Press.
Hacker, V. L., Thomas, S. A., & Stark, D. (2009). 
Validation of the stroke aphasic depression 
questionnaire using the brief assessment 
schedule depression cards in an acute 
stroke sample. British Journal of Clinical Psy-
chology, 49(Pt. 1), 123–127. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1348/014466509X467440
Hagen, C., Malkmus, D., & Durham, P. (1972). 
Levels of cognitive functioning. Retrieved from  
http://www.northeastcenter.com/rancho_
los_amigos_revised.htm
Halbauer, J. D., Ashford, J. W., Zeitzer, J. M., 
Adamson, M. M., Lew, H. L., & Yesavage, J. 
A. (2009). Neuropsychiatric diagnosis and 
management of chronic sequelae of war-
related mild to moderate traumatic brain 
injury. Journal of Rehabilitation Research and 
Development, 46(6), 757–796. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1682/JRRD.2008.08.0119
Haley, K. L., Womach, J. L., Helm-Estabrooks, 
N., Caignon, D., & McCulloch, K. L. (2010). 
The life interests and values cards. Chapel 
Hill: University of North Carolina School 
of Medicine.
Hall, N., Boisvert, M., & Steele, R. (2013). Tele-
practice in the assessment and treatment 
of individuals with aphasia: A systematic 
review. International Journal of Telerehabili-
tation, 5(1). Retrieved from http://dx.doi​
.org/10.5195/ijt.2013.6119
Hallowell, B. (1999, October). Students learn 
while serving: Respite for caregivers of 
persons with dementing illnesses. NSSLHA 
News & Notes, 4.
Hallowell, B. (2000). A student-run respite 
network for caregivers of persons with 
dementing illness. Communication Connec-
tion, 14(1), 10.
Hallowell, B. (2008). Strategic design of pro-
tocols to evaluate vision in research on 
aphasia and related disorders. Aphasiology, 
22(6), 600–617. http://dx.doi.org/10​.1080/​
02687030701429113
Hallowell, B. (2012a). Exploiting eye-mind 
connections for clinical applications in lan-
guage disorders. In R. Goldfarb (Ed.), Trans-
lational speech-language pathology and audiol-
ogy (pp. 335–341). San Diego, CA: Plural.
Hallowell, B. (2012b, April). First do no harm: 
Asking tough ethical questions of students and 
faculty members engaged in global outreach, 
education, and research. Presented at the 
Global Summit on Higher Education in 
Communication Sciences and Disorders, 
Newport Beach, CA. Retrieved from http://
new.capcsd.org/proceedings/2012/Post​ 
ers/8.%20Hallowell%202012%20-%20
First%20do%20no%20harm.pdf
Hallowell, B. (2012c). Using NSF-Sponsored 
projects to enrich students’ written com-
munication skills. In 2007 Annual Review 
of Engineering Design Projects to Aid Persons 
with Disabilities (pp. 25–31). Mansfield Cen-
ter, CT: Creative Learning Press/National 
Science Foundation.
Hallowell, B. (2014). A magnificent new era for 
global collaborations in higher education in 
communication sciences and disorders. Re- 
trieved from http://www.asha.org/Aca​
demic/questions/New-Era-for-Global- 
Collaborations-in-Higher-Education/?utm 

622   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
_source=asha&utm_medium=enewsletter 
&utm_campaign=0412AAR
Hallowell, B. (2015). Using eye tracking to assess 
auditory comprehension: Results with lan-
guage-normal adults and adults with aphasia. 
Manuscript in preparation.
Hallowell, B., & Chapey, R. (2008a). Deliver-
ing language intervention services to adults 
with neurogenic communication disorders. 
In R. Chapey (Ed.), Language intervention 
strategies in adult aphasia (5th ed., pp. 203–
227). Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins.
Hallowell, B., & Chapey, R. (2008b). Introduc-
tion to language intervention strategies in 
adult aphasia. In R. Chapey (Ed.), Language 
intervention strategies in aphasia and related 
communication disorders (5th ed., pp. 3–19). 
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins.
Hallowell, B., Douglas, N., Wertz, R. T., & 
Kim, S. (2004). Control and description 
of visual function in research on aphasia 
and related disorders. Aphasiology, 18(5–7), 
611–623. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0268​
7030444000084
Hallowell, B., & Henri, B. (2013). Strategies 
for promoting access to speech-language 
pathology and audiology services. In R. 
Lubinski & M. Hudson (Eds.), Professional 
issues in speech-language pathology and audi-
ology (4th ed., pp. 375–398). San Diego, CA: 
Plural.
Hallowell, B., & Hickey, E. (2014). Engaging 
in ethical and sustainable international expe-
riences. Retrieved from http://www.asha​
.org/Events/live/10-23-2014-Ethical-Sus​
tainable-International-Experiences/
Hallowell, B., & Hickey, E. (2015). How to 
help ​— not harm — underserved popula-
tions abroad. The ASHA Leader, 20(5), 24–25. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/leader.OV1​
.20052015.24
Hallowell, B., & Ivanova, M. V. (2009). Devel-
opment and standardization of a multiple-
choice test of auditory comprehension 
for aphasia in Russian. Journal of Medical 
Speech-Language Pathology, 17(2), 83–98.
Hallowell, B., & Lansing, C. R. (2004). Track-
ing eye movements to study cognition and 
communication. The ASHA Leader, 9(21), 
22–25.
Hallowell, B., Shaw, V., Heuer, S., & Schwartz, 
F. (2015). Relationships of real-time glucose 
levels on cognitive-linguistic performance in 
adults with and without diabetes. Manuscript 
under review.
Hallowell, B., Wertz, R. T., & Kruse, H. (2002). 
Using eye movement responses to index 
auditory comprehension: An adaptation 
of the revised token test. Aphasiology, 16(4–
6), 587–594. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
02687030244000121
Halper, A. S., Cherney, L. R., Burns, M. S., & 
Mogil, S. I. (1996). RIC Evaluation of commu-
nication problems in right hemisphere dysfunc-
tion–revised (RICE-R). Rockville, MD: Aspen.
Hammill, D. D., & Bryant, B. R. (1991). Detroit 
Tests of Learning Aptitude–Adult (DTLA-A). 
Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Hammill, D. D., Pearson, N., & Wiederholt, 
J. L. (2009). CTONI-2 Comprehensive Test of 
Nonverbal Intelligence. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Hannemann, B. T. (2006). Creativity with 
dementia patients: Can creativity and art 
stimulate dementia patients positively? 
Gerontology, 52(1), 59–65. http://dx.doi.org/ 
​10.1159/000089827
Harmon, K. G., Drezner, J. A., Gammons, M., 
Guskiewicz, K. M., Halstead, M., Herring, 
S. A., . . . Roberts, W. O. (2013). American 
medical society for sports medicine position 
statement: concussion in sport. British Jour-
nal of Sports Medicine, 47(1), 15–26. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2012-091941
Harris, G. M. (2014). An interpretive phenomeno-
logical analysis of religious coping and relation-
ship with God among older adults with func-
tional impairments. Tuscaloosa, AL: Acumen 
University of Alabama Libraries’ Digital 
Archives.
Harry, B. (1992). Cultural diversity, families, and 
the special education system: Communication 
and empowerment. New York, NY: Teachers 
College Press.
Hartley, A. (2006). Changing role of the speed 
of processing construct in the cognitive psy-
chology of human aging. In J. E. Birren & K. 
W. Schaire (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology 

References   623
of aging (6th ed., pp. 183–207). Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: Elsevier.
Hartley, S. (1998). A review of service delivery 
issues in less developed countries. Disabil-
ity and Rehabilitation, 20, 227–284. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3109/09638289809166083
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1988). Working 
memory, comprehension, and aging: A re- 
view and a new view. Psychology of Learn-
ing & Motivation, 22, 193–225. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60041-9
Hashimoto, N., & Frome, A. (2011). The use 
of a modified semantic features analysis 
approach in aphasia. Journal of Communica-
tion Disorders, 44(4), 459–469. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2011.02.004
Hassan, F. H., & Hallowell, B. (2015). Rela-
tionship between locus of control among older 
Muslims with disability and their access to 
healthcare.Unpublished manuscript, Ohio 
University, Athens, OH.
Hassing, L. B., Grant, M. D., Hofer, S. M., 
Pedersen, N. L., Nilsson, S. E., Berg, S., . . .  
Johansson, B. (2004). Type 2 diabetes mel-
litus contributes to cognitive decline in 
old age: A longitudinal population-based 
study. Journal of the International Neuropsy-
chological Society, 10(4), 599–607. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1355617704104165
Hays, D. G., & Erford, B. T. (2014). Developing 
multicultural counseling competence: A sys-
tems approach. Boston, MA: Pearson.
Healthcare Interactive, Inc. (2008). The savvy 
caregiver. Retrieved from http://www.hcin​
teractive.com/SavvyCaregiver
Heaton, S. K., Thompson, L. L., Psychological 
Assessment Resources, & Business Video 
Productions. (1995). Wisconsin Card Sorting 
Test. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment 
Resources.
Hecht, S. W. (2008). Herbal contributions to 
the management of the multi-factorial cog-
nitive disorders — Alzheimer’s disease and 
vascular dementia. Perspectives on Neuro-
physiology and Neurogenic Speech and Lan-
guage Disorders, 18, 114–123. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/nnsld18.3.114
Heckhausen, J., Wrosch, C., & Schulz, R. (2010).  
A motivational theory of life-span develop-
ment. Psychological Review, 117(1), 32–60. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0017668
Heilman, K. M., & Gonzalez Rothi, L. J. (2003). 
Apraxia. In K. M. Heilman & E. Valenstein 
(Eds.), Clinical neuropsychology (4th ed., pp. 
215–35). Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.
Helm, N. A., & Barresi, B. (1980). Voluntary 
control of involuntary utterances: A treatment 
approach for severe aphasia [Clinical aphasiol­
ogy paper]. Retrieved from http://aphasi​
ology.pitt.edu/archive/00000587/
Helm-Estabrooks, N. (1992a). ADP: Aphasia 
Diagnostic Profiles. Chicago, IL: Riverside.
Helm-Estabrooks, N. (1992b). Test of Oral and 
Limb Apraxia. Chicago, IL: Riverside.
Helm-Estabrooks, N. (2001). Cognitive Linguis-
tic Quick Test. San Antonio, TX: The Psycho-
logical Corporation.
Helm-Estabrooks, N., Albert, M. L., & Nicho-
las, M. (2014). Manual of aphasia and aphasia 
therapy (3rd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Helm-Estabrooks, N., Emery, P., & Albert, M. L. 
(1987). Treatment of aphasic perseveration 
(TAP) program: A new approach to apha-
sia therapy. Archives of Neurology, 44(12), 
1253–1255. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/arch​
neur.1987.00520240035008.
Helm-Estabrooks, N., Fitzpatrick, P. M., & 
Barresi, B. (1982). Visual action therapy for 
global aphasia. Journal of Speech and Hear-
ing Disorders, 47(4), 385–389. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/jshd.4704.385
Helm-Estabrooks, N., & Hotz, G. (1991). Brief 
Test of Head Injury (BTHI). Rolling Mead-
ows, IL: Riverside.
Helm-Estabrooks, N., & Nicholas, M. (2000). 
Sentence production program for aphasia. Aus-
tin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Helm-Estabrooks, N., Nicholas, M. L., & Mor-
gan, A. (1989). Melodic intonation therapy. 
Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Helm-Estabrooks, N., Ramage, A. E., Bayles, K. 
A., & Cruz, R. (1998). Perseverative behav-
ior in fluent and nonfluent aphasia adults. 
Aphasiology, 12(8), 689–698. http://dx.doi 
.org/10.1080/02687039808249566
Helm-Estabrooks, N., & Ramsberger, G. (1986). 
Treatment of agrammatism in long-term 

624   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Broca’s aphasia. The British Journal of Disor-
ders of Communication, 21(1), 39–45. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3109/13682828609018542
Helm-Estabrooks, N., Ramsberger, G., Morgan, 
A. R., & Nicholas, M. (1989). Boston assess-
ment of severe aphasia. Chicago, IL: Riverside 
Press.
Helm-Estabrooks, N., & Whiteside, J. (2012). 
Use of life interests and values (LIV) cards 
for self-determination of aphasia rehabili-
tation goals. Perspectives on Neurophysiology 
and Neurogenic Speech and Language Disor-
ders, 22(1), 6–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/
nnsld22.1.6
HelpAge International and Handicap Interna-
tional. (2011). A study of humanitarian financ-
ing for older people and people with disabilities, 
2010–2011. Retrieved from http://d3n8a8​
pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/handicapinter​
national/pages/313/attachments/origi​
nal/1369934025/Humanitarian_financing_
report_2012_-_HelpAge_and_Handicap_
International.pdf?1369934025
Henseler, I., Regenbrecht, F., & Obrig, H. 
(2014). Lesion correlates of patholinguistic 
profiles in chronic aphasia: Comparisons of 
syndrome-, modality- and symptom-level 
assessment. BRAIN, 137, 918–930. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awt374
Hepburn, K. W., Lewis, M., Sherman, C. W., 
& Tornatore, J. (2003). The savvy caregiver 
program: Developing and testing a trans-
portable dementia family caregiver training 
program. The Gerontologist, 43(6), 908–915. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/geront/43.6.908
Hersh, D. (2009). How do people with aphasia 
view their discharge from therapy? Apha-
siology, 23(3), 331–350. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/02687030701764220
Hersh, D., Worrall, L., O’Halloran, R., Brown, 
K., Grohn, B., & Rodriguez, A. D. (2013). 
Assess for success: Evidence for therapeu-
tic assessment. In N. Simmons-Mackie, J. 
M. King, & D. R. Beukelman (Eds.), Sup-
porting communication for adults with acute 
and chronic aphasia (pp. 145–164). Baltimore, 
MD: Paul H. Brookes.
Heuer, S., & Hallowell, B. (2007). An evalua-
tion of multiple-choice test images for com-
prehension assessment in aphasia. Aphasi-
ology, 21(9), 883–900. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1080/02687030600695194
Heuer, S., & Hallowell, B. (2009). Visual atten-
tion in a multiple-choice task: Influences 
of image characteristics with and without 
presentation of a verbal stimulus. Aphasi-
ology, 23(3), 351–363. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/02687030701770474
Heuer, S., & Hallowell, B. (2015). A novel eye-
tracking method to assess attention alloca-
tion in individuals with and without apha-
sia using a dual-task paradigm. Journal of 
Communication Disorders, 55, 15–30. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2015.01.005
Hickin, J., Best, W., Herbert, R., Howard, D., & 
Osborne, F. (2002). Phonological therapy for 
word-finding difficulties: A re-evaluation. 
Aphasiology, 16(10–11), 981–999. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/02687030244000509
Hickman, C. S., & Dyer, W. M. (1998). Improv-
ing telemedicine consultation with TeleDoc 
and the emergent technologies. In M. L. 
Armstrong (Ed.), Telecommunications for 
health professionals (pp. 204–214). New York, 
NY: Springer.
Hicks, R. R., Fertig, S. J., Desrocher, R. E., Koro-
shetz, W. J., & Pancrazio, J. J. (2010). Neu-
rological effects of blast injury. The Journal 
of Trauma, 68(5), 1257–1263. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1097/TA.0b013e3181d8956d
Higgins, C., Kearns, Á., & Franklin, S. (2012). 
Poster: The development of a semantic fea-
ture analysis based mobile application for 
individuals with aphasia. In Proceedings of 
the 10th International Conference on Mobile 
Systems, Applications, and Services (pp. 513–
514). New York, NY: ACM. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1145/2307636.2307710
Hilari, K., Byng, S., Lamping, D., & Smith, S. 
(2003). Stroke and aphasia quality of life 
scale-39: Evaluation of acceptability, reli-
ability and validity. Stroke, 34, 1944–1950. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/01.STR.0000​0​
81987.46660.ED
Hill, A. J., Theodoros, D. G., Russell, T. G., 
Cahill, L. M., Ward, E. C., & Clark, K. M. 
(2006). An Internet-based telerehabilitation 
system for the assessment of motor speech 

References   625
disorders: A pilot study. American Journal of 
Speech-Language Pathology, 15, 45–56. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2006/006)
Hillis, A., & Caramazza, A. (1992). The reading 
process and its disorders. In D. I. Margo-
lin (Ed.), Cognitive neuropsychology in clini-
cal practice (pp. 229–253). New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press.
Hillis, A. E. (1989). Efficacy and generaliza-
tion of treatment for aphasic naming errors. 
Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilita-
tion, 70(80), 632–636.
Hillis, A. E., Barker, P. B., Beauchamp, N. J., 
Gordon, B., & Wityk, R. J. (2000). MR perfu-
sion imaging reveals regions of hypoperfu-
sion associated with aphasia and neglect. 
Neurology, 55(6), 782–788. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1212/WNL.55.6.782
Hillis, A. E., Barker, P. B., Wityk, R. J., Aldrich, 
E. M., Restrepo, L., Breese, E. L., & Work, 
M. (2004). Variability in subcortical aphasia 
is due to variable sites of cortical hypoper-
fusion. Brain and Language, 89(3), 524–530. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl​.2004​
.01.007
Hillis, A. E., Kleinman, J. T., Newhart, M., 
Heidler-Gary, J., Gottesman, R., Barker, 
P. B., . . . Chaudhry, P. (2006). Restoring 
cerebral blood flow reveals neural regions 
critical for naming. The Journal of Neurosci-
ence, 26(31), 8069–8073. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2088-06.2006
Hinckley, J., Boyle, E., Lombard, D., & Bartels- 
Tobin, L. (2014). Towards a consumer-
informed research agenda for aphasia: Pre-
liminary work. Disability and Rehabilitation, 
36(12), 1042–1050. http://dx.doi.org/10.310
9/09638288.2013.829528
Hinckley, J. J., & Douglas, N. F. (2013). Treat-
ment fidelity: Its importance and reported 
frequency in aphasia treatment studies. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathol-
ogy, 22(2), S279–S284. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1044/1058-0360(2012/12-0092)
Hinckley, J. J., Douglas, N. M., Goff, R. A., 
& Nakano, E. V. (2013). Supporting com-
munication with partner training. In N. 
Simmons-Mackie, J. M. King, & D. R. Beu-
kelman (Eds.), Supporting communication 
for adults with acute and chronic aphasia (pp. 
245–274). Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.
Ho, K. M., Weiss, S. J., Garrett, K. L., & Lloyd, 
L. L. (2005). The effect of remnant and pic-
tographic books on the communicative 
interaction of individuals with global apha-
sia. AAC: Augmentative and Alternative Com-
munication, 21(3), 218–232. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/07434610400016694
Hoerster, L., Hickey, E. M., & Bourgeois, M. S. 
(2001). Effects of memory aids on conversa-
tions between nursing home residents with 
dementia and nursing assistants. Neuropsy-
chological Rehabilitation, 11(3–4), 399–427. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/096020100420​
00051
Hoffman, S. W., Shesko, K., & Harrison, C. R. 
(2010). Enhanced neurorehabilitation tech-
niques in the DVBIC assisted living pilot 
project. NeuroRehabilitation, 26(3), 257–269. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/NRE-2010-0561
Hoge, C. W., McGurk, D., Thomas, J. L., Cox, 
A. L., Engel, C. C., & Castro, C. A. (2008). 
Mild traumatic brain injury in U.S. soldiers 
returning from Iraq. New England Journal 
of Medicine, 358(5), 453–463. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1056/NEJMoa072972
Holland, A., Frattali, C., & Fromm, D. (1999). 
CADL-2: Communication Activities of Daily 
Living (2nd ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Holland, A. L. (1982). Observing functional 
communication of aphasic adults. Journal of 
Speech and Hearing Disorders, 47, 50–56. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360​(2010/09-0095)
Holland, A. L. (1991). Pragmatic aspects of 
intervention in aphasia. Journal of Neurolin-
guistics, 6(2), 197–211. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1016/0911-6044(91)90007-6
Holland, A. L., & Fridriksson, J. (2001). Apha-
sia management during early phases of 
recovery following stroke. American Jour-
nal of Speech-Language Pathology, 10(1), 
19–28. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/​1058-03​
60(2001/004)
Holland, A. L., Fromm, D., & Swindell, C. S. 
(1986). The labeling problem in aphasia: An 
illustrative case. Journal of Speech and Hear-
ing Disorders, 51(2), 176–180. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/jshd.5102.176

626   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Holland, A. L., Halper, A. S., & Cherney, L. 
R. (2010). Tell me your story: Analysis of 
script topics selected by persons with apha-
sia. American Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 19(3), 198. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1044/1058-0360(2010/09-0095)
Holland, A. L., & Nelson, R. L. (2014). Coun-
seling in communication disorders: A wellness 
perspective. San Diego, CA: Plural.
Hoover, E. L., & Carney, A. (2014). Integrating 
the iPad into an intensive, comprehensive 
aphasia program. Seminars in Speech and 
Language, 35(1), 25–37. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1055/s-0033-1362990
Hopper, T., Bayles, K., Harris, F., & Holland, A. 
(2001). The relationship between minimum 
data set ratings and scores on measures 
of communication and hearing among 
nursing home residents with dementia. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathol-
ogy, 10(4), 370–381. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1044/1058-0360(2001/031)
Hopper, T., Bourgeois, M., Pimentel, J., Qualls, 
C. D., Hickey, E., Frymark, T., & School-
ing, T. (2013). An evidence-based system-
atic review on cognitive interventions for 
individuals with dementia. American Jour-
nal of Speech-Language Pathology/American 
Speech-Language-Hearing Association, 22(1), 
126–145. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/​1058-
0360(2012/11-0137)
Hopper, T., Holland, A., & Rewega, M. (2002). 
Conversational coaching: Treatment out-
comes and future directions. Aphasiology, 
16(7), 745–761. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
02687030244000059
Hopper, T., Mahendra, N., Kim, E., Azuma, T., 
Bayles, K. A., Cleary, S. J., & Tomoeda, C. K. 
(2005). Evidence-based practice recommen-
dations for working with individuals with 
dementia: Spaced-retrieval training. Journal 
of Medical Speech-Language Pathology, 13(4), 
xxvii–xxxiv. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/
leader.FTR3.10152005.10
Hopper, T. L. (2003). “They’re just going to 
get worse anyway”: Perspectives on reha-
bilitation for nursing home residents with 
dementia. Journal of Communication Disor-
ders, 36(5), 345–359. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1016/S0021-9924(03)00050-9
Hopper, T. L. (2007). The ICF and dementia. 
Seminars in Speech & Language, 28(4), 273–282.
Horner, J. (2003). Morality, ethics, and law: 
Introductory concepts. Seminars in Speech 
and Language, 24(4), 263–274. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1055/s-2004-815580
Horner, J. (2013). Communication access, 
rights, and policies. In N. Simmons-Mackie, 
J. M. King, & D. R. Beukelman (Eds.), Sup-
porting communication for adults with acute 
and chronic aphasia (pp. 303–324). Baltimore, 
MD: Paul H. Brookes.
Horowitz, S. (2013). The healing power of 
music and dance. Alternative and Comple-
mentary Therapies, 19(5), 265. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1089/act.2013.19502.
Horton-Deutsch, S., Twigg, P., & Evans, R. 
(2007). Health care decision-making of per-
sons with dementia. Dementia, 6(1), 105–
120. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/​1471301​20​
7075643
Hough, M. S. (1990). Narrative comprehension 
in adults with right and left hemisphere 
brain-damage: Theme organization. Brain 
and Language, 38(2), 253–277. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/0093-934X(90)90114-V
Hough, M. S. (2010). Melodic intonation ther-
apy and aphasia: Another variation on a 
theme. Aphasiology, 24(6–8), 775–786. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030903501941
Howe, L. L. (2009). Giving context to post-
deployment post-concussive-like symp-
toms: Blast-related potential mild traumatic 
brain injury and comorbidities. The Clinical 
Neuropsychologist, 23(8), 1315–1337. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/13854040903266928
Howe, T. (2008). The ICF contextual factors 
related to speech-language pathology. Inter-
national Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 
10(1–2), 27–37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
14417040701774824
Howe, T. J., Worrall, L. E., & Hickson, L. M. H. 
(2004). What is an aphasia-friendly environ-
ment? Aphasiology, 18, 1015–1038. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030444000499
Huckans, M., Pavawalla, S., Demadura, T., 
Kolessar, M., Seelye, A., Roost, N., . . . Storz-
bach, D. (2010). A pilot study examining 
effects of group-based Cognitive Strategy 
Training treatment on self-reported cogni-

References   627
tive problems, psychiatric symptoms, func-
tioning, and compensatory strategy use in 
OIF/OEF combat veterans with persistent 
mild cognitive disorder and history of 
traumatic brain injury. Journal of Rehabilita-
tion Research and Development, 47(1), 43–60. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1682/JRRD​.2009​.02​
.0019
Huisingh, R., Bowers, L., Zachman, L., Blag-
den, C., & Orman, J. (1990). The Word Test–
Elementary–Revised. East Moline, IL: Lingui-
Systems.
Hula, W. D., Doyle, P. J., Stone, C. A., Aus-
termann Hula, S. N., Kellough, S., Wam-
baugh, J. L., . . . St. Jacque, A. (2015). The 
aphasia communication outcome measure  
(ACOM): Dimensionality, item bank cali-
bration, and initial validation. Journal of 
Speech Language and Hearing Research, 58(3), 
906. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/2015_JSL​
HR-L-14-0235
Humphreys, G. W., Bickerton, W. L., Samson, 
D., & Riddoch, M. J. (2012). The Birmingham 
Cognitive Screen (BCoS). London, UK: Psy-
chology Press.
Hund-Georgiadis, M., Zysset, S., Weih, K., 
Guthke, T., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2001). 
Crossed nonaphasia in a dextral with left 
hemispheric lesions: A functional mag-
netic resonance imaging study of mirrored 
brain organization. Stroke, 32, 2703–2707. 
http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/32/​
11/2703
Hunt, K. W. (1970). Syntactic maturity in 
school children and adults. Monograph of 
the Society for Research in Child Development, 
35, 1–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/1165818
Hurkmans, J., de Bruijn, M., Boonstra, A. M., 
Jonkers, R., Bastiaanse, R., Arendzen, H., 
& Reinders-Messelink, H. A. (2012). Music 
in the treatment of neurological language 
and speech disorders: A systematic review. 
Aphasiology, 26(1), 1–19. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/02687038.2011.602514
Hux, K., Buechter, M., Wallace, S., & Weissling, 
K. (2010). Using visual scene displays to 
create a shared communication space for 
a person with aphasia. Aphasiology, 24(5), 
643–660. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0268​
7030902869299
Ince, L. P. (1968). Desensitization with an apha-
sic patient. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
6(2), 235–237. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/​
0005-7967(68)90014-4
India Today. (2014). Speech therapists. Retrieved 
from http://indiatoday.intoday.in/educa​
tion/story/speech-therapists/1/363861.ht​
mlindiatoday.intoday.in/education/story/​
speech-therapists
Ingersoll-Dayton, B., Spencer, B., Kwak, M., 
Scherrer, K., Allen, R. S., & Campbell, R. 
(2013). The couples life story approach: A dy- 
adic intervention for dementia. Journal of 
Gerontological Social Work, 56(3), 237–254. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01634372.2012​
.758214
Ingstad, B., & Reynolds Whyte, S. (1995). Dis-
ability and culture. Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press.
Institute for Health Care Improvement. (n.d.). 
IHI Triple Aim Initiative. Retrieved from 
http://www.ihi.org/Engage/Initiatives/
TripleAim/pages/default.aspx
Institute of Safe Medicine Practices. (2013). 
ISMP’s list of error-prone abbreviations, sym-
bols, and dose designations. Retrieved from 
https://www.ismp.org/tools/errorprone​
abbreviations.pdf
International Coach Federation. (2015). What is 
professional coaching? Retrieved from http://
coachfederation.org/
Interprofessional Education Collaborative 
Expert Panel. (2011). Core competencies for 
interprofessional collaborative practice: Report 
of an expert panel. Washington, DC: Inter-
professional Education Collaborative. Re- 
trieved from https://www.aamc.org/
Isquith, P. K., Roth, R. M., & Gioia, G. A. 
(2010). Tasks of executive control (TEC). Lutz, 
FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Ivanova, M. V., & Hallowell, B. (2011). Validity 
of an eye-tracking method to index work-
ing memory in people with and without 
aphasia. Aphasiology, 26, 556–578. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2011.618219
Ivanova, M. V., & Hallowell, B. (2012). Validity 
of an eye-tracking method to index working 
memory in people with and without apha-
sia. Aphasiology, 26(3–4), 556–578. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2011.618219

628   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Ivanova, M. V., & Hallowell, B. (2013). A tuto-
rial on aphasia test development in any lan-
guage: Key substantive and psychometric 
considerations. Aphasiology, 27(8), 891–920. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2013​
.805728
Ivanova, M. V., & Hallowell, B. (2014). A new 
modified listening span task to enhance 
validity of working memory assessment for 
people with and without aphasia. Journal of 
Communication Disorders, 52, 78–98. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis.2014.06.001
Jabbari, B., Maulsby, R. L., Holtzapple, P. A., 
& Marshall, N. K. (1979). Prognostic value 
of EEG in acute vascular aphasia: A long-
term clinical-EEG study of 53 patients. 
Clinical EEG, 10(4), 190–197. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1177/155005947901000403
Jackson, H. H. (1878). On affectations of speech 
from disease of the brain. Brain, 1, 304–330.
Jacobs, B. J., & Thompson, C. K. (2000). Cross-
modal generalization effects of training 
noncanonical sentence comprehension and 
production in agrammatic aphasia. Journal 
of Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 
43(1), 5–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/jsl​
hr.4301.05
Jaffee, M. S., Helmick, K. M., Girard, P. D., 
Meyer, K. S., Dinegar, K., & George, K. 
(2009). Acute clinical care and care coor-
dination for traumatic brain injury within 
Department of Defense. Journal of Reha-
bilitation Research and Development, 46(6), 
655–666. http://dx.doi.org/10.1682/JRRD​
.2008.09.0114
Jain, N., Layton, B. S., & Murray, P. K. (2000). 
Are aphasic patients who fail the GOAT in 
PTA? A modified Galveston Orientation 
and Amnesia Test for persons with aphasia.  
The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 14, 13–17. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1076/1385-4046​
(200002)14:1;1-8;FT013
Jakubowitz, M., & Schill, M. J. (2008). Ethical 
implications of using outdated standard-
ized tests. SIG 16 Perspectives on School-
Based Issues, 9(2), 79–83. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1044/sbi9.2.79
Jehkonen, M., Laihosalo, M., & Kettunen, J. 
(2006). Anosognosia after stroke: Assess-
ment, occurrence, subtypes and impact 
on functional outcome reviewed. Acta 
Neurologica Scandinavica, 114(5), 293–306. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0404​.2006​
.00723.x
Jianfie, C., Meifang, Y., & Jia, W. (1988). Hem-
orrheological study on the effect of acu-
puncture in treating cerebral infarction. 
Journal of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 8(3), 
167–172.
Jin, J., & Bridges, S. M. (2014). Educational 
technologies in problem-based learning 
in health sciences education: A systematic 
review. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 
16(12), e251–e251. http://dx.doi.org/​10.21​
96/jmir.3240
Johnson, A. F., & Jacobson, B. H. (2007). Medi-
cal speech-language pathology: A practitioner’s 
guide. New York, NY: Thieme.
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, F. (2009). Joining 
together: Group theory and group skills (10th 
ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Johnson, M. L., Taub, E., Harper, L. H., Wade, 
J. T., Bowman, M. H., Bishop-McKay, S., . . . 
Uswatte, G. (2014). An enhanced protocol 
for constraint-induced aphasia therapy II: 
A  case series. American Journal of Speech- 
Language Pathology, 23(1), 60–72. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360​(2013/​
12-0168)
John-Steiner, V. (2006). Creative collaboration. 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Joint Ad Hoc Committee on PhD Shortages in 
Communication Sciences and Disorders. 
(2002). Crisis in the discipline: A plan for reshap-
ing our future. American Speech-Language- 
Hearing Association and the Council of Aca-
demic Programs in Communication Sciences 
and Disorders. Retrieved from http://www​ 
.capcsd.org/reports/JointAdHocCmteFinal 
Report.pdf
Joint Ad Hoc Committee on PhD Shortages in 
Communication Sciences and Disorders. 
(2008). Report of the 2008 Joint Ad Hoc Com-
mittee on PhD shortages in communication 
sciences and disorders. American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) 
and the Council of Academic Programs in 
Communication Sciences and Disorders. 

References   629
Retrieved from http://www.asha.org/up​
loadedFiles/academic/reports/2008PhD​
AdHocComFullReport.pdf
Joint Commission. (2010). Advancing effective 
communication, cultural competence, and patient- 
and family-centered care. Retrieved June 27, 
2015, from http://www.jointcommission 
.org/roadmap_for_hospitals/default.aspx
Joltin, A., Camp, C. J., & McMahon, C. M. 
(2003). Spaced-retrieval over the telephone: 
An intervention for persons with dementia. 
Clinical Psychologist, 7(1), 50–55. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/13284200410001707483
Judd, T. (1989). Crossed “right hemisphere 
syndrome” with limb apraxia: A case study. 
Neuropsychology, 3(3), 159–173. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1037/h0091765
Jung, W., Kwon, S., Park, S., & Moon, S. (2012). 
Can combination therapy of conventional 
and oriental medicine improve poststroke 
aphasia? Comparative, observational, prag-
matic study. Evidence-Based Complementary 
and Alternative Medicine: eCAM. Retrieved 
from http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2012/65​
4604
Junqué, C., Litvan, I., & Vendrell, P. (1986). 
Does reversed laterality really exist in 
dextrals? A case study. Neuropsychologia, 
24(2), 241–254. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/​
0028-3932(86)90056-4
Jurica, S. J., Leitten, C. L., & Mattis, S. (2001). 
Dementia rating scale: Professional manual. 
Odessa, FL: Psychological Corp.
Kaderavek, J. N., & Justice, L. M. (2010). Fidel-
ity: An essential component of evidence-
based practice in speech-language pathol-
ogy. American Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 19(4), 369. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1044/1058-0360(2010/09-0097)
Kagan, A. (2011). A-FROM in action at the 
Aphasia Institute. Seminars in Speech and 
Language, 32(3), 216–228. http://dx.doi.org/​ 
10.1055/s-0031-1286176
Kagan, A., Black, S. E., Duchan, J. F., Simmons-
Mackie, N., & Square, P. (2001). Training 
volunteers as conversation partners using 
“supported conversation for adults with 
aphasia” (SCA): A controlled trial. Journal 
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 
44(3), 624–638. http://dx.doi.org/​10.1044/​
1092-4388(2001/051)
Kagan, A., & Kimelman, M. D. (1995). Informed 
consent in aphasia research: Myth or real-
ity. Clinical Aphasiology, 23, 65–75. Retrieved 
from http://aphasiology.pitt.edu/archive/​
00001304/02/23-06.pdf
Kagan, A., & Simmons-Mackie, N. (2007). 
Beginning with the end: Outcome-driven 
assessment and intervention with life par-
ticipation in mind. Topics in Language Dis-
orders, 27(4), 309–317. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1097/01.TLD.0000299885.39488.bf
Kagan, A., Simmons-Mackie, N., Rowland, A., 
Huijbregts, M., Shumway, E., McEwen, S., 
. . . Sharp, S. (2008). Counting what counts: 
A framework for capturing real-life out-
comes of aphasia intervention. Aphasiology, 
22(3), 258–280. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
02687030701282595
Kagan, A., Simmons-Mackie, N., Victor, J. C., 
Carling-Rowland, A., Hoch, J., Huijbregts, 
M., . . . Mok, A. (2011). Assessment for living 
with aphasia (ALA). Toronto, Canada: Apha-
sia Institute.
Kahn-Denis, K. B. (1997). Art therapy with geri-
atric dementia clients. Art Therapy, 14(3), 
194–199. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0742​
1656.1987.10759281
Kanaya, A. M., Barrett-Connor, E., Gilden­
gorin, G., & Yaffe, K. (2004). Change in 
cognitive function by glucose tolerance 
status in older adults: A 4-year prospec-
tive study of the Rancho Bernardo study 
cohort. Archives of Internal Medicine, 164(12), 
1327–1333. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archinte.164.12.1327
Kaplan, D. M., Tarvydas, V. M., & Gladding, 
S. T. (2014). 20/20: A vision for the future 
of counseling: The new consensus defini-
tion of counseling. Journal of Counseling & 
Development, 92(3), 366–372. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1002/j.1556-6676.2014.00164.x
Kaplan, E., Goodglass, H., & Weintraub, S. 
(2000). Boston Naming Test (2nd ed.). Phila-
delphia, PA: Lea & Febiger.
Karanth, P. (2000). Multilingual/multiliter-
ate/multicultural studies of aphasia: The 
Rosetta Stone of neurolinguistics in the 

630   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
new millennium. Brain and Language, 71(1), 
113–115. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/brln​
.1999.2227
Karlawish, J. (2008). Measuring decision-
making capacity in cognitively impaired in- 
dividuals. Neurosignals, 16(1), 91–98. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1159/000109763
Karnath, H.-O., Milner, D., & Vallar, G. (2002). 
The cognitive and neural bases of spatial neglect. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Karnath, H.-O., & Rorden, C. (2012). The anat-
omy of spatial neglect. Neuropsychologia, 
50(6), 1010–1017. http://dx.doi.org/10.10​
16/j.neuropsychologia​.2011​.06.027
Katz, R. C. (2001). Computer applications in 
aphasia treatment. In R. Chapey (Ed.), Lan-
guage intervention strategies in aphasia and 
related neurogenic communication disorders 
(4th ed., pp. 718–738). Baltimore, MD: Lip-
pincott Williams & Wilkins.
Katz, R. C., Hallowell, B., Code, C., Arm-
strong, E., Roberts, P., Pound, C., & Katz, 
L. (2000). A multinational comparison of 
aphasia management practices. Interna-
tional Journal of Language & Communication 
Disorders, 35(2), 303–314. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1080/136828200247205
Kauhanen, M. L., Korpelaninen, J., Hiltunen, 
P., Maatta, R., Mononen, H., Brusin, E., . . .  
Myllyla, V. V. (2000). Aphasia, depression, 
and non-verbal cognitive impairment in 
ischemic stroke. Cerebrovascular Diseases, 
10(6), 455–461. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/​
000016107
Kay, J., Lesser, R., & Coltheart, M. (1992). Psy-
cholinguistic Assessment of Language Process-
ing in Aphasia (PALPA). Hove, East Sussex, 
UK: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kay, J., Lesser, R., & Coltheart, M. (1997). Psy-
cholinguistic Assessments of Language Process-
ing in Aphasia (PALPA). Hove, East Sussex, 
UK: Psychology Press.
Kean, M. L. (1977). The linguistic interpreta-
tion of aphasic syndromes: Agrammatism 
in Broca’s aphasia, an example. Cognition, 
5(1), 9–46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/​00​
10-0277(77)90015-4
Kean, M. L. (1985). Agrammatism. Orlando, FL: 
Academic Press.
Kearns, K., & Elman, R. J. (2008). Group ther-
apy for aphasia: Theoretical and practical 
considerations. In R. Chapey (Ed.), Lan-
guage intervention strategies in aphasia and 
related neurogenic communication disorders 
(5th ed., pp. 376–400). Baltimore, MD: Lip-
pincott Williams & Wilkins.
Kearns, K. P. (1985). Response elaboration 
training for patient initiated utterances. In 
R. N. Brookshire (Ed.), Clinical aphasiology 
(pp. 196–204). Minneapolis, MN: BRK.
Kearns, K. P., & Scher, G. P. (1989). The gen-
eralization of response elaboration training 
effects. Clinical Aphasiology, 18, 223–245. 
Retrieved from http://aphasiology.pitt​
.edu/archive/00000076/01/18-17.pdf
Kearns, K. P., & Yedor, K. (1991). An alternat-
ing treatments comparison of loose train-
ing and a convergent treatment strategy. 
Clinical Aphasiology, 20, 223–238. Retrieved 
from http://aphasiology.pitt.edu/archive/​
00000146/01/20-21.pdf
Keenan, J. S., & Brassell, E. G. (1975). Aphasia 
language performance scales (Spanish ver-
sion). Murfreesboro, TN: Pinnacle Press.
Keengwe, J., Onchwari, G., & Oigara, J. N. 
(2014). Promoting active learning through the 
flipped classroom model. Hershey, PA: Infor-
mation Science Reference.
Keith, R. W. (2009). SCAN-3 for Adolescents and 
Adults: Tests for auditory processing disorders. 
San Antonio, TX: Pearson.
Kelley, J. M., Kraft-Todd, G., Schapira, L., Kos-
sowsky, J., & Riess, H. (2014). The influ-
ence of the patient-clinician relationship on 
healthcare outcomes: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. PLoS ONE, 9(4), 1–7. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0094207
Kelly, H., Brady, M. C., & Enderby, P. (2010). 
Speech and language therapy for aphasia 
following stroke. Cochrane Database of Sys-
tematic Reviews, 5, CD000425. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000425.pub2
Keltner, N. L., & Cooke, B. B. (2007). Biologi-
cal perspectives: Traumatic brain injury ​— ​
war related. Perspectives in Psychiatric Care, 
43(4), 223–226. http://dx.doi.org/10​.1111/​
j.1744-6163.2007.00138.x

References   631
Kember, D., Ho, A., & Hong, C. (2008). The 
importance of establishing relevance in 
motivating student learning. Active Learning 
in Higher Education, 9(3), 249–263. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/1469787408095849
Kemper, S., & Harden, T. (1999). Experimen-
tally disentangling what’s beneficial about 
elderspeak from what’s not. Psychology and 
Aging, 14(4), 656–670. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1037/0882-7974.14.4.656
Kemper, S., & Kemtes, K. (2000). Aging and 
message production and comprehension. 
In D. C. Park & N. Schwartz (Eds.), Cogni-
tive aging: A primer (pp. 197–213). Philadel-
phia, PA: Psychology Press.
Kemper, S., Schmalzried, R., Herman, R., & 
Mohankumar, D. (2011). The effects of vary-
ing task priorities on language production 
by young and older adults. Experimental 
Aging Research, 37(2), 198–219. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/0361073X.2011.554513
Kemper, S., & Sumner, A. (2001). The structure 
of verbal abilities in young and older adults. 
Psychology and Aging, 16(2), 312–322. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0882-7974.16.2.312
Kempler, D., Teng, E. L., Taussig, M., & Dick, 
M. B. (2010). The common objects memory 
test (COMT): A simple test with cross-cul-
tural applicability. Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society, 16(3), 537. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1355617710000160
Kempler, D., Van Lancker, D., Marchman, V., 
& Bates, E. (1999). Idiom comprehension in 
children and adults with unilateral brain 
damage. Developmental Neuropsychology, 15, 
327–349. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​8756​
5649909540753
Kendall, D., Conway, T., Rosenbek, J., & 
Gonzalez-Rothi, L. (2003). Case study: 
Phonological rehabilitation of acquired 
phonologic alexia. Aphasiology, 17(11), 
1073–1095. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0268​
7030344000355
Kennedy, M. R. T., Coelho, C., Turkstra, L., Ylvi-
saker, M., Moore Sohlberg, M., Yorkston, K., 
. . . Kan, P.-F. (2008). Intervention for execu-
tive functions after traumatic brain injury: 
A systematic review, meta-analysis and 
clinical recommendations. Neuropsycho-
logical Rehabilitation, 18(3), 257–299. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/09602010701748644
Keren, G., & Willemsen, M. C. (2009). Decision 
anomalies, experimenter assumptions, and 
participants’ comprehension: Reevaluating 
the uncertainty effect. Journal of Behavioral 
Decision Making, 22(3), 301–317. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1002/bdm.628
Kertesz, A. (2006). Western Aphasia Battery-
Enhanced. San Antonio, TX: Psychological 
Corporation.
Kertesz, A. (2007). Western Aphasia Battery–
Revised. San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Assess-
ment.
Kessels, R. P. C., Bucks, R. S., Willison, J. R., 
& Byrne, L. M. T. (2011). Location Learning 
Test–Revised. Retrieved from http://hdl​
.handle.net/2066/99466
Khazei, A., Jarvis-Selinger, S., Ho, K., & Lee, 
A. (2005). An assessment of the telehealth 
needs and health-care priorities of Tanna 
Island: A remote, underserved and vulner-
able population. Journal of Telemedicine and 
Telecare, 11(1), 35–40. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1258/1357633053430458
Kiernan, R. J., Mueller, J., Langston, J. W., 
& van Dyke, C. (1987). The neurobehav-
ioral cognitive status examination: A brief 
but differentiated approach to cognitive 
assessment. Annals of Internal Medicine, 
107(4), 481–485. http://dx.doi.org/​10.7326/​
0003-4819-107-4-481
Kilov, A., Togher, L., & Grant, S. (2009). Prob-
lem solving with friends: Discourse par-
ticipation and performance of individuals 
with and without traumatic brain injury. 
Aphasiology, 23(5), 584–605. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687030701855382
King, D., Brughelli, M., Hume, P., & Gissane, 
C. (2014). Assessment, management and 
knowledge of sport-related concussion: 
Systematic review. Sports Medicine, 44(4), 
449–471. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s40​
279-013-0134-x
King, J. M. (2013a). Communication supports. 
In N. Simmons-Mackie, J. M. King, & D. R. 
Beukelman (Eds.), Supporting communication 
for adults with acute and chronic aphasia (pp. 
51–72). Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.

632   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
King, J. M. (2013b). Supporting communi-
cation with technology. In N. Simmons-
Mackie, J. M. King, & D. R. Beukelman 
(Eds.), Supporting communication for adults 
with acute and chronic aphasia (pp. 73–98). 
Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes.
King, J. M., Simmons-Mackie, N., & Beukel-
man, D. R. (2013). Supporting communi-
cation: Improving the experience of living 
with aphasia. In N. Simmons-Mackie, J. M. 
King, & D. R. Beukelman (Eds.), Support-
ing communication for adults with acute and 
chronic aphasia (pp. 1–10). Baltimore, MD: 
Paul H. Brookes.
Kinney, J. M., & Rentz, C. A. (2005). Observed 
well-being among individuals with demen-
tia: Memories in the Making©, an art pro-
gram, versus other structured activity. 
American Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and 
Other Dementias, 20(4), 220–227. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1177/153331750502000406
Kiran, S. (2008). Typicality of inanimate cat-
egory exemplars in aphasia treatment: 
Further evidence for semantic complex-
ity. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing 
Research, 51(6), 1550–1568. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2008/07-0038)
Kiran, S., Caplan, D., Sandberg, C., Levy, J., 
Berardino, A., Ascenso, E., . . . Tripodis, 
Y. (2012). Development of a theoretically 
based treatment for sentence comprehen-
sion deficits in individuals with aphasia. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathol-
ogy, 21(2), S88–S102. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1044/1058-0360(2012/11-0106)
Kiran, S., & Johnson, L. (2008). Semantic com-
plexity in treatment of naming deficits in 
aphasia: Evidence from well-defined cate-
gories. American Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 17(4), 389–400. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2008/06-0085)
Kiran, S., Sandberg, C., & Sebastian, R. (2011). 
Treatment of category generation and re- 
trieval in aphasia: Effect of typicality of cat-
egory items. Journal of Speech, Language, and 
Hearing Research, 54(4), 1101–1117. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388​(2010/10-0117)
Kiran, S., & Thompson, C. K. (2003). The role 
semantic complexity in treatment of nam-
ing deficits: Training semantic categories 
in fluent aphasia by controlling exemplar 
typicality. Journal of Speech, Language, and 
Hearing Research, 46(4), 773–787.
Kirmess, M., & Maher, L. M. (2010). Con-
straint induced language therapy in early 
aphasia rehabilitation. Aphasiology, 24(6–8), 
725–736. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0268​
7030903437682
Kitwood, T. (1997). Dementia reconsidered: The 
person comes first. New York, NY: Open Uni-
versity Press.
Kitwood, T., & Bredin, K. (1994). Charting the 
course of quality care. Journal of Dementia 
Care, 2(3), 22–23.
Kleim, J. A., & Jones, T. A. (2008). Principles 
of experience-dependent neural plasticity: 
Implications for rehabilitation after brain 
damage. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hear-
ing Research: JSLHR, 51(1), S225–239. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2008/018)
Klein, R., McNamara, P., & Albert, M. L. 
(2006). Neuropharmacologic approaches to 
cognitive rehabilitation. Behavioural Neurol-
ogy, 17(1), 1–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/​
2006/298756
Klein, R. B., & Albert, M. L. (2004). Can drug 
therapies improve language functions of 
individuals with aphasia? A review of the 
evidence. Seminars in Speech and Language, 
25(2), 193–204. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/​
s-2004-825655
Knollman-Porter, K. (2008). Acquired apraxia 
of speech: A review. Topics in Stroke Reha-
bilitation, 15(5), 484–493. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1310/tsr1505-484
Knowles, M. (1984). The adult learner: A ne- 
glected species (3rd ed.). Houston, TX: Gulf.
Kolk, H. (1995). A time-based approach to 
agrammatic production. Brain and Language, 
50(3), 282–303. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/
brln.1995.1049
Kolk, H. H., & Heeschen, C. (1990). Adapta-
tion symptoms and impairment symptoms 
in Broca’s aphasia. Aphasiology, 4, 221–231. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687039008​
249075
Kolk, H. H., Van Grunsven, M. J. F., & Keyser, 
A. (1985). On parallelism between produc-

References   633
tion and comprehension in agrammatism. 
In M.-L. Kean (Ed.), Agrammatism (pp. 165–
206). Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Kontou, E., Thomas, S. A., & Lincoln, N. B. 
(2012). Psychometric properties of a revised 
version of the Visual Analog Mood Scales. 
Clinical Rehabilitation, 26(12), 1133–1140. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/026921551244​
2670
Kopelman, M. D., Thomson, A. D., Guerrini, 
I., & Marshall, E. J. (2009). The Korsakoff 
syndrome: Clinical aspects, psychology 
and treatment. Alcohol and Alcoholism, 44(2), 
148–154. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/alcalc/
agn118
Kormanik, M., & Rocco, T. (2009). Internal 
versus external control of reinforcement: 
A review of the locus of control construct. 
Human Resource Development Review, 8(4), 
463–483. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/15344​
84309342080
Kosky, C., & Schlisselberg, G. (2013). Oral com-
munication skills in senior citizens: A com-
munity service model. SIG, 10 Perspectives 
on Issues in Higher Education, 16, 28–38. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/ihe16.1.28
Kramer, A. F., Fabiani, M., & Colcombe, S. 
(2006). Contributions of cognitive neurosci-
ence to the understanding of behavior and 
aging. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), 
Handbook of the psychology of aging (6th ed., 
pp. 57–83). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Krestel, H., Annoni, J.-M., & Jagella, C. (2013). 
White matter in aphasia: A historical 
review of the Dejerines’ studies. Brain and 
Language, 127(3), 526–532. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2013.05.019
Krishnan, G., Tiwari, S., Pai, A. R., & Rao, S. 
N. (2012). Variability in aphasia following 
subcortical hemorrhagic lesion. Annals of 
Neurosciences, 19(4), 158–160. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.5214/ans.0972.7531.190404
Kuljic-Obradovic, D. C. (2003). Subcortical 
aphasia: Three different language disorder 
syndromes? European Journal of Neurology, 
10(4), 445–448. http://dx.doi.org/​10.1046/​
j.1468-1331.2003.00604.x
Kuller, L. H., Shemanski, L., Psaty, B. M., 
Borhani, N. O., Gardin, J., Haan, M. N., . . . 
Tracy, R. (1995). Subclinical disease as an 
independent risk factor for cardiovascular 
disease. Circulation, 92(4), 720–726. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1161/01.CIR.92.4.720
Kurczek, J., & Duff, M. (2011). Cohesion, coher-
ence, and declarative memory: Discourse 
patterns in individuals with hippocampal 
amnesia. Aphasiology, 25(6–7), 6–7. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2010.537345
Kurland, J., Pulvermüller, F., Silva, N., Burke, 
K., & Andrianopoulos, M. (2012). Con-
strained versus unconstrained intensive 
language therapy in two individuals with 
chronic, moderate-to-severe aphasia and 
apraxia of speech: Behavioral and fMRI out-
comes. American Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 21(2), S65–S87. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2012/11-0113)
Labouvie-Vief, G. (1984). Logic and self-reg-
ulation from youth to maturity: A model. 
In M. L. Commons & F. A. Richards (Eds.), 
Beyond formal operations. New York, NY: 
Praeger.
Lacey, E. H., Lott, S. N., Snider, S. F., Sperling, 
A., & Friedman, R. B. (2010). Multiple oral 
re-reading treatment for alexia: The parts 
may be greater than the whole. Neuropsycho-
logical Rehabilitation, 20(4), 601–623. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/09602011003710993
Lacey, E. H., Lott, S. N., Sperling, A. J., Snider, 
S. F., & Friedman, R. B. (2007). Multiple oral 
re-reading treatment for alexia: It works, 
but why? Brain and Language, 103(1–2), 
115–116. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0960​
2011003710993
LaFrance, C., Garcia, L. J., & Labreche, J. 
(2007). The effect of a therapy dog on the 
communication skills of an adult with 
aphasia. Journal of Communication Disorders, 
40(3), 215–224. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j​
.jcomdis.2006.06.010
Langlois, J. A., Rutland-Brown, W., & Wald, 
M. M. (2006). The epidemiology and 
impact of traumatic brain injury: A brief 
overview. The Journal of Head Trauma Reha-
bilitation, 21(5), 357–378. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1097/00001199-200609000-00001
Lantz, M. S., Buchalter, E. N., & McBee, L. (1997). 
The Wellness Group: A novel intervention  

634   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
for coping with disruptive behavior in 
elderly nursing home residents. Gerontolo-
gist, 37(4), 551–556. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1093/geront/37.4.551
Lanyon, L., & Rose, M. L. (2009). Do the hands 
have it? The facilitation effects of arm and 
hand gesture on word retrieval in aphasia. 
Aphasiology, 23(7–8), 809–822. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687030802642044
LaPointe, L. L. (1999). Quality of life with apha-
sia. Seminars in speech and language, 20(1), 5–17. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/​s-2008-1064005
LaPointe, L. L. (2000). Quality of life with brain 
damage. Brain and Language, 71(1), 135–137. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/brln.1999.2233
LaPointe, L. L., & Eisenson, J. (2008). Exam-
ining for aphasia: Assessment of Aphasia and 
Related Impairments–Fourth edition (EFA-4). 
Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
LaPointe, L. L., & Horner, J. (1998). Reading 
Comprehension Battery for Aphasia-2. Austin, 
TX: Pro-Ed.
Laska, A. C., Mårtensson, B., Kahan, T., von 
Arbin, M., & Murray, V. (2007). Recognition 
of depression in aphasic stroke patients. 
Cerebrovascular Diseases, 24(1), 74–79. http://​ 
dx.doi.org/10.1159/000103119
Lasker, J. P., & Garrett, K. L. (2005). Multimodal 
communication screening task for persons with 
aphasia: Booklet and score sheet–revised. http: // 
aac.unl.edu/screen/picture.pdf
Lasker, J. P., Stierwalt, A. G., Spence, M., & 
Calvin-Root, C. (2010). Using webcam 
interactive technology to implement treat-
ment for severe apraxia: A case example. 
Journal of Medical Speech-Language Pathology, 
18(4), 4–10.
Laughlin, S. A., Naeser, M. A., & Gordon, W. 
P. (1979). Effects of three syllable durations 
using the melodic intonation therapy tech-
nique. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 
22(2), 311–320. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/
jshr.2202.311
Laures, J. S., & Shisler, R. J. (2004). Complemen-
tary and alternative medical approaches to 
treating adult neurogenic communication 
disorders: A review. Disability and Rehabili-
tation, 26(6), 315–325. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1080/0963828032000174106
Laures-Gore, J., & Marshall, R. S. (2008). Acu-
puncture as a treatment technique for apha-
sia and cognitive impairments. Perspectives 
on Neurophysiology and Neurogenic Speech 
and Language Disorders, 18, 107–113. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/nnsld18.3.107
Laureys, S., Owen, A. M., & Schiff, N. D. (2004). 
Brain function in coma, vegetative state, 
and related disorders. The Lancet Neurology, 
3(9), 537–546. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S1474-4422(04)00852-X
Lavis, J. N., Guindon, G. E., Cameron, D., Bou-
pha, B., Dejman, M., Osei, E. J. A., & Sadana, 
R. (2010). Bridging the gaps between 
research, policy and practice in low- and 
middle-income countries: A survey of re- 
searchers. CMAJ: Canadian Medical Associa-
tion Journal, 182(9), E350–E361. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.081164
Lawlor, E. F., Kreuter, M. W., Sebert-Kuhl-
mann, A. K., & McBride, T. D. (2015). Meth-
odological innovations in public health 
education: Transdisciplinary problem solv-
ing. American Journal of Public Health, 105​
(Suppl. 1), S99–S103. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.2105/AJPH.2014.302462
Lawson, R., & Fawcus, M. (1999). Increasing 
effective communication using a total com-
munication approach. In S. Byng, K. Swin-
burn, & C. Pound (Eds.), The aphasia therapy 
file (pp. 61–71). East Sussex, UK: Psychol-
ogy Press.
Laxe, S., Zasler, N., Tschiesner, U., López-
Blazquez, R., Tormos, J. M., & Bernabeu, 
M. (2011). ICF use to identify common 
problems on a TBI neurorehabilitation unit 
in Spain. NeuroRehabilitation, 29(1), 99–110. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/NRE-2011 
-0683
Lê, K., Coelho, C., Mozeiko, J., Krueger, F., & 
Grafman, J. (2012). Predicting story good-
ness performance from cognitive measures 
following traumatic brain injury. Ameri-
can Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 
21(2), 115–125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/​
1058-0360(2012/11-0114)
Leach, E., Cornwell, P., Fleming, J., & Haines, 
T. (2010). Patient centered goal-setting in a 
subacute rehabilitation setting. Disability 

References   635
and Rehabilitation, 32(2), 159–172. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.3109/09638280903036605
Leahy, M. M., McTiernan, K., Smith, M. M., 
Sloane, P., Walsh, I. P., Walshe, M., & Ni 
Cholmain, C. (2010). Foundation studies in 
education for therapy practice: Curriculum 
updating. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 
62(5), 255–259. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/​
000314789
Lee, J. E., Kaye, R. C., & Cherney, L. R. (2009). 
Conversational script performance in adults 
with non-fluent aphasia: Treatment inten-
sity and aphasia severity. Aphasiology, 23(7–
8), 885–897. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​02​
687030802669534
Lee, L. L. (1971). Northwestern Syntax Screening 
Test. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University 
Press.
Lehman-Blake, M. T., & Tompkins, C. A. 
(2001). Predictive inferencing in adults 
with right hemisphere brain damage. Jour-
nal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research: 
JSLHR, 44(3), 639–654. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1044/1092-4388(2001/052)
Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of 
language. New York, NY: Wiley.
Lenneberg, E. (1973). The neurology of lan-
guage. Daedalus, 102, 115–133. Retrieved 
from http://www.jstor.org/stable/20024149
Leonard, C., Laird, L., Burianová, H., Graham, 
S., Grady, C., Simic, T., & Rochon, E. (2015). 
Behavioural and neural changes after a 
“choice” therapy for naming deficits in 
aphasia: Preliminary findings. Aphasiology, 
29(4), 506–525. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
02687038.2014.971099
Leonard, C., Rochon, E., & Laird, L. (2008). Treat-
ing naming impairments in aphasia: Findings 
from a phonological components analysis 
treatment. Aphasiology, 22(9), 923–947. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0268​7030​701831474
Leppävuori, A., Pohjasvaara, T., Vataja, R., 
Kaste, M., & Erkinjuntti, T. (2003). Gen-
eralized anxiety disorders three to four 
months after ischemic stroke. Cerebrovas-
cular Diseases, 16(3), 257–264. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1159/000071125
Leritz, E. C., McGlinchey, R. E., Lundgren, K., 
Grande, L. J., & Milberg, W. P. (2008). Using 
lexical familiarity judgments to assess ver-
bally mediated intelligence in aphasia. Neu-
ropsychology, 22(6), 687–696. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1037/a0013319
Levin, H. S., O’Donnell, V. M., & Grossman, 
R. G. (1979). The Galveston orientation and 
amnesia test. The Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Disease, 167(11), 675–684.
Lewin, S., Skea, Z., Entwistle, V. A., Zwaren-
stein, M., & Dick, J. (2001). Interventions 
for providers to promote a patient-centred 
approach in clinical consultations. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews.
Lewin, S. A., Skea, Z. C., Entwistle, V., Zwa-
renstein, M., & Dick, J. (2001). Interven-
tions for providers to promote a patient-
centred approach in clinical consultations. 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 
4(10). Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1002/14651858.CD003267
Lezak, M. D., Howieson, D. B., Loring, D. W., 
Hannay, H. J., & Fischer, J. S. (2004). Neuro-
psychological assessment (4th ed.). New York, 
NY: Oxford University Press.
Li, E. C., Kitselman, K., Dusatko, D., & Spinelli, 
C. (1988). The efficacy of PACE in the reme-
diation of naming deficits. Journal of Com-
munication Disorders, 21(6), 491–503. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-9924(88)90019-6
Liang, J., Li, F., Wei, C., Song, H., Wu, L., Tang, 
Y., & Jia, J. (2014). Rationale and design of 
a multicenter, Phase 2 clinical trial to inves-
tigate the efficacy of traditional Chinese 
medicine SaiLuoTong in vascular demen-
tia. Journal of Stroke and Cerebrovascular 
Diseases, 23(10), 2626–2634. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/j.j​strokecerebrovasdis.2014​
.06.005
Lincoln, N. B., Sutcliffe, L. M., & Unsworth, 
G. (2000). Validation of the stroke aphasic 
depression questionnaire (SADQ) for use 
with patients in hospital. Clinical Neuropsy-
chological Assessment, 1, 88–96.
Linebarger, M. C., McCall, D., & Berndt, R. 
S. (2004). The role of processing support 
in the remediation of aphasic language 
production disorders. Cognitive Neuropsy-
chology, 21(2–4), 267–282. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02643290342000537

636   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Linebaugh, C. (1983). Treatment of anomic 
aphasia. In C. Perkins (Ed.), Current thera-
pies for communication disorders: Language 
handicaps in adults (pp. 181–189). New York, 
NY: Thieme-Stratton.
Linebaugh, C., & Lehner, L. (1977). Cueing hier-
archies and word retrieval: A therapy pro-
gram. Clinical Aphasiology, 7, 248–260. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030444000363
Linebaugh, C. W., Shisler, R. J., & Lehner, L. 
(2005). Cueing hierarchies and word re- 
trieval: A therapy program. Aphasiology, 
19(1), 77–92. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02​
687030444000363
Liu, Z., Zhang, Y., Yan, X., & Liu, J. (2015). Acu-
puncture for stroke: An overview of system-
atic reviews. Integrative Medicine Research, 
4(1), 10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.imr​
.2015.04.311
Lomas, J., Pickard, L., Bester, S., Elbard, H., 
Finlayson, A., & Zoghaib, C. (1989). The 
Communicative Effectiveness Index: Devel-
opment and psychometric evaluation of a 
functional communication measure for 
adult aphasia. Journal of Speech and Hearing 
Disorders, 54(1), 113–124. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1044/jshd.5401.113
Lorenzen, B., & Murray, L. L. (2008). Bilingual 
aphasia: A theoretical and clinical review. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathol-
ogy, 17(3), 299–317. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1044/1058-0360(2008/026)
Love, T., & Oster, E. (2002). On the categori-
zation of aphasic typologies: The SOAP (a 
test of syntactic complexity). Journal of Psy-
cholinguistic Research, 31(5), 503–529. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1021208903394
Loverso, F. L., Prescott, T. E., & Selinger, M. 
(1988). Cueing verbs: A treatment strategy 
for aphasic adults (CVT). Journal of Reha-
bilitation Research and Development, 25(2), 
47–60. Retrieved from http://www.rehab​
.research.va.gov/jour/88/25/2/pdf/love​
rso.pdf
Loverso, F. L., Selinger, M., & Prescott, T. E. 
(1979). Application of verbing strategies to 
aphasia treatment. Clinical Aphasiology, 9, 
229–238. Retrieved from http://aphasiol-
ogy.pitt.edu/archive/00000395/01/09-27.
pdf
Lowell, S., Beeson, P. M., & Holland, A. L. 
(1995). The efficacy of a semantic cueing 
procedure on naming performance of adults 
with aphasia. American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, 4, 109–114. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360.0404.109
Lowit, A., & Kent, R. D. (2011). Assessment of 
motor speech disorders. San Diego, CA: Plural.
LPAA Project Group. (2000). Life participation 
approach to aphasia: A statement of values for 
the future. Retrieved from http://www.asha​
.org/Publications/leader/2000/000215/
Life-Participation-Approach-to-Aphasia-
-A-Statement-of-Values-for-the-Future.htm
Lubinski, R., Moscato, B. S., & Willer, B. S. 
(1997). Prevalence of speaking and hearing 
disabilities among adults with traumatic 
brain injury from a national household 
survey. Brain Injury, 11(2), 103–114. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/026990597123692
Luck, A. M., & Rose, M. L. (2007). Interviewing 
people with aphasia: Insights into method 
adjustments from a pilot study. Aphasiology, 
21(2), 208–224. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
02687030601065470
Luckowski, A. (2014). Patients with dementia: 
Caring for horses lifts the spirits. Nursing, 
44(7), 25–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01​
.NURSE.0000450789.10849.c5
Lucks Mendel, L., Mendel, M. I., & Battle, D. 
E. (2004). Climbing the academic ladder. 
The ASHA Leader, 9, 1–23. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/leader.FTR1.09142004.1
Luijpen, M. W., Swaab, D. F., Sergeant, J. 
A., Van Dijk, K. R. A., & Scherder, E. J. A. 
(2005). Effects of transcutaneous electrical 
nerve stimulation (TENS) on memory in 
elderly with mild cognitive impairment. 
Behavioural Brain Research, 2, 349. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2004.09.017
Lund, M. L., Tamm, M., & Branholm, I. (2001). 
Patients’ perceptions of their participation 
in rehabilitation planning and profession-
als’ view of their strategies to encourage 
it. Occupational Therapy International, 8(3), 
151–167. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/oti.143

References   637
Lundgren, K. (2004). Complementary and 
alternative approaches to treating commu-
nication disorders. Seminars in Speech and 
Language, 25(2), 119–120. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1055/s-2004-825649
Luria, A. R., & Hutton, J. T. (1977). A modern 
assessment of the basic forms of aphasia. 
Brain and Language, 4(2), 129–151. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0093-934X(77)90012-8
Luterman, D. (2008). Counseling persons with 
communication disorders and their families. 
Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Lyon, J. G. (1995). Drawing: Its value as a com-
munication aid for adults with aphasia. 
Aphasiology, 9(1), 33–50. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/02687039508248687
Lyon, J. G. (1996). Optimizing communication 
and participation in life for aphasic adults 
and their primary caregivers in natural set-
tings: A model for treatment. In G. Wallace 
(Ed.), Adult aphasia rehabilitation (pp. 137–
160). Boston, MA: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Lyon, J. G. (1998). Coping with aphasia. San 
Diego, CA: Singular.
Lyon, J. G. (1999). A commentary on qualita-
tive research in aphasia. Aphasiology, 13(9–
11), 689–690. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
026870399401795
Lyon, J. G., Cariski, D., Keisler, L., Rosenbek, J., 
Levine, R., Kumpula, J., . . . Blanc, M. (1997). 
Communication partners: Enhancing par-
ticipation in life and communication for 
adults with aphasia in natural settings. 
Aphasiology, 11(7), 693–708. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1080/02687039708249416
Lyon, J. G., & Helm-Estabrooks, N. (1987). 
Drawing: Its communicative significance 
for expressively restricted aphasic adults. 
Topics in Language Disorders, 8(1), 61–71. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00011363-
198712000-00008
Maas, E., Robin, D. A., Austermann Hula, S. 
N., Freedman, S. E., Wulf, G., Ballard, K. J., 
& Schmidt, R. A. (2008). Principles of motor 
learning in treatment of motor speech dis-
orders. American Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 17(3), 277–298. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2008/025)
Macauley, B. (2006). Animal-assisted therapy 
for persons with aphasia: A pilot study. Jour-
nal of Rehabilitation Research & Development, 
43(3), 357–365. http://dx.doi.org/10.1682/
JRRD.2005.01.0027
MacDonald, S. (2005). Functional Assessment 
of Verbal Reasoning and Executive Strategies 
(FAVRES). Guelph, Canada: CCD.
Maddy, K. M., Capilouto, G. J., & McComas, 
K. L. (2014). The effectiveness of semantic 
feature analysis: An evidence-based sys-
tematic review. Annals of Physical and Reha-
bilitation Medicine, 57(4), 254–267. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rehab.2014.03.002
Maguire, A. M., & Ogden, J. A. (2002). MRI 
brain scan analyses and neuropsychologi-
cal profiles of nine patients with persisting 
unilateral neglect. Neuropsychologia, 40(7), 
879–887. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S00​
28-3932(01)00169-5
Mahadevan, S., & Park, Y. (2008). Multifaceted 
therapeutic benefits of Ginkgo biloba L.: 
Chemistry, efficacy, safety, and uses. Journal 
of Food Science, 73(1), R14–R19. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1750-3841.2007.00597.x
Mahendra, N., & Arkin, S. (2003). Effects of 
four years of exercise, language, and social 
interventions on Alzheimer discourse. Jour-
nal of Communication Disorders, 36(5), 395–
422. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9924​
(03)00048-0
Mahendra, N., & Arkin, S. M. (2004). Exercise 
and volunteer work: Contexts for AD lan-
guage and memory interventions. Semi-
nars in Speech and Language, 25(2), 151–167. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-2004-825652
Mahendra, N., Bayles, K. A., & Harris, F. P. 
(2005). Effect of presentation modality 
on immediate and delayed recall in indi-
viduals with Alzheimer’s disease. Ameri-
can Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 
14(2), 144–155. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/​
1058-0360(2005/015)
Mahendra, N., Hopper, T., Bayles, K. A., 
Azuma, T., Clearly, S., & Kim, E. (2006). 
Evidence-based practice recommendations 
for working with individuals with demen-
tia: Montessori-based interventions. Journal 

638   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
of Medical Speech-Language Pathology, 14(1), 
xv–xxvx.
Maher, L. M., Kendall, D., Rodriguez, A., Pin-
gel, K., Swearengin, J. A., Leon, S. A., . . . 
Rothi, L. J. G. (2006). A pilot study of use-
dependent learning in the context of Con-
straint Induced Language Therapy. Journal 
of the International Neuropsychological Society, 
12(6), 843–852. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S1355617706061029
Malkmus, D., & Stenderup, K. (1974). Ranchos 
Los Amigos Cognitive Scale–Revised. Downey, 
CA: Ranchos Los Amigos Hospital.
Manheim, L. M., Halper, A. S., & Cherney, L. 
(2009). Patient-reported changes in commu-
nication after computer-based script train-
ing for aphasia. Archives of Physical Medicine 
and Rehabilitation, 90(4), 623–627. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2008.10.022
Mansbach, W. E., MacDougall, E. E., & 
Rosenzweig, A. S. (2012). The Brief Cogni-
tive Assessment Tool (BCAT): A new test 
emphasizing contextual memory, executive 
functions, attentional capacity, and the pre-
diction of instrumental activities of daily 
living. Journal of Clinical and Experimental 
Neuropsychology, 34(2), 183–194. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/13803395.2011.630649
Marcotte, K., Adrover-Roig, D., Damien, B., de 
Préaumont, M., Généreux, S., Hubert, M., 
& Ansaldo, A. I. (2012). Therapy-induced 
neuroplasticity in chronic aphasia. Neuro-
psychologia, 50(8), 1776–1786. http://dx.doi​ 
.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012​
.04.001
Marcotte, K., & Ansaldo, A. I. (2010). The neu-
ral correlates of semantic feature analysis 
in chronic aphasia: Discordant patterns 
according to the etiology. Seminars in Speech 
and Language, 31(1), 52–63. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1055/s-0029-1244953
Marien, P., Engelborghs, S., Pickut, B. A., & 
De Deyn, P. P. (2000). Aphasia following 
cerebellar damage: Fact or fallacy? Journal 
of Neurolinguistics, 13(2–3), 145–171. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0911-6044(00)00009-9
Marquardt, K. (2015). Best social services jobs: 
Speech-language pathologist. Retrieved from 
http://money.usnews.com/careers/best-
jobs/speech-language-pathologist
Marshall, J., Best, W., Cocks, N., Cruice, M., 
Pring, T., Bulcock, G., . . . Cautea, A. (2012). 
Gesture and naming therapy for people 
with severe aphasia: A group study. Journal 
of Speech, Language & Hearing Research, 55(3), 
726–738. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1092-
4388(2011/11-0219)
Marshall, J. F. (1984). Brain function: Neu-
ral adaptations and recovery from injury. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 35, 277–308. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ps.35​
.020184.001425
Marshall, R., & Watts, M. (1976). Relaxation 
training: Effects of communicative ability of 
aphasic adults. Archives of Physical Medicine 
and Rehabilitation, 57, 464–467.
Marshall, R. C. (1983). Communication styles 
of fluent aphasic clients. In H. Winitz (Ed.), 
Treatment of language disorders (pp. 163–180). 
Baltimore, MD: University Park Press.
Marshall, R. C., & Freed, D. B. (2006). The per-
sonalized cueing method: From the labora-
tory to the clinic. American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, 15(2), 103–111. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2006/011)
Marshall, R. C., Karow, C. M., Freed, D. B., & 
Babcock, P. (2002). Effects of personalised 
cue form on the learning of subordinate 
category names by aphasic and non-brain-
damaged subjects. Aphasiology, 16(7), 763–
771. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/026870302​
44000040
Marshall, R. S., & Basilakos, A. (2014). Hot or 
not? A survey regarding knowledge and 
use of complementary and alternative prac-
tices in speech-language pathology. Con-
temporary Issues in Communication Sciences 
and Disorders, 41, 235–251.
Marshall, R. S., & Laures-Gore, J. (2008). What 
is complementary and alternative medicine? 
Perspectives on Neurophysiology and Neuro-
genic Speech and Language Disorders, 18(3), 
86. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/nnsld18.3.86
Marshall, R. S., Laures-Gore, J., DuBay, M., 
Williams, T., & Bryant, D. (2015). Unilat-
eral forced nostril breathing and aphasia ​— ​

References   639
Exploring unilateral forced nostril breathing 
as an adjunct to aphasia treatment: A case 
series. Journal of Alternative and Complemen-
tary Medicine, 21(2), 91–99. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1089/acm.2013.0285
Martin, A. D. (1977). Aphasia testing: A second 
look at the Porch Index of Communicative 
Ability. Journal of Speech and Hearing Dis-
orders, 42(4), 547–562. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1044/jshd.4204.547
Martin, E. M., Lu, W. C., Helmick, K., French, 
L., & Warden, D. L. (2008). Traumatic brain 
injuries sustained in the Afghanistan and 
Iraq wars. American Journal of Nursing, 
108(4), 40–47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01​
.NAJ.0000315260.92070.3f
Martin, N., Fink, R., & Laine, M. (2004). 
Treatment of word retrieval deficits with 
contextual priming. Aphasiology, 18(5–7), 
457–471. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0268​
7030444000129
Martin, N., Fink, R. B., Renvall, K., & Laine, 
M. (2006). Effectiveness of contextual rep-
etition priming treatments for anomia 
depends on intact access to semantics. Jour-
nal of the International Neuropsychological 
Society, 12(6), 853–866. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1017/S1355617706061030
Martínez, A., Villarroel, V., Seoane, J., & del 
Pozo, F. (2004). A study of a rural telemedi-
cine system in the Amazon region of Peru. 
Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 10(4), 
219–225. http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/​1357​
633041424412
Mashima, P. A., & Doarn, C. R. (2008). Over-
view of telehealth activities in speech-
language pathology. Telemedicine Journal and 
E-Health, 14(10), 1101–1117. http://dx.doi 
.org/10.1089/tmj.2008.0080.
Massaro, M. E., & Tompkins, C. A. (1992). 
Feature analysis for treatment of commu-
nication disorders in traumatically brain-
injured patients: An efficacy study. Clinical 
Aphasiology, 22, 245–256. Retrieved from 
http://aphasiology.pitt.edu/archive/​0000​
0174/01/22-19.pdf
Mathias, J. L., Bowden, S. C., Bigler, E. D., & 
Rosenfeld, J. V. (2007). Is performance on 
the Wechsler test of adult reading affected 
by traumatic brain injury? British Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 46(4), 457–466. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1348/014466507X190197
Matuszek, S. (2010). Animal-facilitated therapy 
in various patient populations: Systematic 
literature review. Holistic Nursing Practice, 
24(4), 187–203. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/
HNP.0b013e3181e90197
Mavi, İ. (2007). Perspectives on public aware-
ness of stroke and aphasia among Turkish 
patients in a neurology unit. Clinical Lin-
guistics & Phonetics, 21(1), 55–70. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/02699200600903254
Mayer, J. F., & Murray, L. L. (2002). Approaches 
to the treatment of alexia in chronic apha-
sia. Aphasiology, 16(7), 727–743. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/02687030143000870
McAllister, S., Lincoln, M., Ferguson, A., & 
McAllister, L. (2006). COMPASS®: Compe-
tency assessment in speech pathology. Mel-
bourne: Speech Pathology Association of 
Australia.
McCann, C., Tunnicliffe, K., & Anderson, R. 
(2013). Public awareness of aphasia in New 
Zealand. Aphasiology, 27(5), 568–580. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2012.740553
McCauley, R. J., & Swisher, L. (1984). Psycho-
metric review of language and articulation 
tests for preschool children. Journal of Speech 
and Hearing Disorders, 49(1), 34–42. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/jshd.4901.34
McCooey-O’Halloran, R., Worrall, L., Tof-
folo, D., Code, C., & Hickson, L. (2004). The 
inpatient functional communication interview 
(IFCI). Oxon, UK: Speechmark.
McCrory, P., Meeuwisse, W. H., Aubry, M., 
Cantu, B., Dvorˇák, J., Echemendia, R. J., . . . 
McCrea, M. (2013). Consensus statement on 
concussion in sport: The 4th international 
conference on concussion in sport held in 
Zurich, November 2012. British Journal of 
Sports Medicine, 47(5), 1–12. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1136/bjsports-2013-092313
McIntosh, R. D., Brodie, E. E., Beschin, N., & 
Robertson, I. H. (2000). Improving the clinical  
diagnosis of personal neglect: A reformu-
lated comb and razor test. Cortex: A Journal 

640   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System 
and Behavior, 36(2), 289–292. http://dx.doi 
.org/10.1016/S0010-9452(08)70530-6
McKelvey, M., & Weissling, K. (2013). There 
is a continued need for empirical data sup-
porting the treatment of people with apha-
sia in the acute care setting including the 
use of modified melodic intonation therapy. 
Evidence-Based Communication Assessment 
and Intervention, 7(2), 79–83. http://dx.doi 
.org/10.1080/17489539.2013.849934
McNeil, M. R., & Kimelman, M. D. (2001). Dar-
ley and the nature of aphasia: The defining 
and classifying controversies. Aphasiology, 
15(3), 221–229. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
02687040042000223
McNeil, M. R., & Pratt, S. R. (2001). Defining 
aphasia: Some theoretical and clinical im- 
plications of operating from a formal defi-
nition. Aphasiology, 15(10–11), 901–911.
McNeil, M. R., & Prescott, T. E. (1978). Revised 
Token Test. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
McNeil, M. R., Prescott, T. E., & Chang, E. 
(1975). A measure of PICA ordinality. Clini-
cal Aphasiology, 3. Retrieved from https://
www.google.com/search?tbm=bks&hl=en
&q=Parallell+short+forms+of+the+Boston
+Naming+Test&gws_rd=ssl#hl=en&q=A+
Measure+of+PICA+Ordinality
McNeil, M. R., Prescott, T. E., & Lemme, M. L. 
(1976). An application of electromyographic 
biofeedback to aphasia/apraxia treatment. 
In Clinical Aphasiology Conference Proceed-
ings (pp. 151–171). Minneapolis, MN: BRK.
McPherson, A., Furniss, F. G., Sdogati, C., 
Cesaroni, F., Tartaglini, B., & Lindesay, J. 
(2001). Effects of individualized memory 
aids on the conversation of persons with 
severe dementia: A pilot study. Aging & 
Mental Health, 5(3), 289–294. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/13607860120064970
McRae, K., Hare, M., Elman, J. L., & Ferretti, 
T. (2005). A basis for generating expec-
tancies for verbs from nouns. Memory & 
Cognition, 33(7), 1174–1184. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.3758/BF03193221
McVicker, S., Parr, S., Pound, C., & Duchan, J. 
(2009). The communication partner scheme: 
A project to develop long-term, low-cost 
access to conversation for people living with 
aphasia. Aphasiology, 23(1), 52–71. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030701688783
Meinzer, M., Djundja, D., Barthel, G., Elbert, 
T., & Rochstroh, B. (2005). Long-term sta-
bility of improved language functions in 
chronic aphasia after constraint-induced 
aphasia therapy. Stroke, 36(7), 1462–1466. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/0​.STR.00001​699​
41​.29831.2a
Mella, N., Fagot, D., Lecerf, T., & Ribaupierre, 
A. (2015). Working memory and intrain-
dividual variability in processing speed: 
A lifespan developmental and individual-
differences study. Memory & Cognition, 
43(3), 340–356. http://dx.doi.org/10.3758/
s13421-014-0491-1
Meller, W., Sheehan, W., & Thurber, S. (2008). 
Phenomenology of coarse brain disease. In 
S. H. Fatemi & P. J. Clayton (Eds.), The medi-
cal basis of psychiatry (pp. 445–454). Totowa, 
NJ: Humana Press. Retrieved from http://
link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978- 
1-59745-252-6_26
Meneilly, G. S., Cheung, E., Tessier, D., 
Yakura, C., & Tuokko, H. (1993). The effect 
of improved glycemic control on cogni-
tive functions in the elderly patient with 
diabetes. Journal of Gerontology, 48(4), 
M117–121. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ger​
onj/48.4.M117
Mentis, M., & Prutting, C. A. (1987). Cohe-
sion in the discourse of normal and head-
injured adults. Journal of Speech and Hearing 
Research, 30(1), 88–98. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1044/jshr.3001.88
Mernoff, S. T., & Correia, S. (2010). Military 
blast injury in Iraq and Afghanistan: The 
Veterans Health Administration’s poly-
trauma system of care. Medicine and Health, 
Rhode Island, 93(1), 16–18, 21. Retrieved 
from https://www.rimed.org/medhealth​
ri/2010-01/2010-01-16.pdf
Mesulam, M.-M., Thompson, C. K., Wein-
traub, S., & Rogalski, E. J. (2015). The 
Wernicke conundrum and the anatomy of 
language comprehension in primary pro-
gressive aphasia. Brain, 138(8). http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awv154

References   641
Mesulam, M.-M., & Weintraub, S. (2014). Is it 
time to revisit the classification guidelines 
for primary progressive aphasia? Neurol-
ogy, 82(13), 1108–1109. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1212/WNL.0000000000000272
Meyer, K., Kaplan, J. T., Essex, R., Webber, C., 
Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. (2010). Predict-
ing visual stimuli on the basis of activity in 
auditory cortices. Nature Neuroscience, 13(6), 
667–668. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn.2533
Meyers, J., & Meyers, K. R. (1995). Rey Complex 
Figure Test and Recognition Trial: Professional 
manual. Lutz, FL: Psychological Assessment 
Resources.
Michaelsen, L. K., Sweet, M., & Parmelee, D. 
X. (2008). Team-based learning: Small group 
learning’s next big step. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.
Michaelson, S., Rose, J. T., & May, A. E. (1967). 
Controlling for “experimenter effect” in the 
psychometric assessment of brain damage. 
British Journal of Medical Psychology, 40(4), 
371–374. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-​
8341.1967.tb00586.x
Mielczarek, E. V., & Engler, B. D. (2012). Mea-
suring mythology: Startling concepts in 
NCCAM grants. Skeptical Inquirer, 1, 34.
Mihailidis, A., Blunsden, S., Boger, J., Richards, 
B., Zutis, K., Young, L., & Hoey, J. (2010). 
Towards the development of a technology 
for art therapy and dementia: Definition of 
needs and design constraints. The Arts in 
Psychotherapy, 37(4), 293–300. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/j.aip.2010.05.004
Mikolajczyk, A., & Bateman, A. (2012). Psycho-
dynamic counselling after stroke: A pilot service 
development project and evaluation. Retrieved 
from http://www.acnr.co.uk/2012/12/
psychodynamic-counselling-after-stroke-
a-pilot-service-development-project-and-
evaluation/
Millis, B. J., Cottell, J., & P. G. (1998). Coop-
erative learning for higher education faculty. 
Phoenix, AZ: The Oryx Press.
Milman, L., & Holland, A. (2012). The Scales of 
Cognitive and Communicative Ability for Neu-
rorehabilitation. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Mioshi, E. D., Kate, M., Joanna, A., Robert, 
H., & John R. (2006). The Addenbrooke’s 
Cognitive Examination Revised (ACE-R): 
A brief cognitive test battery for dementia 
screening. GPS International Journal of Geri-
atric Psychiatry, 21(11), 1078–1085. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/gps.1610
Mirman, D., Yee, E., Blumstein, S. E., & Mag-
nuson, J. S. (2011). Theories of spoken word 
recognition deficits in aphasia: Evidence 
from eye-tracking and computational mod-
eling. Brain and Language, 117(2), 53–68. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl​.2011​.01​
.004
Mitrushina, M., Boone, K. B., Razani, J., & 
D’Elia, L. F. (2005). Handbook of normative data 
for neuropsychological assessment (2nd ed.). 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Miyake, A., Carpenter, P. A., & Just, M. A. 
(1994). A capacity approach to syntactic 
comprehension disorders: Making normal 
adults perform like aphasic patients. Cogni-
tive Neuropsychology, 11(6), 671–717. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02643299408251989
Moberg, P. J., & Rick, J. H. (2008). Decision-
making capacity and competency in the 
elderly: A clinical and neuropsychologi-
cal perspective. NeuroRehabilitation, 23(5), 
403–413. Retrieved from http://content.ios​
press.com/articles/neurorehabilitation/
nre00435
Monetta, L., Tremblay, T., & Joanette, Y. (2003). 
Semantic processing of words, cognitive 
resources and N400: An event-related 
potentials study. Brain and Cognition, 53(2), 
327–330. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S02​
78-2626(03)00136-2
Morgan, A. L., & Helm-Estabrooks, N. (1987). 
Back to the drawing board: A treatment pro-
gram for nonverbal aphasic patients [Clinical 
aphasiology paper]. Retrieved from http://
aphasiology.pitt.edu/archive/00000921/
Morrow, K. L., & Fridriksson, J. (2006). Com-
paring fixed- and randomized-interval 
spaced retrieval in anomia treatment. Jour-
nal of Communication Disorders, 39(1), 2–11. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomdis​.2005​
.05.001
Mortley, J., Enderby, P., & Petheram, B. (2001). 
Using a computer to improve functional 
writing in a patient with severe dysgraphia. 

642   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Aphasiology, 15(5), 443–461. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687040042000188
Mozeiko, J., Le, K., Coelho, C., Krueger, F., & 
Grafman, J. (2011). The relationship of story 
grammar and executive function following 
TBI. Aphasiology, 25(6–7), 826–835. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2010.543983
Mueller, J., Kiernan, R., & Langston, J. W. (2014). 
Cognistat. Abingdon, UK: Psychology Press 
(UK).
Mumby, K., Bowen, A., & Hesketh, A. (2007). 
Apraxia of speech: How reliable are speech 
and language therapists’ diagnoses? Clini-
cal Rehabilitation, 21(8), 760–767. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1177/0269215507077285
Munoz-Sandoval, A. F., Cummins, J., Al- 
varado, C. G., & Ruef, M. L. (1998). Bilingual 
Verbal Ability Tests. Itasca, IL: Riverside.
Munoz-Sandoval, A. F., Cummins, J., Al- 
varado, G., & Ruef, M. L. (2005). Bilingual 
Verbal Ability Tests (BVAT). Toronot, Canada: 
Nelson.
Munyi, C. W. (2012). Past and present percep-
tions towards disability: A historical per-
spective. Disability Studies Quarterly, 32(2). 
Retrieved from http://dsq-sds.org/article/
view/3197/3068
Murray, C. K., Reynolds, J. C., Schroeder, J. 
M., Harrison, M. B., Evans, O. M., & Hos-
penthal, D. R. (2005). Spectrum of care pro-
vided at an echelon II medical unit during 
operation Iraqi freedom. Military Medicine, 
170(6), 516–520. http://dx.doi.org/10.7205/
MILMED.170.6.516
Murray, J., Schneider, J., Banerjee, S., & Mann, 
A. (1999). Eurocare: A cross-national study 
of co-resident spouse carers for people 
with Alzheimer’s disease: II. A qualitative 
analysis of the experience of caregiving. 
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 
14(8), 662–667. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
(SICI)1099-1166(199908)14:8<662::AID-GPS​
993>3.0.CO;2-4
Murray, L. L. (2004). Cognitive treatments for 
aphasia: Should we and can we help atten-
tion and working memory problems? Jour-
nal of Medical Speech-Language Pathology, 
12(3), xxv–xi.
Murray, L. L. (2012). Direct and indirect treat-
ment approaches for addressing short-term 
or working memory deficits in aphasia. 
Aphasiology, 26(3–4), 317–337. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687038.2011.589894
Murray, L. L., & Clark, H. M. (2006). Neuro-
genic disorders of language: Theory driven 
clinical practice. Clifton Park, NY: Thomson 
Delmar Learning.
Murray, L. L., & Ray, A. H. (2001). A com-
parison of relaxation training and syntax 
stimulation for chronic nonfluent aphasia. 
JCD Journal of Communication Disorders, 
34(1), 87–113. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0021-9924(00)00043-5
Murray, L. L., Timberlake, A., & Eberle, R. (2007). 
Treatment of underlying forms in a discourse 
context. Aphasiology, 21(2), 139–163. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030601026530
Music and Memory. (2015). Music and mem-
ory. Retrieved from http://music​andmem 
ory.org/music-brain-resources/current- 
research/
Musiek, F. E., Baran, J. A., & Shinn, J. (2004). 
Assessment and remediation of an auditory 
processing disorder associated with head 
trauma. Journal of the American Academy 
of Audiology, 15(2), 117–132. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.3766/jaaa.15.2.3
Myburgh, J. A. (2009). Severe and multiple 
trauma. In A. D. Bersten & N. Soni (Eds.), 
Oh’s intensive care manual (p. 771). Philadel-
phia, PA: Elsevier B.V.
Myers, P. J., Wilmington, D. J., Gallun, F. J., 
Henry, J. A., & Fausti, S. A. (2009). Hear-
ing impairment and traumatic brain injury 
among soldiers: Special considerations for 
the audiologist. Seminars in Hearing, 30(1), 
5–27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/​s-0028- 
1111103
Myers, P. S. (1999). Right hemisphere damage: 
Disorders of cognition and communication. San 
Diego, CA: Singular.
Myers, P. S., & Blake, M. L. (2008). Commu-
nication disorders associated with right 
hemisphere damage. In R. Chapey (Ed.), 
Language intervention strategies in aphasia 
and related neurogenic communication disor-

References   643
ders (5th ed., pp. 963–987). Philadelphia, 
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Myers, P. S., & Linebaugh, C. W. (1981). Com-
prehension of idiomatic expressions by 
right-hemisphere-damaged adults. In R. H. 
Brookshire (Ed.), Clinical aphasiology: Con-
ference proceedings. Minneapolis, MN: BRK.
Nadeau, S. E., & Crosson, B. (1997). Subcortical 
aphasia. Brain and Language, 58(3), 355–402; 
discussion 418–423. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1006/brln.1997.1707
Naeser, M. A., & Helm-Estabrooks, N. (1985). 
CT scan lesion localization and response to 
melodic intonation therapy with nonfluent 
aphasia cases. Cortex, 21(2), 203–223. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0010-9452(85)80027-7
Naeser, M. A., Martin, P. I., Nicholas, M., 
Baker, E. H., Seekins, H., Kobayashi, M., 
. . . Pascual-Leone, A. (2005). Improved 
picture naming in chronic aphasia after 
TMS to part of right Broca’s area: An open-
protocol study. Brain and Language, 93(1), 
95–105. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl​
.2004.08.004
Naeser, M. A., Martin, P. I., Treglia, E., Ho, M., 
Kaplan, E., Bashir, S., . . . Pascual-Leone, 
A. (2010). Research with rTMS in the treat-
ment of aphasia. Restorative Neurology and 
Neuroscience, 28(4), 511–529. http://dx.doi.
org/10.3233/RNN-2010-0559
Nakase-Thompson, R. (2004). The Mississippi 
Aphasia Screening Test. Retrieved from http://
www.tbims.org/combi/mast/index​.html
Nasreddine, Z. S. (2003). Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA). Retrieved from http://
www.mocatest.org/
National Center for Complementary and Inte-
grative Health. (n.d.). Complementary, alter-
native, or integrative health: What’s in a name? 
Retrieved from https://nccih.nih.gov/
health/integrative-health
National Center for Dissemination of Disabil-
ity Research. (1999). Disability, diversity, 
and dissemination: A review of the litera-
ture on topics related to increasing the uti-
lization of rehabilitation research outcomes 
among diverse consumer groups. Research 
Exchange, 4(1), 1–74.
National Center for Injury Prevention and 
Control. (2003). Report to Congress on mild 
traumatic brain injury in the United States: 
Steps to prevent a serious public health problem. 
Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention.
National Health and Medical Research Council. 
(2009a). NHMRC additional levels of evidence 
and grades for recommendations for developers 
of guidelines. Retrieved from http://www​
.nhmrc.gov.au/_files_nhmrc/file/guide​
lines/stage_2_consultation_levels_and 
_grades.pdf
National Health and Medical Research Council. 
(2009b). NHMRC additional levels of evidence  
and grades for recommendations for guideline 
developers. Canberra. Retrieved from https:// 
www.nhmrc.gov.au/_files_nhmrc/file/
guidelines/developers/nhmrc​_levels_
grades_evidence_120423.pdf
National Institute on Aging, National Institute 
of Health, & U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. (2004). 2003 Progress report 
on Alzheimer’s disease: Research advances at 
NIH. Retrieved from http://www.alzheim​
ers.org
National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke. (2015a). Frontotemporal dementia 
information page: National institute of neuro-
logical disorders and stroke. Retrieved from 
http://www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/
picks/picks.htm
National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke. (2015b). Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis-
ease fact sheet. Retrieved from http://www​
.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/cjd/detail_cjd​
.htm
National Institute on Aging, National Institute 
of Health, & U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services. (2004). 2003 progress report 
on Alzheimer’s disease: Research advances at 
NIH. Retrieved from http://www.alzheim​
ers.org
National Stroke Association. (2006). Recovery 
after stroke: Coping with emotions. Retrieved 
from http://www.stroke.org/site/Doc​Ser​
ver/NSAFactSheet_Emotions.pdf?doc​ID​
=990

644   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
National Stroke Association. (2014). What is 
stroke? Retrieved from http://www.stroke​
.org/understand-stroke/what-stroke
NBCC International. (2015). Professional coun-
seling. Retrieved from http://www.nbccin​
ternational.org/Who_we_are/Professional​
_Counseling
Ndi, A. (2012). Setting the stage of “Ab/
normality” in rehabilitative narratives: 
Rethinking medicalization of the disabled 
African body. Disability Studies Quarterly, 
32(2). Retrieved from http://dsq-sds.org/
article/view/3195
Neiman, M. R., Duffy, R. J., Belanger, S. A., 
& Coelho, C. A. (1994). Concurrent valid-
ity of the Kaufman hand movement test as 
a measure of limb apraxia. Perceptual and 
Motor Skills, 79(3), 1279–1282. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.2466/pms.1994.79.3.1279
Neiman, M. R., Duffy, R. J., Belanger, S. A., & 
Coelho, C. A. (2000). The assessment of limb 
apraxia: Relationship between performances 
on single-and multiple-object tasks by left 
hemisphere damaged aphasic subjects. Neu-
ropsychological Rehabilitation, 10(4), 429–448. 
http://dx.doi.org/10​.1080/​096020100412005
Nelson, T. D. (2008). The young science of 
prejudice against older adults: Established 
answers and open questions about ageism. 
In E. Borgida & S. T. Fiske (Eds.), Beyond com-
mon sense (pp. 45–61). New York, NY: Black-
well. Retrieved from http://onlinelibrary​
.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9780470696422​
.ch3/summary
NetQues Project Management Team. (2014). 
NetQues. Retrieved from http://www.net​
ques.eu/
Newhoff, M., Bugbee, J. K., & Ferreira, A. 
(1981). A change of PACE: Spouses as treat-
ment targets. Clinical Aphasiology, 11, 234–
243. Retrieved from http://aphasiology.pitt​
.edu/archive/00000647/
Newman, C. W., & Weinstein, B. E. (1986). 
Judgments of perceived hearing handicap 
by hearing-impaired elderly men and their 
spouses. Journal of Academic Rehabilitative 
Audiology, 19, 109–115.
Nicholas, L. E., & Brookshire, R. H. (1993). 
A system for quantifying the informative-
ness and efficiency of the connected speech 
of adults with aphasia. Journal of Speech and 
Hearing Research, 36(2), 338–350. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1044/jshr.3602.338
Nicholas, L. E., & Brookshire, R. H. (1995). 
Performance deviations in the connected 
speech of non-brain-damaged and apha-
sic adults. American Journal of Speech Lan-
guage Pathology, 4(4), 118–123. Retrieved 
from http://aphasiology.pitt.edu/archive/​
00000287/
Nicholas, L. E., MacLennan, D. L., & Brook-
shire, R. H. (1986). Validity of multiple-
sentence reading comprehension tests for 
aphasic adults. Journal of Speech and Hear-
ing Disorders, 51(1), 82–87. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/jshd.5101.82
Nicholas, M., Sinotte, M. P., & Helm-Estabrooks,  
N. (2011). C-Speak Aphasia alternative 
communication program for people with 
severe aphasia: Importance of executive 
functioning and semantic knowledge. Neu-
ropsychological Rehabilitation, 21(3), 322–366.
Nickels, L., & Best, W. (1996). Therapy for nam-
ing disorders (Part I): Principles, puzzles and 
progress. Aphasiology, 10(1), 21–47. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687039608248397
Nickels, L., Byng, S., & Black, M. (1991). Sen-
tence processing deficits: A replication of 
therapy. The British Journal of Disorders of 
Communication, 26(2), 175–199. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.3109/13682829109012002
Niemann, H., Ruff, R. M., & Kramer, J. H. 
(1996). An attempt towards differentiat-
ing attentional deficits in traumatic brain 
injury. Neuropsychology Review, 6(1), 11–46. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01875418
Njemanze, P. C. (2003). Crossed aphasia in 
a dextral with right hemispheric lesion: 
A functional transcranial Doppler study. 
Stroke, 34(11), 213–214. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1161/01.STR.0000099064.02408.D9
Northcott, S., & Hilari, K. (2011). Why do peo-
ple lose their friends after a stroke? Inter-
national Journal of Language & Communica-
tion Disorders, 46(5), 524–534. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1111/j.1460-6984.2011.00079.x
Norton, A., Zipse, L., Marchina, S., & Schlaug, 
G. (2009). Melodic intonation therapy: 

References   645
Shared insights on how it is done and why 
it might help. Annals of the New York Acad-
emy of Sciences, 1169, 431–436. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04859.x
Novack, T. A., Caldwell, S. G., Duke, L. 
W., Bergquist, T. F., & Gage, R. J. (1996). 
Focused versus unstructured intervention 
for attention deficits after traumatic brain 
injury. The Journal of Head Trauma Rehabili-
tation, 11(3). Retrieved from http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1097/00001199-199606000-00008
Nozari, N., & Dell, G. (2013). How damaged 
brains repeat words: A computational 
approach. Brain and Language, 126(3), 327–
337. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl​
.2013.07.005
Obler, L. K., & Albert, M. L. (1979). Action 
Naming Test (experimental edition). Boston, 
MA: Boston VA Medical Center.
Odekar, A., & Hallowell, B. (2005). Comparison 
of alternatives to multidimensional scoring 
in the assessment of language comprehen-
sion in aphasia. American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, 14(4), 337–345. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2005/032)
Odekar, A., Hallowell, B., Kruse, H., Moates, 
D., & Lee, C.-Y. (2009). Validity of eye move-
ment methods and indices for capturing 
semantic (associative) priming effects. Jour-
nal of Speech, Language & Hearing Research, 
52(1), 31–48. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/​
1092-4388(2008/07-0100)
Oelschlaeger, M. L., & Thorne, J. C. (1999). 
Application of the correct information unit 
analysis to the naturally occurring conver-
sation of a person with aphasia. Journal 
of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 
42(3), 636–648. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/
jslhr.4203.636
Office of the New York Attorney General. 
(2015). A.G. Schneiderman asks major retail-
ers to halt sales of certain herbal supplements 
as DNA tests fail to detect plant materials listed 
on majority of products tested. Retrieved from 
http://www.ag.ny.gov/press-release/ag-
schneiderman-asks-major-retailers-halt-
sales-certain-herbal-supplements-dna-tests
O’Halloran, R., & Larkins, B. (2008). The 
ICF activities and participation related to 
speech-language pathology. International 
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 10(1–2), 
18–26. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​1441​704 
0701772620
Okie, S. (2005). Traumatic brain injury in the 
war zone. The New England Journal of Medi-
cine, 352(20), 2043–2047. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1056/NEJMp058102
Onslow, M. (2008). Eternity and clinical 
translation of speech-language pathology 
research. International Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, 10(3), 118–126. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/17549500801891632
Orange, J. B., & Colton-Hudson, A. (1998). 
Enhancing communication in dementia 
of the Alzheimer’s type. Topics in Geriatric 
Rehabilitation, 14(2), 56–75. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1097/00013614-199812000-00007
Orange, J. B., Ryan, E. B., Meredith, S. D., & 
MacLean, M. J. (1995). Application of the 
communication enhancement model for 
long-term care residents with Alzheim-
er’s disease. Topics in Language Disorders, 
15(2), 20–35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/​
00011363-199502000-00004
Oren, S., Willerton, C., & Small, J. (2014). Effects 
of spaced retrieval training on semantic 
memory in Alzheimer’s disease: A system-
atic review. Journal of Speech, Language and 
Hearing Research, 57(1), 247–270. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2013/12-
0352)
Orenstein, E., Basilakos, A., & Marshall, R. S. 
(2012). Effects of mindfulness meditation 
on three individuals with aphasia. Inter-
national Journal of Language & Communica-
tion Disorders, 6, 673. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1111/j.1460-6984.2012.00173.x
Orjada, S. A., & Beeson, P. M. (2005). Concurrent 
treatment for reading and spelling in apha-
sia. Aphasiology, 19(3–5), 341–351. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/02687030444000796
Orozco, G., Lee, W. M. L., Blando, J., & 
Shooshani, B. (2014). Introduction to multi-
cultural counseling for helping professionals 
(3rd ed.). Florence, KY: Routledge.
Orsulic-Jeras, S., Schneider, N., & Camp, C. 
(2000). Special feature: Montessori-based 
activities for long-term care residents with 

646   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
dementia. Topics in Geriatric Rehabilitation, 
16(1), 78–91. http://dx.doi.org/​10.1097/​
00013614-200009000-00009
Orsulic-Jeras, S., Schneider, N. M., Camp, C. J., 
Nicholson, P., & Helbig, M. (2001). Montes-
sori-based dementia activities in long-term 
care: Training and implementation. Activi-
ties, Adaptation & Aging, 25(3–4), 107–120. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J016v25n03_08
O’Sullivan, P., Chao, S., Russell, M., Levine, S., 
& Fabiny, A. (2008). Development and imple-
mentation of an objective structured clinical 
examination to provide formative feedback 
on communication and interpersonal skills 
in geriatric training. Journal of the American 
Geriatrics Society, 56(9), 1730–1735. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415​.2008.01860.x
Overton, W. F. (2010). Life-span development: 
Concepts and issues. In W. F. Overton (Ed.), 
The handbook of life-span development, cogni-
tion, biology, and methods (Vol. 1, pp. 1–29). 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Owolabi, L. F., & Yakasai, M. M. (2012). Stroke-
related Wernicke’s aphasia mistaken for 
psychosis: A case report. Journal of Medicine 
in the Tropics, 14(1), 83–85.
Owsley, C., & Sloane, M. E. (1990). Vision and 
aging. In R. D. Nebes & S. Corkin (Eds.), 
Handbook of neuropsychology (Vol. 4, pp. 229–
249). New York, NY: Elsevier Science.
Pachet, A., Aster, K., & Brown, L. (2010). Clini-
cal utility of the mini-mental status exami-
nation when assessing decision-making 
capacity. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and 
Neurology, 23(1), 3–8. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1177/0891988709342727
Paciaroni, M., & Bogousslavsky, J. (2011). Jules 
Joseph Déjerine versus Pierre Marie. Fron-
tiers of Neurology and Neuroscience, 29, 162–
169. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/000321784
Palmer, R., & Patterson, G. (2011). One size 
does not fit all: Obtaining informed con-
sent from people with aphasia. Advances in 
Clinical Neuroscience and Rehabilitation, 11(2), 
30–31. Retrieved from http://www.acnr.co​
.uk/MJ11/30_ACNRMJ11_rehab.pdf
Pang, Y., Wu, L.-B., & Liu, D.-H. (2010). Acu-
puncture therapy for apoplectic aphasia: 
A systematic review. Chinese Acupuncture & 
Moxibustion, 30(7), 612–616.
Papadopoulos, K., Paralikas, T., Barouti, M., & 
Chronopoulou, E. (2014). Self-esteem, locus 
of control and various aspects of psychopa-
thology of adults with visual impairments. 
International Journal of Disability, Develop-
ment and Education, 61(4), 403–415. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/1034912X.2014.955785
Papathanasiou, I., Coppens, P., & Potagas, C. 
(2011). Aphasia and related neurogenic commu-
nication disorders. Burlington, MA: Jones & 
Bartlett Learning.
Pape, T. L.-B., Jaffe, N. O., Savage, T., Collins, 
E., & Warden, D. (2004). Unresolved legal 
and ethical issues in research of adults with 
severe traumatic brain injury: Analysis of 
an ongoing protocol. Journal of Rehabilita-
tion Research and Development, 41, 155–174. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1682/JRRD.2004​.02​
.0155
Paradis, M., & Libben, G. (1987). The assessment 
of bilingual aphasia. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
Paratz, E. D. (2011). The significance of aphasia 
in neurological cancers. Australian Medical 
Student Journal, 2(1), 15–18. Retrieved from 
http://www.amsj.org/archives/868
Park, C. L., Braun, T., & Siegel, T. (2015). Who 
practices yoga? A systematic review of 
demographic, health-related, and psycho-
social factors associated with yoga practice. 
Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 38(3), 460–
471. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10865-015-
9618-5
Park, C. L., Lechner, S. C., Antoni, M. H., & 
Stanton, A. L. (Eds.). (2008). Medical ill-
ness and positive life change: Can crisis lead to 
personal transformation? Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Parr, S. (2007). Living with severe aphasia: 
Tracking social exclusion. Aphasiology, 
21(1), 98–123. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
02687030600798337
Parr, S., Byng, S., Gilpin, S., & Ireland, C. 
(1997). Talking about aphasia: Living with loss 
of language after stroke. Buckingham, PA: 
Open University Press.

References   647
Pataraia, E., Simos, P. G., Castillo, E. M., Bill-
ingsley-Marshall, R. L., McGregor, A. L., 
Breier, J. I., . . . Papanicolaou, A. C. (2004). 
Reorganization of language-specific cortex 
in patients with lesions or mesial tempo-
ral epilepsy. Neurology, 63(10), 1825–1832. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/01.WNL​.0000​
144180.85779.9A
Patterson, J. P. (2002). Post-stroke depression 
in persons with chronic aphasia. Perspec-
tives on Gerontology, 7(2), 5–9. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/gero7.2.5
Patterson, K., & Howard, D. (1992). Pyramids 
and Palm Trees Test. San Antonio, TX: Pearson.
Patterson, R., Robert, A., Berry, R., Cain, M., 
Rochon, E., Iqbal, M., & Leonard, C. (2012). 
Public awareness of aphasia in southern 
Ontario: A survey. Stroke, 43(11), E151.
Paul, D., Frattali, C., Holland, A., Thompson, 
C., Caperton, C., & Slater, S. (2004). Quality 
of Communication Life Scale. Rockville, MD: 
ASHA.
Paxton, J. L., Barch, D., Storandt, M., & Braver, 
T. S. (2006). Effects of environmental sup-
port and strategy training on older adults’ 
use of context. Psychology and Aging, 21(3), 
499–509. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0882-
7974.21.3.499
Payne, J. C. (2014). Adult neurogenic language 
disorders: Assessment and treatment. A compre-
hensive ethnobiological approach. San Diego, 
CA: Plural.
Payne, J. C. (2015). Supporting family caregiv-
ers of adults with communication disorders: 
A resource guide for speech-language patholo-
gists and audiologists. San Diego, CA: Plural.
Pazzaglia, M., Smania, N., Corato, E., & Aglioti, 
S. M. (2008). Neural underpinnings of ges-
ture discrimination in patients with limb 
apraxia. The Journal of Neuroscience, 28(12), 
3030–3041. http://dx.doi.org/10.1523/J​
NEUROSCI.5748-07.2008
Peach, R. K. (2008). Global aphasia: Identifica-
tion and management. In R. Chapey (Ed.), 
Language intervention strategies in adult apha-
sia and related neurogenic communication dis-
orders (5th ed., pp. 565–594). Baltimore, MD: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Peach, R. K. (2013). Cognitive basis for sen-
tence planning difficulties in discourse after 
traumatic brain injury. American Journal of 
Speech-Language Pathology, 22(2), S285–
S297. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360​
(2013/12-0081)
Peach, R. K., & Reuter, K. A. (2010). A discourse-
based approach to semantic feature analysis 
for the treatment of aphasic word retrieval 
failures. Aphasiology, 24(9), 971–990. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030903058629
Pedersen, P. M., Jorgensen, H. S., Nakayama, 
H., Raaschou, H. O., & Olsen, T. S. (1997). 
Comprehensive assessment of activities of 
daily living in stroke. Archives of Physical 
Medicine and Rehabilitation, 78(2), 161–165. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0003-9993​(97)​
90258-6
Penn, C. (1988). The profiling of syntax and 
pragmatics in aphasia. Clinical Linguistics 
& Phonetics, 2(3), 179. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1080/02699208808985255
Penn, C., Frankel, T., Watermeyer, J., & Müller, 
M. (2009). Informed consent and aphasia: 
Evidence of pitfalls in the process. Aphasiol-
ogy, 23(1), 3–32. http://dx.doi.org/10​.1080/​
02687030701521786
Peri, K., Kerse, N., & Halliwell, J. (2004). Goal-
setting for older people: A literature review and 
synthesis. Auckland, New Zealand: Uni­
Services.
Perlmuter, L. C., Tun, P., Sizer, N., McGlinchey, 
R. E., & Nathan, D. M. (1987). Age and diabe-
tes related changes in verbal fluency. Experi-
mental Aging Research, 13(1–2), 9–14. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/03610738708259294
Perry, A., Morris, M., Unsworth, C., Duckett, 
S., Skeat, J., Dodd, K., . . . Reilly, K. (2004). 
Therapy outcome measures for allied 
health practitioners in Australia: The Aus-
TOMs. International Journal for Quality in 
Health Care, 16(4), 285–291.
Piaget, J. (1936). La naissance de l’intelligence chez 
l’enfant. Neuchatel, Switzerland: Delachaux 
et Nieslé.
Pick, A. (1931). In the handbuch der normalen 
und pathologischen physiologie (Vol. 15). Hei-
delberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag.

648   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Pimental, P. A., Kingsbury, N. A., & Pro-Ed 
(Firm). (2000). Mini Inventory of Right Brain 
Injury. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Pimental, P., & Knight, J. (2000). Mini Inventory of 
Right Brain Injury–Second edition (MIRBI-2).  
Grand Prairie, Canada: Brijan Resources.
Plassman, B. L., Havlik, R. J., Steffens, D. C., 
Helms, M. J., Newman, T. N., Drosdick, 
D., . . . Breitner, J. C. (2000). Documented 
head injury in early adulthood and risk of 
Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias. 
Neurology, 55(8), 1158–1166.
Poeck, K., & Pietron, H.-P. (1981). The influ-
ence of stretched speech presentation on 
token test performance of aphasic and right 
brain damaged patients. Neuropsychologia, 
19(1), 133–136. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/​
0028-3932(81)90052-X
Politis, A. (2014). Breaking with tradition: 
A paradigm shift in cognitive rehabilitation. 
Perspectives on Neurophysiology and Neuro-
genic Speech and Language Disorders, 24(1), 
4–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/nnsld24.1.4
Pollens, R. (2004). Role of the speech-language 
pathologist in palliative hospice care. Jour-
nal of Palliative Medicine, 7(5), 694–702. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/jpm.2004.7.694.
Polovoy, C. (2014). From silence to a “din of 
interaction.” The ASHA Leader, 19, 20–21. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/leader.LML​
.19102014.20
Ponsford, J. L., & Kinsella, G. (1988). Evalu-
ation of a remedial programme for atten-
tional deficits following closed-head injury. 
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsy-
chology, 10(6), 693–708. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/01688638808402808
Poole, A. (2012). Which are more legible: Serif or 
sans serif typefaces? Retrieved from http://
alexpoole.info/blog/which-are-more-legi​
ble-serif-or-sans-serif-typefaces/
Popovici, M., & Miha˘ilescu, L. (1992). Melodic 
intonation in the rehabilitation of Roma-
nian aphasics with bucco-lingual apraxia. 
Romanian Journal of Neurology and Psychia-
try, 30(2), 99–113.
Porch, B. E. (1967). Porch Index of Communicative 
Ability: Vol. 1: Theory and development. Palo 
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologist Press.
Porch, B. E. (2001). Porch Index of Communica-
tive Ability–revised (4th ed.). Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press.
Porch, B. E. (2008). Treatment of aphasia sub-
sequent to the Porch Index of Communi-
cative Ability (PICA). In R. Chapey (Ed.), 
Language intervention strategies in aphasia and 
related communication disorders (4th ed., pp. 
800–813). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Wil-
liams & Wilkins.
Potter, R. E., & Goodman, N. J. (1983). The imple-
mentation of laughter as a therapy facilita-
tor with adult aphasics. Journal of Communi-
cation Disorders, 16(1), 41–48. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/0021-9924(83)90025-4
Pound, C., Duchan, J., Penman, T., Hewitt, A., 
& Parr, S. (2007). Communication access 
to organizations: Inclusionary practices 
for people with aphasia. Aphasiology, 21, 
23–28. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0268​70​
30600798212
Powell, J. A., Hale, M. A., & Bayer, A. J. (1995). 
Symptoms of communication breakdown 
in dementia: Carers’ perceptions. Interna-
tional Journal of Language & Communication 
Disorders, 30(1), 65–75. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.3109/13682829509031323
Power, E., Anderson, A., & Togher, L. (2011). 
Applying the WHO ICF framework to com-
munication assessment and goal setting in 
Huntington’s disease: A case discussion. 
Journal of Communication Disorders, 44(3), 
261–275. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcom​
dis.2010.12.004
Power, G. A. (2010). Dementia beyond drugs: 
Changing the culture of care. Baltimore, MD: 
HPP/Health Professions Press.
Power, G. A. (2014). Dementia beyond disease: 
Enhancing well-being. Baltimore, MD: Health 
Professions Press.
Prescott, T. E., Selinger, M., & Loverso, F. L. 
(1982). An analysis of learning generaliza-
tion and maintenance of verbs by an apha-
sic patient. Clinical Aphasiology, 12, 178–182. 
Retrieved from http://aphasiology.pitt​
.edu/archive/00000724/
Prosser, M., & Sze, D. (2014). Problem-based 
learning: Student learning experiences and 
outcomes. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 

References   649
28(1/2), 112–123. http://dx.doi.org/10.310
9/02699206.2013.820351
Pulvermüller, F., Neininger, B., Elbert, T., Mohr, 
B., Rockstroh, B., Koebbel, P., & Taub, E. (2001). 
Constraint-induced therapy for chronic 
aphasia after stroke. Stroke, 32(7), 1621–1626. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/01​.STR.32.7.1621
Pulvermüller, F., & Roth, V. M. (1991). Com-
municative aphasia treatment as a further 
development of pace therapy. Aphasiology, 
5(1), 39–50. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​02​
687039108248518
Purdy, M. (2002). Executive function ability in 
persons with aphasia. Aphasiology, 16(4–6), 
549–557. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0268​
7030244000176
Purdy, M., & Hindenlang, J. (2005). Educating 
and training caregivers of persons with apha-
sia. Aphasiology, 19(3–5), 377–388. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/02687030444000822
Purdy, M., & Van Dyke, J. A. (2011). Multi-
modal communication training in aphasia: 
A pilot study. Journal of Medical Speech- 
Language Pathology, 19(3), 45–53.
Purves, B. A., Petersen, J., & Puurveen, G. 
(2013). An aphasia mentoring program: 
Perspectives of speech-language pathol-
ogy students and of mentors with aphasia. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathol-
ogy, 22(2), S370–S379. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1044/1058-0360(2013/12-0071)
Quinlan, J. D., Guaron, M. R., Deschere, B. R., 
& Stephens, M. B. (2010). Care of the return-
ing veteran. American Family Physician, 
82(1), 43–49. Retrieved from http://www​
.aafp.org/afp/2010/0701/p43.html
Quintas, R., Cerniauskaite, M., Ajovalasit, D., 
Sattin, D., Boncoraglio, G., Parati, E. A., & 
Leonardi, M. (2012). Describing function-
ing, disability, and health with the Inter-
national Classification of Functioning, Dis-
ability, and Health brief core set for stroke. 
American Journal of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, 91(2), S14–S21. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1097/PHM.0b013e31823d4ba9
Ramsberger, G., & Helm-Estabrooks, N. (1988).  
Visual action therapy for bucco-facial apraxia. 
Retrieved from http://aphasiology.pitt​
.edu/archive/00000087/01/18-28.pdf
Randolph, C., Tierney, M. C., Mohr, E., & 
Chase, T. N. (1998). The Repeatable Battery 
for the Assessment of Neuropsychological 
Status (RBANS): Preliminary clinical valid-
ity. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neu-
ropsychology, 20(3), 310–319. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1076/jcen.20.3.310.823
Rao, P. R. (1995). Drawing conclusions on the 
efficacy of “drawing” as a treatment option 
for persons with severe aphasia. Aphasiol-
ogy, 9, 59–62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
02687039508248690
Rao, P. R. (2015). Outcomes and quality: Key 
characteristics of a successful SLP value 
journey. SIG, 2 Perspectives on Neurophysi-
ology and Neurogenic Speech and Language 
Disorders, 25, 94–106. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1044/nnsld25.3.94
Rao, S., Leo, G. J., Haughton, V. M., St Aubin-
Faubert, P., & Bernardin, L. (1989). Corre-
lation of magnetic resonance imaging with 
neuropsychological testing in multiple scle-
rosis. Neurology, 39, 161–166. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1212/WNL.39.2.161
Rapp, B., & Kane, A. (2002). Remediation of 
deficits affecting different components of 
the spelling process. Aphasiology, 16(4–6), 
439–454. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0268​
7030244000301
Rapp, S. B. G., & Marsh, A. P. (2002). Mem-
ory enhancement training for older adults 
with mild cognitive impairment: A pre-
liminary study. Aging & Mental Health, 6(1), 
5–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/1360​7860​
120101077
Raskin, S. A., Buckheit, C., & Sherrod, C. 
(2010). Memory for Intentions Test. Lutz, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources.
Rautakoski, P. (2011). Training total communi-
cation. Aphasiology, 25(3), 344–365. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2010.530671
Raven, J. C. (2007). Advanced progressive matri-
ces: APM. San Antonio, TX: Pearson.
Raven, J. C., Raven, J., & Court, J. H. (2003). 
Manual for Raven’s progressive matrices and 
vocabulary scales. Section 1: General overview. 
San Antonio, TX: Harcourt Assessment.
Ravona-Springer, R., Luo, X., Schmeidler, 
J., Wysocki, M., Lesser, G., Rapp, M., . . . 

650   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Schnaider Beeri, M. (2010). Diabetes is 
associated with increased rate of cognitive 
decline in questionably demented elderly. 
Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 
29(1), 68–74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1159/​
000265552
Raymer, A. M., Beeson, P., Holland, A., Kend-
all, D., Maher, L. M., Martin, N., . . . Rothi, L. 
J. G. (2008). Translational research in apha-
sia: From neuroscience to neurorehabilita-
tion. Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing 
Research, 51(1), S259–S275. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2008/020)
Raymer, A. M., Cudworth, C., & Haley, M. 
(2003). Spelling treatment for an individ-
ual with dysgraphia: Analysis of gener-
alisation to untrained words. Aphasiology, 
17(6/7), 607. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
02687030344000058
Raymer, A. M., Singletary, F., Rodriguez, A., 
Ciampitti, M., Heilman, K. M., & Rothi, L. 
J. G. (2006). Effects of gesture+verbal treat-
ment for noun and verb retrieval in aphasia. 
Journal of the International Neuropsychological 
Society: JINS, 12(6), 867–882. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1017/S1355617706061042
Raymer, A. M., Strobel, J., Thomason, B. J., & 
Reff, K. L. (2010). Errorless versus error-
ful training of spelling in individuals with 
acquired dysgraphia. Neuropsychological 
Rehabilitation, 20(1), 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1080/09602010902879834
Reimer, T. J., Hagen, C., Malkmus, D., Dur-
ham, P., Stenderup, K., Peterson, C., . . . 
Education Institute. (1995). The Rancho lev-
els of cognitive functioning. Downey, CA: Los 
Amigos Research & Education Institute.
Reisberg, B., Ferris, S. H., de Leon, M. J., & 
Crook, T. (1982). The global deterioration 
scale for assessment of primary degenera-
tive dementia. The American Journal of Psy-
chiatry, 139(9), 1136–1139.
Reitan, R. M. (1981). Reitan-Indiana Aphasia 
Screening Test. Tucson, AZ: Reitan Neuro-
psychology Laboratory.
Reitan, R. M., & Wolfson, D. (1997). The influ-
ence of age and education on neuropsy-
chological performances of persons with 
mild head injuries. Applied Neuropsychol-
ogy, 4(1), 16–33. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/
s15324826an0401_3
Rentz, C. A. (2002). Memories in the Mak-
ing©: Outcome-based evaluation of an art 
program for individuals with dementing 
illnesses. American Journal of Alzheimer’s 
Disease and Other Dementias, 17(3), 175–181. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/15333175020170 
0310
Reynolds, C. R. (2002). Comprehensive Trail-
Making Test (CTMT). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Richardson, J. D., Fillmore, P., Rorden, C., 
LaPointe, L. L., & Fridriksson, J. (2012). 
Re-establishing Broca’s initial findings. 
Brain and Language, 123(2), 125–130. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2012.08.007
Rider, J. D., Wright, H. H., Marshall, R. C., 
& Page, J. L. (2008). Using semantic fea-
ture analysis to improve contextual dis-
course in adults with aphasia. American 
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 17, 
161–172. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-
0360(2008/016)
Ridgeway, V., Robertson, I. H., Ward, T., & 
Nimmo-Smith, I. (1994). Test of Everyday 
Attention. Bury St. Edmunds, UK: Thames 
Valley Test Co.
Ripich, D. N., & Horner, J. (2004). The neu-
rodegenerative dementias: Diagnoses and 
interventions. The ASHA Leader, 9, 4–15. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/leader.FTR1​
.09082004.4
Ripich, D. N., & Wykle, M. (1996). Commu-
nicating with persons with Alzheimer’s dis-
ease: The FOCUSED program for caregivers. 
Training manual. Austin, TX: Psychological 
Corporation.
Ripich, D. N., Wykle, M., & Niles, S. (1995). 
Alzheimer’s disease caregivers: The FO- 
CUSED program. Geriatric Nursing, 16(1), 
15–19. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0197-
4572​(05)80073-4
Ripich, D. N., Ziol, E., Fritsch, T., & Durand, 
E. J. (2000). Training Alzheimer’s disease 
caregivers for successful communication. 
Clinical Gerontologist, 21(1), 37–56. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1300/J018v21n01_05

References   651
Ripich, D. N., Ziol, E., & Lee, M. M. (1998). Lon-
gitudinal effects of communication training 
on caregivers of persons with Alzheimer’s 
disease. Clinical Gerontologist, 19(2), 37–55. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J018v19n02_04
Roach, A., Schwartz, M. F., Martin, N., Grewal, 
R. S., & Brecher, A. (1996). The Philadelphia 
Naming Test: Scoring and rationale. Clini-
cal Aphasiology, 24, 121–133. Retrieved from 
http://aphasiology.pitt.edu/archive/0000​
0215/01/24-09.pdf
Roberts, D., & Gaspard, G. (2013). A palliative 
approach to care of residents with dementia. 
Nursing Older People, 25(2), 32–36. http://
dx.doi.org/10.7748/nop2013.03.25.2.32​
.e703
Roberts, P., Code, C., & McNeil, M. (2003). 
Describing participants in aphasia research: 
Part 1. Aphasiology, 17(10), 911–932. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030344000328
Roberts, P. M. (2001). Aphasia assessment and 
treatment in bilingual and multicultural 
populations. In R. Chapey (Ed.), Language 
intervention strategies in aphasia and related 
neurogenic communication disorders (4th ed., 
pp. 208–232). Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins.
Roberts, P. M. (2008). Issues in assessment 
and treatment for bilingual and culturally 
diverse patients. In R. Chapey (Ed.), Lan-
guage intervention strategies in aphasia and 
related neurogenic communication disorders 
(5th ed., pp. 245–275). Philadelphia, PA: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Roberts, P. M., & Doucet, N. (2011). Perfor-
mance of French-speaking Quebec adults 
on the Boston Naming Test. Canadian Jour-
nal of Speech-Language Pathology and Audiol-
ogy, 35(3), 254–267. Retrieved from http://
cjslpa.ca/detail.php?ID=1078
Robey, R. R. (1998). A meta-analysis of clinical 
outcomes in the treatment of aphasia. Jour-
nal of Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 
41(1), 172–187. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/
jslhr.4101.172
Robey, R. R., & Schultz, M. C. (1998). A model 
for conducting clinical-outcome research: 
An adaptation of the standard protocol 
for use in aphasiology. Aphasiology, 12(9), 
787–810. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0268​
7039808249573
Roche, N. L., Fleming, J. M., & Shum, D. H. K. 
(2002). Self-awareness of prospective mem-
ory failure in adults with traumatic brain 
injury. Brain Injury, 16(11), 931–945. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02699050210138581
Rochon, E., Laird, L., Bose, A., & Scofield, J. 
(2005). Mapping therapy for sentence pro-
duction impairments in nonfluent apha-
sia. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 15(1), 
1–36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/096020​
10343000327
Rochon, E., Leonard, C., Burianova, H., Laird, 
L., Soros, P., Graham, S., & Grady, C. (2010). 
Neural changes after phonological treat-
ment for anomia: An fMRI study. Brain and 
Language, 114(3), 164–179. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2010.05.005
Rogers, M. A., King, J. M., & Alcorn, N. B. 
(2000). Proactive management of primary 
progressive aphasia. In D. R. Beukelman, 
K. M. Yorkston, & J. Reichle (Eds.), Aug-
mentative and alternative communication for 
adults with acquired neurologic disorders (pp. 
305–337). Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
Rohde, A., Townley-O’Neill, K., Trendall, K., 
Worrall, L., & Cornwell, P. (2012). A com-
parison of client and therapist goals for 
people with aphasia: A qualitative explor-
atory study. Aphasiology, 26(10), 1298–1315. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2012​
.706799
Rojas Sosa, M. C., Fraire Martínez, M. I., 
Olvera Gómez, J. L., & Jáuregui-Renaud, 
K. (2009). Early auditory middle latency 
evoked potentials correlates with recovery 
from aphasia after stroke. Clinical Neuro-
physiology, 120(1), 136–139. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2008.10.011
Román, G. C., Tatemichi, T. K., Erkinjuntti, 
T., Cummings, J. L., Masdeu, J. C., Garcia, 
J. H., . . . Scheinberg, P. (1993). Vascular 
dementia: Diagnostic criteria for research 
studies. Report of the NINDS-AIREN Inter-
national Workshop, 43(2), 250–260. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.43.2.250

652   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Rose, M. L. (2013). Releasing the constraints 
on aphasia therapy: The positive impact 
of gesture and multimodality treatments. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathol-
ogy, 22(2), S227–S239. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1044/1058-0360(2012/12-0091)
Rose, M. L., Cherney, L. R., & Worrall, L. E. 
(2013). Intensive comprehensive aphasia 
programs: An international survey of prac-
tice. Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation, 20(5), 
379–387. http://dx.doi.org/10.1310/tsr2005- 
379
Rose, M. L., & Douglas, J. (2003). Limb apraxia, 
pantomine, and lexical gesture in aphasic 
speakers: Preliminary findings. Aphasiology, 
17(5), 453–464. http://dx.doi​.org/10.1080/​
02687030344000157
Rose, M. L., Ferguson, A., Power, E., Togher, 
L., & Worrall, L. (2014). Aphasia reha-
bilitation in Australia: Current practices, 
challenges and future directions. Interna-
tional Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 
16(2), 169–180. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
02687030344000157
Rose, T., Worrall, L., Hickson, L., & Hoffmann, 
T. (2010). Do people with aphasia want writ-
ten stroke and aphasia information? A ver-
bal survey exploring preferences for when 
and how to provide stroke and aphasia 
information. Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation, 
17(2), 79–98. http://dx.doi.org/10.1310/tsr​
1702-79
Rose, T. A., Worrall, L. E., McKenna, K. T., 
Hickson, L. M., & Hoffmann, T. C. (2009). 
Do people with aphasia receive written 
stroke and aphasia information? Aphasiol-
ogy, 23(3), 364–392. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1080/02687030802568108
Rosenbek, J. C., LaPointe, L. L., & Wertz, R. T. 
(1989). Aphasia: A clinical approach. Boston, 
MA: Little, Brown & Co.
Rosenfeld, J. V., & Ford, N. L. (2010). Bomb 
blast, mild traumatic brain injury and psy-
chiatric morbidity: A review. Injury, 41(5), 
437–443. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.injury​
.2009.11.018
Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (2009). Artifacts 
in behavioral research: Robert Rosenthal and 
Ralph L. Rosnow’s classic books. New York, 
NY: Oxford University Press.
Ross, J. D., & Ross, C. M. (1976). Ross Test Of 
Higher Cognitive Processes: Administration 
manual. Novato, CA: Academic Therapy.
Ross, K. B., & Wertz, R. T. (2003). Discrimina-
tive validity of selected measures for dif-
ferentiating normal from aphasic perfor-
mance. American Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 12(3), 312–319. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2003/077)
Ross, K. B., & Wertz, R. T. (2004). Accuracy of 
formal tests for diagnosing mild aphasia: 
An application of evidence-based medi-
cine. Aphasiology, 18(4), 337–355. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/02687030444000002
Ross-Swain, D., & Fogle, P. (1996). Ross Infor-
mation Processing Assessment–Geriatric. Aus-
tin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Ross-Swain, D., & Fogle, P. (2012). Ross Infor-
mation Processing Assessment–Geriatric (2nd 
ed.). Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Roth, R. M., Isquith, P. K., & Gioia, G. A. (2005). 
Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Func-
tion–Adult version (BRIEF-A). Lutz, FL: Psy-
chological Assessment Resources.
Rothi, L. J. G., & Heilman, K. M. (2014). 
Apraxia: The neuropsychology of action. New 
York, NY: Psychology Press.
Rothi, L. J. G., Raymer, A. M., & Heilman, K. 
M. (1997). Limb praxis assessment. In L. J. 
G. Rothi & K. M. Heilman (Eds.), Apraxia: 
The neuropsychology of action (pp. 61–74). 
New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Rowland, A., & McDonald, L. (2009). Evalu-
ation of social work communication skills 
to allow people with aphasia to be part of 
the decision-making process in health care. 
Social Work Education, 28(2), 128–144. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02615470802029965
Royal College of Physicians. (2014). Speech 
and language therapy provision for people 
with dementia: RCSLT position paper 2014. 
Retrieved from http://www.rcslt.org/
members/publications/publications2/
dementia_position_paper2014
Royall, D. (2005). The emperor has no clothes: 
Dementia treatment on the eve of the 

References   653
aging era. Journal of the American Geriatrics 
Society, 53, 163–164. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53029.x
Royall, D., Palmer, R., Chiodo, L. K., & Polk, 
M. J. (2005). Executive control mediates 
memory’s association with change in 
instrumental. Journal of the American Geriat-
rics Society, 53, 11–17. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53004.x
Royall, D. R., Mahurin, R. K., & Gray, K. F. 
(1992). Bedside assessment of executive 
cognitive impairment: The executive inter-
view. Journal of the American Geriatrics Soci-
ety, 40(12), 1221–1226. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1111/j.1532-5415.1992.tb03646.x
Ruff, R. M. (1996). Ruff Figural Fluency Test: 
Professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychologi-
cal Assessment Resources.
Ruml, W., Caramazza, A., Shelton, J. R., & 
Chialant, D. (2000). Testing assumptions 
in computational theories of aphasia. Jour-
nal of Memory and Language, 43, 217–248. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jmla.2000.2730
Rush, B. K., Barch, D., & Braver, T. S. (2006). 
Accounting for cognitive aging: Context 
processing, inhibition or processing speed? 
Neuropsychology, Development, and Cogni-
tion. Section B, Aging, Neuropsychology and 
Cognition, 13(3–4), 588–610. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/13825580600680703
Rusted, J., Sheppard, L., & Waller, D. (2006). 
A multi-centre randomized control group 
trial on the use of art therapy for older peo-
ple with dementia. Group Analysis, 39(4), 
517–536. http://dx.doi.org/10​.1177/​0533​
316406071447
Ryan, C. M. (1988). Neurobehavioral complica-
tions of type I diabetes: Examination of pos-
sible risk factors. Diabetes Care, 11(1), 86–93. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2337/diacare.11.1.86
Ryan, C. M., Geckle, M. O., & Orchard, T. J. 
(2003). Cognitive efficiency declines over 
time in adults with Type 1 diabetes: Effects 
of micro- and macrovascular complications. 
Diabetologia, 46(7), 940–948. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1007/s00125-003-1128-2
Ryan, E. B., Bourhis, R. Y., & Knops, U. (1991). 
Evaluative perceptions of patronizing 
speech addressed to elders. Psychology and 
Aging, 6(3), 442–450. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1037/0882-7974.6.3.442
Sabat, S. R. (2005). Capacity for decision-
making in Alzheimer’s disease: Selfhood, 
positioning and semiotic people. Austra-
lian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 
39(11–12), 1030–1035. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/j.1440-1614.2005.01722.x
Sabo, S., de Zapien, J., Teufel-Shone, N., 
Rosales, C., Bergsma, L., & Taren, D. (2015). 
Service learning: A vehicle for building 
health equity and eliminating health dis-
parities. American Journal of Public Health, 
105(Suppl. 1), S38–S43. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.2105/AJPH.2014.302364
Sacchett, C. (2002). Drawing in aphasia: Mov-
ing towards the interactive. International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 57(4), 
263–277. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/ijhc​
.2002.1018
Sacchett, C., Byng, S., Marshall, J., & Pound, 
C. (1999). Drawing together: Evaluation of 
a therapy programme for severe aphasia. 
International Journal of Language & Commu-
nication Disorders, 34(3), 265–289. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/136828299247414
Saffran, E. M., Berndt, R. S., & Schwartz, M. F. 
(1989). The quantitative analysis of agram-
matic production: Procedure and data. 
Brain and Language, 37(3), 440–479. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0093-934X(89)90030-8
Salter, K., McClure, J. A., Foley, N. C., & Tea-
sell, R. (2011). Community integration fol-
lowing TBI: An examination of community 
integration measures within the ICF frame-
work. Brain Injury, 25(12), 1147–1154. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3109/02699052.2011.613088
Salthouse, T. A. (1996). The processing-speed 
theory of adult age differences in cognition. 
Psychological Review, 103(3), 403–428. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.103.3.403
Salthouse, T. A. (2000). Aging and measures 
of processing speed. Biological Psychology, 
54(1–3), 35–54. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0301-0511(00)00052-1
Sambunaris, A., & Hyde, T. M. (1994). Stroke-
related aphasias mistaken for psychotic 

654   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
speech: Two case reports. Journal of Geriat-
ric Psychiatry and Neurology, 7(3), 144–147. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0891988794​
00700303
Sampson, M., Johnson, G., & Brown, J. (2013). 
On the pulse: Audit-proof your documen-
tation. The ASHA Leader, 18(8), 30. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/leader.OTP.1808​2013.30
Sandson, J., & Albert, M. L. (1984). Varieties 
of perseveration. Neuropsychologia, 22(6), 
715–732. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0028-
3932(84)90098-8
Santo Pietro, M. J., & Boczko, F. (1998). The 
Breakfast Club: Results of a study examin-
ing the effectiveness of a multi-modality 
group communication treatment. Ameri-
can Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease and Other 
Dementias, 13(3), 146–158. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1177/153331759801300307
Santo Pietro, M. J., & Otsuni, E. (2003). Success-
ful communication with persons with Alz­
heimer’s disease: An in-service training manual 
(2nd ed.). St. Louis, MO: Butterworth- 
Heinemann.
Saper, R. B., Phillips, R. S., Sehgal, A., Khouri, 
N., Davis, R. B., Paquin, J., . . . Kales, S. N. 
(2008). Lead, mercury, and arsenic in U.S.- 
and Indian-manufactured Ayurvedic medi-
cines sold via the Internet. JAMA: The Jour-
nal of the American Medical Association, 8, 915.
Sapolsky, D., Domoto-Reilly, K., & Dickerson, 
B. C. (2014). Use of the Progressive Aphasia 
Severity Scale (PASS) in monitoring speech 
and language status in PPA. Aphasiology, 
28(8–9), 993–1003. http://dx.doi.org/10.10
80/02687038.2014.931563
Sarkaki, A., Rafieirad, M., Hossini, S. E., Far-
bood, Y., Motamedi, F., Mansouri, S. M. T., 
& Naghizadeh, B. (2013). Improvement in 
memory and brain long-term potentiation 
deficits due to permanent hypoperfusion/
ischemia by grape seed extract in rats. Ira-
nian Journal of Basic Medical Sciences, 16(9), 
1004–1010.
Sarno, J. E., Rusk, H. A., Diller, L., & Sarno, 
M. (1972). The effect of hyperbaric oxygen 
on the mental and verbal ability of stroke 
patients. Stroke, 3(1), 10–15. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1161/01.STR.3.1.10
Saur, D., Lange, R., Baumgaertner, A., 
Schraknepper, V., Willmes, K., Rijntjes, M., 
& Weiller, C. (2006). Dynamics of language 
reorganization after stroke. Brain: A Journal 
of Neurology, 129(Pt. 6), 1371–1384. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/awl090
Saver, J. L., Fonarow, G. C., Smith, E. E., 
Reeves, M. J., Grau-Sepulveda, M. V., Pan, 
W., . . . Schwamm, L. H. (2013). Time to 
treatment with intravenous tissue plas-
minogen activator and outcome from acute 
ischemic stroke. JAMA, 309(23), 2480–2488. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/jama.2013.6959.
Saxton, J. (2004). The Severe Impairment Battery. 
London, UK: Harcourt Assessment.
Schaie, K. W. (2005). Developmental influences 
on adult intelligence: The Seattle Longitudinal 
Study. New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press.
Schaie, K. W., & Willis, S. L. (2002). Adult devel-
opment and aging. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
Schenkenberg, T., Bradford, D. C., & Ajax, E. T. 
(1980). Line bisection and unilateral visual 
neglect in patients with neurologic impair-
ment. Neurology, 30(5), 509–509. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL.30.5.509
Schensul, J. J., Torres, M., & Wetle, T. T. (1992). 
Educational materials and innovative dissemi-
nation strategies: Alzheimer’s disease among 
Puerto Rican elderly. Hartford, CT: Institute 
for Community Research.
Scherder, E. J., Bouma, A., & Steen, A. M. 
(1995). Effects of short-term transcutane-
ous electrical nerve stimulation on memory 
and affective behaviour in patients with 
probable Alzheimer’s disease. Behavioural 
Brain Research, 67(2), 211–219. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/0166-4328(94)00115-V
Schiller, N., Ferreira, V., & Alario, F.-X. (2007). 
Words, pauses, and gestures: New direc-
tions in language production research. Lan-
guage and Cognitive Processes, 22(8), 1145–
1150. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​01690960​
701491415
Schlaug, G., Altenmüüller, E., & Thaut, M. 
(2010). Music listening and music making in 
the treatment of neurological disorders and 
impairments. Music Perception: An Inter-

References   655
disciplinary Journal, 27(4), 249–250. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1525/mp.2010.27.4.249
Schlaug, G., Marchina, S., & Norton, A. (2008). 
From singing to speaking: Why singing may 
lead to recovery of expressive language 
function in patients with Broca’s aphasia. 
Music Perception, 25(4), 315–323. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1525/MP.2008.25.4.315
Schlaug, G., Norton, A., Marchina, S., Zipse, L., 
& Wan, C. Y. (2010). From singing to speak-
ing: Facilitating recovery from nonfluent 
aphasia. Future Neurology, 5(5), 657–665. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2217/fnl.10.44
Schlosser, R. (2002). On the importance of 
being earnest about treatment integrity. 
Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 
18(1), 36–44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/aac​
.18.1.36.44
Schlund, M. W. (1999). Self-awareness: Effects 
of feedback and review on verbal self 
reports and remembering following brain 
injury. Brain Injury, 13(5), 375–380. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/026990599121566
Schmahmann, J. D., & Sherman, J. C. (1998). 
The cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome. 
Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 121, 561–579. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/brain/121.4.561
Schnakers, C., Vanhaudenhuyse, A., Giacino, 
J., Ventura, M., Boly, M., Majerus, S., . . . Lau-
reys, S. (2009). Diagnostic accuracy of the 
vegetative and minimally conscious state: 
Clinical consensus versus standardized 
neurobehavioral assessment. BMC Neurol-
ogy, 9(1), 35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/​
1471-2377-9-35
Schneider, B. A., Daneman, M., & Murphy, D. 
R. (2005). Speech comprehension difficul-
ties in older adults: Cognitive slowing or 
age-related changes in hearing? Psychol-
ogy and Aging, 20(2), 261–271. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1037/0882-7974.20.2.261
Schneider, N. M., & Camp, C. J. (2003). Use 
of Montessori-based activities by visitors 
of nursing home residents with dementia. 
Clinical Gerontologist, 26(1–2), 71–84. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1300/J018v26n01_07
Schneiderman, A. I., Braver, E. R., & Kang, 
H. K. (2008). Understanding sequelae of 
injury mechanisms and mild traumatic 
brain injury incurred during the conflicts 
in Iraq and Afghanistan: Persistent post-
concussive symptoms and posttraumatic 
stress disorder. American Journal of Epide-
miology, 167(12), 1446–1452. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1093/aje/kwn068
Schneiderman, E. I., Murasugi, K. G., & Saddy, 
J. D. (1992). Story arrangement ability in 
right brain-damaged patients. Brain and 
Language, 43(1), 107–120. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/0093-934X(92)90024-9
Schönberger, M., Humle, F., & Teasdale, T. W. 
(2006). The development of the therapeu-
tic working alliance, patients’ awareness 
and their compliance during the process 
of brain injury rehabilitation. Brain Injury, 
20(4), 445–454. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​
02699050600664772
Schretlen, D. (1997). The Brief Test of Attention: 
Professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychologi-
cal Assessment Resources.
Schretlen, D. J. (2010). Modified Wisconsin Card 
Sorting Test (M-WCST). Lutz, FL: Psycho-
logical Assessment Resources.
Schuell, H. (1953). Aphasic difficulties under-
standing spoken language. Neurology, 3(3), 
176–84. http://dx.doi.org/10.1212/WNL​
.3.3.176
Schuell, H. (1954). Clinical observations on 
aphasia. Neurology, 4(3), 179–189.
Schuell, H. (1965). The Minnesota Test of Dif-
ferential Diagnosis of Aphasia. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Schuell, H. (1973). Differential diagnosis of apha-
sia with the Minnesota Test (2nd ed.). Minne-
apolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Schuell, H., & Jenkins, J. J. (1959). The nature 
of language deficit in aphasia. Psychologi-
cal Review, 66(1), 45–67. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1037/h0045014
Schuell, H., Jenkins, J. J., & Jimenez-Pabon, E. 
(1964). Aphasia in adults: Diagnosis, prognosis, 
and treatment. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Schwartz, M. F. (1984). What the classical 
aphasia categories can’t do for us, and why. 
Brain and Language, 21(1), 3–8. http://dx 
.doi.org/10.1016/0093-934X(84)90031-2
Schwartz, M. F., Saffran, E. M., Fink, R. B., 
Myers, J. L., & Martin, N. (1994). Mapping 

656   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
therapy: A treatment programme for agram-
matism. Aphasiology, 8(1), 19–54. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687039408248639
Schwartz, M. F., Saffran, E. M., & Marin, O. M. 
(1980). Fractionating the reading process 
in dementia: Evidence from word specific 
print-to-sound associations. In M. Col-
theart, K. Patterson, & J. C. Marshall (Eds.), 
Deep dyslexia (pp. 259–269). Boston, MA: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Searle, J. R. (1969). Speech acts: An essay in the 
philosophy of language. London, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Seifert, L. S. (2001). Customized art activi-
ties for individuals with Alzheimer-type 
dementia. Activities, Adaptation & Aging, 
24(4), 65–74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/
J016v24n04_06
Sekhon, J., Douglas, J., & Rose, M. (2015). Cur-
rent Australian speech-language pathology 
practice in addressing psychological well-
being in people with aphasia after stroke. 
International Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 17(3), 252–262. http://dx.doi.org
/10.3109/17549507.2015.1024170
Seki, K., & Sugishita, M. (1983). Japanese-
applied melodic intonation therapy for 
Broca aphasia. Brain and Nerve, 35(10), 
1031–1037.
Seligman, M. E. P. (2002). Authentic happiness: 
Using the new positive psychology to realize 
your potential for lasting fulfillment. New 
York, NY: Free Press.
Shadden, B. (2005). Aphasia as identity theft: 
Theory and practice. Aphasiology, 19(3–5), 
211–223. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0268​7​
930444000697
Shadden, B. B. (1998). Obtaining the discourse 
sample. In L. R. Cherney, B. B. Shadden, & 
C. A. Coelho (Eds.), Analyzing discourse in 
communicatively impaired adults (pp. 9–34). 
Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen.
Shadden, B. B. (2011). Language and aging: 
Primary and tertiary factors. In M. A. Toner, 
B. B. Shadden, & M. B. Gluth (Eds.), Aging 
and communication (pp. 205–234). Austin, 
TX: Pro-Ed.
Shah, S. H., Engelhardt, R., & Ovbiagele, B. 
(2008). Patterns of complementary and 
alternative medicine use among United 
States stroke survivors. Journal of the Neuro-
logical Sciences, 271(1–2), 1–2. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/j.jns.2008.04.014
Shapiro, L. P. (1997). Tutorial: An introduc-
tion to syntax. Journal of Speech, Language 
and Hearing Research, 40(2), 254–272. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/jslhr.4002.254
Sherrington, C., Herbert, R. D., Maher, C. G., & 
Moseley, A. M. (2000). PEDro. A database of 
randomized trials and systematic reviews 
in physiotherapy. Manual Therapy, 5(4), 
223–226. http://dx.doi.org/10.1054/math​
.2000.0372
Shogren, K. A. (2011). Culture and self- 
determination: A synthesis of the litera-
ture and directions for future research and 
practice. Career Development for Exceptional 
Individuals, 34(2), 115–127. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1177/​0885728811398271
Sicotte, C., Lehoux, P., Fortier-Blanc, J., & 
Leblanc, Y. (2003). Feasibility and outcome 
evaluation of a telemedicine application in 
speech-language pathology. Journal of Tele-
medicine and Telecare, 9(5), 253–258. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1258/135763303769211256
Simmons-Mackie, N. (2004). Just kidding! 
Humour and therapy for aphasia. In J. F. 
Duchan & S. Byng (Eds.), Challenging apha-
sia therapies: Broadening the discourse and 
extending the boundaries (pp. 101–117). East 
Sussex, UK: Psychology Press.
Simmons-Mackie, N. (2013a). Frameworks for 
managing communication support for peo-
ple with aphasia. In N. Simmons-Mackie, 
J. M. King, & D. R. Beukelman (Eds.), Sup-
porting communication for adults with acute 
and chronic aphasia (pp. 11–50). Baltimore, 
MD: Paul H. Brookes.
Simmons-Mackie, N. (2013b). Staging com-
munication supports across the health care 
continuum. In N. Simmons-Mackie, J. M. 
King, & D. R. Beukelman (Eds.), Support-
ing communication for adults with acute and 
chronic aphasia (pp. 99–144). Baltimore, MD: 
Paul H. Brookes.
Simmons-Mackie, N., Code, C., Armstrong, E., 
Stiegler, L., & Elman, R. J. (2002). What is 
aphasia? Results of an international survey. 

References   657
Aphasiology, 16(8), 837–848. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687030244000185
Simmons-Mackie, N., & Damico, J. S. (1999). 
Qualitative methods in aphasia research: 
Ethnography. Aphasiology, 13(9–11), 681–
687. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687039​
9401786
Simmons-Mackie, N., & Damico, J. S. (2003). 
Contributions of qualitative research to the 
knowledge base of normal communication. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathol-
ogy, 12(2), 144–154. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1044/1058-0360(2003/061)
Simmons-Mackie, N., & Damico, J. S. (2011). 
Counselling and aphasia treatment: Missed 
opportunities. Topics in Language Disorders, 
4, 336.
Simmons-Mackie, N., Elman, R. J., Holland, 
A. L., & Damico, J. S. (2007). Management 
of discourse in group therapy for aphasia. 
Topics in Language Disorders, 1, 5.
Simmons-Mackie, N., & Elman, R. J. (2011). 
Negotiation of identity in group therapy 
for aphasia: The Aphasia Café. International 
Journal of Language & Communication Disor-
ders, 46(3), 312–323. http://dx.doi.org/10.3
109/13682822.2010.507616
Simmons-Mackie, N., Kagan, A., Victor, J. C., 
Carling-Rowland, A., Mok, A., Hoch, J. S., 
. . . Streiner, D. L. (2014). The assessment 
for living with aphasia: Reliability and 
construct validity. International Journal of 
Speech-Language Pathology, 16(1), 82–94. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/17549507.2013​
.831484
Simmons-Mackie, N., & King, J. M. (2013). 
Communication support for everyday life 
situations. In N. Simmons-Mackie, J. M. 
King, & D. R. Beukelman (Eds.), Support-
ing communication for adults with acute and 
chronic aphasia (pp. 221–244). Baltimore, 
MD: Paul H. Brookes.
Simmons-Mackie, N., King, J. M., & Beukel-
man, D. R. (2013). Supporting communication 
for adults with acute and chronic aphasia. Balti-
more, MD: Paul H. Brookes.
Simmons-Mackie, N., Raymer, A., Armstrong, 
E., Holland, A., & Cherney, L. R. (2010). 
Communication partner training in apha-
sia: A systematic review. Archives of Physi-
cal Medicine and Rehabilitation, 91(12), 1814–
1837. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr​.20​
10.08.026
Simmons-Mackie, N., & Schultz, M. (2003). 
The role of humour in therapy for aphasia. 
Aphasiology, 17(8), 751–766. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687030344000229
Simmons-Mackie, N. N., Kagan, A., O’Neill 
Christie, C., Huijbregts, M., McEwen, S., & 
Willems, J. (2007). Communicative access 
and decision making for people with apha-
sia: Implementing sustainable healthcare 
systems change. Aphasiology, 21(1), 39–66. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030600​
798287
Simpson, F. (2006). Mount Wilga High Level Lan-
guage Test: Administration & scoring manual 
plus test form with UK adaptations and large 
print additions. Retrieved from http://www​
.docstoc.com/docs/29634047/MOUNT-
WILGA-HIGH-LEVEL-LANGUAGE-TEST
Simpson, F., Jane, C., Lynne, M., & Wendy, C. 
(2006). Mount Wilga High Level Language 
Test: Administration & scoring manual plus 
test form with UK adaptations and large print 
additions. Retrieved from http://nebula​
.wsimg.com
Singh, N. N., Lancioni, G. E., Sigafoos, J., O’Reilly, 
M. F., & Winton, A. S. W. (2014). Assistive 
technology for people with Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. In G. E. Lancioni & N. N. Singh (Eds.), 
Assistive technologies for people with diverse abil-
ities (pp. 219–250). New York, NY: Springer. 
Retrieved from http://link.springer.com/
chapter/10​.1007/978-1-4899-8029-8_8
Skenazy, J., A., & Bigler, E. D. (1984). Neuro-
psychological findings in diabetes mel-
litus. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 40(1), 
246–258. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/1097-
4679(198401)40:1<246::AID-JCLP2270​
400148>3.0.CO;2-P
Skenes, L. L., & McCauley, R. J. (1985). Psy-
chometric review of nine aphasia tests. 
Journal of Communication Disorders, 18(6), 
461–474. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0021-
9924(85)90033-4
Sklar, M. (1983). Sklar aphasia scale. Los Ange-
les, CA: Western Psychological Services.

658   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Small, J. A., Gutman, G., Makela, S., & Hill-
house, B. (2003). Effectiveness of commu-
nication strategies used by caregivers of 
persons with Alzheimer’s disease during 
activities of daily living. Journal of Speech, 
Language, and Hearing Research, 46(2), 353– 
367. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388​
(2003/028)
Small, S. L. (2004). A biological model of apha-
sia rehabilitation: Pharmacological perspec-
tives. Aphasiology, 18(5–7), 473–492. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030444000156
Smart, J. F., & Smart, D. W. (1997). The racial/
ethnic demography of disability. Journal of 
Rehabilitation, 63(4), 9–15.
Smith, A. (1973). Symbol Digit Modality Test 
(SDMT). Los Angeles, CA: Western Psycho-
logical Services.
Snedden, T. R. (2013). Concept analysis of 
concussion. Journal for Specialists in Pediat-
ric Nursing, 18(3), 211–220. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1111/jspn.12038
Snyder, C. R., & Lopez, S. J. (2002). Handbook 
of positive psychology. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.
Sohlberg, M. M. (2000). Assessing and manag-
ing unawareness of self. Seminars in Speech 
and Language, 21(2), 135. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1055/s-2000-7561
Sohlberg, M. M., Avery, J., Kennedy, K. M., 
Coelho, C. A., Ylvisaker, M., Turkstra, L. S., 
& Yorkston, K. M. (2003). Practice guide-
lines for direct attention training. Journal 
of Medical Speech-Language Pathology, 11(3), 
xix–xxxix.
Sohlberg, M. M., Kennedy, M., Avery, J., 
Coehlo, C., Turkstra, L. S., Ylvisaker, M., 
& Yorkston, K. M. (2007). Evidence based 
practice for the use of external aids as a 
memory rehabilitation technique. Journal 
of Medical Speech-Language Pathology, 15, 
xv–li.
Sohlberg, M. M., & Mateer, C. A. (1987). Effec-
tiveness of an attention training program. 
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuro-
psychology, 9, 177–130. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/01688638708405352
Sohlberg, M. M., & Mateer, C. A. (2001a). 
Improving attention and managing atten-
tional problems: Adapting rehabilitation 
techniques to adults with ADD. Annals of 
the New York Academy of Sciences, 931(1), 
359–375. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-​
6632.2001.tb05790.x
Sohlberg, M. M., & Mateer, C. A. (2001b). 
Attention Process Training Test. Youngsville, 
NC: Lash & Associates.
Sohlberg, M. M., & Mateer, C. A. (2010). 
APT-III: Attention process training: A direct 
attention training program for persons with 
acquired brain injury. Youngsville, NC: Lash 
& Associates.
Sohlberg, M. M., McLaughlin, K. A., Todis, 
B., Larsen, J., & Glang, A. (2001). What 
does it take to collaborate with families 
affected by brain injury? A preliminary 
model. The Journal of Head Trauma Rehabili-
tation, 16(5), 498–511. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1097/00001199-200110000-00008
Sohlberg, M. M., & Turkstra, L. S. (2011). 
Optimizing cognitive rehabilitation: Effective 
instructional methods. New York, NY: Guil-
ford Press.
Sonies, B. C. (1997). Scales of adult independence, 
language and recall. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed. 
Retrieved from http://www.library.ohiou​
.edu/ezpauth/redir/athens.php?http://
search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct​
=true&db=mmt&AN=test.1434&site=
eds-live&scope=site
Sosa, R. M. C., Martínez, F. M. I., Gómez, O. 
J. L., & Jáuregui-Renaud, K. (2009). Early 
auditory middle latency evoked poten-
tials correlates with recovery from aphasia 
after stroke. Clinical Neurophysiology, 120(1), 
136–139. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.clin​
ph.2008.10.011
Sparks, R. W. (2008). Melodic intonation ther-
apy. In R. Chapey (Ed.), Language interven-
tion strategies in aphasia and related neurogenic 
communication disorders (5th ed., pp. 837–
851). Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins.
Sparks, R. W., Helm, N. A., & Albert, M. (1974). 
Aphasia rehabilitation resulting from 
Melodic Intonation Therapy. Cortex, 10(4), 
303–316. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0010-
9452(74)80024-9

References   659
Sparks, R. W., & Holland, A. L. (1976). Method: 
Melodic intonation therapy for aphasia. 
Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 41, 
287–297. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/jshd​
.4103.287
Speer, P., & Wilshire, C. E. (2013). What’s in 
a sentence? The crucial role of lexical con-
tent in sentence production in nonfluent 
aphasia. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 30(7–8), 
507–543. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/026432
94.2013.876398
Spencer, K. A., Tompkins, C. A., Schultz, R., 
& Rau, M. T. (1995). The psychosocial out-
comes of stroke: A longitudinal study of 
depression risk. Clinical Aphasiology, 23, 
9–23. Retrieved from http://aphasiology.
pitt.edu/archive/00000185/01/23-02.pdf
Spieler, D. H., & Balota, D. A. (2000). Fac-
tors influencing word naming in younger 
and older adults. Psychology and Aging, 
15(2), 225–231. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/​
0882-7974.15.2.225
Spreen, O., & Benton, A. L. (1977). Neurosen-
sory center comprehensive examination for 
aphasia: Manual of directions (Rev. ed.) Victo-
ria, BC, Canada: Neuropsychology Labora-
tory, University of Victoria.
Spreen, O., & Risser, A. H. (2003). Assessment 
of aphasia. Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.
Springer, L., Glindemann, R., Huber, W., & 
Willmes, K. (1991). How efficacious is pace-
therapy when “language systematic train-
ing” is incorporated? Aphasiology, 5(4–5), 
391–399. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0268​
7039108248541
Stahl, B., Henseler, I., Turner, R., Geyer, S., & 
Kotz, S. (2013). How to engage the right 
brain hemisphere in aphasics without even 
singing: Evidence for two paths of speech 
recovery. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 
7(35), 1–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fn​
hum.2013.00035
Stallings, J. W. (2010). Collage as a therapeutic 
modality for reminiscence in patients with 
dementia. Art Therapy: Journal of the Ameri-
can Art Therapy Association, 27(3), 136–140. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/07421656.2010​
.10129667
Starrfelt, R., Ólafsdóttir, R. R., & Arendt, 
I.-M. (2013). Rehabilitation of pure alexia: 
A review. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 
23(5), 755–779. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
09602011.2013.809661
State University of New York at Buffalo 
Research Foundation, & Center for Func-
tional Assessment Research. (1990). Guide 
for use of the uniform data set for medical reha-
bilitation. Buffalo: State University of New 
York at Buffalo.
Stein, J., & Brady Wagner, L. C. (2006). Is 
informed consent a “yes or no” response? 
Enhancing the shared decision-making 
process for persons with aphasia. Topics in 
Stroke Rehabilitation, 13(4), 42–46. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1310/tsr1304-42
Steinberg, B. A., Bieliauskas, L. A., Smith, G. E., 
Langellotti, C., & Ivnik, R. J. (2005). Mayo’s 
older Americans normative studies: Age- 
and IQ-adjusted norms for the Boston nam-
ing test, the MAE token test, and the judg-
ment of line orientation test. The Clinical 
Neuropsychologist, 19(3–4), 280–328. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/13854040590945229
Stern, R. A. (1997). Visual analog mood scales pro-
fessional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological 
Assessment Resources.
Stern, R. A., Arruda, J. E., Hooper, C. R., 
Wolfner, G. D., & Morey, C. (1997). Visual 
analogue mood scales to measure inter-
nal mood state in neurologically impaired 
patients: Description and initial validity 
evidence. Aphasiology, 11(1), 59–71. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687039708248455
Stevens, L. C. (2009). Understanding how stu-
dents learn: Preparing students to become 
professionals. SIG, 10 Perspectives on Issues 
in Higher Education, 12, 16–23. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/ihe12.1.16
Storey, J. E., Rowland, J. T. J., Conforti, D. 
A., & Dickson, H. G. (2004). The Rowland 
Universal Dementia Assessment Scale 
(RUDAS): A multicultural cognitive assess-
ment scale. International Psychogeriatrics, 
16(1), 13–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1​
041610204000043
Strauss, E., Sherman, E. M. S., & Spreen, O. 
(2006). A compendium of neuropsychological 

660   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
tests: Administration, norms, and commentary 
(3rd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press.
Strijbos, J.-W., & Fischer, F. (2007). Method-
ological challenges for collaborative learn-
ing research. Learning and Instruction, 17(4), 
389–393. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.learn​
instruc.2007.03.004
Stroke Foundation of Australia. (2010). Clinical 
guidelines for stroke management. Retrieved 
from http://www.nhmrc.gov.au/_files_nh​
mrc/publications/attachments/cp126.pdf
Stroke Foundation of New Zealand. (2010). Clin-
ical guidelines for stroke management. Retrieved 
from http://www.stroke.org.nz/resources/
NZClinicalGuidelinesStrokeManagement​
2010ActiveContents.pdf
Sturrock, A., & Leavitt, B. R. (2010). The clini-
cal and genetic features of Huntington’s 
disease. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and 
Neurology, 23(4), 243–259. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1177/0891988710383573
Suhr, J., Anderson, S., & Tranel, D. (1999). Pro-
gressive muscle relaxation in the manage-
ment of behavioural disturbance in Alzheim-
er’s disease. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 
9(1), 31–44. http://dx.doi.org/​10.1080/​71​
3755590
Sulheim, S., Holme, I., Ekeland, A., & Bahr, R. 
(2006). Helmet use and risk of head injuries 
in alpine skiers and snowboarders. JAMA, 
295(8), 919–924. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
jama.295.8.919.
Sung, J. E., McNeil, M. R., Pratt, S. R., Dickey, 
M. W., Hula, W. D., Szuminsky, N. J., & Doyle, 
P. J. (2009). Verbal working memory and its 
relationship to sentence-level reading and lis-
tening comprehension in persons with apha-
sia. Aphasiology, 23(7–8), 1040–1052. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0268​7030802592884
Sutcliffe, L. M., & Lincoln, N. B. (1998). The 
assessment of depression in aphasic stroke 
patients: the development of the stroke 
aphasic depression questionnaire. Clinical 
Rehabilitation, 12(6), 506–513. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1191/026921598672167702
Swinburn, K., & Byng, S. (2006). The Commu-
nication Disability Profile. London, UK: Con-
nect Press.
Swinburn, K., Porter, G., & Howard, D. (2004). 
Comprehensive Aphasia Test. Hove, UK: Psy-
chology Press.
Sydenham, E., Dangour, A. D., & Lim, W. S. 
(2012). Omega-3 fatty acid for the prevention 
of cognitive decline and dementia. Sao Paulo 
Medical Journal, 130(6), 419. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1590/S1516-31802012000600013
Syder, D., Body, R., Parker, M., & Boddy, M. 
(1993). Sheffield Screening Test for Acquired 
Language Disorders. Windsor, UK: NFER 
Nelson.
Szaflarski, J. P., Ball, A. L., Grether, S., Al-
fwaress, F., Griffith, N. M., Neils-Strunjas, 
J., . . . Reichhardt, R. (2008). Constraint-
induced aphasia therapy stimulates lan-
guage recovery in patients with chronic 
aphasia after ischemic stroke. Medical Sci-
ence Monitor, 14(5), CR243–CR250.
Szelies, B., Mielke, R., Kessler, J., & Heiss, 
W.-D. (2002). Prognostic relevance of quan-
titative topographical EEG in patients with 
poststroke aphasia. Brain and Language, 
82(1), 87–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0093-934X(02)00004-4
Taber, K. H., Warden, D. L., & Hurley, R. A. 
(2006). Blast-related traumatic brain injury: 
What is known? Journal of Neuropsychiatry 
and Clinical Neurosciences, 18(2), 141–142. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1176/jnp.2006​.18​.2.141
Tactus Therapy. (2015). Naming therapy: The 
essential app for word finding [Mobile appli-
cation software]. Retrieved from http://tac​
tustherapy.com/app/naming/
Tanaka, Y., Albert, M., Cahana-Amitay, D., 
Midori, H., Fujita, K., Miyazaki, M., . . . 
Tanaka, M. (2013). Combined therapy with 
Propranolol and Bromocriptine for treat-
ment of aphasia. Procedia Social and Behav-
ioral Sciences, 94, 251–252. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.09.125
Tanaka, Y., Miyazaki, M., & Albert, M. L. 
(1997). Effects of increased cholinergic activ-
ity on naming in aphasia. Lancet, 350(9071), 
116–117. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S01​
40-6736(05)61820-X
Tanner, D., & Culbertson, W. (1999). Quick 
assessment for aphasia. Oceanside, CA: Aca-
demic Communication Associates.

References   661
Tariq, S. H., Tumosa, N., Chibnall, J. T., Perry, 
M. H., & Morley, J. E. (2006). Compari-
son of the Saint Louis University mental 
status examination and the mini-mental 
state examination for detecting demen-
tia and mild neurocognitive disorder — a 
pilot study. The American Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry, 14(11), 900–910. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1097/01.JGP.0000221510.33817.86
Tavalaro, J. (1997). Look up for yes. New York, 
NY: Kodansha International.
Taylor, H. G., & Solomon, J. R. (1979). Reversed 
laterality: A case study. Journal of Clinical 
Neuropsychology, 1(4), 311–322. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/01688637908401105
Taylor, J. B. (2006). My stroke of insight: A brain 
scientist’s personal journey. New York, NY: 
Viking.
Teasdale, G., & Jennett, B. (1974). Assess-
ment of coma and impaired consciousness. 
Lancet, 2(7872), 81–84. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1016/S0140-6736(74)91639-0
Teng, E. L., & Chui, H. C. (1987). The modified 
mini-mental state (3MS) examination. The 
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 48(8), 314–318.
Terrell, B. Y., & Ripich, D. N. (1989). Discourse 
competence as a variable in intervention. 
Seminars in Speech and Language, 10(04), 
282–297. http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-20​
08-1064269
Terrio, H., Brenner, L. A., Ivins, B. J., Cho, J. 
M., Helmick, K., Schwab, K., . . . Warden, 
D. (2009). Traumatic brain injury screening: 
Preliminary findings in a US Army brigade 
combat team. Journal of Head Trauma Reha-
bilitation, 24(1). Retrieved from http://oai​
.dtic.mil/oai/oai?&verb=getRecord&meta​
dataPrefix=html&identifier=ADA523828
Tesak, J., & Code, C. (2008). Milestones in the 
history of aphasia: Theories and protagonists. 
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Thal, L. J., Salmon, D. P., Lasker, B., Bower, 
D., & Klauber, M. R. (1989). The safety and 
lack of efficacy of vinpocetine in Alzheim-
er’s disease. Journal of the American Geriat-
rics Society, 37(6), 515–520. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.1989.tb05682.x
Theodoros, D., Hill, A., Russell, T., Ward, E., 
& Wootton, R. (2008). Assessing acquired 
language disorders in adults via the Inter-
net. Telemedicine Journal and E-Health, 14(6), 
552–559. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/tmj​
.2007.0091.
Thomas, W., Fox, N., Norton, L., Rashap, A. W., 
Angelelli, J., Tellis-Nyak, V., . . . Brostoski, D. 
(2005). The Eden Alternative Domains of Well-
Being. Retrieved from http://www.edenalt​
.org/about-the-eden-alternative/the-eden-
alternative-domains-of-well-being/
Thompson, C. K. (2000a). Neuroplasticity: Evi-
dence from aphasia. Journal of Communica-
tion Disorders, 33, 357–366. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1016/S0021-9924(00)00031-9
Thompson, C. K. (2000b). The neurobiology 
of language recovery in aphasia. Brain and 
Language, 71(1), 245–248. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1006/brln.1999.2260
Thompson, C. K. (2002). Northwestern Verb Pro-
duction Battery. Unpublished manuscript.
Thompson, C. K. (2008). Treatment of syntac-
tic and morphologic deficits in agrammatic 
aphasia: Treatment of underlying forms. In 
R. Chapey (Ed.), Language intervention strat-
egies in aphasia and related neurogenic commu-
nication disorders (pp. 735–756). Baltimore, 
MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Thompson, C. K., Ballard, K. J., & Shapiro, 
L. P. (1998). The role of syntactic complex-
ity in training wh- movement structures 
in agrammatic aphasia: Optimal order for 
promoting generalization. Journal of the 
International Neuropsychological Society, 4(6), 
661–674.
Thompson, C. K., Choy, J., Holland, A., & Cole, 
R. (2010). Sentactics: Computer-automated 
treatment of underlying forms. Aphasiol-
ogy, 24(10), 1242–1266. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/02687030903474255
Thompson, C. K., & den Ouden, D.B. (2008). 
Neuroimaging and recovery of language 
in aphasia. Current Neurology and Neurosci-
ence Reports, 8(6), 475–483. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1007/s11910-008-0076-0
Thompson, C. K., Hall, H. R., & Sison, C. E. 
(1986). Effects of hypnosis and imagery 
training on naming behavior in aphasia. 
Brain and Language, 28(1), 141–153. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0093-934X(86)90097-0

662   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Thompson, C. K., Riley, E. A., Ouden, D. den, 
Meltzer-Asscher, A., & Lukic, S. (2013). 
Training verb argument structure produc-
tion in agrammatic aphasia: Behavioral and 
neural recovery patterns. Cortex, 49(9), 2358–
2376. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex 
.2013.02.003
Thompson, C. K., & Shapiro, L. P. (2005). Treat-
ing agrammatic aphasia within a linguistic 
framework: Treatment of underlying forms. 
Aphasiology, 19(10–11), 1021–1036. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030544000227
Thompson, C. K., Shapiro, L. P., Kiran, S., 
& Sobecks, J. (2003). The role of syntactic 
complexity in treatment of sentence defi-
cits in agrammatic aphasia: The Complex-
ity Account of Treatment Efficacy (CATE). 
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing 
Research: JSLHR, 46(3), 591–607. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2003/047)
Thornton, K. E. (2002). The improvement/
rehabilitation of auditory memory func-
tioning with EEG biofeedback. NeuroReha-
bilitation, 17(1), 69–80.
Thornton, R., & Light, L. (2006). Language 
comprehension and production in normal 
aging. In J. E. Birren & K. W. Schaie (Eds.), 
Handbook of the psychology of aging (6th ed., 
pp. 261–287). Burlington, MA: Elsevier.
Threats, T. T. (2005). Culturally sensitive care 
in the health care setting. Perspectives in 
Communication Sciences and Disorders Cul-
turally, Linguistically, Diverse Populations, 12, 
3–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/cds12.3.3
Threats, T. T. (2010a). The complexity of 
social/cultural dimension in communica-
tion disorders. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopae-
dica, 62(4), 158–165. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1159/000314031
Threats, T. T. (2010b). The ICF and speech-
language pathology: Aspiring to a fuller 
realization of ethical and moral issues. 
International Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 12(2), 87–93. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.3109/17549500903568476
Threats, T. T. (2010c). The ICF framework and 
third party disability: Application to the 
spouses of persons with aphasia. Topics in 
Stroke Rehabilitation, 17(6), 451–457. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1310/tsr1706-451
Threats, T. T., & Worrall, L. (2004). Classifying 
communication disability using the ICF. 
Advances in Speech Language Pathology, 6(1), 
53–62. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14417040
410001669426
Ting, D. S. J., Pollock, A., Dutton, G. N., Dou-
bal, F. N., Ting, D. S. W., Thompson, M., & 
Dhillon, B. (2011). Visual neglect following 
stroke: Current concepts and future focus. 
Survey of Ophthalmology, 56(2), 114–134. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.surv​ophthal​
.2010.08.001
Tocco, M., Bayles, K., Lopez, O., Hofbauer, R., 
Pejovic, V., Miller, M., & Saxton, J. (2014). 
Effects of memantine treatment on lan-
guage abilities and functional communica-
tion: A review of data. Aphasiology, 28(2), 
236–257. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687
038.2013.838617
Togher, L., Balandin, S., Young, K., Given, F., 
& Canty, M. (2006). Development of a com-
munication training program to improve access 
to legal services for people with complex com-
munication needs. Retrieved from http://
hdl.handle.net/10536/DRO/DU:30067075
Tompkins, C. A. (2008). Theoretical consid-
erations for understanding “understand-
ing” by adults with right hemisphere brain 
damage. Perspectives on Neurophysiology and 
Neurogenic Speech and Language Disorders, 
18(2), 45–54. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/
nnsld18.2.45
Tompkins, C. A. (2012). Rehabilitation for 
cognitive-communication disorders in 
right hemisphere brain damage. Archives 
of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 93(1), 
S61–S69. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr​
.2011.10.015
Tompkins, C. A., Bloise, C. G., Timko, M. L., & 
Baumgaertner, A. (1994). Working memory 
and inference revision in brain-damaged 
and normally aging adults. Journal of Speech 
and Hearing Research, 37(4), 896–912. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/jshr.3704.896
Tompkins, C. A., Fassbinder, W., Lehman-
Blake, M. T., & Baumgaertner, A. (2002). 

References   663
The nature and implications of right hemi-
sphere language disorders: Issues in search 
of answers. In A. E. Hillis (Ed.), Handbook of 
adult language disorders: Integrating cognitive 
neuropsychology, neurology, and rehabilitation 
(pp. 429–448). New York, NY: Psychology 
Press.
Tompkins, C. A., & Lehman, M. T. (1998). 
Interpreting intended meanings after right 
hemisphere brain damage: An analysis of 
evidence, potential accounts, and clinical 
implications. Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation, 
5, 29–47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1310/2NTF-
GTQU-MXN0-L3U7
Toro, P., Schönknecht, P., & Schröder, J. (2009). 
Type II diabetes in mild cognitive impair-
ment and Alzheimer’s disease: Results 
from a prospective population-based study 
in Germany. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 
16(4), 687–691. http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/
JAD-2009-0981
Townend, E., Brady, M., & McLaughlan, K. 
(2007a). A systematic evaluation of the 
adaptation of depression diagnostic meth-
ods for stroke survivors who have apha-
sia. Stroke, 38(11), 3076–3083. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.484238
Townend, E., Brady, M., & McLaughlan, K. 
(2007b). Exclusion and inclusion criteria for 
people with aphasia in studies of depres-
sion after stroke: A systematic review and 
future recommendations. Neuroepidemiol-
ogy, 29(1–2), 1–17. http://dx.doi.org/10​.11​
59/000108913
Trudeau, D. L., Anderson, J., Hansen, L. M., 
Shagalov, D. N., Schmoller, J., Nugent, S., 
& Barton, S. (1998). Findings of mild trau-
matic brain injury in combat veterans with 
PTSD and a history of blast concussion. The 
Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuro-
sciences, 10(3), 308–313. http://dx.doi​.org/​
10.1176/jnp.10.3.308
Truscott, M. (2004). Person to person: Adapt-
ing leisure and creative activities for people 
with early stage dementias. Alzheimer’s Care 
Quarterly, 5(2), 92–102.
Tsegaye, M. T., De Bleser, R., & Iribarren, C. 
(2011). The effect of literacy on oral lan-
guage processing: Implications for aphasia 
tests. Clinical Linguistics & Phonetics, 25(6–
7), 628–639. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/026
99206.2011.567348
Tucker-Drob, E. M., & Salthouse, T. A. (2011). 
Individual differences in cognitive aging. In 
T. Chamorro-Premuzic, S. von Stumm, & A. 
Furnham (Eds.), The Wiley-Blackwell hand-
book of individual differences (pp. 242–267). 
Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. Retrieved 
from http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/​
10.1002/9781444343120.ch9/summary
Tucker-Drob, E. M., & Salthouse, T. A. (2013). 
Individual differences in cognitive aging. Mal-
den, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Tuomainen, J., & Laine, M. (1991). Multiple oral 
rereading technique in rehabilitation of pure 
alexia. Aphasiology, 5(4–5), 401–409. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687039108248542
Turken, U., & Dronkers, N. F. (2011). The neu-
ral architecture of the language comprehen-
sion network: Converging evidence from 
lesion and connectivity analyses. Frontiers in 
Systems Neuroscience, 5. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.3389/fnsys.2011.00001
Turkstra, L. S. (2010). The positive behavioral 
momentum of Mark Ylvisaker. Seminars in 
Speech and Language, 31(3), 162–167. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0030-1257532
Turkstra, L. S. (2013). Inpatient cognitive 
rehabilitation: Is it time for a change? The 
Journal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 28(4), 
332–336. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/HTR​
.0b013e31828b4f3f
Turkstra, L. S., Coelho, C., & Ylvisaker, M. 
(2005). The use of standardized tests for 
individuals with cognitive-communication 
disorders. Seminars in Speech and Language, 
26(4), 215–222.
Turkstra, L. S., Ylvisaker, M., Coelho, C., Ken-
nedy, M. R. T., Sohlberg, M. M., Avery, J., & 
Yorkston, K. (2005). Practice guidelines for 
standardized assessment for persons with 
traumatic brain injury. Journal of Medical 
Speech-Language Pathology, 13, ix–xxviii.
Ueda, S., & Okawa, Y. (2003). The subjective 
dimension of functioning and disability: 
What is it and what is it for? Disability and 

664   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Rehabilitation, 25, 596–601. http://dx.doi 
.org/10.1080/0963828031000137108
Ufer, K., & Wilson, B. A. (2000). BADS: Behavioral 
assessment of the dysexecutive syndrome. Bury 
St. Edmunds, UK, Thames Valley Test Co.
United Nations. (n.d.). Convention on the rights 
of persons with disabilities. Retrieved from 
http://www.un.org/disabilities/conven​
tion/conventionfull.shtml
United Nations. (2006). Convention on the rights 
of persons with disabilities. Retrieved from 
http://www.un.org/disabilities/conven​
tion/conventionfull.shtml
United Nations. (2008). Opportunities and 
challenges for an aging world. AARP United 
Nations Briefing Series. Retrieved from 
http://aarpintorg.stage.bridgelinedigital​
.net:8020/conference/conference_show​
.htm?doc_id=604706
United Nations. (2009). World population to 
exceed 9 billion by 2050. Retrieved from 
http://www.un.org/esa/population/pub​
lications/wpp2008/pressrelease.pdf
United Nations. (2012). Follow-up to the Second 
World Assembly on Ageing: Report of the Sec-
retary General. Retrieved from http://www​
.un.org/en/ga/third/66/documentslist​
.shtml
University of Michigan Spectrum Center. 
(n.d.). LGBT terms and definitions. Retrieved 
from https://internationalspectrum.umich​
.edu/life/definitions
Urbenjaphol, P., Jitpanya, C., & Khaoropthum, 
S. (2009). Effects of the sensory stimula-
tion program on recovery in unconscious 
patients with traumatic brain injury. Jour-
nal of Neuroscience Nursing, 41(3), E10–E16. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/JNN.0b013e​
3181a23e94
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2006). Occu-
pational employment. Retrieved August 18, 
2014, from http://www.bls.gov/opub/ooq/ 
2005/winter/art02.pdf
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2014). Speech-
language pathologists. Retrieved August 
18, 2014, from http://www.bls.gov/ooh/
Healthcare/Speech-language-pathologists 
.htm
U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices. (2010). National standards for culturally 
and linguistically appropriate services (CLAS) 
in health care. Retrieved from https://www.
thinkculturalhealth.hhs.gov/Content/clas​
.asp
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2013). 
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy: Don’t be mis-
led. Retrieved from http://www.fda.gov/
ForConsumers/ConsumerUpdates/ucm​
364687.htm
U.S. News and World Report. (2014). The 100 
best jobs. U.S. News and World Report: 
Money. Retrieved from http://money.us​
news.com/careers/best-jobs/rankings/
the-100-best-jobs?page=3
van der Gaag, A., Smith, L., Davis, S., Moss, B., 
Cornelius, V., Laing, S., & Mowles, C. (2005). 
Therapy and support services for people 
with long-term stroke and aphasia and their 
relatives: A six-month follow-up study. 
Clinical Rehabilitation, 19(4), 372–380. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1191/0269215505cr785oa
van der Ploeg, E. S., Eppingstall, B., Camp, 
C. J., Runci, S. J., Taffe, J., & O’Connor, D. 
W. (2013). A randomized crossover trial to 
study the effect of personalized, one-to-one 
interaction using Montessori-based activi-
ties on agitation, affect, and engagement 
in nursing home residents with dementia. 
International Psychogeriatrics, 25(4), 565–575. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S104161021200​
2128
van Vuuren, S., & Cherney, L. R. (2014). A vir-
tual therapist for speech and language ther-
apy. In T. Bickmore, S. Marsella, & C. Sidner 
(Eds.), Intelligent virtual agents (pp. 438–
448). New York, NY: Springer International. 
Retrieved from http://link.springer.com/
chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-09767-1_55
Vance, D. E., & Johns, R. N. (2003). Montes-
sori improved cognitive domains in adults 
with Alzheimer’s disease. Physical & Occu-
pational Therapy in Geriatrics, 20(3–4), 19–33. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/J148v20n03_02
Vasterling, J. J., Verfaellie, M., & Sullivan, K. 
D. (2009). Mild traumatic brain injury and 
posttraumatic stress disorder in returning 

References   665
veterans: Perspectives from cognitive neu-
roscience. Clinical Psychology Review, 29(8), 
674–684. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr​
.2009.08.004
Ventry, I. M., & Weinstein, B. E. (1982). The 
Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly: 
A new tool. Ear and Hearing, 3(3), 128–134.
Verhaeghen, P. (2003). Aging and vocabulary 
scores: A meta-analysis. Psychology and 
Aging, 18(2), 332–339. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1037/0882-7974.18.2.332
Verna, A., Davidson, B., & Rose, T. (2009). 
Speech-language pathology services for peo-
ple with aphasia: A survey of current practice 
in Australia. International Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, 11(3), 191–205. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/175495009027​26059
Vignolo, L. A. (1964). Evolution of aphasia 
and language rehabilitation: A retrospec-
tive exploratory study. Cortex, 1(3), 344–367. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0010-9452(64)​
80008-3
Vines, B. W., Norton, A. C., & Schlaug, G. 
(2011). Non-invasive brain stimulation 
enhances the effects of melodic intonation 
therapy. Frontiers in Psychology, 2. Retrieved 
from http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg​
.2011.00230
von Steinbüchel, N., Wilson, L., Gibbons, 
H., Hawthorne, G., Höfer, S., Schmidt, S., 
. . . Truelle, J.-L. (2010). Quality of Life after 
Brain Injury (QOLIBRI): Scale develop-
ment and metric properties. Journal of Neu-
rotrauma, 27(7), 1167–1185. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1089/neu.2009.1076.
Wada, J., & Rasmussen, T. (1960). Intracarotid 
injection of sodium amytal for the lateral-
ization of cerebral speech dominance exper-
imental and clinical observations. Journal of 
Neurosurgery, 17(2), 266–282. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.3171/jns.1960.17.2.0266
Waggoner, T. L. (1994). Color vision testing made 
easy. Gulf Breeze, FL: Home Care Vision.
Wagner, P. J., Lentz, L., & Heslop, S. D. M. (2002). 
Teaching communication skills: A  skills-
based approach. Academic Medicine: Journal 
of the Association of American Medical Col-
leges, 77(11), 1164.
Währborg, P. (1991). Assessment and manage-
ment of emotional and psychosocial reactions 
to brain damage and aphasia. San Diego, CA: 
Singular.
Walker, G. M., & Schwartz, M. F. (2012). Short 
form Philadelphia Naming Test: Rationale 
and empirical evaluation. American Journal 
of Speech-Language Pathology, 21(2), S140–
S153. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/​1058-0360​
(2012/11-0089)
Walker-Batson, D. (2000). Use of pharmaco-
therapy in the treatment of aphasia. Brain 
and Language, 71(1), 252–254. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1006/brln.1999.2262
Walker-Batson, D., Curtis, S., Natarajan, R., 
Ford, J., Dronkers, N., Salmeron, E., . . . Un- 
win, D. H. (2001). A double-blind, placebo-
controlled study of the use of amphetamine 
in the treatment of aphasia. Stroke, 32(9), 
2093–2098. http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/hs​
0901.095720
Walker-Batson, D., Mehta, J., Smith, P., & John-
son, M. (2015). Amphetamine and other 
pharmacological agents in human and ani-
mal studies of recovery from stroke. Prog-
ress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biologi-
cal Psychiatry. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j​
.pnpbp.2015.04.002
Wallace, D. (2009). Improvised explosive de- 
vices and traumatic brain injury: The mili-
tary experience in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
Australasian Psychiatry: Bulletin of Royal 
Australian and New Zealand College of Psy-
chiatrists, 17(3), 218–224. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/10398560902878679
Wallace, G. L. (2006). Blast injury basics: 
A primer for the medical speech-language 
pathologist. The ASHA Leader, 11(9), 26–28. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/leader.FTR7​
.11092006.26
Wallace, S. E., Purdy, M., & Skidmore, E. 
(2014). A multimodal communication pro-
gram for aphasia during inpatient reha-
bilitation: A case study. NeuroRehabilitation, 
35(3), 615–625. http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/
NRE-141136
Wallace, S. J., Worrall, L., Rose, T., & Le Dorze, 
G. (2014). A good outcome for aphasia. 

666   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Aphasiology, 28(11), 1400–1404. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2014.935119
Waller, G. (2009). Evidence-based treatment 
and therapist drift. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 47(2), 119–127. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1016/j.brat.2008.10.018
Wallston, K., Malcarne, A., Flores, V. L., Hans-
dottir, I., Smith, C. A., Stein, M. J., . . . Cle-
ments, P. J. (1999). Does God determine 
your health? The God locus of health con-
trol scale. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 
23(2), 131–142. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/​
A:1018723010685
Wallston, K. A., Wallston, B. S., & DeVellis, R. 
(1978). Development of the multidimen-
sional health locus of control (MHLC) scales. 
Health, Education & Behavior, 6(1), 160–170.
Wambaugh, J. L., Doyle, P. J., Martinez, A. L., 
& Kalinyak-Fliszar, M. (2002). Effects of 
two lexical retrieval cueing treatments on 
action naming in aphasia. Journal of Reha-
bilitation Research and Development, 39(4), 
455–466. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0268​
7040143000302
Wambaugh, J. L., & Ferguson, M. (2007). 
Application of semantic feature analysis to 
retrieval action names in aphasia. Journal of 
Rehabilitation Research & Development, 44(3), 
381–394. http://dx.doi.org/10.1682/JRRD​
.2006.05.0038
Wambaugh, J. L., Mauszycki, S., Cameron, R., 
Wright, S., & Nessler, C. (2013). Semantic 
feature analysis: Incorporating typicality 
treatment and mediating strategy training 
to promote generalization. American Journal 
of Speech-Language Pathology, 22(2), S334–
S369. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360​
(2013/12-0070)
Wambaugh, J. L., Mauszycki, S., & Wright, S. 
(2014). Semantic feature analysis: Applica-
tion to confrontation naming of actions in 
aphasia. Aphasiology, 28(1), 1–24. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2013.845739
Wambaugh, J. L., Nessler, C., & Wright, S. 
(2013). Modified response elaboration train-
ing: Application to procedural discourse 
and personal recounts. American Journal 
of Speech-Language Pathology, 22(2), S409–
S425. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/​1058-0360​
(2013/12-0063)
Wambaugh, J. L., Wright, S., & Nessler, C. 
(2012). Modified response elaboration train-
ing: A systematic extension with replica-
tions. Aphasiology, 26(12), 1407–1439. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687038.2012​.702887
Wambaugh, J. L., Wright, S., Nessler, C., & 
Mauszycki, S. C. (2014). Combined aphasia 
and apraxia of speech treatment (CAAST): 
Effects of a novel therapy. Journal of Speech, 
Language and Hearing Research, 57(6), 2191–
2207. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/2014​_JSL​
HR-L-14-0004
Warden, D. (2006). Military TBI during the 
Iraq and Afghanistan wars. The Journal of 
Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 21(5), 398–402. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1.1.455.9367
Wardlaw, J. M., Murray, V., Berge, E., del 
Zoppo, G., Sandercock, P., Lindley, R. L., 
& Cohen, G. (2012). Recombinant tissue 
plasminogen activator for acute ischaemic 
stroke: An updated systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Lancet, 379(9834), 2364–2372. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736​
(12)60738-7
Waters, G. S., & Caplan, D. (2003). The reliabil-
ity and stability of verbal working memory 
measures. Behavior Research Methods, Instru-
ments, & Computers, 35(4), 550–564. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3758/BF03195534
Wechsler, D. (2001). Wechsler Test of Adult Read-
ing (WTAR). San Antonio, TX: Psychologi-
cal Corp.
Wechsler, D. (2009). WMS-IV Wechsler Memory 
Scale (4th ed.). San Antonio, TX: Pearson.
Weiduschat, N., Thiel, A., Rubi-Fessen, I., 
Hartmann, A., Kessler, J., Merl, P., . . . Heiss, 
W. D. (2011). Effects of repetitive transcra-
nial magnetic stimulation in aphasic stroke: 
A randomized controlled pilot study. Stroke: 
A Journal of Cerebral Circulation, 42(2), 409–
415. http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/STROKE​
AHA.110.597864
Weimer, M. (2014). The art of asking questions. 
Retrieved from http://www.facultyfocus 
.com/articles/effective-teaching-strate​
gies/art-asking-questions/

References   667
Weinger, K., & Jacobson, A. M. (1998). Cog-
nitive impairment in patients with type 1 
(insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus: Inci-
dence, mechanisms and therapeutic impli-
cations. CNS Drugs, 9(3), 233. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.2165/00023210-199809030-00006
Weiss, H., Agimi, Y., & Steiner, C. (2010). Youth 
motorcycle-related brain injury by state 
helmet law type: United States, 2005-2007. 
Pediatrics, 126(6), 1149–1155. Retrieved from 
http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/con​
tent/126/6/1149.full
Welland, R., Lubinski, R., & Higginbotham, 
D. (2002). Discourse comprehension test 
performance of elders with dementia of the 
Alzheimer type. Journal of Speech, Language 
& Hearing Research, 45(6), 1175–1187. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2002/095
Wepman, J. M. (1972). Aphasia therapy: A new 
look. Journal of Speech and Hearing Disorders, 
37, 203–214. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/jshd 
.3702.203
Wertheimer, J. C., Roebuck-Spencer, T. M., Con-
stantiniclou, F., Turkstra, L. S., Pavol, M., 
& Paul, D. (2008). Collaboration between 
neuropsychologists and speech-language 
pathologists in rehabilitation settings. Jour-
nal of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, 23(5), 273–
285. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.HTR.00​
00336840.76209.a1
Wertz, R., & Irwin, W. H. (2001). The efficacy 
of language rehabilitation in aphasia. Apha-
siology, 15(3), 231–247. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1044/jshd.3701.03
Wertz, R. T., Collins, M. J., Weiss, D., Kurtzke, 
J. F., Friden, T., Brookshire, R. H., . . . Res-
urreccion, E. (1981). Veterans Administra-
tion cooperative study on aphasia: A com-
parison of individual and group treatment. 
Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 24(4), 
580–594. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/jshr​.24​
04.580
Wertz, R. T., Dronkers, N. F., Bernstein-
Ellis, E., Sterling, L. K., Shubitowski, Y., 
Elman, R., . . . Deal, J. L. (1992). Potential 
of telephonic and television technology 
for appraising and diagnosing neurogenic 
communication disorders in remote set-
tings. Aphasiology, 6(2), 195–202. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1080/02687039208248591
Wertz, R. T., Weiss, D. G., Aten, J. L., Brook-
shire, R. H., García-Buñuel, L., Holland, A. 
L., . . . Brannegan, R. (1986). Comparison of 
clinic, home, and deferred language treat-
ment for aphasia: A Veterans Administra-
tion cooperative study. Archives of Neurology, 
43(7), 653–658. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/
archneur.1986.00520070011008
Westby, C. (2009). Considerations in working 
successfully with culturally/linguistically 
diverse families in assessment and inter-
vention of communication disorders. Semi-
nars in Speech & Language, 30(4), 279–289. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0029-1241 
725
Whitaker, H. A. (1984). Editorial note: Two 
views on aphasia classification. Brain and 
Language, 21, 1–2.
White, T., & Stern, R. A. (2003). NAB, Neuropsy-
chological Assessment Battery: Psychometric 
and technical manual. Lutz, FL: Psychologi-
cal Assessment Resources.
Whitten, P. (2006). Telemedicine: Communica-
tion technologies that revolutionize health-
care services. Generations, 30(2), 20–24.
Whurr, R. (1996). The Aphasia Screening Test-
AST (2nd ed.). San Diego, CA: Singular.
Wickenden, M. (2013). Widening the SLP lens: 
How can we improve the wellbeing of peo-
ple with communication disabilities glob-
ally. International Journal of Speech-Language 
Pathology, 15(1), 14–20. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.3109/17549507.2012.726276
Wiig, E. H., & Secord, W. (1989). Test of Language 
Competence — Expanded edition. San Antonio, 
TX: Pearson.
Wiig, E. H., & Semel, E. M. (1974). Development 
of comprehension of logico-grammatical  
sentences by grade school children. Percep-
tual and Motor Skills, 16, 627–636. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.2466/pms.1974.38.1.171
Wiig, E. H., Nielson, N. P., Minthon, L., & 
Warkentin, S. (2003). Alzheimer’s Quick Test: 
Assessment of parietal function. Svensk Ver-
sion & Norsk Versjon. Stockholm, Sweden: 
Psykologiførlaget.

668   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Wilcox, M. J., Davis, G. A., & Leonard, L. B. 
(1978). Aphasics’ comprehension of con-
textually conveyed meaning. Brain and 
Language, 6(3), 362–377. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1016/0093-934X(78)90069-X
Williams, K., Kemper, S., & Hummert, M. L. 
(2003). Improving nursing home commu-
nication: An intervention to reduce elder-
speak. The Gerontologist, 43(2), 242–247. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/geront/43.2.242
Williams, K., Kemper, S., & Hummert, M. L. 
(2005). Enhancing communication with 
older adults: Overcoming elderspeak. Jour-
nal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental Health 
Services, 43(5), 12–16. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.3928/0098-9134-20041001-08
Williams, K. T. (1997). Expressive Vocabulary 
Test–Second edition (EVT 2). Journal of the 
American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psy-
chiatry, 42, 864–872.
Wilshire, C. E., Lukkien, C. C., & Burmester, B. 
R. (2014). The sentence production test for 
aphasia. Aphasiology, 28(6), 658–691. http://
dx.doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/026
87038.2014.893555
Wilson, B., Cockburn, J., & Halligan, P. 
(1987a). Behavioral Inattention Test. Bury St. 
Edmunds, UK: Thames Valley Test Co.
Wilson, B., Cockburn, J., & Halligan, P. (1987b). 
Development of a behavioral test of visuo-
spatial neglect. Archives of Physical Medicine 
and Rehabilitation, 68(2), 98–102.
Wilson, B., Evans, J. J., Emslie, H., Foley, J., 
Shiel, A., Watson, P., . . . Groot, Y. (2005). 
Cambridge Prospective Memory Test. London, 
UK: Pearson.
Wilson, B. A., Alderman, N., Burgess, P. W., 
Emslie, H., & Evans, J. J. (1996). The behav-
ioural assessment of the dysexecutive syndrome. 
Bury St. Edmunds, UK: Thames Valley Co.
Wilson, B. A., Baddeley, A. D., & Cockburn, J. 
(2008). Rivermead Behavioural Memory Test–
Third Edition (RBMT-3). San Antonio, TX: 
Pearson.
Wilson, L., Onslow, M., & Lincoln, M. (2004). 
Telehealth adaptation of the Lidcombe pro-
gram of early stuttering intervention: Five 
case studies. American Journal of Speech- 
Language Pathology, 13, 81–92. http://dx.doi 
.org/10.1044/1058-0360(2004/009)
Winans-Mitrik, R. L., Hula, W. D., Dickey, M. 
W., Schumacher, J. G., Swoyer, B., & Doyle, 
P. J. (2014). Description of an intensive resi-
dential aphasia treatment program: Ratio-
nale, clinical processes, and outcomes. 
American Journal of Speech-Language Pathol-
ogy, 23(2), S330–S342. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1044/2014_AJSLP-13-0102
Winblad, B., Palmer, K., Kivipelto, M., Jelic, V., 
Fratiglioni, L., Wahlund, L.-O., . . . Petersen, 
R. C. (2004). Mild cognitive impairment — ​
Beyond controversies, towards a consen-
sus: Report of the International Working 
Group on mild cognitive impairment. Jour-
nal of Internal Medicine, 256(3), 240–246. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2796.2004​
.01380.x
Wingfield, A., Tun, P. A., & McCoy, S. L. (2005). 
Hearing loss in older adulthood. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 14(3), 
144–148. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.0963-
7214.2005.00356.x
Winhuisen, L., Thiel, A., Schumacher, B., Kes-
sler, J., Rudolf, J., Haupt, W. F., & Heiss, W. 
D. (2005). Role of the contralateral inferior 
frontal gyrus in recovery of language func-
tion in poststroke aphasia: A combined 
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation 
and positron emission tomography study. 
Stroke: A Journal of Cerebral Circulation, 36(8), 
1759–1763. http://dx.doi.org/10.1161/01​
.STR.0000174487.81126.ef
Wiseman-Hakes, C., MacDonald, S., & Keight-
ley, M. (2010). Perspectives on evidence 
based practice in ABI rehabilitation. “Rel-
evant research”: Who decides? NeuroReha-
bilitation, 26(4), 355–368.
Wolfe, E. W., & Smith, E. V. (2007). Instrument 
development tools and activities for mea-
sure validation using Rasch models: Part 
I. Instrument development tools. Journal of 
Applied Measurement, 8(1), 97–123.
Woodcock, R. W., McGregor, K., & Mather, 
N. (2007). Woodcock Johnson III Normative 
Update (NU) Tests of Cognitive Abilities (WJIII 
NU). Rolling Meadows, IL: Riverside.

References   669
Woolgar, A., Hampshire, A., Thompson, R., 
& Duncan, J. (2011). Adaptive coding of 
task-relevant information in human fronto-
parietal cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience: 
The Official Journal of the Society for Neuro-
science, 31(41), 14592–14599. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2616-11.2011
Working Group on Cognitive-Communication 
Disorders. (2005). Roles of speech-language 
pathologists in the identification, diagnosis, 
and treatment of individuals with cognitive-
communication disorders: Position statement. 
Retrieved from http://www.asha.org/pol​
icy/PS2005-00110/
World Health Organization. (n.d.-a). WHO 
capacity building. Retrieved from http://
www.who.int/disabilities/capacity_build​
ing/en/
World Health Organization. (n.d.-b). WHO 
community-based rehabilitation (CBR). Re- 
trieved from http://www.who.int/disabili​
ties/cbr/en/
World Health Organization. (1980). Interna-
tional Classification of Impairments, Disabili-
ties, and Handicaps: A manual of classification 
relating to the consequences of disease. Geneva, 
Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (1999). ICIDH-2 
International Classification of Functioning and 
Disability: Beta-2 draft, full version, July 1999. 
Geneva, Switzerland: Assessment, Classifi-
cation, and Epidemiology. Retrieved from 
http://www.sustainable-design.ie/arch/
Beta2full.pdf
World Health Organization. (2001). International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and 
Health (ICF). Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (2004). The Mexico 
statement on health research. Knowledge for 
better health: Strengthening health systems. 
Geneva, Switzerland: Author.
World Health Organization. (2006). Constitu-
tion of the World Health Organization. Re- 
trieved from http://www.who.int/gover​
nance/eb/who_constitution_en.pdf
World Health Organization. (2010). Framework 
for action on interprofessional education and 
collaborative practice. Geneva, Switzerland: 
Author. Retrieved from http://whqlibdoc​
.who.int/hq/2010/WHO_HRH_HPN_​
10.3_eng.pdf
World Health Organization & World Bank. 
(2011). World report on disability (No. ISBN-
13 9789241564182). Geneva, Switzerland: 
World Health Organization.
Worrall, L. (1992). Everyday Communication 
Needs Assessment. Brisbane, Australia: Uni-
versity of Queensland.
Worrall, L. (1999). FCTP: Functional Communi-
cation Therapy Planner. Bicester, UK: Speech-
mark.
Worrall, L. (2006). Professionalism and func-
tional outcomes. Journal of Communication 
Disorders, 39(4), 320–327. http://dx.doi​.org/​ 
10.1016/j.jcomdis.2006.02.007
Worrall, L., Brown, K., Cruice, M., Davidson, 
B., Hersh, D., Howe, T., & Sherratt, S. (2010). 
The evidence for a life-coaching approach to 
aphasia. Aphasiology, 24(4), 497–514. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030802698152
Worrall, L., Rose, T., Howe, T., McKenna, K., & 
Hickson, L. (2007). Developing an evidence- 
base for accessibility for people with apha-
sia. Aphasiology, 21(1), 124–136. http://dx​
.doi​.org/10.1080/02687030600798352
Worrall, L., Sherratt, S., Rogers, P., Howe, T., 
Hersh, D., Ferguson, A., & Davidson, B. 
(2011). What people with aphasia want: 
Their goals according to the ICF. Aphasiol-
ogy, 25(3), 309–322. http://dx.doi.org/10​
.1080/02687038.2010.508530
Wright, H. H., & Capilouto, G. J. (2009). 
Manipulating task instructions to change 
narrative discourse performance. Aphasiol-
ogy, 23(10), 1295–1308. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1080/02687030902826844
Wright, H. H., Capilouto, G. J., Srinivasan, C., & 
Fergadiotis, G. (2011). Story processing abil-
ity in cognitively healthy younger and older 
adults. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hear-
ing Research, 54(3), 900–917. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2010/09-0253)
Wright, H. H., Capilouto, G., Wagovich, S., 
Cranfill, T., & Davis, J. (2005). Development 
and reliability of a quantitative measure 
of adults’ narratives. Aphasiology, 19(3–5), 

670   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
263–273. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0268​7​
030444000732
Wright, H. H., Marshall, R. C., Wilson, K. B., 
& Page, J. L. (2008). Using a written cue-
ing hierarchy to improve verbal naming in 
aphasia. Aphasiology, 22(5), 522–536. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/02687030701487905
Wright, H. H., & Shisler, R. J. (2005). Work-
ing memory in aphasia: Theory, measures, 
and clinical implications. American Journal 
of Speech-Language Pathology, 14(2), 107–
118. http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/1058-0360​
(2005/012)
Wylie, K., McAllister, L., Davidson, B., & Mar-
shall, J. (2013). Changing practice: Implica-
tions of the World Report on Disability for 
responding to communication disability 
in underserved populations. International 
Journal of Speech-Language Pathology, 15(1), 
1–13. http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/17549507​
.2012.745164
Xiao, Y., Wang, J., Jiang, S., & Luo, H. (2012). 
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for vascular 
dementia. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews, 7, 1–21. http://dx.doi.org/10​.10​
02/14651858.CD009425.pub2
Xing, S., Zhu, C., Zhang, R., & An, L. (2014). 
Huperzine A in the treatment of Alzheim-
er’s disease and vascular dementia: A meta-
analysis. Evidence-Based Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine, 363985. Retrieved from 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2014/363985
Xu, S. S., Gao, Z. X., Weng, Z., Du, Z. M., & Xu, 
W. A. (1995). Efficacy of tablet huperzine-
A on memory, cognition, and behavior in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Pharmacologica 
Sinica, 16(5), 391–395.
Xydakis, M. S., Fravell, M. D., Nasser, K. E., 
& Casler, J. D. (2005). Analysis of battle-
field head and neck injuries in Iraq and 
Afghanistan. Otolaryngology–Head and Neck 
Surgery, 133(4), 497–504. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1016/j.otohns.2005.07.003
Ylvisaker, M. (1992). Communication outcome 
following traumatic brain injury. Seminars 
in Speech and Language, 13, 239–251. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-2008-1064200
Ylvisaker, M. (1998). Traumatic brain injury 
rehabilitation: Children and adolescents (Vol. 
14, 2nd ed.). Woburn, MA: Butterworth-
Heinemann.
Ylvisaker, M. (2006). Self-coaching: A context-
sensitive, person-centred approach to social 
communication after traumatic brain injury. 
Brain Impairment, 7(3), 246–258. http://dx​
.doi.org/10.1375/brim.7.3.246
Ylvisaker, M., & Feeney, T. (2009). Apprentice-
ship in self-regulation: Supports and inter-
ventions for individuals with self-regulatory 
impairments. Developmental Neurorehabilita-
tion, 12(5), 370–379. http://dx.doi.org/10.31​
09/17518420903087533
Ylvisaker, M., Shaughnessy, M. F., & Great-
house, D. (2002). An interview with Mark 
Ylvisaker about students with traumatic 
brain injury. North American Journal of Psy-
chology, 4(4), 291.
Ylvisaker, M., Turkstra, L. S., & Coelho, C. 
(2005). Behavioral and social interventions 
for individuals with traumatic brain injury: 
A summary of the research with clinical 
implications. Seminars in Speech and Lan-
guage, 26(4), 256–267. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1055/s-2005-922104
Ylvisaker, M., Turkstra, L. S., Coehlo, C., 
Yorkston, K., Kennedy, M., Sohlberg, M. 
M., & Avery, J. (2007). Behavioural inter-
ventions for children and adults with 
behaviour disorders after TBI: A systematic 
review of the evidence. Brain Injury, 21(8), 
769–805. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/​0269​
9050701482470
Yorkston, K. M., & Beukelman, D. R. (1980). 
An analysis of connected speech samples 
of aphasic and normal speakers. Journal of 
Speech and Hearing Disorders, 45(1), 27–36. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1044/jshd.4501.27
Yorkston, K. M., & Beukelman, D. R. (1984). 
Assessment of intelligibility of dysarthric 
speech. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed.
Youmans, G., Holland, A., Muñoz, M., & Bour-
geois, M. (2005). Script training and auto-
maticity in two individuals with aphasia. 
Aphasiology, 19(3–5), 435–450. http://dx.doi​
.org/10.1080/02687030444000877
Ystad, M. A., Wehling, E., Rootwelt, H., 
Espeseth, T., Westlye, L. T., Andersson, 
M., . . . Lundervold, A. (2009). Hippocam-

References   671
pal volumes are important predictors for 
memory function in elderly women. BMC 
Medical Imaging, 9, 1–15. http://dx.doi.org/​
10.1186/1471-2342-9-17
Yue, J., Dong, B. R., Lin, X., Yang, M., Wu, H. 
M., & Wu, T. (2012). Huperzine A for mild 
cognitive impairment. Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews. Retrieved from http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/​1465​
1858.CD008827.pub2/abstract
Zacks, R. T., & Hasher, L. (1993). Capacity 
theory and the processing of inferences. In 
L. L. Light & D. M. Burke (Eds.), Language, 
memory, and aging (pp. 154–170). New York, 
NY: Cambridge University Press.
Zhang, Z., Wang, X., Chen, Q., Shu, L., Wang, J., 
& Shan, G. (2002). Clinical efficacy and safety 
of huperzine Alpha in treatment of mild to 
moderate Alzheimer disease, a placebo-
controlled, double-blind, randomized trial. 
Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi, 82(14), 941–944.
Zhang, Z. J. (1989). Efficacy of acupuncture in 
the treatment of post-stroke aphasia. Journal 
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 9(2), 87–89.
Zientz, J., Rackley, A., Chapman, S. B., Hop-
per, T., Mahendra, N., Kim, E. S., & Cleary, 
S. (2007). Evidence-based practice recom-
mendations for dementia: Educating care-
givers on Alzheimer’s disease and training 
communication strategies. Journal of Medical 
Speech-Language Pathology, 15(1), liii–lxiv.
Zigmond, A. S., & Snaith, R. P. (1983). Hospital 
anxiety and depression scale. Acta Psychiat-
rica Scandinavia, 6, 361–370.
Zraick, R. I., Allen, R. M., & Johnson, S. B. 
(2003). The use of standardized patients 
to teach and test interpersonal and com-
munication skills with students in speech-
language pathology. Advances in Health 
Sciences Education: Theory and Practice, 8(3), 
237–248. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1026​
015430376
Zraick, R. I., Harten, A. C., & Hagstrom, F. 
(2014). Interprofessional education and 
practice: A primer for training future clini-
cians. SIG, 10 Perspectives on Issues in Higher 
Education, 17, 39–46. http://dx.doi.org/​10​
.1044/aihe17.2.39


673
Index
A
AAC. see Augmentative and alternative 
communication
AAC TechConnect, 456
AAPPSPA. see American Academy of 
Private Practice in Speech Pathology 
and Audiology
AASP. see Acute Aphasia Screening Protocol
Abbreviations, 395, 396–403
ABCD. see Arizona Battery for 
Communication Disorders of 
Dementia
AbilityNet, 456
Ablenet, 456
Abstract attitude, 55
Abstraction, 55
Academic of Neurologic Communication 
Disorders and Sciences, 419
Academic programs, 251–252
Academy of Aphasia, 6, 31
Academy of Neurologic Communication 
Disorders and Sciences (ANCDS), 
27–28, 31, 340, 469
Acalculia, 141, 289
Acceleration-deceleration injury, 74, 75, 571
Access to services
how to promote, 234–241, 236
infrastructure factors, 252, 252
ACE. see Addenbrooke’s Cognitive 
Examination
ACESA. see Assessment of Communicative 
Effectiveness in Severe Aphasia
Achromatopsia, 98, 571
ACOM. see Aphasia Communication 
Outcome Measure
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome 
(AIDS)
AIDS dementia complex, 198, 571
HIV/AIDS, 80, 581
HIV/AIDS-associated dementia, 198
HIV/AIDS-associated encephalopathy, 
198
HIV-associated mild neurocognitive 
disorder, 198
Acquired neurogenic language disorders, 
3–14
advocacy for people with, 241–242
aspects of life that improve with, 485
disciplinary areas relevant to, 8, 9
etiologies, 67–86
foundations, 41–149
incidence of, 8–10
key challenges, 253–254
key neurophysiological principles, 88–93
neurophysiology of, 87–115
prevalence of, 8–10
prognostic factors, 97
screening for, 290–293
tools for, 340, 361–370
ACT. see Anagram and Copy Treatment; 
Aphasia Couples Therapy
Action Naming Test (ANT), 332, 345
Activity, 61, 571
Activity limitations, 571
Acupuncture, 497
Note:  Page numbers for color figures are preceded by CF. Page numbers in bold reference 
non-text material.

674   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Acute Aphasia Screening Protocol (AASP), 
341
Acute confusional state, 198
AD. see Alzheimer’s disease
Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination–
Revised (ACE-R), 358
Adderall, 427
Additive conjunctives, 571
Adjunct or adjuvant approaches, 491, 571
ADP. see Aphasia Diagnostic Profiles
Adult daycare centers, 216, 571
Adult development, 134
Adult learning theory, x
Advance directives, 244, 571
Advocacy, 7, 235–247
for reduced medicalization of 
communication disabilities, 239–240
roles and responsibilities, 212
A-FROM. see Living with Aphasia. 
Framework for Outcome 
Measurement
Age
biological, 133, 573
chronological, 574
cognitive, 134, 575
and language assessment, 300–301
psychological, 134, 588
social, 134, 589
Ageism, 146
Agents, 571
Age-related identity threat, 137–138, 571
Aging, 133–134
biopsychosocial models of, 134, 573
cultural aspects of, 252–253
demographics of, 135, 251
key theories, 134–135
motivational theory of life-span 
development model, 134–135, 585
normal changes of, 134–145, 141–142
positive aspects of, 136–137
primary, 587
secondary, 589
stages of, 134
Agnosia
aperceptive, 108, 572
associative, 109, 572
auditory, 188, 573
auditory sound, 573
auditory verbal, 573
definition of, 571
visual, 108–109, 308–309, 593
visual object, 593
A-GOAT. see Galveston Orientation and 
Amnesia Test for Aphasia
Agrammatic PPA, 205
Agrammatism, 162–163, 571
AIA. see Association Internationale 
d’Aphasie
AIDS. see Assessment of the Intelligibility 
of Dysarthric Speech
AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome)
HIV/AIDS, 80, 581
HIV/AIDS-associated dementia, 198
HIV/AIDS-associated encephalopathy, 198
HIV-associated mild neurocognitive 
disorder, 198
AIDS dementia complex, 198, 571
ALA. see Assessment for Living with 
Aphasia
Alarcon, Nancy, 411
Albert test, 306–307, 583. see also Line 
cancellation task
Alertness, 315–316, 571
Alexia, 4
ALFA. see Assessment of Language-Related 
Functional Activities
Allen chart, 303–304
Allocentric neglect, 571
Allopathic approaches, 491, 571
ALPS. see Aphasia Language Performance 
Scales
Alternative approaches, 491, 500
caution with, 500–502
evidence base for, 496–499
research studies on, 497–499
Alzheimer’s Association, 487
Alzheimer’s disease, 195–196, 240, 571–572, 
CF9
MCI due to, 195–196, 584
Alzheimer’s Disease Education and 
Referral Center, 487
Alzheimer’s Disease International, 487
Alzheimer’s Quick Test (AQT), 343
American Academy of Neurology, 417
American Academy of Private Practice 
in Speech Pathology and Audiology 
(AAPPSPA), 215

Index   675
American Brain Tumor Association, 487
American Heart Association (AHA), 73–74
American Psychiatric Association (APA), 
194, 321
American Speech-Language-Hearing 
Association (ASHA), 25, 31, 255
Compendium of EBP Guidelines and 
Systematic Reviews, 419
Functional Assessment of 
Communication Skills for Adults 
(FACS), 329, 330, 345
National Outcomes Measurement 
System (NOMS), 330–331
American Stroke Association, 73–74, 487
Amphetamines, 427
Amsterdam Nijmegen Everyday Language 
Test (ANELT), 334, 345, 378
Amusia, 188, 572
Anagram and Copy Treatment (ACT), 565, 
572
evidence for, 565–566
principles of, 565
steps for carrying out, 565
Anagrams, 572
Anastomosis, 94, 572
Anatomy
associated with visual deficits, 99–104
neuroanatomy, 88
ANELT. see Amsterdam Nijmegen 
Everyday Language Test
Aneurysms, 68, 572
ruptured, 69, CF2
Angiography
cerebral, 126–127, 127, 574
computed tomography (CT), 126
magnetic resonance (MRA), 126, 584
Angioplasty, 73, 572
Angular injury, 75. see also Rotational injury
Annual deductibles, 222, 572
Anomia, 39. see also Dysnomia
cueing hierarchy approaches to, 535–536, 
577
Anomic aphasia, 159, 166, 572
Anosognosia, 187–188, 572
ANT. see Action Naming Test
Anterior lesions, 155
Antioxidants, 428, 572
Anxiety, 323
AoS. see Apraxia, of speech
Aperceptive agnosia, 108
Aphasia, 4, 43–58
as acquired, 44
anomic, 159, 166, 572
assessment tools for, 340, 345–352
associated lesions, 157–159
biopsychosocial frameworks for, 53–54
Broca’s, 49, 157, 162–164, 574
child, 5
classification of, 153–154, 167–169
cognitive neuropsychological 
frameworks for, 50–53
cognitive symptoms of, 47
complementary and alternative 
interventions for, 497
concrete-abstract framework for, 55
conduction, 157, 165, 576
crossed, 159, 166–167, 577
definition of, 4, 38–39, 43–46, 46–48, 
47–48, 572
as dissociation syndrome, 160
effects on language, 44–45
expressive, 45, 154–155, 580, 586
fluent, 154, 156, 377, 580, CF12
frameworks for, 48–56, 56–57
global, 158, 164–165, 581
global aspects, 249–256
hallmark features of, 153–170, 157–159
historically relevant frameworks for, 55
jargon, 583
as language disorder, 45–46
life-affecting impacts of, 441
medical framework for, 50
microgenetic framework for, 56
mixed transcortical, 158, 166, 585
multidimensional frameworks for, 49–50
neurolinguistic definitions of, 47, 50–53
as neurological, 44
nonfluent, 154, 156, 377, 580, 586, CF12
optic, 109, 586
primary progressive, 159, 166, 194, 
204–205, 206, 587, CF9
propositional language framework for, 
55
psycholinguistic frameworks for, 50–53
receptive, 45, 154–155, 588
referring to people with, 34
social frameworks for, 54–55
subcortical, 159, 167, 591

676   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Aphasia  (continued)
subtypes of, 153–154, 155–160, 157–159
sudden onset of, 478–479
supporting the rights of individuals 
with, 242–243
syndromes of, 153–170
thought process framework for, 56
transcortical motor, 158, 165, 592
transcortical sensory, 158, 165, 592
unidimensional frameworks for, 49
Wernicke’s, 49, 92, 157, 160–162, 594
Aphasia Access, 31, 412, 487
Aphasia Alliance, 487
Aphasia and Stroke Association of India, 
487
AphasiaBank, 381
Aphasia Center of California, 487
Aphasia centers, 10, 216–217, 457
Aphasia Communication Outcome 
Measure (ACOM), 331, 345
Aphasia Corner, 487
Aphasia Couples Therapy (ACT), 445, 572
Aphasia Diagnostic Profiles (ADP), 329, 
336, 345
Aphasia-friendly communication, 414–415
Aphasia Help, 487
Aphasia Hope Foundation, 487
Aphasia Institute, 487
Aphasia Language Performance Scales 
(ALPS), 341
Aphasia mentoring programs, 446, 572
Aphasia Network, 487
Aphasia New Zealand Charitable Trust, 
487
Aphasia Now, 487
Aphasia Recovery Connection, 487
Aphasia Screening Test (AST), 341, 342
AphasiaScripts, 455
Aphasia Software Finder (ASF), 456
Aphasia Toolbox, 456, 487, 489
Aphasia United, 254, 418
Aphasiologists, 6, 8, 10, 572
career outlook for, 10–12
credentials for, 25–27, 27–28
preferred terms for, 37
Aphasiology, 6, 8, 572
Aphasiology, 6
Apps, 455–456
Apraxia
bucco-facial, 517
constructional, 309, 576
ideational, 312, 581
ideomotor, 312, 582
limb, 312–313, 583
of speech (AoS), 5–6, 45, 311, 572
APT. see Attention Process Training
AQT. see Alzheimer’s Quick Test
Argentina, 25
Argument structure, 552, 572
Aricept (donepezil), 427
Arizona Battery for Communication 
Disorders of Dementia (ABCD), 358
Arousal, 315–316, 572
Arteriography, 126–127. see also 
Angiography
Arteriosclerosis, 69–70. see also 
Atherosclerosis
Arteriovenous malformations, 68, 572
ASF. see Aphasia Software Finder
ASHA. see American Speech-Language-
Hearing Association
Asia, 135
Asocicion Ayuda Afasia, 487
Assessment(s), 257–404, 259–260, 260–261
best conditions for, 264
best practices for, 19, 261–275, 275
as collaborative, 267
comprehensive, 293–294
confounding factors, 281–282, 300–324
context factors, 282
conversational analysis, 375–377
with criterion-referenced measures, 
274–275
discourse analysis, 375, 376–377
documentation of results, 391–404
dynamic, 268, 271–274, 578
interpersonal factors, 282
as intervention, 259, 408
language assessment, 300–324
as ongoing, 408
person-based, 262
process analysis approach to, 270, 324, 
324–326, 325
psychometric aspects of, 279–298
purpose of, 260, 263–264, 328–331
as research process, 270–271, 272

Index   677
roles and responsibilities, 212
setting for, 264
standardized, 268, 271–274, 331–332,  
590
strengths-based, 263
test design factors, 282, 283–289
timing of, 264
Assessment for Living with Aphasia 
(ALA), 329, 331, 346
Assessment instruments
with alternative response modes, 333
available tools, 337–340, 341–370
critical factors, 327
evaluation of, 333–334, 337
instructions, 336
with parallel forms, 334
quality of, 333–334
review form for, 337–339
scoring systems, 336–337
selection of, 327–337
training to administer and score, 336
up to date, 334
Assessment of Communicative 
Effectiveness in Severe Aphasia 
(ACESA), 345
Assessment of Language-Related 
Functional Activities (ALFA), 346
Assessment of the Intelligibility of 
Dysarthric Speech (AIDS), 361
Assessment Protocol of Pragmatic Skills, 
378
Assessment reports, 394–395
Assessment results, 336
best practices for reporting, 393–394
best practices for sharing, 391–392
counseling related to, 479
cultural impacts on, 268–269
stroke survivor’s account, 393
Association Internationale d’Aphasie 
(AIA), 31, 255
Associative agnosia, 109, 572
AST. see Aphasia Screening Test
Astrocytoma, 81, 572
Ataxia, 313–314, 572
Atherosclerosis, 69–70, 573
Athetosis, 314, 573
Attention, focused, 580
Attention deficits, 316–318
assessment tools for, 361, 362, 363, 365, 
368, 369
associated with MCI and dementia, 200
associated with right brain injury, 183, 
187–188
divided attention, 578
test design factors, 282, 288
treatment of, 431
visual, 593
Attention Process Training (APT), 449, 573
Attention Process Training Test (APT-Test), 
353
Attention switching, 573
Attitude, 55, 500
Auditory agnosia, 188, 573
Auditory linguistic processing, 109, 110
Auditory-perceptual impairments
associated with right brain injury, 183, 
188
test design factors, 282, 283
Auditory sound agnosia, 573
Auditory system, 109, 110
Auditory verbal agnosia, 573
Augmentative and alternative 
communication (AAC), 444–445
apps and software, 455–456
devices, 333
AusTOM. see Australian Therapy Outcome 
Measure
Australia, 26, 36–37, 220–221
Australian Aphasia Association, 31, 487
Australian Therapy Outcome Measure 
(AusTOM), 329
Autobiographical memory, 137, 573
Automatic speech, 282, 285
Autopagnosia, 308–309, 573
AVMs. see Arteriovenous malformations
Awareness, 315–316
enhancement of, 236–237
lack of, 318–319
means of indexing, 318
metalinguistic, 553–554
public, 236–237, 237–239, 495
raising public awareness, 236–237, 
237–239
research studies on, 498
self-awareness, 318–319
Ayurvedic medicine, 492

678   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
B
Back to the Drawing Board (BDB) program, 
514, 573
activities for, 515
evidence for, 515
implementation of, 514–515
principles of, 514
Bacterial infections, 79–80, 573
BADS. see Behavioral Assessment of 
Dysexecutive Syndrome
Ballismus, 314, 573
Balloons test (BT), 361
Barkley Deficits in Executive Functioning 
Scale (BDEFS), 361
BASA. see Boston Assessment of Severe 
Aphasia
Basal rule. see Floor rule
BASDEC. see Brief Assessment Schedule 
Depression Cards
BBICC. see Burns Brief Inventory of 
Communication and Cognition
BC-ANCDS. see Board certification in adult 
neurogenic communication disorders 
and sciences
BCS. see Birmingham Cognitive Screen
BDAE-3. see Boston Diagnostic Aphasia 
Examination–3
Bedside Evaluation Screening Test, 2nd 
Edition (BEST-2), 341
Behavioral Assessment of Dysexecutive 
Syndrome (BADS), 319, 353
Behavioral challenges, 415–419
with people who have dementia, 202
with TBI survivors, 174
Behavioral Inattention Test (BIT), 308, 361
Behavioral treatment, 425–426
Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive 
Function–Adult Version (BRIEF-A), 361
Beneficence, 242, 573
Benton Visual Retention Test, 5th Edition 
(BVRT-5), 361
BEST-2. see Bedside Evaluation Screening 
Test, 2nd Edition
Best practices
for assessment, 19, 261–275, 275
for interpreting discourse analysis 
results, 385–387
for intervention, 19, 407–422, 416
for judgments about prognosis, 392–393
for reporting assessment results, 393–394
for responding to misguided statements, 
480–482
for sharing results, 391–392
for treatment, 407–415
Better Conversations with Aphasia: A 
Learning Resource, 487
Beukelman, David, 412
Bilateral quadrantopsia, 105, 107, 573
Bilingual Verbal Ability Tests (BVAT), 362
Billing, 212
Binocular visual fields, 101, 101, 573, CF6
Biofeedback, 497, 499
Biological age, 133, 573
Biopsy, 81, 573
Biopsychosocial frameworks, 53–54, 573
Biopsychosocial models of aging, 134, 573
Birmingham Cognitive Screen (BCS), 343
BIT. see Behavioral Inattention Test
Bitemporal (heteronymous) hemianopsia, 
105, 106, 573
Blast injury, 76–78, 175, 573
Blindness, monocular, 104, 104
Blood oxygen-level dependent (BOLD) 
effect, 123, 573
Blood supply, 91, 93–96, 95, 96, CF4
Bloom’s Taxonomy, x
BNT. see Boston Naming Test
BNVR. see Butt Nonverbal Reasoning Test
Board certification in adult neurogenic 
communication disorders and sciences 
(BC-ANCDS), 27
Body awareness, 498
Body functions, 61, 573
Body structures, 61, 573
BOLD effect. see Blood oxygen-level 
dependent effect
BOSS. see Burden of Stroke Scale
Boston Assessment of Severe Aphasia 
(BASA), 346
Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination–3 
(BDAE-3), 329, 335, 336, 346
Boston Group Classification, 155
Boston Naming Test (BNT), 332, 347
Bradykinesia, 313–314, 573
Brain
aging, 135–136, 136–137
blood supply, 91, 93–96, 95, 96, CF4

Index   679
factors that promote health, 145, 145–146
functional areas of, 88, 89, 90, CF3
hemispheric lobes of, 90
improvements due to changes in, 485, 486
interconnectivity throughout, 92
plasticity of, 92–93
right brain structure-function 
relationships, 190
structural changes over time, 135–136
views of, 90
Brain attack, 68, 574
Brain damage (term), 38
Brain injury
communication needs after, 429–430
consciousness conditions after, 315, 315
focal, 75–76, 580
initial treatment after, 429–431
prognostic factors, 96–98, 97
recovery mechanisms, 424–425
right brain injury, 181, 182–183
traumatic (TBI), 74–76, 75, 76, 171–180, 
592
Brain Injury Association, 31
Brain Injury Association of America, 487
Brain Injury Research Program (Chicago, 
Illlinois), 11
Brainstem, 90–91
Brain Trauma Foundation, 487
Brain tumors, 81
Brazil, 25
The Breakfast Club, 467–468, 468, 574
Breathing therapy, 498
BRIEF. see Behavior Rating Inventory of 
Executive Function
Brief Assessment Schedule Depression 
Cards (BASDEC), 322
Brief Test of Attention (BTA), 362
Brief Test of Head Injury (BTHI), 353
British Aphasiology Society, 31, 487
Broca’s aphasia, 49, 162–164, 574
associated lesions, 157, 162
hallmark features of, 157, 162
speech sample, 164
Broca’s area, 88, 89, CF3
Brodmann’s areas, 88, 89, 103, CF3
BT. see Balloons test
BTA. see Brief Test of Attention
BTHI. see Brief Test of Head Injury
Bucco-facial apraxia, 517
Bumper stickers, 45, 46, CF1
Bungalow Software, 457
Burden of Stroke Scale (BOSS), 362
Burns Brief Inventory of Cognition and 
Communication (Burns Inventory), 362
Burns Brief Inventory of Communication 
and Cognition: Right Hemisphere 
Inventory (BBICC-RHI), 357
Butt Nonverbal Reasoning Test (BNVR), 347
BVAT. see Bilingual Verbal Ability Tests
BVRT. see Benton Visual Retention Test
Byng, Sally, 411
Byrne, Kerry, 412
C
CADL-2. see Communicative Activities of 
Daily Living–Second Edition
CAIAC. see Cognitive Approach to 
Improving Auditory Comprehension
Calcarine fissure, 102–103, 574
Calculation, 282, 289
California Verbal Learning Test–Second 
Edition (CVLT-II), 362
Cambridge Prospective Memory Test 
(CAMPROMPT), 363
Canada, 26, 37
Canadian Stroke Network (Stroke Engine-
Assess), 340
Canonical sentences, 552, 574
Capacity, 61, 574
Capitation, 223, 574
CAPM. see Comprehensive Assessment of 
Prospective Memory
Career development
opportunities for specialized career 
growth, 28–29
strategies that help boost, 29, 30
Career opportunities, 8
Career outlook, 10–12
Career settings, 10
Caregivers, 408–409, 445, 468–469
Case-based decision making, 408
Case history, 294–296, 295
Case rate, 223, 574
CAT. see Coding Analysis Toolkit; 
Comprehensive Aphasia Test; 
Computerized axial tomography (CAT 
or CT)

680   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Cataracts, 104, 574
Catastrophic reaction, 164, 574
CATE. see Complexity account of treatment 
efficacy
Causal conjunctives, 574
CBR. see Community-based rehabilitation
CCRCs. see Continuing care retirement 
communities
CCRSA. see Communication Confidence 
Rating Scale for Aphasia
CDP. see Communication Disability Profile; 
Communicative Drawing Program
Ceiling rule, 271, 574
Center for Aphasia Research and 
Treatment (Chicago, Illlinois), 11
Center for Rehabilitation Outcomes 
Research (Chicago, Illlinois), 11
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS), 329
Central nervous system (CNS), 90
Centre de Neuroscience Cognitive, 11
Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique, 11
Cerebral angiography, 126–127, 127, 574
Cerebral arteries, 94–96, 96, CF4
Cerebral blood flow, regional (rCBF), 123
Cerebrovascular accident, 67–68, 574
Cerebrovascular disease, ischemic, 196
Certification, 25–26, 27, 28–29
CETI. see Communicative Effectiveness 
Index
Chapey, Roberta, 411
CHAT (software program), 381
CHI. see Closed-head injury
Child aphasia, 5
China Rehabilitation Research Center, 11
Chinese medicine, 492
Choice, 243
free, 508
Chorea, 314, 574
Chronological age, 574
CIAT. see Constraint-induced aphasia 
therapy
CILT. see Constraint-induced language 
therapy
Circle of Willis, 94, 95, 127, 574, CF4
Circumlocution, 163–164, 574
CIT. see Constraint-induced therapy
CIU analysis. see Correct information unit 
analysis
CLAN (software program), 381
CLAS in Health Care. see National 
Standards for Culturally and 
Linguistically Appropriate Services in 
Health Care
Clinical aphasiologists, 8, 15–31, 17–18
ICF relevance to, 63–64
research centers or institutes that 
employ, 10, 11
teams, 218–220
Clinical aphasiology, 6, 249–256
Clinical Aphasiology Conference, 6, 31
Clinical doctorates, 27
Clinical linguists, 25
Clinical practice, 3–14
Clinical reporting, 395, 396–403
Clinical Research Center (NIH), 11
Clinical services, 228–229, 229–232
Clinicians, 15–31, 24
features consumers want, 23
as vehicles, 20–23, 22, CF1
Clinics
not-for-profit, 215
private practice, 215
university-based, 215–216
Clock drawing task, 307, 307
Closed-class words, 163, 574
Closed-head injury, 74, 574
Cloze sentence or phrase, 574
CLQT. see Cognitive Linguistic Quick Test
CMP. see Code-Müller Protocols
CMS. see Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services
Coaching
best practices for, 480–482
conversational, 445, 576
life coaching, 471–490, 583
from positive psychology framework, 
476
for self-advocacy, 480
self-coaching, 410
wellness coaching, 473, 583
Cochrane Collaboration, 418, 575
Cochrane Libraries, 418
Code-Müller Protocols (CMP), 347
Codeswitching, 186, 575

Index   681
Coding Analysis Toolkit (CAT), 380
Cognistat, 343
Cognitive age, 134, 575
Cognitive Approach to Improving 
Auditory Comprehension (CAIAC), 
450
Cognitive-communicative impairments
associated with dementia, 193–207
associated with MCI, 194–195
associated with neurodegenerative 
conditions, 193–207
associated with right brain injury, 
182–183
associated with right hemisphere 
syndrome, 181–192
associated with traumatic brain injury, 
171–180
Cognitive development, 134, 583
Cognitive effort, 575
Cognitive impairment
first-in/last-out model of, 467, 580
MCI (mild cognitive impairment), 84, 
194–195, 199–201, 200, 204, 585, CF9
MCI due to Alzheimer’s disease, 
195–196, 584
Cognitive-linguistic ability
general approaches for enhancing, 
439–458
normal changes associated with aging, 
137–140, 143–145
Cognitive-linguistic disorders
acquired, 3–5, 88–93
associated with diabetes mellitus, 82–83, 
83
associated with TBI, 5, 575
concomitant deficits, 320
guidelines for differentiating, 140–143, 
141–142
neurogenic, 88, 151–207
Cognitive Linguistic Quick Test (CLQT), 
335, 343
Cognitive neuropsychological frameworks, 
50–53
definition of, 50, 575
general approaches, 447–448
Cognitive Neuroscience Society, 31
Cognitive processing
assessment tools for, 367
general slowing hypothesis for, 144, 581
normal changes associated with aging, 
137–140
speed of, 590
speed-of-processing theories, 144, 590
Cognitive rehabilitation, 448–451
Cognitive resources hypothesis, 185, 575
Cognitive screening tools, 340, 343–344, 
361-370
Cognitive stimulation approach, 450–451
Coherence analysis, 384, 385
Collaboration, 267
interdisciplinary, 176
interprofessional, 212
transnational, 254
Collaborative competence, 
interprofessional, 19, 20, 21
Collaborative learning, xi
Collaborative practice, 19
Collateral sprouting, 425, 575
Color Trails Test (CTT), 363
Color vision deficits, 304
Comb and Razor Test (CRT), 363
Comité Permanent de Liaison des 
Orthophonistes–Logopèdes de 
L’union Européenne, 25
Common Objects Memory Test (COMT), 363
Commtap: Communication Activities, 487
Communication
aphasia-friendly, 414–415
assessment tools for, 369
best practices for responding to 
misguided statements, 480–482
direct, 266–267
facilitating, 459–469
functional, 410–412
neurogenic disorders of, 3–4, 5–6, 250–251
nonverbal, 262
about people with disabilities, 33–39
as right, 236–237, 407–408
after stroke or brain injury, 429–430
supported, 442–443, 591
Communication challenges
associated with dementia, 199–201
associated with MCI, 199–201
underlying complications, 84–85
Communication Confidence Rating Scale 
for Aphasia (CCRSA), 347

682   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Communication counseling, 473, 484
Communication disabilities, 10
advocacy for reduced medicalization of, 
239–240
real-life impacts of, 266
Communication Disability Profile (CDP), 
331, 347
Communication Forum Scotland, 487
Communication partners, 409–410
Communication Partner Scheme, 445, 575
Communication Profile for the Hearing 
Impaired (CPHI), 363
Communication support
apps and computer software, 455–456
FOCUSED strategies, 466
how to promote access to, 234–241, 236
total communication approaches, 
443–447, 591
Communicative Activities of Daily Living–
Second Edition (CADL-2), 348, 378
Communicative Drawing Program (CDP), 
511, 575
evidence for, 513–514
implementation of, 512–513
principles of, 511–512
Communicative Effectiveness Index 
(CETI), 331, 348, 378
Community-based approaches, 240–241
Community-based rehabilitation, 240–241, 
575
Compassion, 475–476
Compendium of EBP Guidelines and 
Systematic Reviews (ASHA), 419
Compensatory strategies, 382–384, 383, 
430–431, 507–518
Competence
cultural, 249–250
determination of, 243–244
Complementary approaches, 491–504
research studies on, 495, 496, 496, 497–499
resources for, 502
Complexity account of treatment efficacy 
(CATE), 432, 575
Comprehension, 243
Comprehensive Aphasia Test (CAT), 335, 
348
Comprehensive assessment, 293–294
Comprehensive Assessment of Prospective 
Memory (CAPM), 353
Comprehensive Test of Nonverbal 
Intelligence, 2nd Edition (CTONI-2), 
363
Comprehensive Trail-Making Test (CTMT), 
363
Computed tomography (CT) angiography, 
126
Computerized axial tomography (CAT or 
CT), 117–119, 118, 119, 575, CF7
Computerized Profiling, 380
Computerized transcription and analysis 
programs, 379–381, 380–381
Computer software, 455–456
Concomitant challenges, 282, 323–324
Concomitant cognitive-linguistic deficits, 
320
Concrete-abstract framework, 55, 575
Concurrent validity, 281
Concussion, 78, 575
Conduction aphasia, 49, 165, 576
associated lesions, 157, 165
hallmark features of, 157, 165
Conduit d’approche, 576
Cones, 99, 100, 576
Confabulation, 576
Conflicts of interest, financial, 245–246
Confounding factors, 281–282, 283–289, 
299–326, 576
Confusion
acute confusional state, 198
language of, 583
transient confusional state, 198, 592
Conjunctives
additive, 571
causal, 574
temporal, 591
Connect: The Communication Disability 
Network, 488
Connectionist models, 576
Consciousness
signs of, 315–316
stages after stroke or brain injury, 315, 
315
Consensus Statement on Clinical Judgment 
and Health Care Settings, 246
Conservatorship, 244, 576
Consistency, internal, 582
Constraint-induced aphasia therapy 
(CIAT), 519, 576

Index   683
Constraint-induced language therapy 
(CILT), 430–431, 519, 576
evidence for, 520–521
implementation of, 520
principles of, 519–520
Constraint-induced therapy, 430
Constructional apraxia, 309, 576
Construct validity, 281, 576
Consumers, 23
Content validity, 280, 576
Content words, 163, 576
Context factors, 282
Context-processing deficiency theories, 
143–144
Contextual factors, 61, 576
Continuing care retirement communities 
(CCRCs), 10, 214–215, 576
Continuous perseveration, 161
Contracts, 212
Contrecoup injury, 75, 75, 76, 576, CF2
Convergent validity, 281, 576
Conversation, 374
challenges associated with right brain 
injury, 182, 184
compensatory strategies for, 507–518
Conversational analysis, 375–377
Conversational coaching, 445, 576
Conversational discourse, 374
Coordination of care, 212
Copays, 222, 576
Copy and Recall Treatment (CART), 562, 
576
evidence for, 563–565
principles of, 563
steps for carrying out, 563
Correct information unit (CIU), 576
Correct information unit (CIU) analysis, 
382
Cortical reorganization, 425, 576
Cortical stimulation brain mapping. see 
Electrocorticography
Cost control, 229, 229–232
Cost-control systems, 228–229
Council on Academic Accreditation in 
Speech-Language Pathology, 225
Counseling, 430, 471–490, 576
best practices for, 480–482
communication, 484
at discharge, 480
in end-of-life care, 484
opportunities for, 484–485
related to assessment results, 479
related to sharing prognosis, 479
roles and responsibilities, 212
time management for, 477–480
after trauma, 477
during treatment, 479
Counseling moments, 474, 477–480
Coup injury, 75, 76, 576, CF2
Couples therapy, 445, 572
CPHI. see Communication Profile for the 
Hearing Impaired
Cranial nerve II (optic nerve), 100, 101
Creativity, 8
Credentials, 25–27, 27–28
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 80, 198, 577
Criterion-referenced measures, 274–275, 
577
Criterion validity, 281, 577
Crossed aphasia, 159, 166–167, 577
CT. see Computerized axial tomography 
(CAT or CT)
CTMT. see Comprehensive Trail-Making 
Test
CTONI-2. see Comprehensive Test of 
Nonverbal Intelligence
Cueing hierarchy approaches, 535–536, 577
evidence for, 537–538
implementation of, 536–537
principles of, 536
Cultural aspects, 252–253
Cultural competence, 249–250
Cultural differences, 268–270, 410
Culturally contextualized academic and 
clinical programs, 251–252
CVA. see Cerebrovascular accident
CVLT. see California Verbal Learning Test
Cycling approach, xi
D
d2 Test of Attention (d2TA), 364
Damico, Jack, 412
DAT. see Dementia, of Alzheimer’s type
DCT-2. see Discourse Comprehension Test, 
2nd Edition
DEB. see Dysarthria Examination Battery
Decision making, case-based, 408

684   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Decision-making capacity, 243–244
Declarative memory, 577
Decubitus ulcer, 324, 577
Dedoose, 380
Deep dyslexia, 108, 577
Deep relaxation, 497
Delirium, 198
Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System 
(D-KEFS), 319, 353
Dementia, 84, 194
AIDS dementia complex, 198, 571
of Alzheimer’s type, 195–196
cognitive changes associated with, 200
cognitive-communicative disorders 
associated with, 193–207
communication challenges associated 
with, 199–201
complementary and alternative 
interventions for, 498–499
diagnosis of, 199
facilitating communication in people 
with, 459–469
forms of, 195–198
frontotemporal, 197, 580
HIV/AIDS-associated, 198
ischemic, 196
Montessori approaches to, 466–467
multi-infarct, 196, 585
Parkinson’s-associated, 197, 586–587
pseudodementia, 198. see also Transient 
confusional state
reimbursable SLP services for people 
with, 203
reversible, 198
role of SLPs in working with people who 
have, 201–202
support for people with, 467–469
tools for assessing, 340, 358–360
vascular, 196, 593
ways to support people with, 204
Dementia Advocacy and Support Network, 
488
DementiaBank, 381
Dementia Rating Scale-2 (DRS-2), 358
Dementia with Lewy bodies, 196–197, 577
Demographic shifts, 135, 251
Dendritic branching, 425, 577
Department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS), 250
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), 221, 
457
Depression, 320–323
addressing, 482–484
diagnostic criteria for, 321
persistent depressive disorder, 482–483, 
587
Derivational linguistic theory, 552, 577
Descriptive discourse, 374
Detroit Test of Learning Aptitude–Adult 
(DTLA-A), 364
Developed countries, 135
Developing countries, 135
Development
adult, 134
career, 28–29, 30
cognitive, 134, 583
life-span, 134–135, 585
professional, 28–29
stages of, 134
Diabetes mellitus, 82–83, 577
cognitive-linguistic deficits associated 
with, 82–83, 83
types of, 82
Diabetic encephalopathy, 82–83, 577
Diagnosis, 127–129, 259, 267–268
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM-5) (APA), 194, 483
Diaschisis, 70, 424, 577
Dietary supplements, 501–502
Differential diagnosis, 299–300, 577
discourse analysis for, 376–377
general guidelines for, 140–143, 141–142
problem-solving approaches to, 299–326
special difficulties in TBI, 177
Different Strokes: Support for Younger 
Stroke Survivors, 488
Diffusion MRI, 122, 122, 577, CF8
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), 122, 122, 
577, CF8
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), 585
Direct current stimulation, transcranial 
(tDCS), 428, 592
Direct injury. see Translational injury
Disability, 577–578
cultural aspects of, 252–253
people with, 33–39, 34–35
perceptions of, 9–10
Discharge counseling, 480

Index   685
Disciplinary areas, 8, 9
Discourse, 373–374, 375–376, 578
challenges associated with right brain 
injury, 182, 184
conversational, 374
descriptive, 374
expository, 374
extralinguistic, 375
genres of, 374–375
levels of, 375
linguistic, 375
narrative, 374
normal changes with aging, 139–140
paralinguistic, 375
persuasive, 374
procedural, 374
sampling, 373–389
test design factors, 282, 287
types of, 375
Discourse Abilities Profile, 378
Discourse analysis, 375, 376
best practices for interpreting results, 
385–387
challenges in, 387–388
for differential diagnosis, 376–377
equipment for, 387
key measures for, 379–385, 383–384
key strategies for, 377–379
programs for, 379–381, 380–381
relevance of, 387
replicability of, 387
for research, 377
sources of intraindividual variability in, 
385–386, 386
for treatment planning, 377
variability, 387–388
Discourse coherence, 140, 186, 384, 385,  
578
Discourse cohesion, 385, 578
metrics for analysis of, 384, 385
Discourse comprehension: indices of, 383, 
384
Discourse Comprehension Test, 378
Discourse Comprehension Test, 2nd 
Edition (DCT-2), 348
Discourse manipulation, 271
Discriminant validity, 281, 578
Disfluency, 163–164, 578
Displays, visual scene, 444–445, 593
Dissociation syndrome, 160, 578
Divided attention, 578
D-KEFS. see Delis-Kaplan Executive 
Function System
DLB. see Dementia with Lewy bodies
DM. see Diabetes mellitus
DME. see Durable medical equipment
Doctorates, 27
Documentation
abbreviations used in, 395, 396–403
of assessment results, 391–404
of life-affecting nature of services, 226
requirements for reimbursement, 224
roles and responsibilities, 212
Domain-referenced measures, 274, 578
Donations, philanthropic, 223
Donepezil (Aricept), 427
Doors and People (DP), 364
Dragon Dictation (software), 455
Drugs, thrombolytic, 71, 591
DSM-5. see Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders
DTI. see Diffusion tensor imaging
DTLA. see Detroit Test of Learning 
Aptitude
Duchan, Judith, 411
Durable medical equipment (DME), 179
Durable power of attorney for health care, 
244, 578
DWI. see Diffusion-weighted imaging
Dynamic assessment, 268, 271–274, 578
Dysarthria, 5–6, 45, 311–312, 578
assessment tools for, 361, 367
strategies to distinguish, 312
Dysarthria Examination Battery (DEB),  
364
Dyschromatopsia, 98
Dysgraphia, 4, 167, 315
assessment tools for, 365
definition of, 38, 578
Dyslexia, 4, 108, 167
deep, 108, 577
definition of, 38, 578
surface, 108
Dysnomia, 39, 141, 163–164, 578
Dysphasia, 4, 38–39, 578
Dysprosodia, 187. see also Dysprosody
Dysprosody, 187, 578
Dysthymic disorder, 483, 578

686   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
E
ECB. see Executive Control Battery
ECNA. see Everyday Communication 
Needs Assessment
Ecological validity, 281, 433, 578
Economic considerations
finance systems, 228–229
financial conflicts of interest, 245–246
funding options, 220, 222–223, 495, 587
philanthropic donations, 223
roles and responsibilities, 212
for work with TBI survivors, 178–179
Edema, 70, 424, 578
Education, 301–302
interprofessional, 19, 21
professional, 239
public, 237–239
roles and responsibilities, 212, 213
EEG. see Electroencephalography
EFA-4. see Examining for Aphasia–Fourth 
Edition
Effectiveness, 416, 578
Effect size, 418, 578
Efficacy, 416, 579
Efficiency, 383, 416, 579
Egocentric neglect, 579
Elderspeak, 146–148, 147, 579
Electrical stimulation. see Transcranial 
direct current stimulation (tDCS)
Electrocorticography, 129, 130, 579, CF11
Electroencephalography (EEG), 127–129, 
128, 579, CF11
Ellipsis, 579
Elman, Roberta, 411
Embolic stroke, 68, 579
Embolism, 68, 69, 579, CF2
Emotional lability, 164, 323, 482, 579
Empathy, 475–476
Empowering approaches, vii, 476
Empowerment, 7
Encephalopathy, 79, 579
diabetic, 82–83, 577
HIV/AIDS-associated, 198
metabolic disorders that cause, 83–84
Endarterectomy, 73, 579
End-of-life care, 484
Engaged learning, xi
Environmental factors, 61, 410, 579
Environmental systems approaches, 442, 579
Episodic memory, 137, 579
Equal participation, 508, 579
Equal protection of the laws, 242, 579
Equipment
for discourse analysis, 387
durable medical equipment (DME), 179
instrumentation, 117–131
ERPs. see Event-related potentials
Error, measurement, 270
Errorless learning methods, 463, 579
Ethics, 241–242
collaborative competencies, 21
ICF relevance to, 62
Etiologies, 67–86
European Brain Injury Society, 31, 37
European Union (EU), 25
Event-related potentials (ERPs), 129, 579
Everyday Communication Needs 
Assessment (ECNA), 348
Evidence
classes of, 417
grading of, 417
of need for skilled services, 225
of treatment progress, 226–227
Evidence-based practice (EBP), viii, x, 
415–419, 495
application of, 419–420
best practices, 413–414
confirmation of, 225–226
expansion of, 241
sources of information to support, 419
Evoked potentials, 129. see also Event-
related potentials
EVT. see Expressive Vocabulary Test
Exaggerated speech, 414
Examining for Aphasia–Fourth Edition 
(EFA-4), 349
Excellent clinical aphasiologists, 17–18, 
17–23
Excellent clinicians, 15–31, 24
Excellent service delivery, 209–256
Executive Control Battery (ECB), 364
Executive function, 319
Executive function deficits, 175, 319, 579
assessment tools for, 361, 369
associated with MCI and dementia, 200

Index   687
associated with right brain injury, 183, 188
test design factors, 282, 288
Executive Interview (EXIT25), 358
EXIT25. see Executive Interview
Experts, 251–252, 267–268
preferred terms for, 37
Explicit memory. see Declarative memory
Expository discourse, 374
Expressive aphasia, 45, 154–155, 580, 586
Expressive language
approaches for enhancing, 519–533
challenges associated with right brain 
injury, 182–183, 184–185, 186–187
test design factors, 282, 284–287
Expressive Vocabulary Test (EVT), 364
External locus of control, 476, 580
Extralinguistic discourse, 375
Eye(s), 100, CF5
Eyetracking, 129
F
FAB. see Florida Affect Battery
Face validity, 281, 580
Family members, 408–409
Fascination, 7
FAST-2. see Frenchay Aphasia Screening 
Test, 2nd Edition
FAVRES. see Functional Assessment of 
Verbal Reasoning and Executive 
Strategies
FCMs. see Functional Communication 
Measures
FCTP. see Functional Communication 
Therapy Planner
FDA. see Frenchay Dysarthria Assessment
Feedback
biofeedback, 497, 499
natural, 508, 585
Fee-for-service, 223, 580
Fiber tracking, 122. see also Tractography
Figurative language, 185, 580
Finance systems, 228–229
funding options, 220, 222–223, 495, 587
philanthropic donations, 223
roles and responsibilities, 212
Financial conflicts of interest, 245–246
First-in/last-out model, 467, 580
FLCI. see Functional Linguistic 
Communication Inventory
Floor rule, 271, 580
Florida Affect Battery–Revised (FAB-R), 
365
FLS. see Frontal lobe syndrome
Fluent aphasia, 154, 156, 377, 580, CF12
Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET imaging, 
123, 124, CF9
Focal brain injury, 75–76, 580
Focused attention, 580
FOCUSED program, 465–466, 466, 580
Font sizes, 415
Font style, 414–415
Food supplements, 501–502
Forward-chaining, 580
Fraud, 245
Free choice, 508
Frenchay Aphasia Screening Test, 2nd 
Edition (FAST-2), 341
Frenchay Dysarthria Assessment (FDA), 
365
Frenchay Dysarthria Assessment–Second 
Edition (FDA-2), 365
Friendship and Aphasia, 488
Frontal lobe syndrome, 175, 580
Frontotemporal degeneration, 197
Frontotemporal dementia, 197, 580
Functional Assessment of Communication 
Skills for Adults (FACS) (ASHA), 329, 
330, 345
Functional Assessment of Verbal 
Reasoning and Executive Strategies 
(FAVRES), 354
Functional communication, 410–412
Functional Communication Measures 
(FCMs), 330, 580
Functional Communication Therapy 
Planner (FCTP), 348
Functional Independence Measures (FIMs), 
329–330, 336–337, 580
scores and interpretations, 328, 330
Functional Linguistic Communication 
Inventory (FLCI), 358
Functional maintenance programs, 203
Functional MRI (fMRI), 123, 580
Functioning, 61, 580
Function words, 163, 580

688   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Funding, 495
mixed options, 222–223
per diem, 220, 223, 587
philanthropic donations, 223
Fundraising, 212
G
Galveston Orientation and Amnesia Test 
(GOAT), 354
Galveston Orientation and Amnesia Test 
for Aphasia (A-GOAT), 349
Garcia, Linda, 411
GATE. see General Architecture for Text 
Engineering
Gavel Clubs, 446
GCS. see Glasgow Coma Scale
GDS. see Global Deterioration Scale
General Architecture for Text Engineering 
(GATE), 380
Generalized intellectual impairment: 
language of, 5, 194, 583
General Practitioner Assessment of 
Cognition (GPCOG), 344
General slowing hypothesis, 144, 581
Gilpion, Sue, 411
Ginkgo, 492–493
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), 316, 317, 354
Glioblastoma multiforme, 81, 581
Glioma, 81, 118–119, 119, 581
Global aphasia, 158, 164–165, 581
Global capacity building, 251–253
Global Deterioration Scale (GDS), 359
Global organizations, 254
Global paraphasia, 160, 581
Global perspectives, viii, 249–256
Global trends, 250–251, 253
GOAT. see Galveston Orientation and 
Amnesia Test
Government agencies, 229
Government-sponsored programs, 220–221
GPCOG. see General Practitioner 
Assessment of Cognition
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, 
Development and Evaluation 
(GRADE) Working Group, 417
Grammaticality judgments, 162, 581
Graphic organizers, 540–542, 541
Graphomotor ability, 581
Group treatment, 451–452, 452–454
Guardianship, 244, 581
H
HADS. see Hospital Anxiety and 
Depression Scale
Handicap, 581
HAROLD (Hemispheric Asymmetry 
Reduction in Older Adults), 136, 581
HBO. see Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
Head injury
closed, 74, 574
open, 75–76, 586
Health
concomitant challenges to, 282, 323–324
cultural aspects, 252–253
holistic, 581
Health care agencies
home health agencies, 10, 215
payment to, 223
Health care cost cutting and cost control, 
229–232
Health care finance and cost-control 
systems, 228–229
Health care systems, 251
Health clinics
not-for-profit clinics, 215
private practice clinics, 215
university-based, 215–216
Health insurance, 221–222
annual deductibles, 222, 572
cost-savings tactics used by companies, 
229
covered services, 224–225
Health insurance plans, 221–222, 581
Health maintenance organizations 
(HMOs), 213–214, 581
Health surveys, 9
Healthy adults, 35–36
Hearing, 109–111
Hearing Handicap Inventory for the 
Elderly (HHIE), 365
Hearing Handicap Inventory for the 
Elderly–Spouse (HHIE-SP), 365
Hearing problems, 309–310
assessment tools for, 363, 368

Index   689
HelpAge International, 236
HELPSS. see Language Program for Syntax 
Stimulation
Hematoma, 68, 581
subdural, 69, 591
Hemianopia, 105, 581
Hemianopsia, 105, 581
bitemporal (heteronymous), 105, 106, 573
homonymous, 105, 106, 581
Hemi-inattention, 187
Hemispatial neglect, 187, 305
Hemispheric Asymmetry Reduction in 
Older Adults (HAROLD), 136, 581
Hemispheric specialization, 89, 581
Hemorrhage
intracerebral, 69, 582
subarachnoid, 69, 591
Hemorrhagic stroke, 68, 581
Herbal medicine, 492–493, 493, 501–502
research studies on, 497, 498, 499
Heteronymous (bitemporal) hemianopsia, 
105, 106, 573
HHIE. see Hearing Handicap Inventory for 
the Elderly
Hinkley, Jackie, 457
Historically relevant frameworks, 55
HIV/AIDS (human immunodeficiency 
virus/acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome), 80, 581
AIDS dementia complex, 198, 571
HIV-associated mild neurocognitive 
disorder, 198
HIV/AIDS-associated dementia, 198
HIV/AIDS-associated encephalopathy, 198
HIV-associated mild neurocognitive 
disorder, 198
HMOs. see Health maintenance 
organizations
Holistic health, 491–492, 581
Holland, Audrey, 410–411
Home health agencies, 10, 215
Homeopathy, 499
Homonymous hemianopsia, 105, 106, 581
Hospice, 217
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale 
(HADS), 322
Hospital-based SLPs, 28
Hospitals, 10, 213
Human immunodeficiency virus/acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (HIV/
AIDS), 80, 581
AIDS dementia complex, 198, 571
HIV/AIDS-associated dementia, 198
HIV/AIDS-associated encephalopathy, 198
HIV-associated mild neurocognitive 
disorder, 198
Human rights, 62
communication as, 407–408
supporting, 242–243
Humor, 7
neuropsychological benefits of, 446–447
as therapy, 446–447
Huntington’s disease, 197, 581
Huntington’s Disease Society of America, 
488
Hyperaffectivity, 184, 581
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy, 498, 500, 501, 581
Hypermetropia, 104, 581
Hyper RESEARCH, 380
Hypnosis, 497
Hypoaffectivity, 184, 581
Hypoperfusion, 71, 72, 581
Hypothesis testing, patient-specific, 408
I
ICD-10-CM. see International Classification 
of Diseases–Clinical Modification
Iceland, 25
ICF. see International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health
ICIDH. see International Classification 
of Impairment, Disabilities and 
Handicaps
ICVD. see Ischemic cerebrovascular disease
Ideational apraxia, 312, 581
Identity, age-related threat, 137–138, 571
Ideograms, 581
Ideographic scripts, 581
Ideomotor apraxia, 312, 582
IFCI. see Inpatient Functional 
Communication Interview
Imagery, 497, 498
Imaging, 117–131, 582. see also specific 
modalities
Impairment, 582. see also specific types

690   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Implicit memory, 582
Inclusive language, 37–38
India, 25
Infarct or infarction, 71, 582
Infections
bacterial, 79–80, 573
opportunistic, 80, 586
types that affect cortical function, 80
Inferencing, 186, 582
Information, new, 508, 586
Information exchange, 582
measures of, 383–384, 384–385
Information sharing, 430
considerations for, 391–392
counseling related to, 479
strategies and resources for, 485–489
Informativeness: indices of, 382, 383
Infrastructure challenges, 251, 252
Inhibition theories, 144–145, 582
Inhibitory deficit theories, 144–145, 582
Injury
acceleration-deceleration, 74, 75, 571
angular, 75
blast, 76–78, 175, 573
brain, 96–98, 97
closed-head, 74, 574
contrecoup, 576, CF2
coup, 576, CF2
direct. see Translational injury
focal, 75–76, 580
open-head, 75–76, 586
right brain, 181, 182–183
rotational, 75, 76, 589, CF2
translational, 74–75, 592
traumatic brain (TBI), 74–76, 75, 76, 
171–180, 592
Inpatient Functional Communication 
Interview (IFCI), 349
Institute for Health Care Improvement, 
229–230
Institute for Psycholinguistics, 11
Instrumentation, 117–131
Insurance companies, 229
Insurance intermediary, 582
Integrative approaches, 449, 491–504
research studies on, 495, 496, 496
resources for, 502
Intellectual impairment
assessment tools for, 370
generalized: language of, 5, 194
Intelligence, 301–302
Intelligence tests, 363, 369
Intensive programs, 456–457
Interdisciplinary collaboration, 176, 413
Interdisciplinary learning, 212
Interdisciplinary teams, 219, 582
Interexaminer reliability, 280, 582
Internal consistency, 582
Internal locus of control, 476, 582
Internal reliability, 280, 582
International Association of Logopedics 
and Phoniatrics, 31
International Behavioral Neuroscience 
Society, 31
International Classification of Diseases–
Clinical Modification, 10th Revision 
(ICD-10-CM), 395, 582
International Classification of Functioning, 
Disability, and Health (ICF) (WHO), 
53, 59–65, 60, 582
ICF-focused approaches, 441–442
International Classification of Impairment, 
Disabilities and Handicaps (ICIDH) 
(WHO), 59, 60
International Clinical Phonetics and 
Linguistics Association, 31
International Cognitive Linguistics 
Association, 31
International Communication Project, 237
International Neuropsychological Society, 
31
Internet Stroke Center, 488
Interpersonal factors, 282
Interprofessional collaboration, 19, 212
example competencies, 21
principles constituting competencies, 19, 
20
Interprofessional education, 19, 21
Interstimulus intervals (ISIs), 433, 582
Intervention
assessment as, 259, 408
best practices for, 19, 407–422, 416
counseling at start of, 477–479
facilitating brain changes, 427–429
facilitating communication, 459–469
grading methods, 417
ICF relevance to, 62–63
mechanism of action, 433–434

Index   691
roles and responsibilities in, 212
strengths-based, 413
theories of, 423–435
Interviews, screening, 290, 291–293
Intoning, 582
Intracerebral hemorrhage, 69, 582
Intraexaminer reliability, 280, 582
Intrahemispheric specialization, 92, 582–583
Ireland, 26
Ischemic cerebrovascular disease, 196
Ischemic dementia, 196
Ischemic penumbra, 71, 582
Ishihara plates, 304, 583
ISIs. see Interstimulus intervals
Israel, 25
J
Jackson, Hughling, 55
Japan, 135
Jargon aphasia, 583
Johns Hopkins University Dysgraphia 
Battery (JHUDB), 332, 365
Judgment(s)
Consensus Statement on Clinical 
Judgment and Health Care Settings, 
246
grammaticality, 162, 581
semantic, 547
Justice, 242, 583
K
Kagan, Aura, 411, 412
Knowledge
of performance, 433, 584
of response, 433, 584
Knowledge translation
expansion of, 241
key challenges, 253–254
Korsakoff’s syndrome, 197, 583
Kwalitan, 380
L
Laboratoire de Psychologie et 
Neurocognition, 11
Language(s)
and aging, 133–149
alternatives to the word patient, 34
of confusion, 583
elderspeak, 146–148, 147
expressive, 186–187, 519–533
figurative, 185, 580
of generalized intellectual impairment, 5, 
194, 583
inclusive and welcoming, 37–38
normal changes associated with aging, 
137–140
in older adults, 140–143
person-first, 34
PET images associated with, 123–126, 
125, CF10
preservation of, 145–146
propositional, 55
spontaneous, 282, 286
tonal, 187, 591
welcoming, 37–38
Language assessment, 300–324
Language assessment tools, 369, 370
Language differences, 269
Language disorders, 45–46. see also 
Neurogenic language disorders
challenges in identifying, 84–85
etiologies of, 84–85
Language formulation difficulties, 448
Language impairment, 5
assessment tools for, 369
associated with right brain injury, 
182–183, 184–185, 185–186, 186–187
guidelines for differentiating, 140–143, 
141–142
in older adults, 140–143
tools for, 368
Language proficiency, 268, 370
Language Program for Syntax Stimulation 
(HELPSS), 558, 559–560
Language screening tools, 340, 341–343
Lateral geniculate body, 101, 583
LaTrobe Communication Questionnaire 
(LCQ), 354
Law(s), 241–242
equal protection of the laws, 242, 579
procedures to help ensure self-
determination, 244
LCQ. see LaTrobe Communication 
Questionnaire
Lea chart, 303, 303–304

692   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Leadership, 7, 212
Learning
errorless methods, 463, 579
interdisciplinary, 212
lifelong, 8, 19
Left visual neglect, 187
Legal concerns, 235–247
Legal procedures, 244
Legibility, 414, 583
Lewy bodies: dementia with, 196–197, 577
Lewy Body Dementia Association, 488
Lexical decision tasks, 583
Lexical perseveration, 161, 161, 583
Lexical processing, 535–550
Licensure, 28–29
Lichtenstein, 25
Life coaching, 471–490, 583
Life expectancy, 135
Life Interests and Values Cards, 294
Lifelong learning, 8, 19
Life participation
aspects that improve after onset of 
acquired neurogenic communication 
disorders, 485
goals for, 262–263
Life participation approaches, 440–443, 
443–447
Life Participation Approach to Aphasia 
(LPAA), 54, 411, 441, 583
Life Participation Model of AAC, 444
Life-span development: motivational 
theory of, 134–135, 585
Life-span model of postformal cognitive 
development, 134, 583
Limb apraxia, 312–313, 583
Line bisection task, 306, 306, 583
Line cancellation task, 306, 306–307, 583
Linebaugh, Craig, 535
Lingraphica SmallTalk, 456
Linguistic differences, 268–270, 410
Linguistic discourse, 375
Linguistic metrics, surface-level, 382, 383
Linguistic processing, auditory, 109, 110
Linguistic theory, derivational, 552, 577
Listening, 475–476
Literacy, 301–302
Literal paraphasias, 160. see also Phonemic 
paraphasias
Living will, 244, 583
Living with Aphasia: Framework for 
Outcome Measurement (A-FROM), 
441, 583
Location Learning Test-Revised (LLT-R), 
359, 365
Locations, optimal, 410
Locked-in syndrome, 316, 583
Locus of control, 476–477, 583
external, 476, 580
internal, 476, 582
Logopedes, 37
Logopedists, 25, 37
Logopenic PPA, 205
Logorrhea, 160, 583
Long-term care facilities, 10, 214
Long-term memory, 583–584
Long-term potentiation, 425, 583
Loose training programs, 530, 584
LPAA. see Life Participation Approach to 
Aphasia
LTP. see Long-term potentiation
Lyon, Jon, 411
M
Mackie, Nina Simmons, 411
MAE. see Multilingual Aphasia 
Examination
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), 
126, 584
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 119, 
119–123, 584, CF7
diffusion MRI, 122, 122, 577, CF8
diffusion-weighted (DWI), 585
example images, 121, CF12
functional MRI (fMRI), 123, 580
T1-weighted, 120, 121, 592
T2-weighted, 120, 121, 592
Magnetic resonance venography (MRV), 126
Magnetic stimulation, transcranial (TMS), 
592
Magnetoencephalography (MEG), 129, 584
Main event index, 382, 584
Majority regions, 251
Malaysia, 25
Malingering, 584
Managed care, 229, 584

Index   693
Management, 212
Mapping hypothesis, 163
Mapping Therapy, 556, 584
evidence for, 557–558
implementation of, 556–557
principles of, 556
Marketing, 212, 495
MAST. see Mississippi Aphasia Screening 
Test
Materials, xii, 413
Max Planck Institute (Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands), 11
Max Planck Institute for Human 
Cognitive and Brain Activity (Leipzig, 
Germany), 11
MAXQDA, 380
Mayo Clinic, 11
MCI. see Mild cognitive impairment
MCLA. see Measure of Cognitive-Linguistic 
Abilities
MCSTPA. see Multimodal Communication 
Screening Task for Persons with 
Aphasia
Measurement errors, 270
Measure of Cognitive-Linguistic Abilities 
(MCLA), 354
Measures, norm-referenced, 274, 586
Medicaid, 221, 584
Medicalization, 239–240
Medical necessity, 226, 230
Medical treatment, 71–72
Medicare, 221, 230, 584
benefits for people with dementia, 203
Part A, 221, 584
Part B, 221, 584
Part D, 221, 584
Meditation, 497, 498
MEG. see Magnetoencephalography
Melodic Intonation Therapy (MIT), 523, 
582, 584
evidence for, 526–529
implementation of, 524–526
Level I, 524
Level II, 525
Level III, 525–526
Level IV, 526
principles of, 523–524
suggestions for, 524
Memory
autobiographical, 137, 573
declarative, 577
episodic, 137, 579
implicit, 582
long-term, 583–584
normal changes with aging, 137–138
procedural, 137, 587
prospective, 588
semantic, 137, 589
short-term, 137, 589
source, 137, 590
test design factors, 282, 287
working, 143, 594
Memory books and wallets, 460–463, 584
Memory for Intentions Test (MIST), 365
Memory problems, 320
assessment tools for, 362, 363, 365, 370
associated with dementia, 199, 200
associated with MCI and dementia, 200
associated with right brain injury, 183, 
188
test design factors, 282, 287
Meninges, 91
Meningioma, 81, 584
Meningitis, 584
Meningoencephalitis, 79
Mental effort. see Cognitive effort
Mental health services, 474
Mentoring
aphasia mentoring programs, 446, 572
in discourse analysis, 387
roles and responsibilities, 213
Metabolic disorders, 83–84
Metalinguistic awareness, 553–554
Metastatic tumors, 81, 589
Microgenetic framework, 56, 584–585
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 84, 194, 
585, CF9
cognitive changes associated with, 200
communication impairments associated 
with, 194–195, 199–201
complementary and alternative 
interventions for, 498
due to Alzheimer’s disease, 195–196, 584
HIV-associated, 198
ways to support people with, 204
Mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI), 78

694   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Military service personnel, 77–78
Mindfulness meditation, 497
Mini Inventory of Right Brain Injury–
Second Edition (MIRBI-2), 357
Mini-Mental State Examination–2nd 
Edition (MMSE-2), 333, 344
Minimum terminal units or T-units, 
381–382, 585
Mini-stroke, 592
Minnesota Test for Differential Diagnosis 
of Aphasia (MTDDA), 49
MIRBI. see Mini Inventory of Right Brain 
Injury–Second Edition
Mississippi Aphasia Screening Test 
(MAST), 341
MIST. see Memory for Intentions Test
MIT. see Melodic Intonation Therapy
Mixed funding options, 222–223
Mixed transcortical aphasia, 49, 158, 166, 585
MMSE-2. see Mini-Mental State 
Examination–2nd Edition
MoCA. see Montreal Cognitive Assessment
Modified Mini-Mental State Examination 
(3MS), 344
Modified Wisconsin Card Sorting Test 
(M-WCST), 366
Monocular blindness, 104, 104
Monocular visual fields, 101–102, 102, 585, 
CF6
Montessori approaches, 466–467, 585
Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), 
344
Mood disorders, 320–323, 369
MOR. see Multiple Oral Reading
Morality, 241–242
Moral principles, 242
Morbid (term), 38
Morespeech, 455
Motivational theory of life-span 
development, 134–135, 585
Motor aphasia, transcortical, 49, 158, 165, 
592
Motor challenges, 310–314
Motor deficits, 313–314
ocular, 99, 108, 586
Motor speech disorders, 3–4, 45, 365
Motor vehicle–related TBIs, 79
Mount Wilga High Level Language Test 
(MWHLLT), 355
Mount Wilga High Level Language Test–
Revised (MWHLLT-R), 355
Moxibustion, 497
MRA. see Magnetic resonance angiography
MRI. see Magnetic resonance imaging
MRV. see Magnetic resonance venography
MTF. see Multicultural Task Force
Multicultural differences, 476–477, 500
Multicultural opportunities, 7–8
Multicultural strengths, 268
Multicultural Task Force (MTF) (NAA), 
254–255
Multidimensional frameworks, 585
Multidisciplinary teams, 218–219, 585
Multi-infarct dementia, 196, 585
Multilingual Aphasia Examination, 3rd 
Edition (MAE), 342
Multilingual opportunities, 7–8
Multilingual speakers, 269
Multimodal Communication Screening 
Task for Persons with Aphasia 
(MCSTPA), 342
Multiple Oral Reading (MOR), 567–568, 
585
Music and Memory, 488
M-WCST. see Modified Wisconsin Card 
Sorting Test
MWHLLT. see Mount Wilga High Level 
Language Test
Myopia, 104, 585
N
NAB. see Neuropsychological Assessment 
Battery
Naming, 282, 285
Naming and Oral Reading for Language  
in Aphasia 6-Point (NORLA-6) Scale, 
349
Narrative discourse, 374
NASHC. see National Association of 
Speech and Hearing Centers
National Aphasia Association (NAA), 31, 
45, 237, 488
bumper stickers, 45, 46, CF1
Multicultural Task Force (MTF), 254–255
National Association of Speech and 
Hearing Centers (NASHC), 215
National Brain Tumor Society, 488

Index   695
National Center for Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine (US), 492
National Center on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders (US), 11
National Health Service (NHS) (UK), 220, 
488
National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neuro Sciences (India), 11
National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke (US), 11
National Institute on Aging (US), 11, 487
National Institutes for Health Research 
(NIHR) (UK), 11, 488
National Institutes of Health (NIH) (US),  
11
Neuroscience at NIH, 31
Office of Alternative Medicine, 492
National Outcomes Measurement System 
(NOMS) (ASHA), 330–331
National Parkinson Foundation, 488
National Standards for Culturally and 
Linguistically Appropriate Services 
(CLAS) in Health Care, 250
National Stroke Association, 488
Natural feedback, 508, 585
Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK), 380
NaturalReader, 455
Natural supplements, 501–502
NAVS. see Northwestern Assessment of 
Verbs and Sentences
NCCEA. see Neurosensory Center 
Comprehensive Examination for 
Aphasia
NCDs. see Neurocognitive disorders
Necrosis, 71, 585
Neglect, 585
allocentric, 571
egocentric, 579
hemispatial, 187
visual, 304–308, 593
Negotiation, 212
Neologisms, 585
Neologistic paraphasia, 160, 585
Neoplasms, 80–81, 585
Networking, 7, 29
Neuroanatomy, 88
Neurocognitive disorders, 194, 198
Neurodegenerative disease, 84, 585
assessment tools for, 370
cognitive-communicative disorders 
associated with, 193–207
metabolic changes associated with, 123, 
125, CF9
tools for assessing, 340, 358–360
Neurodiagnostic methods, 127–129
Neurofibrillary tangles, 585
Neurogenic cognitive-linguistic disorders, 
151–207
acquired, 3–14
considerations for writing and talking 
about people with, 33–36
neuroanatomy associated with, 88
neurophysiology associated with, 88
Neurogenic communication disorders, 3–4, 
5–6
conditions that cause, 251
fantastic benefits of, 6–8
global trends, 250–251
incidence of, 8–9, 250–251
prevalence of, 8–9, 250–251
Neurogenic language disorders
acquired, 3–4, 67–86, 87–115
frameworks for, 57
ICF relevance to people with, 63–64
neurophysiology of, 109–111
preferred terms for experts who work 
with people who have, 37
treatment of, 407–415
visual system aspects, 99–104
Neurogenic speech disorders, 3–4
Neurogenic symptoms, 38–39
Neuroimaging, 117–131. see also specific 
modalities
Neurolinguistic frameworks, 50–53, 
585–586
Neuronal regeneration, 424–425, 585
Neuropathologies, 87–115
Neurophysiology, 87–115, 91
of hearing, 109–111
key principles, 88–93
Neuroplasticity, 92–93, 586
Neuropsychological Assessment Battery 
(NAB), 366
Neuropsychologists, 25
Neuroscience at NIH, 31
Neurosensory Center Comprehensive 
Examination for Aphasia (NCCEA), 
349

696   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
New information, 508, 586
New Zealand, 26, 36–37
New Zealand Speech-Language 
Therapists’ Association (NZSTA), 26
NHS. see National Health Service
NLTK. see Natural Language Toolkit
Noise buildup, 310, 586
NOMS. see National Outcomes 
Measurement System
Noncanonical sentences, 586
Nonfluent aphasias, 154, 156, 586
Nonmaleficence, 242, 586
NORLA-6 Scale. see Naming and Oral 
Reading for Language in Aphasia 
6-Point Scale
Normal, 190–191
Norm-referenced measures, 274, 586
Northwestern Assessment of Verbs and 
Sentences (NAVS), 332, 366
Northwestern Syntax Screening Test 
(NSST), 350
Norway, 25
Not-for-profit clinics, 10, 215
NSST. see Northwestern Syntax Screening 
Test
Nutritional supplements, 428, 501–502
NZSTA. see New Zealand Speech-
Language Therapists’ Association
O
Occlusive stroke, 68, 586
Ocular motor deficits, 99, 108, 586
Ocular motor problems, 304
OHI. see Open-head injury
Older adults, 35
cognitive-linguistic characteristics of, 
140–143, 141–142
language impairment in, 140–143
word-finding problems in, 138
Online Communication Cafes, 489
Online resources, xii, 456
Open-class words, 163, 586
Open-head injury, 75–76, 586
Opportunistic infections, 80, 586
Optic aphasia, 109, 586
Optic chiasm, 100, 101, 586
Optic nerve (cranial nerve II), 100, 101, 586
Optic radiations, 101, 586
Optic tract, 101, 586
Optimal locations and conditions, 410
Optimal timing, 410
Oral Reading for Language in Aphasia 
(ORLA), 568–569, 586
evidence for, 569–570
principles of, 569
steps for carrying out, 569
Virtual Therapist (VT) program, 570
Orange, J. B., 412
Organizations, 29
ORLA. see Oral Reading for Language in 
Aphasia
Orthophonists
credentials for, 25
terms for referring to, 37
Outcome(s), 416, 586
Outcome research
discovery phase, 417–418, 578
effectiveness and efficiency test phase, 
418, 578
effectiveness test phase, 418, 578–579
efficacy test phase, 418, 579
five-phase, 417–418
optimizing phase, 418, 586
Out-of-pocket pay, 222
Oxygen therapy, hyperbaric, 498, 500, 501, 
581
P
PACE. see Promoting Aphasics’ 
Communicative Effectiveness
Paced Auditory Serial Addition Test 
(PASAT), 355, 366
PACST. see Putney Auditory 
Comprehension Screening Test
PALPA. see Psycholinguistic Assessments 
of Language Processing in Aphasia
Paralinguistic discourse, 375
Paralysis, 313
Paraphasias, 56, 160, 586
global, 160, 581
literal, 160
neologistic, 160, 586
phonemic, 160, 587
semantic, 160, 589
verbal, 160
Paresis, 313

Index   697
Parkinson’s-associated dementia, 197, 
586–587
Parr, Susie, 411
Participation, 61
equal, 508, 579
restrictions, 587
Participation Model of AAC, 412
Partners: training for, 445
PASAT. see Paced Auditory Serial Addition 
Test
PASS. see Progressive Aphasia Severity 
Scale
Passive clauses, reversible, 162, 588
Pathologic lability, 323. see also Emotional 
lability
Patient(s), 587
Patient-specific hypothesis testing, 408
Payment for services, 220
to agencies, 223
factors that promote, 224
mixed funding options, 222–223
private pay, 222
reasons for denial of reimbursement, 227
sources of, 220–223
ways SLPs get paid, 220
PBA. see Pseudobulbar affect
PCA. see Phonological Components 
Analysis
PCI. see Propositional complexity index
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test, 4th 
Edition (PPVT-4), 366
Pedagogy, x
PEDro Scale, 419
Penumbra, 123, 587
ischemic, 71, 582
Perceptual impairments
associated with MCI and dementia, 200
associated with right brain injury, 183
test design factors, 282, 283
Per diem funding, 220, 223, 587
Performance, 61, 587
knowledge of, 433, 584
Perfusion
hypoperfusion, 71, 72, 581
reperfusion, 71, 588
Perfusion-weighted imaging (PWI), 
122–123, 587
Perseveration
continuous, 161
lexical, 161, 161, 583
phonemic, 161, 587
recurrent, 161, 161, 588
semantic, 161, 589
stuck-in-set, 161, 590
verbal, 161, 593
Persistent depressive disorder, 482–483, 587
Personal characteristics, x
Personal factors, 61, 587
Person-centered care, vii, 408
Person-first language, 34
Persuasive discourse, 374
PET. see Positron emission tomography
Pharmacological agents
mechanism of action, 426–427
thrombolytic drugs, 71, 591
Philadelphia Naming Test (PNT), 332, 350
Philanthropic donations, 223
Phonemic paraphasias, 160, 587
Phonemic perseveration, 161, 587
Phoniatrists, 37
Phonological Components Analysis (PCA), 
543, 587
evidence for, 545
example chart, 544
implementation of, 543–544
principles of, 543
Phrase movement, 552, 587
Physicians’ orders, 224
Physiology
associated with visual deficits, 99–104
neurophysiology, 87–115, 91
PICA-R. see Porch Index of Communicative 
Ability–Revised
Pick’s disease, 197
Pioneers, 411–412
Pittsburgh Healthcare System, 457
Plasticity, 92–93, 586
PNT. see Philadelphia Naming Test
Population, aging, 135, 251
Porch Index of Communicative Ability–
Revised (PICA-R), 335, 336, 350
Positive psychology, 472, 476
Positron emission tomography (PET), 
123–126, 587
example images, 124, 125, CF9, CF10
Posterior lesions, 155
Pound, Carole, 411
PPA. see Primary progressive aphasia

698   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
PPT. see Pyramids and Palm Trees Test
PPVT. see Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test
Pragmatic deficits, 175, 319–320
associated with dementia, 200–201
associated with right brain injury, 182, 184
Pragmatics, 373–374, 587
measures of, 383–384
normal changes with aging, 140
test design factors, 282, 287
Preauthorization, 224
Predicting Language Outcome and 
Recovery After Stroke, 488
Predictive validity, 281, 587
Prefixes, 38–39
Premorbid (term), 38
Press of speech, 160–161. see also Logorrhea
Primary progressive aphasia, 166, 194, 
204–205, 587, CF9
agrammatic, 205
associated lesions and hallmark features 
of, 159
distinguishing features of, 166
logopenic, 205
role in working with people with, 206
semantic, 205
subtypes of, 205
Primary tumors, 81, 587
Private pay, 222
Private practice clinics, 10, 215
Problem-Solving Approach, 566, 587
evidence for, 567
principles of, 566
steps for carrying out, 566–567
Problem-solving approaches, 299–326
Procedural discourse, 374
Procedural memory, 137
Process analysis approach, 270
benefits of, 324–326
components of, 324, 324
example, 324, 325, CF15
Professional development, 28–29
Professional education, 239
Professional information sharing, 29
Professional networks, 7
Professional organizations, 29, 31
Professional relationships, 227
Professional responsibilities, 211–213
Profile of Communication 
Appropriateness, 378
Prognosis
best practices for judgments about, 
392–393
considerations for, 96–98, 97, 391–404
counseling related to, 479
Progressive aphasia, primary, 166, 194, 
204–205, 587, CF9
associated lesions and hallmark features 
of, 159
role in working with people with, 206
Progressive Aphasia Severity Scale (PASS), 
350
Progressive muscle relaxation, 497, 498
Proloquo2Go, 456
Promoting Aphasics’ Communicative 
Effectiveness (PACE), 424, 507, 587
evidence base or, 510–511
implementation of, 508–510
principles of, 507–508
scoring, 509, 510
Promotion, 235–241, 236
Propositional complexity index (PCI), 382, 
587
Propositional language framework, 55,  
587
Propositions, 55, 382, 588
Prosody, 588
Prosopagnosia, 109, 308–309, 588
Prospective memory, 588
Pseudobulbar affect (PBA), 323, 482. see also 
Emotional lability
Pseudodementia, 198. see also Transient 
confusional state
Psycholinguistic Assessments of Language 
Processing in Aphasia (PALPA), 50–51, 
51, 314, 332, 350
Psycholinguistic frameworks, 50–53, 588
Psychological age, 134, 588
Psychologists, 474
Psychology, positive, 472, 476
Psychometric aspects, 279–298
Psychosocial support, 475
Psychotherapists, 474
Public awareness, 495
raising, 236–237, 237–239
Public education, 237–239
Pupillometry, 129
Putney Auditory Comprehension 
Screening Test (PACST), 333, 342

Index   699
PWI. see Perfusion-weighted imaging
Pyramids and Palm Trees Test (PPT), 351
Q
QAA. see Quick Assessment for Aphasia
QAD. see Quick Assessment for Dysarthria
QCLS. see Quality of Communication Life 
Scale
QDA Miner, 380
QOLIBRI. see Quality of Life after Brain 
Injury
Quadrantopsia, 105, 107
bilateral, 105, 107, 573
Quality assurance, 212
Quality of Communication Life Scale 
(QCLS), 351
Quality of life
aspects that improve after onset of 
acquired neurogenic communication 
disorders, 485
ways to enhance, 201–202
Quality of Life after Brain Injury 
(QOLIBRI), 355
Query-based approach, x–xi
Questions, Wh-, 547
Quick Assessment for Aphasia (QAA), 342
Quick Assessment for Dysarthria (QAD), 
367
R
Rancho Los Amigos Scale of Cognitive 
Functioning, 336–337
Rancho Los Amigos Scale of Cognitive 
Functioning–Revised (RLASCF-R), 355
Randomized controlled trials, 588
Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices 
(RAPM), 367
Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RMP), 367
RBANS. see Repeatable Battery for the 
Assessment of Neuropsychological 
Status
RBI. see Right brain injury
RBMT-3. see Rivermead Behavioral 
Memory Test–Third Edition
RCBA. see Reading Comprehension Battery 
for Aphasia
RCFT. see Rey Complex Figure Test
RCSLT. see Royal College of Speech and 
Language Therapists
Readability, 414, 588
Reading
approaches for improving, 561–570
normal changes with aging, 139
PET images associated with, 123–126, 
125, CF10
Reading comprehension, 282, 284
Reading Comprehension Battery for 
Aphasia (RCBA), 314
Reading Comprehension Battery for 
Aphasia, 2nd Edition (RCBA-2), 332, 
351
Reading-focused programs, 561–562
Reading problems, 314
associated with right brain injury, 183, 
188–189
Reading tasks, 307–308, 308
Reasoning, 282, 288
Receptive aphasia, 45, 154–155, 588
Receptive language(s)
challenges associated with right brain 
injury, 182–183, 184–185, 185–186
test design factors, 282, 283–284
Reciprocal scaffolding, 445–446, 588
Recordkeeping, 212
Recovery
mechanisms of, 424–425
optimal times to initiate treatment, 429
spontaneous, 92–93, 429, 590
Recurrent perseveration, 161, 161, 588
Red flag diagnoses, 199
Referrals, 239
Register, 375, 588
Rehabilitation
cognitive, 448–451
community-based, 240–241, 575
research in, 62–63
telerehabilitation, 218, 219
Rehabilitation centers, 10, 213
Rehabilitation counselors, 474
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, 11
Reimbursement
denial of, 227–228
factors that promote, 224
rates of, 229
reasons for denial of, 227
requirements for, 224

700   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Reitan-Indiana Aphasia Screening Test 
(AST), 342
Relaxation
deep, 497
research studies on, 498
Reliability, 279–280, 588
interexaminer, 280, 582
internal, 280, 582
intraexaminer, 280, 582
test-retest, 279–280, 591
Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of 
Neuropsychological Status (RBANS), 
359
Reperfusion, 71, 424, 588
Repetition, 282, 284
Repetitive spelling, 564
Repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (rTMS), 428, 592
Replicability, 387
Reporting assessment results
abbreviations used in, 395
best practices for, 393–394
Research, 3–14
assessment as, 270–271, 272
on complementary and alternative 
approaches, 497–499
on complementary and integrative 
approaches, 495, 496, 496
discourse analysis for, 377
ICF relevance to, 62–63
key challenges, 253–254
on rehabilitation, 62–63
roles and responsibilities, 212
Research centers or institutes, 10, 11
Research participants, 35
Reserve capacity, 588
Residential programs, 456–457
Resource allocation, 588
Resource capacity theories, 143, 588
Resources, 485–489
for complementary and integrative 
approaches, 502
online, xii, 456
websites, 487–488
Respect for people, 242, 588
Response: knowledge of, 433, 584
Response Elaboration Training (RET), 
530–531, 588
Rest, 430
Restitutive approach, 430–431, 588
Restorative approach, 588
Retina, 99, 100, 588
Retirement communities, continuing care 
(CCRCs), 10, 214–215, 576
Reversible dementia, 198
Reversible passive clauses, 162, 588
Revised Token Test (RTT), 274, 332, 336,  
351
Rey Complex Figure Test (RCFT), 367
RFFT. see Ruff Figural Fluency Test
RHD. see Right hemisphere damage
RHLB. see Right Hemisphere Language 
Battery
RHS. see Right hemisphere syndrome
RIC Evaluation in Right Hemisphere 
Dysfunction–Revised (RICE-R), 357
Right brain injury, 181
assessment tools for, 340, 357
cognitive-communicative challenges 
associated with, 182–183
special challenges for survivors, 191
structure-function relationships in, 190
Right brain syndrome, 5. see also Right 
hemisphere syndrome
Right ear advantage, 111, 588
Right hemisphere damage, 181
Right Hemisphere Language Battery 2nd 
Edition (RHLB-2), 357
Right hemisphere syndrome, 5, 181–182, 
588
classification of symptoms of, 189–190
cognitive-communicative challenges 
associated with, 182–183
cognitive-communicative disorders 
associated with, 181–192
effects on communication, 182–189
special challenges in serving people 
with, 189–191
underdiagnosis of, 189
Rights, 62
of communication, 407–408
supporting, 242–243
Right-sided visual neglect, CF14
RIPA. see Ross Information Processing 
Assessment
Rivermead Behavioral Memory Test–Third 
Edition (RBMT-3), 334, 355
RJCA, 380

Index   701
RLASCF. see Rancho Los Amigos Scale of 
Cognitive Functioning
RMP. see Raven’s Progressive Matrices
Rods, 99, 100, 589
Rogers, Margaret, 411
Roles and responsibilities
in addressing depression, 482–484
collaborative competencies, 21
in hospice, 217
impact of, 261–262
professional responsibilities, 211–213
in supporting the rights of individuals 
with aphasia and related disorders, 
242–243
in working with people who have 
dementia, 201–202
in working with people who have PPA, 
206
Ross Information Processing Assessment, 
2nd Edition (RIPA-2), 356
Ross Information Processing Assessment–
Geriatric, 2nd Edition (RIPA-G:2), 359
Ross Test of Higher Cognitive Processes 
(RTHCP), 367
Rotational injury, 75, 76, 589, CF2
Rotter, Julian, 476
Rowland Universal Dementia Assessment 
Scale (RUDAS), 359
Royal College of Speech and Language 
Therapists (RCSLT), 26
RTHCP. see Ross Test of Higher Cognitive 
Processes
RTT. see Revised Token Test
RUDAS. see Rowland Universal Dementia 
Assessment Scale
Ruff Figural Fluency Test (RFFT), 356
S
SADQ. see Stroke Aphasia Depression 
Questionnaire
SAILR. see Scales of Adult Independence, 
Language, and Recall
Saint Louis University Mental Status 
Examination (SLUMS), 344
Sampling discourse, 373–389, 377–379
Sampling methods, 9
SAQOL-39. see Stroke and Aphasia Quality 
of Life Scale
Savvy Caregiver Program (SCP), 468–469, 
589
Scaffolding, reciprocal, 445–446, 588
Scales, 327–371
Scales of Adult Independence, Language, 
and Recall (SAILR), 359
Scales of Cognitive and Communicative 
Ability for Neurorehabilitation 
(SCCAN), 344
Scales of Cognitive Injury for Traumatic 
Brain Injury (SCATBI), 356
SCAN-3:A Test for Auditory Processing 
Disorders in Children and Adults 
(SCAN3-A), 368
SCATBI. see Scales of Cognitive Injury for 
Traumatic Brain Injury
SCCAN. see Scales of Cognitive and 
Communicative Ability for 
Neurorehabilitation
Scheduling, 212
Schuell’s stimulation approach, 451, 590
Science of Aphasia, 31, 488
Sclera, 100, 101, 589
SCOLP. see Speed and Capacity of 
Language Processing Test
Scope of practice, 176, 202–203, 473–474, 499
Scotoma, 104–105, 105, 589
SCP. see Savvy Caregiver Program
Screening, 290–293, 589
example interview questions and tasks, 
290, 291–293
roles and responsibilities, 212
for visual neglect, 307–308, 308
Screening instruments, 327–371, 341–370
aphasia assessment tools, 340, 345–352
cognitive screening tools, 340, 343–344
for dementia and other 
neurodegenerative conditions, 340, 
358–360
language screening tools, 340, 341–343
right brain injury assessment tools, 340, 
357
TBI assessment tools, 340, 353–356
visual screening charts, 303, 303–304
Scripts, ideographic, 581
Script training, 521, 589
evidence for, 522–523
implementation of, 522
principles of, 521–522

702   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
SCWT. see Stroop Color and Word Test
SDMT. see Symbol Digit Modality Test
Secondary aging, 589
Secondary or metastatic tumors, 81, 589
Selective attention. see Focused attention
Self-advocacy, 480
Self-awareness, 318–319
Self-coaching, 410
Self-determination, 244
Self-esteem, 369
Semantic confusions, 199
Semantic Feature Analysis (SFA), 424, 538, 
589
baseline phase and target selection, 
538–539
chart method, 539, 539–540
evidence for, 542–543
graphemic organizer method, 540–542, 
541
implementation of, 538–542
principles of, 538
Semantic judgments, 547
Semantic memory, 137, 589
Semantic paraphasias, 160, 589
Semantic perseveration, 161, 589
Semantic PPA, 205
Sensitivity, 281, 333, 589
Sensorimotor tracking, 129
Sensory aphasia, transcortical, 49, 158, 165, 
592
Sensory deficits, visual, 98, 99, 593
Sensory stimulation, 428, 589
Sentactics (software), 555
Sentence Production Program for Aphasia 
(SPPA), 558, 589
evidence for, 559–560
implementation of, 558–559
principles of, 558
sentence types for, 558
Sentence Production Test for Aphasia 
(SPTA), 351
Sentences
canonical, 552, 574
cloze, 574
noncanonical, 552, 554, 586
types of, 558, 558
SentenceShaper, 455
Service delivery, 209–256
at a distance, 217–218
settings for, 213–217
Services
covered, 224–225
documentation of, 226
global capacity building, 251–253
how to promote access to, 235–241, 236
life-affecting nature of, 226
preauthorization for, 224
reimbursable SLP services, 203, 223–227
skilled, 225, 589
by third-party payers, 224
unskilled, 593
Settings
for assessment, 264
for service delivery, 213–217
Severe Impairment Battery (SIB), 360
Sexual orientation, 269–270
SFA. see Semantic Feature Analysis
Shadden, Barbara, 411
Sheffield Screening Test for Acquired 
Language Disorders (SSTALD), 342
Short-term memory, 137, 589
SIB. see Severe Impairment Battery
Sickle cell anemia, 70
Signal degradation theories, 144, 589
Simmons-Mackie, Nina, 412
Single-photon emission computerized 
tomography (SPECT), 126, 589
Situational characteristics, x
Skilled nursing facilities (SNFs), 10, 214, 
589
Skilled services, 225, 589
Sklar Aphasia Scale (SAS), 343
SLPs. see Speech-language pathologists
SLTs. see Speech-language therapists
SLUMS. see Saint Louis University Mental 
Status Examination
SNFs. see Skilled nursing facilities
SOAP Test of Syntactic Complexity 
(SOAP-TSC), 332, 351
Social age, 134, 589
Social circles, 265–266, CF13
Social cognition deficit hypothesis, 
184–185, 590
Social communication challenges, 440
Social frameworks, 54–55, 590
Socially focused programs, 447
Social participation approaches, 440–443, 
443–447

Index   703
Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI), 
178–179
Sodium amytal infusion, 126, 590
Software
for discourse analysis, 387
to support communication and 
treatment, 455–456
transcription and analysis programs, 
379–381, 380–381
Song, spoken (sprechesang), 524, 590
Source memory, 137, 590
Spaced retrieval training (SRT), 463–465, 
464, 590
Speakability, 488
Specializations, 28–29
Specificity, 281, 333, 590
Specific language impairment, 590
SPECT. see Single-photon emission 
computerized tomography
Speech
apraxia of (AoS), 5–6, 45, 311, 572
automatic, 282, 285
direct, 266–267
exaggerated, 414
PET images associated with, 123–126, 
125, CF10
press of, 160–161
telegraphic, 163, 591
Speech, Spatial, and Qualities of Hearing 
Scale (SSQ), 368
Speech acts, 375, 590
analysis of, 384, 385
examples, 375
SpeechBite (database), 419, 469, 590
Speech disorders, 45
motor, 3–4, 45, 365
neurogenic, 3–4
Speech-Language and Audiology Canada 
(SAC), 26
Speech-language pathologists (SLPs), 6, 10
career outlook for, 11–12
as coaches, 472–473
as communication counselors, 473
content to master, 25
as counselors, 472–473, 474, 475
excellent clinicians, 16
global capacity building, 251
guidelines for clinical doctorates, 27
hospital-based, 28
impact of, 261–262
as life coaches, 472–473
minimum degree requirements for, 25–26
payment for services, 220–223
preferred terms for, 37
reimbursable services, 203, 223–227
requirements for certification, 25–26
roles and responsibilities, 201–202, 
211–213, 242–243, 482–484
specializations, 28–29
terms for referring to, 36–37
Speech-language therapists (SLTs), 25, 
36–37
Speech Pathology Australia (SPA), 25, 26
Speech therapists (STs)
career outlook for, 11
terms for referring to, 36–37
Speed and Capacity of Language 
Processing Test (SCOLP), 368
Speed of processing, 590
Speed-of-processing theories, 144, 590
Spelling, repetitive, 564
Spoken song (sprechesang), 524, 590
Spontaneous language, 282, 286
Spontaneous recovery, 92–93, 429, 590
Sports-related injuries, 79
SPPA. see Sentence Production Program for 
Aphasia
Sprechesang (spoken song), 524, 590
Sprouting, collateral, 425, 575
SPTA. see Sentence Production Test for 
Aphasia
SRT. see Spaced retrieval training
SSDI. see Social Security Disability 
Insurance
SSQ. see Speech, Spatial, and Qualities of 
Hearing Scale
SSTALD. see Sheffield Screening Test for 
Acquired Language Disorders
Standardized assessments, 268, 271–274, 
331–332, 590
Statutory surrogacy, 244, 590
Stereotypy, 165, 590
Stimulation-facilitation approach, 451, 590
Stimulus power, 590
Story completeness, 382, 590
Story goodness index, 382, 590
Story grammar, 382, 590
Strengths-based assessment, 263

704   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Strengths-based intervention, 413
Stress-saliency hypothesis, 163
Stroke, 67–69
assessment tools for, 362, 363
causes of, 69–70
communication needs after, 429–430
consciousness conditions after, 315, 315
definition of, 67–68, 590
embolic, 68, 579
hemorrhagic, 68, 581
initial treatment of, 429–431
mechanisms of recovery from, 424–425
medical treatment of, 71–72
mini-stroke, 592
occlusive, 68, 586
physiological effects of, 70–71
prevention of, 72–74, 73
prognostic factors, 96–98, 97
risk factors for, 70
sudden onset of, 72
thrombotic, 68, 591
types of, 68
warning signs for, 73–74, 74
Stroke and Aphasia Quality of Life Scale 
(SAQOL-39), 329, 352
Stroke Aphasia Depression Questionnaire 
(SADQ), 322, 333, 352
Stroke Association, 488
Stroke Engine-Assess (Canadian Stroke 
Network), 340
Stroke Survivor, 488
Stroke survivors, 393
Stroop Color and Word Test-Adult (SCWT-
A), 368
STs. see Speech therapists
Stuck-in-set perseveration, 161, 590
Subarachnoid hemorrhage, 69, 591
Subcortical aphasia, 159, 167, 591
Subdural hematoma, 69, 591
Suffering (term), 38
Sundowner’s syndrome, 201, 591
Sundowning, 201, 591
Supplements, 501–502
Supported communication, 442–443, 591
Suppression deficit hypothesis, 186, 591
Surface dyslexia, 108
Surrogacy, statutory, 244, 590
Survey instruments, 10
Symbol Digit Modality Test (SDMT), 368
Syntax
approaches for improving, 551–560
normal changes with aging, 138–139
Systematic Analysis of Language 
Transcripts (SALT), 379–381, 381
T
T1-weighted imaging, 120, 121, 592
T2-weighted imaging, 120, 121, 592
Tactus Therapy Solutions, 455
Talkbank, 381
Talking about people with disabilities, 33–39
TalkRocket Go, 456
TalkTablet, 456
TAP. see Treatment of Aphasic 
Perseveration
Tasks of Executive Control (TEC), 369
Tavistock Trust for Aphasia, 488
TAWF-2. see Test of Adolescent/Adult 
Word Finding-2
Taylor, Jill Bolte, 68, 239
TBI. see Traumatic brain injury
TBIBank, 381
tDCS. see Transcranial direct current 
stimulation (tDCS)
TEA. see Test of Everyday Attention
Teaching, 213
Team-based learning, xi
Teams and teamwork, 21
interdisciplinary teams, 219, 413, 582
multidisciplinary teams, 218–219, 585
transdisciplinary teams, 219–220, 592
types of teams, 218–220
TEC. see Tasks of Executive Control
Technology resources, 456
Telegraphic speech, 163, 591
Telehealth, 218
Telemedicine, 218
Telepractice, 217–218, 591
Telerehabilitation, 218, 219
Temporal conjunctives, 591
Terminal units or T-units, 381–382, 585
Terminology
abbreviations used in clinical reporting, 
395, 396–403
alternatives to the word patient, 34
elderspeak, 146–148, 147
for healthy adults, 35–36

Index   705
inclusive and welcoming language, 
37–38
for older people, 35
for people with disabilities, 34–35
preferred terms for experts, 37
prefixes, 38–39
for research participants, 35
for SLPs, 36–37
terms that convey negative connotations, 
38
therapy vs treatment, 36
Terrorism-related traumatic brain injury 
(TBI) survivors, 175–176
Test design factors, 282, 283–289
Test of Adolescent/Adult Word Finding-2 
(TAWF-2), 368
Test of Everyday Attention (TEA), 274, 317, 
334, 369
Test of Language Competence–Expanded 
Edition (TLC-E), 369
Test of Nonverbal Intelligence-4 (TONI-4), 
369
Test-retest reliability, 279–280, 591
Tests, 327–371
Thalamus: lateral geniculate body of, 101, 
583
Thematic roles, 591
Thematic role training, 553–554, 554–555
Theory of mind, 185, 591
Therapist drift, 440, 591
Therapy (term), 36
Therapy Outcome Measure (TOM), 329
Third-party payers, 199, 227, 591
preauthorization for services by, 224
Thought process framework, 56, 591
Threats, Travis, 411–412
3MS. see Modified Mini-Mental State 
Examination
Thrombolytic drugs, 71, 591
Thrombotic stroke, 68, 591
Thrombus, 68, 69, 591, CF2
TIAs. see Transient ischemic attacks
Time management
for assessment, 264, 335
best time to initiate treatment, 429, 434
for counseling, 477–480
for discourse analysis, 387
optimal timing, 410, 429
scheduling, 212
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), 71, 426, 
591
TLC. see Test of Language Competence
TMS. see Transcranial magnetic stimulation
Toastmasters International, 446
TOM. see Therapy Outcome Measure
Tonal languages, 187, 591
TONI. see Test of Nonverbal Intelligence
Total communication approaches, 591
Touch Chat, 456
Toxemia, 82, 591
tPA. see Tissue plasminogen activator
Tractography, 122, 122, 592, CF8
Traditional Chinese medicine, 492
Training
to administer and score assessments, 336
Attention Process Training (APT), 449, 
573
for caregivers, 445
for discourse analysis, 387
loose programs, 530, 584
for partners, 445
Response Elaboration Training (RET), 
530–531, 588
script training, 521–523, 589
spaced retrieval training (SRT), 463–465, 
464, 590
thematic role, 553–554, 554–555
Transcortical aphasia, mixed, 585
Transcortical motor aphasia, 49, 158, 165, 
592
Transcortical sensory aphasia, 49, 158, 165, 
592
Transcranial direct current stimulation 
(tDCS), 428, 592
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), 
428, 592
repetitive (rTMS), 428, 592
Transcription programs, 379–381, 380–381
Transcutaneous electrical nerve 
stimulation, 498
Transdisciplinary teams, 219–220, 592
Transient confusional state, 198, 592
Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs), 72, 592
Translational injury, 74–75, 592
Transmission deficit theories, 144, 592
Transnational collaboration, 254
Traumatic brain injury (TBI), 74–76, 75, 76
assessment challenges, 176–177

706   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Traumatic brain injury (TBI)  (continued)
assessment tools for, 340, 353–356
blast-induced, 77, 175–176
challenges faced by survivors of, 177–178
cognitive-communicative disorders 
associated with, 171–180
cognitive-linguistic disorders associated 
with, 5, 575
common sequelae in survivors, 173–174
communication symptoms of, 172–176, 
177
complementary and alternative 
interventions for, 499
definition of, 592
economic considerations for work with 
survivors, 178–179
improvements due to brain changes 
after, 485, 486
intervention for survivors, 449
mild (mTBI), 78
in military service personnel, 77–78
prevention of, 78–79
special challenges for survivors, 175–176
special considerations for clinicians 
working with survivors of, 176–177
special difficulties in differential 
diagnosis of symptoms of, 177
treatment for survivors, 450
war- and terrorism-related, 175–176
Treatment, 259–260
adjunct or adjuvant approaches, 491, 571
allopathic approaches, 491, 571
apps and computer software to support, 
455–456
best level of complexity for, 432
best practices for, 407–415
best time to initiate, 434
complementary approaches, 491–504
complexity account of treatment efficacy 
(CATE), 432
counseling during, 479
environmental systems approaches, 442, 
579
evidence of progress, 226–227
general approaches, 439–504, 447–448
herbs, 492–493, 493
humor as, 446–447
integrative approaches, 449, 491–504
modalities of, 433
optimal focus of, 429–431
optimal intensity and duration of, 
431–432
optimal times to initiate, 429
parameters to consider, 432–433
planning, 377
purposes of, 423–424
roles and responsibilities, 212
socially focused programs, 447
specific approaches, 505–570
Treatment (term), 36
Treatment dosage, 592
Treatment fidelity, 439–440, 592
Treatment intensity, 431–432, 592
Treatment of Aphasic Perseveration (TAP), 
531–532, 592
cues for, 532–533
evidence for, 533
implementation of, 532–533
principles of, 532
scoring sheets for, 532–533
Treatment of Underlying Forms (TUF), 552, 
592
evidence for, 555–556
implementation of, 553–555
principles of, 552–553
Tree pruning hypothesis, 163
“Triple Aim Initiative” (Institute for Health 
Care Improvement), 229–230
Tropes (software program), 381
Trousseau, Armand, 4
TTSReader, 455
Tumors, 80–81. see also Neoplasms
primary, 81, 587
secondary or metastatic, 589
T-units or terminal units, 381–382, 585
Turkey, 25
Twitter, 486–489
TWT-R. see Word Test-Revised
Type-token ratios, 382, 592
U
UAM Corpus Tool, 381
UCL Aphasia Research Group Blog, 488
UK. see United Kingdom
UK Stroke Forum, 31
Ulcers, decubitus, 324, 577
Understanding Aphasia (website), 488

Index   707
Unidimensional frameworks, 592–593
Uniform data set, 593
Unilateral forced nostril breathing, 503, 
CF16
research studies on, 498
resources for, 502
United Kingdom, 26
Acquired Brain Injury Forum, 488
certification requirements, 26
National Health Service (NHS), 220
terms for referring to SLPs, 36–37
United Nations
Convention of the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities, 242
Principles for Older Persons, 236
United States, 26
aging populations, 135
certification requirements, 25–26
University-based clinics, 215–216
Unskilled services, 593
V
VAC. see Verb as Core
Validity, 280, 593
concurrent, 281, 575
construct, 281, 576
content, 280, 576
convergent, 281, 576
criterion, 281, 577
discriminant, 281, 578
ecological, 281, 433, 578
face, 281, 580
predictive, 281, 587
Values, 21
VAMS. see Visual Analog Mood Scales
Vascular dementia, 196, 593
VASES. see Visual Analogue Self-Esteem 
Scale
VAST. see Verb and Sentence Test; Video-
Assisted Speech Technology
VAT. see Visual Action Therapy
VCIU. see Voluntary Control of Involuntary 
Utterances
Vehicles: clinicians as, 20–23, 22, CF1
Venography, magnetic resonance (MRV), 126
Ventricular system, 91
Verbal paraphasias, 160. see also Semantic 
paraphasias
Verbal perseveration, 161, 593
Verb and Sentence Test (VAST), 352
Verb as Core (VAC), 548–549, 549–550, 593
Verb Network Strengthening Treatment 
(VNeST), 545, 593
baseline, 546
evidence for, 548
generation of agent-patient pairs, 
546–547
generation of agent-patient pairs again, 
547
implementation of, 546–547
principles of, 545–546
semantic judgments, 547
stimulus selection and creation, 546
Wh- questions about agent-patient pairs, 
547
Verbs, 545
Victims (term), 38
Video-Assisted Speech Technology (VAST), 
455
Videoconferencing, 489
Vigilance, 315–316
Virtual Therapist (VT) program, 570
Viruses, 79–80, 593
Visual Action Therapy (VAT), 515–516, 
516–517, 593
Visual acuity deficits, 302–304
Visual acuity tests, 303, 303–304
Visual agnosia, 108–109, 308–309, 593
Visual Analog Mood Scales (VAMS), 
322–323, 369
Visual Analog Mood Scales–Revised 
(VAMS-R), 322–323, 369
Visual Analogue Self-Esteem Scale 
(VASES), 323, 369
Visual attention deficits, 98, 108, 361, 593
Visual deficits, 302–309
anatomy and physiology associated 
with, 99–104
higher-level, 108–109
Visual field cuts, 304
Visual field deficits, 104–105, 304
Visual fields, 101, 103, 593
binocular, 101, 101, 573, CF6
monocular, 101–102, 102, 585, CF6
Visual integration deficits, 98–99, 308–309, 
593
Visualization, 497

708   Aphasia and Other Acquired Neurogenic Language Disorders
Visual neglect, 304–308, 593
left, 187
right-sided, CF14
screening for, 307–308, 308
Visual object agnosia, 308–309, 593
Visual-perceptual impairments, 183, 188
Visual scene displays, 444–445, 593
Visual screening charts, 303, 303–304
Visual sensory deficits, 98, 99, 593
Visual system, 90, 98–99, 99–104, 100, CF5
Visuoconstructive deficits, 109, 309, 593
Vitamin B, 498
Voluntary Control of Involuntary 
Utterances (VCIU), 529, 593
evidence for, 530
steps for carrying out, 529–530
VT. see Virtual Therapist program
W
WAB. see Western Aphasia Battery
Wada test, 89–91, 126. see also Sodium 
amytal infusion
War-related traumatic brain injury (TBI) 
survivors, 175–176
WCST. see Wisconsin Card Sorting Test
Wechsler Memory Scale–III (WMS-III), 334, 
370
Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR), 
301, 370
Welcoming language, 37–38
Wellness
complementary and integrative 
approaches to, 491–493
concomitant challenges to, 282, 323–324
Wellness coaching, 473, 583. see also Life 
coaching
Wernicke’s aphasia, 49, 92, 160–162, 376, 
594
associated lesions, 157, 160
hallmark features of, 157, 160, 161–162
Wernicke’s area, 88, 89, CF3
Western Aphasia Battery–Extended 
(WAB-E), 352
Western Aphasia Battery–Revised 
(WAB-R), 274, 329, 352
White matter, 90
WHO. see World Health Organization
Wh- questions, 547
Wiig-Semel Test of Linguistic Concepts 
(W-STLC), 356
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST), 370
WJIII NU. see Woodcock Johnson III 
Normative Update Tests of Cognitive 
Abilities
WMS. see Wechsler Memory Scale
WMS-III. see Wechsler Memory Scale–III
Woodcock Johnson III Normative Update 
(NU) Tests of Cognitive Abilities 
(WJIII NU), 370
Word finding
approaches for improving, 535–550
normal changes with aging, 138
Word-finding problems
assessment tools for, 368
associated with dementia, 199
in older adults, 138
Words
closed-class, 574
content, 576
function, 580
open-class, 586
WordStat, 381
Word Test-Revised (TWT-R), 370
Working memory, 594
Working memory theories, 143, 594
World Assembly on Ageing, 236
World Bank Office of Disability and 
Development, 236
World Health Organization (WHO), 254
definition of community-based 
rehabilitation, 240–241
International Classification of 
Functioning, Disability and Health 
(ICF), 53, 59–65, 60, 441–442, 582
International Classification of 
Impairment, Disabilities and 
Handicaps (ICIDH), 59, 60
World Report on Disability, 237
World Stroke Association, 31
World Stroke Organization (WSO), 254
Writing
approaches for improving, 561–570
best practices for reporting assessment 
results, 393–394
ideographic scripts, 581

Index   709
normal changes with aging, 139
about people with disabilities, 33–39
test design factors, 282, 286
Writing deficits, 183, 188–189, 315
Writing-focused programs, 561–562
WSO. see World Stroke Organization
W-STLC. see Wiig-Semel Test of Linguistic 
Concepts
WTAR. see Wechsler Test of Adult Reading
X
X-ray computed tomography. see 
Computerized axial tomography (CAT 
or CT)
Y
Ylvisaker, Mark, 411


