
 Approaching Infinity 
 

 Also by Michael Huemer 
 ETHICAL INTUITIONISM 
 THE PROBLEM OF POLITICAL AUTHORITY 
 SKEPTICISM AND THE VEIL OF PERCEPTION 
 

 Approaching Infinity 
 Michael  Huemer 
 Professor of Philosophy, University of Colorado at Boulder, USA
 
 

 © Michael Huemer 2016 
 All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this 
 publication may be made without written permission. 
 No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted 
 save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the 
 Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence 
 permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 
 Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS. 
 Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication 
 may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages. 
 The author has asserted his right to be identified  as the author of this work 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs  and Patents Act 1988. 
 First published 2016 by 
 PALGRAVE MACMILLAN 
 Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited, 
 registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke,
 Hampshire RG21 6XS. 
 Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC, 
 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010. 
 Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies
and has companies and representatives throughout the world. 
 Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, 
 the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries. 
 This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully 
 managed and sustained forest sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing 
 processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the 
 country of origin. 
 A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Huemer, Michael, 1969– author.
Title: Approaching infinity / Michael Huemer.
Description: New York : Palgrave Macmillan, 2016. | Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2015040546| ISBN  9781137560865 (pbk.)
Subjects: LCSH: Infinite.
Classification: LCC BD411 .H84 2016 | DDC 111/.6—dc23
LC record available at http://lccn.loc.gov/2015040546 
 
ISBN 978-1-137-56086-5          ISBN 978-1-137-56087-2 (eBook)
DOI 10.1057/9781137560872

 For Iskra 
 

This page intentionally left blank

vii
Contents 
  List of Figures 
  xi 
 Preface 
  xii 
 Part I  The Need for a Theory of Infinity 
 1    The Prevalence of the Infinite  
 3 
 
   1.1  The concept of infinity and the infinite  
  3 
 
   1.2 The infinite in mathematics  
 4 
 
   1.3 The infinite in philosophy  
 5 
 
   1.4 The infinite in the physical world  
 6 
 
   1.5 The infinite in modern physics  
 7 
 
   1.6 Controversies  
  7  
 2    Six Infinite Regresses 
  
 9 
 
   2.1 The regress of causes  
 9 
 
   2.2 The regress of reasons  
 10 
 
   2.3 The regress of forms 
 11 
 
   2.4 The regress of resemblances  
 12 
 
   2.5 The regress of temporal series  
 14 
 
   2.6 The regress of truths  
  15 
 
   2.7 Conclusion 
  16 
 3    Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite  
 17 
 
 3.1  A word about paradoxes  
 17 
 
   3.2 The arithmetic of infinity  
 17 
 
   3.3 The paradox of geometric points  
 18 
 
   3.4 Infinite sums  
  20 
 
   3.5 Galileo’s paradox  
 
 21 
 
   3.6 Hilbert’s hotel  
  22 
 
   3.7 Gabriel’s horn 
  23 
 
   3.8 Smullyan’s infinite rod   
 24 
 
  3.9 Zeno’s paradox  
  25  
 
  3.10  The divided stick 
  27 
 
  3.11 Thomson’s lamp  
  28 
 
  3.12 The Littlewood-Ross Banker  
 29 
 
  3.13 Benardete’s paradox  
  31 

viii Contents
 
  3.14 
Laraudogoitia’s marbles  
 32 
 
  3.15 
The spaceship  
  33 
 
  3.16 
The Saint Petersburg paradox  
 34 
 
  3.17 
The Martingale betting system  
 35 
 
  3.18 
The delayed heaven paradox  
 36 
 
  3.19 
Conclusion  
  38  
 Part II  Old Theories of Infinity  
 4    Impossible Infinite Series: Two False Accounts  
  41 
 
   4.1 
  ‘An infinite series cannot be completed by 
successive synthesis’  
  41 
 
   4.2 
‘An infinite series of preconditions cannot be satisfied’ 
 44 
 
   4.3 
Conclusion  
  47 
 5    Actual and Potential Infinities  
  49 
 
 5.1  
 The theory of potential infinity  
 49 
 
   5.2 
Why not actual infinities?  
 51 
 
   5.3 
Infinite divisibility  
  52 
 
   5.4 
Infinite time  
  57 
 
   5.5 
Infinite space  
  57 
 
   5.6 
Infinitely numerous numbers  
  
65 
 
   5.7 
Infinitely numerous abstract objects  
  67 
 
   5.8 
Infinitely numerous physical objects  
  
68 
 
   5.9 
Conclusion  
69 
 6    The Cantorian Orthodoxy 
  71 
 
   6.1 
The importance of Georg Cantor  
 71 
 
   6.2 
Sets  
 
 71 
 
   6.3 
Cardinal numbers  
  73 
 
   6.4 
‘Greater’, ‘less’, and ‘equal’  
 74 
 
   6.5 
 Many sets are equally numerous  
 75 
 
   6.6 
The diagonalization argument  
 78 
 
   6.7 
Cantor’s theorem  
  80 
 
   6.8 
The paradoxes of set theory  
 82 
 
   6.9 
Other paradoxes of infinity  
 85 
 
  6.10 
 Conclusion 
  89 
  Part III  A New Theory of Infinity and Related Matters 
 7    Philosophical Preliminaries  
  93 
 
   7.1 
Metapreliminaries  
  93 
 
   7.2 
Phenomenal conservatism  
 95 

Contents ix
 
   7.3 Synthetic a priori knowledge  
 
  97 
 
   7.4 Metaphysical possibility  
  100 
 
   7.5  Possibility and paradox  
105 
 
   7.6 A realist view of mathematics  
  106 
 8   Sets 
  108 
 
   8.1 Sets are not collections  
  108 
 
   8.2 Sets are not defined by the axioms  
  110 
 
   8.3 Many regarded as one: the foundational sin? 
 111 
 
   8.4 The significance of the paradoxes  
  113 
 
   8.5 Are numbers sets?  
  114 
 
   8.6 Set theory and the laws of arithmetic  
  116 
  9    Numbers  
  119 
 
   9.1 Cardinal numbers as properties  
  119 
 
   9.2 Frege’s objection  
  120 
 
   9.3 Arithmetical operations  
  122 
 
   9.4 The laws of arithmetic    
 123 
 
   9.5  Zero 
  124 
 
  9.6 A digression on large numbers  
  127 
 
   9.7  Magnitudes and real numbers  
  129 
 
   9.8 Indexing uses of numbers  
  137 
 
   9.9 Other numbers  
  138 
 10    Infinity 
  143 
 
  10.1 Infinity is not a number  
  143 
 
  10.2 Infinite cardinalities  
  148 
 
  10.3 Infinite extensive magnitudes  
  150 
 
  10.4 Infinite intensive magnitudes  
  151 
 
  10.5 Some a priori physics  
  158 
 11    Space 
  162 
 
  11.1 Pointy space versus gunky space  
  162 
 
  11.2 The unimaginability of points  
  163 
 
  11.3 The zero argument  
  164 
 
  11.4  When zero is not mere absence  
  165 
 
  11.5 The paradox of contact     
168  
 
  11.6 The problem of division  
 
 170 
 
  11.7 The dimensionality of space is necessary    
171 
 
  11.8 The measure-theoretic objection  
  
173 
 12    Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved  
  176 
 
  12.1 The arithmetic of infinity  
  176 

x Contents
 
  12.2 The paradox of geometric points  
  
176  
 
   12.3 Infinite sums    
178 
 
   12.4  Galileo’s paradox  
  
180 
 
   12.5 Hilbert’s hotel  
  
182 
 
   12.6 Gabriel’s horn  
  
183 
 
   12.7 Smullyan’s infinite rod 
 184 
 
   12.8 Zeno’s paradox  
  185 
 
   12.9 The divided stick 
  188 
 
  12.10 Thomson’s lamp  
  194 
 
  12.11 The Littlewood-Ross Banker  
  201 
 
  12.12 Benardete’s paradox  
  207 
 
  12.13 Laraudogoitia’s marbles  
  211 
 
  12.14 The spaceship 
 211 
 
  12.15 The Saint Petersburg paradox  
  213 
 
  12.16 The Martingale betting system  
  218 
 
  12.17 The delayed heaven paradox  
  220  
 
  12.18 Comment: shallow and deep impossibilities  
 223 
 13    Assessing Infinite Regress Arguments  
  229 
 
 13.1 The problem of identifying vicious regresses  
 229 
 
   13.2 Viciousness through metaphysical impossibility  
 230 
 
   13.3 Viciousness through implausibility  
  
232 
 
   13.4 Viciousness through explanatory failure  
  
 236 
 
   13.5 Conclusion 
 245 
 14    Conclusion   
 247 
 
 14.1  Why study infinity?  
  247 
 
   14.2 Troubles with traditional approaches  
  248 
 
   14.3 A new approach to infinity  
  248 
 
   14.4  Some controversial views about sets, numbers, 
and points  
  249 
 
   14.5 Solving the paradoxes  
  250 
 
   14.6  For further reflection, or: what is wrong 
with this book? 
  251 
  References 
  261 
 Index 
  269 
 

xi
 List of Figures 
   3.1 
  A magically expanding rod    
20 
  3.2 
  Hilbert’s hotel  
  23 
  3.3 
  Gabriel’s horn  
  24 
  3.4 
  Smullyan’s rod  
  25 
  3.5 
  The divided stick  
  28 
  5.1 
  Relationship between the side and the diagonal of a square  
 56 
  5.2 
  Three lines connecting two points 
 59 
  5.3 
  Newton’s bucket  
  63 
  6.1 
  Cantor’s theorem 
  81 
  9.1 
  Three instances of twoness   
 119 
 10.1 
  Infinite temperature and negative temperature 
  156 
 10.2 
  An impossible Newtonian scenario  
  159 
 11.1 
  A line and a triangle  
  165 
 11.2 
  Two ways of dividing a stick in half   
 171 
 11.3 
  The Cantor lines  
  174 
 12.1 
  A magically expanding rod    
177 
 12.2 
  Dividing a stick with infinitely many knives   
190  
 12.3 
  Cutting a material    
193 
 12.4 
  A rotary switch for Thomson’s lamp  
  199  
 12.5 
  The Banker paradox with diminishing bills 
 203 
 12.6 
  Benardete’s walls  
  208 
 14.1 
  An impossible Newtonian scenario  
  252 

xii
 Preface 
 For many years, I have made a point of confounding my philosophy 
students with a variety of paradoxes, including several paradoxes of the 
infinite. And for many years, I tried myself to think through these para-
doxes, without success. I list seventeen of these paradoxes in Chapter 3. 
But over and above the seventeen paradoxes, there were three philo-
sophical questions about the infinite that exercised me. 
 Here is the first issue. It seems that there are some infinite series that 
can be completed. For instance, for an object to move from point A to 
point B, it must first travel half the distance, then half the remaining 
distance, then half the remaining distance, and so on. According to one 
famous argument, because this is an infinite series, the object can never 
reach point B. The proper response seems to be to insist that one can in 
fact complete an infinite series. 
 On the other hand, it seems that there are other infinite series that 
cannot be completed. For instance, imagine a lamp that starts out on, 
then is switched off after half a minute, then back on after another 
quarter minute, then off after another eighth of a minute, and so on. 
At the end of one minute, is it on or off? The proper response seems 
to be that one could not complete such an infinite series of switch-
ings. We might think this is because an infinite series, by definition, 
is endless, and one cannot come to the end of something that is 
endless. 
 In other words, the solution to the first puzzle (‘one can complete an 
infinite series’) seems to be the opposite of the solution to the second 
puzzle (‘one cannot complete an infinite series’). That’s puzzling. What 
we would like to say is that some infinite series are possible, and others 
are impossible. But why? What is the difference between the infinite 
series of halfway-motions, and the infinite series of lamp-switchings? 
That’s the first philosophical question I wanted to answer. 
 This puzzle is tied up with a popular genre of arguments in philosophy: 
it is common to argue that some philosophical theory must be rejected 
because it leads to an infinite regress. For instance, if every event has a 
cause, and the cause of an event is also an event, then there must be an 
infinite regress of causes. To avoid this, some say, we should reject the 
idea that everything has a cause; instead, we should posit a ‘first cause’, 
something that caused everything else and was itself uncaused. 

Preface xiii
 But almost as common as infinite regress arguments is a certain type of 
response, which claims that there is nothing wrong with the infinite regress. 
For instance, some say that we should simply accept that there is an infinite 
series of causes stretching into the past forever. Now, there seems to be wide 
agreement among philosophers that some but not all infinite regresses are 
bad; but there has been no consensus on which regresses are bad (‘vicious’) 
and which benign. Hence, the second philosophical question I wanted to 
answer: What makes an infinite regress vicious or benign? 
 Finally, I started reflecting on infinities in science, where there seems 
to be an analogous issue. Some infinities are considered ‘bad’ – for 
instance, the infinite energy density and infinite spacetime curvature of 
a black hole are considered problems in astrophysics. They are thought 
to indicate a breakdown of accepted theories (notably, general relativity), 
and astrophysicists have been trying to devise new theories that elim-
inate these infinities. But there are other infinities that no one seems 
worried about: no one seems to consider the notion of an infinitely large 
universe, or the notion of an infinite future, to be problematic. Why is 
this? What makes some infinite quantities in a theory problematic while 
others are perfectly acceptable? 
 One can see that these three questions – ‘Why are some infinite series 
completeable and others not?’, ‘Why are some infinite regresses vicious 
and others not?’, and ‘Why are some infinite quantities problematic and 
others not?’ – are quite similar, and so perhaps they have a common 
answer. After several years of puzzlement concerning the first two ques-
tions, I finally tried to connect them with the third question. It was then 
that I thought of a theory that seems to me to account for which sorts 
of infinities are possible and which impossible. After publishing one 
paper on the subject (‘Virtue and Vice among the Infinite’), I decided to 
expand my ideas into this book. 
 I would like to thank Stuart Rachels for the conversations about 
the infinite that led to this expansion. In addition, I am grateful 
for the comments of Adrian Moore and Matt Skene on earlier drafts of 
the manuscript, and the questions and comments of Peter Klein, Ted 
Poston, Jeanne Peijnenberg, David Atkinson, and the other participants 
of the Infinite Regress Workshop organized by Scott Aiken at Vanderbilt 
University in October, 2013, where I presented my earlier paper on the 
subject. If there are any errors in this book, as surely there must be, they 
are the fault of one of these other philosophers – most likely Peter Klein, 
because he supervised my PhD and should have trained me better. 
 

 Part I 
 The Need for a Theory of Infinity 

3
 Two things are infinite: the universe and human stupidity. 
 – Albert Einstein/Frederick S. Perls 1 
 1.1  The concept of infinity and the infinite 
 What is the infinite? The infinite is sometimes described as that which 
is unlimited, boundless, or so great that it is impossible for anything 
to be greater. For instance, an infinitely heavy stone would be a stone 
so heavy that it would be conceptually impossible for anything to be 
heavier. (Whether there could be such a stone is another matter.) An 
infinite area would be an area such that no area could be larger. 
 What about the noun ‘infinity’ – what does this refer to? Infinity is 
commonly thought of as a very large number – a number larger than all 
the other numbers; or, a number so large that if you add one to it, the 
result is no larger than you started with. Another way to get at the idea 
is to define infinity by reference to some particular thing that is infi-
nite. For instance, we might say: infinity is the number that describes 
how many natural numbers there are. Or: infinity is the number that 
describes how big all of space is. 
 1 
 The Prevalence of the Infinite 
 1   This quotation comes from the Gestalt psychotherapist Frederick Perls (1947, 
111), who attributes it to ‘a great astronomer’ then goes on to say that Einstein has 
shown that the universe is  not infinite. Later, Perls (1969, 33) modified the quota-
tion and ascribed it to Einstein, who is supposed to have said it in conversation 
with Perls (the original version contained ‘as far as we know’ after ‘infinite’).  

4 Approaching Infinity
 Much later in this book, we see why the above characterizations are 
inadequate and what a more adequate characterization looks like. But 
that requires much more work, so for now, I leave the reader with the 
above characterizations, which at least point at the intuitive conception 
of infinity and the infinite. 
 Why is infinity interesting? Three reasons: first, the infinite is an 
important part of reality. Second, many important philosophical 
arguments invoke the concept of infinity, infinite regresses in partic-
ular. Third, infinity is extremely puzzling, and we have yet to attain a 
clear grasp of it. We begin in this chapter with the first of these three 
points; the second and third points are elaborated in Chapters 2 and 3, 
respectively. 
 1.2  The infinite in mathematics 
 Pace Einstein, more than two things are infinite. In mathematics, there 
are a variety of infinite classes of abstract objects. The most familiar of 
these is the set of counting numbers (the numbers 1, 2, 3, and so on). 
There is no last member of this set; no matter how high you count, 
there are always more counting numbers. And the point is of course not 
one about human counting capacities; the main point of interest is one 
that would hold even if there were no conscious beings: for any natural 
number  n , there is another greater than it. 
 Similarly, the real numbers (which include whole numbers in addition 
to fractions and irrational numbers) are infinitely numerous, since again, 
for any real number  r , there are real numbers larger than  r . Indeed, if you 
pick any two real numbers, there are infinitely many others sandwiched 
between them. For example, between the numbers 2 and 2.1, there are 
the numbers 2.01, 2.011, 2.0111, and so on. 
 These numbers are the least controversial; anyone who believes in 
numbers at all believes in the reals. Negative numbers used to be contro-
versial since it seemed odd that there should be a quantity less than 
nothing. Potentially controversial classes of numbers include imaginary 
numbers, infinitesimals, hyperreals, and transfinite cardinals. Each of 
these kinds of number,  if they exist at all, are also infinitely numerous. 
If there are imaginary numbers, then there are infinitely many of them 
( i , − i , 2 i , −2 i , ... ); if there are infinitesimals, then there are infinitely 
many of them; and so on. 
 That is just to speak of numbers. Other mathematical objects, if they 
exist at all, are also infinitely numerous. For instance, if sets exist, then 
there are the sets {1}, {2}, {1,2}, {3}, {1,3}, {2,3}, {1,2,3}, and so on. Or, if 

The Prevalence of the Infinite 5
you prefer sets built from concrete elements, there are {the moon}, {{the 
moon}}, {{the moon}, the moon}, {{{the moon}}}, and so on. Almost any 
other type of mathematical object will also be infinitely numerous, if 
that type of object exists at all (for example, vectors, groups, functions, 
points, spaces). 
 1.3  The infinite in philosophy 
 Philosophers often discuss  propositions , which are usually thought of as 
a special kind of abstract object. A proposition is the sort of thing that 
can be either true or false; however, propositions are to be distinguished 
both from  statements  and from  beliefs . When you have a belief, the thing 
that you believe to be the case is a proposition. Multiple people can 
believe the same thing (the same proposition). A person can also have 
multiple attitudes toward the same proposition; for instance, you may 
both believe and regret that you have eaten all the coffee ice cream. 
The phrase ‘that you have eaten all the coffee ice cream’ denotes a 
proposition. There can also be multiple sentences that express the same 
proposition; for instance, ‘It is raining’ and ‘Il pleut’ (the French transla-
tion of ‘It is raining’) both express the proposition that it is raining.  2 If 
propositions exist, then there are infinitely many of them. There are, 
for instance, the propositions that 2 is greater than 1, that 3 is greater 
than 1, that 4 is greater than 1, and so on. 
 Then there are universals. A ‘universal’ is something that multiple 
things could have in common, in the sense of something that could be 
predicated of them. For instance, in my refrigerator I have a tomato and 
a chili pepper. Both are red; in other words, redness is one of the things 
they have in common. So redness is a universal. Note, incidentally, that 
redness would be a universal even if there were fewer than two red things 
in the universe: redness is a universal because it is the sort of thing that 
multiple things  could have in common, even if in fact multiple things 
don’t have this in common. (I don’t know why philosophers call these 
things ‘universals’. The name ‘universal’ makes it sound as though they 
are shared by  everything , but in fact all that is required is that they are 
 capable of being shared by  more than one thing.) 
 2  This may need to be relativized to a conversational context – that is, ‘it is 
raining’ expresses the proposition that it is raining at the time and place made 
salient by the context of the utterance. That it rains at some other place or time 
would be a distinct proposition. 

6 Approaching Infinity
 How many universals are there? Infinitely many. Every color is a 
universal – not just the familiar colors such as red, green, and blue, but 
 every shade  of color, however specific, including the shades for which 
English lacks a name. Each of these colors is something that multiple 
things  could have in common. Similarly, every shape is a universal – not 
just the familiar shapes such as round, square, and triangular, but every 
irregular shape, including the ones that have no names in English, and 
including those shapes such that no physical object is actually shaped 
that way. Each of these shapes is something that multiple objects could 
have in common. Similarly, every possible size is a universal; every type 
of emotional state is a universal (for example, being happy, being afraid, 
being angry); and so on. 
 Finally, many philosophers have held that there is one particularly 
interesting entity that is infinite, namely, God. God has been thought to 
be infinite in a variety of respects – to have unlimited power, unlimited 
knowledge, to be present everywhere at all times, and so on. According 
to Descartes, the word ‘infinite’ strictly applies ‘only to that in which 
no limits of any kind can be found; and in this sense God alone is 
infinite.’ 3 
 1.4  The infinite in the physical world 
 Physical space – the space that we occupy and move around in – is infi-
nite in two ways. First, space is  infinitely extended  (it extends infinitely far 
in all directions). Imagine traveling away from the Earth. No matter how 
far away you went, it would always be possible to go farther. You would 
never, so to speak, come to the edge of space, like some giant wall. And 
the real point here is not about our traveling capabilities; the point of 
interest is that there are places arbitrarily far from here. That is, for any 
distance,  d , there are places farther from here than  d (even if there are no 
physical objects in those places). 
 Second, space is  infinitely divisible . If you have a line segment, for 
example, you can divide the segment into a left half and a right half. 
Then the left half can itself be divided into a left half (the leftmost 
quarter of the original segment) and a right half. Then  that left half 
(the leftmost eighth of the original segment) can be divided into a left 
half and a right half. And so on. Again, the point here is not one about 
human dividing capabilities; the real point is that for any two points, 
there are other points in between them, which entails that there are 
 3   Descartes 1984, 81. Compare Aquinas 1981, I.Q7. 

The Prevalence of the Infinite 7
infinitely many points, and infinitely many line segments, within any 
given line segment. 
 The same observations apply to time. Time appears to extend infi-
nitely in both directions. No matter how far into the past one looks, 
there were moments earlier than that. No matter how far into the future 
one looks, there will be moments after that. There may one day come an 
end of humanity, or an end of the Earth, or even an end of our material 
universe, but there is not going to come an end of  time . 
 Like space, time is infinitely divisible. Take a one-minute interval of 
time. It can be divided into the first half and the last half. Then the first 
half can itself be divided into a first half (the first 15 seconds of the orig-
inal interval) and a second half. Then that first half can be divided into 
a first half (the first 7.5 seconds of the original interval) and a second 
half. And so on. Every time interval contains infinitely many smaller 
intervals, and infinitely many instants. 
 1.5  The infinite in modern physics 
 In modern physics, some infinite quantities have been theorized but 
remain controversial. A black hole, as described by the general theory of 
relativity, is a region of infinite density (a positive amount of mass-en-
ergy is concentrated in zero volume) and infinite spacetime curvature. 
The same is true of the Big Bang singularity in which the universe is 
thought to have originated. However, the appearance of these infinities 
is generally regarded as signaling a breakdown of the theory (general 
relativity) under these conditions. To accurately describe a black hole 
or the conditions at the beginning of the universe, one would have to 
take account of quantum mechanics, and there is as yet no accepted 
quantum mechanical account of gravitation.  4 Scientists working on 
quantum gravity are seeking ways to eliminate the infinities from the 
theory. 
 1.6  Controversies 
 Some (perhaps all) of the above examples are controversial. Some people 
would deny that all of these are genuine examples of existing infinities, 
either because they deny that the things I am discussing really exist, or 
because they think the things I am discussing are finite. For instance, 
some would deny that there are infinitely many sets, because they deny 
 4   Wald 1984, 211–12; Hamade 1996. 

8 Approaching Infinity
that sets exist at all. Some would deny that the past is infinite, because 
they think there was a beginning of time. I address some of these contro-
versies later, when I consider certain philosophical theories that have 
led people to deny the existence of actual infinities. For now, I hope 
simply to have made a prima facie case that infinity is an important 
aspect of reality, worthy of investigation. If you accept at least some of 
my examples, this should suffice.  
 

9
 It is commonly thought that there are  some  kinds of infinite series that 
one should avoid in one’s philosophical theories – infinite series such 
that, if a theory requires one of them, then the theory should therefore 
be rejected. These are referred to as ‘vicious infinite regresses’. On the 
other hand, it is also commonly thought that  not all  infinite series need 
be avoided; sometimes a theory entails the existence of an infinite series, 
but the theory should  not  therefore be rejected. These are referred to as 
‘virtuous’ or (less misleadingly) ‘benign infinite regresses’. 
 Infinite regress arguments are common in philosophy. These are 
arguments that claim that a certain philosophical doctrine should be 
rejected because the doctrine leads to a vicious infinite regress, or that 
a certain philosophical doctrine should be accepted in order to avoid a 
vicious regress. 
 What makes an infinite regress virtuous or vicious? This remains a 
matter of controversy, and one purpose of this book is to work toward a 
satisfying answer to this question. But we will be in a better position to 
address the question after we have looked at some examples of infinite 
regresses, as well as a variety of problems involving the infinite. In the 
present chapter, I confine myself to listing several infinite regresses that 
appear in philosophy, with the aim of evincing the need for an account 
of virtue and vice among the infinite. 
 2.1  The regress of causes 
 Perhaps the most famous infinite regress argument is the First Cause 
Argument for the existence of God (also known as the Cosmological 
Argument). We find in the world many events that are linked by 
 2 
 Six Infinite Regresses 

10 Approaching Infinity
relations of cause and effect. Suppose some present event, A, was caused 
by B. Then we can ask what caused B. If B was caused by C, then we can 
ask what caused C. If C was caused by D, then we can ask what caused 
D. And so on. 
 But, the argument goes, there cannot be an infinite regress of causes. If 
there were, this would mean that an infinite series had to be completed 
in order for event A to occur; but an infinite series cannot be completed 
(compare the absurd idea of counting to infinity); therefore, event A 
would not have been possible. To avoid the infinite regress, we must 
postulate a ‘first cause’, something that started the chain of causation 
and was not itself caused by anything. 1 
 How one gets from the idea of a first cause to the idea of God is less 
clear. As far as the above reasoning goes, the first cause need not be 
unique, that is, there might be more than one uncaused cause; it need 
not be a conscious being, let alone an all-knowing, all-powerful, morally 
good being; and it need not even exist in the present (the first cause or 
causes might have existed only in the distant past). Nevertheless, the 
theist would wish to argue that God is the most plausible candidate for 
a first cause. 
 Our concern here, however, is whether the argument for a first cause 
succeeds, not whether the first cause is God or something else. Even 
before God is introduced, the first cause argument is controversial. 
While some philosophers find the idea of an infinite series of causes 
stretching back infinitely into the past paradoxical, others find the idea 
unproblematic. 2 This is to say that there is no general agreement on 
whether the infinite regress of causes is vicious or benign.  
 2.2  The regress of reasons 
 Suppose you believe some proposition, A, and assume that this is a 
rationally justified belief. We can then ask what reason you have to 
believe A. Now suppose that your reason for believing A is B. It seems 
that, for B to justify A, you must also be justified in believing B. So 
we can ask why you believe B. Now suppose your reason for believing 
B is C. Again, it seems that C must also be justifiably believed, so we 
can ask for your reason for believing C. But this process cannot go on 
forever; you cannot actually have an infinite series of reasons for belief. 
Therefore, there must be a point at which you have a justified belief, but 
 1  Aquinas 1981, I.Q2.A3; Kant 1965, B454; Craig 1991.  
 2   Russell 1961, 587. 

Six Infinite Regresses 11
that belief is not based on any reasons. This is referred to as a ‘founda-
tional’ belief, and the people who believe that there are foundational 
beliefs are referred to as ‘foundationalists’. 
 The preceding paragraph summarizes the leading argument for foun-
dationalism. It is due in part to that argument that foundationalism has 
been the dominant position in the history of philosophy. Another way 
of stating the basic idea is this: we must posit foundational beliefs in 
order to avoid a vicious regress of reasons. 3 
 Recently, however, some philosophers have questioned whether the 
regress of reasons is really vicious. This position is known as ‘infinitism’.  4 
Infinitists agree that there are justified beliefs, they agree that circular 
reasoning must be avoided, but they disagree that any beliefs are founda-
tional; instead, they hold that the infinite regress of reasons is a virtuous 
regress. Traditionally, foundationalists argue that the regress of reasons 
is vicious because no human being could complete an infinitely long 
chain of reasoning. In response, infinitists maintain that justified belief 
only requires that the believer be  capable of providing a reason for a 
given belief, if and when the belief is challenged; it does not require that 
the believer have actually provided a reason for every belief. Thus, there 
is no requirement of completing an infinitely long chain of reasoning. 
In addition, infinitists maintain that, while it may be impossible for an 
individual to have infinitely many beliefs occurring in their conscious-
ness at one time, it is possible for a person to have infinitely many  dispo-
sitional  beliefs; these are beliefs that one counts as holding by virtue of 
one’s dispositions, rather than what one is thinking at the moment.  
 2.3  The regress of forms 
 Plato’s best known idea was his theory of universals, the Theory of the 
Forms. 5 This theory held that there is a realm of non-physical, abstract 
objects, the ‘Forms’. There are Forms for every property – or at least every 
important property  6 – that objects might have in common. Thus, there 
are Forms of Roundness, Largeness, Humanness, Beauty, Goodness, and 
so on. Furthermore, Plato appears to have held that the Form of F (where 
 3  Aristotle 1941,  Posterior Analytics I.2; Huemer 2010. 
 4  Infinitism was pioneered by my old grad school advisor, Peter Klein (1999; 
2003). See also Turri and Klein 2014. 
 5  See the  Meno (Plato 2012) and  The Republic  (Plato 1974), 514a–518d. For 
Plato’s trenchant criticisms of his own theory, see the  Parmenides in Plato 1931. 
 6  See the  Parmenides (Plato 1931) at 130c–d, where Socrates denies the existence 
of Forms for such things as hair, mud, and filth. 

12 Approaching Infinity
F is some property) is a perfect example of F. For instance, the Form of 
Roundness is a perfect circle, existing in some non-physical realm. All 
circles in the physical, observable world are but imperfect approxima-
tions to the Form of Roundness. 
 There is a famous argument (at least it is famous among philoso-
phers – which really doesn’t make it famous at all) against the Theory 
of Forms, known as the Third Man Argument.  7 Suppose there are two 
men, say Homer and Carl. According to Plato, to explain what Homer 
and Carl have in common, we have to posit the Form of Man. This 
Form of Man is a perfect man, just as the Form of Roundness is a perfect 
circle. (This is already quite bizarre.) The Form of Man will therefore 
have something in common with Homer and Carl – it, too, is a man. 
Therefore, to explain what the Form of Man has in common with the 
ordinary, physical men, we will have to posit  another  Form. This second 
Form will also presumably be a perfect example of manhood, so it will 
have something in common with Homer, Carl, and the first Form of 
Man. Thus begins an infinite regress. 
 Unlike the previous two cases, the viciousness of this regress is not 
very controversial – no one has tried to defend the idea that there really 
is this infinite series of Forms of Man. Contemporary thinkers avoid the 
regress by denying that the property of being  F is itself an instance of 
 F . For example, even if there is a universal of Manhood, that universal 
is not itself a man; hence, there is no occasion to introduce a second 
universal of Manhood. 8 
 2.4  The regress of resemblances 
 In contrast to Plato, many philosophers have held that universals do 
not exist, or that there are no abstract objects; there are only concrete, 
particular things. 9 This sort of view is called ‘nominalism’. 
 Nominalists then owe us an explanation for why it  seems  as though 
there are universals. For example, there might be three blue things – say, 
the sky, a blueberry, and a blue parrot. It seems as though there is some-
thing they have in common – or as we might say, there is a respect in 
which the three objects are the same – namely, their blueness. Blueness 
 7   See Plato 1931,  Parmenides 132a–b, where the argument is given using the 
Form of the Large. Aristotle (1941) appears to have changed the example to the 
Form of Man ( Metaphysics 990b17, 1039a2;  Sophistical Refutations 178b36ff.). 
 8   Armstrong 1978, 71. 
 9   Hume 1992, 17–25; Ockham 1994. 

Six Infinite Regresses 13
is not a particular, concrete thing; it is a universal. So it seems that there 
is at least one universal. 
 Here is one way in which nominalists have responded; the following 
view is known as ‘resemblance nominalism’: there are three distinct 
bluenesses, (A) the blueness of the sky, (B) the blueness of the berry, 
and (C) the blueness of the parrot. Each of these is a property confined 
to a specific object at a certain place and time; none of them is repeat-
able. Furthermore, the three bluenesses do not themselves literally have 
anything in common; they are not  the same  in any respect. Rather, they 
are merely  similar , that is they  resemble  each other to some degree, and 
this is why we apply the word ‘blue’ to all of them.  10 Resemblance itself 
is taken as a basic, unanalyzed notion. (Obviously, the nominalist could 
not explain the ‘resemblance’ between two objects in terms of their 
sharing some number of properties; this would undermine their aim of 
avoiding the need to posit universals.) 
 David Armstrong has presented a variety of infinite regress argu-
ments against a variety of nominalist theories. One of these arguments, 
directed against resemblance nominalism, begins by pointing out that 
 resemblance itself seems to be a universal. The blueness of the sky resem-
bles that of the berry, which resembles that of the parrot, which resem-
bles that of the sky. So there are at least three examples of resemblance. 
Since resemblance can thus be ascribed to more than one pair, resem-
blance is a universal. So it would seem that, just as the nominalist owed 
us an explanation for the fact that three objects may all be blue, the 
nominalist will also owe us an explanation for the fact that three pairs 
may all resemble. 
 Now, if the nominalist tries to explain resemblance in the same way 
that she explained blueness, she will have to say: it’s not that the three 
cases of resemblance have something in common; there isn’t anything 
that is  the same  in the three cases. Rather, the three instances of resem-
blance merely  resemble  each other. So now we have a new level of resem-
blance, with three more resemblances: the resemblance between (the 
resemblance between A and B) and (the resemblance between B and 
C), the resemblance between (the resemblance between B and C) and 
(the resemblance between A and C), and the resemblance between (the 
resemblance between A and B) and (the resemblance between A and C). 
But these three resemblances, so the nominalist must maintain, do not 
literally have anything in common either. Rather,  they  merely resemble 
each other. And so we are off on an infinite regress. Letting ‘A’ stand for 
 10   Price 1953; Rodriguez-Pereyra 2002. 

14 Approaching Infinity
the blueness of the sky, ‘B’ for the blueness of the blueberry, and ‘C’ for 
the blueness of the parrot, and letting ‘R( x , y )’ stand for the resemblance 
between  x and  y , we have the following series (I list just the first four of 
the infinitely many stages): 
 All of these increasingly complex resemblances must exist. Armstrong 
initially said that this regress was vicious, so that we must reject resem-
blance nominalism.  11 Later, however, he decided, along with the 
defenders of resemblance nominalism, that the regress is benign.  12 
 2.5  The regress of temporal series 
 J. M. E. McTaggart presented a famous argument for ‘the unreality of 
time’. 13 Events in time may have the properties of being  past ,  present , 
or  future , where these properties are understood to be mutually exclu-
sive. Now consider some particular event,  e . Before  e occurs, a person 
can truthfully say, ‘ e is in the future.’ While it is occurring, a person 
can truthfully say, ‘ e is in the present.’ And after it occurs, a person can 
truthfully say, ‘ e is in the past.’ Therefore,  e must possess all three proper-
ties, past, present, and future. But this is contradictory, since as we have 
said, the attributes of pastness, presentness, and futurity are mutually 
exclusive. To resolve the paradox, McTaggart urges, we must deny that 
anything exists in time. 
 Instead of rejecting the reality of time, we might try to resolve the 
paradox by saying that there is no contradiction since  e does not 
have the properties of pastness, presentness, and futurity  at the same 
time . For example, suppose  e is the event of my writing this chapter. 
 Stage 1 
 Stage 2 
 Stage 3 
 A 
 B 
 C 
 R(A,B) 
 R(B,C) 
 R(A,C) 
 R[R(A,B), R(B,C)] 
 R[R(B,C), R(A,C)] 
 R[R(A,B), R(A,C)] 
 Stage 4 
 ... 
 R{R[R(A,B), R(B,C)], R[R(B,C), R(A,C)]} 
 R{R[R(B,C), R(A,C)], R[R(A,B), R(A,C)]} 
 R{R[R(A,B), R(B,C)], R[R(A,B), R(A,C)]} 
 ... 
 11   Armstrong 1978, 54–6. 
 12   Armstrong 1989, 54–7; Price 1953, 23–6. 
 13   McTaggart 1908. 

Six Infinite Regresses 15
 e is in the present  at the present ; however, in the past,  e was in the 
future; and in the future,  e will be in the past. Of course, nothing can 
have incompatible properties simultaneously; however, there is no 
contradiction in a thing’s having incompatible properties at different 
times. 
 McTaggart says that this response involves introducing a second 
temporal series. The original temporal series involved ordinary events, 
which are ordered as past, present, and future. The second temporal 
series involves the pastness, presentness, and futurity of events, which 
 themselves may be past, present, or future. But then McTaggart’s objec-
tion can be raised anew for this second time series:  the  presentness of  e 
itself has the properties of being past, present, and future. Again, these 
are incompatible properties, so this is a contradiction. 
 We might try to resolve this second contradiction by claiming that – 
just as  e itself has the properties of being past, present, and future at 
different times – so the  presentness  of  e has the properties of being past, 
present, and future at different times. (For example, the presentness of 
 e is present in the present, it was future in the past, and it will be past 
in the future.) But now we are embarked on an infinite regress. To avoid 
the regress, says McTaggart, we must deny the reality of time. Other 
philosophers, however, embrace the infinite regress as benign – there 
just are all of these temporal facts. For example,  e is present, and the 
presentness of  e is present, and the presentness of the presentness of  e is 
present, and so on. 14 
 2.6  The regress of truths 
 Our final infinite regress is the truth regress. The truth regress results 
from the observation that, for any proposition, P, P entails that it is true 
that P. The proposition that it is true that P then entails that it is true 
that it is true that P. And so on. Thus, if there is any true proposition, P, 
then there will be the following infinite series of truths: 
 P 
 It is true that P. 
 It is true that it is true that P. 
 ⁝ 
 14  Smith 1986. 

16 Approaching Infinity
 This is the least controversial of the infinite regresses – it is generally 
agreed to be benign.  15 No one thinks that we need to avoid this infinite 
series by denying that P entails that it is true that P; instead, the standard 
response is simply to accept that all these truths exist. 
 2.7  Conclusion 
 What can we conclude from the preceding six examples of infinite 
regresses? Perhaps just this: philosophers are in need of an account 
of when an infinite regress is vicious. There is at present no generally 
accepted account of this, though we shall see some candidate accounts 
later. In fact, it seems likely that most philosophers, even those who 
employ infinite regress arguments, do not have any account – not even 
a controversial one – of what makes a regress vicious. This may help 
to explain why infinite regress arguments in philosophy often produce 
stalemates in which one side claims that the regress is vicious while 
the other insists that it is virtuous. These regress arguments concern 
some of the most fundamental and important issues in all of human 
inquiry, including the beginning (if any) of the universe and the struc-
ture of knowledge. A successful account of virtue and vice among the 
infinite would therefore be of great interest. In developing such an 
account (much later in this book), we should bear in mind the few rela-
tively uncontroversial data points encountered in this chapter: the truth 
regress is benign; the regress of Forms is probably vicious; and in the 
regress of reasons for belief, an infinite regress of  actual, consciously occur-
ring reasons would be vicious.  
 
 15   See, for example, Armstrong 1989, 54; Hochberg 1999, 196; Nolan 2001, 
523–4. 

17
 3.1  A word about paradoxes 
 In this chapter, I aim to convince you that infinity is puzzling. I start 
with some simple mathematical puzzles before moving on to more 
exotic paradoxes. I will not attempt to  solve  any of the paradoxes in this 
chapter; solutions will be considered later. 
 A word about the term ‘paradox’. Some people take the word to refer 
to a situation in which a contradiction is true. On this interpretation, 
there is of course no such thing as a paradox. None of my ‘paradoxes’ 
would count as true paradoxes, because in fact a true paradox would just 
be impossible by definition. I find this use of the word uninteresting. 
 I understand paradoxes, roughly, as situations that are highly puzzling, 
either because there seem to be compelling arguments for incompat-
ible conclusions about the situation, or because there seems to be a 
compelling argument for something that seems absurd. A solution to 
the paradox would be an account that removes the puzzlement. This 
could be done by explaining why the situation in question cannot arise, 
by explaining why the seemingly compelling argument (or one of the 
seemingly compelling arguments) is fallacious, or by somehow making 
the seemingly absurd conclusion of the argument stop seeming absurd.  
 3.2  The arithmetic of infinity 
 Suppose there is a number infinity, denoted by ‘∞’. Most people will agree 
that if you add one to it, you get the same number, infinity. That is:
 ∞ + 1 = ∞ 
(Equation 3.1) 
 If equation 3.1 is true, then it seems that we should be able to subtract 
∞ from both sides of the equation, thus obtaining 1 = 0. 
 3 
 Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite 

18 Approaching Infinity
 Here is another way to derive the result. Most people who believe in 
the number ∞ agree that if you divide a finite number by it, the result 
is zero:
 1/∞ = 0 
(Equation 3.2) 
 (If you disagree with equation 3.2, try to think what else could go on 
the right hand side of the equation. No number other than zero is small 
enough.) If equation 3.2 is correct, then it seems that we should be able 
to multiply both sides of the equation by ∞, thus obtaining:
 1 = 0·∞ 
(Equation 3.3) 
 But in general, 0· x = 0, so it seems that we can again obtain the result 
that 1 = 0. 
 More simply put, it is paradoxical that there should be a quantity that 
is not increased when you add something (greater than zero) to it (as 
in equation 3.1), or a number such that when you take that number of 
zeros, you get a quantity larger than zero (as in equation 3.3).  
 3.3  The paradox of geometric points 
 According to standard geometry, space is composed of  geometric points . 
Every geometrical object – including circles, triangles, lines, planes, 
spheres, and space itself – consists of a collection of points. 
 And what is a point? Recall the idea (Section 1.4) that any line segment 
can be divided into two smaller segments. The same is true of two-dimen-
sional objects (for instance, a square can always be cut in half) and three-
dimensional objects (for instance, a cube can be cut in half). Well, a  point 
is conceived as a part of space so small that it  cannot  be divided; there is 
no such thing as half of a point.  1 Points are  zero -dimensional objects, with 
zero length, zero area, and zero volume. This has to be so, since if a point 
had any size greater than zero, then it could be divided in half. 
 Now, here is something that is generally true about geometrical 
objects: their sizes (lengths, areas, or volumes) are additive. For instance, 
if you divide a sphere in half, the volume of the left hemisphere plus 
the volume of the right hemisphere equals the volume of the sphere. If 
you divide a line segment in thirds, the length of the left third plus the 
 1   Thus, the first definition from Euclid’s (1998)  Elements , the definitive text of 
geometry for two millennia, reads, ‘A point is that which has no part.’  

Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite 19
length of the middle third plus the length of the right third equals the 
length of the original segment. 
 Similarly, if a geometrical object is made up of points, one would 
think, the size of any geometrical object should equal the sum of the 
sizes of the points that make it up. For instance, the volume of a sphere 
should equal the sum of the volumes of all the points that make up 
the sphere. The length of a line segment should equal the sum of the 
lengths of the points that make it up. And so on. 
 But how can this be, when each of these points has a size of zero? If 
one combines many zeroes, the result should be zero, so it would seem 
that a line segment consisting of points (even if there are infinitely many 
points) should have a length of zero.  2 If you are tempted now to question 
whether points really have zero size, consider the alternative: if a point has 
any length larger than zero, then any line segment would have to have a 
length of infinity, since there are infinitely many points in any segment. 
 Furthermore, a one-meter line segment and a two-meter line segment 
contain the same number of points (infinitely many). Therefore, it 
appears that we must say that infinity times zero meters equals one 
meter, and infinity times zero meters also equals two meters: 
 ∞·0 = 1 
 ∞·0 = 2 
 By the transitivity of equality, 1 = 2. 
 Here is a metaphysical ‘application’.  3 Suppose there were a stick made 
of continuously distributed matter, so that it completely fills a certain 
region of space. (This is unlike actual sticks, which are almost entirely 
empty space at the atomic level.) And let’s say we have a coordinate 
system in which the stick extends from  x -coordinate 0 to  x -coordinate 
1 (the  y and  z coordinates don’t matter for the example). It seems that 
this stick ought to have a part corresponding to each part of the space 
it occupies – so, for example, for each  x -value between 0 and 1, there 
should be a cross-sectional slice of the stick that occupies just that 
 x -value. Each of these slices would be a single geometric point thick. 
These are unusual objects, but if you accept the existence of geometric 
points in general, it seems that you ought to accept that the stick could 
have such parts. 
 2   This paradox goes back to Aristotle (1941,  On Generation and Corruption , 
316a23–35). 
 3   Brentano (1988, 146) uses this to argue against the existence of points.  

20 Approaching Infinity
 Now imagine that we cut the stick up into single-point-thick slices, 
and we rearrange the pieces as follows: for each slice, if the slice starts 
out with an  x -coordinate of  r , we move that piece to an  x -coordinate of 
2 r (see Figure 3.1). The result: the new stick completely fills its space, 
from  x =0 to  x =2, just as the old stick completely filled the interval from 
 x =0 to  x =1. No  x -coordinate in that interval is left empty, and each is 
occupied by qualitatively the same thing that initially occupied the 
coordinates in the interval [0,1]. So what we have is a new stick that is 
just like the old one, only twice as long. We have created more material 
just by rearranging its parts. 4 
 3.4  Infinite sums 
 Consider the following infinite collection of numbers:
 1, −1, 2, −2, 3, −3, ...  
 (all the positive and negative integers). What is the sum of all these 
numbers? 
 There are many ways to answer this question. First answer: the sum is 
zero, because we can group the terms to be added as follows: 
 (1 − 1) + (2 − 2) + (3 − 3) + ...  
  = 0 + 0 + 0 + ...  
  = 0. 
 4   This is similar to the Banach-Tarski Paradox, in which a unit sphere is 
dissected into five pieces, which are then rearranged to form  two spheres of the 
same size as the original (Banach and Tarski 1924). The Banach-Tarski Paradox is 
more amazing, since only finitely many pieces are needed; however, it depends 
on the controversial Axiom of Choice, and the pieces are not actually describable 
or imaginable by any human being. 
0
r
2r
x
 Figure 3.1  A magically expanding rod 

Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite 21
 Second answer: the sum is infinity, because we can group the terms as 
follows: 
 1 + (−1 + 2) + (−2 + 3) + (−3 + 4) + ...  
  = 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + ...  
  = ∞. 
 Third answer: the sum is negative infinity, because we can arrange and 
group the terms as follows: 
 −1 + (1 − 2) + (2 − 3) + (3 − 4) + ...  
  = −1 − 1 − 1 − 1 − ...  
  = −∞. 
 Since one can obtain different sums depending on the order in which 
one adds the numbers, what is the true sum of these numbers? Is there 
a ‘correct’ way of ordering the terms? 
 3.5  Galileo’s paradox 
 A perfect square is a number that results from multiplying a natural 
number by itself – for instance, 1, 4, 9, and so on. The numbers that 
must be multiplied by themselves to obtain the perfect squares are called 
roots. Thus, 1 is the root of 1, 2 is the root of 4, 3 is the root of 9, and 
so on. Galileo discovered the following paradox in 1638.  5 Question: in 
comparing the perfect squares to the roots, which are more numerous? 
Are there more squares than roots, more roots than squares, or the same 
number of each? It seems that there must be at least as many squares as 
roots, because every root has a distinct square. 
 Second question: in comparing the perfect squares to the natural 
numbers in general, which are more numerous? Well, of course every 
perfect square is a natural number, but most of the natural numbers 
are not perfect squares. Indeed, as one goes through the list of natural 
numbers, perfect squares become ever rarer. For instance, among the 
first 100 natural numbers, ten are squares, for a proportion of 0.1. 
Among the first 10,000 natural numbers, only a hundred are squares, 
for a proportion of 0.01. Among the first 1,000,000 natural numbers, a 
 5   Galilei 1914, 31–3. Yes, Galileo discussed this 240 years before Cantor’s devel-
opment of transfinite arithmetic. And no, Cantor did not solve the paradox.  

22 Approaching Infinity
thousand are perfect squares, for a proportion of only 0.001. And so on. 
As we go on, the ratio of squares to natural numbers approaches ever 
closer to zero. So it seems that not only are the natural numbers more 
plentiful than the perfect squares; the perfect squares actually form only 
an infinitesimal portion of all the natural numbers. 
 But wait. The set of roots is  identical to the set of natural numbers, 
since every natural number can be squared. So it cannot be that there 
are  fewer  squares than there are  natural numbers , and also that there are 
 at least as many squares as there are  roots . 
 Galileo’s conclusion was that infinities cannot be compared in terms 
of size. If two things are infinite, we cannot say that one is either greater 
than, less than, or equal to another; we can only say that both are infi-
nite. But this is strange. If  x is a quantity, and  y is a quantity, how can 
it be that  x and  y fail to have any quantitative relation to each other – 
how can a definite quantity fail to be less than, equal to, or greater than 
another definite quantity? 
 3.6  Hilbert’s hotel 
 Suppose you run a hotel with an infinite number of rooms. At the 
moment, all the rooms are filled. A new customer arrives, seeking a room 
for the night. You tell him that all the rooms are taken. The customer is 
just about to leave when you say, ‘Oh, don’t worry. I said all the rooms 
were filled, but I didn’t say we couldn’t fit you in!’ You then tell each 
guest to move down one room: the guest in room 1 moves to room 2, 
the guest from room 2 moves to room 3, and so on. This leaves room 1 
vacant, which you use to accommodate the new guest. 
 The next day, all the rooms are still full. But this time, an  infinite 
collection of new customers arrives, all wanting separate rooms. ‘Well, 
we’re all full, but that doesn’t mean we can’t accommodate you!’ you 
say. This time, you tell each guest to move to room number 2 n , where  n 
is his current room number. Thus, the guest in room 1 moves to room 2, 
the guest from room 2 moves to room 4, the guest from room 3 moves 
to room 6, and so on (Figure 3.2). This leaves free all the odd-numbered 
rooms, which you use to accommodate the new guests.  6 This seems 
paradoxical. If a hotel is full, it ought not to be able to accommodate a 
new patron, let alone an infinite number of new patrons, without either 
 6   Hilbert first described the scenario in a 1924 lecture (2013, 730). It was subse-
quently popularized by Gamow (1947, 17). Kragh (2014) traces the entertaining 
history of the scenario. 

Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite 23
expelling any of the existing patrons or forcing anyone to double up in 
a room. 
 Let us try to make the puzzle sharper. Let  R 1 be the number of rooms 
in the hotel at the beginning of the story. Let  G 1 be the number of guests 
staying in the hotel at the beginning of the story. Since these guests 
exactly fill the rooms, it seems that  R 1 =  G 1 . Now, let  G 2 be the infinite 
number of new guests who arrive at the hotel, seeking accommodations, 
and let  R 2 be the number of rooms existing in the hotel at the end of the 
story. At the end of the story, when all the new guests have been accom-
modated, these new guests  together with  the old guests exactly fill up all 
the rooms. Therefore, it seems that  R 2 =  G 1 +  G 2 . And therefore, we seem 
obliged to say one of two things: Either 
  i .   We say that  R 1 =  R 2 , in which case  G 1 =  G 1 +  G 2 , so we can infer that  G 2 = 0. 
But we already said that  G 2 was infinite; hence, infinity is zero. Or,  
 ii .    We say that  R 2 >  R 1 , in which case we have increased the number of 
rooms in our hotel merely by rearranging the guests. Furthermore, 
since no new rooms were built, we magically caused the identical set 
of rooms to constitute a greater number. 
 At least one philosopher has taken the strangeness of this scenario to 
prove that actual infinities cannot exist. 7 
 3.7  Gabriel’s horn 
 Gabriel’s Horn is a geometric figure that has a finite volume but an infi-
nite surface area. To envision the shape, first consider the graph of the 
Rm. 1
Rm. 2
Rm. 3
Rm. 4
Rm. 5
Rm. 6
 Figure 3.2  Hilbert’s hotel 
 7   Craig 1991. 

24 Approaching Infinity
function  y = 1/ x , for  x ≥ 1 (ignore everything to the left of  x = 1). Imagine 
that that shape is rotated about the  x axis. The surface traced out is 
Gabriel’s Horn (see Figure 3.3). It can be proven that the surface area of 
the horn is infinite, while the volume inside the horn is finite.  
 Imagine that you had a physical object with such a shape, and you 
wanted to paint it. To cover an infinite surface, it would seem that you 
would need an infinite amount of paint. However, since the volume 
is finite, you could fill the entire horn with a finite amount of paint, 
thereby completely covering the inner surface. 
 3.8  Smullyan’s infinite rod 
 Imagine that there is an infinite, flat plane. Everywhere on (and above) 
the plane, there is a gravitational force pulling downward. There is a 
finite vertical rod sticking out of the plane, perpendicular to the plane, 
with a hinge at the top. Attached to the hinge is an infinitely long, 
perfectly rigid rod (see Figure 3.4). The infinite rod is initially oriented 
perpendicular to the finite rod (parallel to the plane). Assume that the 
rods and plane are unbendable, unbreakable, and impenetrable.  
 What happens to the infinite rod in this example? Even though the 
force of gravity is pulling it downward, and even though it is supported 
on only one end, the rod cannot tilt downward, because any nonzero 
amount of downward rotation would require the rod to intersect and 
break through the plane somewhere. Therefore, the rod will remain 
suspended parallel to the plane, as if by magic.  8 In modern physics 
terminology, the rod undergoes an infinite  net  torque, yet it maintains a 
constant angular velocity of zero. 
 Figure 3.3  Gabriel’s horn 
 8   Smullyan 2008, 246. 

Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite 25
 3.9  Zeno’s paradox 
 Perhaps the most famous paradox of the infinite is due to the ancient 
Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea.  9 Zeno was a student of Parmenides, the 
ancient Greek philosopher who held that change was impossible. Zeno 
devised his paradoxes of motion to show that – as a special case of the 
thesis that change is impossible – motion is impossible. Here, I describe 
two of these paradoxes. 10 
 Suppose you drop a ball. What will happen? You may think that the 
ball will fall to the ground, but actually, this is impossible. Call the ball’s 
starting point in the air ‘point A’, and call the alleged destination on 
the ground ‘point B’. For the ball to move from point A to point B, it 
must first travel half the distance. After it does that, it will then have to 
travel half the remaining distance (bringing it to three quarters of the 
total distance). Then it must travel half the remaining distance (taking 
it to seven eighths of the total distance). Then it must travel half the 
remaining distance ... and so on. This series continues infinitely. But it is 
not possible to complete an infinite series. Therefore, the ball can never 
reach the ground. 
 Figure 3.4  Smullyan’s rod 
 9  Sadly, no writings of Zeno survive. We know of his arguments through 
writers who discussed him, notably Aristotle (1941,  Physics  233a13, 239b5, 
263a4). Benardete (1964) devotes considerable attention to Zeno’s paradoxes.  
 10  Zeno had a third paradox, but it is too lame to include in the main text. It 
seems to involve inferring, from the premise that an arrow in flight cannot move 
any nonzero distance at a single instant of time, that the arrow is at rest at each 
instant, and thence that the arrow never moves. 

26 Approaching Infinity
 Some students who hear of this puzzle draw the conclusion that the 
ball will get closer and closer to the ground but never  quite reach it. This 
is wrong. If the above reasoning is correct, then it can be applied to 
any object and  any chosen destination point . Therefore, no object can go 
anywhere. For example, the ball could not reach the point one foot off 
the ground, any more than it could reach the ground. 
 Many students who hear of Zeno’s paradox naively assume that the 
mathematical theory of infinite series somehow solves the paradox, or 
that calculus somehow solves it.  11 The line of thinking may be some-
thing like this: ‘In a math class, I learned something about infinite series 
like this. So that must solve the problem.’ Generally speaking, what 
students are taught is that the series,  
1
2
1
2
1
4
1
8
1
n
n
=
+
+
+
=
∞
∑
...
converges to 1; that is, as one adds more and more terms, the sum comes 
arbitrarily close to 1. Mathematicians therefore say that the infinite sum 
equals 1. 
 And this would solve the problem, if the problem were to calculate 
the distance from point A to point B. In that case, the theory of infinite 
sums will tell us that, if we view the total distance as a sum of these infi-
nitely many smaller parts, this sum is equal to 1, meaning 100 per cent 
of the original distance. Viewing the distance as a single line segment 
of a given length, or as an infinite collection of smaller and smaller 
segments added together, makes no difference to the total length. 
 But that was not the problem. The question was not ‘what is the 
distance between A and B?’, and Zeno is not saying that the distance 
from A to B is infinite. Zeno is saying that to reach point B, one would 
have to  complete the infinite series . But (allegedly), one cannot do such a 
thing – not because the distance is too long, nor because it will take too 
much time, but because it is conceptually impossible to  complete  a series 
that  has no end . This assumption is in no way challenged by standard 
modern mathematical treatments of infinite series, nor of any concepts 
used in calculus. Quite the contrary is in fact the case: standard treat-
ments are designed  precisely  to avoid the assumption that an infinite 
series can actually be completed. 
 11   If you thought this, don’t feel bad; no less a philosopher than Alfred North 
Whitehead (1929, section II.ii.2) commented, ‘Zeno produces an invalid argu-
ment depending on ignorance of the theory of convergent numerical series.’  

Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite 27
 The version of the paradox that I have just stated uses an  endless 
series to argue that the ball can never  complete  its journey. Another vari-
ation uses a  beginningless  series to argue that the ball can never  begin its 
journey: in order to travel from point A to point B, the ball must first 
travel half the distance. But  before  it can reach the halfway mark, it must 
first go one quarter of the distance. But before it does that, it must first 
go one eighth of the distance. And so on. Because there is an infinite 
series of preconditions, the ball can never get started. This version of the 
paradox also has the virtue of forestalling the confused thoughts (a) that 
the ball can get  close  to the ground even if it can’t reach it, and (b) that 
somehow calculating the infinite sum,
1
2
1
n
n=
∞
∑
, solves the problem. 
 That was Zeno’s first paradox of motion. The second paradox uses 
a similar idea. Achilles decides to have a race with a tortoise. Because 
Achilles is the faster runner, they both agree that the tortoise should get 
a head start. Achilles starts at point A, while the tortoise starts at point 
B, which is ahead of A. To overtake the tortoise, Achilles must first get to 
point B, where the tortoise was at the start of the race. But by the time 
Achilles reaches B, the tortoise will have advanced to a new place, call it 
‘point C’. Now Achilles must run to point C. But by the time he reaches 
C, the tortoise will have advanced to point D. Then Achilles must run 
to D ... Matters continue in this way forever. To overtake the tortoise, 
Achilles must first complete this infinite series of catching-up actions. 
But one cannot complete an infinite series. Therefore, no matter how 
fast Achilles may be, he can never overtake the tortoise. 
 3.10  The divided stick 
 Contra Zeno, let us now suppose that it is possible to complete an infinite 
series (it certainly seems that things move!). Now, imagine that there is 
a stick composed of an infinitely divisible material (forget about atomic 
theory). We spend half a minute cutting the stick in half. Then we spend 
the next quarter minute cutting both of those halves in half, so that the 
original stick has now been cut into quarters. Then we spend an eighth 
of a minute cutting all of the quarters in half. And so on (see Figure 3.5). 
At the end of one minute, what is left? It appears that the result must 
be an infinite number of slices of the stick. How thick will each slice be? 
For any nonzero size you name, there was a point in the series when 
the pieces were cut smaller than that size. Therefore, the slices have no 
nonzero size; that is, they have a size of zero. How much matter could 
each of these slices contain? It seems that the answer must, again, be 
zero. But it seems that if each slice has zero mass and zero volume, then 

28 Approaching Infinity
the total of all of them must have zero mass and zero volume – so the 
material of the stick has been destroyed. 12 
 3.11  Thomson’s lamp 
 Suppose there is a lamp with an on/off switch. The lamp starts out on. 
After half a minute, it is switched off. After another quarter minute, it 
is switched back on. After another eighth of a minute, it is switched off. 
And so on. At the end of one minute, an infinite number of switchings 
will have occurred. Will the lamp then be on or off? 13 
 This question is puzzling, in the first place, because it seems that the 
question  should have an answer – if such a lamp were made, it would be 
in some state at the end of one minute. But no answer to the question 
seems right. It doesn’t seem correct to say simply ‘the lamp will be on’, 
nor does it seem correct to say ‘the lamp will be off’. The answer seems 
to turn on whether infinity is even or odd, but infinity is neither even 
nor odd. But nor does it seem correct to declare that the lamp will be 
neither on nor off. (How could this be? If the lamp explodes at the last 
instant? But surely this isn’t the solution.) Nor does it seem correct to 
say that the lamp’s state will be randomly selected – for example, that 
it will just have a 50 per cent probability of being on and a 50 per cent 
probability of being off. 
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage ∞
 Figure 3.5  The divided stick 
 12   This scenario is from Benardete 1964, 184–5. Benardete ascribes to the final 
pieces an ‘infinitesimal’ width rather than zero width. I stick with zero, since 
there are no infinitesimal quantities. Cf. Moore 1990, 5; Oppy 2006, 11–12, 66–8. 
Oppy (67) rejects the infinitesimal approach on the grounds that there is no way 
of identifying a uniquely correct infinitesimal. 
 13   This is from James Thomson (1954), who uses it to argue that it is impossible 
to complete an infinite set of tasks. Variations appear in Benardete 1964, 23.  

Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite 29
 We can also construct an argument against each answer: on the one 
hand, it seems that the lamp cannot be on at the end of the minute, 
because it was switched off at the first step of the series, and thereafter 
it was never turned on again without subsequently being turned off. 
But by the same token, it cannot be off, because it started out on, and 
it was never switched off without subsequently being switched back on 
again.  
 3.12  The Littlewood-Ross Banker 
 You are to play a game with a person known as the Banker.  14 Your only 
goal in this game is to increase your wealth. At the start of the game, 
there is an infinite pile of one dollar bills. The bills are labeled with the 
natural numbers: bill #1, bill #2, bill #3, and so on. You start out owning 
only bill #1; the Banker owns all the rest. The game has infinitely many 
turns. In the first turn, the Banker offers to let you trade bill #1 for 
bills #2–10. If you decline, the Banker keeps bills 2–10. If you accept, as 
presumably you should, you gain $9 (bills #2–10) and the Banker gains 
$1 (bill #1). In the second turn of the game, the Banker lets you take bills 
#11–20, which you may keep for yourself, but you must give him your 
lowest-numbered bill (either bill #1 or bill #2) – netting you a $9 profit. 
The game continues on in this way, so that at each turn, you are offered 
the chance to take the next ten bills from the pile for yourself, and give 
the Banker the lowest numbered bill from your pile. If you accept every 
time, then after each stage  n , you have 9 n dollars, and the Banker has 
 n dollars. Let us assume, finally, that each turn of the game is played in 
half the time as the previous one: the first turn takes half a minute, the 
second turn takes a quarter of a minute, and so on, so that at the end of 
one minute, all the infinitely many turns have been played. 
 If you always act to maximize your wealth, taking the $9 profit in 
each round, how much money will you have at the end of the game? 
On the one hand, it seems that you should have an infinite amount 
of money, because you took a $9 net gain, infinitely many times: 
9 3 ∞ = ∞. But on the other hand, you will have nothing, because at 
the end of the game, the Banker has bill #1 (which you gave him in 
 14   What follows in the text is a variant on the paradox first discovered by 
Littlewood (1986, 26 [originally published 1953]) and later elaborated by Ross 
(1976, 36–8). For some reason, philosophers tend to falsely credit the paradox to 
Ross. Barrett and Arntzenius (1999) discuss the decision-theoretic version of the 
paradox. Cf. Oppy 2006, 15–16. 

30 Approaching Infinity
the first round), bill #2 (which you gave him in the second round), bill 
#3 (which you gave him in the third round), and so on. For every  n , 
the Banker has bill # n , because you gave it to him in the  n th round. 
Therefore, in the end the Banker has every bill, so you have nothing. 
This is odd, because there is no stage of the game at which you lose 
money; at every moment up until the end of the game, you have some 
money, getting more and more as the game continues; but at the last 
instant, as the clock reaches one minute and the game completes, your 
pile of money vanishes. 
 Next, imagine that you demand a rematch with the Banker. This 
time, when he asks you for bill #1, instead of giving it to him, you 
take bill #10, surreptitiously erase the ‘0’ on the end of its label so 
that it says ‘1’, and hand it to him. Then you take your bill #1 and 
append a ‘0’ on the end of its label so that it becomes labeled ‘10’. 
When he asks you for bill #2, you likewise relabel bill #20 as #2 and 
hand it to him, then relabel your bill #2 as #20. You continue in 
this manner through the entire game. At each stage, you effectively 
switch the labels of your highest- and lowest-numbered bills, give 
the Banker the new lowest-numbered bill, and keep the rest. This 
time, how much money do you have at the end of the game? You 
still have the bill that was originally labeled bill #1, although you 
have relabeled this bill by adding a ‘0’ to its label infinitely many 
times (in rounds 1, 10, 100, and so on). So it is now labeled with a 
‘1’ followed by infinitely many ‘0’’s, but it is still yours. Similarly for 
bills 2–9, 11–19, and so on: you took those, and you never gave them 
away. Each time you were supposed to give one of them away, you 
surreptitiously gave the Banker your highest-numbered bill instead. 
The bills originally labeled ‘10’, ‘20’, ‘30’, and so on, all went to the 
Banker, though they were relabeled so that they now say ‘1’, ‘2’, ‘3’, 
and so on. So each of you ends up with an infinite pile of money. 
This result is surprising, because in this variant, each of you has 
qualitatively  the same thing at every stage of the game as you had in 
the original variant: at the end of round 1, you have bills labeled 
‘2’ through ‘10’, and the Banker has a bill labeled ‘1’; at the end of 
round 2, you have bills labeled ‘3’ through ‘20’, and the Banker has 
bills labeled ‘1’ and ‘2’; and so on. The two series are qualitatively 
identical, the only difference between them lying in the bare numer-
ical identity of the bills that each player has at any given stage. Yet 
the one series gives you an infinite amount of money, whereas the 
other gives you nothing.  

Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite 31
 3.13  Benardete’s paradox 
 A ball is placed at the top of a hill, where, if nothing interferes, it will roll 
down to the bottom.  15 There is, however, an infinite series of impene-
trable walls placed on the hill, any one of which would suffice to stop 
the ball. Call these walls  w 1 ,  w 2 ,  w 3 , and so on.  w 1 is located halfway 
down the hill from where the ball is,  w 2 is located a quarter of the way 
down the hill,  w 3 is located one eighth of the way down the hill, and so 
on. (Assume that each wall is half the thickness of the previous one, so 
that there is room for all of them.) What happens to the ball? 
 The ball will of course be unable to roll any distance down the hill, 
since for any distance it might have rolled, there are infinitely many 
walls that would stop the ball before it got that far. But which wall stops 
the ball? The ball is not stopped by  w 1 , since the ball would have been 
stopped by  w 2 before it could reach  w 1 . Nor is it stopped by  w 2 , since it 
would have hit  w 3 before it could reach  w 2 . Nor is it stopped by  w 3 , since 
it would have first hit  w 4 . And so on. For any  n , the ball does not hit  w  n  , 
since it would have hit  w  n +1 first. Therefore, the ball will simply hold still 
at the top of the hill, without anything stopping it. 
 One might propose that there is another object, distinct from all the 
 w  i  , which stops the ball. Call this object  w ω .  w ω is the composite object 
composed of all the walls  w  i  put together. You might think of this as 
another impenetrable wall (with a thickness equal to half the distance 
down the hill), albeit a wall with many gaps in it. Well, whether you 
want to call  w ω a ‘wall’ or not, it stops the ball from rolling. 16 
 Here is a variation of the paradox. Imagine that, instead of an infinite 
series of walls, there is an infinite series of gods,  G 1 ,  G 2 , and so on, each 
of whom is able to create an impenetrable wall at any chosen location.  G 1 
happens to have the intention of creating an impenetrable wall halfway 
down the hill,  if and only if the ball makes it more than one quarter of the 
way down the hill.  G 2 , for his part, intends to create an impenetrable wall 
one quarter of the way down the hill, if and only if the ball makes it more 
than one eighth of the way down the hill. And so on. In this case, the 
ball cannot move any distance down the hill. But which wall, created by 
which god, will stop the ball? For every  n ,  G  n  fails to create a wall, since 
 15   The following paradoxes are from Benardete 1964, 236–8, 259–60. Cf. Moore 
1990, 4–5; Oppy 2006, 10–11, 16–18. 
 16   This is Hawthorne’s view (2000, 626). Benardete (1964, 260) entertains 
similar suggestions. Cf. Laraudogoitia 2003, 126. 

32 Approaching Infinity
 G  n +1 would have stopped the ball before it reached the point where  G  n  
found it necessary to act. So none of the gods creates a wall. So the ball 
simply hovers at the top of the hill with nothing holding it back. 
 In another variation, Benardete asks us to imagine a pile of infinitely 
many opaque stone slabs. The bottom slab is one inch thick and has the 
numeral ‘1’ painted on its upper surface. On top of this is a second slab, 
which is half an inch thick and has the numeral ‘2’ painted on its upper 
surface. On top of that, a slab one quarter inch thick with a ‘3’ painted 
on it. And so on. The whole pile is two inches thick. Now, suppose you 
stand above this pile and look down. You can’t see the first slab, since 
your view of it is blocked by the second slab. Likewise, your view of the 
second slab is blocked by the third, your view of the third is blocked by 
the fourth, and so on. Your view of each slab is blocked, so you can’t see 
any of them. But surely you cannot see through the pile either. So what 
do you see?  
 3.14  Laraudogoitia’s marbles 
 Imagine an infinite series of marbles, arranged in a straight line, in a 
Newtonian world. The first marble is located at point A. The second 
marble is located half a meter to the right of A. The third is located a 
quarter meter to the right of the second marble (so, 75 centimeters to 
the right of A). The fourth is located an eighth of a meter to the right of 
the third. And so on. These marbles get smaller and smaller, with each 
having half the diameter of the last, so that all of them can fit into a 
one-meter-long space. Assume that every marble is perfectly rigid (so all 
collisions are perfectly elastic) and all have the same mass. Now, suppose 
someone pushes the first marble, imparting to it a velocity of 1 meter 
per second to the right. What will happen? 17 
 After half a second, the first marble strikes the second, whereupon the 
first marble stops and the second starts moving at 1 meter per second to 
the right. After another quarter second, the second marble runs into the 
third, whereupon the second marble imparts its momentum to the third. 
After another eighth of a second, the third marble strikes the fourth, 
and so on. After one second, every one of the marbles has been struck. 
However, nothing emerges on the right-hand side of the series. If there 
were a last marble in the series, that last marble would emerge at the 
right edge (one meter to the right of point A), moving 1 m/s to the right. 
 17   This case is from Laraudogoitia 1996. 

Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite 33
But because the series of marbles is infinite, there is no last marble, so 
there is nothing to emerge at the right. Therefore, the momentum and 
kinetic energy of the system will simply vanish: all the marbles will have 
been struck, every one will have transferred its momentum to another 
marble, and nothing will come out on the right. 
 Laraudogoitia points out that the laws of Newtonian mechanics 
are time-reversal-invariant. What this means is that for any sequence 
of events that is consistent with Newton’s laws, the reverse sequence 
(in which everything happens the same way, except with the opposite 
directions of motion and opposite order of events) is also consistent 
with the laws. Thus, if the marble sequence described above is possible, 
then the reverse sequence must also be possible, in which a system 
containing infinitely many marbles starts out with zero momentum and 
zero kinetic energy, and then the marbles spontaneously start moving 
to the left, each marble transferring a leftward velocity of 1 m/s to the 
marble to its left. In this reverse sequence, the process ends up with the 
first marble at point A moving 1 m/s to the left and all the other marbles 
stationary. 
 3.15  The spaceship 
 Imagine that there is a spaceship that travels in a straight line, starting 
at a speed of 1 m/s to the right, and accelerates at an increasing rate, so 
that after one second it is moving at 2 m/s; after another half second, 
it is moving at 4 m/s; after another quarter of a second it is moving at 
8 m/s; and so on.  18 At the end of two seconds, the ship would be traveling 
at infinite velocity. At this time,  where would the ship be? 
 The total distance traveled would be infinite. In the first stage, the 
ship travels at a speed of at least 1 m/s for one second, thus covering a 
distance of at least one meter. In the second stage, it travels at a speed 
of at least 2 m/s for a half second, thus covering a distance of at least 
(2)(½) = 1 meter. And so on. Since there are infinitely many stages, the 
total distance is at least 1 + 1 + 1 + ... = ∞. 
 But there simply is no position infinitely far from the starting point; 
for any two points in space, there is some (finite) distance between them. 
The ship would have a definite position, getting farther and farther 
away, at each instant from the starting time  up to  but not including the 
final time two seconds later. But at  t = 2 seconds, there is nowhere the 
 18   Benardete 1964, 149; Moore 1990, 70–1; Oppy 2006, 12.  

34 Approaching Infinity
ship could be. Perhaps the ship would go out of existence at that instant, 
destroyed by its excessive speed. 
 3.16  The Saint Petersburg paradox 
 Imagine that you have the chance to play a simple game. A fair coin is 
to be flipped some number of times. If it comes up heads on the first 
flip, you get $2, and the game ends; otherwise, the coin is flipped again. 
If it comes up heads on the second flip, you get $4, and the game ends; 
otherwise, the coin is flipped again. If it comes up heads on the third 
flip, you get $8. And so on. In brief, the coin is flipped until the first time 
it comes up heads, whereupon you get a payoff of $2  n  , where  n is the 
number of times the coin was flipped. The question is: how much is it 
worth to get a chance to play this game? Or, how much should a rational 
person be willing to pay to be allowed to play? 19 
 There is a standard way of addressing this kind of question: we calcu-
late the expected payoff of the game. This is done by adding up, for 
every possible outcome of the game, the probability of the outcome 
occurring multiplied by the payoff you receive if it occurs. The outcomes 
are listed below (where, for example, ‘TH’ indicates tails on the first flip, 
followed by heads on the second flip), with their associated probabilities 
and payoffs: 
 19    This problem was originally published by the Swiss mathematician Daniel 
Bernoulli in 1738, who attributes it to his  cousin Nicolas Bernoulli, also a mathe-
matician (not to be confused with Daniel’s  brother  Nicolas Bernoulli, who was  also 
a mathematician). For the modern English translation, see Bernoulli 1954, 31.  
 Outcome 
 Probability 
 Payoff 
H
1/2
$2
TH
1/4
$4
TTH
1/8
$8
⁝
⁝
⁝
 So the expected value of the game is (1/2)($2) + (1/4)($4) + (1/8)($8) 
+ ... = 1 + 1 + 1 + ... = $∞. So the fair price for a chance to play the game 
is $∞. 
 Why is this paradoxical? First, it does not seem that the game is worth 
anything close to an infinite amount of money. Indeed, few people would 
value it even as high as $20. Is our intuitive valuation mistaken, or is 
there something wrong with the reasoning of the preceding paragraph? 

Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite 35
 Second, it seems almost contradictory to hold that the value of the 
game is infinite, since if one plays the game, one will never gain an 
infinite payout. All the possible payouts are finite (though they increase 
without bound), so there is zero chance that one will gain $∞. Therefore, 
if one were to pay an infinite amount to play the game, one would 
be guaranteed to lose money (and an infinite amount, at that!). More 
generally, it is strange that there should be a variable whose actual value 
is  known with certainty to be less than its expected value. 
 3.17  The Martingale betting system 
 You’re about to play roulette in a European casino. You like the color 
red, so you bet that the ball will land on red. The probability of this 
happening is 18/37 (the wheel has 18 red squares, 18 black squares, and 
1 green square), or about 48.6 per cent. So if you play repeatedly, you 
should win about 48.6 per cent of the time, with the house winning the 
other 51.4 per cent of the time. In the long run, as everyone knows, the 
house comes out ahead. 
 But wait – despite the house’s advantage, there is a way to guarantee 
that  you come out ahead (without cheating). Unfortunately, this system 
requires that you start with an infinite bankroll, and that there be no 
betting limits – if these conditions do not apply to you, then don’t try 
this system! 
 First, bet $1 on red. If you win, walk away with your $1 profit. 
If you lose, play again, but this time stake $2 on red. Again, if you 
win, walk away with your net profit of $1 (the $2 payout, minus the 
$1 loss from the first bet). If you lose the second bet, place a third 
bet, this time staking $4. If you win, walk away with your $1 profit 
($4 from the third bet, minus the $2 loss from the second bet and the 
$1 loss from the first bet). And so on. Simply continue doubling down 
until you win, at which point you can walk away with your $1 profit. 
Eventually, the ball will land on red, so you are guaranteed to come 
out ahead.  20  
 So you have a guaranteed way to win $1, provided that you start with 
$∞. This may not sound terribly impressive. But if this works, there is 
also a way to extract an  infinite  amount of money from the casino. First, 
apply the betting strategy as described above, until you win your dollar 
 20  It is  logically possible , consistent with the stipulations of the scenario, that 
you get stuck with an infinite series of black and green; however, the probability 
of this happening is zero. 

36 Approaching Infinity
of profit. Then, instead of walking away, simply  start over  with the $1 bet 
on red again. Follow the strategy again, doubling down every time you 
lose, until you win a second dollar. Then start over, applying the strategy 
until you win a third dollar. And so on. 
 Something seems to have gone wrong here. Given the house’s built-in 
advantage (the odds in each bet favor the house, 19–18), the house should 
come out ahead in the long run. Yet the system we have just described 
seems to guarantee, over the long run, unlimited losses for the house. 
 Now, you may worry about the infinite time it will presumably take 
to collect your desired infinite winnings. For the impatient, imagine 
the following further stipulations, all of which appear jointly logically 
consistent: in your first implementation of the betting strategy, your first 
spin of the roulette wheel takes one minute, the second spin (if there is one) 
takes half a minute, the third spin (if there is one) takes a quarter minute, 
and so on. Thus, the first application of the betting strategy, netting you 
your first $1 profit, is guaranteed to be complete within two minutes. 
 Now, the second time you implement the betting strategy, assume 
that the first spin takes a  half minute , the second spin (if there is one) 
takes a quarter minute, and so on. So you are guaranteed to win your 
second dollar within  one minute . 
 In your third application of the betting strategy, the first spin take a 
quarter minute, the second takes an eighth of a minute, and so on. So 
you win your third dollar within a half minute. 
 And so on. All told, then, you complete infinitely many iterations of 
the betting strategy, netting an infinite profit, within four minutes.  21 
 3.18  The delayed heaven paradox 
 One final decision-theoretic puzzle. You have just died and gone to meet 
your Maker. After death, there are three destinations to which souls may 
be assigned:
 1.   People who lived sufficiently good lives are assigned to Heaven, 
where they enjoy a high positive level of wellbeing – let’s say, 100 
utils – every day for eternity. (Note: a ‘util’ is a hypothetical unit of 
happiness or desire-satisfaction.) 
 21  Here is the math: the total time taken is 
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
2 2
4
0
2
2
0
0
2
j
2
j
i
i2
i
i
∞
=
∞
∞
∞
∑
1
2
2
2
i 2
2
1
2
1
i
j
2
∑
∑
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
2
= 2
=
 
.

Seventeen Paradoxes of the Infinite 37
 2.   People who lived sufficiently bad lives are assigned to Hell, where 
they suffer a similarly high  negative  welfare level – say, −100 utils – 
every day for eternity. (Negative utils represent unhappiness or desire-
frustration.) 
 3.   People who lived so-so lives are assigned to Limbo, where their exist-
ence is completely neutral (0 utils), every day for eternity. 
 Assume that the suffering of one day in hell exactly counterbalances the 
enjoyment of a day in heaven, so that a day in heaven plus a day in hell 
is exactly as good as two days in Limbo. 
 When you arrive at the Pearly Gates, eager (or apprehensive?) to learn 
your fate, God informs you that your life was neither good enough to 
earn eternity in Heaven, nor yet bad enough to earn eternity in Hell. In 
such circumstances, he says, you would normally be assigned to eter-
nity in Limbo. However, as a special offer just for you, you may instead 
choose to take one day in Hell, followed by  two days in Heaven, followed 
by the rest of eternity in Limbo. If you decline, you go straight to Limbo. 
It’s a good deal, so you accept. 
 You spend your day in Hell – where, we presume, you are forced to 
grade stacks of philosophy essays by C students – then return to the 
Pearly Gates. ‘Whew’, you say to God. ‘That really sucked. Now I’m 
ready for some Heaven!’ 
 ‘Of course’, says God. ‘You may now take your two days in Heaven, 
followed by an eternity in Limbo.  Or ... I have another special offer, just for 
you! You may spend another day in Hell, after which I will let you have 
 four  days in Heaven, followed by the rest of eternity in Limbo. What say 
you?’ 
 Again, it’s a good deal – the goodness of two more days in heaven 
more than makes up for the badness of one extra day in Hell. So you 
accept, spend another day grading papers, then come back to see God. 
 Once again, he offers you a special deal: spend a third day in Hell, 
then you can have  six days in Heaven, followed by Limbo. 
 Everyone can see where this is going. Each time you return from a day 
in Hell, God offers to let you take another day in Hell, thereby earning 
an extra two days in Heaven. And yes, you always have to take your day 
in Hell before you can take any days in Heaven. Each time, if you are 
rational, you accept. The result: you spend eternity grading papers. How 
can it be that, by making the prudent choice every time, you wind up 
with the worst possible outcome? 

38 Approaching Infinity
 3.19  Conclusion 
 The conclusion to be drawn from this chapter is similar to that of the 
last chapter: we need an account of when infinite series are possible or 
impossible. It is natural to try to resolve some of the preceding para-
doxes by declaring that the infinite series postulated in the paradoxes 
are impossible. If you are tempted to say this, remember that not all of 
the paradoxes depended on the assumption that an infinite series can be 
completed. Zeno’s paradoxes start from precisely the opposite premise, 
that an infinite series  cannot  be completed. So if one denies in general 
that infinite series can be completed, one avoids some of the paradoxes, 
but at the price of joining sides with Zeno. 
 What we would like to be able to say is that  some  infinite series cannot 
be completed, while others can; that, for example, the Littlewood-Ross 
Banker and Thomson Lamp are of the uncompletable kind; and that 
the Zeno series are of the completable kind. But we can’t just  say that. 
We need an account of why that is the case. We need a theory of when 
infinities are impossible.  
 

 Part II 
 Old Theories of Infinity 

41
 In this chapter and the next, we consider what earlier thinkers have 
said about when an infinite series, or other form of infinity, is impos-
sible. There are three main views to consider: (i) that an infinite series 
can never be completed by traversing the steps in succession, (ii) that 
a condition cannot obtain if it has an infinite series of preconditions, 
and (iii) that there can exist only potential infinities, never an actual 
infinity. These theories are not mutually exclusive; one could endorse 
two or even all three of these views at once, as I believe thinkers about 
the infinite have often done. Nevertheless, I shall discuss the three ideas 
separately, the first two in this chapter and the third (which requires the 
most extended discussion) in the next chapter. 
 4.1  ‘An infinite series cannot be completed by 
successive synthesis’ 
 4.1.1   A quasi-Kantian theory 
 In his  Critique of Pure Reason , Immanuel Kant offered the following argu-
ment for a beginning of the universe:
 If we assume that the world has no beginning in time, then up to 
every given moment an eternity has elapsed, and there has passed 
away in the world an infinite series of successive states of things. Now 
 the infinity of a series consists in the fact that it can never be completed 
through successive synthesis . It thus follows that it is impossible for an 
infinite world-series to have passed away, and that a beginning of the 
world is therefore a necessary condition of the world’s existence.  1 
 4 
 Impossible Infinite Series: 
Two False Accounts 
 1   Kant 1965, B454; emphasis added. 

42 Approaching Infinity
 Kant was not really endorsing this argument (nor, however, was the 
argument supposed to be a mere fallacy); his purposes in giving this 
argument, however, do not concern us here. The italicized phrase in any 
case has a certain intuitive plausibility as an account of (one species of) 
the impossible infinite. I take it that what Kant means is that an infinite 
series cannot be completed by going through each stage of the series,  one 
after the other  (on the other hand, if one could somehow perform every 
stage simultaneously, perhaps matters would be different). A number of 
other philosophers have endorsed this view. 2 
 Notice that the impossibility of completing an infinite series is here 
represented, not, for example, as a contingent observation about our 
world, but as a metaphysically necessary truth, perhaps even a  conceptual 
truth. Notice, too, that the claim is not that an infinite series cannot be 
completed because the  time  required would be infinite – Kant does not, 
for example, commit the mathematical error of assuming that the sum 
of an infinite series of nonzero intervals must be infinite.  3 It is known in 
modern mathematics that an infinite series of numbers, each of which 
is greater than zero, may have a finite sum, but this does not address 
the problem. The problem is that, allegedly, it is  conceptually impossible 
to complete an infinite series because an infinite series, by definition, is 
endless, and one cannot come to the end of something that is endless. 
 This view would seem to resolve several of the paradoxes of Chapter 3. 
Puzzles about Thomson’s Lamp are immediately avoided: since the lamp 
 in principle cannot  be switched infinitely many times, there is no need to 
say whether it would end up on or off after infinitely many switchings. 
In general, one need not answer questions of the form ‘If X happened, 
would Y be the case?’ when X is conceptually impossible. (Compare the 
silly question, ‘If 1 equalled 2, how much would 7×9 be?’) Similarly for 
the Divided Stick paradox: since the stick cannot be divided infinitely 
many times, there is no need to say what the pieces resulting from such 
an infinite division would be like. For the Littlewood-Ross paradox: since 
the game with the Banker could not be completed, there is no need to 
address how much money one would have at the end. For Laraudogoitia’s 
Marbles: since the infinite series of collisions could not be completed, 
there is no need to puzzle about the creation or destruction of energy 
and momentum that would allegedly result from its completion. For the 
Spaceship: since the ship could not complete its process of acceleration 
to infinite speed, there is no need to say where it would be once it had 
 2  Thomson 1954; Craig 1991; Wittgenstein 1975, p. 146.  
 3   Hume, on the other hand, did commit this error (1992, 29–30).  

Impossible Infinite Series: Two False Accounts 43
done so. One version of the Martingale Betting paradox would also be 
avoided, namely, the version in which you collect an infinite pile of 
winnings within four minutes. 
 4.1.2  The failure of the theory 
 There are at least two problems with this attempted set of solutions. 
First, the claim that an infinite series could not be completed leaves us 
with a puzzle as to what exactly would stop it. Take Thomson’s Lamp: 
the supposition that the lamp gets switched after intervals of 1/2  n  
minutes for  n = 1, 2, 3, ... seems logically coherent. It entails that an infi-
nite number of switchings occur within one minute. If one thinks that 
the infinite number of switchings  cannot  occur, one must say at what 
point the series would stop. Will it have to stop after the one thousandth 
switching? The one millionth? The one billionth? And what exactly will 
stop it? 
 One might say: the physical properties of the switch will determine 
how many times it can be switched. Depending on how it is constructed, 
the switch will break at some point, sooner or later. This would of course 
be true of any real, physical mechanism. But now the theory we’re 
trying to evaluate claims that it is  conceptually impossible to complete an 
infinite series – we are supposed to see this to be true just in virtue of the 
meaning of ‘infinite series’. It is hard to believe that the way to vindicate 
this claim is to point to the fact that switches in the actual world eventu-
ally wear out. We need to know why it is conceptually impossible, for 
example, for there to be a switch that would never wear out. 
 Second and more decisively, the quasi-Kantian theory supports Zeno’s 
‘proof’ that motion is impossible. Here is one formulation of Zeno’s 
argument:
 1.   To reach the ground, the ball must complete the following series of 
motions in sequence: ½, ¾, ⅞, ... (where each of these numbers repre-
sents how far the ball would have gone after completing the corre-
sponding step in the series of motions). 
 2.   This series is infinite. 
 3.   It is impossible to complete an infinite series by traversing the steps 
in sequence. 
 4.   Therefore, it is impossible for the ball to reach the ground.  
 This is a pretty simple argument; there are not many places where one 
could claim that it goes wrong. The logic appears unassailable, and there 
are only three premises. Of these three premises, I cannot see how one 

44 Approaching Infinity
can deny #1 or #2. Therefore, if one affirms premise 3 – as the theory we 
are now considering explicitly does – it is hard to see how one can avoid 
concluding that motion is impossible. Or, to put the point the other way 
around: motion is obviously possible. But every motion can be divided 
into an infinite series of sub-motions, all of which are completed, one 
after another in sequence, every time something moves. Therefore, an 
infinite series can in fact be completed by successive synthesis. 
 Exactly where Zeno and Kant went wrong – what mistake causes 
premise 3 to seem true – we discuss in a later chapter (Section 12.8).  
 4.2  ‘An infinite series of preconditions cannot be satisfied’ 
 4.2.1  The theory 
 Here is another account of the impossible infinite: suppose there is an 
infinite series of conditions or states of affairs,  C 1 ,  C 2 ,  C 3 , ... . Suppose further 
that each member of the series (except the first) is a  precondition  for the one 
 before it:  C 2 is a precondition for  C 1 ,  C 3 is a precondition for  C 2 , and so on. 
Equivalently, each member of the series  is dependent upon  the next one:  C 1 
depends on  C 2 , which depends on  C 3 , and so on. In that case, none of the 
conditions can be satisfied.  4 A related view would be this: if each member 
of the series would need to be  explained by  the subsequent member, then 
none of the  C  i  can obtain, or none of them can be explained. 
 This view has some intuitive plausibility. Note that as we proceed through 
the series, we never get any closer to completing it; each stage is always 
infinitely far away from the end, just as every natural number is infinitely 
less than infinity. One is tempted to say, therefore, that one is always infin-
itely far from satisfying all the conditions required for  C 1 to obtain; or that 
one is always infinitely far from successfully explaining  C 1 . 
 This view does not appear to help us with the paradoxes of Chapter 3. 
It may, however, help us to assess the viciousness or virtuousness of the 
regresses canvassed in Chapter 2. A reasonable case could be made that 
four of the six regresses are vicious on the present theory:
 i .   In the regress of causes, each event is explained by and is dependent 
upon its cause, and the occurrence of the cause is a precondition for 
the occurrence of the effect.  5 So, on the present theory, an infinite 
regress of causes would be vicious. 
 4   Cameron 2008; Gillett 2003, 712–13. 
 5   The cause is of course not a logical, conceptual, or metaphysical precondition 
for the effect (unless we individuate events by their causes). It is a  causal precon-
dition. This statement is trivial; nevertheless, it suffices for the argument.  

Impossible Infinite Series: Two False Accounts 45
  ii .    In the regress of reasons, each belief’s justification is dependent upon 
the justifiedness of the reason supporting it; for example, the justi-
fiedness of the reason for A is a precondition on the justifiedness of 
A itself. So an infinite regress of reasons would be vicious.  
 iii .    In the regress of Forms, at least on one interpretation, the Form 
of Man is supposed to be required to  explain the fact that various 
particular men have something in common. It is their ‘participating 
in’ the Form of Man that makes them men. Plato seems to have 
regarded this participation in a Form as being a matter of similarity 
to the Form, so indeed it would appear that an individual’s partici-
pating in the Form would need to be explained by that individual 
and the Form both participating in some further Form. There thus 
appears to be a vicious regress of needed explanatory conditions.  
 iv .    The regress of resemblances, on the other hand, would apparently be 
benign. The individual bluenesses, A, B, and C, are not held to  depend 
upon  the resemblance relations, R(A,B), R(B,C), and R(A,C). Indeed, 
things would seem to be the other way around – the existence of the 
resemblance between A and B depends upon the existence of A and 
B. A and B exist independently; the existence of the resemblance 
between them stems from their existence. 
   v .    In the regress of time series, McTaggart would likely claim that each 
time series depends upon the next one to rescue it from incoherence. 
For example, the time series in which ordinary events are ordered 
would, on its own, be impossible because contradictory; it depends 
for its very consistency on the existence of the time series in which 
the presentness, pastness, and futurity of ordinary events are ordered. 
Likewise, the time series in which the presentness (etc.) of ordinary 
events are ordered depends upon another time series, in which the 
presentness (etc.) of the presentness (etc.) of events are ordered. So 
the regress would be vicious. 
 vi .    The regress of truths is benign, for the fact that P is true is not a 
precondition on the fact that P; rather, the fact that P gives rise to 
the fact that P is true, which gives rise to the fact that it’s true that 
P is true, and so on. [P is true] obtains in virtue of P’s obtaining, not 
vice versa. So there is only an infinite series of  consequences  of P, not 
an infinite series of preconditions. 
 4.2.2  The failure of the theory 
 All of this, however, is of somewhat academic interest, because the 
present theory of the impossible infinite – that an infinite series of 
preconditions cannot be satisfied – is false. Consider the beginningless 

46 Approaching Infinity
Zeno series, in which the ball makes the series of motions: ... , ⅛, ¼, ½, 1. 
This is an infinite series of preconditions: to reach the endpoint, the ball 
must  first  reach the halfway mark; to reach the halfway mark, it must 
first reach the one quarter mark; and so on. Nevertheless, all of these 
conditions are in fact satisfied, every time an object moves. 
 Or consider a line segment one meter long. The segment is made up 
of a left half and a right half. Typically, when a thing is made up of 
parts, we think that the thing depends for its existence on the exist-
ence of those parts, and that the thing exists at least partly in virtue 
of those parts existing. So the one-meter line depends for its existence 
upon, and exists at least partly in virtue of, the existence of the left half 
and the right half. Similarly, the left half depends upon the left quarter 
and the second quarter; the leftmost quarter depends upon the leftmost 
eighth and the second eighth; and so on. So there is an infinite series of 
dependencies; nevertheless, all these objects exist. The same point can 
be made using a time interval of some specified length. 
 Now, what was wrong with the argument in favor of this theory of 
the impossible infinite? Earlier, we said that as one goes through the 
infinite series of preconditions, one is at every stage still infinitely far 
from reaching the end, and this is supposed to support the conclusion 
that none of the conditions can obtain. Perhaps the thought is that the 
first condition,  C 1 , ‘starts out’ not obtaining, and will only get to obtain 
if we can get to the end of the entire infinite series of conditions. And 
perhaps the argument borrows from the notion, discussed in Section 
4.1, that it is impossible to complete such a series, since the series is 
endless. 
 This thinking would be understandable if the members of the series 
were actions occurring in a temporal sequence, and if each action 
required at least some minimum duration. Then it would be correct 
to say such things as ‘we are always infinitely far from completing the 
series.’ But (except in the case of the regress of causes; see below) we are 
not generally dealing with a series of temporal events. What is needed 
for  C 1 to obtain is simply for  C 2 to obtain, which in turn requires  C 3 to 
obtain, and so on; so all told, what  C 1 requires is that every member of 
the series obtains. But the members do not need to obtain at different 
times, in a certain temporal order; they may all simply obtain simultan-
eously (or they may all obtain timelessly). Nor is there any need for any 
human observer, or anyone else, to recognize or otherwise  go through 
the members of the series. For example, in the infinite regress of Forms, 
there is no reason why anyone would need to identify each of the Forms 
in the series, or do anything else involving them that might count as 

Impossible Infinite Series: Two False Accounts 47
‘going through’ the series. The Forms themselves, if they exist, would all 
simply exist timelessly and independently of observers. Of course, this 
is not to say that the notion of an infinite series of Forms is  plausible . 
The point is simply that it is not at all clear why there could not be an 
infinite series of objects standing in dependence relations, each one to 
the next. 
 In the special case of the infinite regress of causes, there is a sequence 
of events that occur in a certain temporal order. Here, at least, do we 
have a problem? Well, it is really not clear what the problem would be. 
In most cases, an infinite series of events occurring one after another 
in time would be problematic because an infinite duration would be 
required to complete the series. For example, we should not postulate a 
belief arrived at by an infinitely long chain of argument, because it would 
take a person forever to complete such an argument – and we don’t have 
forever! But in the case of the regress of causes in the universe, we in fact 
 have  an infinite time to work with – time stretches back infinitely into 
the past, and the infinite series of causes occupies exactly that span of 
time. Why may not an infinite series of events transpire  in an infinite 
amount of time ? 
 A defender of the First Cause Argument might object that, if there was 
no first cause, then we can never truly explain any given present-day 
event, because to explain it, we would have to cite every cause in the 
infinite chain preceding that event. Now, it may be true that one cannot 
 fully explain  an event without citing all the causes in its history – but 
then, I think it should come as no surprise that we in fact cannot fully 
explain events in this sense. 
 Perhaps the defender of the First Cause Argument would say that there 
must at least  exist a complete explanation for any given event, even if 
we humans cannot  give the explanation. Now, it really is not clear to me 
why we should assume that everything must have a complete explana-
tion; why may there not simply be brute facts? In addition, it remains 
unclear why a present event should not have a complete explanation, 
even in a world with no first cause. Certainly, no finite portion of the 
series of causes would explain the event. But what about  the entire infinite 
series  of causes in the event’s history – why shouldn’t we say that  that is 
the complete explanation? 
 4.3  Conclusion 
 Since they are both false, the theories considered in this chapter cannot 
help us resolve the paradoxes of infinity. An infinite series of events 

48 Approaching Infinity
 can be completed. A series that is endless in the sense of having no last 
member can nevertheless be completed, in the sense that there may be 
a time such that every member of the series occurs before that time. 
Similarly, a series with no first member can nevertheless be begun, in 
the sense that there may be a time such that every member occurs after 
that time. These points are illustrated by the endless and beginningless 
Zeno series. 
 It also seems that an endless series of preconditions, with each member 
dependent on the next, can be satisfied. It is not clear why one should 
think this impossible, and the possibility seems to be illustrated by the 
beginningless Zeno series, as well as any region of space or interval of 
time, where the existence of the whole depends at least in part on the 
existence of each of its parts. 
 
 

49
 5.1  The theory of potential infinity 
 Historically, the most popular theory of the impossible infinite is the 
one handed down by Aristotle: that infinity can only be  potential , 
never  actual . 1 What does this mean? Here are two helpful remarks from 
Aristotle’s discussion of the infinite: 
 A quantity is infinite if it is such that we can always take a part outside 
what has already been taken. 
 Our account does not rob the mathematicians of their science [ ... ]. 
In point of fact they do not need the infinite and do not use it. They 
postulate only that the finite straight line may be produced as far as 
they wish. 2 
 The latter passage is particularly instructive. The idea appears to be 
this: there is an infinite potentiality, because  there is no limit to how 
long a line can be. A line cannot be infinitely long – this would be an 
‘actual infinity’ – but a line can be of  any  finite length. The possible 
lengths of lines go on up forever – for any line, there could be one 
twice as long. 
 5 
 Actual and Potential Infinities 
 1   Compare Wittgenstein 1975, 162 (emphasis mine): ‘[I]t makes sense to say 
there can be infinitely many objects in a direction, but no sense to say there are 
infinitely many.’ 
 2   Aristotle 1941,  Physics  III, 207a8–9; 207b27–31. The second remark is 
misleading, since as it turns out, Aristotle thought space had a finite size, which 
implies that a straight line may not in fact be extended as far as one wishes – it 
cannot be extended beyond the sphere of the heavens ( De  Caelo II.7, II.9). 

50 Approaching Infinity
 Here are some more examples that I think Aristotle would approve of:
   i .   A one-meter line segment is infinitely divisible, but not infinitely 
divided. That is, there is no limit to how many times one can divide 
it; however many times a line is divided, it is always possible to 
divide it again. But one will never have divided it infinitely many 
times. Hence, this is a potential, not an actual infinity. 
    ii .   The series of natural numbers is potentially infinite, because there is no 
limit to how high one can count. But however high one has counted, 
it will always be to a finite number. There is no number ‘infinity’.  
 iii .    There is no limit to how fast something can move (remember that 
Aristotle is writing millennia before the special theory of relativity) – 
for any possible speed, there are possible speeds twice as fast. But 
there is no such speed as ‘infinity’. (If there were, where would you 
wind up after traveling at such a speed?) 
 In saying that there are potential infinities but not actual infinities, 
Aristotle is  not saying that there are things that are capable of being 
infinite, yet somehow they never exercise this capacity and so never 
become infinite. He is saying that there are some potentialities that are 
unlimited – sometimes, there is no particular limit to how great some-
thing can be in some respect – but nevertheless, no matter what happens, 
every quantity will always have some definite, finite value. 
 Many other thinkers have held some variant of this view. Indeed, 
some sort of finitism has been the dominant position in the history of 
the subject. A few more quotations: 3 
 [T]here cannot be any infinite magnitude, since no species of magni-
tude is infinite. [ ... ] [I]t is impossible for an actually infinite multi-
tude to exist, even accidentally. (Saint Thomas Aquinas, ca. 1270) 
 Whatsoever we imagine, is  finite . Therefore there is no idea or 
conception of any thing we call  infinite . [ ... ] When we say any thing 
is infinite, we signify only that we are not able to conceive the ends 
and bounds of the thing named. (Thomas Hobbes, 1651) 
 The infinity of numbers, to the end of whose addition every one 
perceives there is no approach, easily appears to any one that reflects 
 3   Sources: Aquinas 1981,  Summa  I, Q7; Hobbes 1996, 23, emphasis in original; 
Locke 1975, II.xvii.8; Gauss, letter to Schumacher in 1831, quoted in Benardete 
1964, 13. 

Actual and Potential Infinities 51
on it. But, how clear soever this idea of the infinity of number be, 
there is nothing yet more evident than the absurdity of the actual 
idea of an infinite number. (John Locke, 1689) 
 I must protest most vehemently against your use of the infinite as 
something consummated, as this is never permitted in mathematics. 
The infinite is but a  façon de   parler ; an abridged form for the state-
ment that limits exist which certain ratios may approach as closely as 
we desire, while other magnitudes may be permitted to grow beyond 
all bounds. (Carl Friedrich Gauss, 1831) 
 5.2  Why not actual infinities? 
 Why can’t there be an actual infinity? Why should there not be an infi-
nitely long line, an infinite number, or an object of infinite mass? 
 The following brief passage from Aristotle’s  Physics gives a sense of the 
fundamental philosophical motivation for rejecting actual infinities. The 
context was a discussion of whether there is any infinitely large object.  
 Surely what is in a specific location is in space, and what is in space 
is in a specific location. Just, then, as the infinite cannot be a quan-
tity – that would imply that it has a particular value, e.g., two or three 
cubits; quantity just means these – so a thing’s being in space means 
that it is  some where, and that is either up or down or in some other 
of the six directions: but each of these is a limit. It is plain from these 
arguments that there is no body which is  actually infinite. 4 
 4   Aristotle 1941,  Physics  III.5.206a2–8. Here, I have boldly/rashly (since I do not 
read Greek!) modified the translation of R.P. Hardie and R.K. Gaye in four ways: (i) I 
have changed ‘in place’ to ‘in space’, because the former expression does not make 
sense in the context, notwithstanding that both Ross’ (Aristotle 1936, 366) and 
Coughlin’s (Aristotle 2005, 56) translations agree with Hardie and Gaye. Aristotle 
presumably was not talking about what normal English speakers call something’s 
being ‘in place’ (as when, for example, one puts procedures in place for preventing 
fraud). (ii) I have changed ‘special place’ to ‘specific location’. Aristotle presumably 
was not talking about what we would call ‘special places’ – like a nice, secluded spot 
in the woods by a babbling creek. (iii) I have changed ‘it has a particular quantity’ 
to ‘it has a particular value’, again for coherence. The hypothesis that infinity is a 
quantity does not imply that infinity has a quantity. In English, quantities don’t 
‘have’ other quantities (nor do they ‘have’ themselves). (iv) Finally, I changed ‘the 
six differences of position’ to ‘the six directions’, because it does not make sense in 
English to speak of a thing being ‘in’ a ‘difference of position’. In this last change, I 
follow Ross and Coughlin. This experience raises the question of whether Aristotle’s 
translators perhaps know Greek better than they know English.  

52 Approaching Infinity
 Saint Thomas Aquinas gives a similar argument:
 [E]very natural body has some determined substantial form. Since 
therefore the accidents follow upon the substantial form, it is neces-
sary that determinate accidents should follow upon a determinate 
form; and among these accidents is quantity. So every natural body 
has a greater or smaller determinate quantity. Hence it is impossible 
for a natural body to be infinite. 5 
 Here is what I make of these passages: Every actual thing in the world 
must be fully determinate in respect of all its properties. For example, if 
a thing is in space, then it must have a specific location; there cannot 
be, as some interpretations of quantum mechanics posit, an object that 
is in a certain box, but neither in the left half nor in the right half. Or, 
if a thing has mass, then there must be some definite value of its mass. 
(Of course, there could be things to which mass and location do not 
apply, such as thoughts or numbers – that is why I included the clauses 
‘ if  a thing is in space’ and ‘ if a thing has mass’.) However, any definite 
value of a variable constitutes a limit – to be in a particular place, or to 
have a particular mass, is to be limited in a certain way. The infinite, 
by definition, is unlimited. So to be infinite in respect of some variable 
is incompatible with having a determinate value of that variable – for 
instance, to say that a thing has infinite mass would be to deny that it 
has any specific, determinate mass. Therefore, no thing can actually be 
infinite in respect of any variable; for instance, no thing can actually 
have infinite mass. 
 Whether that is a correct paraphrase of Aristotle or not, the above 
represents an interesting motivation for rejecting the actual infinite, 
so let us take that to be the theory under consideration. I shall later 
(Chapter 10) discuss some further arguments that ‘infinity’ does not 
name any determinate quantity. 
 5.3  Infinite divisibility 
 5.3.1   Aristotle on Zeno’s paradox 
 Of the paradoxes mentioned in Chapter 3, Aristotle directly addresses 
those due to Zeno (the other paradoxes being unknown in his time). He 
 5   Aquinas 1981,  Summa I, Q7. Ignore the bits about accidents and substantial 
forms, if you don’t know what those are. The last two sentences are the important 
part. 

Actual and Potential Infinities 53
makes a number of remarks about Zeno, but I shall focus on his remarks 
apropos of the distinction between actual and potential infinities. 
 Aristotle concedes that, because there cannot be an actual infinity, 
Zeno’s endless series would be uncompletable, if indeed it were an 
actual infinity. He maintains, however, that the endless series of halfway 
motions is a merely  potential  infinity. The distance between point A and 
point B, he says, is  capable  of being divided as many times as one likes. 
However, it is never actually divided infinitely many times. 
 On the face of it, this claim is a bit obscure. The spatial intervals that 
Zeno identifies – the first half of the distance from A to B, the next 
quarter of the distance, and so on – appear to be actual segments; it is 
not as though some of them are merely  capable of coming into exist-
ence but don’t actually exist. (What would it mean for a part of space 
to fail to exist?) The suggestion that the line might be capable of being 
divided some number of times yet fail to be ‘actually divided’ so many 
times makes it sound as though ‘dividing’ a line is a human activity, and 
as though the segments Zeno is talking about will not exist (or the ball 
will not have to traverse them?) unless some human being performs this 
‘dividing’ activity to bring them into existence. 
 But that is quite a strange suggestion. For an object to travel from 
point A to point B, it is necessary that it travel half the distance before 
it may reach the endpoint, and this fact is just a matter of the objective 
structure of space (given the assumption that the object must take a 
straight, continuous path). It does not depend on any human beings, 
and it does not matter whether any human being has recognized the 
halfway point, or performed any other activity by way of ‘dividing’ the 
distance. Even if there were no human beings in the universe, an object 
still could not move from point A to point B without traversing the 
first half of that distance. And the object would not merely need the 
 capacity  to travel the first half of the distance; it would have to  actually 
traverse that distance, before it could actually make it to point B (barring 
teleportation). 
 In fact, I think Aristotle’s point is not the confused one we have just 
refuted. What is required for a division to be actual, on Aristotle’s view, 
is not some mental act by observers. Rather, for the ball’s motion to be 
‘actually’ divided into two halves, it would be necessary that the motion 
should be discontinuous; specifically, that the ball should pause at the 
halfway mark before continuing on its journey.  6 Thus, for the endless 
Zeno series to count as an actual infinity, on Aristotle’s reckoning, the 
 6   Aristotle 1941,  Physics VIII.8, 263a23–b10. 

54 Approaching Infinity
ball would have to stop and start infinitely many times – and in that 
case, Aristotle would indeed consider the series uncompletable (here I 
would agree with Aristotle). If, as is normally the case, the ball’s motion 
is continuous (with no pauses), then it is really just a single movement, 
not an infinite series of movements. 
 5.3.2   The failure of Aristotle’s solution 
 Why think that the ball must pause at the halfway mark in order for the 
division to be ‘actual’? Aristotle’s stated reason for this is that if there is 
no pause, then the first stage in the series (the ball’s traveling the first 
half of the distance) would  overlap with the second stage in the series 
(the ball’s traveling the next quarter of the distance). This overlap would 
consist of a single point: the temporal endpoint of the first stage would 
be identical with the beginning point of the second stage. This prevents 
the alleged two stages from being genuinely separate motions; instead, 
there is really just one motion. 
 If the single point of overlap is the concern, then there are a number 
of ways that Zeno could avoid it. Zeno could redefine the stages so that, 
for example, the first stage is defined as including the ball’s motion from 
point A up to  but not including  the halfway mark; that is, it is the motion 
over the half-open interval, 0 ≤  d < ½. The second stage of the ball’s 
motion would then include the points where ½ ≤  d < ¾, and so on. Here, 
however, Aristotle might still say that the division is non-actual; he 
might insist that an actual division between motions requires a nonzero 
temporal gap between them. 
 Another option for Zeno would be to say that the infinite series of 
events consists in ( i ) the ball’s  reaching the halfway point (an event 
which occurs at a single instant of time), ( ii ) the ball’s  reaching the three 
quarter mark, and so on. Then each item in the series is separated from 
the next by a nonzero temporal gap, and it remains the case that the 
ball cannot reach the ground before all infinitely many of these events 
have occurred. 
 In any case, it remains unclear why we should accept the Aristotelian 
strictures on what may count as distinct motions. What is wrong with 
the idea of two distinct actions that are temporally contiguous, or even 
that overlap at some point in time? The ball’s traveling the first half 
of the distance is an event that actually occurs (assuming, that is, that 
objects really move), regardless of what may happen after that. If the 
ball stopped at the halfway mark, then Aristotle would certainly accept 
that this event had occurred. But the ball’s going on to traverse the 
next quarter of the distance can have no effect on whether the event of 

Actual and Potential Infinities 55
its traveling the first half of the distance occurred. So the first halfway 
motion actually occurs, whether or not the ball continues moving 
without delay. The same is true of each of the motions in Zeno’s series. So 
there is an infinity of actual motions, that is, there is an actual infinity. 
 I have no doubt that it is valid to regard the ball’s motion from A to 
B as a single event. I merely insist that this is not the  only valid way to 
regard things; it is also legitimate to view the ball’s motion as consisting 
of two events, or three events, and so on. The world does not contain a 
privileged way of dividing it up such that all other ways are ‘false’. Now, 
some ways of dividing (or not dividing) the ball’s motion fail to produce 
any paradox – if we view it as a single event, no paradox is evident. But 
this hardly solves our problem. If there is  any  legitimate (not objectively 
wrong) way of regarding the ball’s motion that generates a paradox, 
then we have a problem. 
 5.3.3  Minimum distances 
 Perhaps we can avoid Zeno’s paradoxes by postulating indivisible parts 
of space, so that at some point, it becomes impossible to further divide 
the distance between A and B, and then the ball can simply traverse the 
smallest distance in one step. Of course, in standard geometry, there 
are indivisible parts of space – they are called ‘points’ – but they will 
not serve the present purpose, because they each have a size of zero, 
enabling a line segment to be divided into infinitely many of them. The 
minimum parts of space in the present view would have to have some 
real, nonzero size, such that an ordinary, macroscopic distance could be 
divided into only finitely many of these smallest parts. 
 I must confess that I have difficulty conceiving this alleged possibility. 
I cannot understand what an indivisible – yet nonzero! – distance would 
be like. The hypothesis that, for example, a millionth of an inch might 
be indivisible seems to me to make as much sense as the hypothesis that 
the number 1/2,000,000 might fail to exist, even though 1/1,000,000 
does, or the hypothesis that there is a real number that cannot be multi-
plied by two. 
 Nevertheless, I may be able to conduct some reasoning concerning 
this hypothesis. Most people who entertain the ‘minimum distance’ 
theory agree that the following is an implication of the theory: for 
any two points in space, the distance between those points is equal to 
some integer multiple of the minimum distance. Now, I suppose that 
a square may exist, and that it may have four corners (Figure 5.1a). 
Call the length of the side of the square (the distance between adjacent 
corners) ‘ s ’, and call the length of the diagonal (the distance between 

56 Approaching Infinity
opposite corners) ‘ d ’. Let the hypothetical minimum possible distance 
be  m . On the present theory,  s is some integer multiple of  m , and  d is 
another integer multiple of  m . Therefore, the ratio of the diagonal to the 
side,  d/s , is a ratio of two integers (since  m cancels out). That is,  d/s is a 
rational number. 
 But that is false. Consider the argument given by Plato in the  Meno . 7 
Construct a square whose base is the diagonal of the original square 
(Figure 5.1b). The area of the small square is  s 2 , and that of the large 
square is  d 2 . The area of the large square is also twice that of the small 
square (the small square is made up of two triangles, where the large 
square is made up of four triangles of the same size). So  d 2 = 2 s 2 , and so 
 d / s = √2. Unless we’re radically revising our arithmetic along with our 
geometry, √2 is no rational number. 
 My claim here is not that the theory of minimum distances could not 
be made consistent; a sufficiently dogmatic partisan could, for example, 
simply deny that squares have diagonals. My claim is that this view 
simply is not plausible. 
 I conclude that space provides us with an example of an actual infinity, 
because every nonzero spatial interval actually contains infinitely many 
parts. In fact, there are infinitely many sets of infinitely many parts – 
that is, there are infinitely many ways of dividing a line segment into an 
infinity of parts. Similarly, every volume of space, every interval of time, 
and every continuous motion contains an infinity of parts.  
(a)
d
s
d
s
(b)
 Figure 5.1  Relationship between the side and the diagonal of a square  
 7   Plato 2012, 84d–85b. Plato does not make the point about irrational number; 
he just gives the argument that the square constructed on the diagonal is of twice 
the area as the original square. 

Actual and Potential Infinities 57
 5.4  Infinite time 
 In addition to its infinite divisibility, time exhibits another kind of 
infinity, its infinite  extent . In particular, time extends infinitely far into 
the future. In contrast to the infinite past, no one seems bothered by an 
infinite future. Perhaps an Aristotelian could reconcile this by saying 
that the future is not (yet) actual. Although there is an infinite amount 
of time ahead of us, the future times are not actual until they occur, and 
there will never come a time at which they have all occurred, so the 
infinite future will never be actualized. It is unclear whether this defense 
of the theory of potential infinity succeeds, mostly because the notions 
of ‘actuality’ and ‘potentiality’ are unclear. 
 Time also extends infinitely far into the past. This should be more 
troubling to an Aristotelian, since it is more plausible to say that the past 
is actual as of the present time than it is to say that the future is actual 
as of the present time.  8 Interestingly, Aristotle did  not accept the notion 
that time had a beginning, as his rejection of actual infinities might 
lead us to expect. He argues that time is without beginning, though he 
neglects to explain why this does not count as an actual infinity. He 
likewise maintains that changes have been occurring throughout the 
eternal history of the universe, which would seem to constitute another 
actual infinity. 9 
 Perhaps Aristotle would deny that these are actual infinities, on the 
grounds that the infinitely many past moments and past events do not 
exist  all at once . But if this were his view, it would be hard to understand 
his treatment of Zeno’s paradox. There, he seems to allow that the motions 
in Zeno’s series would be actual if they were separated by temporal gaps 
(pauses); this is incompatible with the idea that the actual must all exist 
simultaneously. It is in any case quite odd to view events that have already 
occurred as mere potentialities, rather than actual events.  
 5.5  Infinite space 
 5.5.1   The edge of space 
 Space, too, appears to be an actual infinite, as it extends infinitely far 
in all directions. Aristotle denies this, holding that the cosmos consists 
of a sphere of finite circumference, with the Earth at the center and 
 8   Tooley 1997; Craig 2010. 
 9   Aristotle 1941, Physics III.6, 206a7–10; VIII.1. 

58 Approaching Infinity
the heavens as the outermost spherical shell. He claims that there is 
nothing, not even empty space, outside this outermost shell. 10 
 Pace Aristotle, there is no edge of space. Even if there were some 
outer shell of the material universe that the laws of physics somehow 
prevented one from escaping, one could still at least  refer to  the very 
beyond into which one was prevented from traveling, and this suffices 
to conclude that at least there would be space there. 
 Someone  could insist that no, one could  not  refer to or think about 
the beyond in this case. I just find this position obviously false. I find 
it inconceivable that there be a sphere (or any other finite region) such 
that one could not even refer to the places outside of it. For those who 
claim to conceive of such a possibility, the best I can make of it is that 
they are actually thinking of a region surrounded by empty space – but 
(like Aristotle  11 ) they may have some philosophical  theory that tells them 
that there cannot be empty space, so they declare that in this scenario 
space itself would be limited. 
 5.5.2  Round space 
 In modern times, a different theory is sometimes advanced to explain 
how space might be finite. The modern theory supposes that space might 
have a finite extent and yet there be no edge of it. On this theory, if you 
tried to travel a great distance in one direction, instead of hitting an 
edge of space and being forced to stop, you would find yourself coming 
back to where you started from,  as though  you had gone around in an 
enormous circle – and yet you were truly traveling in a straight line the 
whole time. 
 People who like this idea usually illustrate it using the analogy of the 
surface of a sphere. Suppose we did not know that the Earth was round, 
and someone undertook to walk in a straight line on the Earth’s surface 
for as long as possible, never to return. After walking long enough (and 
supposing that he could walk across the ocean), he would be surprised 
to find himself returning to where he started, coming from the opposite 
direction. The Earth’s surface is of finite size but it has no edge, so if 
you try to walk a great distance on it, you will find yourself, instead of 
falling off the edge, just coming back to where you started. Similarly, it is 
said, the whole of physical space might be like the surface of the sphere: 
maybe it has a finite size, but no boundaries. 12 
 10  Aristotle 1941, De Caelo I.9, 278b–279a. 
 11  Aristotle 1941, Physics IV.6–9. 
  12   Einstein 1961, chapter 31. 

Actual and Potential Infinities 59
 Many people take this analogy quite seriously, and many students 
when first introduced to it seem to find it quite clever. Yet it always 
struck me as the silliest sophistry. (Well, perhaps not the  silliest  – there 
is after all quite a lot of competition in that category – but certainly 
high in silliness.) There is no difficulty in understanding how the 
man who walks around the world winds up back where he started: he 
walked in a circle. A very large circle, to be sure, but a circle nonethe-
less. We were promised an explanation of how it is possible that by 
traveling in a  straight line , one should wind up back where one started. 
How is that demonstrated by giving an example of someone walking 
in a circle? 
 The standard answer: ‘The man’s path actually  was a straight line  on 
the surface  of the Earth. Among paths on a spherical surface, the shortest 
path connecting any two points is an arc of a great circle. Therefore, 
within a spherical surface, a great circle is a straight line.’ 
 What this argument does is essentially ( i ) to restrict our attention to only 
a certain set of lines, all of which are curved (every line drawn on a globe is 
curved), then ( ii ) to identify the least curved among these and declare them 
to be straight. Here is an analogy: consider points A and B in Figure 5.2, 
and consider just the three lines L 1 , L 2 , and L 3 connecting them:  
L2
L1
L3
A
B
 Figure 5.2  Three lines connecting two points 
 Remember, I’m stipulating that you’re only allowed to consider those 
three lines. With that understood, L 2 is the shortest path between A and 
B. Therefore, L 2 is a straight line. 
 I hope you agree that that is false. And it’s not that L 2 is straight ‘within 
that set of lines’; it just is not straight at all. Similarly, the path around 
the world is not straight at all. 
 Even after acknowledging this point, there are at least three ways we 
might interpret the point of the spherical surface example so that it 

60 Approaching Infinity
might still show something of interest. Here they are, along with my 
replies:
    i .   Perhaps the example of the spherical surface is merely meant to 
demonstrate that the concept of a region that is  finite but unbounded 
is not contradictory. Since it is not contradictory, the whole of phys-
ical space might be finite but unbounded. 
 
   Reply: the last sentence is a non-sequitur. That the predicate ‘finite 
but unbounded’ is not a contradiction provides no reason to believe 
that space might be finite but unbounded. 
   ii .    Perhaps the example is meant to suggest that our space might be 
embedded in some higher-dimensional space, and that our space 
might be curved in the higher-dimensional space. If so, what look 
like straight lines to us might actually be curved in the larger space, 
just as what look (to a two-dimensional being) like straight lines on 
the surface of a sphere are really curved. In that case, by traveling 
far enough in what  looks to us  like a straight line, we might wind up 
back where we started. 
 
   Reply: On this hypothesis, our three-dimensional space would be 
finite, but then the larger space would be the relevant example of 
an actual infinity – unless of course it too is only a finite portion of 
some even higher dimensional space. But then the latter would be 
the relevant example of the actual infinite. And so on. The example 
fails to motivate the idea that a  genuinely straight line can double 
back on itself; more importantly, it fails to evade the notion of the 
actual infinite.  
 iii .    Perhaps the suggestion is that even if our space is not embedded in a 
larger space, and what look to us like straight lines are really straight, 
it still might turn out that a straight line, if sufficiently extended, 
comes back around on itself. This is because even though our space 
is not curved in some higher-dimensional space, it still might have 
the same geometry as a space that was so curved. 
 
   Reply:  But this is exactly what the example fails to show. We can 
readily imagine the geometry of a spherical surface, by actually imag-
ining a sphere. But if someone says: ‘Okay, now imagine a surface 
with exactly that geometry, including the part about how a straight 
line doubles back on itself, but this time  don’t  let the surface curve’ – 
well, this is precisely what we cannot imagine. And we have been 
given no reason at all for thinking this possible. Nor have we been 
given any reason for thinking that our space can have that geometry 
without being embedded in a higher-dimensional space. 13 

Actual and Potential Infinities 61
 Now suppose it turned out – as, empirically, it might – that when-
ever someone tried to travel in a straight line for some very long 
distance, he always wound up back where he started. In that case, I 
still would not say that space was finite. I would say that something 
was preventing anyone from actually traveling such a distance in a 
straight line, that is, that all these travelers were actually moving in 
circles (or other closed curves). Because of this, some regions of space 
might be inaccessible to us. But this, as a metaphysical possibility, is 
hardly surprising, nor does it provide any reason for thinking that 
space itself might be finite. For an analogy, imagine a person inside 
the event horizon of a black hole: it is physically impossible for this 
person ever to escape the black hole, but they would be wrong to infer 
that there is nothing beyond. In the same way, it might be physically 
impossible for anyone in our physical universe to escape beyond a 
certain distance, but we would be wrong to infer that there is nothing 
beyond. 14  
 I have not tried to  prove that a straight line does not double back 
on itself, as that is self-evident. What I have been employed about is 
pointing out that no good reason for doubting this proposition has been 
given. In particular, the analogy of the great circle on the surface of a 
sphere provides no reason at all for doubting it, and accordingly casts no 
doubt on the idea of space as an actual infinite. 
 5.5.3  Relational space 
 How else might we avoid admitting that space is an actual infinite? 
Instead of claiming that space is finite, we could claim that it is a merely 
 13  What about the empirical evidence for General Relativity, such as the 
gravitational bending of light (Dyson et al. 1920)? Properly interpreted, this is 
not evidence of curved spacetime but rather evidence that light fails to travel 
straight paths in spacetime. See Reichenbach’s (1957, section 3) discussion of the 
‘universal force’ theory. Pace Reichenbach (22), I think not only that this sort 
of theory should not be ruled out by definition, but that it is in fact the correct 
interpretation of the evidence. 
 14   There is much more to say on this subject, because the theory about finite 
but unbounded space is tied in various ways to broad philosophical theories (espe-
cially empiricism and verificationism) that held sway in the twentieth century. 
These theories were held so widely and so dogmatically among philosophers, 
scientists, and mathematicians, that great portions of the edifice of modern 
thought in all three areas were built around them. Unfortunately, these philo-
sophical theories are fundamentally false; however, a full treatment of them 
would require a separate book. I will touch on them again in Chapter 7.  

62 Approaching Infinity
potential infinity. Maybe points in space – at least the unoccupied 
points – exist as mere potentialities, rather than actualities. 
 According to the relational theory of space, defended famously by 
G.W.F. Leibniz, space has no independent existence.  15 What exists are 
physical objects and the spatial relationships among them. All sensible 
discourse about space is really discourse about (possible and actual) 
spatial properties and relationships of bodies. When an object is said to 
be moving at 100 kilometers an hour, what this means is that its posi-
tion  relative to  some salient object, such as the Earth, is changing at that 
rate. 
 What about when we talk about regions of empty space? The rela-
tionist (as I shall call defenders of this theory) might say that talk about 
empty space is really talk about unactualized potentialities for objects to 
stand in certain spatial relations. For instance, suppose I claim to have 
a bottle with a perfect vacuum inside. Maybe what this really means 
is that there is the unactualized potential for physical material to be 
between the sides of the bottle. 
 On this view, the fact that space is infinitely extended might just be the 
fact that, for any given distance one cares to name, there is the (perhaps 
unactualized) potential for a material object to be at that distance from 
here. Thus, the infinitude of space is a potential infinity. 
 This would be a terrific way of rescuing Aristotle from the example of 
space as an actual infinite ... if the relational theory of space were plau-
sible. In the beginning of his famous  Principia , Newton describes the 
following scenario.  16 A bucket of water is suspended from a rope. The 
bucket is rotated several times, so that the rope is twisted up. At this 
time, the bucket and water are at rest relative to one another, and the 
surface of the water is level – call this Stage 1 (see Figure 5.3). Then 
the bucket is released. As the rope untwists, the bucket rotates. At first, 
the bucket is rotating relative to the water, and the surface of the water is 
level (Stage 2). Then the water starts to rotate as well, so that bucket and 
water are again at rest relative to one another. The surface of the water 
is now concave, with the water trying to climb the sides of the bucket 
(Stage 3). Subsequently, the bucket will start to rotate back in the other 
direction, so that now the bucket is rotating relative to the water, in the 
direction opposite from the initial direction, and the surface of the water 
is still concave (Stage 4). 
 15   See Leibniz’ letters in Leibniz and Clarke 2007. 
 16  Newton 1846, Book I, 81, from the scholium to the definitions.  

Actual and Potential Infinities 63
 Here we have an observable phenomenon to be explained: what 
causes the surface of the water to be concave in Stages 3 and 4, but flat 
in Stages 1 and 2? I assume that the only physical objects involved in the 
explanation are the water, the bucket, the rope, and perhaps the Earth 
beneath them. (The phenomenon is not caused by, say, a kangaroo in 
Australia, or the planet Neptune, or the Andromeda Galaxy.  17 It is logi-
cally possible that these things are causally implicated, but not plau-
sible.) The concavity of the water in Stages 3 and 4 is a manifestation 
of ‘centrifugal force’, which is due to the rotation of the water.  18 The 
details of the correct mechanical explanation do not concern us here. 
What concerns us is that the phenomenon cannot be explained in terms 
of the rotation of the water  relative  to the bucket, since we have rela-
tive rotation in Stage 2 while the water is flat; we also have a lack of 
relative rotation in Stage 3 while the water is concave. It appears that 
the phenomenon must be explained in terms of the water’s  absolute 
rotation. But this notion of absolute rotation presupposes the existence 
of space, as a thing distinct from the physical objects occupying it. In 
Stages 1 and 3, the water is in the same spatial relationship to  the bucket 
(in both cases, the two are rotationally at rest relative to one another); 
what is different is the relationship of the water to  space itself : in Stage 1, 
1
2
3
4
 Figure 5.3  Newton’s bucket 
 17  This is a gentle dig at Ernst Mach (1919, 232), who proposed that the 
phenomenon was to be explained in terms of rotation relative to the fixed stars – 
hence, the Andromeda Galaxy inter alia was implicated in pulling the water up 
the sides of the bucket. 
 18  Centrifugal force is referred to as a ‘fictitious force’ in physics, since it 
appears only in non-inertial reference frames; nevertheless, the term describes a 
real phenomenon, as illustrated by the observably different shapes of the water in 
Newton’s bucket experiment. That phenomenon needs to be explained, whether 
it be described in terms of a ‘force’ or not. 

64 Approaching Infinity
the water is rotationally at rest in absolute space; in Stage 3, the water is 
rotating in absolute space. That is why there is centrifugal force in Stage 
3 but not Stage 1. Similar points apply to Stages 2 and 4. 
 But wait – didn’t Einstein’s Theory of Relativity refute the whole 
notion of absolute space? No, despite the similarity between the words 
‘relativity’ and ‘relational’ (the first six letters are the same!) the Theory 
of Relativity is not, and does not imply, the Relational Theory of Space. 
The Theory of Relativity is best understood as an account of the math-
ematical structure of spacetime – roughly speaking, that we occupy a 
Minkowski spacetime.  19 On this account, there is no objective distinc-
tion between rest and uniform (non-accelerated) motion – or in other 
words, between vertical and slanted lines in spacetime. There  is , however, 
an objective distinction between uniform and  accelerated  motion, or 
between straight lines and curved lines in spacetime. It is that distinc-
tion that is used to explain the bucket phenomenon: in modern physics, 
rotational motion is considered a form of accelerated motion, even if 
the speed is constant (this is because rotation involves continual change 
in  direction  of motion), and  acceleration is absolute . (Yes, it is generally 
held that  velocity  is relative to a reference frame, and yet the  rate of 
change  of velocity is absolute. This is odd but not contradictory.) It is 
because the water is rotating  absolutely  in Stages 3 and 4 that there is the 
centrifugal force phenomenon. There is no centrifugal force in Stages 1 
and 2 because the water is objectively not rotating. That was Newton’s 
analysis, and that is still the modern analysis. The contemporary view, 
post Relativity, disagrees with Newton’s when it comes to absolute  veloci-
ties , but the two concur on the question of absolute  accelerations . 
 And absolute acceleration is all we need to reject the relational theory 
of space (or spacetime). The relational theory of space holds that space 
(or spacetime) does not have independent existence, that it exists solely 
as a set of possible spatial (or spatiotemporal) relationships among phys-
ical objects. The notion of absolute acceleration is incompatible with the 
 19  This is of course speaking just of Special Relativity. For an excellent exposi-
tion of spacetime structure in Special Relativity, see Maudlin 2002, ch. 2. Maudlin 
(1993) proposes that a relationist could respond to Newton’s bucket scenario by 
positing cross-temporal spatial relations, for example, a particle of water at t 1 
might be at a distance from itself at t 2 . However, he nevertheless concludes that 
General Relativity supports substantival spacetime. For discussion of how General 
Relativity supports substantival spacetime, see also Grünbaum 1957; Dainton 
2001, 301–2 (arguing that relationists cannot make sense of gravitational waves). 
For additional, philosophical arguments for substantival spacetime, see Tooley 
1997, 258–82, 360–71. 

Actual and Potential Infinities 65
theory, since the absolute acceleration of an object cannot be defined in 
terms of its relationships to other physical objects. Relationists can only 
recognize  relative  accelerations – that is, one physical object can accel-
erate relative to another. In brief, the relational theory contradicts both 
classical and modern physics. We therefore cannot rely on the relational 
theory to rescue us from the notion of space (or spacetime) as an actual 
infinite. 
 5.6  Infinitely numerous numbers 
 The set of natural numbers is proverbially infinite, that is, there are infin-
itely many of them. Aristotle would not wish to say that there are only 
finitely many natural numbers and hence that there is a last natural 
number in the series.  20 His view must be, then, that the infinitude of 
the natural numbers is merely a potential, rather than an actual infinity. 
How might one motivate this? 
 One possibility would be to claim that the infinity of the natural 
numbers consists in the fact that there is no limit to how high one can 
count. That is, for any natural number  n , it is possible to count higher 
than  n ; one cannot, however, count to infinity. This interpretation is 
supported to some degree by Aristotle’s remark:
 [I]n the direction of largeness it is always possible to think of a larger 
number: for the number of times a magnitude can be bisected is infi-
nite. Hence this infinite is potential, never actual. 21 
 This approach, however, depends upon an overly anthropocentric 
conception of number, such that a number does not exist until someone 
counts it off or otherwise recognizes the number. On this view, it might 
turn out, for example, that there is no natural number between 45,670 
and 45,672, because maybe no one has ever named that number. Note 
that it would not suffice to hold that a number may exist in virtue of 
our accepting propositions that  entail  its existence – for instance, the 
opponent of actual infinities could not say that the successor of 45,670 
exists in virtue of our accepting that 45,670 exists  and our accepting the 
 20  Aristotle 1941, 206a7–11. 
 21  Aristotle 1941, Physics III.7, 207b10–12. Aristotle is no subjectivist in general, 
so I find the interpretation suggested in the text improbable qua Aristotelian 
exegesis. Nevertheless, the suggestion bears discussion since later opponents of 
actual infinities might endorse it, even if Aristotle would not.  

66 Approaching Infinity
general principle that for every number  n ,  n +1 exists. This view would 
not enable one to avoid an actual infinity, since we (at any rate, most of 
us) already in fact accept arithmetical propositions that entail the exist-
ence of infinitely many numbers. To avoid an actual infinity, one would 
have to claim that something more is needed for a number to actually 
exist – for example, we must count off that number, or use it in a calcula-
tion, or at least identify it specifically. 22 
 Second, and more plausibly, one might claim that the mode in which 
numbers ‘exist’ in general is a mere potential existence. As Benardete 
says, 
 Mathematical existence is ontological possibility. When we say that 
there  exists an immediate successor for every natural number, what 
is the ontological import of that assertion? This: given any class of 
 n apples (say) ... it is always  possible  that another class of  n +1 apples 
might exist. 23 
 Imagine that there are only 1,000 concrete objects in the world. In this 
situation, it would not be crazy to claim that the number 1,001 ‘exists’ 
only in the sense that there  could have been another object, so that 
there would have been 1,001 objects. We might then want to describe 
the existence of the number 1,001 as a kind of ontological potentiality. 
But now, what about the number 1,000; would  this  number also exist as 
a mere potentiality? Presumably not. Presumably a number that actu-
ally applies to some collection of actually existing objects itself actually 
exists. 
 But it should be possible to count anything actual, including not only 
concrete objects but abstract objects, including numbers themselves. If 
so, we only need one concrete object to generate an infinity of actual 
numbers. The first concrete object guarantees that the number 1 actu-
ally exists, because 1 applies to that object. Then the concrete object 
together with the number 1 constitute two things. So the number 2 also 
actually exists. But then the concrete object together with the number 1 
and the number 2 constitute three things. And so on. 
 22   My above use of the expression ‘the successor of 45,670’ might suffice to 
bring into existence the number to which that phrase refers. Nevertheless, the 
point in the text should be clear enough. It is implausible to claim that we bring 
numbers into existence like that. 
 23  Benardete 1964, 29. 

Actual and Potential Infinities 67
 There exists at least one concrete object, in actual fact. Therefore, in 
fact infinitely many natural numbers exist. 
 5.7  Infinitely numerous abstract objects 
 Besides numbers, it seems that there are also infinitely many proper-
ties that things might have, and infinitely many relations in which 
things might stand; that is, there are infinitely many universals. There 
are infinitely many physical properties – for instance, infinitely many 
shapes, infinitely many amounts of mass that an object might have, 
infinitely many velocities, and so on. 
 As suggested in Chapter 1, there are also infinitely many propos-
itions – for instance, the proposition that 2 is greater than 1, the propos-
ition that 3 is greater than 1, and so on. 
 Or, if you prefer an example not involving mathematics, consider the 
proposition that rabbits are furry. Now here is a distinct proposition: 
rabbits are not furry. And a third proposition: rabbits are not not furry. 
And a fourth: rabbits are not not not furry. 
 Why isn’t this an actual infinity? Perhaps because propositions have 
a merely potential sort of existence: maybe a proposition is merely a 
 potential fact (something that  could be a fact)? 
 But whether or not this is a plausible view to take of propositions 
in general, surely if one takes this view one will want to say that 
there are some actual facts, which do not have a merely potential 
existence. If so, how many facts are there? There must be infinitely 
many. Here is one way to arrive at that result: suppose rabbits are 
furry (as indeed they are). Then there will be (1) the fact that rabbits 
are furry. There will also be (2) the fact that there exists the fact that 
rabbits are furry. Then there will be (3) the fact that there exists fact 
#2. And so on. 
 Here is another way to get the result. Suppose that infinitely many 
numbers exist. Then there will be the fact that 1 exists, the fact that 2 
exists, the fact that 3 exists, and so on. Or, suppose that infinitely many 
numbers do  not exist. Then there must be some  n such that there are no 
natural numbers greater than  n . There will then be the following facts: 
the fact that  n +1 does not exist, the fact that  n +2 does not exist, and so 
on. Suppose you think that  no numbers exist. Then you should hold it 
to be a fact that 0 does not exist, that 1 does not exist, that 2 does not 
exist, and so on. So, whether or not there are infinitely many numbers, 
there must be infinitely many facts. 

68 Approaching Infinity
 5.8  Infinitely numerous physical objects 
 The visible universe is estimated to contain on the order of 
10 29 (100,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000) stars.  24 This is a lot of 
stars. However, it is not infinity. In fact, this number, incomprehensibly 
large as it is, is still  infinitely far away from infinity. 
 But that is only the  visible universe. There may be any number of 
other galaxies beyond what we can see. Indeed, as far as I can tell, there 
might even be  infinitely  many other stars in other galaxies outside the 
visible (to us) universe. The Aristotelian prohibition on actual infin-
ities would enable us to rule this out completely a priori, that is, to 
predict, in advance of observation, that there must somewhere be a 
farthest star from us, beyond which there would be no more stars. But 
this just seems misguided; there seems nothing incoherent or other-
wise impossible in the idea that the stars might simply continue on 
forever. 
 In addition, there might be whole other spacetimes, or parallel 
universes, as postulated by some theories in contemporary physics. 
According to the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics, 
each time there is an event that has more than one possible outcome, 
the world splits into a number of separate worlds, one for each 
possible outcome, and each possible outcome occurs in one of the 
worlds. Since there are many events that have infinitely many possible 
outcomes, the world would in fact constantly be splitting into infin-
itely many worlds (each of which itself splits again, and so on). More 
recently, some string theorists have hypothesized that our spacetime 
is one of many spacetimes (called ‘membranes’ or ‘branes’) coexisting 
in a higher-dimensional space. A collision between two branes might 
explain the Big Bang. There may be infinitely many branes in the 
multiverse.  25  
 My point in raising these hypotheses is not that any of them is in fact 
correct. My point is that one of them  might be correct, and even if none 
of them is in fact correct, one of them  could have been  true. This makes 
these theories counterexamples to Aristotle’s theory, which entails that 
an actual infinite isn’t even theoretically possible. An infinite collection 
of material objects would seem to be the clearest example of an actual 
infinite. 
 24   Howell 2014. 
 25   For discussion of the varieties of multiverse theorized in contemporary 
physics and astrophysics, see Greene 2011. 

Actual and Potential Infinities 69
 5.9  Conclusion 
 It really would be difficult to overstate Aristotle’s influence on thinking 
about infinity throughout Western intellectual history, both in math-
ematics and in philosophy. Virtually every thinker on the subject takes 
account of his distinction between actual and potential infinities – 
whether it be to affirm or to deny the ‘actual infinite’. Unfortunately, 
the distinction is less than completely clear. Are future events that will 
in fact happen but have not yet happened ‘actual’ or only ‘potential’? 
Are numbers actual or potential existents? What about properties, prop-
ositions, facts, past events, unoccupied regions of space? 
 If we recall the motivation for rejecting actual infinities, then we 
should be prepared to take a very broad view of what counts as ‘actual’. 
The argument we ascribed to Aristotle was roughly this:
 1.   Every actual thing must be fully determinate. 
 2.   To be infinite is to lack a determinate value for some quantity. 
Therefore, 
 3.   No actual thing can be infinite. 
 If this is the argument, then the term ‘actual thing’ must be understood 
to include everything of which premise 1 would be true – thus, every-
thing that is fully determinate. And this would seem to include space, 
time, the set of natural numbers, the set of physical objects, the set of 
physical properties, the set of facts, and the set of steps in the Zeno 
series. It would seem that each of these things must be determinate, in 
the sense that it cannot lack a specific value for a variable that applies to 
it, for example, it cannot have mass without having any specific mass, 
or duration without any specific duration. 
 Perhaps you disagree with this. In the Copenhagen Interpretation of 
quantum mechanics, it is said that objects can be in indeterminate states, 
for example, an electron that is in a box but in neither the left half nor 
the right half, or the famous Schrödinger’s cat that is neither alive nor 
dead. 26 But if you believe in this sort of thing, then you should reject 
Aristotle’s theory at the start, since you would reject premise 1 of the 
above argument (assuming here that there is not some other convincing 
rationale for the conclusion). 
 I am not addressing people who reject premise (1). Here is what I think 
would be odd. It would be odd if someone accepted (1) (that all actual 
 26   Albert 1994, 10–16. 

70 Approaching Infinity
things must be fully determinate), and yet  also  thought that none of the 
things I listed above – space, time, the set of natural numbers, the set of 
physical objects, the set of physical properties, the set of facts, and the 
set of steps in the Zeno series – need be determinate. I assume that, at a 
bare minimum, the claim ‘all actual things must be fully determinate’ 
entails that every individual physical object must be fully determinate. 
I think it would be very odd if someone held that to be true but yet 
thought, for example, that the  set  of all physical objects could exhibit 
indeterminacy. Nor do I see any reason why the set of numbers would be 
any more capable of indeterminacy, or the whole of space, or the whole 
of time, and so on. 
 The reader need not agree with all of my examples of actual infini-
ties. Since Aristotle’s theory holds that actual infinities are in principle 
impossible, we only need one example of something that ( i ) is or could 
be infinite and ( ii ) falls within the scope of the Aristotelian principle 
that things must be determinate. I happen to think that there are  many 
such examples, which are pretty easy to think of. But as long as you 
think there is at least one, you should reject the Aristotelian account of 
the impossible infinite.  
 

71
 No one shall be able to drive us from the paradise that Cantor 
created for us. 
 – David Hilbert 1 
 6.1  The importance of Georg Cantor 
 I have already remarked upon Aristotle’s enormous influence on thinking 
about infinity. If I had to name one other figure whose influence on the 
field has been prodigious, it would be Georg Cantor, the mathemat-
ician who (along with Bernard Bolzano) founded set theory, founded 
the theory of transfinite numbers, and was perhaps history’s greatest 
champion for the actual infinite. Most of the standard doctrine now 
accepted among mathematicians and philosophers concerning infinity 
is taken straight from the pages of Cantor. 
 Cantor was concerned to combat the Aristotelian view that there cannot 
be an actual infinity, mainly because Cantor believed that God was infinite. 
Believe it or not, he developed a whole new branch of mathematics to 
vindicate his theological views by showing that the idea of an actual 
infinity is coherent. In this chapter, I shall explain Cantor’s theory of trans-
finite numbers; I shall not, however, explore the theological implications, 
if any, of the theory. Readers already familiar with the standard, Cantorian 
theory of transfinite numbers may wish to skip over the exposition.  
 6.2  Sets 
 The core notion of Cantor’s theory is that of a set. What is a set? 
Some treatments of the subject simply state that the term is basic and 
 6 
 The Cantorian Orthodoxy 
 1   Hilbert 1967, 376. 

72 Approaching Infinity
undefinable, and leave it at that.  2 This is quite unsatisfactory. ‘Set’ is a 
technical term; readers therefore cannot simply be assumed to already 
know its technical meaning in mathematics. If nothing helpful can be 
said to explain the concept to new readers, then one ought to suspect 
that the concept itself is unclear. 
 Other treatments say that the notion of a set is defined by the axioms 
of set theory – that is, a set is defined as the type of thing of which those 
axioms are true.  3 This assumes that we can just see that there must be 
such a thing. 
 Most commonly, however, it is said that a ‘set’ is simply a collection or 
group. 4 Presumably, ‘collection’ is here intended in the ordinary English 
sense, for if ‘collection’ too is being used in a technical sense, then we 
have made no progress. One text gives ‘a pack of wolves’ and ‘a bunch 
of grapes’ as examples.  5 The objects that are to be collected together are 
referred to as the ‘members’ or ‘elements’ of the set, and they are said to 
‘belong to’ the set. This characterization roughly accords with Cantor’s 
own definition:
 By a ‘set’ we are to understand any collection into a whole M of defi-
nite and separate objects m of our intuition or our thought. 6 
 Some comments: (a) In standard versions of set theory, there is no 
requirement that the members of a set be objects of thought or intuition; 
a set can have members that no one has ever thought about or intuited. 
(b) The use of ‘definite’ either is redundant or also conflicts with standard 
set theory: Are there objects that are  not  definite? If there are, then there 
is no reason why they might not also belong to sets. If there aren’t, then 
the use of ‘definite’ is redundant. (c) Similarly for the use of ‘separate’. 
 2   Kunen 1980, xi; Enderton 1977, 11. 
 3   Fraenkel 1967. We discuss this theory below in Chapter 8, Section 8.2. For a 
list of axioms, see below, Section 6.8.3. 
 4   Milewski 1989, 7; Hrbacek and Jech 1999, 1. Sometimes, textbooks state that 
a set must be defined by some rule that all the members satisfy (for example, 
Courant and Robbins 1996, 78). This is erroneous since the widely accepted 
Axiom of Choice asserts the existence of sets that are not formed according to 
any particular rule (what rule, for example, picks out a unique member from any 
set of real numbers?). More simply, one can have sets of objects that, intuitively, 
have nothing in common. 
 5   Halmos 1974, 1. 
 6   Cantor 1915, 85. Jourdain translates the German ‘Menge’ as ‘aggregate’. I 
have substituted ‘set’, since this is the currently accepted term for these math-
ematical objects. 

The Cantorian Orthodoxy 73
If this is non-redundant, presumably it rules out such things as over-
lapping objects. But in standard set theory, there is no prohibition on 
overlapping objects belonging to sets – for example, there is a set whose 
members are my left hand and my left thumb. (d) The phrase ‘into a 
whole’ appears to be redundant (is there the possibility of a collection 
into a non-whole?). Finally, (e) even the term ‘objects’ is either redun-
dant or conflicts with standard set theory. If the term is non-redundant, 
then presumably ‘objects’ would contrast with such things as properties, 
relationships, or actions. But in standard set theory, sets can perfectly 
well contain properties, relationships, and actions, as well as objects. 
Taking all these points into account, then, the definition reduces to this: 
a set is a collection. 
 Cantor elsewhere gave another characterization of sets:
 A set is a many which allows itself to be thought of as a one.  7 
 By using ‘many’ as a singular count noun (‘ a many’), it appears that 
we are already assuming that it is legitimate to regard the many as one 
thing. So it seems that this definition could be more perspicuously 
written: a set is a multitude. 
 This is probably about as much as we are going to get in the way 
of a definition of sets. I will have more to say about the concept later 
(Chapter 8). 
 By convention, sets are designated with capital letters. Suppose  A and 
 B are sets. Then  A is the same set as  B (that is,  A = B ) if and only if they 
have exactly the same members, that is, every member of  A is a member 
of  B and vice versa.  A is said to be a subset of  B when every member of  A 
is a member of  B (this has the consequence that every set is a subset of 
itself).  A is a  proper subset of  B when  A is a subset of  B but  A is not iden-
tical with  B (so  B has some members that are not in  A ). 
 6.3  Cardinal numbers 
 The cardinal numbers are the numbers used for counting, or saying how 
many of something there are. Cardinal number terms, such as ‘two’ or 
‘eight’, have two interestingly different uses: sometimes, they are used 
as adjectives, as in ‘Two octopi entered the room’; other times, they are 
used as nouns, as in ‘Two is prime.’ The latter use seems to be intended 
to refer to some special, mathematical object. What is this object? 
 7   Cantor 1932, 204. 

74 Approaching Infinity
 Here is Cantor’s description:
 We will call by the name ‘power’ or ‘cardinal number’ of M the 
general concept which, by means of our active faculty of thought, 
arises from the set M when we make abstraction of the nature of its 
various elements m and of the order in which they are given. 8 
 This is not extremely clear. Later thinkers were to propose that a cardinal 
number is a kind of  set : the numeral ‘1’ (in its noun usage) refers to the set 
of all single-membered sets (the set whose members are all and only the sets 
that have exactly one member). ‘2’ refers to the set of all two-membered 
sets. And so on. This explains the natural numbers, which are all of the 
finite cardinal numbers. This is the view of numbers that we shall discuss.  9 
 What about infinity – are there any infinite numbers? Yes. Consider 
the set of all the natural numbers. It has infinitely many elements. Now 
consider the set of all sets with exactly  that  many elements (that is, 
the same number as the set of natural numbers): this, too, is a cardinal 
number. It is represented  0 (this is read ‘aleph null’).  0 is the first 
infinite cardinal number. 
 Are there any more infinite cardinal numbers? We shall see. 
 6.4  ‘Greater’, ‘less’, and ‘equal’ 
 Suppose two sets,  A and  B , are the same size, that is, contain equally 
many elements. Then it will be possible to pair off the sets’ members 
with each other, in such a way that every member of  A is paired with 
exactly one member of  B , and vice versa. For instance, say you have a 
set of three horses, {Seabiscuit, Mr Ed, Shadowfax}. You also have a set 
of three carrots, {carrot1, carrot2, carrot3} (carrots have less interesting 
names than horses do). Then, because the sets are equally numerous, it 
is possible to pair the carrots with horses in such a way that each horse 
gets one and only one carrot, and each carrot goes to one and only one 
horse. For instance, we could pair them up like this: 
 Seabiscuit ➟ carrot2 
 Mr Ed ➟ carrot1 
 Shadowfax ➟ carrot3 
 8   Cantor 1915, 86 (again reading ‘set’ for ‘menge’). 
 9  Frege 1980, 79–80, 87–90; Russell 1920, 18–19. Frege portrays a number as a 
set of  concepts , where a concept is a Platonic object; for simplicity, I use Russell’s 
notion of a set of sets. A more recent proposal identifies the number 0 with the 
empty set, 1 with {0}, 2 with {0,1}, and so on. Since the Frege/Russell proposal is 
much more natural, I prefer to discuss it in the text. 

The Cantorian Orthodoxy 75
 (I have assigned the carrots arbitrarily; there are four other ways of doing 
the pairing, but all that matters is that there be at least one way.) This 
kind of pairing of elements is known as a  one-to-one function  (or  mapping ) 
from the first set  onto the second set. In this example, we have a one-
to-one function from the set of horses onto the set of carrots. 
 Cantor uses this notion to  define  numerical equality: two sets are 
equally numerous (have the same number of elements, have exactly as 
many elements as each other) if and only if there is a one-to-one func-
tion from one set onto the other. 
 On the other hand, suppose that there is  no one-to-one function from 
 A onto  B , but there  is a one-to-one function from  A onto a  proper subset 
of  B . In other words, when we try to pair up the elements of the two sets, 
some elements of  B are always left over. In that case, we can say that  A 
is  smaller  than  B , or contains  fewer elements than  B , or is  less numerous 
than  B . For instance, if, when we paired up horses with carrots, assigning 
one carrot to each horse, we found that no matter how we did the pair-
ings, we would always have some carrots left over, then we would say 
that the set of horses was ‘less numerous’ than the set of carrots. 
 Similarly, if there is no one-to-one function from  A onto  B but there is 
a one-to-one function from a  proper subset  of  A onto  B , then we can say 
that  A is  larger than (contains more elements than, is more numerous 
than)  B . Thus, if when we try pairing horses with carrots, we find that no 
matter how we do the pairings, all the carrots are used up and there are 
still horses left without carrots, then we would say that the set of horses 
was ‘more numerous’ than the set of carrots. 
 Importantly, none of these are supposed to be strange, new, technical 
uses of terms. The foregoing is intended to explain the  existing meanings 
of the familiar expressions ‘equal’, ‘less’, and ‘greater’, as they are used 
in arithmetic and ordinary life. 
 Furthermore, Cantor proposes that these same definitions of terms can 
be applied equally to infinite collections as to finite collections. Thus, just 
as in the case of finite sets, two infinite sets will be said to have ‘equally 
many’ elements if and only if there is a one-to-one function from the one 
set onto the other. One will be ‘larger’ than the other if there is no one-
to-one function from the one onto the other, but there is a one-to-one 
function from a proper subset of the first onto the second.  
 6.5  Many sets are equally numerous 
 Many pairs of sets, probably many more than you would have suspected, 
turn out to be equinumerous on Cantor’s criterion. Two obvious 

76 Approaching Infinity
examples: the set of natural numbers is the same size as the set of even 
numbers, and also the same size as the set of perfect squares. The diagram 
below illustrates how these sets’ members can be paired up: 
 More surprisingly, it turns out that the set of  rational numbers is the 
same size as the set of natural numbers (this despite the fact that the 
rational numbers include all the natural numbers, and that between 
any two natural numbers is an infinity of rational numbers). A rational 
number is defined as a number that can be written as the ratio of two 
integers. That is, if  r is rational, then there is a pair of natural numbers, 
( n ,  m ), such that  r =  n / m . This is equivalent to saying that the decimal 
expansion of  r either terminates or repeats. It is therefore possible to 
make a table listing all the rational numbers, as follows: 
 Some of the entries in that table are redundant. For example, ‘1/1’ and 
‘2/2’ both appear, but those expressions denote the same number. So 
imagine a similar table, but with the redundant entries deleted, keeping 
only fractions that are reduced to lowest terms: 
2
4
6
8
 ... 
2 n 
 ... 
↕
↕
↕
↕
↕
1
2
3
4
 ... 
 n 
 ... 
↕
↕
↕
↕
↕
1
4
9
16
 ... 
 n 2 
 ... 
Possible 
values of  m 
Possible values of  n 
1
2
3
4
 ... 
1
1
2/1
3/1
4/1
 ... 
2
1/2
2/2
3/2
4/2
 ... 
3
1/3
2/3
3/3
4/3
 ... 
4
1/4
2/4
3/4
4/4
 ... 
⁝
⁝
⁝
⁝
⁝
Possible 
values of  m 
Possible values of  n 
1
2
3
4
 ... 
1
1
2/1
3/1
4/1
 ... 
2
1/2
–
3/2
–
 ... 
3
1/3
2/3
–
4/3
 ... 
4
1/4
–
3/4
–
 ... 
⁝
⁝
⁝
⁝
⁝

The Cantorian Orthodoxy 77
 Now imagine going through all the entries in the table in a certain 
order: start at 1/1, then go to 2/1, then 1/2, then 1/3, then 3/1, and so 
on. The order is shown by the dotted line in the table below:  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
 ... 
↕
↕
↕
↕
↕
↕
↕
↕
↕
↕
1/1
2/1
1/2
1/3
3/1
4/1
3/2
2/3
1/4
1/5
 ... 
Possible 
values of  m 
Possible values of  n 
1
2
3
4
5
 ... 
1
1
2/1
3/1
4/1
5/1
 ... 
2
1/2
–
3/2
–
5/2
 ... 
3
1/3
2/3
–
4/3
5/3
 ... 
4
1/4
–
3/4
–
5/4
 ... 
5
1/5
2/5
3/5
4/5
–
...
⁝
⁝
⁝
⁝
⁝
⁝
 It should be clear that the dotted line can be continued indefinitely 
and that it passes through all the entries in the table, going through 
them in a particular order. This indicates how the pairing of rational 
numbers with natural numbers works: the first rational number (1/1) 
gets paired with ‘1’; the second rational number that we come to (2/1) 
gets paired with ‘2’; the third (1/2) gets paired with ‘3’; and so on:  
 This constitutes a one-to-one function from the natural numbers onto 
the rational numbers. So there are exactly as many natural numbers 
as rational numbers. This number,  0 , is referred to as a ‘count-
able infinity’, since it is the infinity of the counting numbers. Thus, 
the natural numbers, the perfect squares, the even numbers, and the 
rational numbers are all said to be countably infinite. If there are any 
larger infinities, they will be called ‘uncountable infinities’. 
 It turns out, by the way, that the set of real numbers contains exactly 
as many members as the set of  pairs of real numbers; that the points on 
a line are exactly as numerous as the points in a two-dimensional plane; 
and indeed, perhaps most amazingly, that the set of points in, say, a 
one-inch line segment is exactly as numerous as the set of points in all 
of space. (I omit the proofs of these theorems. 10 ) 
 10   The key point is that one can encode the decimal expansion of two or more 
numbers into another decimal expansion. For example, a pair of real numbers, 
(.459131 ... , .208817 ... ) can be mapped to a single number constructed from 
alternating digits of the first two numbers: .425098183117 ... .  

78 Approaching Infinity
 6.6  The diagonalization argument 
 At this point, you might be wondering if all infinite collections are 
equally numerous. The answer is no. The proof of this negative result is 
famous enough that everyone who reads a book about infinity should 
know it, so I explain it here. 
 Let us start by comparing the set of all natural numbers with the set of 
real numbers between 0 and 1. Each of these real numbers can be written 
as an infinitely long decimal expansion, for example, ‘0.19479843 ... ’. 
(In some cases, the infinite decimal expansion contains an infinite series 
of zeroes, as in the case of ½, which is 0.50000 ... .) Which set, if any, is 
the more numerous? 
 Let’s start with the hypothesis that they are equally numerous, and see 
if that works out. That means that there is a one-to-one function from 
the natural numbers onto the real numbers between 0 and 1. Another 
way of saying this is that it is possible to make a list of all the real 
numbers between 0 and 1, where you have a first real number, a second 
one, a third one, and so on, and where every real appears somewhere on 
the list (that is, as the  n th entry, for some natural number  n ). Suppose we 
have such a list. It might look something like this: 
 n 
 f ( n )
1
.545092 ... 
2
.436214 ... 
3
.197967 ... 
4
.849465 ... 
5
.465546 ... 
6
.654654 ... 
⁝
⁝
 We’re supposing that  f is a function that maps the natural numbers one-
to-one onto the real numbers between 0 and 1. I have made up the 
entries in the  ‘f ( n )’ column at random (so don’t bother looking for a 
pattern). For the following argument, it doesn’t matter what you put 
there; all that matters is that we have some list of real numbers between 
0 and 1 in the right-hand column. 
 Now I am going to tell you about a real number that does not appear 
in that list. I call this number ‘ R ’.  R has an infinite decimal expansion. 
The way you find the digits of  R is by going down the list of real numbers 
above, and adding one to the first digit of the first number, then adding 
one to the second digit of the second number, then adding one to the 
third digit of the third number, and so on. (If a digit is ‘9’, then consider 

The Cantorian Orthodoxy 79
the result of adding one to it to be ‘0’.) You write down the results in 
sequence, and that gives you the decimal expansion of  R . This is illus-
trated in the following table: 
 n 
 f ( n )
Digits of  R 
1
.  5 4 5 0 9 2 ... 
.  6 
2
. 4  3 6 2 1 4 ... 
. 6  4 
3
. 1 9  7 9 6 7 ... 
. 6 4  8 
4
. 8 4 9  4 6 5 ... 
. 6 4 8  5 
5
. 4 6 5 5  9 6 ... 
. 6 4 8 5  0 
6
. 6 5 4 6 5  0  ... 
. 6 4 8 5 0  1 
⁝
⁝
⁝
 This is referred to as the ‘diagonalization argument’, because you 
construct  R by moving diagonally down the digits in the list of values of 
 f ( n ), starting at the upper left. In the table above, I have underlined the 
digits from the list that are used to construct  R . Now,  R cannot be one of 
the values of  f ( n ). It is not  f (1), because it differs from  f (1) in (at least) its 
first decimal place. It is not  f (2), because it differs from  f (2) in the second 
decimal place. And so on. In general, for any  n ,  R is not equal to  f ( n ), 
because  R differs from  f ( n ) in the  n th decimal place. But  R is obviously 
a real number between 0 and 1. This proves that the function  f , which 
was  supposed  to be a one-to-one function from the natural numbers onto 
the real numbers between 0 and 1, is not in fact such a function, because 
there is at least one real number between 0 and 1 that is not paired with 
any natural number. 
 The same sort of argument can be applied no matter what the func-
tion is. That is, Cantor’s diagonalization procedure can be applied to 
 any list of decimal numbers that might have been placed opposite the 
numbers 1, 2, 3, and so on in the table. No matter what the list is, you 
can prove that there is a real number that isn’t on the list. Therefore, 
it is in fact impossible to have a one-to-one function from the natural 
numbers onto the real numbers between 0 and 1; if you attempt such a 
pairing, then there will always be some real numbers left over. 
 It is, however, perfectly possible to have a one-to-one function from 
the natural numbers onto a  proper subset  of the real numbers between 0 
and 1. For example, the function  f ( n ) = 1/ n will do. 
 Thus, the set of real numbers between 0 and 1 satisfies the criterion 
given in Section 6.4 for being ‘more numerous than’ the set of natural 
numbers. Of course, the set of  all real numbers (which, by the way, has 
the same cardinality as the set of real numbers between 0 and 1) is also 

80 Approaching Infinity
more numerous than the set of natural numbers. The cardinal number of 
the real numbers is referred to as  c , or ‘the continuum’. It is an uncount-
able infinity – but not, as we shall see, the only uncountable infinity.  
 6.7  Cantor’s theorem 
 So now we have two infinite numbers:  0 and  c . How many more infinite 
numbers are there? As it turns out, infinitely many. This is guaranteed 
by another result known as Cantor’s Theorem, which is another thing 
that anyone who reads a book about infinity should know. 
 First, some more set theory background. In standard set theory, there 
is a set called ‘the empty set’, which contains no members. It is desig-
nated ‘{ }’ or ‘∅’. (Frege defined it, roughly, as the set of all things that are 
not identical with themselves.  11 ) There are also ‘singleton sets’, each of 
which has only one member. Sets are distinct from their members, even 
if the set has only one member. For example, King Kong, {King Kong}, 
and {{King Kong}} are supposed to be three different objects. 
 Given a set,  A , the  powerset of  A (denoted ‘( A )’) is defined as the set 
of all subsets of  A . For example, take the empty set. What is its powerset? 
Well, the empty set has exactly one subset (namely, itself – note that 
every set is a subset of itself). So the powerset of the empty set is {∅}. The 
powerset of  that , in turn, is {∅,{∅}}. 
 Take the set containing King Kong and Godzilla, which is represented 
{King Kong, Godzilla}. Its powerset is {∅, {King Kong}, {Godzilla}, {King 
Kong, Godzilla}}. 
 Notice that, in all these examples, the powerset of  A has more members 
than  A : the empty set has zero members, but its powerset has one 
member, and the powerset of  that  powerset has two members. The set 
containing King Kong and Godzilla has two members, but its powerset 
has four members. It can be shown in general that if  A has  n members, 
then the powerset of  A has 2  n  members. 
 When  A is a finite set, it is easy to see that the powerset of  A will have 
more members than  A . What is not so obvious is what happens when  A 
is an infinite set. Will the powerset of  A still have more members than  A ? 
The answer turns out to be yes, and this is Cantor’s theorem. Following 
is the proof. 
 Let  A be any set (it could be finite or infinite; doesn’t matter). Let ( A ) 
be the powerset of  A . Now suppose  f is a function from  A to ( A ). So 
(just restating that),  f maps each  member of  A to a specific  subset of  A . 
 11   Frege 1980, 87. 

The Cantorian Orthodoxy 81
 Now I am going to tell you about a subset of  A that is not included in 
that mapping – that is, there is no member of  A that is mapped to this 
subset. (This is going to be analogous to the diagonalization argument 
from the last section.) I’m going to call this special subset  S . Here is how 
you construct  S . Go through the members of  A . Each of these members 
is mapped to some subset of  A . So let’s say  a is some member of  A .  a is 
mapped to  f ( a ), which is some subset of  A . Now, either  f ( a ) contains  a 
as one of its members, or it doesn’t. If  f ( a ) contains  a , then  a does  not 
go into  S ; if  f ( a ) does  not  contain  a , then  a goes into  S . In other words, 
 S  is going to be formed from all the elements of  A that are mapped to 
subsets that do not contain those elements. Figure 6.1 provides a graph-
ical representation of what’s going on. 
 Each ellipse represents a set.  a ,  b ,  c , and so on are the elements of set 
 A . I use three dots to indicate that there may be many more elements 
not listed. The arrows indicate the mapping, given by  f , from  A to the 
powerset of  A . Finally,  S is represented on the right. Notice that in the 
diagram,  b was mapped to a set that does not contain  b (specifically,  b 
was mapped to the empty set). That is why  b is included in set  S  on the 
right.  e was also mapped to a set that does not contain  e (specifically, to 
the set { d }), so  e also goes into  S . Similarly for  c , since it was mapped to 
{ a ,  b }, which does not contain  c . However,  a was mapped to a set that 
contains  a (specifically, to { a ,  e }), so  a does  not  go into  S . Similarly for 
item  d , mapped to { e ,  d }. 
 Once you see how set  S is constructed, you can see that  S is not in the 
range of  f . That is, there is no element from  A that gets mapped to  S . 
Using the example from Figure 6.1: we know element  a is not mapped 
to  S , because  a is mapped to a set that contains  a , whereas  S does  not 
contain  a . We know  b is not mapped to  S , because  b is mapped to a set 
Set A
Set S
b
e
c
d
d
d
e
e
e
c
c
b
b
a
a
a
Powerset of A
 Figure 6.1 Cantor’s theorem 

82 Approaching Infinity
that does not contain  b , whereas  S does  contain  b . And so on. For each 
member  m of  A ,  m is not mapped to  S , because either ( i )  m is mapped 
to a subset that contains  m , in which case  S does  not contain  m , or 
( ii )  m is mapped to a subset that does not contain  m , in which case  S does 
contain  m . The way  S is constructed guarantees that it is not one of the 
subsets used in the mapping. 
 But  S is definitely a subset of  A . So  f does not succeed in mapping the 
elements of  A one-to-one onto the subsets of  A . Since this reasoning can 
be carried out no matter what  f is, it shows that it is impossible to pair up 
the elements of  A with all of the subsets of  A ; no matter how you do the 
pairing, there are always subsets of  A that are left over. This shows that 
there are  more  subsets of  A than there are elements of  A . This reasoning, 
again, applies regardless of whether  A is finite or infinite. 
 So now there are not just two infinities. For  any set, we can construct 
a set with a higher cardinality, that is, with ‘more’ elements. Thus, we 
have an infinite hierarchy of ever larger infinities, starting with the 
set of natural numbers, followed by the powerset of the set of natural 
numbers, followed by the powerset of  that , and so on. 
 6.8  The paradoxes of set theory 
 6.8.1  Russell’s paradox 
 Mathematicians tend to love Cantor’s mind-boggling hierarchy of infin-
ities (in fact, the hierarchy of infinities that mathematicians posit today 
is even larger and more mind-boggling than I have so far indicated) – 
hence Hilbert’s famous remark about ‘the paradise that Cantor has 
created’. However, set theory has also been beset with paradoxes from 
its beginning. Let’s look at a couple of these paradoxes, starting with the 
most famous set theoretic paradox, Russell’s Paradox. 12 
 Most sets are not members of themselves. For example, the set of all 
left-handed marmots is not a member of itself, since it is not itself a 
left-handed marmot. On the other hand, it seems that at least some sets 
 are members of themselves. For instance, the set of all sets must be a 
member of itself, since it is a set. 
 Now, let’s think about all the sets that are not members of themselves. 
We ought to be able to collect them together, right? The result would 
be the set of all the sets that are not members of themselves. Call this 
set  R (for ‘Russell set’). So  R is the set that contains  x whenever  x is not 
a member of  x . 
 12   Russell 1920, 136. 

The Cantorian Orthodoxy 83
 Question: is  R a member of  R ? Well, as we said, for any  x ,  R contains 
 x if and only if  x does not contain  x . Now you can substitute ‘ R ’ for ‘ x ’: 
that means that  R contains  R if and only if  R does not contain  R . But that 
is a contradiction. 
 Here’s the reasoning more slowly: suppose that  R contains  R . Then, 
since the only sets it contains are sets that don’t contain themselves, 
that means  R must be a set that does not contain itself. So, if  R contains 
itself, then  R does not contain itself. 
 Now suppose  R does not contain itself. Then, since  R includes 
all the sets that don’t contain themselves,  R must include  R . So, if  R 
does not contain itself, then  R contains itself. Either way, we have a 
contradiction. 
 6.8.2  Cantor’s paradox 
 Here is another paradox. Consider the set of all sets, commonly known 
as the Universal Set, or  V . Is  V larger than, smaller than, or the same size 
as its powerset, ( V )? 
 Well, on the one hand, we already proved that  every  set is smaller than 
its own powerset, so  V must contain fewer elements than ( V ). 
 On the other hand, ( V ) is a set of sets (every powerset is a set of sets). 
And  V , by definition, contains every set whatsoever. So  V must contain 
 every element of ( V ). So  V must contain at least as many elements as 
( V ) does. 
 Again, we have a contradiction.  V can’t be smaller than and at the 
same time at least as large as ( V ). 
 6.8.3  The standard treatment 
 How do set theorists and logicians deal with these paradoxes? The 
currently accepted approach is simply to banish the offenders from 
Cantor’s paradise. That is, we deny that  R exists, we deny that  V exists, 
and the paradoxes go away. 
 Well, it’s a little more complicated than that – set theorists don’t 
merely declare that those two sets don’t exist and leave it at that. Rather, 
they try to devise systems of axioms for set theory, where these axioms 
entail the existence of the ‘good’ sets (the ones that don’t generate 
paradoxes, such as the set of all natural numbers, or the set of all real 
numbers), but where the axioms do  not  entail the existence of any of 
the ‘bad’ sets (the sets that generate paradoxes, such as the Russell Set 
or the Universal Set). Early versions of set theory unfortunately implied 
the existence of such paradoxical sets (essentially because they implied 
that for any description you care to formulate, there must exist the set of 

84 Approaching Infinity
the things that satisfy that description). After the paradoxes were discov-
ered, people devised several different systems of axioms that avoid the 
paradoxes by rejecting the existence of such things as the Russell Set 
and the Universal Set. The currently most popular system of axioms is 
known as Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory, or ZF. One axiom, the Axiom of 
Choice, is controversial; if it is included, then the result is called ZFC.  13 I 
list the axioms here, but don’t worry too much about them:
 Axioms of ZFC 
 1.   Axiom of Extensionality:  If  X and  Y have the same elements, then 
 X=Y . 
 2.   Unordered Pair Axiom:  For any  a and  b there exists a set { a ,  b } that 
contains just  a and  b . 
 3.   Subset Axiom:  If  F is a property then for any set  X , there exists a set 
containing exactly those members of  X that have  F . 
 4.   Union Axiom:  For any  X there exists the set  X , the union of all 
the elements of  X . 
 5.   Powerset Axiom:  For any  X there exists the set ( X ), the set of all 
subsets of  X . 
 6.   Axiom of Infinity:  There exists an infinite set, namely, a set that 
contains the empty set, and for every member that it contains, 
it contains the union of that member with that member’s own 
singleton. 
 7.   Axiom of Replacement:  If  F is a function, then for any  X there exists 
the set, { F ( x ):  x  X }, which contains the values that the function 
returns for each element of  X . 
 8.   Axiom of Foundation:  Every nonempty set has a minimal element, 
that is, one which does not contain another in the set.  
 9.   Axiom of Choice:  Every family of nonempty sets has a choice func-
tion, namely, a function which assigns to each of the sets one of 
its own elements.  
 13   The Axiom of Choice is controversial, among other reasons, because it 
enables one to prove the Banach-Tarski Theorem (or Banach-Tarski Paradox, 
depending on how you feel about it). This theorem states that it is possible to 
dissect a sphere of radius 1 into a finite number of pieces, rearrange the pieces 
using only rigid rotations and translations (with pieces allowed to move through 
each other), and reassemble them into two spheres of radius 1. No one can actu-
ally describe these pieces (which are infinitely complex), but the Axiom of Choice 
allows one to prove that such must exist. For an attempt at an intuitive account 
of the theorem, see The Writer 2003. 

The Cantorian Orthodoxy 85
 The important points for our purposes are that ZF implies the existence 
of an infinite hierarchy of sets, including sets with (each of infinitely 
many) infinite cardinalities, starting from  0 ; and that as far as anyone 
knows so far, ZF does not entail the existence of any paradoxical sets, 
such as the Russell Set or the Universal Set. 
 6.9  Other paradoxes of infinity 
 Maybe we can avoid the paradoxes of set theory, such as Russell’s 
Paradox and Cantor’s Paradox. But what about all the paradoxes of the 
infinite that we surveyed in Chapter 3? Now that we have laid down a 
theory of infinite numbers, can we use the theory to solve the previous 
paradoxes? 
 6.9.1   Identifying infinite cardinalities in the paradoxes 
 Most of the paradoxes we discussed involve an infinite series of actions 
or events. In each case, Cantor’s theory can tell us how many members 
the series has: it is  0 , as opposed to, say,  c , or  2 . But that interesting 
bit of information hardly enables us to resolve the paradoxes. For 
example, we can now say that the Thomson Lamp scenario posits  0 
switchings of the lamp. But that hardly tells us whether at the end the 
lamp will be on or off. Similarly, Hilbert’s Hotel contains  0 rooms and 
 0 guests; Zeno’s Paradox divides the ball’s motion into  0 stages; the 
Divided Stick is divided  0 times; the game played in the Littlewood-
Ross Paradox contains  0 rounds; Benardete’s Paradox posits  0 walls (or 
gods, or slabs); Laraudogoitia posited  0 marbles; the Spaceship doubles 
its speed  0 times; the St. Petersburg game has  0 possible outcomes; the 
Martingale Betting System requires  0 rounds of gambling; and finally, 
the Delayed Heaven Paradox takes place over  0 days. And that informa-
tion helps us resolve ... none of them. 
 In one case, a cardinality other than  0 makes an appearance: in the 
Paradox of Geometric Points, we have continuum many geometric 
points, which is more than  0 . But this information hardly seems to 
help solve the puzzle – knowing that the order of infinity is  c rather than 
 0 hardly renders it perfectly clear how infinitely many zeroes add up to 
some nonzero quantity. 
 6.9.2   Infinite magnitudes 
 Some of the paradoxes involve a different sort of infinity altogether, an 
infinite  magnitude  rather than an infinite cardinal number (sometimes 
there is an infinite magnitude  in addition to  an infinite number). In the 

86 Approaching Infinity
puzzle of Smullyan’s Infinite Rod, it isn’t that there are infinitely many 
of something; the rod is just infinitely long. Gabriel’s Horn doesn’t 
involve infinitely many of anything; it just has an infinite surface area. 
The Spaceship doubles its speed  0 times, which results in its traveling 
an infinite distance, so in this case, an infinite cardinality appears 
(the number of doublings) in addition to an infinite magnitude (the 
distance). In the St. Petersburg Paradox, besides the infinite cardinality 
(the number of possible outcomes), there is an infinite magnitude (the 
expected monetary value of the game). Cantor’s theory says nothing 
about infinite magnitudes; it is solely a theory of cardinal numbers.  
 6.9.3  Actual infinities and Zeno’s paradoxes 
 Cantor intended his mathematical work to have philosophical signifi-
cance. Specifically, he thought that his mathematical theory of infinite 
cardinalities provided support for the idea that,  contra  Aristotle, actual 
infinities are possible. If we buy this, it would help us resolve one of 
the paradoxes: we could perhaps resolve Zeno’s Paradox by declaring 
that, since actual infinities are perfectly possible, there is no problem 
with the ball’s completing an infinite series of actions en route to its 
destination. 
 However, this view seems to exacerbate almost all of the other para-
doxes (Thomson’s Lamp, Hilbert’s Hotel, Littlewood-Ross, and so on), 
since almost all of the paradoxes depend upon postulating actual 
infinities. 
 6.9.4  The paradoxes of one-to-one mapping 
 There are two paradoxes that Cantor’s theory seems to bear on rather 
directly. I have in mind Galileo’s Paradox and Hilbert’s Hotel. In response 
to Galileo’s question, Cantor declares that there are exactly as many 
natural numbers as perfect squares, because it is possible to place the 
natural numbers and the squares in a one-to-one correspondence. 
 Does this solve Galileo’s puzzle? Hardly. Galileo already thought of 
that exact point. The fact that the natural numbers and the squares can 
be put in one-to-one correspondence isn’t the solution to the paradox; 
it is part of what  generates  the paradox. (A good rule of thumb: typi-
cally, one does not solve a paradox by reiterating part of its setup.) The 
puzzle is that there is a compelling argument  both  that the two sets are 
equally numerous (the one-to-one correspondence argument),  and that 
one set is larger than the other (for the squares are a proper subset of 
the natural numbers). Cantor embraces the first of these arguments and 
rejects the second. His only justification for this is fiat: he proposes to 

The Cantorian Orthodoxy 87
simply  define the relations ‘equal to’, ‘greater than’, and ‘less than’ using 
the one-to-one correspondence criterion, while ignoring the proper-
subset criterion. 
 Of course, one could not consistently embrace both of the arguments 
Galileo mentions, since they entail contradictory results. But Cantor’s 
decision to embrace only the one-to-one correspondence argument is 
not the only alternative. One could embrace the proper-subset argu-
ment while rejecting the one-to-one correspondence argument.  14 Or 
one could, like Galileo, reject both arguments and hold that the ‘greater 
than’, ‘less than’, and ‘equal to’ relations do not apply to pairs of infinite 
sets. Cantor does not argue for his alternative over the others. 
 The same odd feature of infinite sets – namely, that an infinite set 
can be mapped one-to-one onto a proper subset of itself – is at work in 
Hilbert’s Hotel. Here again, we know what Cantor would say. He would 
agree that one can make room for the new guests by moving the old 
guests around, and he would counsel us to get used to this interesting 
feature of the infinite. Noting that  0 +  0 =  0 , 15 he would say that, 
when the infinitely many new guests are added to the infinitely many 
old guests, the resulting set of guests is no bigger than it was before the 
new guests arrived; hence, there is nothing wrong with the idea that 
we can still accommodate everyone in the same set of rooms. Again, 
this is not so much an attempt to  solve  the paradox as it is a decision to 
embrace paradox. 
 6.9.5  The arithmetic of infinity 
 Some of the paradoxes involve performing arithmetical operations on 
infinity, for example, subtracting ∞ from both sides of the equation 
‘∞ + 1 = ∞’. With our new knowledge of transfinite numbers, we might 
try subtracting  0 from both sides of ‘ 0 +1 =  0 ’, obtaining ‘0 = 1’. The 
standard response to these problems is similar to the standard response 
to the set theoretic paradoxes: prohibit the troublesome operations. In 
the standard view of transfinite arithmetic, even though  0 is a number, 
one cannot subtract it from itself, that is, ‘ 0 −  0 ’ is undefined. Similarly, 
division by  0 is undefined. Followers of Cantor counsel us to simply 
get used to the fact that infinite numbers behave differently from finite 
numbers in certain respects, and this is one of them. 16 
 14  This would give us only a partial ordering, but what’s wrong with that?  
 15   This equation actually appears in Cantor 1915, 106. 
 16   Oppy 1995. 

88 Approaching Infinity
 Note that in standard arithmetic, something similar is true of zero: 
one can divide any real number by any real number,  except  zero. So zero 
behaves differently from other numbers; however, this is not generally 
taken to show that zero isn’t a number. Similarly, Cantor would argue, 
we should not deny that  0 is a number merely because it behaves differ-
ently from the more familiar numbers. 
 6.9.6   The divided stick paradox 
 With Cantor’s help, we can now formulate a new version of the Divided 
Stick Paradox from Section 3.10. We assume the stick is in a world where 
the matter comprising a physical object is continuously distributed 
throughout the space that the object occupies (rather than the object’s 
being decomposable into a finite number of elementary particles, as in 
our actual world). The stick gets divided into halves, then into quarters, 
then eighths, and so on. After the infinitely many stages of division, the 
stick has been converted into an infinity of slices, each of which has a 
thickness of zero. 
 How many of these slices will there be? Infinitely many, but which 
order of infinity is it? It appears to be  0 , for consider where cuts 
have been made by the end of the process. If we designate one end 
of the stick ‘0’ and the other end ‘1’, then the stick gets cut at the 
following locations: 1/2, 1/4, 3/4, 1/8, 3/8, 5/8, 7/8, ... (including all 
locations of the form  n /2  m  , where  n and  m are natural numbers and 
 n < 2  m  ). All of these are rational numbers, and we already know that 
the rational numbers have cardinality  0 . So there are only  0 cuts 
made in the stick, which seems to imply that the stick is divided into 
only  0 pieces.  17 And as we said, each of these pieces must have a 
width (and a mass) of zero. 
 But now think back to before the stick was divided. The stick filled 
a certain space. Space contains  continuum many points. Furthermore, 
if we consider a line stretching from position 0 (the left end of the 
stick) to position 1 (the right end of the stick), that line would have 
continuum many points. The stick therefore contained continuum 
many cross-sectional slices, each of thickness zero, one for each point 
along that line. 
 17   Oppy (2006, 66–8) seems to agree with this. However, here is a contrary 
argument: after  n stages in the series of divisions, there are 2  n  pieces (2 pieces 
after the first stage, 4 after the second, and so on). Therefore, after  0 stages, 
there will be 20 pieces, and 20 =  c . For the resolution of this puzzle, see below, 
Section 12.9.  

The Cantorian Orthodoxy 89
 In other words: we started with a composite of continuum many 
pieces, and by cutting it up, we turned it into only  0 pieces, where each 
of the  0 pieces is qualitatively indistinguishable (the same size, mass, 
and so on) as each of the continuum many pieces was. So it appears that 
continuum many pieces disappeared. Where did they go? 
 6.10  Conclusion 
 Cantor has not helped us to resolve the paradoxes of infinity. On most of 
the paradoxes, Cantor’s system of transfinite numbers seems to simply 
have no bearing, as in the case of Thomson’s Lamp or Littlewood-Ross. 
One might think Cantorian acceptance of actual infinities helps resolve 
Zeno’s Paradox, but only at the cost of exacerbating all the paradoxes 
that rest on the possibility of actual infinities. In some cases (Galileo’s 
Paradox, Hilbert’s Hotel), the Cantorian approach is simply to embrace 
the paradoxical results. In one case (the Divided Stick), the Cantorian 
framework enables us to reformulate the paradox in a way that adds to 
our puzzlement. 
 In other cases, the accepted treatment within modern mathematics is 
to rule out paradoxes by fiat: for the set theoretic paradoxes, we deny 
the existence of the sets that lead to paradox, tailoring our mathematical 
systems ad hoc to rule them out. For the paradoxes of infinite arith-
metic, we disallow the troublesome operations (subtracting or dividing 
by infinity). 
 This, it seems to me, hardly constitutes a satisfying solution to the 
paradoxes. We already know at the start, before looking at the details 
of any paradoxes, that there cannot be a true contradiction. Therefore, 
if we have seemingly compelling premises leading to contradictory 
conclusions, we know that at least one of them is wrong. It is not illu-
minating to be told that much, nor does that solve any intellectual 
problem. Nor does our commentary become illuminating or intellec-
tually satisfying if we simply pick a premise to reject, with no more 
account of why that premise is wrong than to say that it (perhaps 
together with other premises that seem more obviously true) leads to 
a contradiction – namely, the very contradiction that led us to iden-
tify a paradox in the first place. To  solve  a paradox and not merely 
 avoid it, one must say something to explain how the premise one 
identifies as false could be false, or at least something that makes the 
premise cease to seem like something that ought to be true. 
 It is for this reason that I say that the set theoretic paradoxes have yet 
to be solved.  18 It certainly seems as though, if we have a well-formed 

90 Approaching Infinity
description, there ought to be a set of the things satisfying that descrip-
tion. This principle is known as the Comprehension Axiom of naive set 
theory. The Comprehension Axiom seems obvious to most people who 
are introduced to set theory, and it still  seems  as though it ought to be 
true, even after one has heard about the set theoretic paradoxes. The 
standard approach is simply to say: ‘The Comprehension Axiom is false, 
since it leads to those set theoretic paradoxes.’ But that does nothing to 
explain how it can be false, or to remove the intuition that it ought to 
be true. If our standards for solving paradoxes were so generous, then 
any paradox would be solved as soon as we identified the premises on 
which it rested. 
 Similar remarks apply to the problems of infinite arithmetic. There 
must be something wrong, either with adding infinity or with subtracting 
infinity, since addition and subtraction of infinity enables us to derive 
that 1 = 0. But again, our standards for solving a paradox should not be 
so low that the preceding observation counts as a solution. 
 Ideally, we would like something like this: an illuminating account 
of the nature of a set that reveals why, for example, there could not be 
such a thing as the set of all sets (say, because the idea is confused or a 
misuse of the concept); followed by an account of the nature of subtrac-
tion, division, and/or infinity that reveals why the idea of subtracting or 
dividing by infinity similarly fails to make sense. 
 
 
 18   This criticism applies more fairly to the Zermelo-Fraenkel approach than to, 
say, Russell’s theory of types. Russell’s approach attempts a natural explanation 
for why there could be no set of all sets that do not contain themselves; however, 
it requires that ‘is a member of’ is infinitely ambiguous (having infinitely many 
senses). The von Neumann-Bernays-Gödel approach turns on the similarly weird 
thesis that there is a special type of class (‘proper classes’) that are incapable of 
being members of other classes. 

 Part III 
 A New Theory of Infinity and 
Related Matters 

93
 7.1  Metapreliminaries 
 7.1.1   Why a chapter of preliminaries? 
 Before explaining my views concerning infinity and related matters, 
I want to first set out some philosophical preliminaries. This chapter 
explains some general features of my philosophical outlook, including 
some broad epistemological and metaphysical points. 
 Why is such a chapter needed? Briefly, the reason is that there are 
certain philosophical assumptions that tend to generate strong resist-
ance to my views, and these assumptions are commonly accepted by 
those interested in issues connected with science and mathematics, and 
hence by many likely readers for a book on infinity. I have in mind 
especially the assumptions of modern (twentieth-century) empiricism. 
Readers sympathetic to empiricism will tend to reject the rest of this 
book. Indeed, empiricists tend to take their philosophical assumptions 
so much for granted that they are likely to think that I have committed 
elementary oversights or engaged in obvious nonsense, rather than that 
I have systematic reasons for rejecting their underlying philosophical 
assumptions. Many individuals have empiricist assumptions but are 
unaware that they constitute a substantive and controversial philosoph-
ical theory. 
 7.1.2  Modern empiricism 
 Empiricism  is, roughly, the doctrine that it is impossible to attain any 
substantive knowledge of the world except on the basis of observation. 
Thus, if a statement cannot be observationally tested, it is unknowable. 
In contrast,  rationalism  holds that there is some substantive knowledge 
about the world that is not based on observation; this knowledge is 
usually said to derive from the exercise of pure reason. 
 7 
 Philosophical Preliminaries 

94 Approaching Infinity
 In the twentieth century, empiricists developed increasingly extreme 
anti-rationalist positions. Thus, an extreme form of empiricism,  logical 
positivism , went on to claim that if a statement cannot be observation-
ally tested, it is not merely unknowable; it is literally  meaningless , that 
is, it fails to assert anything; it is a mere pseudo-statement.  1 These ideas 
were used to declare wide swathes of human intellectual endeavor 
meaningless, including such fields as metaphysics, theology, and ethics. 
Another implication of the view was that if any scientific theory entails 
the existence of observationally undetectable facts, that theory must be 
either false or meaningless. 
 Ironically, empiricists have generally treated their philosophy more 
like an a priori axiom than like an empirical hypothesis. That is, empiri-
cism is usually assumed as self-evident, whereupon the philosopher 
proceeds to unhesitatingly embrace whatever consequences follow. 
 Perhaps the central motivation for empiricism in the last century 
stemmed from the extremely high regard in which natural science 
has been held. Peter van Inwagen describes an ideology of ‘scientism’, 
consisting in ‘an exaggerated respect for science [ ... ] and a corresponding 
disparagement of all other areas of human intellectual endeavour’.  2 One 
consequence was the idea that all knowledge must be like scientific 
knowledge, which empiricists take to be purely empirical. Hence David 
Hume’s famous declaration that all books not containing mathematics 
or science should be burned, because they ‘contain nothing but soph-
istry and illusion’.  3 Hume wrote in the eighteenth century; since then, 
the tide of scientism only grew stronger. 
 7.1.3  The significance of empiricism 
 The more extreme forms of empiricism, particularly logical positivism, 
have dramatically lost favor since the mid-twentieth century, at least 
among philosophers. But even these extreme views remain important, 
because they have left behind a pervasive influence on modern thought, 
even among people who do not generally subscribe to them. 
 1  For classic statements of this view, see Carnap 1932 and Ayer 1952. See also Quine 
(1951), who, despite the misleading title ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism’, is concerned 
to defend an even more extreme empiricism than that of Ayer and Carnap.  
 2  van Inwagen 1983, 215. 
 3  From David Hume (1975, III.iii, 165): ‘If we take in our hand any volume; 
of divinity or school metaphysics, for instance; let us ask, Does it contain any 
abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number? No. Does it contain any 
experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence? No. Commit it 
then to the flames: for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.’  

Philosophical Preliminaries 95
 In particular, logical positivism was so widely accepted in the early 
twentieth century that it tended to be taken for granted in the devel-
opment of theories in science and mathematics. Positivistic assumptions 
were crucial in motivating Einstein’s Theory of Relativity, the Copenhagen 
Interpretation of quantum mechanics, and the formalist approach to 
mathematics, to name three particularly prominent developments.  4 
Today, even those who would explicitly disavow positivism tend to accept 
positivist-inspired theories without knowing their provenance. We gener-
ally trust that the scientists of the past considered all the relevant alterna-
tives before adopting the theories that they have passed down to us. But 
in fact, alternatives that conflicted with positivism or empiricism tended 
to be dismissed without fair consideration in the twentieth century. 
 It is hard to overstate the extent to which the thinking of an indi-
vidual is influenced by the intellectual culture in which the individual 
is trained. This is clear in the case of scientists, who inherit a large body 
of specific, detailed knowledge. In the case of philosophers, our inher-
itance tends to be more inchoate – rather than a body of well-defined 
principles, we inherit certain broad habits of thought; a general sense of 
what sorts of ideas are ‘plausible’; as well as some very broad philosoph-
ical viewpoints, such as ‘naturalism’. Vague as these things are, they are 
of enormous importance in forming one’s philosophical views. (How 
would your philosophical views differ if you had been trained in the 
medieval philosophical tradition?) 
 Empiricism and positivism set the agenda of twentieth-century 
analytic philosophy, which remains the leading philosophical tradition 
in the English-speaking world. As a result, they have informed contem-
porary theories, philosophical methodology, and intuitions in a variety 
of ways, both great and subtle. The influence of empiricism was particu-
larly powerful in the philosophy of science and philosophy of mathe-
matics, fields that have particular bearing on the subject of the infinite.  
 7.2  Phenomenal conservatism 
 I have elsewhere defended an epistemological thesis known as phenom-
enal conservatism.  5 Because I have discussed it at length elsewhere, 
 4  See Einstein 1961, 2 (advancing a formalist-like philosophy of mathematics) 
and 22–3 (advancing the positivist account of meaning as a prerequisite for 
understanding relativity). For discussion of the influence of logical positivism on 
the Copenhagen Interpretation, see Kenna 2011. 
 5  Huemer 2001; 2006; 2007. For discussion of the theory, including a variety of 
objections and replies, see the papers in Tucker 2013. 

96 Approaching Infinity
here I will be brief. Phenomenal conservatism holds that undefeated 
appearances are a source of justification (perhaps the  only  source of 
justification) for belief. An appearance is ‘undefeated’ when there are 
no positive grounds for doubting it. An appearance is a broad type 
of mental state, distinct from and normally prior to belief, which is 
reported by expressions such as ‘it appears to me that P’ or ‘it seems to 
me that P’, where P is some proposition. There are a number of species 
of appearances, including sensory experiences, memory experiences, 
and rational intuitions. Rational intuitions are appearances that result 
from intellectual consideration of a proposition, but not from infer-
ence. There are also appearances that occur during reasoning, known as 
inferential appearances, whereby one proposition or set of propositions 
seem to support another proposition.  6 Examples of appearances include 
the following: When I look out the window, it seems to me that there 
is a squirrel in the tree (visual appearance); I seem to recall falling off 
my motorcycle a few times in college (memory appearance); it seems 
to me that the shortest path between any two points must be a straight 
line (rational intuition); it seems to me that, given that cows have four 
stomachs, it follows that cows have more than one stomach (inferential 
appearance). 
 All beliefs that are initially plausible candidates for being justified 
are based on appearances. This includes philosophical beliefs about 
when beliefs are justified or not. Those who disagree with phenomenal 
conservatism are just those to whom phenomenal conservatism does not 
 seem  correct. But when one holds a belief, one is rationally committed 
to holding the source of one’s belief to be an adequate source of justifi-
cation; one is in a self-defeating position if one thinks that one’s belief 
is based on something that in no way justifies it. Therefore, once one 
recognizes the actual source of our relevant beliefs, one must endorse 
appearances as a source of justification. There are a number of other 
considerations in favor of phenomenal conservatism, for which see the 
previously cited works. 
 There is no rational basis for discriminating fundamentally among 
species of appearances. What makes sensory experiences a source of 
justification is the same thing that makes memories and intuitions a 
source of justification: namely, all three mental states are appearances, 
that is, they are all states in virtue of which the world seems a certain 
way to the subject. It is, for example, arbitrary to hold that sensory expe-
riences may be presumed reliable but that intuitions should not be. It 
 6  Huemer 2016. 

Philosophical Preliminaries 97
is equally arbitrary to hold that we must start by trusting intuition and 
reason but not sensory experience. 
 Note that phenomenal conservatism is not the thesis that all appear-
ances are true. It does not hold that, once we describe how things 
initially appear, inquiry is at an end. Rather, how things initially appear 
is the rational starting point: things are presumed to be as they appear 
unless contrary evidence (which itself would have to come from other 
appearances) arises. 
 7.3   Synthetic a priori knowledge 
 7.3.1  The question of the synthetic, a priori 
 More than any other question, the question of synthetic, a priori knowl-
edge has dominated philosophy during the last three hundred years. 
Here is some terminology:
 
 
●
Empirical knowledge  is knowledge whose justification depends essen-
tially on observations – that is, if A is known empirically, then there is 
some set of observations that constitute the evidence that justifies A.  
 
 
●
A priori knowledge  is knowledge that is not empirical. That is, its justifi-
cation does not depend essentially on any set of observations. (Note: 
the question is  not  about how concepts are formed, whether there are 
innate concepts, or whether there is innate knowledge. It is solely a 
question about the  justification for certain beliefs.) 
 An  
 
●
analytic  statement is, roughly, one whose denial is a contradic-
tion. For example, ‘All bachelors are unmarried’ is analytic, because 
its denial – ‘Some bachelors are married’ – is a contradiction. Analytic 
statements are sometimes called ‘true by definition’. 7 
 A  
 
●
synthetic  statement is one that is not analytic, that is, its denial is 
consistent. For instance, ‘Most bachelors are slobs’ is synthetic; it is 
not contradictory to deny that most bachelors are slobs. 
 So here is the question that, as I say, has dominated the last three hundred 
years of philosophy: is there any synthetic, a priori knowledge? In other 
words, can there be a sentence whose denial is not contradictory, but 
 7  The definition of ‘analytic’ and ‘synthetic’ is tricky, and perhaps no defini-
tion is fully satisfactory. For the problem with the ‘true by definition’ or ‘true in 
virtue of meaning’ characterization, see Quine 1936. For other (less convincing) 
criticisms of the distinction, see Quine 1951. Nevertheless, standard examples of 
‘analytic’ sentences seem to be interestingly different from standard examples of 
‘synthetic’ sentences, and this shows,  pace Quine, that there is some distinction. 

98 Approaching Infinity
nevertheless we can see it to be true in a way that does not depend on 
observation for its justification? 
 7.3.2   The answer 
 There are a great many examples of synthetic a priori knowledge. Here 
are twelve of them:
 1.   No object is completely purple and also completely orange. 
 2.  For any two moments in time, one is earlier than the other. 
 3.  Other things being equal, it is better to be happy than to be 
miserable. 
 4.  If  x is inside  y , and  y is inside  z , then  x is inside  z . 
 5.  For any three outcomes,  x ,  y , and  z , if  x is better than  y , then a 
lottery which gives a 10 per cent chance of getting  x and a 90 per 
cent chance of getting  z is better than a lottery which gives a 10 per 
cent chance of getting  y and a 90 per cent chance of getting  z . 
 6.  The appearance of white is more similar to the appearance of yellow 
than to that of any other chromatic color. 
 7.  No action can cause an effect to occur before the action itself 
occurs. 
 8.  The number three exists. 
 9.  There  could have been only seven planets in the solar system. 
10.  The shortest path between any two points is a straight line. 
11.  The present is more real than the future. 
12.  The probability that either it is raining or it isn’t is 1. 
 I have tried to give a sense of how widespread and significant the 
apparent synthetic a priori is. There are examples involving numbers, 
spatial properties, colors, ethical value, decision theory, time, causation, 
probability, possibility, and probably many more things. 
 Why describe these things as a priori? Take a famous epistemological 
thought experiment: suppose that I am a disembodied brain being kept 
alive by scientists in a vat of nutrients; my brain is being artificially 
stimulated to create the illusion of a physical world, and so on. In this 
case, all of my observations are false. Nevertheless, even if this scenario 
is true, I still know that no object is completely purple and completely 
orange. I of course don’t know that there are any orange objects or 
purple objects in the real world outside my vat. But that doesn’t matter. 
If there are no orange objects, then there also aren’t any objects that are 
orange  and purple. If there  are  some orange objects, then those objects 
are not purple. I don’t need to exit the vat to know this. 

Philosophical Preliminaries 99
 But anything that I can still know even if all my observations are false 
is something that is not dependent on observation for its justification. 
That is, it is a priori. So my belief that nothing can be completely purple 
and completely orange is a priori. A similar argument applies to all the 
other items in the list above. 
 Why think that the items on that list are  synthetic ? To show that 
one of those statements is analytic, this is what one would have to do: 
produce the definitions of the relevant terms in the statement, substi-
tute the definitions for the terms they define, then, from the denial of 
the resulting statement, derive a sentence of the form ‘A and not A’. 
One should not merely assert that there is such a derivation; one should 
give the derivation. If this cannot be done, then the original sentence 
is synthetic. 
 Generally speaking, it cannot be done. Take the sentence, ‘No object is 
completely purple and also completely orange.’ The project of showing 
this to be analytic is stymied at the first stage by the fact that there is no 
verbal definition of either ‘purple’ or ‘orange’. (There is only an ‘osten-
sive definition’, that is, these terms have to be explained by pointing 
to examples of the relevant colors.) The sentence’s denial, ‘Something 
is completely purple and also completely orange’, has the same logical 
form as ‘Something is completely furry and also completely happy’, 
which is not a contradiction. 
 For now, the above will have to do as a brief indication of some of the 
grounds for rejecting empiricism. There is of course quite a bit more to be 
said, and others have written much more extensively on the subject.  8 
 7.3.3  How much synthetic a priori knowledge is there? 
 The central idea of empiricism is that one cannot attain substantive 
knowledge of the world without relying on observation. Traditionally, 
the distinction between analytic and synthetic statements matters to 
empiricists because they think that analytic knowledge is not substan-
tive, that it is not genuine knowledge of the world, that it only reflects 
knowledge of the meanings of words or concepts.  9 For this reason, they 
are willing to accept analytic a priori knowledge, but not synthetic a 
priori knowledge. If there is even one example of synthetic, a priori 
knowledge, then empiricism must be rejected. 
 Now suppose we must reject empiricism for that reason (as in fact 
we must). Is there nevertheless some reason why we should endeavor 
 8  See especially BonJour 1998; Bealer 1992; 1999. 
 9  Incidentally, Quine (1936) showed this last claim to be untenable.  

100 Approaching Infinity
to  minimize  the extent of synthetic a priori knowledge that we 
acknowledge? 
 I see no such reason. If there is at least one item of synthetic a priori 
knowledge, then, whatever the source of that item of knowledge is, it 
may also generate other items of knowledge. I see no reason to assume a 
priori that the amount of knowledge attributable to this source is small, 
rather than large. 
 What is the source of our synthetic a priori knowledge? The best 
answer to this is rational intuition, and the best explanation for our 
justification for relying on rational intuition is phenomenal conserva-
tism. If we accept rational intuition as a source of knowledge, there is 
no reason why we must attempt to minimize our reliance on it. Rational 
intuition is not relevantly different from observation, reasoning, or 
memory for present purposes; all of these are simply different species 
of appearances, and this is what makes each a presumptive source of 
justified belief. To attempt to minimize the use of intuition would 
be as sensible as attempting to minimize the use of observation or 
reasoning. (On the other hand, we have good reason for seeking 
multiple justifications for a given conclusion; if it is possible to support 
a conclusion through  both observation and intuition, this is preferable 
to supporting it through only one of these means. But it is not the case 
that it is preferable to ascribe knowledge to sensory observation rather 
than intuition.)  
 7.4  Metaphysical possibility 
 7.4.1   The meaning of ‘possible’ and related terms 
 Now some more philosophical terminology: a proposition is  possible if 
it could be true (or could have been true). A proposition is  impossible if 
it is not possible. A proposition is  necessary  if it could not be (and could 
not have been) false; that is, its denial is impossible. A proposition is 
 contingent if it is neither necessary nor impossible; that is, it could be 
true and could be false. 
 All of these words, however, are ambiguous. There are multiple senses 
of ‘possible’, and hence also multiple senses of ‘necessary’, ‘contingent’, 
and ‘impossible’. In one sense, a thing is said to be possible when one 
lacks sufficient evidence to rule it out. (‘I don’t remember where I left 
my wallet. It  could be in the restaurant.’) In another sense, a thing is 
said to be possible when we have an available way of bringing it about. 
(‘We  could get the report done today, but we’d have to work overtime.’) 

Philosophical Preliminaries 101
Neither of these senses is relevant to our inquiry; I mention them only 
to contrast them with the type of possibility we’ll be concerned with. 
 Philosophers usually focus on one or two very broad senses of possi-
bility, ‘logical possibility’ and ‘metaphysical possibility’. A proposition 
is said to be logically possible provided only that it is not contradictory. 
This seems like a pretty uninteresting sense of ‘possible’, but more on 
this later. 
 Metaphysical possibility is the broadest sense of ‘possibility’, that is, 
the sense in which the greatest number of things count as ‘possible’, 
short of the uninteresting ‘logical possibility’. Metaphysical possibility 
is undefinable; however, a few things can be said to help point toward 
its meaning, as follows. 
 7.4.2   Metaphysical possibility is broader than 
physical possibility 
 According to the philosophical tradition, even things that conflict 
with the laws of nature may nonetheless be in some sense ‘possible’, 
because in one sense, the laws of nature could have been different.  10 
For example, one can say: ‘It could have turned out that we lived in a 
perfectly Newtonian world.’ That sense of ‘could’ is metaphysical possi-
bility. However, not just any proposition is metaphysically possible; even 
when we are speaking in the broad sense, such that the world could 
have been Newtonian, it still is not the case that, for example, two and 
two could have been five. 
 7.4.3  Metaphysical possibility as conceivability? 
 To say that something is metaphysically possible is something  close to 
saying that it is coherently conceivable. This characterization helps to 
get people into the neighborhood of the concept of metaphysical possi-
bility, but it won’t do as a definition. A small problem: ‘conceivable’ 
just means ‘ possible to conceive’, so we would then need to explain the 
meaning of  that use of ‘possible’. 
 A more important problem: a proposition might be impossible for 
human beings to conceive solely because of some cognitive defect or 
limitation on our part. For example, suppose there is a proposition 
so complicated that to express it in English would require a book one 
 10  Although this is the received view in metaphysics, I think it may be false – I 
think some or all of the laws of nature may be metaphysically necessary. However, 
I shall not argue the point here. 

102 Approaching Infinity
million pages long. This proposition might be inconceivable to us purely 
because of its complexity. This would not show that the proposition is 
impossible in the intended, metaphysical sense. We could get closer to 
the intended notion of possibility by speaking of conceivability by an 
ideal observer, say, one with unlimited intelligence. 11 
 7.4.4  Metaphysical possibility and science fiction 
 The notion of metaphysical possibility can also be illuminated by consid-
ering the limitations of fictional stories. In some perfectly good stories, 
the laws of nature are different from what they are in the real world. For 
instance, in  Star Trek , people travel faster than the speed of light all the 
time. Though this violates the actual laws of physics, viewers rarely find 
it objectionable; we accept that the  Star Trek  universe has an alternative 
physics. 
 By contrast, other aspects of stories are rejected by alert fans as ‘not 
making sense’. Time travel stories sometimes evoke this kind of criti-
cism, as when a character is portrayed as going back in time and ‘altering 
the past’ in a way that would prevent him from going back in time in 
the first place. On the other hand, science fiction enthusiasts sometimes 
try to invent alternate interpretations to defend the coherence of such 
stories – for example, on the ‘branching timelines’ theory, when a person 
‘goes back’ to some earlier time  t , what actually happens is that a new 
branch of the universe is generated in which things are exactly as they 
were in the original universe at time  t , except that the ‘time traveler’ is 
added to the world; the new branch then evolves normally from there, 
while the old branch is unaltered. 
 Now, don’t worry about whether time travel stories are really coherent, 
or whether branching timelines is an admissible interpretation of such 
stories. That isn’t the point of this discussion. The point here is to 
gesture at a certain sort of possibility. Implicit in the discussion between 
the critics and the defenders of time travel stories is the assumption that 
there is a certain very broad sort of possibility that ought to constrain 
stories, such that if a story is impossible in this broad sense, it is thereby 
defective. But mere violation of the laws of physics does not make a 
 11  Even with this modification, this type of definition fails. It isn’t really the 
ability to  conceive  a proposition that matters, since a person might conceive of  P 
in some sense (certainly, one might understand  P ) while having a strong intuition 
that it is impossible that  P . The type of conceivability we want would really be 
something like ‘the ability to perfectly understand  P without having the intuition 
that it is impossible that  P ’. But the sort of ability there mentioned would prob-
ably itself need to be explained in terms of metaphysical impossibility.  

Philosophical Preliminaries 103
story impossible in this sense – witness the lack of objection to faster-
than-light travel. This sense of possibility is the metaphysical: critics 
are claiming that the time travel stories are  metaphysically impossible. 
Interpretations such as the branching timelines interpretation are 
designed to show that the stories are metaphysically possible. 
 7.4.5  Metaphysical possibility as a priori knowability? 
 Metaphysical possibility is closely tied to the notion of a priori knowl-
edge. It appears that all the things that are known a priori are metaphys-
ically necessary; their denial is metaphysically impossible.  12 This goes 
for the analytic as well as the synthetic a priori. Thus, we know a priori 
that pentagons have five sides, and it is metaphysically necessary that 
pentagons have five sides; we know a priori that no object is completely 
purple and completely orange, and it is metaphysically necessary that 
no object is completely purple and completely orange. 
 Does the reverse implication hold – if a proposition is metaphysically 
necessary, must it be knowable a priori?  13 Surely not by us. Take the case 
of Goldbach’s Conjecture, the hypothesis that every even number is the 
sum of two prime numbers. This proposition is not intuitively obvious, 
and thus far, it has yet to be proved or disproved. It  may  be impossible 
to prove or disprove. (If it is  false , then it could be disproved; one would 
only need to exhibit the counterexample. But if it is true, then it might 
be unprovable.) But it is not metaphysically contingent. If every even 
number is the sum of two prime numbers, then this is a necessary truth; 
if some even number is not the sum of two prime numbers, then  that is a 
necessary truth. So there might be a metaphysically necessary truth that 
 12  Possible exception: assume there is some variable,  X , about which we have 
no a priori knowledge except that the variable exists and has a continuum 
of possible values. Let  x  be one of these possible values of  X . Claim: we can 
know a priori that  X≠x . For the a priori probability that  X=x  is zero (each of 
the continuum many possibilities has probability zero). But it is metaphysically 
possible that  X=x . Hence, we can have a priori knowledge of a metaphysically 
contingent truth. However, this sort of case is not particularly relevant to the 
issues we’ll be discussing. 
 13  Why do I not rely on analytic philosophers’ favorite example of a necessary 
empirical truth, viz., [Water is H 2 O] (see, for example, Putnam 1975)? I think the 
proposition [Water is H 2 O] might be identical with either [H 2 O is H 2 O] or [The 
watery stuff is H 2 O] (it is odd to think that there should be  three propositions 
here; of course, there would have to be something like different modes of presen-
tation of a proposition). But neither of the latter two are examples of necessary 
truths not knowable a priori. Hence, I am not certain that [Water is H 2 O] is such 
an example either. 

104 Approaching Infinity
we cannot know a priori. As a matter of fact, we have excellent  empirical 
evidence for Goldbach’s conjecture: computers have checked all the 
even numbers up to about 4×10 18 , and so far, every one has turned out 
to be the sum of two primes. 14 
 It may be that every necessary truth could be known a priori by an 
ideal intellect, such as God. However, as this wouldn’t do us much good, 
I shall not further discuss this possibility. 
 7.4.6  Logical vs. metaphysical possibility 
 Return now to the notion of logical possibility. A proposition is supposed 
to be logically possible provided only that it is free of self-contradiction. 
What is the relationship between metaphysical and logical possibility? 
Are they the same? 
 From what we have said above, it is clear that they are not the same. 
The synthetic a priori truths are metaphysically necessary, yet their denial 
is not contradictory (this is what we meant by calling them ‘synthetic’). 
It is just a paraphrase of this to say that they are not logically necessary. 
 Why should one care about logical possibility? The notion is of interest 
to empiricists, since their view is that all a priori knowledge is of logi-
cally necessary truths, which is just another way of saying there is no 
synthetic a priori knowledge.  15 The synthetic, necessary, a priori truths 
that I have been defending are anathema to empiricists. 
 Once we reject empiricism, however, logical possibility loses most 
of its interest. The mere fact that a sentence fails to contradict itself 
really does not constitute any interesting sense in which what it says 
is possible. For instance, the statement ‘some object is entirely purple 
and entirely orange’ is not a logical contradiction – it does not entail 
a sentence of the form ‘A and not A’. However, there is no  interesting 
sense in which it is possible for something to be completely purple and 
completely orange; if we choose to misleadingly label the sentence ‘logi-
cally possible’, then we must remind ourselves that there is no meta-
physical import to this ‘possibility’; it is merely a comment on a certain 
formal property of the sentence. 
 14  e Silva 2014. 
 15  Some people would define ‘logical necessity’ even more narrowly, such that 
only propositions derivable from the laws of logic,  without  relying on definitions 
of any predicates or terms, count as logically necessary. Thus, ‘All bachelors are 
bachelors’ would be logically necessary but ‘All bachelors are unmarried’ would 
be logically contingent. This sense of ‘necessity’ is even less interesting.  

Philosophical Preliminaries 105
 7.4.7   False signs of possibility: Analogies and 
mathematical systems 
 No one should believe that a proposition is metaphysically possible 
merely because it is logically possible. Similarly, here are two other types 
of bad reasons for ascribing metaphysical possibility:
First, the argument from mathematical systems: in this type of 
argument, one cites the existence of a coherent mathematical system 
as proof (or at least evidence) that it is possible for something in 
reality to satisfy the system. This is fallacious. Mathematical systems 
in modern times are constrained by nothing other than mere consist-
ency and mathematicians’ sense of what is  interesting  – they are not 
constrained by metaphysical possibility. Thus, for example, the fact 
that one can develop a coherent mathematical system in which one 
talks about ‘infinite numbers’ such as  0 , does not show that any 
such numbers exist or could exist. Nor, similarly, does the exist-
ence of a consistent mathematical system for talking about ‘infini-
tesimal numbers’ mean that there are or could be any infinitesimal 
quantities. 
 Second, the argument by analogy:  A is possible, and there is an 
analogy to be drawn between  A and  B ; therefore,  B is possible. This is 
usually fallacious, particularly when the analogy is based upon mere 
similarity of mathematical structure. For example, it is possible to 
travel in either direction along a spatial dimension, and there is an 
analogy to be drawn between the temporal dimension and a spatial 
dimension (they have the same mathematical structure); therefore, it 
is possible to travel forward or backward in time. The problem in this 
case is that although time and space are similar in some respects, such 
as the mathematical relations of their points, nothing at all follows 
about their being similar in the  relevant respect, that is, the possibility 
of travel in them.  
 7.5  Possibility and paradox 
 How does all this bear on the infinite and its paradoxes? In the following 
chapters, I argue that most of the paradoxes of the infinite involve 
scenarios that are  logically possible but  metaphysically  impossible. That is: 
there are no formal contradictions in the descriptions of the scenarios, 
but there is no metaphysically serious sense in which such things could 
happen. This, I claim, resolves the paradoxes. However, such solutions 
would not be available to those who deny the existence of synthetic 

106 Approaching Infinity
a priori knowledge or identify logical possibility with metaphysical 
possibility.  16  
 I take a liberal view of metaphysical necessity. That is, I hold that there 
are many more necessary truths than are standardly recognized by philoso-
phers, scientists, and mathematicians; equivalently, I think there are many 
 fewer possibilities  than are commonly recognized. I believe that the explana-
tion for the sparse view of necessities (and expansive view of possibilities) 
taken by most today is that it is a holdover from empiricism and logical 
positivism. For an empiricist, nothing can be ruled out a priori unless it is 
actually a contradiction (or, of course, it conflicts with empiricism). Even 
though empiricism is less popular than it once was, contemporary philos-
ophy retains a significant resistance to synthetic necessary truths. 
 Suppose we want to know whether some proposition  P is metaphysi-
cally necessary, impossible, or contingent. Many think that the  presump-
tion should be that  P is contingent, that is, that one who thinks  P either 
necessary or impossible has a sort of burden of proof. This is understand-
able if one identifies metaphysical possibility with logical possibility: in 
that case, to claim that  P is impossible would be to claim that  P entails a 
contradiction, that is, something of the form ‘ A and not- A ’; likewise, to 
claim that  P is necessary would be to claim that the  denial  of  P entails a 
contradiction. If someone thinks either of these things is the case, it is 
reasonable to ask them to show us the contradiction in question. 
 If, however, metaphysical possibility is distinct from logical possi-
bility, and if there are many things that are logically contingent yet 
metaphysically necessary or impossible, then it is unclear why there 
should be any such burden of proof. If, when one considers  P ,  P initially 
 seems  possible, then one should presume that it is possible unless and 
until reasons to the contrary appear. Similarly, if  P seems impossible, one 
should presume that  P is impossible, and so on. What if  P neither seems 
possible nor seems impossible – that is, we have no intuition either way? 
In this case, one should withhold judgment, pending further argument. 
One should not presume that  P is possible. 
 7.6  A realist view of mathematics 
 A final preliminary topic: the nature of mathematics. Mathematics, in 
my view, is a body of a priori knowledge, some of it analytic and some 
 16  Here, I disagree with Oppy (2006, 48), who contends that, in discussing the 
paradoxes of the infinite, ‘the question is whether it is possible to tell consistent 
stories’ involving the infinite. This is not the interesting question.  

Philosophical Preliminaries 107
synthetic. This knowledge concerns the properties of and relations 
between certain kinds of universals. These universals are properties and 
relationships that other things could instantiate. For a mathematical 
object or other universal to exist, it is not necessary that anything in 
fact exemplify the property. It is, however, necessary that there  could be 
things exemplifying the property. 
 Thus, geometry studies shapes – their properties and the relationships 
among them. Shapes are properties that physical objects could have. 
Arithmetic studies the properties and relationships of numbers, where 
numbers are properties that groups of things (whether physical or non-
physical) can exemplify – for example, whenever there are two of anything, 
the property of twoness is exemplified. Probability theory studies prob-
abilities, which are degrees of support that propositions can have. Game 
theory studies instrumental rationality, which is a property that intentional 
actions can exemplify. And transfinite mathematics studies infinitude, 
which is a property that certain collections have; for example, the collec-
tion of all the points of space exemplifies a certain kind of infinitude. 
 This view of mathematics (which is a form of mathematical Platonism) 
always seemed to me completely natural, so much so that I have never 
seriously entertained any other view. Nevertheless, the view is quite 
controversial in contemporary philosophy of mathematics. 
 Some philosophers and mathematicians believe, instead, that mathe-
matics is essentially a conventional symbol-manipulation game: mathema-
ticians invent a series of symbols, arbitrarily stipulate rules for manipulating 
them, and then work out what strings of symbols can be obtained by 
playing according to the rules. In this theory, a mathematical system need 
not have anything whatever to do with reality – the whole system is pure 
invention, so there is no question of justifying the rules or securing ‘correct’ 
rules. If it should happen that some feature of reality mirrors the relations 
among the symbols in the game, then we’ve gotten lucky. 
 That view of mathematics, known as ‘formalism’, is motivated by 
empiricism. The empiricists of the twentieth century were loath to admit 
that there was any a priori knowledge of objective reality, yet they had 
to contend with the obviously a prioristic approach of mathematics – 
mathematicians do not go out and do experiments or observations. 
Some empiricists turned to the formalist philosophy of mathematics to 
rescue them from what would otherwise be a striking collection of coun-
terexamples to their epistemological theory. If, as I have been urging, we 
reject empiricism, there is no reason for believing formalism.  
 

108
 8.1  Sets are not collections 
 According to the now-standard view developed by the likes of Cantor, 
Frege, and Russell, all of mathematics is based on set theory. Numbers, 
functions, vectors, and all the other objects studied in other branches of 
mathematics are constructed out of sets. This makes the concept of a set 
very important! We should make sure that we understand this concept 
very clearly. 
 I must confess, most unfortunately, that I do not. I doubt that you 
do either. The most common explanation given is that a set is simply 
a collection or group. But it is easy to see that ‘set’ in set theory is not 
in fact used in the way that the rest of us (that is, people other than set 
theorists) use ‘collection’. Note the following features of the concept of 
sets:
     i .   It is uncontroversial in set theory that there is an ‘empty set’, a set 
with no members. What collection is this supposed to be? Do we 
really understand the idea that there is a collection when there is 
nothing at all that is collected? 
   ii .    It is uncontroversial in set theory that there are singleton sets, and 
that they are distinct from their members. That is, for any object  a , 
{ a }≠ a . Again, do we really understand the notion that, when only 
one object is present to start with, there is then a  collection of that 
one object – and that this collection is not the object itself but is 
some other thing? If I have exactly one car, do I have a  collection of 
cars, which is a distinct object from my car? 
 iii .    It is again uncontroversial in set theory that there are infinitely 
many ‘pure sets’, that is, sets that are constructed, from the ground 
 8 
 Sets 

Sets 109
up, using no objects other than sets. In fact, there is no limit to the 
order of infinity one can construct using pure sets –  0 ,  1 ,   , and 
so on. Are we to believe that this, too, is supported on the ordinary 
notion of a collection? That in the ordinary English sense of ‘collec-
tion’, there are infinitely many infinite collections built up from 
nothing but other collections, all starting from the collection that 
you have when you have nothing to collect? 
   iv .    It is commonly accepted in set theory (but this is somewhat more 
controversial than the preceding points) that there are non-con-
structible sets – these are sets such that there is no way of describing 
their membership. (We get this from the Axiom of Choice, which is 
widely used but not uncontroversial.  1 ) Is it true that, in the ordinary 
sense of ‘collection’, there are collections such that there is no way 
of specifying what is collected together? 
   v .    In set theory, sets are typically understood as abstract, non-phys-
ical objects, even when their members are physical.  2 Is a collec-
tion or group of physical objects an abstract, non-physical object? 
When introducing the notion of a set in Chapter 6, I mentioned 
that according to one textbook, a pack of wolves and a bunch of 
grapes would be examples of sets. But these are not abstract objects: 
a deer might be killed by a pack of wolves, but no deer is killed by 
an abstract object; a person may eat a bunch of grapes, but no one 
eats an abstract object. If the set theorists are to be believed, then, 
in addition to the individual grapes, and in addition to the bunch 
of grapes, there is also a  third sort of object in the offing, an abstract, 
non-physical, mathematical object, that has each of the grapes as 
‘members’. Really, what reason is there for believing this? 
 Perhaps it will be said that, when we call a set a collection, ‘collection’ 
is not to be understood in the ordinary sense of the word but in some 
technical, mathematical sense. But then we have made no progress at all 
toward understanding ‘set’. It is as if I introduced the word ‘flumir’ by 
explaining that a flumir is simply a smoople. 
 My reason for skepticism about set theory is not anything to do with 
‘simplicity’ or ‘weirdness’, as are the usual reasons for skepticism on the 
part of contemporary philosophers about abstract objects. I am not saying 
 1  See above, Chapter 6, fn. 13. 
 2  But see Maddy (1990, 58–67), who claims that sets built from physical 
elements have spatiotemporal locations and can be perceived. On this unconven-
tional view, sets might no longer qualify as ‘abstract’ (Maddy 1990, 59); neverthe-
less, they are not material objects. 

110 Approaching Infinity
that we should doubt sets because they make our ontology larger, and I am 
not saying that we should resist them because they’re unobservable, non-
spatiotemporal, or the like. I am saying we should be skeptical because no 
one has been able to explain what these things are supposed to be.  
 8.2  Sets are not defined by the axioms 
 The second most popular explanation of the notion of a set is that the 
term ‘set’ is defined by the axioms of set theory. That is, sets are simply 
the things that satisfy those axioms. 
 There are two problems with this view. First, it assumes that we can 
just see that  there is  something satisfying those axioms. I confess that 
I don’t find this obvious at all; I simply don’t know what the objects 
would be. They’re not collections. They’re not aggregates. I don’t see 
that there is in reality anything having the characteristics mentioned in 
points ( i )–( v ) above. 
 Second, the claim that the axioms of set theory define the term ‘set’ 
is refuted by a famous result in model theory: the Löwenheim-Skolem 
Theorem. The proof of this theorem is beyond the scope of this book; 
I will, however, explain what the theorem says.  3 It should be noted 
that logicians do not throw the word ‘theorem’ around; things that are 
called ‘theorems’ (Gödel’s Theorem, the Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem, 
the Compactness Theorem) are things that have been proved. Among 
the experts in the subject, there is no controversy about them. In the 
present case, this is what the theorem states:
 Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem:  If a countable set of sentences of first 
order logic has a model, then it has a countable model.  
 To explain: a ‘countable’ set is a set with at most  0 members, that is, it 
has either finitely many members or  0 members. ‘First order logic’ is a 
type of formal logical system. Of particular interest here, the standard set 
of axioms of set theory can be formulated as a countable set of sentences 
of first order logic; thus, the Theorem applies to them.  4 A ‘model’ for a 
set of sentences is a way of assigning interpretations to the sentences 
(specifying what the sentences are about, and what each of the  predicates 
applies to) that makes all of the sentences come out true. Finally, a ‘count-
able model’ is a model in which there are at most  0 objects. 
 3  For discussion of the mathematics, see Ebbinghaus 2007. For discussion of the 
theorem’s philosophical implications, see Bays 2014. 
 4  For a list of the standard axioms of set theory, see above, Section 6.8.3.  

Sets 111
 So the Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem implies that, if there is any way 
of interpreting the axioms of set theory so that they are all true, then 
there is a way of doing so using at most  0 objects. But it is uncontrover-
sial among set theorists that there are (many, many) more than  0 sets. 
That was proved in Chapter 6, Sections 6.6–6.7. So an interpretation of 
the axioms that uses only  0 objects would be a  mis interpretation, that 
is, it would fail to capture what set theorists intend these axioms to be 
about. Löwenheim-Skolem tells us that such a misinterpretation is not 
ruled out by the formal structure of the axioms. 
 Now, according to the proposal under consideration in this section, 
the concept of a set is supposed to be defined just by that formal struc-
ture. ‘Set’ and ‘member of’ are supposed to be defined merely as ‘what-
ever would make the following axioms true: ... ’, where you fill in the 
ellipsis with a formal statement of the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms. This 
cannot be correct, since the axioms could be made true by an interpreta-
tion that clearly deviates from what set theorists intend. Hence, we have 
yet to find an acceptable explanation of the meaning of ‘set’. 
 But you might object: ‘The preceding argument presupposes that you 
actually  do know what set theorists mean by ‘set’; otherwise, how could 
you say what counts as a misinterpretation of the notion of a set?’ The 
answer is that one can know some of the things that are supposed to 
be true of  X ’s (according to the people who believe in  X ’s), even if one 
has no idea what things might satisfy those conditions. In the present 
case, we know that, according to the people who believe in sets, there 
are supposed to be uncountably many of them. I know that much, even 
though I don’t know what a set really is. 
 Another objection: ‘But the proof of the Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem 
 uses sets. How can you appeal to the theorem if you don’t believe in 
sets?’ Reply:  if sets exist, then the Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem is true, 
in which case sets are not adequately defined by the ZF axioms. So either 
sets don’t exist, or they are not adequately defined by the ZF axioms. 
This is enough for present purposes. 
 8.3  Many regarded as one: the foundational sin? 
 Recall Cantor’s second characterization of sets: ‘A set is a many which 
allows itself to be thought of as a one.’  5 This might be the most philo-
sophically illuminating characterization. 
 5  Cantor 1932, 204. 

112 Approaching Infinity
 Notice first, however, that this rules out the empty set, for surely a 
mere absence of objects does not constitute ‘a many’. It also rules out 
singletons, since a single object isn’t a many either. Even if we somehow 
allowed singletons to fit under this definition, a singleton would not be 
distinct from its ‘member’, for surely if  x is already one object, we do not 
convert it into a different object by regarding it as ‘a one’. 
 Leaving those cases, assume we have two or more objects. Cantor’s 
suggestion appears to be that (at least in most cases), it is permissible to 
regard these objects as one. 
 But wait. How can this be legitimate? By hypothesis, the objects under 
consideration are  many (or at least two). Two does not equal one, nor 
does three equal one, nor do any of the other, larger numbers equal one. 
Many things are not in fact a single thing. Does set theory then rest on 
a contradiction? 
 Perhaps Cantor was speaking loosely. Suppose there are two objects, 
 a and  b . When we form the set { a ,  b }, we do not literally treat the two 
objects as one – we do not find ourselves saying that  a =  b . Rather, we 
treat { a ,  b } as a  third thing, which is identical with neither  a nor  b , but 
which ‘contains’ each of them. 
 This is fair enough as a way of avoiding inconsistency. But notice 
the split personality of sets. When the theorist initially introduces sets, 
he downplays their ontological significance: gathering some objects 
together into a set is not introducing some completely different kind 
of object; it is just choosing to view the existing objects in a certain 
way. Or so Cantor’s remark would lead us to think. We therefore need 
not scruple about the addition to our ontology. But when the theory of 
sets is developed, sets then are treated as a completely different kind of 
object, distinct from their members but standing in some undefinable 
relation to them. 
 I conjecture that the double life of sets is crucial to their widespread 
acceptance. It is only in the first stage, when we are informally intro-
duced to sets as ‘collections of objects’ or as ‘multitudes regarded as 
ones’ that it seems harmless to admit their existence. By the time we’re 
being introduced to the cardinality   , we’ve forgotten what led us to 
regard these objects as ontologically innocent to begin with. 
 If sets are understood as a fundamentally different kind of thing from 
concrete objects (even sets whose members are all concrete objects), 
then we need a more serious account of what these things are, and a 
more serious reason for believing that such things exist, than we have 
been given by Cantor, Frege, Russell, et al. If, on the other hand, sets 
are understood in the seemingly ontologically innocent way suggested 

Sets 113
by Cantor, as in some sense nothing over and above their members, 
then we should worry about two things. First, we should worry about 
the idea that one can somehow build up infinite hierarchies of infinite 
sets, starting from only finitely many (or even zero!) concrete objects. 
Second, we should worry about the seeming inconsistency of regarding 
 many distinct things as  one thing. 
 8.4  The significance of the paradoxes 
 For those who believe in sets, the Naive Comprehension Axiom seems 
intuitively obvious. This is the principle that for any well-formed predi-
cate, there is a set of the things that satisfy it. For example, if you have 
the predicate ‘ ... is red’, then you can say there is a set of all the things 
that are red. But this axiom generates both Russell’s Paradox and Cantor’s 
Paradox. 
 This should have tipped us off that there is something wrong with 
the notion of a set. The Comprehension Axiom was not, after all, 
merely some peripheral, dubious hypothesis about sets. Before the para-
doxes were discovered, a proponent of sets would have said that the 
Comprehension Axiom was a  central and  self-evident principle about the 
way sets work. Giving up the Comprehension Axiom while still believing 
in sets is comparable to believing in the addition operation but giving 
up the idea that  x +1 is greater than  x . 
 If a concept generates paradoxes, that is generally a reason for thinking 
it an invalid concept. Now, one might say: ‘But the paradoxes have now 
been excised! As far as anyone can tell, the newer versions of set theory, 
without the Comprehension Axiom, entail no contradictions.’ But the 
ad hoc manner in which this result was achieved deprives it of evidential 
import. If the foundational intuitions on the basis of which some objects 
were initially introduced are proven to be contradictory, this removes 
the central reason we had for believing in those objects. The fact that 
someone can subsequently tailor the theory to avoid the contradictions, 
in a completely ad hoc manner, hardly restores our reason for believing 
those objects exist. The reason we have for believing in a set of all cats 
is the same reason – in essence, the  same intuition  – that we had for 
believing in a set of all sets. 
 Furthermore, the modifications made to the theory in this case are 
particularly suspicious: we are supposed to believe in all the various indi-
vidual sets, but deny the existence of the set of all sets. Now, one of the 
things you are supposed to be able to do with sets is to explain seman-
tics: according to many champions of sets, the meaning of a general 

114 Approaching Infinity
term is to be explained, in part, in terms of the  set  of things to which 
the term applies. For instance, the meaning of ‘red’ is explained in terms 
of the set of all red things.  6 If this is correct, then if a general term has 
no associated set (N.B., it isn’t merely that the set of things it applies to 
is the empty set; it’s that there is no set of the things it applies to), the 
term must be meaningless. But the term ‘set’, according to modern set 
theory, has no associated set – there is no set of all the things it applies 
to, since that would have to be the set of all sets. Therefore, it seems, the 
term ‘set’ is meaningless. 
 Of course, one might simply say that the meaning of ‘set’ is not given 
by the set of things to which it applies, but is to be understood in some 
other way. Suppose there is some such other way. Maybe the meaning of 
‘set’ is given by the Platonic Form of Sethood. But if there is such a Form, 
then why wouldn’t there also be a Form of Redness, and why wouldn’t 
 that explain the meaning of ‘red’? A similar question would seem to 
apply no matter what we say about the meaning of ‘set’ – which shows 
that sets really don’t help us explain semantics after all. 
 None of this proves that there are no sets. It is not  obvious that there 
isn’t anything that ‘set’ refers to. But it is also not obvious that there  is , 
and there is no strong reason to believe that there is. 
 8.5  Are numbers sets? 
 Wait, how can I say that? Everyone knows that set theory is the founda-
tion of virtually all of mathematics! If we reject sets, won’t we have to 
give up the rest of mathematics? 
 Let us examine the sort of foundation that set theory provides. In 
Chapter 6, we saw the set-theoretic account (or at least  one set theoretic 
account) of the natural numbers. This was Russell’s view: The number 
zero is just the empty set. The number one is the set of all sets that are 
equinumerous with {0}, where two sets are defined to be ‘equinumerous’ 
if and only if there exists a one-to-one function from either set onto the 
 6  From Sider 2005, 2: ‘In linguistics, for example, one can think of the meaning 
of a predicate, “is red” for instance, as a set – the set of all red things. Here’s one 
hint of why sets are so useful: we can apply this idea to predicates that apply to 
other predicates. For instance, think of “red is a color”. “Is a color” is a predicate, 
and it looks like it holds of things like the meaning of “is red”. So we can think 
of “is a color” as meaning a set containing all the colors. And these colors in turn 
are sets: the set of all red things, the set of all green things, etc.’ Sider’s remarks 
should presumably be taken to apply to one sort of ‘meaning’, namely,  reference , 
as opposed to  sense . 

Sets 115
other. The number two is the set of all sets that are equinumerous, in 
that same sense, with {0,1}. And so on. 
 In other words, when I claim to have two apples in the cupboard, here 
is what I am saying: there is a set of which every apple in my cupboard 
is a member, and this set is itself a member of the set of all sets such that 
there is a one-to-one mapping between them and the set which contains 
only the following members: ( i ) the set that has no members, ( ii ) the set 
of all sets such that there is a one-to-one mapping between them and 
the set that contains only the set that has no members. 
 Now you understand why I didn’t try to explain the claim that there 
are  six apples. 
 Now that you’re comfortable with the natural numbers, let me explain 
fractions. 7 When I mention the number ⅔, I am referring to an equiva-
lence class of ordered pairs, namely, {2,3	, 4,6	, 6,9	, 8,12	, ... }. What 
is an ordered pair? Well, the ordered pair 2,3	 is actually just the set {{2}, 
{2,3}}. And you remember what 2 and 3 are. So actually the number ⅔ 
is an infinite set, whose first member is the set containing the following 
members:
    I.   the set containing the set of all sets such that there is a one-to-one 
mapping between them and the set containing (A) the set that has 
no members and (B) the set of all sets for which there is a one-to-one 
mapping between them and the set that contains only the set that 
has no members, and 
 II.   the set containing the following members: 
 
  A.  the set of all sets such that there is a one-to-one mapping between 
them and the set containing (1) the set that has no members and 
(2) the set of all sets for which there is a one-to-one mapping 
between them and the set that contains only the set that has no 
members, and 
 
  B.  the set of all sets such that there is a one-to-one mapping between 
them and the set containing just (1) the set that has no members, 
(2) the set of all sets for which there is a one-to-one mapping 
between them and the set that contains the set that has no 
members, and (3) the set of all sets such that there is a one-to-one 
mapping between them and the set that contains (a) the set that 
has no members, and (b) the set of all sets for which there is a 
 7  The explanation derives from Wildberger 2006, though Wildberger himself 
hilariously ridicules this sort of construction. 

116 Approaching Infinity
one-to-one mapping between them and the set that contains the 
set that has no members. 
 That is just the  first  member of the  infinite set of ordered pairs that is the 
number ⅔. I don’t have time to write down what the second member is. 
 Now you would like to know what a real number is, wouldn’t you? 
Well, I don’t have time to tell you. Let’s just say it is a pair of infinite sets 
of rational numbers.  8 And now you have a sense of how set theory is the 
foundation of the rest of mathematics. 
 But ... really? What is going on with theories like this? Are we supposed 
to think that when I say my gas tank is  two thirds  full, I am discussing a 
relation between the gas tank and that set I just started to tell you about 
above (where I only had the patience to tell you the first member)? I find 
it hard to credit that anyone, even a philosopher, believes that. What 
crazypants semantic theory is going to make that set turn out to be the 
referent of ‘two thirds’ in ‘The pie is two thirds gone’? 
 Either the set theoretic constructions are supposed to identify the actual 
referents of mathematical terms, in their normal usage, or they are not. 
If they are, then the constructions are wildly implausible on their face 
and completely unjustified, as no attempt at all is made to argue that the 
set theoretic objects are the actual referents. On the other hand, if the 
constructions are  not supposed to identify the actual referents of math-
ematical terms, then their philosophical significance is obscure. If Cantor, 
Russell, et al., are merely saying, ‘Here are some objects that have the same 
formal properties as the number system (because I deliberately constructed 
them that way)’, I suppose this might be mildly interesting. But it hardly 
justifies claims to have identified the  foundation  of mathematics.  
 8.6  Set theory and the laws of arithmetic 
 Here are some famous laws of arithmetic: where  a ,  b , and  c are any 
numbers: 
 8  Dedekind 1901. Other constructions are possible, but Dedekind cuts are 
perhaps the most common way of constructing the real numbers.  
 a +  b =  b  +  a 
(Commutative Law of Addition)
( a +  b ) +  c =  a + ( b +  c )
(Associative Law of Addition)
 a ×  b =  b  ×  a 
(Commutative Law of Multiplication)
( a ×  b ) ×  c =  a × ( b  ×  c )
(Associative Law of Multiplication)
 a ( b +  c ) =  ab  +  ac 
(Distributive Law)

Sets 117
 How do we know these things? 
 Here is one answer: because they can be derived using one of the set-
theoretic constructions for the numbers. This answer is crazily implau-
sible. Derivations using set theoretic constructions tend to be complex 
and difficult to follow; it is much harder to see that they are correct 
than it is to see that the above laws are correct. Furthermore, the only 
way anyone knows that a set theoretic construction is adequate is that 
 it yields the correct results . When someone wants to argue that we ‘can 
construe’ the numbers 0, 1, 2, ... as the sets ∅, {∅}, {∅, {∅}}, ... , they do 
this by arguing that those sets have the formal properties of the natural 
numbers – that is, the properties that we  already know  the numbers have. 
The set theorist will then define addition, multiplication, and other 
operations and predicates, and argue that these operations and predi-
cates, on the proposed definitions, have the correct properties – that 
is to say, again, the properties that we already know the arithmetical 
operations and predicates have.  9 Frege, after defining numbers, actually 
says, ‘Let us try, therefore, whether we can derive from our definition 
[ ... ] any of the  well-known properties of numbers.’  10 If, for example, a set 
theoretic construal of arithmetic had the result that addition was not 
commutative, that construal would  ipso facto be rejected as inadequate. 
 This is hardly a startling revelation on my part. There is no one working 
on the ‘foundations of mathematics’ who doesn’t know all this. Yet it 
directly and obviously entails that what they are working on is not actu-
ally the foundations of mathematics, since the propositions that they 
seek to derive are known prior to and (epistemically) independently of 
the derivations. This epistemic independence is shown by the fact that, 
if a proposed construction were to conflict with one of the ‘well-known’ 
properties of numbers, of addition, or the like, the well-known property 
would not be in the least called into question; the construction would 
just be refuted. In fact, the things being derived are used as justification 
for the things  from which the derivations start – for example, the ability 
to derive commutativity is offered as (part of) a  reason for  construing 
numbers as sets. 
 Now, one might be tempted to say: ‘Perhaps the set theoretic construc-
tions explain, not  how we come to know  the truths of arithmetic, but 
rather  what makes them true . The notion of ‘foundations’ of math-
ematics is ontological, rather than epistemological.’ But this, again, 
is just implausible, because on the proposed account of what makes 
  9  See Cantor 1915, 85–103; Frege 1980, 81–96. 
 10  Frege 1980, 81, emphasis mine. 

118 Approaching Infinity
arithmetical truths true, there is  no plausible way in which we could know 
those facts  independently of knowing anything about set theory. If, for 
example, the number ⅔ is the sort of incredibly complicated set that we 
discussed in Section 8.5 above, and similarly with all the other numbers, 
then there is no plausible way in which people could have known that 
2
3
1
6
5
6
+
=
 without knowing any set theory and without doing any  
derivations using it. 
 Conclusion: set theory is not the foundation of arithmetic, let alone 
all of mathematics. The rejection of sets therefore would not undermine 
the foundations of mathematics in any interesting sense.  
 

119
 9.1  Cardinal numbers as properties 
 Having rejected the set theoretic foundation for arithmetic, let us return 
to the beginning: what is a number? 
 Begin with the cardinal numbers, that is, the counting numbers. A 
cardinal number is a kind of property.  1 These properties are best ‘defined 
ostensively’, that is, by giving examples. Suppose I want to explain what 
the number two is, to someone who has never heard of it. I would show 
them something like Figure 9.1. 
 In that picture, there are  two stars,  two hexagons, and  two lightning 
bolts. That is, two is the property that the stars instantiate, and the hexa-
gons also instantiate it, and the lightning bolts also instantiate it.  2 It is 
no coincidence that this is how children are actually taught number 
 9 
 Numbers 
 1  My view here is completely unoriginal: it is based on Byeong-Uk Yi’s excellent 
(1999) ‘Is Two a Property?’ For discussion of the logic of plural predication, plural 
quantifiers, and so on, see his 2002. 
 2  Abstract objects can also instantiate numbers, for example, redness and square-
ness are  two universals. I use examples of concrete particulars for convenience.  
 Figure 9.1  Three instances of twoness 

120 Approaching Infinity
concepts (not by telling them about the set of all sets with one-to-one 
mappings onto the set {0,1}!). The ontological status of the number two 
is thus the same as that of other universals, such as redness and square-
ness. If you believe in those other properties, as well you should, then 
you should also believe in numbers. 
 9.2  Frege’s objection 
 Gottlob Frege thought he had a refutation of the view that numbers are 
properties of concrete objects.  3 His argument: the same concrete thing 
can be said to instantiate different numbers. Suppose you have a deck of 
cards. What is the number that it instantiates? Well, it is  one deck, but 
it is  fifty-two  cards. But if numbers are properties, presumably different 
numbers are incompatible properties, so the same thing couldn’t possess 
both oneness and fifty-twoness at the same time. Therefore, number is 
not a property of a concrete object, such as the deck of cards. Instead, 
Frege proposes, numbers must be properties of ‘concepts’ (but note that 
Fregean ‘concepts’ are not mental; they are more like what the rest of 
us would call  properties ). Thus, we resolve the puzzle of the deck of cards 
by saying that there are two distinct concepts: the concept ‘deck’ (or 
maybe, ‘deck that is on this table now’) and the concept ‘card’ (or, ‘card 
that is on this table now’), and the number 1 applies to the former, 
while the number 52 applies to the latter. Cantor and Russell, on the 
other hand, would ditch the talk of concepts and say that there are two 
distinct  sets : the singleton set of which the deck is the sole member, and 
the fifty-two-membered set which has each card as a member. 
 Frege’s argument refutes  a theory about numbers, but not my theory. 
The view Frege refutes is one that holds the following:
     i .   Each number is a property of a concrete particular (at least, a prop-
erty that  may be instantiated by a concrete particular), 
    ii .    In the deck example, the deck has the property 1, and the cards have 
the property 52, and 
 iii .    The deck is identical with the cards. 
 Indeed, that is a confused view; Frege is right about that. 
 Here is how I would correct that view: First, thesis ( i ) is false, because 
there is only one number that is capable of being a property of  a concrete 
particular, and that is the number 1. It is logically impossible, for example, 
 3  Frege 1980, 28–9. 

Numbers 121
for the number 2 to be a property of a concrete object; the number 2 can 
only be a property of  two concrete objects. In general, the number  n can 
only be a property of  n objects. Numbers are different from other proper-
ties in this respect: most predicates are capable of being instantiated by a 
single subject, but natural numbers, as predicates, require plural subjects 
(except for the number one, which requires exactly one subject). The 
fundamental twoness facts are facts of the form T( a , b ) (in English: ‘ a 
and  b are two’), where T is the property of twoness, and  a and  b are the 
subjects which instantiate that property. They don’t  each instantiate the 
property; they  jointly  instantiate it.  4 The plurality of the subjects is an 
irreducible aspect of the proposition: it is not that twoness applies to the 
 set  { a , b }; it’s not that there’s a special thing called a ‘pair’ and twoness 
applies to the  pair ; and it’s not that  a and  b are parts of a larger object, 
 a + b , where twoness applies to the composite object  a + b . All of those 
are variants on the idea that there is  a thing (that is,  one thing) which 
instantiates twoness, which is contradictory. The  only subjects involved 
in the situation are  a and  b , and  they , that is, those two things, together 
instantiate twoness. 
 Second, thesis ( iii ) above is incoherent. What does it mean to say some-
thing is identical with more than one thing? Identity is a two-place rela-
tion, and a single thing must play the role of each term of the relation. 
This is part of the grammar of ‘=’. Thus, ‘the deck is identical with the 
cards’ is not merely false; it is malformed. The only way to make sense 
of it is to modify it. Thus, we could interpret it as ‘The deck is identical 
with  each of  the cards’ (obviously false), or ‘The deck is identical with  the 
set of  the cards’ (also false), or ‘The deck is identical with  the aggregate 
of  the cards’, where the aggregate of the cards is understood to be the 
composite object that has each of the cards as parts and has no other 
parts that don’t overlap with those. This last statement is the only one 
that isn’t obviously false.  5 But that interpretation generates no problem. 
If we’re talking about  the aggregate of  the cards,  that instantiates the 
number 1. It does not instantiate 52. Remember, the aggregate of cards 
is  an object, which has each of the cards as parts. So  its parts  number 52, 
but  it numbers 1. There is no way of getting one thing instantiating two 
different numbers. 
 4  Note also that the T( a , b ) here does not ascribe a  relation between a  and  b . It 
ascribes a property, but the subject of the property is irreducibly plural.  
 5  It’s not obviously true, either. If we replace a single card from the deck, 
perhaps the result would count as ‘the same deck’, but as a different aggregate. 
But nevermind that. 

122 Approaching Infinity
 9.3  Arithmetical operations 
 What is addition? ‘Two apples plus three apples make five apples’ 
means something like this: if you have two apples, and you also have 
three more apples (that is, three that are each different from either of 
the original two), then you have five apples. What of the statement 
of pure mathematics, ‘2 + 3 = 5’? This means something like: if there 
are two (of anything), and there are three (of anything, but different 
from the original two), then the two things and the three things are 
five. 
 What is multiplication? ‘2 × 3’ means something like: the result of 
taking two, three times, or: the number of things that there are, when 
there are three separate instances of twoness. 
 What is subtraction? ‘3 − 2’ means something like: the result of excluding 
two things from three things, or: the number of things that remain, if, 
out of three things, two things are excluded from consideration. 
 And division? ‘6 ÷ 3’ means something like: the number of instances 
of threeness that would constitute six things. 
 Notice that none of the arithmetical operations is a physical opera-
tion, not even when applied to physical objects. The idea of adding 
two apples to three apples does not refer to doing anything  physically 
with the apples. It is not, for example, a matter of bringing the apples 
into spatial proximity. If it were some physical operation, then arith-
metic would be contingent and empirical, since it is possible that upon 
moving objects into closer proximity, or performing whatever other 
physical operation, we would find that the total number of objects 
changes (perhaps apples at a certain distance from each other merge, 
or destroy each other, or reproduce). Adding two apples to three apples 
is solely a matter of considering two apples and, without making any 
changes to any of the apples,  considering an additional three apples, 
and figuring out how many apples that would make. There is not 
even any passage of time assumed: if at  t there are two apples and 
at the same time there are an additional three apples, then, at that 
time, there are five apples; the arithmetical statement does not entail 
any empirical prediction that there will continue to be five apples at 
any later time.  6 This is why arithmetical statements are necessary and 
knowable a priori.  
 6  This is not meant to exclude cross-temporal counting. For instance, if Iskra ate 
two apples yesterday and three apples today, then she ate five apples in two days.  

Numbers 123
 9.4  The laws of arithmetic 
 Recall the most famous laws of arithmetic: 
 a + b =  b + a 
(Commutative Law of Addition) 
 ( a + b )+ c =  a +( b + c ) 
(Associative Law of Addition) 
 a × b =  b × a 
(Commutative Law of Multiplication) 
 ( a × b )× c =  a ×( b × c ) 
(Associative Law of Multiplication) 
 a ( b + c ) =  ab + ac  
(Distributive Law) 
 Why do these hold, and how do we know them? 
 In essence, the reason why ( a +  b ) is equal to ( b +  a ) is that the expres-
sions ‘( a +  b )’ and ‘( b +  a )’ are  synonymous : both simply refer to the result 
of combining those two numbers. The order in which the numbers’ 
names are  written on the page  has no semantic significance, any more 
than the color of the font in which they are written. Here is a simple 
illustration. You manage an airline. You have two airplanes parked at 
terminal A, and another three parked at terminal B. 
 ✈ ✈  ✈ ✈ ✈ 
  A    B  
 How many airplanes do you have in total? Okay, now what if you 
‘instead’ had three airplanes parked at terminal B and two at terminal 
A;  then  how many airplanes would you have in total? Now, it’s not that 
these two questions happen to have the same answer. It’s that these are 
the same question. ‘Two airplanes at terminal A and three airplanes at 
terminal B’ is  synonymous  with ‘three airplanes at terminal B and two 
airplanes at terminal A’. That is why addition is commutative. A similar 
observation applies to Associativity. 
 Why is multiplication commutative? The following diagram illustrates 
the meaning of 2 × 3 and 3 × 2: 












 The left part of the picture illustrates 2 × 3, as it contains two rows of 
three circles . The right part of the diagram, in turn, illustrates 3 × 2, 
using the same representational conventions. Notice that the right hand 

124 Approaching Infinity
picture is just the same as the left one, rotated ninety degrees. You can 
see that a similar diagram could be created for  n ×  m , for any natural 
numbers  n and  m . And you can see that the point applies not just to 
circles but to any objects, as the circles can be taken merely as symbols 
for any objects (including non-spatial objects). That is how we know 
that multiplication is commutative. 
 A similar diagram (in three dimensions) can be used to illustrate 
Associativity; the generalization is obvious. 
 Why does the Distributive Law hold, that is,  a ( b +  c ) =  ab  +  ac ? Again, 
a diagram: 














+
+
 Each row represents 3 + 4, and there are two rows, so that shows 
2(3 + 4). Now, here is a representation of 2 × 3 + 2 × 4: 














⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
+ ⎡
⎣⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦⎥
⎤
⎦
 On the left are two rows of three, and on the right two rows of four, so 
we have two times three, plus two times four. But this is the same as the 
previous diagram, except with brackets and plus symbols rearranged. 
The brackets and plus symbols are extraneous; they are just there to 
direct your attention. You can see now that this sort of illustration could 
be made for any other three numbers besides 2, 3, and 4. This is why 
Distribution holds. 
 Now, to get to the philosophical point. I am not trying to convince you 
of the truth of the laws of arithmetic, as I presume you already believe 
them. I am trying to convince you that we don’t need any complex set 
theoretic derivations, or any other abstruse reasoning, to explain our 
knowledge of these principles of arithmetic. Nor are they arbitrary rules 
that mathematicians just made up. The laws of arithmetic are simple, 
necessary truths, which when seen in the right light, are self-evident.  
 9.5  Zero 
 Here is an objection: ‘Zero is the same kind of thing as the (other) natural 
numbers. If the number  n is instantiated by  n things, then the number 

Numbers 125
zero must be instantiated by zero things. But there cannot be a property 
that, when it is instantiated, is instantiated by zero things. So zero is not 
a property. So the natural numbers are not properties.’ 
 Reply: zero is not the same kind of thing as one, two, three, and so on. 
In the original, core sense of the term ‘number’, zero is not a number. 
We can christen zero as a number, but this is an  extension  of the concept 
‘number’. Because it is an extension of the concept, we should not be 
surprised that the ‘number’ zero differs in important ways from the orig-
inal numbers. 
 Why is zero not a number in the original sense? Because a number, in 
the primary sense, is a property that objects can have, whereas zero is 
not a property that objects can have. This remains plausible in ordinary 
language: if I have zero cookies, I should not say, ‘I have a number of 
cookies’; I should say ‘I do not have any cookies.’ It is no coincidence 
that the concept of zero has a quite different history from that of the 
positive integers, having started life as a mere placeholder – something 
like a punctuation mark used to indicate that a certain position was 
unoccupied. 7 
 Again, we find an objection in Frege: A cardinal number is an answer 
to a ‘how many?’ question. The answer to ‘How many cookies do you 
have?’ might be ‘Zero’. Therefore, zero is a number. 8 
 To borrow from Husserl’s reply: The answer to ‘How many cookies 
do you have?’ might be ‘None’. But none isn’t a number.  9 Furthermore, 
the answer ‘none’ means the same as the answer ‘zero’ in this context; 
therefore, zero isn’t a number either. 
 Compare Frege’s argument to the following: ‘A time is an answer to 
a “when” question. Now, the answer to “when are you going to admit 
that set theory is a fantasy?” might be “Never”. Therefore, never is a 
time.’ The conclusion is false; never is not a time. Not all answers to 
‘when’ questions name times; one kind of answer to a ‘when’ ques-
tion is an answer that  denies that there is any time  such as the one being 
asked about. Only a  positive  answer to a ‘when’ question is a time. By 
the same token, we could at most say that any  positive  answer to a ‘how 
many’ question is a number. ‘None’ would be a negative answer. Despite 
 7  On the history of zero, see O’Connor and Robertson 2000.  
 8  Frege 1980, section 44, p. 57. 
 9  Husserl (2003, 137–8) gives this argument, including the diagnosis that only 
a positive answer to ‘how many ... ?’ names a number. Benardete (1964, 32–42) 
also endorses this line. Frege (1972, 333–4) responds unconvincingly. Husserl and 
Benardete also deny that  one is a number, since they think a number must be a 
multiplicity; on that point, I must differ with them. 

126 Approaching Infinity
the surface grammar, the logical form of ‘I have no cookies’ is not the 
same as that of ‘I have two cookies’; the latter ascribes twoness to my 
cookies, whereas the former simply denies that I have cookies. What 
holds of ‘none’ and ‘no’ holds for ‘zero’, since it is synonymous in these 
contexts: all three words, unlike the positive numerical adjectives, are 
used to make  negative statements. 
 Objection: ‘But we can do arithmetical operations using zero. How 
could that be, if zero is not a true number, or not a number in the same 
way that the other numbers are?’ 
 Reply: When we decide to extend the number system by including 
zero, we define arithmetical operations for zero in such a way as to keep 
the whole system coherent. When you don’t have any  A ’s, we decide 
to say ‘there are zero  A ’s’. ‘ a +  b ’, in general, means something like: the 
number of things that there are, when there are  a things, and there 
are also  b additional things. ‘ a + 0’ means: the number of things there 
are, when there are  a things, and there  are not any  additional things. 
Similarly,  a × b , in general, means something like: the number of things 
that there are, when there are  b occurrences of  a things. ‘ a × 0’ means: 
the number of things that there are, when there  aren’t any  occurrences 
of  a things. 
 Famously, there is one case in which we do not define the arithmetical 
operations for zero, namely, the case of division. This is because there is 
no natural extension that makes sense. ‘ a ÷  b ’ means something like: the 
number of instances of  b that would constitute  a things, or: the answer 
to the question, ‘If you divide  a things into equal-sized groups, such 
that each group contains  b things, how many groups would there be?’ 
But then ‘ a ÷ 0’ would mean something like: the number of instances 
of not-having-anything that would constitute having  a things, or: the 
answer to the question, ‘If you divide  a things into equal-sized groups in 
such a way that each group doesn’t contain anything, how many groups 
would there be?’ These things make no sense; that is why division by 
zero is prohibited. 
 You might wonder: if the other numerals, in their noun uses, refer 
to properties, what is the referent of ‘0’ in its noun usage? The answer 
is that the symbol does not require a referent to be meaningful. In the 
same way that the noun ‘nothing’ lacks a referent, ‘zero’ lacks a referent. 
Expressions that contain ‘0’ are to be understood as described above, for 
example, as in the above explanation of ‘ a + 0’. When we say ‘there are 
 a things, and there are  not any  additional things’, the expression ‘not 
any’ does not require a referent. 

Numbers 127
 The point here is not to expel zero from the number system. After all, 
the extension of the number system to include zero has proved fruitful. 
The point is simply that ‘zero’ functions differently in some important 
ways from ‘one’, ‘two’, and so on, and that to understand the use of 
‘zero’ does not require positing a property of zeroness. 
 9.6  A digression on large numbers 
 To some, the natural numbers seem too familiar and too  effable  to be 
interesting. But some natural numbers are ineffable. 
 Let me tell you about my favorite natural number. It is too large to 
write its conventional representation in this book. In fact, even in scien-
tific notation, there isn’t enough material in the observable universe to 
write this number. To tell you what it is, I have to introduce some new 
terminology. 
 Multiplication is repeated addition:  a ×  b is the result of adding  a to 
itself repeatedly, with  b occurrences of  a . Exponentiation, by the same 
token, is repeated multiplication. So 3 3 = 3 × 3 × 3 = (3 + 3 + 3) + (3 + 3 + 3) 
+ (3 + 3 + 3). Exponentiation suffices for expressing even the largest 
numbers that scientists have occasion to discuss. For example, there are 
about 10 80 atoms in the observable universe; it was easy to write that 
using exponentiation. 10 
 Now we can define another operation known as ‘tetration’, symbol-
ized by ‘

’, to represent repeated exponentiation.  11 So 3

2 is 3 3 , which 
is 27, and 3

3 would be 3
3
7 625 597 484 987
3
2
3 7
3
=
3
,
,
625
,
,
484
. Then 3

4 is 
3 7,625,597,484,987 , which I can’t show you in conventional decimal nota-
tion, because my publisher won’t pay for the 1.8 billion pages of type 
that would be required to write it down.  12 When we get to 3↑↑5, we’re at 
a number too large to be written in decimal notation using the resources 
of the observable universe. 
 After that, there is the operation of pentation (symbolized by ‘


’), 
which is repeated tetration. These operations are just the start of an infi-
nite series of mathematical operations: 
 10  Villanueva 2009. 
 11  The notation, known as ‘Knuth up-arrow notation’, derives from Knuth 
(1976, 1235–6). Knuth represents exponentiation with a single arrow, ‘↑’. 
 12  It’s about ten to the 3.6 trillionth power, so the number would have 3.6 tril-
lion digits. Assuming about 2000 characters per page, I’d need 1.8 billion pages. 
With extra small type, we might be able to get by with only 200 million pages; 
the publisher still wouldn’t go for it. Note that exponentiation, tetration, and the 
like, are right-associative, so for example, 333
 is read as 3
3
(
)
33 , not (
)
3 3) . 

128 Approaching Infinity
 First operation: 
 a + b 
 Second operation:  a ×  b 
 Third operation:  a  b  
 Fourth operation:  a 

 b 
 Fifth operation: 
 a 


 b 
      ⁝ 
 Now let’s define a new operation, which I will represent ‘✳’. ✳ n is 
the result of applying the  n th operation in that list to the number  n 
with itself, with  n repetitions of  n . Thus, here are some numbers we 
can refer to using this notation, along with their conventional decimal 
representations: 
 ✳1 = 1 
 ✳2 = 2×2 = 4 
 ✳3 = 333 = 7,625,597,484,987. 
 ✳4 = 4

4

4

4 = (uncomputable) 
      ⁝ 
 Now, the ✳ operation is iterable: for example, ✳✳8 is the number 
that results from applying the ✳ operation to the number ✳8, that is, 
applying the ✳8th operation in that list repeatedly to the number ✳8, 
with ✳8 repetitions. Let us use the expression ‘✳  n  k ’ to denote the result 
of prefixing  n occurrences of the ✳ operator to the number  k . 
 Finally, my new favorite number: ✳ ✳8 8. I suspect that it is the largest 
finite number ever referred to. Of course, it would now be easy to name 
much larger numbers, but I don’t like any of them as much, so I will 
refrain from identifying any of them. 
 Now, you may think that ✳ ✳8 8 is a freakish number, and indeed I 
know of no use for such a number other than making points about 
incomprehensibly large numbers. But in a purely statistical sense, ✳ ✳8 8 
is not freakishly  large ; it is, rather, freakishly small. For remember, there 
are infinitely many natural numbers. So in particular, there are infinitely 
many that are larger than ✳ ✳8 8, and only finitely many that are smaller. 
We might say: to a first approximation, all numbers are larger than ✳ ✳8 8. 
If God were to pick a natural number at random, he would, with prob-
ability 1, pick one larger than ✳ ✳8 8. 13 ✳ ✳8 8 is also unusual in another 
 13  This is assuming, falsely, that it makes sense to speak of picking a natural number 
at random. But though this doesn’t really make sense, it illustrates the point.  

Numbers 129
respect (besides its smallness): namely, that it can be expressed using 
an existing human symbol system (albeit one just recently invented). 
In the same way that a googleplex (
)
10100  is too large to express using 
decimal notation (given our physical constraints), and ✳5 is too large to 
express using exponential notation, there are infinitely many numbers 
that remain too large to express even using the ‘✳’ notation, because the 
number of ‘✳’’s that would be required is too large to fit in the observ-
able universe. Even among the numbers less than ✳ ✳8 8, almost all of 
them remain in practice inexpressible. ✳ ✳8 8 is expressible only because 
it happens to result neatly from applying certain mathematical opera-
tions that we can independently grasp, a small number of times. But, for 
example, between ✳ ✳8 7 and ✳ ✳8 8, there are very many numbers, almost 
all of which no one will ever be able to name, because they cannot 
be obtained by applying any defined operations a sufficiently small 
number of times. To a first approximation, all the natural numbers are 
both incomprehensible and unnameable. 
 9.7  Magnitudes and real numbers 
 9.7.1   Magnitudes vs. numbers 
 Magnitudes are a fundamental and pervasive feature of the world. The 
concept of magnitude is probably undefinable, but here are some exam-
ples: the height of the Eiffel Tower, the temperature of a cup of coffee, 
the mass of the Milky Way Galaxy. Just as cardinal numbers are proper-
ties, it is even clearer that magnitudes are properties, typically properties 
of concrete objects. The height of the Eiffel Tower is a property of the 
Eiffel Tower, the mass of the Milky Way is a property of the Milky Way, 
and so on. 
 ‘Magnitude’ is ambiguous between a sense that refers to a  dimen-
sion of a certain kind (as in ‘Length is a magnitude’) and a sense that 
refers to a  particular value on such a dimension (as in ‘The height of the 
Eiffel Tower is a magnitude’). In most cases, context makes clear which 
sense is intended. If clarification is needed, I shall speak of ‘magnitude 
dimensions’ or ‘magnitude values’; for instance, height is a magnitude 
dimension, while the height of the Eiffel Tower (324 meters) is a magni-
tude value. 
 Magnitude values are represented using real numbers. The magni-
tudes, however, are not themselves numbers. Here, a Fregean-style 
argument against numbers as properties of concrete objects applies, 
and this time the argument succeeds. The Eiffel Tower is approximately 

130 Approaching Infinity
324 meters tall, which is to say about 1063 feet tall. If the height of the 
Tower is a number, which one is it? Is it around 324, or around 1063? 
Different units of height could be used to justify assigning any positive 
real number whatsoever to represent the height of this same Tower. But 
if numbers are properties, then different numbers would presumably 
be incompatible properties; the same object could not instantiate two 
of them, let alone  all of them (above zero) at the same time. Therefore, 
the number that we use to represent the height of the Tower is not a 
property of the tower. But the height is a property of the tower. So the 
height is not a number. 
 9.7.2  Real numbers as relationships 
 What, then, is a real number? Earlier, I briefly mentioned a way of 
constructing real numbers from sets; it involves infinite sets of rational 
numbers, with the rational numbers themselves being infinite sets of 
ordered pairs of natural numbers. That is a very unworldly and, to me, 
unnatural approach. Here is a different approach: start with how we use 
real numbers to describe the world. We say that the Eiffel Tower is 324 
meters tall. What is ‘324’ doing there; what role is it playing in the truth-
conditions of that statement? 
 The answer is that the ‘324’ records a  relationship  between the height 
of the Tower and a  unit , the unit in this case being ‘the meter’. The meter 
used to be defined as the distance between a certain pair of marks to be 
found on the Prototype Meter, which was a particular platinum-iridium 
rod located in Sèvres, France. (Today, the meter is defined in terms of the 
speed of light, but let’s stick with the Prototype Meter for simplicity.) 
 The metaphysical background is that magnitude values come in classes 
that are comparable to each other. Every length is comparable to every 
other length, in the sense that for any two lengths, the first is greater 
than, less than, or equal to the other. Similarly, every temperature is 
greater than, less than, or equal to every other temperature. But lengths 
are not comparable to temperatures – the Eiffel tower is not taller than it 
is hot, nor shorter than it is hot, nor yet equally tall as it is hot. 
 When a magnitude is greater than another magnitude, this greater-
ness comes in degrees. The Eiffel Tower and the Burj Khalifa are both 
taller than my house, but the Burj Khalifa is  much more  taller than my 
house than the Eiffel Tower is. The degree to which the Eiffel Tower’s 
height exceeds that of my house is a relationship between the Tower 
and the house. 
 Similarly, the Eiffel Tower’s height stands in a certain relationship to 
the length of the Prototype Meter – the ‘324-times-greater’ relationship. 

Numbers 131
That relationship is what the number 324 is. The relationship is a 
universal, since other pairs of magnitudes can be related in that way. 
The relata are also universals, since other objects could have the same 
height the Eiffel Tower has, and other objects could have the length 
the standard meter has. On the other hand, the Eiffel Tower’s height is 
related in a different way to the unit ‘foot’, which is another universal, 
from how it is related to the unit ‘meter’. It is related to the foot in the 
‘1063-times-greater’ way. That is why both numbers, 324 and 1063, can 
be used to represent the Tower’s height. 
 9.7.3   In defense of the bifurcated account of number 
 In the real world, nothing’s length is ever a whole number of meters, 
unless it is so by definition (for example, the Prototype Meter is precisely 
one meter long, but only because this is true by definition). The Eiffel 
Tower is not  exactly 324 meters tall. Nevertheless, it  could have been 
exactly that tall, that is, this is metaphysically possible. This possibility 
raises the following objection: ‘324 is a real number, since an object 
could be exactly 324 times as long as the standard meter. 324 is also a 
natural number. But on your account, a natural number is a  property , 
whereas a real number is a  relationship . How can the same thing be both 
a property and a relationship?’ 
 Reply: It turns out that there are two numbers 324: the cardinal number 
and the real number. The cardinal number 324 is the property that is 
instantiated by any 324 things. The real number 324 is the relationship 
that almost holds between the Eiffel Tower and the standard meter. In 
the possible world where the Eiffel Tower was  exactly  324 meters tall, it 
would be the real number 324, not the cardinal number, that applied to 
the Tower’s height. Note incidentally that, on the set-theoretic construal 
of numbers, it is also true that there are two distinct 324’s: the natural 
number 324 is supposed to be the set of all 324-membered sets, while 
the real number is a pair of infinite sets of rational numbers. 
 Now you might wonder: why not take a uniform view of cardinal 
numbers and real numbers? There are two natural ways of doing this:
( i ) First, we could say that natural numbers are relationships, just as 
real numbers are. We could address Frege’s deck-of-cards problem by 
saying that the same physical aggregate is differently related to two 
different units: it bears the ‘52-fold’ relationship to the unit ‘card’, 
while bearing the ‘one-fold’ relationship to the unit ‘deck’. 
 
  I once held this view. But here is why the ‘relationship’ theory is 
inferior to the ‘property’ theory of cardinal numbers. The relationship 

132 Approaching Infinity
theory requires that there be an object to be the first relatum, that 
is, the thing that is supposed to stand in a relationship to a unit. In 
the deck-of-cards example, this is no problem: the first relatum is 
the deck, or the aggregate of the cards. But what about this case: I’m 
thinking of two things: Beethoven’s Ninth Symphony, and my cat. 
What exactly is related to what in the ‘two-fold’ manner? Perhaps 
the unit in question is ‘thing’. What is the object that stands in a 
relationship to that unit – the object that is composed of Beethoven’s 
Ninth Symphony and the cat? It is quite doubtful that there is any 
such object. 
 
  Another case: suppose there are seven reasons for being suspicious 
of set theory. Then on the relationship account, there is something 
that is related in the ‘seven-fold’ way to the unit ‘reason for being 
suspicious of set theory’. But is there such an object, an object that 
has each of the seven reasons as  parts ? 
 
  We could avoid these problems by invoking the idea of irreducibly 
plural subjects of a proposition, but once we do that, it seems that 
we don’t need to posit a relationship to explain number; a property 
with plural subjects will do. 
 ( ii ) Alternately, we could say that real numbers are properties in the 
same way that natural numbers are. Perhaps the height of the Eiffel 
Tower in meters should be construed as the  number of meter-long 
segments that make up the tower’s height. 
 
  But how would one accommodate this case: the temperature of 
my coffee is 325 degrees Kelvin. Are we to say that this means there 
are 325 of something in the coffee? Or this case: I put my thumb on 
a scale and exert 5 pounds of force. The ‘number as property’ theory 
would seem to require there to be five subjects of this proposition, 
which collectively instantiate fiveness. Presumably, it would have to 
be five acts of exerting one pound of force. But there aren’t any such 
things; there is only the one force. 
 
  The theory seems adequate to the Eiffel Tower example because 
the Eiffel Tower can be divided into separate parts, each with its own 
height, where these heights add up. But the five-pound force doesn’t 
contain five one-pound parts, nor does the coffee contain 325 one-
degree-Kelvin parts. 
 9.7.4  Measures and magnitudes 
 Above, I suggested that the notion of a magnitude is undefinable. There 
is a branch of mathematics known as measure theory, which studies 

Numbers 133
‘measures’. Because measure theory might be thought to provide insight 
into the nature of magnitudes, I briefly discuss it here. 
 Suppose there is a set  S (it doesn’t matter what its members are). And 
suppose there is a function,  m , from subsets of  S to numbers (where 
‘infinity’ counts as a number), and that  m satisfies the following 
conditions:
     i .   It is nonnegative, that is, the values it assigns to subsets are always 
either zero, some positive real number, or infinity. 
    ii .    It assigns to the empty set the value 0. 
 iii .    It is additive, that is: if  S 1 ,  S 2 , ... are non-overlapping subsets of  S , and 
 S  i  is the set formed by combining  S 1 ,  S 2 , ... (taking all the members 
from all those subsets), then  m ( S  i  ) =  m ( S 1 ) +  m ( S 2 ) + ... .  
 In that case,  m is referred to as a ‘measure’ on the set  S . 14 This captures 
the minimal requirements of a function that could be construed as 
telling us the sizes of the subsets of  S . 
 Example: suppose we have an infinitely long line. We can divide it 
into various segments. We might say one segment is two meters long, 
another 6.7 meters long, and so on. Our concept of length-in-meters 
provides a  measure in the above defined sense:  S would be the set of 
points on the line.  m is the function that assigns to (the set of points 
making up) each portion of the line the length in meters of that portion. 
For example, for the two-meter segment,  m assigns the number 2 to the 
set of points in that segment.  m doesn’t assign a negative number to 
anything, because no part of the line has a negative length.  m assigns 
to the empty set the number zero, because intuitively, if you take no 
points at all, then you have zero length. Illustrating additivity, if you 
have a 2-meter segment and a non-overlapping 6.7-meter segment,  m 
will assign to the combined segment (that is, the set of all the points in 
either segment) the number 6.7 + 2 = 8.7. The set of all the points on the 
line will naturally be assigned the ‘number’ infinity, because the line is 
infinitely long. 
 How might the notion of a measure shed light on the concept of a 
magnitude? Perhaps we could define a magnitude simply as a value 
 14  Additional conditions:  m need not be defined (that is, it need not assign a 
value) for  every subset of  S . However,  m must be defined for at least one of the 
subsets of  S , and for every pair of subsets for which  m is defined,  m should also 
be defined for their intersection, their union, and their difference. Furthermore, 
for any countable collection of subsets for which  m is defined,  m should also be 
defined for their intersection. See Cortzen and Weisstein 2015.  

134 Approaching Infinity
assigned by a measure, in the mathematical sense of ‘measure’. This would 
involve rejecting my above account, since this approach assumes that real 
numbers can be understood prior to understanding magnitudes, and it 
also rejects the distinction between magnitudes and the real numbers used 
to represent them.  15 Of course, the standard definition of measure also 
makes liberal use of sets, about which I have expressed some skepticism. 
 Two reasons why this approach is wrong: First, the mathematical 
notion of a measure is much too weak to capture that of a magnitude. 
Consider the function, defined on the set of all sets of points in three-di-
mensional space, which assigns 0 to the empty set, and which assigns to 
any other set of points the value ∞. That is a measure in good standing 
in the mathematical sense. But there is no corresponding magnitude 
dimension. It is not true, for example, that a single geometric point has 
an infinite magnitude, just because some mathematical function arbi-
trarily assigns it the value ‘∞’. Similarly, there are infinitely many more 
measures that fail to correspond to any magnitude. 
 Second, only some magnitude dimensions have measures in the 
mathematical sense. Consider the temperature of a cup of coffee. The 
left half of the cup might be 325 Kelvin, and the right half likewise 325 
Kelvin, but the whole is not 650 Kelvin. Temperature thus violates the 
additivity condition. 
 9.7.5   Intensive vs. extensive magnitudes 
 As the preceding example illustrates, there are different kinds of magni-
tudes.  Extensive magnitudes are those that are additive across the parts 
of an object. That is, if  E is an extensive magnitude dimension, then if  E 
applies to some object and the object can be decomposed into some non-
overlapping parts, then the magnitude values of all of these parts will 
contribute additively to the magnitude value of the whole.  16 For example, 
length is an extensive magnitude. If you have a line segment, and you 
divide it into a left half and a right half, the length of the left half plus 
 15  The latter problem could doubtless be fixed. Perhaps we could identify a 
magnitude with a set of ordered pairs, where the first member of each pair is a 
measure, and the second member is the value that that measure assigns to the 
thing whose magnitude we are considering. 
 16  I have deliberately described extensive magnitudes in this way so as to allow 
the possibility of treating mass as extensive, despite what is said about it below in 
the text. I prefer, however, to avoid having to classify mass. For more discussion 
of the nature of extensive magnitudes and the possibility of infinite extensive 
magnitudes, see Oppy 2006, pp. 137–41. 

Numbers 135
the length of the right half will equal the length of the whole segment. 
Similarly for volume: if you add together the volumes of a number of 
(non-overlapping) regions of space, you get the volume of the combined 
region. Similarly for duration: if you add together the durations of some 
non-overlapping time intervals, then you get their combined duration. 
 Intensive magnitudes, by contrast, are magnitudes that do not arise 
from adding together the magnitudes of the parts of an object, even when 
the object is decomposable into non-overlapping parts. For example, the 
temperature of the left half of my cup of coffee plus the temperature of 
the right half does not equal the temperature of the whole cup of coffee. 
Other intensive magnitude dimensions include the pitch and loudness 
of sounds, pressure, matter density (the mass per unit volume in some 
region), and brightness of colors. 17 
 There may be ambiguous cases. Consider the property of mass. We 
generally think of the mass of an object as the sum of the masses of its 
non-overlapping parts. For instance, my mass is the sum of the masses 
of the molecules that compose me. However, in chemistry, it is known 
that part of the mass of a molecule is contributed by its potential energy, 
and the potential energy does not belong to any particular part of the 
molecule but instead arises from the  configuration  of the parts. So the 
mass of the molecule is not exactly equal to the sum of the masses of 
its component atoms. However, mass is certainly closer to typical exam-
ples of extensive magnitudes than it is to typical examples of intensive 
magnitudes, since the mass of the molecule is the sum of the masses 
of its component molecules  and the mass contributed by the potential 
energy. It would therefore be strange to call mass an intensive magnitude. 
Perhaps it were better styled an approximately extensive magnitude. 
 One other addendum: it may be that the intensive/extensive distinc-
tion applies only to  natural  magnitudes. I discuss this notion in the 
following subsection. 
 9.7.6   Natural vs. artificial magnitudes 
 Consider the (alleged) magnitude, ‘schmass’, where the schmass of an object 
is defined to be the reciprocal of 3 minus the object’s mass in kilograms:  
 s
m
=
−
1
3
 
 17  Aside: brightness and saturation of color are magnitudes, but it is doubtful 
that hue should be considered a magnitude. One shade may be twice as bright or 
saturated as another, but not twice as hued. 

136 Approaching Infinity
 For example, when an object has a mass of 5 kg, it has a schmass of 
−½ kg −1 . 
 This seems to me, in some sense, not a genuine example of a magni-
tude. It is not really part of the object’s nature; it is just a number that 
one can obtain by performing an arbitrarily chosen series of arithmetical 
operations on (the number representing) the object’s mass, which is the 
only real magnitude involved in the story. However, I will soften that a 
bit and simply call schmass an ‘artificial’ magnitude, in contrast to the 
‘natural’ magnitudes that objects instantiate, such as their mass, height, 
temperature, and so on. 
 As a first approximation, I will take causal efficacy as the test of natu-
ralness. An object’s schmass does not causally explain any aspect of its 
behavior, so we can infer that schmass is an artificial magnitude. But an 
object’s mass, temperature, height, and so on are each causally effica-
cious in a variety of circumstances. 18 
 Causal efficacy is not identical with naturalness. There  could be a 
magnitude that is a genuine aspect of an object’s nature but yet has no 
effect on anything else (that is, it is epiphenomenal) – this is neither 
conceptually nor metaphysically impossible. However, I know of no 
examples of such magnitudes, and I think there is no reason for believing 
that there are any. On the other hand, I do not believe that an artificial 
magnitude  could be causally efficacious. However, I leave open the possi-
bility that naturalness might be relative to a set of causal laws, such that 
a magnitude that is artificial in one possible world might be natural in 
a world where the causal laws were different. (I do not claim that this is 
possible; I merely refrain from taking a stand here, since I don’t want to 
argue about whether it is possible.) 
 The distinction between natural and artificial magnitudes is not to be 
confused with that between  fundamental  and  derived  magnitudes. For 
example, mass density can be calculated in terms of other magnitudes 
(density = mass per unit volume) that might be regarded as more funda-
mental. In that sense, it is a derivative magnitude; density, however, 
can most certainly be causally efficacious. For example, the density of 
a sample of fissile material influences whether the material sustains a 
nuclear chain reaction (critical mass depends on density). So there is 
 18  Note: if a given magnitude value is (or would be)  ever  causally efficacious, 
then the magnitude value is natural. I phrase the criterion in terms of magnitude 
values rather than dimensions to avoid the problem of artificially constructed 
‘magnitude dimensions’ – for example, there might be an artificial ‘dimen-
sion’ some of whose values are masses and some of whose values are instead 
schmasses. 

Numbers 137
no difficulty in having a natural magnitude definable in terms of other 
magnitudes. What is wrong with schmass is not that it can be calculated 
from, or is definable in terms of, mass. What is wrong with schmass is 
that it is just a made up magnitude that doesn’t affect anything.  
 9.8  Indexing uses of numbers 
 Sometimes, number words are used in a manner that does not reflect 
the nature of numbers as I have explained them earlier. Thus, suppose 
you are in a hotel, in room 210. What is the number 210 doing there? Is 
it functioning as a cardinal number, thus indicating that there are 210 
of something; or a real number, indicating that something is 210 times 
greater than some unit? 
 Of course, the answer is neither. There needn’t be 210 rooms in the 
hotel, for example, for the hotel to have a room 210, nor need there be 
210 of anything else relevant, nor need any relevant magnitude be 210 
times greater than anything. In this case, ‘210’ is simply being used as a 
 name for that room. It would have been just as good to call it ‘room 2H’, 
or ‘room Sally’. 
 That was a pretty clear case of a number term being used in a way that 
does not really refer to a number. Some cases are a little more ambig-
uous. Suppose the date is 10 July. What is ‘10’ doing there? One might 
say again that ‘10’ is simply being used as (part of) a name for that 
particular day, just as in the case of ‘room 210’. Or one could say that it 
is actually the cardinal number 10, indicating that ten days have passed 
since the end of June. (But then, when fifty days have passed, why may 
one not say that the date is the 50th?) Thus, to find out how many days 
later the 20th is than the 10th, one can subtract 10 from 20. I won’t here 
try to resolve what the best interpretation is. What matters is just to see 
that there are cases shading from clearly using numerals as mere names, 
to using numerals in somewhat name-like and somewhat number-like 
ways, to using numerals to clearly refer to numbers. 
 There are artificial uses of real number expressions as well. Thus, 
consider the Celsius temperature scale. If an object has a tempera-
ture of 10 ºC, this does not mean that it is ten times hotter than an 
object that is only 1 ºC. If an object is 0 ºC, this does not indicate a 
complete absence of heat (or anything else). Nor, finally, does a nega-
tive temperature indicate the presence of some sort of anti-heat that 
would cancel out an equivalent quantity of heat (nor does it indicate an 
opposite of any other quantity). Celsius temperatures do, however, indi-
cate some genuine quantitative facts. For example, if three objects have 

138 Approaching Infinity
temperatures of 0 ºC, 10 ºC, and 20 ºC, then one can infer that the first 
and second differ in temperature just as much as the second and third. 
 On the other hand, in the  Kelvin temperature scale, ‘0’ really does 
indicate a complete absence of heat, an object at 10 K is ten times hotter 
than one at 1 K, and there are no negative temperatures because there 
is no anti-heat. 19 
 So one way to view the Celsius scale is that it is an artificial way of 
measuring temperature, which is a natural magnitude. Another way to 
view it is that there are two magnitudes (or ‘magnitudes’): temperature 
is a natural magnitude, which can be measured in degrees Kelvin. Then 
there is the artificial magnitude, ‘temperature − 273.15’, which is what 
the Celsius scale measures (0 ºC = 273.15 K). Note that, when tempera-
ture figures in laws of nature, as in the Ideal Gas Law, it is temperature in 
some absolute scale (that is, a scale in which ‘0’ refers to absolute zero, as 
in the Kelvin scale) that must be used. This coheres with the observation 
that only natural magnitudes have causal efficacy. 
 A similar case is that of longitude. Differences in longitude numbers 
represent genuine quantitative differences. However, ‘0º’ is a mere name 
for a certain meridian, rather than a genuine number term; the ‘0’ does 
not, for example, indicate that some quantity is completely absent. 
 This is what I refer to as an  indexing use of numbers. In an indexing 
use, some number is used as a name for a more or less arbitrary item or 
value, but then other numbers are assigned to other items or values, 
according to genuine quantitative relationships to the first item or 
value. Thus, the Prime Meridian is arbitrarily named ‘0º’, but then other 
latitude numbers indicate amounts of angular deviation from the Prime 
Meridian. 
 9.9  Other numbers 
 This section is a digression. Nevertheless, it may be of interest to discuss 
how I would construe certain other kinds of numbers, given my philo-
sophical approach to mathematics, which I describe as a sort of ‘worldly 
Platonism’. By that, I mean that although I regard mathematical objects 
as perfectly real, non-physical, and independent of human observers, 
I also believe that the best way of understanding the nature of a 
 19  Here I speak of temperature as understood in terms of the mean kinetic 
energy of molecules. In the thermodynamic definition of temperature, where 
 T =  ∂E / ∂S , negative temperatures become possible (Quantum Munich 2014). For 
discussion, see below, section 10.4.3. 

Numbers 139
mathematical object is to consider its role in helping us understand the 
concrete world. This is because, although a mathematical object need 
not be realized in the concrete world in order to exist as a mathemat-
ical object, it must be in principle  capable  of being concretely realized. 
Moreover, we typically form concepts for the purpose of understanding 
the concrete world. 
 9.9.1  Rational vs. irrational numbers 
 Non-integer rational numbers are the same kind of thing as real numbers: 
2/3, for example, is a relationship between a given aggregate and a unit. 
The rational numbers differ from the irrational numbers only in that 
the rational numbers are more readily expressible in our language (for 
example, rational numbers have either finite or repeating decimal expan-
sions, whereas irrational numbers have infinite non-repeating decimal 
expansions) – there is no metaphysical difference between these kinds 
of numbers. Thus, when I say that my gas tank is two thirds full, I am 
reporting a relationship between the volume or mass of the gas in the 
tank and the volume/mass of a full tank (thus, I treat the full tank as the 
unit of measure). When I say the pie is two thirds gone, I am reporting 
the quantitative relationship between the current size of the remaining 
pie and the original size of the pie before any of it was eaten. Most such 
statements are of course only approximations. 
 9.9.2  Negative numbers 
 On the face of it, the notion of a number less than zero appears inco-
herent, since it is impossible to have less than nothing. If, for example, I 
have no beer at all in my refrigerator, then no one can have less beer in 
their refrigerator than I have. 
 Negative numbers only make sense in certain contexts. Sometimes, 
there are two quantities that are related as opposites, such that the 
combination of the two quantities is, at least for some purposes, equiva-
lent to the absence of both. For example, if the bank wants to evaluate 
your suitability to take a loan, it may make sense for them to calcu-
late a number called your ‘net worth’ by subtracting your debts from 
your assets, thus treating each dollar of debt as canceling out a dollar of 
assets. In this case, a debt can be viewed as a negative asset, or an asset 
as a negative debt. 
 Or suppose that an engineer is analyzing an airplane design to assess 
the ability of the airplane to fly. In this case, it makes sense to calculate 
a number to be called the ‘net lift’ on the airplane in a certain scenario, 
by subtracting the downward forces on the airplane from the upward 

140 Approaching Infinity
forces, thus treating each pound of downward force as canceling out a 
pound of upward force. The airplane will then climb only if this number 
is positive. Alternately, we could treat downward forces as positive and 
upward forces as negative; in that case, the airplane climbs if and only if 
the net force is negative. 
 A negative number, then, simply represents a magnitude that is the 
opposite of some other magnitude we have chosen to regard as positive. 
Negative values only make sense for some quantities and in some contexts, 
because there are only some cases in which a quantity has an opposite.  
 9.9.3  Imaginary numbers 
 Students are often taught that there is a special number called an ‘imagi-
nary number’, symbolized ‘ i ’, which is the square root of negative one, 
that is, it is the solution to the equation ‘ x 2 = −1’. A complex number is 
then understood as a number of the form  a + bi , where  a and  b are any 
two real numbers. 
 Many find complex numbers puzzling, because it seems that there 
simply is no number that when multiplied by itself yields negative 
one. One cannot conjure such a number into existence just by fiat, as 
the standard approach seems to suppose. Trying to solve the equation 
‘ x 2 = −1’ by inventing a new number is like trying to solve the equation 
‘ x + 1 =  x ’ by inventing a new number,  q , defined to be the number that 
is one greater than itself. 
 Nevertheless, there is an acceptable substitute for the notion of −1. 
Instead of thinking of a complex number as the result of adding a real 
number to the product of a real number and the square root of negative 
one, we can simply think of a complex number as  an ordered pair of real 
numbers . 20 Now, ordinary addition and multiplication are operations on 
numbers, not pairs of numbers, so we will need to define special senses 
of ‘addition’ and ‘multiplication’ for pairs. We define them as follows:  
 〈
〉+ 〈
〉= 〈+
+ 〉
〈
〉× 〈
〉= 〈
−
+
〉
c d
c
+
b +
c d
bd ad
,
〉+ 〈c
,
,
〉× 〈c
,
+
 
 where all the occurrences of addition, multiplication, and subtraction 
on the right hand sides of the above equations refer to the ordinary 
 20  This was discovered by the mathematician William Hamilton (1837). A 
generalization of this approach is known as the Cayley-Dickson Construction 
(Baez 2002, 153–6). 

Numbers 141
arithmetic operations on numbers, and the ‘+’ and ‘×’ on the left 
hand sides refer to the new operations of addition and multiplication 
of ordered pairs. This interpretation gives all the same properties of 
complex numbers as the more familiar approach, only without positing 
that −1 has a square root. 
 9.9.4   Infinitesimal numbers 
 An infinitesimal number is a number that is smaller than any positive 
real number but yet greater than zero. One can also think of an infinites-
imal as the result of dividing a finite number by an infinite number. The 
mathematician Abraham Robinson worked out a consistent theory of 
infinitesimals (and infinite numbers), called ‘non-standard analysis’.  21 
 Infinitesimals are sometimes used in explaining concepts of calculus. 
For instance, a derivative may be thought of as the ratio of two infini-
tesimal quantities,  dy / dx , where  dy is the infinitesimal increase in the 
variable  y that would correlate with an infinitesimal increase in  x ,  dx . 
Note that the  standard analysis treats talk of infinitesimals as a mere 
 façon de parler ; the true definition of  dy / dx is given in terms of the limit 
of a certain ratio of (real) numbers, and the point of the standard delta-
epsilon definitions is precisely to eliminate all reference to infinitesimal 
(or infinite) quantities. Robinson’s  non -standard analysis, however, takes 
talk of infinitesimals literally. 
 Infinitesimals may also be invoked to address the paradox of geometric 
points: instead of viewing a line segment as made up of points each with 
a size of zero, we can view a line segment as consisting of infinitely 
many  infinitesimal  points, where the product of an infinite number and 
an infinitesimal number can be a positive real number. 
 A third application of infinitesimals is in probability theory. In cases 
where an event has a continuum of possible outcomes, the standard 
analysis assigns an initial probability of zero to each outcome. For 
example, suppose that a dart is to be thrown at a dartboard. Assume 
that the dart is guaranteed to hit some single geometric point on the 
dartboard, but that where the dart hits will be completely random. For 
any given point, the probability of the dart hitting that specific point is, 
according to the standard analysis, zero. (It must be zero, because if you 
pick any real number greater than zero, then you get a total probability 
 21  Robinson 1966. Robinson’s theory includes infinite numbers along with the 
infinitesimals. Robinson’s infinite numbers are not to be confused with Cantor’s 
infinite cardinalities; Robinson’s infinite numbers would represent infinite  magni-
tudes , just as real numbers represent finite magnitudes. 

142 Approaching Infinity
greater than one.) Some believe that a more intuitive treatment is to say 
that each point has an  infinitesimal probability of being hit. 
 The only problem that I have with all this is that there simply are 
no such numbers. Or, to rephrase my point in a manner that sounds 
slightly less question-begging: I have no clear concept of a number that 
is smaller than every positive real number but more than zero. The real 
numbers, as far as I understand them, go all the way down to zero; they 
fill  all  of the space between, for example, zero and one. For instance, 
there are the numbers 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, and so on, and one can continue 
in that way indefinitely, finding real numbers  as small as you like . I have 
no notion of a degree of smallness such that the real numbers never 
reach it. Indeed, it seems to me self-evident that there is no such degree 
of smallness. 
 The same is true in the direction of largeness: the real numbers get as 
large as you like; I have no notion of a size so big that the real numbers 
never reach it. I thus think Robinson’s infinite numbers are as much a 
fiction as his infinitesimals.  
 

143
 10.1  Infinity is not a number 
 10.1.1  The concept of infinite number 
 Although there are actual instances of infinitude, there are no infinite 
numbers. When, for example, there are infinitely many  A ’s, the  A ’s do 
not instantiate some specially large number; rather, the  A ’s are literally 
 numberless , or  beyond number . 1 
 The concept of an infinite number is that of a number so large that it 
exceeds all the more familiar numbers, the numbers of the sort discussed 
in Chapter 9. Thus, an infinite cardinal number would be a cardinal 
number larger than every natural number. An infinite magnitude would 
be a magnitude too large to be represented by any real number. 
 This, I claim, is an empty concept. It is not that the concept is contra-
dictory; it is simply that we have no clear conception of anything that 
could satisfy it. The real numbers, so to speak,  go all the way up . That is, 
there are real numbers as large as you like; there is no degree of largeness 
that they fail to reach. The same is true of natural numbers. (Think about 
the number ✳ ✳8 8, and remember that almost all the natural numbers are 
 larger than it.) Thus, there cannot be any number greater than all the 
finite numbers. 
 Why do the followers of Cantor hold that there are infinite numbers? 
Because they have a theory of the nature of numbers, which identifies 
natural numbers with a certain sort of set. Once one does this, one can 
go on to notice that there are sets of the same kind as those one identi-
fied with the natural numbers, except that these new sets would have 
to correspond to infinite numbers. Thus, if we identify the number 2 
 10 
 Infinity 
 1  Cf. Wittgenstein 1975, 157, 162. 

144 Approaching Infinity
with the set of all sets such that there is a one-to-one mapping between 
them and the set {0, 1}, it is then natural to ask about the set of all sets 
such that there is a one-to-one mapping between them and the set 
{0, 1, 2, ... }. The latter would appear to have an equally good claim to 
being considered a number, but it would have to be an infinite number. 
 This argument collapses once we reject the set theoretic account of the 
natural numbers. Natural numbers are not sets; they are plurally instanti-
ated properties. On this latter theory, are there infinite cardinal numbers? 
That is, are there properties that are of the same sort as the natural 
numbers, except that they would be larger than every natural number? 
 The property theory alone does not answer this – that is, merely from 
the idea of a cardinal number as a property that requires plural subjects, 
one can make no inference as to whether there is or is not a property 
of that kind that requires infinitely many subjects. The claim that there 
isn’t rests on further intuitions. But the property theory of numbers, 
unlike the set-theoretic account, at least  allows the possibility that there 
are no infinite numbers. 
 Doubtless what I have said so far is insufficiently persuasive. Intuitions 
about the natural numbers and the real numbers ‘going all the way up’ 
are meant to cohere with the arguments that appear in the following 
sections, strengthening them by offering a conceptual explanation of 
the fact that infinity is not a number. 
 10.1.2  The arithmetic of infinity 
 A number is the sort of thing to which arithmetical operations apply. A 
number can be added to another number, multiplied by another number, 
and so on. This is not an accidental or insignificant feature of numbers; it 
is part of the essence of a number. If someone announces, ‘I am thinking 
of a certain number. However, it  does not make sense to talk about adding 
anything to this number’, then I think we should say this person either 
fails to understand what a number is, or fails to understand what addition 
is. If there is a number of objects, how could it not make sense to speak 
of how many objects would result from combining them with another 
number of objects? Or to speak of how many objects would result from 
excluding some number of objects from the original group? 
 But as we have seen earlier, the normal arithmetical operations do not 
apply to infinity. Sometimes, in informal discourse, infinity is treated as 
though arithmetical operations apply to it, in which case the friends of 
infinity will assert such things as 
 ∞ + 1 = ∞. 
(Equation 10.1) 

Infinity 145
 But this attempted equation makes no sense. It says that a certain number 
is one unit larger than itself, or that a certain number is not increased by 
adding to it, either of which is absurd. In addition, if we admit the above 
equation, there seems to be no clear reason why we should not subtract 
∞ from both sides of it, thus obtaining ‘1=0’. 
 Suppose we ban the  subtraction  of infinite numbers but permit addition 
involving infinity. Then we could allow Equation 10.1 while avoiding 
the consequence that 1=0. However, as long as we recognize −∞, we will 
have the same problem over again:
 −∞ + 1 = −∞. 
(Equation 10.2) 
 We ought to be able to add ∞ to both sides of Equation 10.2, again 
obtaining ‘1=0’. The best course seems to be to ban addition and subtrac-
tion of infinity. 
 What about multiplication and division? Most partisans of infinity as 
a number will agree with statements such as: 
 1/∞ = 0. 
(Equation 10.3) 
 2/∞ = 0. 
(Equation 10.4) 
 Combining Equations 10.3 and 10.4, we then learn that 1/∞ = 2/∞, and 
therefore 1=2. Moreover, once we reject addition of infinity, we should 
reject multiplication by infinity on conceptual grounds, since multi-
plication is just repeated addition. It seems that the best course is to 
prohibit multiplication and division by infinity. 
 Now it looks as though infinity does not bear any arithmetical opera-
tions, which strongly suggests that it is not a number. 
 One might say: ‘But there is at least one number for which at least one 
arithmetical operation is proscribed: division by zero makes no sense. 
But we do not conclude that zero is not a number.’ 
 The fact that one cannot divide by zero reflects the fact that zero is, 
in fact, not the same kind of number as the positive integers. The inclu-
sion of zero represents, as we have said (Section 9.5), an  extension  of 
the concept of number. Now, one might ask: why not make a further 
extension so as to include infinity in the number system? But infinity 
is much  more different from the natural numbers than zero is. Infinity 
shrugs off  all  the arithmetical operations. I submit that this makes it too 
unlike the standard numbers for a reasonable extension of the concept 
‘number’ to include it. 

146 Approaching Infinity
 10.1.3  Galileo’s argument 
 Recall Galileo’s paradox from Section 3.5:
    i .   It seems that there are many more natural numbers than perfect 
squares, because the natural numbers include all the perfect squares, 
plus many more numbers besides. But, 
 ii .    it also seems that there must be at least as many perfect squares 
as natural numbers, because every natural number has a distinct 
square. 
 Galileo drew the conclusion that one cannot apply the notions of 
‘greater’, ‘less’, and ‘equal’ to infinities. One cannot say that there are 
more squares than natural numbers, nor fewer, nor yet the same number; 
one can only say that each class is infinite. 
 But how could a number fail to be greater than, less than, or equal to 
another number? Again, this is not an incidental feature of numbers. 
It is essential to a number that it be a determinate size, which must be 
more than, less than, or the same as any other determinate size. The best 
explanation of the fact that ‘the number of perfect squares’ is quantita-
tively incomparable to ‘the number of natural numbers’ is that there are 
no such numbers. 
 Nowadays, this argument is commonly rejected, based on the 
Cantorian criterion for numerical comparisons in terms of one-to-one 
mappings. The followers of Cantor simply accept ( ii ) above (the argu-
ment for why there must be at least as many squares as natural numbers), 
while rejecting or ignoring ( i ) (the argument for why there must be more 
natural numbers than perfect squares). But there is no actual argument 
for rejecting ( i ), other than that ( i ) conflicts with ( ii ) (which is in fact the 
argument that is always cited). This is unsatisfactory, because  both of the 
following are self-evident truths about the greater-than relation:
 A number is made greater when one adds to it. That is, if there are 
1. 
 n things, and more things are added without removing any of the 
original things, the result is that there are more things. 
 If the members of some collection can be paired up with the members of 
2. 
another collection, then neither collection is greater than the other.  
 (2) is no more obvious or essential to the ordinary notion of ‘greater 
than’ than (1) is.  Both are essential. Therefore, if both principles cannot 
be satisfied when we try to apply the notion of ‘greater than’ to infinite 
sets, what that shows is not that one of the above principles is false; 

Infinity 147
what it shows is that ‘greater than’, in the ordinary sense,  does not apply 
to infinite sets. To put the point without reference to sets: if there are 
infinitely many  A ’s and there are infinitely many  B ’s, then there are not 
more  A ’s than  B ’s, nor fewer, nor the same number. And the reason for 
this is that there is no  number of either  A ’s or  B ’s; the  A ’s and the  B ’s are 
beyond number. 
 10.1.4  Back to Aristotle 
 Aristotle’s argument against actual infinities was essentially this (Section 
5.2): any actual thing must be fully determinate, but infinity is no deter-
minate quantity; therefore, no actual quantity can be infinite. 
 We have now seen some reasons for agreeing with Aristotle’s second 
premise, since in fact infinity is no number. But it is not that infinity is 
completely unrelated to number: to say that some collection is infinite 
is surely to comment on its numerousness in some manner, and to say 
that a magnitude is infinite is surely to comment on its size. Anything 
infinite surely exceeds every  finite  thing of its kind, even if it is incom-
parable to another infinite. So how does infinity fall short of being a 
number? 
 Here is an explanation: although infinitude is surely a quantitative 
property, it is not a  determinate  quantity. To call something infinite 
is to say  something about its number or size, but it is not to  assign a 
specific value  to its number or size. Rather, an ascription of infinitude is 
essentially negative: it says, roughly, that any assigned number or size 
is insufficient. Thus, the infinitude of space consists in the fact that any 
assigned size is insufficient to capture the extent of space. 
 Of course, having thus agreed in part with Aristotle, we shall have to 
explain how we avoid his seemingly radical proscriptions on the actual 
infinite. But of that, more later. 
 10.1.5  Is infinity more than three? 
 The thesis that infinity is not a number naturally invites the speculation 
that an infinite thing cannot even be said to be greater than a finite 
thing, because ‘greater’ is a relation that only makes sense when applied 
to numbers. 
 The above discussion (Section 10.1.4), however, hints at the reply to 
this concern. If infinitude simply had  nothing to do  with number – if an 
ascription of infinitude said nothing about size or numerousness – then 
indeed an infinite thing would not thereby be larger than a finite thing. 
But that is not the view suggested here. The view is that infinity is not 
 a specific numerical value  (nor is  0 or any of the other alleged infinite 

148 Approaching Infinity
numbers). An infinite thing may definitely exceed the finite, while 
bearing no determinate quantitative relation to another infinite. 
 More precisely, the infinite may exceed the finite by having  finite parts 
that are greater than any chosen finite object. For example, the whole of 
physical space exceeds any finite region, because for any finite volume 
 V , there is a part of space with a volume larger than  V . The latter part 
need not be infinite; it may simply be a part with a finite volume greater 
than  V . Because there are always larger and larger finite volumes, we can 
say that space is infinite. Again, more of this in a moment.  
 10.2  Infinite cardinalities 
 I have suggested, following Aristotle, that infinity is not a determinate 
quantity (or, more to the point, that no determinate quantity is infi-
nite). Aristotle inferred from this that there can be no actual infini-
ties but only potential infinities. But we have earlier seen that this 
conclusion is untenable; there are many actual examples of infinitude 
(Chapter 5). How can we accept the Aristotelian premise while rejecting 
the Aristotelian conclusion? Should we say that some actual things are 
indeterminate? 
 In fact, we need not say that, because it is possible to describe what 
there is, including the legitimate examples of infinitude, without 
mentioning any infinite quantities. There are certain kinds of infinity 
that can, so to speak, be constructed entirely out of the finite. 
 Thus, begin with the most famous example of the infinite, the infini-
tude of the natural numbers. What does it mean to say that there are infi-
nitely many natural numbers? Here is one account: it means that the set 
of natural numbers has a certain number of members, and this number 
(known as  0 ) is greater than every natural number. That account is defi-
nitely incompatible with the views I have taken in this chapter. 
 Here is another account: it means that for every natural number  n , 
there exist more than  n natural numbers. For example, 100 is a natural 
number. There are more than 100 natural numbers, since there are, for 
example, the natural numbers from 1 to 101 inclusive. Another natural 
number is 1,000. There are also more than 1,000 natural numbers, since 
there are, for example, the ones from 1 to 1,001. Another natural number 
is 1,000,000. Again, there are more than 1,000,000 natural numbers, 
considering those between 1 and 1,000,001. The same holds for every 
natural number you pick. 
 Notice that nowhere in that explanation did I refer to any non-natural 
numbers. At no point did I mention any single number that is greater 

Infinity 149
than every natural number. For each natural number, there is one greater 
than it; but there is no one number that is greater than  all of them. 
 This account, simple though it seems, is an important advance from 
the earlier account referring to the alleged number  0 , because the present 
account enables us to reconcile the Aristotelian  premises  (no determinate 
number is infinite, and all actual things are determinate) with the actual 
infinite. Note that on my view, it is not that the natural numbers are 
merely potentially infinite. There is no suggestion in the above state-
ments about the natural numbers that, for example, some of them don’t 
yet exist and merely have the potential to come into existence. As far as I 
am concerned, every natural number actually exists, and for each one of 
them, there is one larger than it. This makes the natural numbers both 
actual and infinitely numerous. Yet at the same time, we have found no 
need to ascribe to any particular thing an infinite number. 
 In answer to the question, ‘What is the  number  of all the natural 
numbers?’, the answer is that there is no such number. But you might 
ask: ‘Doesn’t this still mean there is something – namely, the set of all 
the natural numbers – that is indeterminate in a certain respect, since it 
has no definite number?’ 
 My reply is that there is no one thing that consists of, or otherwise 
includes, all the natural numbers. There are only the individual numbers, 
each of them a distinct object – and each of  them is perfectly determi-
nate. The objection relies on a  set  to play the role of ‘a many regarded as 
a one’ (to paraphrase Cantor) – the set of all natural numbers would be 
the single thing that includes all the natural numbers and that exempli-
fies indeterminacy. We have already seen the reasons to be skeptical of 
sets, and there is no apparent way to pose the objection without relying 
on something like a set. 
 But suppose you are uncomfortable with my skepticism about set 
theory; you would like to keep sets (or at least remain agnostic about 
them). In that case, what should you say? You should say that the set 
of all natural numbers simply fails to have a number associated with 
it. There is no such thing as the  number of elements it contains, since 
for every number  n , it has a subset with greater than  n elements. Does 
this make the set an example of indeterminacy? It is not obvious that 
it does; if one wants to keep sets, one should deny that this constitutes 
an example of indeterminacy. Not every object need have a position on 
every dimension. For example, what is the mass of Beethoven’s Ninth 
Symphony? It does not have a mass, but this is not an example of meta-
physical indeterminacy. It’s not that the Symphony has indeterminate 
mass; mass just fails to apply to it. Similarly, one might say, it isn’t that 

150 Approaching Infinity
the set of natural numbers has an indeterminate number of elements; 
number just fails to apply to it. How convincing this is I am not sure. 
 My account of the infinitude of the natural numbers generalizes 
straightforwardly to any case of infinite cardinality. Thus, suppose we 
want to discuss the hypothesis that there are infinitely many stars. This 
does not mean that there is a certain number which is the number of all 
the stars and which is greater than every natural number. What it means 
is that for any natural number  n , there exist more than  n stars. There 
needn’t be any one number that applies to  all the stars; there just needs 
to be, for each  n , a number  n + 1 that applies to some  n + 1 stars. 
 10.3  Infinite extensive magnitudes 
 Now consider the second most famous example of the infinite: space. 
One way in which space is said to exemplify infinitude is that it is infi-
nitely divisible: there is no limit to how many times a volume of space 
could be divided in half. This is just an example of infinite cardinality: 
there are infinitely many sub-regions in any given extended spatial 
region. This means that for any natural number  n , and any region  r , 
there is a way of dividing  r into more than  n sub-regions. Notice, inci-
dentally, that the regions I am talking about are not points (nor are 
they anything else with a volume of zero). They are all regions with a 
positive, real volume. There is no limit to how many regions of nonzero 
volume can be found within a given spatial region. 
 The other way in which space is infinite is in its  extent : space stretches 
infinitely far in all directions. One way of thinking about this infinitude 
is to say there is a certain number, ∞, which represents the total volume 
of all space (in, say, liters) and that number is greater than every real 
number. This is precisely the picture I have been concerned to reject in 
this chapter. 
 So here is the other way of understanding the infinite extent of space: 
it means that for any given volume, there exists a region of space larger 
than that volume. For example, 100 liters is a possible volume. And there 
are regions of space larger than 100 liters – for example, there are 101-liter 
regions. Another volume is 1,000 liters. There are also regions of space 
larger than that – for example, 1,001-liter volumes. Another volume is 
1,000,000 liters. There are volumes larger than that. And so on. 
 Notice that, just as in the case of cardinal numbers, we have been able 
to explain this infinitude without at any point mentioning any infi-
nite number or magnitude. Only real numbers are used in the preceding 
paragraph. Nor do I say that there is a region larger than all the other 

Infinity 151
regions; I say only that for any given volume, there is a region larger 
than it. 
 Here one might ask: ‘Yes, but what about space itself – the totality of 
 all  regions. What is  its  volume?’ As in the case of the set of all natural 
numbers, we have two possible replies. On the one hand, we might deny 
the existence of the object about which the question is posed. We might 
say there is no object that is  all of space; there are only particular, finite-
sized regions (but infinitely many of them, to be sure). And there are just 
larger and larger regions, without end; there is no Master Region that 
includes all the others. 
 On the other hand, we could allow that the totality of space exists, but 
hold that it does not have a volume. As in the case of the set of natural 
numbers, the claim would not be that Space is of indeterminate volume. 
The claim would be that volume fails to apply to the totality of Space; 
volume only applies to particular, limited regions of space. 
 Again, I find the second reply dubious (if there were a region that 
includes all the other regions, it  seems  as though the property of volume 
ought to apply to it). So I prefer the first reply: there is no particular 
thing that is Space; there are only finite spatial regions, with no upper 
bound to their size. 
 This view of extensive magnitudes generalizes straightforwardly. What 
does it mean to say that the past is infinite? It means that for any chosen 
temporal interval, there were times further in the past than that. For 
instance, there are times more than 100 years ago, there are times more 
than 1,000 years ago, and so on. To say that the future is infinite is to say 
that for any chosen temporal distance, there will be times further in the 
future than that. To say that the universe has infinite mass (considering 
this as an extensive magnitude) is to say that for any given value of mass, 
there are aggregates with a mass greater than that value (or perhaps: there 
are spatial regions containing more than that amount of mass).  
 10.4  Infinite intensive magnitudes 
 10.4.1  Why there cannot be infinite intensive magnitudes 
 All of this may leave the reader, so far, with the impression that a staunch 
rejection of the notion of infinite numbers leaves us – quite surprisingly 
and contrary to the Aristotelian tradition – perfectly free to embrace all 
manner of actual infinities. 
 Alas, no. The strategy employed with infinite cardinalities and exten-
sive magnitudes cannot be transferred to  intensive magnitudes. The 
strategy is to capture infinitude by appealing to cardinal numbers or 

152 Approaching Infinity
magnitudes that increase without bound. It is essential to this view 
that there is no one thing that is larger than every finite number, that 
there merely are arbitrarily large things – no one cardinal number larger 
than every natural number, but cardinal numbers larger than any  given 
number; no one magnitude larger than every finite magnitude, but 
magnitudes larger than any given magnitude. 
 The strategy fails for intensive magnitudes because there is no infi-
nite series of distinct things with distinct magnitudes. With an inten-
sive magnitude, there is just the single object with its magnitude. For 
instance, suppose we wanted to say that some object has an infinite 
velocity. This is not a matter of there being ever faster finite groups of 
some things. Nor is it a matter of there being some objects with increasing 
finite velocities. Rather, we have to say that this one object has a velocity 
which exceeds all finite velocities. This requires infinity to function as a 
specific quantity – which is precisely the view of infinity I am rejecting. 
Therefore, it is impossible for something to have an infinite velocity. 
 To state the view more generally, we need to make use of the distinc-
tion between natural and artificial magnitudes again. Recall that the 
‘schmass’ of an object is defined to be the reciprocal of three minus the 
object’s mass: 
 s
m
=
−
1
3
 
 When an object’s mass is 3, its schmass is thus 1/0, which we might say 
is infinity. Well, you might object to saying that, but let’s grant that for 
the sake of argument. Schmass also appears to be an intensive magni-
tude according to our earlier definition, since schmasses are not addi-
tive (if  A has a schmass of 1 and  B has a schmass of 1, the aggregate of 
 A and  B has a schmass of −1, not 2). Now suppose we were to say that 
no intensive magnitude – whether artificial or natural – can be infinite. 
On the present assumptions, we would then have to say that no object 
can have infinite schmass, which in turn means that no object can have 
a  mass  of 3 – clearly absurd. Now, we could try to avoid this result by 
saying that when  m =3,  s is merely undefined, rather than being infinite. 
But rather than debating that matter, it is simpler to exclude artificial 
magnitudes like schmass from consideration. Who knows what some 
artificially constructed ‘magnitude’ might do – and who cares? We have 
no need to articulate metaphysical principles concerning that. 
 Thus, our metaphysical principle will be this:  Every natural, intensive 
magnitude must be finite . This idea bears emphasis, since it will be the key 

Infinity 153
to the resolution of most of the paradoxes of the infinite. Aristotle over-
reached in claiming that there can be no actual infinities whatsoever; he 
was thus led into the absurd position of asserting the finitude of space. In 
fact, it is only infinite  intensive  magnitudes that pose a problem, because 
it is only these that resist explanation in terms of finite quantities along 
the lines suggested in Sections 10.2 and 10.3. 
 The ‘must’ in my principle indicates metaphysical necessity. It is 
not, for example, merely that the laws of nature do not permit infinite 
intensive magnitudes. It is that in no possible world, with no possible 
laws, could there be infinite (natural) intensive magnitudes, because the 
idea of an infinite intensive magnitude requires there to be a quantity 
larger than all other possible quantities. In saying that there is no such 
quantity, I do not mean merely that there is no  thing that instantiates 
such a quantity; I mean there isn’t even a possible value for a thing to 
instantiate. The way in which an infinite magnitude value fails to exist 
is like the way in which the largest prime number fails to exist, or (in 
all probability) the first even number that is not the sum of two prime 
numbers. This sort of existence is not a contingent matter. If there is no 
such number, then there could be no such number. 
 10.4.2  Constructing infinite intensive magnitudes from 
finite magnitudes 
 But one might think that there  is after all a way to express a notion of 
infinite intensive magnitude using only concepts of finite magnitudes. 
We need only make use of the infinite divisibility of space. Suppose 
there is a box full of some material which can be divided into infinitely 
many parts, starting from the left side of the box and moving to the 
right. The whole box has a volume of one liter. Suppose the first half of 
the box has a mass of 1 gram; since its volume is half a liter, the density 
is 2 g/L. Suppose the next quarter of the box also has a mass of 1 gram, 
and hence a density of 4 g/L. The next eighth of the box contains 1 gram 
of material again, for a density of 8 g/L, and so on. In saying this, we 
do not ascribe an infinite magnitude to any particular part of the box; 
each particular density in the series is finite. But now what is the density 
of the whole box? It seems that we would have to say it is infinite. This 
seems also to be a natural intensive magnitude. Is this possible? 
 I want to reject this as a possibility. Part of the motivation for rejecting 
this alleged possibility is that it seems to fit in with the kinds of infinity 
that generated paradoxes in Chapter 3, and not with the kinds of infinity 
that we find in reality (per Chapter 5). It seems that the infinities that 
we have antecedent reason to believe in are all of cardinal numbers or 

154 Approaching Infinity
extensive magnitudes, while the infinities that generate problems are all 
of intensive magnitudes (of this, more in Chapter 12). If we allow infi-
nite intensive magnitudes as described in the preceding paragraph, it is 
unclear what restriction we might place on infinities to avoid paradoxes. 
My theory, then, is that infinite natural intensive magnitudes are impos-
sible, including the one described in the preceding paragraph. 
 But now, what is the conceptual difference between the infinite density 
of that example, which I reject, and the infinite extensive magnitudes 
and cardinal numbers that I have accepted in Sections 10.2 and 10.3? 
My claim is, very roughly, that a natural intensive magnitude cannot be 
infinite because there is no such number as infinity (compare this idea: 
an object cannot have imaginary mass because there is no square root 
of −1). Why does this not also mean that the series of natural numbers 
must be finite, and that space must have finite extent, since otherwise 
an infinite number would apply to these things? 
 In the case of the natural number series, I said that one can avoid 
positing an infinite number in one of two ways: (a) one can deny that 
there is such a thing as  the set of all natural numbers , or (b) one can 
accept that this set exists but deny that any cardinal number applies to 
it. In the case of space, I suggested that one can avoid countenancing an 
infinite number by either (a) denying that there is such a thing as the 
totality of all space, or (b) holding that this totality lacks a volume. In 
each case, my preferred approach would be (a). 
 The density case differs in that these sorts of reply are simply much 
less plausible for the density example than for the natural number or 
space examples. If there were a series of spatial regions having the densi-
ties described in the example, it would be very implausible to claim that 
there  did not exist  a region containing all of them – what sort of view 
would license that claim? The view that even finite regions don’t exist? 
 It would also be implausible to hold that the box exists but lacks a 
density. This would be implausible, because some physical effects seem-
ingly could be attributed to the box’s density. For instance, if there were 
such a box, a spacetime singularity with infinite curvature would seem-
ingly be created (according to general relativity)  because of the infinite 
density . So it seems as though there would be a real, causally efficacious 
property, distinct from any finite density property. 
 No such problem confronts us with the natural number series. There 
is no causally efficacious property that would appear to be the series’ 
overall cardinal number. Of course, there can very well be causally inert 
properties; indeed,  every  property of an abstract object is causally inert. 
So the lack of efficacy does not establish the non-existence of the infinite 

Infinity 155
cardinal number. It is merely that the lack of efficacy fails to compel us 
to posit such a number. 
 Nor are we compelled to posit an infinite magnitude in the case of 
space. No event appears to be causally influenced by the size of the 
totality of space, even if there is such a size – unless of course one counts 
some ‘event’ that is spread across the whole of space. But we can reason-
ably deny the existence of such events, without greatly revising our 
conception of the world. We may say that there are only events with 
finite locations (albeit perhaps infinitely many such events). There is no 
aggregate of all the events, and there is no particular object or event that 
takes up the whole of space. 
 In  one  sense, I am denying the existence of infinite extensive magni-
tudes, just as I deny the existence of infinite (natural) intensive magni-
tudes: that is,  if by ‘an infinite extensive magnitude’ one means a 
particular magnitude value that exceeds all finite values, then I deny 
that there could be any such thing. It is just that, for extensive magni-
tudes – but not for intensive magnitudes – I am prepared to interpret 
talk of infinitude as talk about arbitrarily large finite magnitudes.  
 10.4.3  A putative counterexample: Infinite thermodynamic 
temperatures 
 Temperature is a paradigmatic example of an intensive magnitude. Yet 
recent work in physics has demonstrated the possibility of what physicists 
call  negative temperatures , as well as  infinite temperatures . 2 The phenom-
enon depends (wouldn’t you know it?) on quantum mechanics – it turns 
out, however, that the actual physical phenomenon is not as strange as 
the way it is described. 
 In the kinetic theory of gases, the temperature of a sample of matter is 
reducible to the average kinetic energy of the molecules in that sample.  3 In 
this sense, there are of course no negative temperatures, since this would 
require negative kinetic energies. Nor are there any infinite temperatures, 
since no sample of material possesses infinite kinetic energy. 
 In thermodynamics, however, there is another, technical definition 
of temperature. Background fact: when energy is added to a physical 
system, the entropy (the ‘amount of disorder’) of the system typically 
increases. Furthermore, as a general rule, the hotter the system already 
is, the  smaller  will be the increase in entropy due to a small increase in 
energy. Relying on this fact, the thermodynamic definition states that 
 2  Quantum Munich 2014. 
 3  Giancoli 1988, 425–8. 

156 Approaching Infinity
the temperature of a physical system is the  reciprocal of the rate at which 
entropy increases with increases in energy, thus: 
 T
E
S
= ∂
∂,  
 where  E is the system’s internal energy and  S is its entropy. 
 As noted,  typically as a system becomes more energetic, entropy 
increases. For most physical systems, this relation continues to hold 
at all energy levels (there being infinitely many possible energy 
levels). However, there are some special physical systems in which 
the particles have a maximum possible energy level. In such systems, 
as the system’s internal energy approaches its maximum value (the 
number of particles times the maximum energy level of a particle), 
the entropy  diminishes . In other words, as  E approaches its maximum, 
∂ S /∂ E is negative; therefore, ∂ E /∂ S is also negative. If the system 
reaches its maximum energy level, all the particles will be in the 
same, maximum energy state, which means there will be no entropy 
(the system is perfectly ordered). Figure 10.1 shows the situation: 
graph (a) shows entropy as a function of energy level, (b) shows the 
rate of change of entropy with increasing energy, and (c) shows the 
reciprocal of that rate of change, which is the thermodynamic defini-
tion of temperature. 
 That, briefly, is the concept of negative temperature. It does not 
indicate a situation in which something is colder than absolute zero; 
it simply indicates that a certain variable diminishes with increases in 
another variable, rather than increasing as is the usual case. 
(a)
(b)
(c)
E
E
E
S
∂S/∂E
∂E/∂S
 Figure 10.1  Infinite temperature and negative temperature 

Infinity 157
 To explain infinite temperature: in these same physical systems, there is 
a point at which, with a marginal increase in energy, entropy is  unchanged 
(this happens when the system is exactly midway between its minimum 
and its maximum energy state). That is, ∂ S /∂ E is zero. That means that 
∂ E /∂ S is 1/0, hence infinity. That’s the infinite temperature case.  
 Now, does this constitute a counterexample to the metaphysical thesis 
that no natural intensive magnitude can be infinite? Not really. Plausibly, 
both entropy and energy are natural magnitudes. The rate at which 
entropy increases as energy increases might be a natural magnitude. But 
it is hard to see the  reciprocal of that as a natural magnitude. The funda-
mental situation is that depicted in Figure 10.1(a). Because that graph 
goes horizontal at the middle, it is possible to define a ‘magnitude’ that 
is infinite at that point – the reciprocal of the slope of the graph. This 
would be true for  any quantity whose graph is horizontal at any point. For 
instance, we could define an object’s ‘inverse-velocity’ as 1 divided by the 
rate of change of the object’s position. Then we could say that whenever 
an object is at rest, it has an infinite property, namely, its inverse velocity! 
So far, I see little reason for thinking that this means some genuine prop-
erty of a physical thing is infinite, in any interesting sense.  4  
 You might say: ‘But surely temperature is a natural magnitude – at 
least, we would have said so before hearing about the present cases. If 
this turns out to be the best account of temperature, then the reciprocal 
of the rate of increase in entropy with increasing internal energy must 
be a natural magnitude.’ 
 But there is an obvious reason for thinking that the technical defini-
tion of temperature as ∂ E /∂ S , (a) does not capture what we ordinarily 
call temperature, and (b) does not name a natural magnitude: namely, 
that on this definition, so-called ‘negative temperatures’ are  hotter than 
so-called positive temperatures. Thus, for example, if an object with 
‘negative temperature’ comes in contact with an object with positive 
temperature, energy flows from the negative-temperature object to 
the positive-temperature object. In the  ordinary  sense, having a higher 
temperature means being hotter, yet in the technical, thermodynamic 
sense, positive temperatures are colder than negative temperatures. 
 Another expectation we have about temperature, as we ordinarily 
understand it, is that if objects with different initial temperatures are 
allowed to reach thermal equilibrium, the result (barring energy loss 
 4  For further discussion of infinite temperature, see Oppy (2006, 138), who 
suggests that because we can modify the temperature scale so as to remove the 
infinities, there is no ‘genuinely problematic infinite quantity in the world’.  

158 Approaching Infinity
from the system) should be an intermediate temperature. But when an 
object with a temperature of 10K reaches thermal equilibrium with an 
otherwise similar object with a temperature of −10K, the result will be 
an object with a temperature of ‘∞’, not absolute zero. 
 The existence of ‘infinite temperatures’, then, is just another conse-
quence of an artificial definition of ‘temperature’. The thermodynamic 
definition was adopted because it works well for ordinary cases, where 
entropy increases with increasing energy; it just breaks down for the 
unusual cases where entropy decreases with increasing energy. A better 
conception is that temperature is something like internal energy per 
particle. 
 10.5  Some a priori physics 
 10.5.1  A constraint on causal laws 
 The view taken in Section 10.4 leads to substantive restrictions on the 
sort of laws of nature that might exist. (I use ‘causal laws’ interchange-
ably with ‘laws of nature’.) The laws can be thought of as determining a 
function from possible initial conditions of a system to final conditions 
of the system. That is, if you plug a set of initial conditions into the laws, 
they tell you what the final conditions of the system will be (or might 
be) after some specified interval of time. The following seems to me a 
valid constraint on the form the laws might have:  No correct set of causal 
laws can map a physically possible set of initial conditions to a metaphysically 
impossible set of final conditions . 5 
 I am going to simply assume that that principle is correct. Now let’s 
put that together with the principle that it is metaphysically impos-
sible for any natural, intensive magnitude to be infinite. This means that 
the causal laws cannot permit one to generate infinite natural intensive 
magnitudes, starting from physically possible initial conditions. 
 This is an important, substantive constraint. For example, it entails 
the falsity of the general theory of relativity, because General Relativity 
predicts that, starting from certain initial conditions (which are physi-
cally possible, both in actual fact and according to the theory), a singu-
larity would be generated with infinite energy density and infinite 
spatiotemporal curvature. The initial conditions involve having a star 
above a certain mass; this, according to the theory, eventually results in 
 5  More precisely: there is no metaphysically possible world,  w , such that the 
causal laws that are true in  w map a state of affairs that is physically possible in  w 
to a state of affairs that is metaphysically impossible. 

Infinity 159
the star’s collapse into a black hole. Because it is metaphysically impos-
sible for there to be a region of infinite density or infinite curvature, 
General Relativity cannot be a fully accurate account of gravitation and 
spacetime structure. The real, perfectly general laws must somehow 
prevent such infinities from appearing. 
 This may seem a rather rash declaration; the history of philosophical 
arguments against empirical scientific theories is not encouraging. But 
in fact, what I have just said is widely accepted in astrophysics. That is, it 
is widely held that the infinities appearing in General Relativity signal a 
breakdown of the theory, and that some more advanced theory is needed 
to explain what goes on inside a black hole. No one now knows what 
that theory is (the most popular current alternatives are string theory 
and loop quantum gravity). 
 10.5.2  A Newtonian illustration 
 Here is a less exciting example that is easier to think about. Let’s say 
we’re living in a Newtonian world. There is a series of infinitely many 
objects, O 1 , O 2 , and so on. O 1 is a rod one meter long, with some finite 
mass density. O 2 is a rod half a meter long, with the same cross-sectional 
area as O 1 but twice the mass density (hence, O 2 has the same mass as 
O 1 , packed into half the space). O 3 has the same cross-sectional area 
again, but twice the density and half the length as O 2 . And so on. At 
time  t 0 , these objects are arranged along a single line, with one-meter 
gaps between adjacent members of the series. The series of objects thus 
stretches infinitely off into the distance, away from O 1 . Finally, all the 
objects are initially moving toward O 1 . O 2 is moving at a speed of 1 
meter per second, O 3 at 2 m/s, O 4 at 3 m/s, and so on (see Figure 10.2). 
 All of this  seems physically and metaphysically possible so far. Notice 
that there are no infinite intensive magnitudes in these initial conditions. 
Although the densities of the objects in the series grow without bound, 
none of them is infinite; they are just larger and larger finite densities. 
The objects O 1 , O 2 , ... collectively have infinite mass, but thanks to the 
way they are spread out along the infinite line stretching away from O 1 , 
4 m/s
•  •  •  
3 m/s
2 m/s
1 m/s
O2
O1
O3
O4
O5
 Figure 10.2  An impossible Newtonian scenario 

160 Approaching Infinity
no finite region of space contains an infinite amount of mass; hence, 
there is no region of infinite density. Nor need there be any infinite 
intensive magnitudes in the history of the system – if we retrodict the 
state of the system one second in the past, two seconds in the past, and 
so on, all we find is the same objects, spread even further apart. 
 But what state will the system be in one second after the stated 
initial conditions obtain? That is the time at which all of the rods, O 1 , 
O 2 , and so on, simultaneously collide, thus forming (perhaps only for a 
moment) a single rod two meters long. At each instant before this, the 
assemblage occupies infinite space; only at  t = 1 second does the assem-
blage suddenly occupy a finite region. Within this two meter long 
region, what is the mass density? Since each of the rods has the same 
mass, and infinitely many of them converge within a finite region, 
that region must have infinite mass density at the moment of impact. 
If the objects cannot interpenetrate or deform, then each object will 
have to experience a force at the moment of impact that decelerates 
it instantaneously to velocity zero (hence, an infinite force) – but the 
possibility of deformation would allow the forces to be finite and the 
decelerations smooth. What will happen next? O 1 , having been, in 
effect, struck by an object with infinite momentum (the fusion of O 2 , 
O 3 , and so on), will have to move off to the right with infinite velocity 
after the collision (perhaps not  immediately , but some finite time after 
the collision). 
 This situation, on my view, is metaphysically impossible. My conclu-
sion is that, in any possible world, either the stated initial conditions 
are physically impossible, or the laws of nature somehow prevent the 
objects from coming together in the manner predicted. 
 How might this be so? One way is that there might be a physical limit 
on how tightly mass can be packed into a region of space – that is, the 
laws of nature might determine a maximum possible density of matter. 
In that case, there would be some  n such that the objects after  O  n  in 
the envisioned series would be physically impossible. Perhaps different 
possible laws of nature provide different limits, so the value of  n would 
depend on the particular laws. 
 Another way is that there might be a physical limit on the speed at 
which objects can travel. In that case, there would be some  n such that the 
objects after  O  n  could not travel at the speeds stipulated in the scenario. 
Since the assemblage of objects initially occupies an infinite span of 
space, there would be no time at which all the objects had converged 
within a finite region – there would always be infinitely many of the 
objects that had yet to arrive. 

Infinity 161
 A third possibility is that there might be repulsive forces that increase 
as material objects approach each other, preventing contact, or perhaps 
even preventing them from getting closer than some minimum distance, 
thus guaranteeing that the assemblage of objects in the above scenario 
must always occupy an infinite amount of space.  6 Such forces may also 
explain why (as many believe) it is impossible for two solid objects to 
overlap in space. 
 There need not be any one way in which the laws must prohibit the 
above scenario; it may be that the scenario is physically impossible for 
different reasons in different possible worlds. But every metaphysically 
possible set of laws makes the scenario impossible in some way or other.   
 
 6  This solution, however, could be circumvented by imagining that the objects 
decrease in size by more than half at each stage; for example, instead of the 
length of  O  n +1 being 1/2 the length of  O  n  , we could stipulate that the length of 
 O  n +1 is 1/4 the length of  O  n  , thus allowing the objects to fit within a finite region 
without coming into contact. To prevent this, the repulsive forces would have 
to increase in such a way that the sum of the distances between the  O  i  remains 
divergent. 

162
 11.1  Pointy space versus gunky space 
 In standard geometry, space is said to be composed of indivisible parts 
called ‘points’. There are continuum many of these in any region with 
a nonzero size. All geometric objects – lines, planes, triangles, circles, 
and so on – are said to be built out of points. It is usually said that these 
geometric objects are  sets  of points; however, it makes more sense to 
regard them as  fusions of points, so that is how I shall henceforth speak. 
The fusion of  a and  b is understood as an object that has  a and  b as parts 
and has no other parts that don’t overlap with  a or  b . (The generalization 
to cover fusions of any number of objects should be obvious.) Fusions 
differ importantly from sets: for example, the fusion of two physical 
objects is itself a physical object, whereas a  set  of physical objects would 
be an abstract, mathematical object. Similarly, the fusion of some spatial 
regions would plausibly be a spatial region, whereas the  set  containing 
some spatial regions would not itself be a region but would instead be 
some abstract object. 
 In contrast to the standard view, some theorists have proposed that 
space may be a kind of ‘gunk’, that is, something with no smallest parts.  1 
In this view, instead of thinking of spatial regions as needing to be built 
up from smaller components, we  start  (conceptually) with nonzero 
regions. Any region can then be divided into parts, and the parts divided 
into more parts,  forever , and one never reaches a smallest part. 
 11 
 Space 
 1  Whitehead 1917, 157–78; Arntzenius 2008. There are at least two other ways 
of defining gunk: (1) stuff that has no measure-zero parts; (2) stuff each of whose 
parts contains a completely interior region. 

Space 163
 The current hegemony of the ‘pointy’ conception of space over the 
‘gunky’ or ‘pointless’ conception is undeserved. Here I suggest some 
reasons for taking pointless space seriously. These reasons do not defi-
nitely establish that space is gunky; to repeat, they merely give us reason 
for taking that possibility seriously. 
 11.2  The unimaginability of points 
 Many of us have gotten so used to hearing and talking about points 
that we have forgotten the intrinsic strangeness of the concept. Imagine 
taking a sphere and progressively shrinking it. Its volume gets smaller 
and smaller: one cubic meter, then one cubic millimeter, then one cubic 
micron, and so on. As it gets smaller and smaller, it remains a sphere. But 
what happens when you get down to size  zero ? When you actually reach 
zero, is it the case that you now have a really small object there? Or is it 
that the sphere is simply gone, leaving nothing behind? 
 If you think there is a really small object there, try to imagine this 
object. I predict that anything that you imagine will not be the geometric 
point. You might, for example, imagine a tiny, black dot. But that can’t 
be the point; however tiny the dot you imagine, it’s not small enough. 
In geometry textbooks, points are represented by small, round dots. But 
an actual point is not round; it has no shape at all, because to have a 
shape, an object must have some extension. (Shape is a matter of how 
an object’s parts relate to each other; for example, in a circle, the parts 
are equidistant from a single, central point.) So try to imagine a shape-
less, sizeless, but somehow spatial object. 
 Now you might say: ‘So points are unimaginable. So what? Many 
mathematical objects are unimaginable – that is, they cannot be  visual-
ized – but are nonetheless real (in whatever sense mathematical objects 
are ever real). So this is no proof that points are not real.’ 
 But rather than asking for proof that there are no points, shouldn’t we 
first ask what reason we have for believing that there  are  such things? 
Their unimaginability does not preclude their existence, but doesn’t it 
at least indicate that we would need some pretty impressive reason to 
believe in them? 
 Certainly, some mathematical objects are difficult or impossible to 
visualize. But this would typically be for quite different reasons from the 
reason why points cannot be visualized. Some mathematical objects are 
impossible to visualize because they are  non-spatial , and visualization 
only applies to things in space. Other mathematical objects are unvisu-
alizable because they are too  complex to visualize. But this could not be 

164 Approaching Infinity
the case for points, which are supposed to be the simplest of all spatial 
objects. Points are in fact supposed to be the basic building blocks of all 
other geometrical objects. Is it not strange that  such  a thing should be 
impossible to imagine? 
 11.3  The zero argument 
 Imagine pouring some water out of a pitcher. The pitcher starts with one 
liter of water, which drops to 0.9 liters, then 0.8 liters, and so on. What 
happens when the water gets down to exactly 0 liters; what then is left? 
A very small portion of water? Or  no water at all? 
 We all know that the answer is no water at all. We do not postulate 
that there might be some residual part of the water, which oddly would 
have a volume of zero, clinging to the bottom of the pitcher. This is 
true even if one does not know (or one abstracts from one’s knowledge) 
of atomic theory – that is, even if we imagine that there is some mate-
rial that is continuously distributed through some volume (rather than 
consisting of discrete bits as actual materials do), we still have no temp-
tation to say that some of that stuff might be left in the pitcher, when 
the quantity of stuff was zero. 
 The reason for this is a conceptual point about ‘zero’: to have zero of 
something is simply to fail to have that thing. This applies as well to the 
real number zero as to the cardinal number zero: to have zero turtles is 
to have no turtles; to have zero liters of water is to have no water. 
 In the case of a material substance, its volume is a measure of how 
much space it takes up. When we have one liter of water, that means 
we have water occupying a certain amount of space. Volume measure-
ments can also be applied directly to regions of space. When we ascribe a 
volume to a region of space, the volume is a measure of how much space 
the region  consists of . 
 Now, what is the volume of a geometric point? The standard answer is 
‘zero’. It cannot be anything else; if it is anything greater than zero, then 
you can divide it in half. Furthermore, if a point has a volume greater 
than zero, the total volume arising from infinitely many points would 
have to be infinite – but any nonzero region of space is supposed to 
contain infinitely many points; thus,  every  such region would have to be 
infinite. This is false, since clearly the apartment I am in is not infinite. 
 These premises lead to the following argument:
 1.   The volume of  x is how much space  x occupies or consists of. 
 2.   To have zero of something is to not have any of that thing.  

Space 165
 3.   Therefore, to have a volume of zero is to not occupy or consist of any 
space. (From 1, 2.) 
 4.   If points exist, they are parts of space with zero volume. 
 5.   But there cannot be a part of space that does not consist of any 
space. 
 6.   Therefore, there are no points. (From 4, 5.) 
 If this argument is correct, then it supports a more sweeping conclusion: 
there also are no lines, planes, triangles (since these are plane figures), 
circles, or any other geometrical object with a volume of zero. Of course, 
there are still lines, triangles, and so on, in the  ordinary senses of those 
words – the senses in which we can say, for example, that Figure 11.1 
contains a line and a triangle. But in the idealized,  mathematical  sense, 
that figure contains neither a line nor a triangle, because the alleged line 
has some nonzero thickness, as do the sides of the alleged triangle.  
 11.4  When zero is not mere absence 
 Does the preceding argument prove too much? There are many cases in 
which we apply the number zero but in which this does not appear to 
indicate a complete absence. Hence, premise (2) above – 
 2. To have zero of something is to not have any of that thing.  
 – appears false. Let us consider a few of these cases. 
 First, an easy case: the Greenwich Observatory has a latitude of 0º. 
But this obviously does not indicate that it  fails to have  latitude, nor 
that it lacks any other relevant quantity. In this case, we simply have 
to clarify that premise (2) is intended to apply only to  quantitative  uses 
of ‘zero’, as opposed to mere indexing or naming uses (see Section 9.8). 
The use of ‘0’ in reporting the location of the Greenwich Observatory is 
an indexing use. 
 Figure 11.1  A line and a triangle 

166 Approaching Infinity
 Second example: a certain ice cube has a temperature of 0 ºC. But this 
does not indicate that the ice cube lacks temperature, lacks heat, or lacks 
anything else relevant. We might consider this another indexing use of 
‘0’. Or we might say that ‘0 ºC’ refers to the value of an  artificial  magni-
tude, namely, ‘temperature minus 273.15’, as suggested in Section 9.8. 
 Of course  you can always construct an artificial magnitude with a value 
of zero, even when there is no relevant absence. We thus need to clarify/
qualify premise 2 by stipulating that premise 2 is to apply only in cases 
where zero is a cardinal number or the value of a  natural magnitude. 
Thus, if an object had a temperature of zero  Kelvin , this really would 
indicate a complete absence of thermal motion. 
 Third example: in the mathematical sense of ‘measure’, one can speak 
of a measure on the set of real numbers. The natural measure is one 
in which, for example, the measure of the set of all real numbers is 
infinity, the measure of [3,7] (the set of all real numbers between 3 and 
7 inclusive) is 4, and the measure of {2} (the set containing just that one 
number) is 0. Intuitively, this means something like: the space taken 
up on the real number line by just the number 2 is zero. But {2} is not a 
complete absence; it is not like {}. 
 I think the most plausible response to this example is to observe 
that the measure on the set of real numbers does not correspond 
to any natural magnitude. Notice that to explain what the putative 
magnitude is, I had to invoke a metaphor: that the real numbers form 
a ‘line’, and the measure tells us ‘how much space’ a set of numbers 
takes up on that line. But there is not literally any line there; the 
numbers are completely non-spatial objects. Without that metaphor, 
all we have is a mathematical function, satisfying certain formal 
rules, that assigns numbers to subsets of the set of real numbers. That 
does not suffice to have a genuine magnitude. Notice also that this 
alleged magnitude has no causal efficacy; nothing can be causally 
influenced by some set of numbers’ having some particular measure, 
in the way that things certainly  can  be causally influenced by some 
concrete objects’ having some magnitudes. Finally, notice that there 
appears to be no way of explaining this alleged magnitude without 
reference to sets; it could only be a property of a set. This is problem-
atic not only because there is some reason to doubt the existence of 
sets, but also because, even if sets exist, their properties, again, have 
no causal powers. This contrasts with the cases that I would accept 
as genuine natural magnitudes, such as volume or mass, where there 
is some concrete object (or at least a region of space) to which the 
magnitude can be ascribed. 

Space 167
 Fourth example: in probability theory, some events are assigned a prob-
ability of zero, even though they are possible. This normally happens 
when there is a continuum of possibilities. For example, suppose a 
person could have any of continuum many heights within a certain 
range. Any given  exact  height will have probability zero of being realized 
(this must be so, otherwise the total probability will exceed 1).  2 But does 
this ‘zero’ indicate a complete absence of something? 
 To address this, we must first ask what probability numbers measure. 
First answer: they measure probability. This is unhelpful, since without 
further explanation it is hard to say whether the events in question have 
a complete absence of probability or not. 
 Second answer: they measure possibility; therefore, because the events 
in question are  possible , the zero cannot indicate complete absence. But 
this answer is mistaken: if probability measured possibility, then every-
thing would have a probability of either one or zero, since everything is 
either possible or impossible and there are no degrees in between. 
 Third answer: probability numbers measure the strength of evidence 
or justification for believing something. On this interpretation, the use 
of ‘0’ in probability assessments is an indexing use rather than a numer-
ical use. We arbitrarily assign the bottom of the scale to be the number 
zero; we could as easily have a probability scale ranging from −1 to 1, 
or from 1 to 100. (I do not mean that these choices would be equally 
convenient, of course – only that they would be no less adequate to 
accurately representing reality.) Even in the case where  A is logically 
impossible, the zero probability does not indicate anything like a mere 
absence of justification; rather, it indicates (on the present interpreta-
tion of probability) the strongest possible justification for  denying A . 
 Fourth answer: probability numbers are limiting long-range frequen-
cies. 3 In other words: suppose we want to know the probability of  A 
occurring in conditions  C . We imagine that  C were repeated over and 
over. At any point, there would be a ratio of the number of times that 
 A has occurred to the number of times that  C was repeated. If this ratio 
would approach some limit as the number of repetitions of  C increased 
without bound, then that limit is the probability of  A in conditions 
 C . In the case discussed above, the zero probability means something 
 2  One  could  assign nonzero probabilities to some countable subset of heights 
and then assign zero probability to the rest of the heights, but this violates some 
implicit constraint against arbitrarily treating certain possibilities in a radically 
different way from the nearby possibilities. 
 3  von Mises 1957. 

168 Approaching Infinity
like this: if we measured many individuals’ heights, the frequency with 
which those heights turned out to be exactly six feet would approach 
zero as the number of people measured increased without bound. (I 
think this is true; in fact, I think the frequency would be zero at every 
stage.) Does this ‘zero’ indicate a complete absence of something? If the 
ratio is actually zero, then this indeed indicates a complete absence of 
occurrences of  A . On the other hand, if the ratio is nonzero but is merely 
 approaching  zero as a limit, this does not seem to indicate a complete 
absence; however, in this case zero is also not the actual value of any 
natural magnitude. The limit approached by a certain quotient in a 
counterfactual situation does not appear to be a property of anything, 
nor could it be causally efficacious. The only natural quantities in the 
story appear to be the actual number of times  C is repeated and the 
actual number of times  A occurred. If either of these were zero, that 
would indicate a complete absence. 
 11.5  The paradox of contact 
 The most popular objection to pointy space is not anything I have 
mentioned so far. The most popular objection is that pointy space makes 
it difficult to understand physical contact, which is assumed to be meta-
physically possible. 4 
 Imagine a world containing extended material objects, each of which 
completely fills the (completely connected) region of space that it occu-
pies. (For simplicity, assume there aren’t any objects with holes in them.) 
Three assumptions create trouble for understanding physical contact. 
The first assumption is that it is metaphysically possible for some such 
objects as I have described to exist in a pointy space. Second, no two of 
these material objects could occupy any of the same space at the same 
time (that is, they could not even partially overlap). Third, two objects 
are in contact only if there is no space at all between them. 
 If space is pointy, then there would be a distinction between ‘open’ 
objects and ‘closed’ objects. A closed object would be one that includes 
an outer surface, whereas an open object occupies all the points  inside a 
certain surface, but does not occupy the surface itself. (The distinction is 
analogous to the distinction between (a) the set of real numbers greater 
than zero and less than one and (b) the set of real numbers greater than 
 4  The argument of this section is based on Zimmerman 1996, though 
Zimmerman’s conclusion concerns extended objects rather than space itself. Cf. 
Brentano 1988, 146–7. 

Space 169
 or equal to  zero and less than  or equal to  one. (a) is an open set, whereas 
(b) is a closed set. Similarly, a closed object occupies its boundary.) 
 Now suppose two open objects wanted to come into contact. It would 
be impossible for them to do so, because there would always have to be 
at least one unoccupied point of space between them. When the objects 
were as close as they could be, the two objects’ surfaces (that is, the 
surfaces that surround the objects but which the objects themselves fail 
to occupy) would coincide at (at least) one point. That would be the 
unoccupied point separating the two objects. 
 Suppose that two closed objects wanted to come into contact. Again, 
they could not do so, because if ever there were no empty space between 
the two objects, their surfaces would have to coincide at at least one 
point, in which case both objects would be occupying that point in 
space, and we have already assumed that objects cannot even partially 
overlap in space. The only way for the objects to fail to overlap in space 
is for them to have a nonzero gap between them. So that is what would 
have to happen. If the two objects moved toward each other, some force 
would have to appear to stop them  before they made contact. 
 Perhaps the only way for two objects to come in contact would be for 
an open object to come into contact with a closed object, or more gener-
ally (since an object could be partially open) for an object that is open 
at some point to come into contact with an object that is closed at some 
point, where those points might come to coincide. 
 What seems wrong about this is, first of all, the notion that two objects 
of the same kind could not come into contact. Of course, there might 
be (as in the actual world)  causal laws  that prevent two objects from 
coming into contact. What seems wrong is that it should be  metaphysi-
cally impossible  for any pair of qualitatively identical objects to come 
into contact, given just the structure of space – for example, that there 
might be two spheres that are metaphysically debarred from touching 
unless one of them either (very slightly) expands or contracts. 
 Second, the action at a distance in the case of the closed objects is 
suspicious. Assuming that it is metaphysically impossible for two mate-
rial objects to spatially overlap, this is what would have to be true of the 
pair of closed objects: as they moved toward each other, it would have to 
be that, while there was still a gap between them, some force appeared 
to keep them apart. This must happen because if the objects wait until 
the gap between them is closed, they would already overlap in space (at 
least at one point). 
 Here, by the way, is how things work in the actual world: material 
objects in fact never come into contact at the microscopic level. When 

170 Approaching Infinity
you put your apple on the table, the molecules in the apple merely come 
 close to the molecules in the tabletop, whereupon repulsive forces hold 
them apart, thus preventing the apple from falling through the table. 
So there’s nothing wrong with positing force fields that hold physical 
objects forever at a distance from each other. The idea of the objection 
is merely that this should not be metaphysically necessary. That is, it 
is strange that there should be a pair of objects that are  metaphysically 
required to exert forces on each other at a distance, merely in virtue of 
their shapes; and yet, another pair of objects that was in every way iden-
tical to the first pair, save that they were each missing a part with zero 
thickness, would not be required to exert forces at a distance. 
 I find the preceding argument somewhat less persuasive than do most 
advocates of gunky space. Why? To begin with, I am not sure that it 
is metaphysically impossible for two material objects to interpenetrate. 
Either there is some limit to the mass density that may exist in a given 
region of space, or there is no such limit. First, suppose there is  no  limit. 
 On that assumption , I think it plausible that two material bodies can 
interpenetrate. If the two objects each have a uniform mass density 
 d , interpenetration would merely result in a region of overlap having 
mass density 2 d ; this region would be just like an ordinary region that 
contains a single object with mass density 2 d , so I don’t see why this 
should not be possible. 
 On the other hand, suppose there is a maximum possible mass density. 
In that case, we can readily see why two material objects might be inca-
pable of interpenetration, say, because their mass densities sum to more 
than the maximum possible density. On this assumption, however, I 
find it not so implausible that material objects  must exert forces on each 
other at a distance. (Note that this would seem to be required to avoid 
infinite decelerations at the moment of impact, in the event of a colli-
sion of the two objects.) 
 11.6  The problem of division 
 Finally, the pointy conception of space entails that, if an object 
completely fills a connected region of space, then it is metaphysically 
impossible to divide that object exactly in half.  5 If one cuts a stick in 
half, the points at the middle of the stick – the cross sectional slice 
 5  This objection is colorfully presented by Brentano (1988, 146–7), who, among 
other things, objects to Bolzano’s ‘monstrous doctrine that there would exist 
bodies with and without surfaces’. 

Space 171
a single point thick – must either go with the left half of the stick or 
go with the right half. Thus, the result will be that one half of the 
stick winds up containing a closed end while the other winds up with 
an open end (Figure 11.2). The latter (almost-)half of the stick will 
be like the former except with an infinitely thin piece of its surface 
stripped off. There is nothing formally inconsistent in this picture. 
It is just very bizarre to think that this is how physical reality would 
work. Doesn’t all this rather have the feel of a series of artifacts of a 
human-created conceptual scheme, as opposed to insights into objec-
tive reality?  
 11.7  The dimensionality of space is necessary 
 The preceding arguments provide reason to think that space is  neces-
sarily gunky, rather than pointy. What they suggest is that the notion 
of geometric points is  conceptually confused . These arguments do not 
definitely establish this conclusion; they merely provide some reason 
to suspect that this is the case. One could consistently maintain that 
points exist despite being unimaginable, that having zero of something 
is different from failing to have any of it, that contact between type-iden-
tical solid objects is impossible, that dividing a solid object into identical 
halves is metaphysically impossible. But I think that our ending up with 
such views is a sign of some foundational, conceptual error. 
 There is, incidentally, nothing especially odd about the situation 
of having  inconclusive reasons to believe that something is  necessarily 
true. For instance, we have strong but inconclusive grounds to believe 
Goldbach’s Conjecture (that every even number is the sum of two prime 
numbers), because many numbers have been checked and no counterex-
ample has been found. But if the conjecture is true, it is metaphysically 
necessary. For a simpler example, suppose a smart person tells me that 
 A is necessarily true. Then I have evidence that  A is necessary, but the 
evidence is inconclusive. 
Two possibilities
 Figure 11.2  Two ways of dividing a stick in half 

172 Approaching Infinity
 Suppose that the above arguments are correct. They suggest that it is 
impossible for there to be a part of space with a measure of zero. Not 
only are points impossible, then; lines and planes are impossible. But 
then it follows that space is  necessarily  at least three-dimensional. Since, 
for example, a plane (metaphysically) cannot exist, it is metaphysically 
impossible that all of space should consist of a plane. Similarly, space 
could not have consisted of a single line. 
 Could space have had four or more dimensions? No ... not unless it 
actually does. If there is a possible world in which space has four dimen-
sions, then from the standpoint of that world, it would be true that 
three-dimensional regions were impossible, since they would have 
measure zero. But, assuming that our space actually has three dimen-
sions, three-dimensional objects  are possible. So the putative four-di-
mensional possible world must not exist. In other words, the people 
in the four-dimensional world could give arguments analogous to the 
above arguments against points, lines, and planes, to show that  our 
world is impossible. But since we know our world is possible, there must 
not be any such possible people. 
 You might worry that the above argument turns on taking ‘possible 
worlds’ too seriously, treating them as if they were things that really 
existed. The argument can be rephrased without the possible-worlds 
talk:
 1.   For any propositions  A and  B , if  A is true and  B is metaphysically 
possible, then if  B were the case,  A would (still) be metaphysically 
possible. 
 2.   It’s true that space is three-dimensional. 
 3.   So if it is metaphysically possible that space be four-dimensional, 
then if space were four-dimensional, it would (still) be metaphysi-
cally possible that space be three-dimensional. (From 1, 2.)  
 4.   But it is not the case that if space were four-dimensional, then it 
would be possible that space be three-dimensional. 
 5.   So it is metaphysically impossible that space be four-dimensional. 
(From 3, 4.) 
 But what about contemporary physical theories that postulate many 
dimensions? For instance, recent versions of string theory postulate 
nine or more spatial dimensions. The above argument does not refute 
this, since the argument merely assumes that space is actually three-
dimensional. The argument shows only that the dimensionality of 
space – whatever it is – is necessary, not contingent. That is,  if space 

Space 173
actually has three dimensions, then it is metaphysically necessary that it 
does. If space actually has nine dimensions, then  that is metaphysically 
necessary. 
 This view is not popular among philosophers, who tend to assume 
that  n -dimensional space is possible, for any  n . I think there are two 
common but bad reasons for thinking this. The first is that one can 
formulate logically consistent descriptions of many-dimensional spaces. 
Even though we can’t imagine these spaces, we know how to describe 
them without contradicting ourselves. But as discussed earlier, mere 
formal consistency is no evidence of metaphysical possibility. 
 The second reason is a superficial analogy, which starts from the 
assumption that there could be two-dimensional beings, and extrapo-
lates from there to the idea that there could be four-dimensional beings 
who would be related to us as we are related to the possible two-dimen-
sional beings. The starting assumption is false, and the extrapolation is 
uncompelling. 
 11.8  The measure-theoretic objection 
 There is at least one interesting technical objection to pointless space.  6 
It starts with a variation of a construction known as the Cantor Set. The 
Cantor Set is constructed like this: start with a line one unit long. Remove 
a segment with a length of L 1 (where L 1 is more than zero but less than 
the whole segment) from the middle of the line. This leaves two line 
segments, one to the left and one to the right. Next, from the middle of 
each of these two remaining segments, remove a segment of length L 2 
(where L 2 is more than zero but less than the whole segment). This leaves 
four line segments. From the middle of each of these, remove a segment 
of length L 3 (more than zero but less than the whole segment). And so 
on. Imagine this process repeated infinitely many times. What remains, 
in the standard view, is a set of points known as the Cantor Set. (In the 
best-known version, L  n  is always one third of the size of the segments 
existing at the beginning of each stage.) The segments that were  removed 
each had a positive, real-valued length. I shall call these segments the 
Cantor Lines. So the Cantor  Set  is what is left after removing the Cantor 
 Lines (the Set is the complement of the Lines within the unit interval).  
 Now, consider this version of the construction: in the first stage, we 
remove one segment with a length of 1/4. In the second stage, we remove 
two segments, each with length 1/16. In the third stage, we remove four 
 6  The argument is based on Arntzenius 2008, Section 10.  

174 Approaching Infinity
segments, each with length 1/64. And so on. In other words, assume in 
general that L  n  = 1/4  n  . Figure 11.3 shows the results of the first three cuts. 
What is the total length of all the removed lines? This is the infinite sum 
of the lengths removed at each stage: 
 
1
4
2
1
16
4
1
64
1
4
1
8
1
16
1
2
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+
=
+
+
+
=


.
 
 So a total length of ½ is removed from the original segment, which itself 
had a length of 1 unit. So whatever remains must also have a measure 
of ½. Now comes the problem: on the pointless view of space, it looks 
as though  nothing remains. This is because the Cantor Set contains no 
extended segments (no connected parts with nonzero length). In the 
 standard  view, the Cantor Set consists entirely of disconnected points. 
(For any two points in the Set, there was some stage at which a segment 
in between them was removed. In fact, there were infinitely many such 
stages.) But since we’ve rejected points, it seems that we must say the 
Cantor Set does not exist, and thus that the Cantor Lines must comprise 
the entire original line segment. Yet the original line segment has a 
measure of 1, while the Cantor Lines only add up to ½. 
 Now to clean up the exposition a bit. First point: the talk of ‘removing’ 
segments is just there to make the exposition easier. Since we’re talking 
about regions of space, it is not possible to literally  remove  any of them. 
The point is just to focus your attention on certain parts of a line 
segment. You can think of all the parts that I previously described as 
being ‘removed’, just sitting there in the segment. We can then think 
 Figure 11.3  The Cantor lines 

Space 175
about the fusion of all these parts, and we can ask questions about it, such 
as how big it is and whether it is distinct from the original segment. 
 Second point: if one doesn’t believe in geometric points, then presum-
ably one doesn’t believe in geometric (infinitely thin) lines either. So 
one might want to reject the whole construction, seeing as how it starts 
out by assuming that we have a line segment. But the use of a  line was 
also just for expository purposes. There is a three-dimensional analog 
of the Cantor Set construction, but it is more complicated to imagine. 
It would give us qualitatively the same result. Alternately, instead of a 
 line in the geometric sense, we could imagine an elongated cylinder, 
where we cut the middle quarter out of it, and so on. The volume of the 
removed parts will sum to one half of the original volume. So the talk of 
a ‘line’ is harmless in this context; it isn’t the source of the problem. 
 My preferred approach to this problem may not seem persuasive at 
this point, but I will tell it to you anyway. It is to reject the notion of 
an infinite sum. The problem is generated by taking an infinite series 
of line segments, adding together their lengths, and then comparing 
the result to the original, one-unit-long segment. This presupposes that 
there is such a thing as the sum of an infinite series of numbers. In my 
view, there is no such thing. However, I say more about that in the next 
chapter (Section 12.3), because this bears directly on the resolution of 
one of our earlier paradoxes of the infinite.  
 

176
 This chapter gives the payoff for our theory of the infinite: the reso-
lution of the paradoxes of Chapter 3 (at last!). I assume here that the 
reader has read Chapter 3, and thus that only brief reminders of each of 
the paradoxes are required. 
 12.1  The arithmetic of infinity 
 Here, the puzzle was that, for example, from ‘∞+1 = ∞’, one can seem-
ingly derive that 1=0; from ‘1/0 = ∞’ or ‘1/∞ = 0’ one can seemingly 
derive that 1=0; and from ‘1/∞ = 0’ and ‘2/∞ = 0’ one can seemingly 
derive that 1=2. 
 The resolution of these puzzles is straightforward on my view. The 
expression ‘∞+1’ makes no sense because addition is an operation on 
numbers, and ‘∞’ does not name any number; ‘∞+1’ is like the expres-
sion ‘green + 7’. Consequently, the pseudo-equation ‘∞+1 = ∞’ is a cate-
gory mistake. Similarly for ‘1/0 = ∞’, ‘1/∞ = 0’, and ‘2/∞ = 0’. 
 The Cantorian approach, by contrast, holds that there are infinite numbers, 
but they simply obey different rules from all the other numbers. This is not 
formally inconsistent. However, the theory that infinity violates the rules 
that apply to numbers because infinity is in fact not a kind of number, is 
more explanatory than the theory that infinity is a kind of number that 
simply violates the rules that apply to all other numbers. Intuitively, it 
should be possible to add to a quantity, and doing so should increase it. 
Intuitively, if a number can be added, then it can also be subtracted.  
 12.2  The paradox of geometric points 
 Here, the problem was that an extended region of space with some posi-
tive volume is supposed to be composed entirely out of parts (points) 
each of which has zero volume. 
 12 
 Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 177
 The standard treatment of this puzzle: reject additivity of sizes for 
uncountable collections. On the standard view, when there are uncount-
ably many parts of something, the size of the whole cannot be computed 
from the size and number of its basic parts, even though such parts 
exist and even though they (each) have a size and (collectively) have a 
number. The size of the whole is just a further property of the object. If 
a region is really built up from points, how is it that its magnitude is not 
explained by their magnitudes and number? There is no real explanation 
for this, other than that this is what we must say to avoid paradox. 
 Note that the traditional view accepts that there are infinite sums of 
 0 elements (at least in a manner of speaking – see Section 12.3 below); 
there just aren’t any infinite sums of continuum many or more elem-
ents. In the standard treatment, regions of space satisfy  countable   addi-
tivity  (one can add a finite or countably infinite number of parts to find 
the size of the whole that they compose), yet there is no analogous prin-
ciple of uncountable additivity. This is metaphysically odd. 
 We also noted that if an object were to fill a continuous volume of 
space, it would seemingly be conceptually possible, on the standard 
view, for the point-sized parts to be rearranged to completely fill a space 
exactly twice as large (mapping each part with coordinates ( x ,  y ,  z ) to 
coordinates (2 x ,  y ,  z )). A proponent of the standard view would most 
likely respond to this by simply ‘biting the bullet’ – that is, just embracing 
the conclusion that the rearrangement in question is conceptually and 
metaphysically possible (though not physically possible in our world). 
 One might think: ‘This is not so metaphysically strange. Perhaps 
we start with an object occupying a certain region of space with mass 
density  d , and when we expand it to twice its original size, the result is 
simply that the new region has mass density  d /2, so that total mass is 
conserved.’ However, here is what is odd. Suppose the object is expanded 
horizontally, to twice its original width, as in Figure 12.1.  
 Consider the left half of the stretched object. This  half would seem 
to be  qualitatively identical  to the whole of the original object, since it 
consists entirely of qualitatively identical parts, identically arranged. 
Similarly for the right half. It is therefore unclear why we have not just 
 Figure 12.1  A magically expanding rod 

178 Approaching Infinity
duplicated the original object, in what should be an impossible manner, 
merely by moving its parts around. 
 The simplest way to avoid these paradoxes is to reject the existence 
of size-zero parts of an object. The size of an extended region is not the 
sum of the sizes of the points that make it up, because there in fact are 
no such things as points; there are only positive-sized regions. 
 We could say that, even if there are points, there is no such thing as 
the sum of infinitely many sizes, because there are no infinite sums in 
general. I take up this view in the following section. However, this view 
does not avoid the paradox in which an object is duplicated by rear-
ranging its parts. To avoid this result, we should reject the existence of 
size-zero parts. 1 
 12.3  Infinite sums 
 Here, the puzzle was that the same (infinite collection of) numbers can 
seemingly have different sums, depending on the order in which the 
numbers are added. If we add together all the positive and negative inte-
gers, we can obtain 0 if we add them like this: (1−1) + (2−2) + ... . But we 
can obtain ∞ if we add them like this: 1 + (−1+2) + (−2+3) + ... . 
 The standard view: one can (sort of) talk about a sum of infinitely 
many numbers, but the correct sum sometimes depends upon the order 
in which the numbers are added. An infinite sum must be a sum of 
a  sequence  of numbers, not of a mere  set  of numbers. The two above-
described ways of adding the integers represent two different sequences, 
and therefore there is no problem in the fact that they yield different 
sums, even though they are built from the identical set of numbers. 
 The sum of an infinite series of numbers is defined to be the limit 
(if there is one) of the sequence of finite sums as the number of terms 
increases; if there is no limit, then the series has no sum. In other words, 
as we add more and more terms, if the sum approaches arbitrarily close 
 1  One could avoid the rearrangement paradox while accepting the existence of 
 some size-zero parts, as long as the stick was not completely decomposable into 
size-zero parts (for example, what if the stick contained just three geometric points, 
but was otherwise gunky?). However, I think there is no well-motivated view with 
this consequence. I mention this in a footnote, only for the benefit of readers who 
like to look for any annoying exception to any statement found in the text.  
One could also avoid the paradox by claiming that, although  space consists of 
points, an extended object occupying space does not and cannot consist of point-
like parts, that is, it does not have parts corresponding to each part of space that 
it occupies. This would be odd and ad hoc. 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 179
to some particular value, then that value is regarded as the sum of the 
infinite series. Otherwise, the series has no sum. For example, the  infinite 
sum, 1
2
1
4
1
8
+
+
+, is said to be 1, because as you add up the terms, you 
get ½, then ¾, then ⅞, and so on, getting closer and closer to 1.  2 You can 
find this sort of definition in any standard calculus textbook. 
 Notice something crucial about this way of defining an infinite sum: 
it has the consequence that ‘sum’ has a  different meaning  when speaking 
of an infinite sum than it does when speaking of a finite sum. When you 
have a finite collection of numbers, their sum is the result you end up 
with after adding up all the numbers. But the sum of an infinite series 
is decidedly not understood as the result of adding up all the terms. The 
standard definition is deliberately and explicitly formulated to avoid the 
assumption that one can actually add up all the numbers in the series. 
That is the whole purpose of the talk of limits. 
 In fact, the standard definition seems to presuppose that one  cannot 
add up all the terms of an infinite series. To see why I say this, note 
first that the limit of a function as the independent variable approaches 
some value need not be the actual output of the function at that value 
(even if the function is defined there) – in mathematical symbolism, 
Lim
x
a f x)
x  need not =  f ( a ). To illustrate, recall the Littlewood-Ross Banker 
Paradox (Section 3.12). In that scenario, you gain $9 in each round of 
the game, so the limit of your funds as the number of rounds of the game 
increases is $∞. However, if you actually complete the series, the result is 
$0, not $∞. To put the point in mathematical symbolism: where  f ( n ) is 
the amount of money you have after  n rounds of the game, Lim
n
f n
→∞
= ∞
)
n
, 
but  f (∞) = 0. 
 Now, if there were such a thing as the result of actually adding up infi-
nitely many numbers, presumably that result should be called the infi-
nite sum. And there is no reason to assume that that result must always 
equal the limit of the finite sums. So by defining the infinite sum as the 
limit of the finite sums, mathematicians are presupposing that there is 
no such thing as the result of adding up all the infinitely many terms. 
 In this, I agree with the standard view (at last!). Aside: there are many 
standard views in mathematics, which sometimes derive from the work of 
different mathematicians with very different views of infinity. Thus, the 
standard views in  set theory  and transfinite mathematics, under Cantor’s 
influence, are very friendly to actual infinities and infinite numbers on 
 2  More precisely, where ‘ S  n  ’ denotes the sum of the first  n terms: for any ε > 0, 
there is a number δ such that | S  n  − 1| < ε for all  n > δ. 

180 Approaching Infinity
all fours with the natural numbers. But the standard views in  calculus , 
under the influence of Karl Weierstrass, are very unfriendly to infinity 
as a number or as an actual magnitude. (Robinson’s aptly named ‘non-
standard analysis’ offers a much more infinity-friendly approach, which 
may fit better with Cantor.) 
 As I say, I agree in essence with the standard view of infinite sums, 
although I find the terminology misleading. It is misleading to say 
that there is a sum of an infinite series, if what you mean is actually 
that it is impossible to add up infinitely many terms, but that if you 
add up increasing finite numbers of terms, you approach ever closer to 
some value. Many students wind up confusedly thinking that standard 
analysis supports the exact opposite of the point that it is designed to 
support – witness the view that the theory of infinite sums resolves 
Zeno’s Paradox. This could only be the case if the theory of infinite sums 
somehow shows how one can complete the infinite series, which is the 
precise opposite of what the standard account assumes. I shall hereafter 
use scare quotes when speaking of the sort of ‘infinite sums’ defined in 
terms of limits, to avoid giving the impression that ‘infinite sums’ are 
really sums in the same sense as finite sums. 
 Why aren’t there any genuine infinite sums, in the sense of ‘sum’ that 
applies to finite cases? So far, I have put the point by saying that one 
cannot add up infinitely many numbers. This is true but is not really 
the point – after all, a pair of numbers may have a sum even if no one 
ever computes that sum. The real thesis is this: as a conceptual matter, 
addition is an operation defined on pairs of numbers. From this basic 
understanding, one can define a notion of the sum of three numbers 
(‘ a +  b +  c ’ refers to sum of [the sum of  a and  b ] and  c ), the sum of four 
numbers, and so on. But one cannot thus define the sum of infinitely 
many numbers. One can define an ‘infinite sum’ using limits, but then 
one is changing the meaning of ‘sum’. 
 This explains why ‘infinite sums’ may violate the rules of ordinary 
addition, specifically, the commutative and associative laws (or rather, 
infinitary versions of those laws). If they were genuine sums, then this 
would be paradoxical, since the commutative and associative laws are 
self-evident truths (see Section 9.4 above). ‘Infinite sums’ violate the 
rules for addition because they are not actually sums. 
 12.4  Galileo’s paradox 
 My solution to Galileo’s paradox was given in Chapter 10 (Section 10.1.3): 
since the greater-than, less-than, and equal-to relations are relations 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 181
between numbers, and there are no infinite numbers, these relations do 
not apply to the infinite. Thus, in answer to the question ‘Which are more 
numerous: the perfect squares or the natural numbers?’, we can only 
answer that both are beyond number; hence, neither collection can prop-
erly be said to be greater than the other, nor can they be called equal. 
 This thesis implies a rejection of the conclusion that is usually said to 
be established by Cantor’s famous Diagonalization Argument (Section 
6.6): namely, that the set of real numbers is larger than the set of natural 
numbers. These sets, too, (if sets exist) are incomparable since both are 
infinite. The Diagonalization Argument indeed establishes that there is 
no one-to-one function from the natural numbers onto the real numbers, 
which is an interesting discovery. But it is not the same as the conclu-
sion that the real numbers are more numerous than (that is,  instantiate 
a larger number   than ) the natural numbers; to draw this latter conclu-
sion, we must also make the assumption that the greater-than relation is 
identical to the relation that a set bears to another set when there is no 
one-to-one function between the two, but there is a one-to-one function 
from a proper subset of the former onto the latter. 
 Now one might think: ‘But the primary objection to relying exclusively 
on the one-to-one function criterion is that there is a second criterion 
of greaterness – namely, the proper subset criterion (every set is greater 
than any proper subset of itself) – which is equally important. But in this 
case, the two criteria are in agreement. Why, then, may we not conclude 
that in such a case the one set is really greater than the other?’ 
 The answer is that the best  explanation for the fact that the two 
‘criteria’ for greaterness often diverge in the case of infinite collections 
is that infinity is not a kind of number. This explanation in turn implies 
that no infinite collection stands in the greater-than relation. I enclose 
‘criteria’ in scare quotes in this paragraph because the two principles I 
mentioned earlier – 
 1.   A number is increased when one adds to it. 
 2.   If the members of some collection can be paired up with the members 
of another collection, then neither collection is larger than the 
other. 
 – do not (either singly or in conjunction) constitute a definition of 
‘greater than’ but simply are two self-evident principles about the great-
er-than relation. There are other self-evident principles about the great-
er-than relation, such as that it is transitive and asymmetric, which we 
would not be tempted to call ‘criteria’ of greaterness; this is just how we 

182 Approaching Infinity
should think about principles (1) and (2). With that understood, the 
mere fact that a particular attribution of the greater-than relation fails 
to violate either of these principles does not show that the attribution 
is true. 
 My treatment of Galileo’s Paradox is superior to the Cantorian treat-
ment, because my treatment respects the intuitions on which the 
paradox rests, rather than simply ignoring one of these intuitions.  
 12.5  Hilbert’s hotel 
 Begin with the first version of the story, in which the completely occu-
pied hotel with infinitely many rooms is able to accommodate one new 
guest by moving everyone to the next room down. This could not really 
be done. Since the hotel has infinitely many rooms, these rooms must 
be located farther and farther away from the front desk, with no limit 
to their distance. When the new guest shows up at the front desk, he 
may obtain room #1 right away. But the guest from room #1 will then 
be temporarily unaccommodated as he is moving to room #2. The guest 
from #2 will then be out of a room temporarily, as he relocates to room 
#3. And so on. As the infinitely long relocation task proceeds, there will 
always be one guest temporarily out of a room. A similar point applies 
to the later version in which the hotel tries to accommodate infinitely 
many new guests. 
 But you might think: ‘Why suppose that the hotel guests relocate 
 in sequence , with the guest from room #2 moving  after  the guest from 
room #1 arrives at room #2, and so on? Why not suppose that the hotel 
manager notifies all the guests of the new arrangement, using his PA 
system which communicates with all the guests simultaneously? Then 
the rearrangement can be completed in a finite time.’ 
 The answer is that there cannot be such a PA system, since simulta-
neous communication with  all of the guests would require a signal that 
travels at  infinite velocity. Velocity is a natural intensive magnitude, and 
no such magnitude can be infinite. There is no metaphysical limit to 
how fast a signal might travel, but it must have some finite velocity. 
Given that the hotel extends an infinite distance from the front desk, 
the signal cannot reach  all of the infinitely many guests in any finite 
time. The signal can continue traveling indefinitely, so that it reaches 
each guest at some time, but it will never have reached all the guests. 
 But now suppose that no communication was sent out. Instead, each 
of the guests, completely on his own, just decides to move to the next 
room down. Coincidentally, they all decide this at the same time. This 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 183
is metaphysically possible, even though the probability of such a coin-
cidence happening is zero. The new guest then moves into room #1. As 
far as I can tell, this version of the scenario really does offer a metaphysi-
cally possible way for the hotel to accommodate a new guest. Strange 
but true. 
 Part of the intuitive resistance to this scenario may stem from the sense 
that one is getting something for nothing, in a way that shouldn’t be 
possible: we get one more person accommodated, but without creating 
any new rooms and without the existing guests having to give anything 
up. See if this reflection reduces your intuitive resistance: something is 
in fact given up to obtain the benefit for the new customer. Each of the 
previously existing guests must give up a certain amount of in-room time, 
namely, the amount of time required for them to move from one room 
to the next. Because there are infinitely many guests, the total amount 
of room time given up is infinite. The way is then paved for the new 
guest to enjoy as much room time as he wishes, but the benefit gained 
in room-hours will never exceed the infinite cost in room-hours.  
 12.6  Gabriel’s horn 
 Gabriel’s Horn has a finite volume but an infinite surface area. How 
much paint would be required to paint it? 
 This puzzle does not require any special views about the infinite for its 
resolution. The reason why, in the real world, one cannot paint an infin-
itely large surface with a finite volume of paint is that, in the real world, 
there is a limit to how thin a coat of paint can be (for example, it cannot 
be less than one molecule thick). If, therefore, one divides a given (finite) 
volume of paint by this minimum thickness, one obtains the maximum 
surface area that that volume of paint can possibly cover, which must be 
a finite magnitude. If we assume that this minimum-thickness constraint 
applies to the hypothetical painting of Gabriel’s Horn, then the Horn 
could not in fact be painted with a finite amount of paint. If one tried 
pouring the paint into the Horn (even given a volume of paint no less 
than the Horn’s total volume), the paint would only extend so far: the 
Horn gets thinner and thinner, approaching a diameter of zero as a limit. 
So at the point at which the diameter was less than the minimum thick-
ness for a coat of paint, the paint would be unable to move any further 
into the Horn (for example, because the diameter of the Horn at that 
point was less than the size of a paint molecule). 
 Suppose, on the other hand, that we assume there is no limit to how 
thin a coat of paint may be. In that case, there is no problem: an infinite 

184 Approaching Infinity
surface can be covered by a finite volume of paint. The coat of paint just 
has to get thinner and thinner, approaching a thickness of zero.  
 12.7  Smullyan’s infinite rod 
 In this case, the infinitely long, horizontal rod remains parallel to the 
plane, despite the fact that it is supported at only one end. The rod 
experiences an infinite torque (a force tending to cause it to rotate), and 
there is no counterbalancing torque, since nothing is actually pushing 
on the rod at any point other than the one endpoint. Yet the rod fails 
to rotate. 
 The stipulations of this scenario are, however, impossible. The finite 
vertical rod, the infinite horizontal rod, and the plane are all stipulated 
to be absolutely unbendable, unbreakable, and impenetrable, no matter 
the force applied to them. That is, all three are composed of material 
with infinite yield strength (roughly, resistance to bending), infinite 
tensile strength (resistance to stretching), and infinite compressive 
strength (resistance to compression). What happens when such a mate-
rial is subjected to an infinite force, such as the weight of the infinite 
rod? This question is unanswerable because it is ill-conceived, in the 
same manner as the question ‘What happens when an object with infi-
nite inertia is subjected to an infinite force?’ The only answer is that 
such a scenario is impossible, since there cannot be such an object or 
such a force. Material strength is a natural, intensive magnitude; on 
my account, therefore, there cannot be an object with infinite yield, 
compressive, or tensile strength. 
 The postulation of one infinite intensive magnitude usually leads to 
others. In this case, a material with infinite strength would have infinite 
binding energy, which in turn means that the construction of a sample 
of such material would involve liberating an infinite amount of energy 
from particles with infinite rest mass. 
 Given that the materials must have finite strength, at least one of 
four things will happen: (a) the vertical rod breaks under the weight of 
the horizontal rod, (b) the horizontal rod punctures the plane beneath 
it, (c) the horizontal rod breaks in two, leaving a finite part having one 
end supported by the vertical rod and the other end on the ground, 
and an infinite part lying flat on the ground, or (d) the horizontal rod 
bends, leaving an infinite portion of it lying flat on the ground and a 
finite portion stretching in a concave curve from the ground up to the 
end attached to the vertical rod. In each case, the force that would cause 
these deformations would be the weight of the infinite horizontal rod.  

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 185
 12.8  Zeno’s paradox 
 12.8.1  How to complete an endless series 
 Zeno’s argument against the possibility of motion goes something like 
this:
 1.   To reach the ground, the ball must complete the series, ½, ¾, ⅞, ... .  
 2.   This series is endless. 
 3.   It is impossible to complete an endless series. 
 4.   Therefore, it is impossible for the ball to reach the ground.  
 What is wrong with this argument is that it trades on confusion between 
two meanings of ‘endless’ and two meanings of ‘complete’. To disam-
biguate, I will distinguish ‘endless 1 ’ and ‘endless 2 ’, ‘complete 1 ’ and 
‘complete 2 ’. Assume that  S is some series of events or actions. Then we 
can give the following definitions: 
 S is endless 1 = df  S has no last member. 
 S is endless 2 = df There is no time at which every member of  S has 
 occurred. 
 S is completed 1 = df The last member of  S has occurred. 
 S is completed 2 = df Every member of  S has occurred. 
 Plainly, if a series is endless 1 , then it cannot be completed 1 . Also, if a 
series is endless 2 , then it is never completed 2 . This, I suggest, accounts 
for the plausibility of premise 3. Furthermore, confusion between 
completion 1 and completion 2 would be understandable, since the two 
concepts are coextensive for all finite cases; that is, a finite series is 
always completed 2 exactly when it is completed 1 (where we under-
stand the ‘last member’ of the series as the one that occurs last in time). 
Nevertheless, matters stand otherwise for infinite series, and from the 
fact that an infinite series is endless 1 , it does not follow that it cannot 
be completed 2 . 
 Suppose I am going out of town for the week, and I get you to promise 
to feed all of my pets while I’m gone. If I have a turtle, then to keep 
your promise, you would have to feed the turtle. On the other hand, if 
I  don’t have  a turtle, then feeding my nonexistent turtle is not required. 
Similarly, if series  S has a last member, then going through the last 
member is required for one to count as having gone through all of the 
series. But if  S does not have  a last member, then going through this 
nonexistent member is not required. 

186 Approaching Infinity
 The Zeno series has no last member, so reaching this nonexistent 
member is not required for completing 2 the series. One completes 2 the 
series simply by going through each member at some time. If we are 
given the speed at which the ball falls and the distance it is to fall, we 
could say, for any member of the series, precisely when that member 
gets completed; furthermore, there would be a time such that every 
member of the series would get completed before that time. So the series 
is endless 1 but not endless 2 ; it is never completed 1 but it is completed 2 . 
 Analogous observations apply to the variation of Zeno’s Paradox that 
uses a  beginningless series. In this variation, the ball, to reach the ground, 
must first reach the halfway point; but before that, it must reach the 
one-quarter mark; but before that, it must reach the one-eighth mark; 
and so on. Zeno might argue that because this series has no beginning, 
it cannot be begun, and therefore, the ball cannot even start its journey 
to the ground. Again, Zeno’s case would rest on equivocation. True, 
the series has no first member, so it cannot be ‘begun’ in the sense of 
performing the first member of the series; but the series  can be begun in 
the sense that there can be a time such that every member of the series 
occurs after that time. 
 Neither the beginningless nor the endless Zeno series is ruled out by 
our account of the impossible infinite: no natural intensive magnitude 
is required to take on an infinite value in either of the Zeno series. There 
is only a finite distance, traversed in a finite time at a finite speed. The 
only infinity appearing in the story is the infinite  cardinal number  of 
stages of the series, but this in itself poses no problem. 
 12.8.2  The staccato run 
 There is a variation on the Zeno series that is sometimes called ‘the stac-
cato run’.  3 In this version, a person goes through an endless Zeno series, 
but the person pauses after each part of the journey. Thus, one travels a 
distance of ½ unit, stops, then travels ¼ unit, stops, then travels ⅛ unit, 
stops, and so on. (If the person stops for some nonzero temporal interval 
each time, then these intervals must get progressively shorter.) 
 I agree with Aristotle that  this  infinite series is impossible – but not 
for the reason Aristotle gives. Aristotle’s reason for rejecting the stac-
cato run is that the pauses render the divisions between motions ‘actual’ 
rather than merely potential, and thus that this series would be an 
actual infinity, unlike the original Zeno series, which is a mere potential 
infinity. My reason for rejecting the staccato run is that this variation 
 3  Grünbaum 1968. 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 187
of the Zeno series, unlike the original version, requires infinite natural 
intensive magnitudes. 
 To see why, consider what happens to your acceleration as you proceed 
through this series. In stage  n , you travel a distance  d  n  , in a time  t  n  . 
Your average velocity during the stage is thus  d  n  / t  n  . This average velocity 
remains constant throughout the series; in stage  n + 1, you travel half 
the distance as in stage  n , in half the time, so your average velocity in 
stage  n + 1 is ( d  n  /2)/( t  n  /2) =  d  n  / t  n  , the same as the average velocity in stage 
 n . But in each stage, you have to accelerate from speed zero up to your 
peak velocity, then decelerate back to speed zero – and in each stage, you 
have half the time available to do this as you had in the preceding stage. 
This means that your (average) acceleration must double with each 
succeeding stage. This in turn means that the (average)  force  applied 
to the runner doubles in every stage. The runner’s body will thus need 
infinite material strength in order to avoid disintegration; the runner 
will also need to start the journey with an infinite store of energy, thus 
making the runner’s body a region of infinite energy density.  4 
 12.8.3  The short staccato run 
 The staccato run can be modified to avoid the problems just described. 
Instead of letting  d  n +1 =  d  n  /2, suppose we stipulate that  d  n +1 =  d  n  /4, so that 
in each stage, the runner moves only one  quarter of the distance he 
moved in the previous stage. (The ratio of times remains ½, as before.) 
In that case, the accelerations required in each stage remain constant, 
and there is no longer any need for infinite material strength, nor for 
infinite energy. 
 This type of series may be uncompletable nonetheless. Most moving 
mechanisms contain surfaces in contact that slide relative to one 
another, creating frictional resistance. In such cases, some minimum 
force is required to overcome static friction, to set the surfaces in rela-
tive motion starting from a position of relative rest. As a result, some 
minimum energy is required each time such a mechanism is stopped 
 4  The energy expended in moving the runner is ∫ F · dx, where  x is the distance 
through which the force moves the runner. Distance diminishes by half in each 
stage, while (average) force doubles, so a fixed amount of energy is expended in 
each of infinitely many stages. Oddly enough, Grünbaum (1968, 401) recognizes 
these problems (omitting the point about material strength) yet still seems to 
regard the staccato motion as possible in some sense. About these problems, he 
says only, ‘Let us disregard these specifically dynamical difficulties’ and proceeds 
to describe the staccato motion as ‘kinematically’ physically possible. I am unsure 
what to make of this. Is he proposing that there are two kinds of modality, ‘kine-
matic’ and ‘dynamic’? 

188 Approaching Infinity
and restarted; thus, an infinite number of starts and stops would require 
infinite energy. 
 However, I have no general proof that there cannot be a moveable 
object that stops and starts an infinite number of times in a finite time 
period. The possibility of such an infinite series would depend upon 
there being some frictionless mechanism for moving the object, a 
mechanism that has no minimum energy requirement for starting it up 
from its ‘off’ position. If such a mechanism could exist, then the Short 
Staccato Run would be possible. 
 12.9  The divided stick 
 12.9.1   The standard view 
 In the Divided Stick problem, the stick is divided infinitely many times, 
into halves, quarters, eighths, and so on. What is left at the end? 
 One puzzle we raised (Section 6.9.6) concerns how many pieces are 
left. It looks as though there are  0 cuts made in the stick, resulting in  0 
pieces. 5 Each piece will be a cross sectional slice with a thickness of zero. 
But the stick started out composed of  continuum many pieces just like 
that; so where did all the extra pieces go? 
 First, let’s answer this puzzle according to the standard view: indeed, 
the stick would be divided  0 times, and it would thus be cut into slices 
a single geometric point thick, that is, slices of zero thickness. But there 
would not be  0 pieces; there would be continuum many pieces. The 
stick, in short, would just wind up resolved into the continuum many 
single-point-thick cross-sections of which it was composed to begin 
with. This must be true, because for  any  two of those cross-sectional 
parts, there would be a stage (in fact, infinitely many stages) at which 
the stick was cut somewhere in between those two parts. So at the end, 
no connected regions of nonzero length would remain. 
 The fact that there are  0 cuts does not mean that only  0 pieces are 
produced. To convince yourself of this, consider this example: start with 
the real number line between 0 and 1, and imagine that every rational 
number in that interval is removed. What is left is the set of all irrational 
numbers between 0 and 1. Try to imagine this as a stick with many holes 
in it. There are  0 holes, at the locations of the rational numbers. But 
the parts that remain – all the irrational numbers – have the cardinality 
of the continuum. And there will be no extended, connected parts of 
 5  Oppy 2006, 66–7, 105. 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 189
the line, that is, no extended intervals without holes in them, because 
between  any  two real numbers, there are some (in fact, infinitely many) 
rational numbers. So cutting out the rational numbers amounts to 
making  0 cuts, producing continuum many pieces. 
 What about the question of the mass and length of the stick: since 
each of the slices remaining at the end has a thickness and a mass of 
zero, why isn’t their collective size and mass also zero? On the standard 
view, the answer is that there is no principle of additivity of sizes (or 
masses, or anything else) for uncountable collections. Since there are 
continuum many of these size-zero parts, all bets are off as regards the 
size of the aggregate composed of them. Furthermore, one could rear-
range these pieces to make a stick of any desired length – just move each 
slice with original  x -coordinate  x 0 to location  r / x 0 , where  r is the desired 
length of the new stick. The standard view boldly embraces such coun-
terintuitive consequences. 
 12.9.2  The impossibility of infinite division with a single knife 
 So much for the standard view. On my view of infinity and related 
matters, what should one think of the divided stick? If, as suggested 
in Chapter 11, we reject the possibility of size-zero regions of space, 
and presumably also the existence of size-zero parts of an object, then 
we have a problem. 6 We cannot say that what is left of the stick is a 
collection of slices with a thickness of zero. Since we have rejected infin-
itesimals, it also cannot be a collection of slices with infinitesimal thick-
ness. Perhaps there will be nothing left – the stick will simply have been 
destroyed by the cutting process? 
 A more plausible response is that the infinite cutting process is impos-
sible. Suppose, to begin with, that the stick is to be cut using a single 
knife. The knife must be moved faster and faster, without limit, to 
make all the cuts in a finite time interval. This will require the knife to 
undergo unlimited accelerations and decelerations. A material of any 
finite strength would break apart at some point in this process. So the 
scenario requires a knife with infinite material strength. (As in the case 
of Smullyan’s infinite rod, this also implies an infinite binding energy 
for the material, whose construction would liberate infinite energy from 
particles with infinite rest mass.) Because material strength is a natural 
intensive magnitude, this is metaphysically impossible. 
 In addition, since the knife (with nonzero mass) would have to move an 
infinite total distance in a finite time, the amount of work done in moving 
 6  This problem is discussed by Hawthorne and Weatherson (2004).  

190 Approaching Infinity
the knife would be infinite. Since the scenario is to occur within a finite time 
period within the vicinity of the rod, this spatiotemporal region would have 
infinite mass-energy density. The vicinity of the rod would thus be a singu-
larity, with infinite space-time curvature according to general relativity.  
 12.9.3  The case of multiple knives 
 What if there is more than one knife? Adding any finite number of 
knives makes no difference: some of the knives would still have to make 
infinitely many cuts in a finite time, and so infinite material strength 
would still be required. So what if there is a countable infinity of knives? 
Perhaps each knife is initially poised over one of the division points. 
The knives could all move simultaneously, thus completing  0 divisions 
without any knife being subjected to unlimited forces or accelerations. 
 Alas, there would be no room for all these knives. Recall that the divi-
sions are to be made arbitrarily close to each other – that is, for any 
given division location (place where the rod is to be cut), there are other 
division locations arbitrarily close. A knife with any nonzero thickness 
would therefore get in the way of infinitely many other knives. Each 
knife must therefore have a thickness of zero – but we have already 
rejected the possibility of size-zero objects. 
 Okay, forget about making the cuts simultaneously. Let’s suppose that 
the  0 cuts are made with  0 knives, each knife making a single cut. Knife 
1 starts out one centimeter above the first division point (in the middle 
of the stick). Meanwhile, knives 2 and 3 stand two centimeters above 
the second and third division points; knives 4, 5, 6, and 7 are 3 centim-
eters above the fourth through seventh division points; and so on (see 
Figure 12.2). So the collection of knives stretches an infinite distance 
above the rod. Furthermore, the knives get thinner and thinner as we go 
up: knives 2 and 3 are each half the thickness of knife 1; knives 4, 5, 6, 
Knife 4
Knife 2
Knife 5
Knife 1
Knife 6
Knife 3
Knife 7
 Figure 12.2  Dividing a stick with infinitely many knives 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 191
and 7 are half as thick again; and so on. This prevents any of the knives 
from getting in the way of each other. Assume that the material strength 
of the knives increases without bound, so that the knives always remain 
able to cut through the rod despite their diminishing thicknesses; also, 
the initial velocity of knife  n toward the rod increases as  n increases, such 
that all the knives pass through the rod within a finite time period. 
 What happens when a part of the rod is cut in two – do the two resulting 
halves remain where they are, or are they pushed apart? Suppose we say 
they remain where they are. In that case, there is no real puzzle about 
what is left at the end: what is left will just be the same one-meter rod 
we started with. The rod will have had a countable infinity of objects 
pass through it, but it will remain as it was. Now, you might think that 
merely having a knife pass through it would be enough to divide a rod 
in two. To see why this is a mistake, we need to first think about what 
makes a normal solid object a single object, and what happens when an 
object is cut in two. 
 First, let’s describe how these things work in the actual world. Let’s 
say we have a metal rod. What makes this rod a single object is the 
fact that there are electromagnetic forces (or dispositions to exert forces) 
holding its molecules in a particular configuration. If someone pulls on 
one end of the rod, the whole rod moves, precisely because of these 
dispositions. The intermolecular forces are sensitive to small changes in 
distances: when one pulls on one end of the rod, the rod  slightly deforms 
(normally, this deformation is undetectably small); the molecules at that 
end move  very slightly  farther away from the rest of the rod than they 
were before, and this slight increase in distance causes attractive forces 
between the molecules to arise, pulling them back together. If one grabs 
both ends of the rod and tries pulling them apart, the attractive forces 
can become very large (depending on the material’s tensile strength), 
with very slight stretching of the rod. 
 On the other hand, if one tries  pushing the ends of the rod toward 
each other, this will cause a very slight compression of the rod, where-
upon repulsive forces arise between the molecules, tending to push 
them apart, back to their original distances. The molecules have a sort of 
preferred distance from each other, such that if they are moved slightly 
closer than that distance, repulsive forces arise, and if they are moved 
slightly farther apart than that distance, attractive forces arise.  7 
 However, it is also important that the attractive forces only behave 
this way within a certain narrow range of distances: that is, if some part 
 7  Giancoli 1988, 412. 

192 Approaching Infinity
of the rod is moved  very slightly  farther away from the rest of the rod 
(that is, the rod is stretched), large attractive forces arise; however, once 
a part of the rod is moved a  significant distance  away from the rest of 
the rod, the attractive forces become negligible. This latter situation is 
what we call ‘breaking’ or ‘cutting’ the rod in two. A certain minimum 
amount of energy is required to move the parts of a solid object apart 
to sufficient distances that the attractive forces become negligible; this 
quantity is referred to as the object’s  binding energy . Liquids and gases 
have zero or negligible binding energies; solid objects have significant 
binding energies. 
 Notice that these are not minor details; all of this concerns the very 
essence of solidity, and what it means to break or cut a solid object apart. 
A solid object is essentially an object with a significant binding energy, 
and to break or cut such an object apart is just to cause the parts to 
become separated to such a distance that the attractive forces between 
the parts become negligible. 
 Now, for purposes of the divided stick example, we have to set aside 
atomic theory and imagine that we have a rod composed of atomless 
gunk. It is unclear what else we should assume about the physics of this 
alternate world. However, it seems fair to assume that we’re supposed to 
understand the objects in this hypothetical world in something like the 
way we understand real objects, except for whatever needs to be changed 
when we give up atomic theory. So even though we are no longer supposing 
that the rod contains  smallest parts (atoms or molecules), we should still 
assume that the parts of the rod are stuck together (they resist being sepa-
rated); this is what makes the rod count as a solid object. We should also 
understand that there is some distance such that, if two adjacent parts of 
the rod are separated by at least that distance, then they cease to attract 
each other (to any non-negligible degree), and the rod is thus broken in 
two. Some nontrivial energy input must be required to achieve this result; 
that is, the rod must have some nontrivial binding energy. 
 When a knife passes through an object, thereby cutting it in two, what 
happens is that the knife pushes the two parts of the object apart, suffi-
ciently far that the attractive forces between the parts become negligible. 
For simplicity, assume that the knife has a triangular cross-section. As 
the knife moves into the material that it is cutting, each of the surfaces 
of the knife exerts a force on the part of the material that it is in contact 
with, pushing that material apart, as in Figure 12.3. 
 Importantly, the amount of force with which the knife pushes the 
two halves of the object apart is related to the thickness of the knife 
(and correspondingly, to the angle of the wedge). The thinner the knife 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 193
is, the less force it will exert pushing the pieces apart as the knife moves 
through the material. As the thickness of the knife approaches zero, that 
force approaches zero. 8 
 Now, whatever material the rod is made of, there will be some tensile 
strength of that material, and hence, a minimum energy required to 
separate two parts of the rod sufficiently to make them into two separate 
objects. But in the scenario as we are now envisioning it, the thickness 
of the knives approaches zero as the cutting process proceeds. Hence, at 
some point in the series of ‘cuts’, the knives are no longer able to exert 
sufficient force to cut apart the pieces of the rod. After this point, the 
knives would either pass through the rod without breaking it, or get 
stuck at the surface. Note that in the actual world, a sufficiently thin 
object can in fact pass through a material without breaking it apart. 
 But suppose we say that the hypothetical world has a different sort of 
physics, in which there is no minimum degree of separation required 
to overcome the attractive forces between the parts of an object;  any 
nonzero separation between two parts of the rod causes the parts to 
become two separate objects. What then? 
 The amount of work done in cutting an object apart is equal to the 
magnitude of the force exerted on the parts multiplied by the distance 
the parts are moved apart by that force; this is also equal to the energy 
expended. On the present proposal, since there is no lower limit to the 
distance the parts may be moved, there is no lower limit to how much 
energy is required to break the object apart. That is to say, the object 
has a binding energy of zero. But this means that it is not, after all, a 
 Figure 12.3  Cutting a material 
 8  Why? The force moving the knife is a downward force. As the knife approaches 
zero thickness, its shape approaches that of a vertical plane. A downward force 
impressed on a vertical plane translates into zero horizontal force, since the 
driving force is completely orthogonal to the horizontal dimension.  

194 Approaching Infinity
solid object. If a non-solid object – for instance, a pool of liquid – has an 
infinite number of blades pass through it, what is left at the end is simply 
the same pool of liquid one started with; there is no paradox there.  
 12.9.4  Infinite energy density 
 Here is a simpler consideration applicable to either the single-knife or 
the multiple-knife story. Some minimum amount of energy must be 
expended each time the rod is cut, because one must at least overcome 
the binding energy of the rod, which holds any two parts of the rod 
together. If, therefore, infinitely many cuts are to be made within a finite 
time interval and within the region occupied by the rod, that spatio-
temporal region must have infinite energy density. But this would be an 
infinite natural intensive magnitude. Thus, the whole scenario is impos-
sible; there cannot be enough energy in any region to execute infinitely 
many cuts. 
 12.10   Thomson’s lamp 
 12.10.1  Puzzles of inconsistency and indeterminacy 
 After the lamp is switched infinitely many times, we are asked to say 
whether it ends up on or off. Call this ‘the lamp question’. Why is this 
a puzzle? 
 There are at least two different kinds of puzzling question. One is a 
question in which it seems as though any of the possible answers leads 
to a contradiction or other absurdity; we might call this an  inconsistency 
puzzle . For instance, consider the liar sentence, 
 (L) Sentence L is false. 
 Is L true or false? If it’s true, then it’s true that L is false, so L is false. But if 
it’s false, then it’s false that L is false, so L is true. So both of the possible 
answers, ‘true’ and ‘false’, are ruled out. 
 Another sort of puzzling question is one in which  none  of the possible 
answers is ruled out; this we may call an  indeterminacy puzzle . Thus, 
consider the truth-teller sentence, 
 (T) Sentence T is true. 
 Is T true or false? We could say that T is true, and all that follows is that 
it’s true that T is true, which is perfectly consistent. Or we could say 
that T is false, and all that follows is that it’s false that T is true, which is 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 195
equally consistent. But surely this doesn’t mean that there is no problem 
here. Imagine a philosopher declaring that T is simply true. Granted, 
this philosopher’s view would not be  contradictory , but it would still be 
crazy to hold this view. For what could make this the right view to take, 
rather than the equally consistent claim that T is false? 
 The suggestion that T is either true or false but that we simply  don’t 
know  which it is, seems equally benighted. It’s not that there are some 
epistemically inaccessible facts about the sentence or the world out 
there. It seems, rather, that there just aren’t any facts of a sort that could 
make T count as true rather than false, or vice versa. That is, there is no 
truth-maker for either T or its negation. 
 Of course, not all cases in which a question lacks an answer consti-
tute intellectual problems. For instance, when is Chewbacca’s birthday? 
There is no determinate answer to this question, but this is not intellec-
tually puzzling, because we have no independent expectation that the 
question  should have an answer. An indeterminacy puzzle occurs, then, 
when a question  seemingly should have an answer , and yet none of the 
possible answers has a claim to being the correct one. The question of 
the truth-value of T seemingly should have an answer, because we have 
a background belief or intuition to the effect that meaningful, declara-
tive sentences should generally be either true or false. 
 I don’t mean to suggest that this problem is insoluble, nor that the 
background assumption is unassailable. A solution to the puzzle might 
consist of motivating a theoretical account of the conditions under 
which a statement lacks a definite truth value, and explaining how T 
satisfies these conditions. My point here is simply that some sort of solu-
tion is called for. 
 What about Thomson’s Lamp? Here, the question is ‘After the infi-
nitely many switchings, would the lamp be on or off?’ Thomson presents 
this as an inconsistency puzzle: he says the lamp cannot be on, because 
for every time that it was switched on, it was subsequently switched off; 
but it cannot be off, because for every time that it was switched off, it 
was later switched back on. Yet the lamp must be either on or off. Quoth 
Thomson, ‘This is a contradiction.’ 9 
 12.10.2  Benacerraf’s solution 
 Paul Benacerraf penned a solution to the lamp puzzle, a solution that 
Thomson subsequently accepted.  10 As Benacerraf notes, the description 
   9  Thomson 1954, 5. 
 10  Benacerraf 1962; Thomson 2001. 

196 Approaching Infinity
of what happens during the infinite series of switchings does not logically 
entail anything about anything that happens outside of (either before or 
after) the series. Thus, there is no contradiction in a story according to 
which a lamp is switched infinitely many times, in the way specified in 
Thomson’s example, and at the instant  after  all of these switchings the 
lamp is on. Nor is there a contradiction in a story in which the lamp is 
switched infinitely many times, and at the instant following the switch-
ings the lamp is off. 
 Benacerraf is correct to note that Thomson’s Lamp does not pose an 
inconsistency puzzle; neither answer to the Lamp Question is incon-
sistent. What he overlooks, however, is the  indeterminacy  puzzle. Indeed, 
the very fact that neither answer to the lamp question is inconsistent is 
 part of the setup  of the indeterminacy puzzle. It initially seems as though 
the lamp question should have an answer – there ought to be something 
that would happen if we had such a lamp. But neither ‘on’ nor ‘off’ 
seems to be the correct answer, because neither of these answers is better 
than the other. As Benacerraf notes, logic won’t tell us how the lamp 
ends up; furthermore, it seems as though, short of actually building such 
a lamp, nothing else will either. 
 Benacerraf would probably deny that the lamp question ‘should’ 
have a determinate answer. Questions about what would happen in 
some hypothetical scenario often lack answers because the hypothet-
ical scenario has not been described in enough detail. Benacerraf might 
say that either answer to the lamp question is possible, and it is simply 
up to the person who wants us to consider such a scenario to stipulate 
which thing happens. Their failure to do so leaves the question without 
a determinate answer, but this is no more puzzling than the fact that 
Chewbacca’s birthday is indeterminate because George Lucas failed to 
specify it. So one might argue. 11 
 What should we think of this proposed dissolution of the problem? 
It is true that many questions about counterfactual scenarios lack deter-
minate answers. On the other hand, many such questions  have  determi-
nate answers. Moreover, it is not the case that such questions only have 
determinate answers when the descriptions of the scenarios  entail  those 
answers. 
 For example: suppose there is an ordinary lamp which starts out on. 
At time  t , I switch it off, then I leave the country. No one else interferes 
 11  This position is most clearly defended by Peijnenburg and Atkinson (2010, 
50–1). 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 197
with the lamp either. End of story. Question: one minute after  t , would 
the lamp be on or off? 
 This is not indeterminate. Obviously, the answer is ‘off’. Notice that 
this answer is not entailed by the description of the scenario. After all, 
isn’t it  logically possible  that I switch the lamp off at  t , and then the lamp 
just spontaneously goes back on? Yes, but this is not what  would in fact 
happen if I enacted this scenario. 
 As this case illustrates, in hypothetical scenarios involving lamps, one 
normally does not need to expressly stipulate the state of the lamp at 
each specific instant of time in order for there to be an answer to what 
state it would be in. Normally, it is enough to describe  what things are 
done to the lamp in the time leading up to (and possibly including)  t . 
As long as that is sufficiently described, there is an answer to what state 
the lamp would be in at  t . In Thomson’s scenario, we are told everything 
that is done to the lamp leading up to time  t . We may further assume 
that no one interferes with the lamp  at t  either. On the face of it, there-
fore, there ought to be an answer to the question of what state the lamp 
would be in at  t . Certainly Benacerraf has given us no reason to think 
otherwise – the mere fact that the scenario description does not entail 
an answer to the question cuts no ice. But, as we have said, no answer 
to the question suggests itself as plausibly the right one. So we have an 
indeterminacy puzzle, which so far remains unaddressed. 
 12.10.3  The impossibility of infinite switching 
 My solution to the puzzle will be that there is no need for the lamp 
question to have an answer, because the question contains a false 
presupposition: the question presupposes that a lamp could be switched 
infinitely many times in a finite time. This is in fact metaphysically 
impossible, because it would require the instantiation of infinite inten-
sive magnitudes. 
 In Thomson’s original description of the scenario, the lamp is 
controlled by a pushbutton switch that, when pushed, switches the lamp 
from on to off or vice versa. We are supposed to imagine it being pushed 
 0 times within one minute, with the switchings being performed faster 
and faster, such that infinitely many of them fit within any arbitrarily 
small neighborhood of the boundary instant,  t = 1 minute. 
 Each time it is pushed, the button, starting from rest, moves a certain 
distance downward, then stops, then moves back up and stops. Each 
time, this is accomplished in half the time of the previous button-
pushing. This means that the average speed of the button doubles in 
each stage of the series, which in turn means that (the lower bound of) 

198 Approaching Infinity
the magnitude of the button’s acceleration doubles, which means that 
the force required to accelerate the button doubles.  12 All of this implies 
several infinite intensive magnitudes. The speed of the switch within any 
temporal neighborhood of the final time ( t = 1 minute) will be infinite, 
since the switch moves an infinite total distance in a finite time. The 
amount of work done, and hence the energy expended, in pushing the 
switch these infinitely many times would also be infinite. This implies 
that the spatiotemporal neighborhood of the switch would have infinite 
mass-energy density; hence, it would be a black hole. The friction created 
by the moving parts would also increase without bound, leading to the 
generation of infinite heat within the switching mechanism. Finally, the 
switch must have infinite material strength, since otherwise it would 
be destroyed by the unlimited forces applied to it during the interval. 
Needless to say, on my view all of this is quite impossible. 
 12.10.4  The rotary switch variation 
 All of these infinite magnitudes are generated because we assume that 
the switch must move some minimum distance each time the lamp is 
turned on or off. But what if there is a way to design a switch such 
that there is no minimum distance it must move in order to change its 
state? 
 Here is a possible mechanism (Figure 12.4). There are two metal 
contact points. One of them is fixed; the other is attached to a dial. 
When the dial is in a certain position – call this position ‘0°’ – the metal 
contact points are in contact, which completes a circuit, turning the 
lamp on. When the dial is in any other position, the circuit is broken 
and the lamp is off. The dial starts out at 0°. After half a minute, it is 
rotated 180°, turning the lamp off. After another quarter minute, the 
dial is turned back to 0°. After another eighth of a minute, it is turned 
45° (one quarter of the first rotation). Then back to 0°, then 11.25°, then 
0°, then 2.8125°, and so on. (Aside: why does the rotation multiply by 
one quarter each time, rather than by one half? To avoid divergent accel-
erations, as discussed in Sections 12.8.2–12.8.3.) 
 This series of turns effectively turns the lamp on and off infinitely 
many times. Unlike the original version of the story, this story does 
 12  The accelerations need not be uniform. However, if an object, starting from 
rest, is to move a given distance within a given time, then there will be a certain 
lower bound to the average value of the  magnitude (this being a scalar) of the 
object’s acceleration during that time period. This enables us to predict, with 
generality, that the lamp switch must be subjected to accelerations that increase 
without bound. 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 199
not require the switch to travel an infinite distance in a finite time. The 
‘infinite sum’ of the rotations is 2(180°) + 2(45°) + 2(11.25°) + ... = 480°. 
Since the angular distance the dial is turned decreases exponentially, 
just as the time allotted for the switchings decreases exponentially, 
there is no need for ever-increasing average speeds. The average speed 
of the dial diminishes by ½ in each stage, while average acceleration 
and average force are constant. Since the dial needn’t move an infinite 
distance, there is no longer any need for infinite energy, and since the 
force applied to the mechanism remains bounded, there is no need for 
infinite material strength. 
 On my view, then,  this  scenario is metaphysically possible – or at least, 
I don’t see any reason why it should not be possible (though it may be 
impossible for reasons I haven’t thought of). But in this version of the 
story, there is no indeterminacy puzzle anymore. The question, ‘What 
would be the lamp’s state at the end of the switching process?’ has a 
definite answer: the answer is that the lamp would be  on. 13 
 Why? As the series of switchings proceeds, the angle the dial is turned 
in each stage progressively diminishes, approaching zero as a limit. That 
is, the metal contact attached to the dial comes closer and closer to 
remaining at its 0° position. Therefore, if the spatiotemporal path of the 
contact point is to be continuous, there is only one place the moveable 
contact point can be at the end of the minute: it has to be at the 0° posi-
tion. Any other position would require it to discontinuously jump some 
distance at the last instant. 
Fixed contact
Off
On
Acme Light
Switches
Acme Light
Switches
 Figure 12.4  A rotary switch for Thomson’s lamp 
 13  This point is insightfully argued by Grünbaum (1968, 403–4) and Beresford 
(1981). 

200 Approaching Infinity
 Now, you might say: ‘But it is  logically possible  that the contact have a 
discontinuous spatiotemporal path. It is, for example, logically possible 
that it just appears at the 90° position at the last instant.’ Yes, it is. It is 
also logically possible that the dial turns into a rabbit at the last instant 
and hops away. But these things are not what  would in fact happen. 
In general, physical objects do not teleport randomly, and there is no 
reason to think that this general principle would change if the Thomson 
Lamp were to exist. So what  would  happen is that the dial would end in 
the on position. 
 In fact, the lamp would be on not only at the last instant but 
throughout some short interval at the end of the minute. The reason 
is that when the contact points were sufficiently close, electric current 
would arc across them; thus, turning the dial a very small distance fails 
to turn the lamp off. This is necessarily true in any world with anything 
like electricity as we understand it. To see why, let’s review a little about 
electricity. 
 The current in an electric circuit, according to Ohm’s Law, equals the 
voltage of the circuit divided by its resistance. The resistance of a given 
part of a circuit (with uniform material and uniform cross-section) is 
equal to the resistivity of the material (an intrinsic property of the mate-
rial, which indicates its propensity to resist the flow of electrons through 
it), times its length, divided by its cross-sectional area. Now, the resis-
tivity of air is extremely high, on the order of 10 16 Ohm-meters, which 
is approximately twenty-four orders of magnitude greater than that of a 
good conductor, such as copper.  14 This is why in most practical contexts, 
it is a reasonable approximation to treat air as being completely non-
conductive, or having infinite resistivity. But nothing (not even empty 
space) can have literally infinite resistivity. Given the finite  resistivity  of 
air, the  resistance  created by the gap between the metal contacts would 
be proportional to the width of the gap. As the series of lamp-switch-
ings proceeds, this gap becomes arbitrarily small, which means that the 
resistance it adds to the circuit comes arbitrarily close to zero, and thus, 
the current flow becomes arbitrarily close to the normal current flow of 
the lamp when it is turned on. 
 In the scenario, we are supposed to imagine that  any nonzero gap 
between the contacts completely disrupts the current flow. This is an 
idealization that would be harmless in most practical contexts, but its 
falsity matters crucially in this context. The only way in which it could 
be true would be if either the voltage of the lamp’s power source was zero, 
 14  Helmenstine 2014. 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 201
or the resistivity of air was infinite. But resistivity cannot be infinite, 
since resistivity is a natural intensive magnitude, and if the voltage is 
zero then the lamp is  always off. 
 The principles relied upon in this analysis are not minor details – 
Ohm’s Law and the inverse relationship between resistance and the 
length of a resistor are central principles about how electrical circuits 
work. If one says, ‘Well, suppose those laws were false’, then one is really 
postulating some phenomenon completely different from electricity. In 
that case, it would be up to the person introducing this postulate to 
articulate the nature and principles of this alien phenomenon.  
 12.11  The Littlewood-Ross Banker 
 12.11.1  The impossibility of infinite motion 
 In the Banker paradox, you start with bill #1, and you successively trade 
bill 1 for bills 2–10, bill 2 for bills 11–20, and so on. You take a $9 profit, 
infinitely many times; yet at the end, you have nothing, because for 
every  n , you gave away bill  n in the  n th round of the game. To complete 
the game in a finite time, you play the first round in half a minute, the 
second round in a quarter of a minute, and so on. 
 By now, it will come as no surprise that I consider this scenario to be 
impossible, since it requires various infinite intensive magnitudes. Let’s 
try to describe the scenario in a little more detail. You start out with a 
‘pile’ consisting of just one dollar, which is labeled ‘1’. The Banker starts 
with an infinitely tall pile of $1 bills, with bill #2 on the bottom. Bill 3 is 
on top of bill 2, bill 4 on top of bill 3, and so on. Each time the Banker 
is called upon to give you some bills, he physically moves them from his 
pile onto the top of your pile; similarly, each time you are called upon 
to give him a bill, you physically move it from the bottom of your pile 
to the bottom of the Banker’s pile. 
 In this case, as the game proceeds, the speed with which bills must 
be moved increases without bound; likewise, both your hand and the 
Banker’s hand must move faster and faster without bound, as you 
grab and move bills ever more rapidly. The Banker’s hand will also 
have to move ever-increasing distances as the minute elapses and the 
height of your pile approaches infinity. The velocities of your hands 
(or whatever objects are used to move the bills) would be infinite in 
any neighborhood of the boundary instant ( t = 1 minute), since an 
infinite total distance must be covered in a finite time. The paper of 
which the bills are made would need to have infinite material strength, 

202 Approaching Infinity
as would your hand and the Banker’s hand, in order to withstand 
the unlimited accelerations. You and the Banker would each need 
to possess an infinite store of energy in order to complete the infi-
nite series of motions, so your bodies would need to contain infinite 
mass-energy density, and hence would be black holes. In brief, this 
is impossible in the same way that the original version of Thomson’s 
Lamp is impossible.  
 12.11.2  Motionless variations 
 If moving infinitely many dollar bills is the problem, perhaps we can 
imagine a version of the paradox in which the bills are never physi-
cally moved. Perhaps the infinite pile of money stays where it is, but we 
merely  designate  different bills as  belonging to  either you or the Banker 
in each round of the game. Thus, in round 1, you agree to stipulate – 
without physically doing anything to the bill – that bill 1 becomes the 
property of the Banker, and he agrees to stipulate – again, without physi-
cally affecting any of them – that bills 2–10 become yours. Is this version 
of the scenario possible? 
 Alas, no. If this ‘designation’ of bills is to mean anything, then the 
owner of each bill must be recorded somewhere, in some manner. 
Perhaps you have a notebook in which you and the Banker write down 
which bills are yours and his. Then your pencil must move with infinite 
speed as the minute elapses, since it will have to write infinitely many 
numerals in a finite time period. This just recreates the same sort of 
infinite intensive magnitudes as the original version of the story. Or 
perhaps you record the bills and their owners in a computer. In that 
case, your computer will have to possess infinite memory or storage 
capacity, infinite read and write speeds, and infinite processor capacity, 
in order to record the changes of ownership of all of the dollar bills in a 
finite time period. 
 Or perhaps you and the Banker merely  remember  which bills belong 
to whom. This requires you to have infinite memory capacity and 
infinite speed of thought, since you must think of each of infinitely 
many numbers, in sequence, within a finite time period. Incidentally, 
as noted in Section 9.6, because human beings actually have limited 
mental capacity, almost all natural numbers are in fact unthinkable by 
any human being. 
 12.11.3  The case of diminishing bills 
 Let’s go back to the assumption of bills that are moved as they change 
ownership. Suppose that the bills are initially all lined up along a line, 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 203
as in Figure 12.5.  15 Bills to the right of the line are in the Banker’s ‘pile’; 
those to the left are in yours. In round  n , you push bill  n to the right, 
across the line, while the Banker pushes the bills numbered (10 n −9) 
through 10 n , inclusive, across the line to the left. 
 To make it possible to move infinitely many bills, we must suppose 
that the bills diminish in size as the series progresses. In particular, to 
avoid various illicit infinities (see Sections 12.8.2–12.8.3 above), assume 
that for each  n , bill  n +1 is one quarter the height and one quarter the 
width of bill  n . 16 We might as well give the bills uniform thickness and 
mass density, so that bill  n +1 has one sixteenth the mass of bill  n . All this 
 15  This is based on the presentations of Allis and Koetsier (1991) and van Bendegem 
(1994), with slight modifications. In the illustration, I have given each bill #( n +1) 
one half the width and height of bill  n , rather than one quarter the width and 
height of # n ; this is for convenience, to make the illustration easy to make out.  
 16   As you proceed through the game, your hand engages in two kinds of motion: 
( i ) horizontal motions in which you push bills to the right then pull your hand 
back, and ( ii ) vertical motions in which you move your hand down to the next bill 
in the series. The horizontal motions would constitute a series of motions analo-
gous to the Staccato Run discussed earlier. For the reason given in Section 12.8.2, 
the horizontal distances cannot diminish by only one half in each stage; they 
may, however, diminish by a factor of four in each stage, as discussed in Section 
12.8.3. Furthermore, assuming that the vertical motion of your hand stops in each 
1
2
3
4
5
Your money
Banker’s money
6
8
9
 Figure 12.5  The Banker paradox with diminishing bills 

204 Approaching Infinity
appears to make it metaphysically possible that all of the infinitely many 
bills should be moved in the required way in a finite time period. 
 What is the outcome of this scenario? Littlewood and Ross’ reasoning 
is correct here: at the end, all the bills will lie to the right of the line. You 
might consider this paradoxical; indeed, you may now think that the 
original paradox has simply been traded in for a very slightly, and unim-
portantly, different version of the paradox. So let me explain why the 
situation is at least a little less paradoxical than it appeared in our original 
statement of the problem. There are three reasons why I say this. 
 First, one of the bizarre things about the Littlewood-Ross scenario 
was the way in which a certain quantity (how much money you have) 
approaches infinity as the game proceeds, and yet at the end of the game, 
that quantity stands at zero. There is a discontinuity not only in a certain 
conventional quantity (monetary value) but also in certain objective, 
physical quantities: if all the dollar bills have the same size and mass, 
then the size and mass of your money pile increases without bound as 
the game nears its completion, but then suddenly ends up at zero. 
 In the new version of the scenario, where the dollar bills become 
smaller and smaller, it remains true that the  number of bills  that belong 
to you approaches infinity as the game proceeds yet ends up at zero. 
However, if we characterize your holdings in terms of any natural, phys-
ical magnitude, the discontinuity evaporates. For example, consider the 
 mass of your money pile. In our new version of the scenario, each bill in 
the series is more massive than all the succeeding bills combined.  17 Thus, 
you start with bill #1, which is more massive than all the remaining 
bills combined. In the first round, you trade that bill for bills 2–10, thus 
stage (while you are pushing the appropriate bill to the right), the vertical motions 
also have the structure of the Staccato Run. For the same reason, therefore, the 
vertical distances should diminish by a factor of four. Hence, we should let the 
bills’ widths and heights both diminish by a factor of four in each stage.  
 17  To see why, recall that we have stipulated that for each  n , the mass of bill 
 n + 1 is one sixteenth the mass of bill  n . Thus, if the first bill has a mass of  m 1 , 
then bill  n has a mass of m
n
1
1
(
)
116
−
 and bill ( n +1) has a mass of m
n
1(
)
116 . The 
formula for the sum of a convergent infinite geometric series is
a
a
r
i
i
=
−
=
∞
∑
1
1
,
where  a is the first term of the series and each successive term is equal to  r times 
the term before it. Thus, the combined mass of bills ( n +1) through infinity will be
m
m
n
n
1
1
m
1
16
1
1
16
1
16
16
15
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎦
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞=
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎣
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎦
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
−
m
n
1
1
1
16
1
15 . Thus, the combined 
mass of bills ( n +1) through infinity is one fifteenth of the mass of bill  n . 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 205
shrinking the mass of your money pile. In the second round, you trade 
bill 2 (whose mass is greater than that of bills 3 through ∞ combined) for 
bills 11–20, thus shrinking the mass of your money pile again. Matters 
continue this way, with the mass of your money pile approaching zero 
as the number of rounds played approaches infinity. At the end of the 
game, as one should expect, the mass of your money pile stands at zero. 
The same would be true of the  volume  of your money pile, which dwin-
dles as the game proceeds and then ends at zero. 
 Second, in the original statement of the problem (Section 3.12), we 
considered a variation in which, when called upon to trade in bill #1, 
you disguise bill #10 as bill #1 and vice versa, hand the Banker bill #10, 
and keep bill #1. You behave similarly with respect to bills 2 and 20, 
3 and 30, and so on. Call this the ‘swapping variation’. In the swap-
ping variation, both you and the Banker have qualitatively the same 
thing at each stage as you had in the original version of the game, yet 
in the swapping variation you wind up with an infinite amount of 
money instead of none. If you found that puzzling, that puzzle has 
now been avoided. In the old version of the Banker game, each of the 
bills is qualitatively identical, save for the number printed on it. In our 
new version of the Banker game, the bills are no longer so similar to 
each other; instead, the bills get smaller and smaller as you proceed 
through the series. So swapping bills 1 and 10 (and so on) does  not 
result in the two players having qualitatively identical things at each 
stage of the game as they have in the version in which those bills are 
not swapped. 
 Third, part of the Littlewood-Ross Paradox was a decision theoretic 
problem: it seems that you do the prudent thing in each stage of the 
game by trading your lowest numbered bill for ten bills from the Banker’s 
pile – and yet you wind up with the worst possible outcome (from the 
standpoint of self-interest) at the end of the game. But this depends 
upon the assumption that each of the bills in the series has equal value, 
and that the value of the bills does not diminish as one moves to higher-
numbered bills. This assumption, I claim, is false on any rational utility 
function, given our present version of the scenario. 
 How can that be? Begin with normal assumptions about the value of 
money: you value money because you can use it to buy things. But you 
could not buy something with a dollar bill if the seller could not detect 
your bill. Given the way in which the bills diminish in size and mass 
as we go through the series, there will quickly come a point at which 
the bills are too small for a human being to see. Not long after that, the 
bills will be too small to see with a microscope. Later, they will be too 

206 Approaching Infinity
small to detect even with the most powerful electron microscope in the 
world. Now, if it is proposed that you trade a detectable dollar bill for ten 
undetectable dollar bills, you would be prudentially rational to reject 
the trade. Thus, there is a point in the game at which you should stop 
accepting the Banker’s offers. 
 Now let’s relax the assumptions of the preceding argument. Perhaps 
you don’t need to  buy  things with the dollar bills; let’s just suppose 
you have  some use for them, whatever it might be. Still, it seems that 
any use must require the bills to interact with the world around them 
in some way. But any effect that a dollar bill might have will at some 
point diminish as the size of the bill diminishes, and therefore, whatever 
effect you value, at some point in the series, the bills that the Banker is 
offering will become unable, or less able, to produce the desired effect 
(and remember that any given bill is larger than the sum of all the bills 
that follow it in the series). In the case of buying things, one desires the 
bills to produce a psychological effect on people selling goods. But the 
point generalizes to any real effect. 
 But what if the bills have some other property, besides their size and 
mass, that produces some desired effect? For instance, maybe each bill 
has an electric charge of +1, which enables it to be detected however 
small the bill may be. In that case, the charge density of the region of 
space occupied by the pile of bills would be infinite. This would consti-
tute an infinite natural intensive magnitude; hence, the initial condi-
tions of the scenario would be impossible. 
 But now, what if you just value having bills  intrinsically , so that 
it does not matter to you what effects they have on anything else? 
That is, for every natural number  n , you intrinsically prefer having 
 n +1 bills on your side of the line over having  n or fewer bills on 
your side of the line. In that case, I would say you have an irrational 
utility function – it is irrational for a person to value the moving of 
bills from one side of a line to another (with non-diminishing value 
placed on arbitrarily small changes in position), completely inde-
pendently of whether those motions have any effect on anything, 
including the person himself (and thus independently of whether 
that person could even detect the motions). This is irrational because 
there is no understandable way in which such motions can be viewed 
as good. The fact that, given this utility function, the Banker scenario 
generates a decision-theoretic paradox (maximizing your utility in 
each stage of the game results in the minimum utility at the end of 
the game) simply underscores the irrationality of the assumed utility 
function.  

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 207
 12.12  Benardete’s paradox 
 12.12.1  The first impossibility: Infinite binding energy 
 Benardete asks us to imagine a ball poised at the top of a hill, with 
impenetrable walls placed halfway down the hill, a quarter of the way 
down the hill, an eighth of the way, and so on. The ball cannot roll any 
distance down the hill, yet no particular wall will be the one to stop 
it, since for every wall, there are other walls that the ball would have 
encountered before getting to that one. 
 This scenario is metaphysically impossible. To begin with, there cannot 
be an impenetrable wall, if this is understood as a wall that would not 
be penetrated by any force. Such a wall would require a material with 
infinite yield strength and infinite binding energy. 
 Assume, then, that the walls are not impenetrable in general; rather, 
each wall is merely strong enough that it would not be penetrated by 
this particular ball under the force of gravity. Since the walls have dimin-
ishing thickness – wall  n +1 is half as thick as wall  n , for each  n – we must 
assume that the material strength of the walls increases correspondingly, 
so that wall  n +1 is made of a material twice as strong as that of wall  n . 
 Call the top of the hill ‘point A’. The series of walls converge on A, so 
that within any nonzero distance of A there are infinitely many walls. 
Each of these walls must exceed some minimum binding energy, because 
each must be capable of stopping the ball on its own. Therefore, the 
binding energy of the  system  including the infinite set of walls would 
be infinite. 
 Is this infinite binding energy enough to render this setup metaphys-
ically impossible? Arguably, yes. Binding energy is a natural magnitude 
(it is causally relevant to the conditions under which a system can be 
broken apart). Is it intensive or extensive? Consider the simple case of 
a hydrogen molecule (H 2 ). The molecule can be divided into two parts, 
namely, the two individual hydrogen atoms. But the binding energy of 
the molecule of course does not equal the binding energy of the first atom 
plus the binding energy of the second atom (breaking the  molecule apart 
into subatomic particles would require  more  energy than that required 
to break apart two separate hydrogen atoms). So binding energy is non-
additive in the way required for a magnitude to qualify as intensive. Since 
binding energy is a natural intensive magnitude, it cannot be infinite.  
 12.12.2  The second impossibility: Infinite material strength 
 When an object comes to rest against a wall and the wall stops the object 
from moving, it typically appears to casual observation that the wall is 

208 Approaching Infinity
completely unaffected by the object. For example, if I lean against a brick 
wall, the brick wall appears to remain completely rigid, not bending or 
moving at all. But this is an illusion; on the microscopic level, the wall 
deforms – that is, it bends in response to my pushing against it (this 
bending is of course too slight for the naked eye to observe). This is true of 
 any solid object, no matter what it is made of; no object is  perfectly rigid.  
 Assume, therefore, that each wall is such that, if the ball were to lean 
against the wall, the wall would bend slightly in the direction that the 
ball was pushing it. By how much would the wall bend? (Of course, 
according to the story, the ball never actually winds up leaning against 
any of the individual walls; this question is just about what  would 
happen if, hypothetically, the ball could lean against one of the walls.) 
In the original version of the story, the walls are said to be ‘impene-
trable’. Let us replace that supposition with the supposition that each 
wall  n is strong enough that it would prevent the ball from reaching 
the wall immediately downhill from it (wall  n −1). I assume, then, that 
the deformation in wall  n would be small enough that wall  n would 
not come in contact with the downhill wall (wall  n −1) – for example, if 
the ball were to rest against wall #3, wall #3 would bend  less than the 
amount necessary for wall #3 to collide with wall #2 (see Figure 12.6). 
 Now, because the walls in this scenario are placed closer and closer 
together, the amount of deformation allowed must decrease; specifically, 
wall  n +1 must in general be constructed so as to deform half as much (or 
less) as wall  n . This means that the  compressive  and  yield strengths  of the 
walls continually double – wall  n +1 has double the compressive strength 
and double the yield strength as wall  n . As we get closer and closer to the 
top of the hill, the material strength of the walls approaches infinity. 
Wall 3
Wall 2
Wall 1
 Figure 12.6  Benardete’s walls 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 209
 Now consider the composite object composed of all the walls, and 
call this object ‘wall ω’. What is the compressive strength of wall ω? At 
its downhill edge, it has some finite compressive strength. But at its top 
(in the neighborhood of the top of the hill), its compressive strength 
is  infinite . There is no nonzero distance that this object would deform, 
since any nonzero deformation would involve some of the walls in the 
series being pushed into and even through other walls. In other words, 
at its leading (uphill) edge, wall ω is  perfectly rigid . This is metaphysically 
impossible. Hence, there simply cannot be a collection of walls such as 
we have postulated. 
 12.12.3  The infinite pile of slabs 
 In another variation, Benardete asks us to imagine a pile consisting of 
infinitely many opaque slabs, where slab  n +1 lies on top of, and is half 
the thickness of, slab  n , for  n = 1, 2, 3, and so on. If you stand above the 
pile and look down, you will not see any particular slab, since for each  n , 
your view of slab  n is blocked by slab  n +1. But nor can you see through 
the pile. So what do you see? 
 It may not be immediately obvious that this scenario is impossible in 
essentially the same way as the previous version of Benardete’s Paradox. 
In the previous variation, the impossibility lay in the assumption that 
as the walls become ever thinner, each wall nevertheless remains 
impenetrable to the ball. In the present variation of the paradox, the 
impossibility lies in the assumption that as the slabs become ever 
thinner, each slab nevertheless remains  opaque  – that is, impenetrable 
to photons. 
 No physical material is either completely opaque or completely trans-
parent; for any material, a sufficiently thin layer of it is transparent, 
and a sufficiently thick layer is opaque. For instance, we normally think 
of paper as opaque; however, a  very thin  piece of paper is transparent. 
We normally think of water as transparent; however, a  very thick  layer 
of water – say, the thickness of the ocean – is opaque. The thickness 
required to render a layer of material for practical purposes ‘opaque’ 
depends upon a physical property of the material known as its  attenu-
ation coefficient  (its resistance to transmission of light). The greater the 
attenuation coefficient, the  more opaque  a substance is (or, the thinner 
an opaque layer of the material can be). Paper, for example, has a much 
higher attenuation coefficient than water. 
 If light with a given intensity,  I 0 , strikes a layer of some material with 
an attenuation coefficient of  μ , the intensity of light,  I , that will pass 

210 Approaching Infinity
through the layer is given by a formula known as the Beer-Lambert 
Law: 
 I
I e
x
−
0
  
 where  x is the thickness of the layer of material and  e is Euler’s number 
(≈2.718). Every material has an attenuation coefficient greater than 
zero and less than infinity, so for any given thickness,  some light will 
pass through, and some light will instead be absorbed or scattered. The 
substances that we colloquially call ‘opaque’ are simply those with a 
relatively high attenuation coefficient, such that a small proportion of 
light passes through even with relatively thin layers. The substances that 
we normally call ‘transparent’ are those with a low attenuation coeffi-
cient, such that a high proportion of light passes through even with 
relatively thick layers. 
 Suppose that all the slabs in the Benardete scenario are composed of 
a material with an attenuation coefficient of  μ 1 , and thus the pile as a 
whole has an attenuation coefficient of  μ 1 . In that case, the observer 
standing over the pile will see through the top of the pile to a certain 
depth – that is, to a first approximation, there will be some  n such that 
slabs  n +1 through ∞ will be transparent. More precisely, the slabs will 
approach perfect transparency as  n increases. 
 What the observer will see will simply be determined by the distribu-
tion of photons that are reflected, absorbed, and scattered by the pile. 
The fact that there is no  top slab is irrelevant. A given photon will have 
a probability of penetrating the pile to a given depth as determined by 
(another form of) the Beer-Lambert Law: 
 P
e
x
( )
x =
−μ1
μ
 
 where P( x ) is the probability of penetrating to (at least) depth  x . Thus, 
what the observer sees is perfectly determinate. The appearance of 
paradox arises only from the false assumption that each slab would be 
opaque, which, when combined with the fact that there is no ‘top’ slab 
in the pile, would render it indeterminate what one would see. 
 But now suppose the slabs are each composed of  different  materials. 
Slab 1 is composed of a material with attenuation coefficient  μ 1 , slab 2 
has attenuation coefficient  μ 2 , and so on. Suppose further that these 
materials are of ever increasing opacity, so that for each  n ,  μ  n +1 = 2 μ  n  , 
and assume that  μ 1 is sufficiently high that slab 1 is ‘opaque’ by normal 
standards. In this case, every slab has the same opacity, that is, it is just 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 211
as difficult to see through (it is just as unlikely for a photon to pass 
through) slab  n + 1 as it is for slab  n . 
 This version of the case restores Benardete’s paradox. This version, 
however, is metaphysically impossible. Think of the pile of slabs as a 
single composite material object. What is the attenuation coefficient 
of this object? This will be relative to a direction of approach: from the 
bottom its attenuation coefficient is  μ 1 . But from the top, its attenu-
ation coefficient is infinity – that is, no photon would have any nonzero 
chance of penetrating the object to any nonzero depth. But attenuation 
coefficient is a natural, intensive magnitude; it therefore cannot be 
infinite. There cannot exist a material object such as the one described.  
 12.13  Laraudogoitia’s marbles 
 Laraudogoitia asks us to imagine an infinite series of marbles arranged in 
a straight line, with each marble having half the diameter but the same 
mass as the previous one, so that the whole collection occupies a finite 
space. If the first marble is pushed directly toward the second one, what 
will happen? An infinite series of collisions, one after another, by which 
each marble transfers its momentum to the next one in line. Since there 
is no last marble in the series, once the series of collisions is complete 
there will be no particular marble that carries the momentum. Thus, 
momentum will have been destroyed. Furthermore, since Newtonian 
mechanics is time reversible, this shows that it is also possible for 
momentum to be spontaneously created. 
 Now consider: what is the mass density of the region in which the 
marbles are located? This is a finite volume of space, which contains 
infinitely many marbles, each with the same nonzero mass; thus, 
the density of this region is infinite. At the beginning of the chain of 
marbles is marble #1; at the  end of the chain there is no last marble but 
simply a series of ever smaller marbles. Any region of space extending 
any distance surrounding the end of the chain will contain infinitely 
many marbles and thus will have infinite density. Density is a natural, 
intensive magnitude. Hence, the setup of the scenario is metaphysi-
cally impossible. The fact that the scenario would result in a violation of 
momentum conservation therefore should not trouble us. 
 12.14  The spaceship 
 A spaceship travels at a speed of (at least) one meter per second for one 
second, then 2 m/s for a half second, then 4 m/s for a quarter second, 
and so on. At the end of two seconds, where is the spaceship? 

212 Approaching Infinity
 This scenario is of course impossible. It involves a spaceship that 
travels an infinite distance in a finite time; thus, the velocity of the 
spaceship over the two-second interval would be infinite. Velocity is a 
natural intensive magnitude; hence, it cannot be infinite. 
 But what exactly would prevent the spaceship from accelerating in the 
manner described? At what point in the series would the ship be meta-
physically prevented from further acceleration? 
 Leaving aside relativity (which is metaphysically contingent), there 
is no metaphysical speed limit that all objects must obey, nor is there 
any metaphysical limit to the acceleration that an object may undergo. 
Rather, any given spaceship must have some limits depending upon its 
specific design and properties, with different spaceships having different 
maximum accelerations. 
 Bear in mind that the Spaceship Paradox requires the spaceship not only 
to have a  velocity that increases without bound, but also to have an  acceler-
ation  that increases without bound as  t approaches 2 seconds. That is, not 
only is the ship’s velocity increasing, but the rate of increase of its velocity is 
increasing: first the ship increases its speed from 1 to 2 in one second (for an 
average acceleration of 1 m/s 2 ); then it increases its speed from 2 to 4 in half 
a second (for an average acceleration of (2)/(½) = 4 m/s 2 ); then it increases 
from 4 to 8 in a quarter second ( a = (4)/(¼) = 16 m/s 2 ); and so on. 
 Suppose for simplicity that the spaceship is propelled by rockets. The 
maximum achievable acceleration would depend, among other things, 
on how much fuel the spaceship had on board at the start of its trip. The 
quantity of fuel might be any finite amount, but it cannot be infinity. 
Whatever that amount is, there would be some stage in the acceleration 
process at which the rocket would run out of fuel, thus preventing it 
from completing the next stage. 
 But now suppose that, as the spaceship travels through space, it 
collects more fuel. Perhaps in the initial conditions of the scenario, there 
just happens to be rocket fuel distributed throughout space in the path 
of the spaceship, so much fuel that the spaceship need never run out. 
Then what will limit the spaceship’s acceleration? 
 In this case, its maximum acceleration would most likely be deter-
mined by the design of the engines, which determine how much fuel 
they are capable of burning per unit time. After a certain point, the ship 
will be unable to increase its rate of acceleration further due to such 
factors as the inability to fit more fuel into the engine, or the engine’s 
inability to sustain higher temperatures without melting, and so on. 
 Speaking more generally, the ship must have some maximum rate of 
acceleration determined by the strength of the materials of which it is 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 213
constructed. The acceleration an object undergoes is proportional to 
the force impressed upon it. At some point (if the engines didn’t melt 
first, or reach their maximum fuel throughput, or the like), the forces 
impressed on the spaceship would be so large as to break the ship apart. 
To avoid this, we would have to postulate infinite material strength, 
which is another infinite natural intensive magnitude. 
 12.15  The Saint Petersburg paradox 
 12.15.1  The traditional version: Monetary payouts 
 A coin is flipped some number of times, until the first time it lands 
heads. You then receive a payout equal to $2  n  , where  n is the number of 
flips that it took to get heads. The possible payoffs are thus $2, $4, $8, 
and so on, which have probabilities of occurrence of ½, ¼, ⅛, and so on. 
The expected payoff of the game is thus ($2)(½) + ($4)(¼) + ($8)(⅛) +  
= ∞. However, most people find it absurd that a chance to play this game 
is infinitely valuable. 
 Bernoulli’s original solution succeeds for this version of the paradox: 
money has diminishing marginal utility; thus, for example, a ¼ prob-
ability of getting $4 is worth  less  than a ½ probability of getting $2. In 
general, a 1/2  n −1 probability of getting 2  n +1 dollars is worth less than a 
1/2  n  probability of getting 2  n  dollars. 18 
 You might think: suppose we just increase the monetary amounts to 
compensate. While the probabilities diminish by one half with each 
successive possible outcome, we could stipulate that the monetary 
payouts  more  than double each time – perhaps they multiply by four 
each time, or perhaps they are squared each time, etc. This, however, 
will not genuinely get around Bernoulli’s point, for there is a finite limit 
to the benefit that one could gain from money, whatever the quan-
tity. Perhaps the utility of money asymptotically approaches this limit, 
or perhaps at some point it reaches the limit then remains constant; 
either way, one simply cannot produce arbitrarily large utility merely 
by adding more money, as this version of the paradox requires us to 
assume.  
 12.15.2   The supernatural version: Days in heaven 
 To revive the paradox, assume that the payouts are given in something 
that does not have diminishing marginal utility. Imagine that you meet 
 18  Bernoulli [1738] 1954, 24–6, 32–3. 

214 Approaching Infinity
a person claiming to be God who performs a series of miracles to prove 
his identity. Once you are convinced, God offers to play a version of the 
coin-flipping game with you (for a certain price, to be discussed later). 
He assures you that the coin is fair, that it will be flipped until the first 
time it lands heads, and that He will then give you a payoff of 2  n  days 
in Heaven, where  n is the number of flips. (If you reject the offer, then 
when you die, you will simply pass out of existence, with no time in 
Heaven.) Assume also that each day in Heaven is just as good as the last, 
so there is no diminishing marginal utility. 
 A chance to play the game now has infinite expected utility, so it 
would be rational to accept any finite cost for a chance to play – or so 
one could argue. Thus, for example, it would be rational to hand over all 
of your worldly possessions, if that were the price of playing the game 
once. It would even be rational to agree to spend a trillion years (but not 
forever) in Hell, if that were the price of playing one round of the game. 
Can this be correct? 
 Here is one objection to the foregoing reasoning. The expected utility 
calculation assumes that you know, for certain, such propositions as 
( i ) that paying a certain price will result in your being allowed to play the 
game, ( ii ) that the coin to be flipped is fair, ( iii ) that for each  n , you will 
really get the payout of 2  n  days in Heaven if the coin comes up heads on 
the  n th flip, and ( iv ) that each day in heaven will really be just as good 
as the last. Call the conjunction of propositions ( i )–( iv ) ‘the Setup’. So 
the expected utility calculation assumes that the Setup has a probability 
of 1. But this is metaphysically impossible. It is in principle impossible 
for any external-world proposition, including any prediction about any 
causal consequences of any contemplated action, to have a probability 
of 1. (There are well-known arguments for this in epistemology; I will 
simply assume that this point is accepted.) Therefore, the calculation 
by which we deduced that the expected payoff of playing the game is 
infinity is mistaken. 
 So far, so good. Unfortunately, this objection barely wards off paradox 
for a moment. The original expected utility calculation was this:  
 Expected Utility =
1
2
1
4
1
8
1
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+ ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+ ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
( )
2
( )
4
( )
8
i=
∞
∑
= ∞
1
.  
 Once we take into account the possibility that the Setup is false, we must 
modify this calculation. Suppose there is a probability of  p that the Setup 
is correct. For simplicity, assume that if the Setup is false, then playing 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 215
one round of the game will net you zero utility. In that case, the new 
expected utility calculation must be as follows: 
 Expected Utility = 
p
p
p
p
2
4
8
⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+ ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+ ⎛
⎝⎜
⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠⎟
⎞
⎠
+
=
( )
2
( )
4
( )
8
i=
∞
∑
1
.  
 As long as  p is nonzero, this sum is again infinite. Thus, according to 
the expected utility calculation, even if you are 99.9% confident (but 
not 100%!) that ‘God’ is lying to you and will not actually give you any 
days in Heaven no matter what the outcome of the coin tossing exercise, 
it would still be rational for you to give up all your worldly possessions 
and agree to spend 10 100 years in Hell in exchange for a chance to play 
this game once (of course, you could never be 100% certain that you 
would wind up spending any time in Hell either). But ...  really? 
 12.15.3  The probability of the setup is zero 
 There seem to be the following possible ways of avoiding this 
consequence:
 a.   Reject expected utility maximization as a rational decision-making 
rule, at least for this case. If we want to say that it would be positively 
irrational to agree to spend a googol of years in Hell in exchange for 
a chance to play this game, then we would have to say that maxi-
mizing expected utility is in this instance not only not required, but 
rationally forbidden. 
 b.   Insist that days in Heaven necessarily have diminishing marginal 
utility, and that this cannot be stipulated away, nor can we find any 
other prize that does not have diminishing marginal utility as its 
quantity increases. 
 c.    Maintain that  p actually equals zero, even after one has been presented 
with what might superficially appear to be strong evidence for the 
Setup (whether because the Setup is metaphysically impossible or for 
some other reason). 
 I don’t see a plausible independent motivation for (a) or (b). (c), however, 
has some independent motivation and is not obviously wrong. 
 Recall that the Setup is a conjunction of four conditions. If any one 
of these conditions has probability zero, then the Setup has probability 
zero. Now focus on condition ( iii ), the condition that for each  n , you 
will get a payout of 2  n  days in Heaven if the coin comes up heads on the 

216 Approaching Infinity
 n th flip. This can be viewed as a countably infinite conjunction of the 
following propositions: 
 O 1 : If the coin comes up heads on the first flip, you will get 2 days in 
Heaven. 
 O 2 : If the coin comes up heads on the second flip, you will get 4 days 
in Heaven. 
 O 3 : If the coin comes up heads on the third flip, you will get 8 days 
in Heaven. 
⁝ 
 The probability of this infinite conjunction is equal to the probability of 
 O 1 being true, times the probability of  O 2 being true given the truth of 
 O 1 , times the probability of  O 3 being true given the truth of both  O 1 and 
 O 2 , and so on, that is, 
 
P
O
i
i
i
(
|
Oi
&
)
Oi
1
1
1
=
∞
∏
 
 (stipulate that P( O 1 ) counts as the first factor in that product). 
 Call the  i th factor in that product ‘ p  i  ’ (that is, let  p  i  = P( O  i  | O 1 & ... & O  i −1 ) 
for  i > 1,  p 1 = P( O 1 )). For the infinite product, and hence the probability 
of the Setup, to be nonzero,  p  i  must approach 1 as a limit as  i increases. 
That is,  p  i  must come arbitrarily close to 1 for sufficiently large  i . Should 
this be true on a rational probability distribution? 
 Here is one reason why one might think that  p  i  should constantly 
increase: ( O 1 & ... & O  i −1 ) constitutes something like inductive evidence 
for  O  i  . The larger  i is, the greater the inductive evidence. Hence,  p  i  should 
increase with  i . 
 However, here is a reason why one might think that  p  i  should  not 
increase with  i . The third condition in the Setup, specifying the payouts 
you receive for the different possible outcomes of the coin-tossing, 
amounts to an infinite collection of promises that God makes to you: 
God promises that  O 1 , that  O 2 , that  O 3 , and so on. This is a series of ever-
increasing commitments. The first promise,  O 1 , is modest; it commits 
God only to keeping you in heaven for one day should the coin come 
up heads on the first toss. The second promise,  O 2 , is in one sense twice 
as great a commitment: God commits to your being in heaven for twice 
as long, should the coin come up tails first and then heads. The third 
commitment,  O 3 , is twice as great again, since it commits God to keeping 
you in heaven for twice as long again (should the coin come up heads 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 217
on the third toss). One might think that, as the time commitments 
increase, it becomes  less  likely, rather than more likely, that the promise 
would actually be kept. If this isn’t obvious in the case of the one-day 
and two-day commitments, compare the commitment to give you one 
day in heaven (under certain conditions), to a commitment to give you 
a trillion years in heaven (under certain conditions): the latter commit-
ment is less likely to actually be kept. There is more time during which 
things might go wrong (God might change His mind, Satan might over-
throw God, heaven might fall into disarray, and so on). In general, a 
prediction is less likely to be correct as the length of time that it covers 
increases. This includes your (conditional) prediction that God would 
keep you in heaven for  n years. 
 Arguably, something similar obtains for  any sort of prize that might be 
offered. The point is obvious in the case of the monetary payouts in the 
original version of the paradox: a commitment to pay $2 is much more 
likely to actually be honored than is a commitment to pay out a trillion 
dollars; the latter is in fact virtually certain  not to be honored. Of course, 
the latter commitment is much less likely to be  triggered , since it would 
only be triggered by a series of 39 tails followed by heads, but that is irrele-
vant to the present point. The present point is that  even if  the commit-
ment were triggered (if the coin actually came up tails 39 times before 
heads finally appeared), it is virtually certain that no one would actually 
pay you $1 trillion, no matter what they had previously said. The general 
point is that a larger payout entails a larger change in the world, which is 
less likely to actually be successfully brought about by a given exercise.  
 12.15.4  A counter-argument: The perfection of God 
 One might try to counter the foregoing reasoning by arguing that since 
God is morally perfect, He would not break a promise, no matter how 
much time elapses (perhaps God is a Kantian?). Furthermore, since God 
is all-powerful, he has the power to guarantee you any amount of time 
in heaven. These things, it might be said, are true by definition. And in 
case you are tempted to say that one could never be sure that the person 
with whom one was playing the game was really God, remember that to 
get the paradox going we only need a  nonzero probability  that the Setup 
is true. So it suffices that there is a nonzero probability that the person 
with whom you are playing the game is God, where God, by definition, 
is (among other things) an all-powerful Kantian (hence, He never lies or 
breaks promises). 
 My response at this point is that God, so conceived, is metaphysic-
ally impossible on my account of the infinite. This is because God is 

218 Approaching Infinity
supposed to be infinitely powerful, and this appears to constitute an 
infinite, natural intensive magnitude. 
 Objection: perhaps omnipotence is not an infinite natural intensive 
magnitude, because it is not a magnitude at all. It is just a property. 
 Reply: omnipotence in the sense intended in definitions of God at 
least  includes or  entails  certain magnitudes, and this will suffice for the 
point. To illustrate, imagine three beings, A, B, and C. A can lift up to 
100 pounds; B can lift up to 200 pounds; C can lift up to 300 pounds. 
There is at least one sense, or one respect, in which B and C are each 
 more powerful than A. Furthermore, we can say that C is more powerful 
than A to a greater degree than B is. That is, C’s power exceeds A’s by 
a larger margin than B’s power exceeds A’s. So this sort of power is a 
magnitude. 
 Granted, that sort of power is not what theists are talking about when 
they say that God is powerful – they do not merely mean that God 
can lift any weight. However, that sort of power is  included in  God’s 
power, else human beings would possess a power that God lacks. Thus, 
God’s omnipotence  entails  or  includes  the sort of power I have referred 
to, which we may call ‘weight-lifting power’. The weight-lifting power 
of an omnipotent being would presumably be infinite. Hence, God’s 
omnipotence entails his instantiation of an infinite, intensive magni-
tude. By the same sort of reasoning, an omnipotent God would presum-
ably instantiate any number of other infinite intensive magnitudes. 
 For these reasons, I believe that there could not be an omnipotent 
being. There can be very powerful beings, and there is no limit to how 
much power a being can possess, but no being can possess  unlimited 
power. For this reason, too, there cannot be a being who is able to guar-
antee you  n days in heaven for  every possible value of  n . 
 12.16   The Martingale betting system 
 You are to play a gambling game in which (as in real life) the odds favor 
the house. You start with an infinite bankroll, and there are no betting 
limits. Despite the fact that the odds always favor the house, it appears 
that you can guarantee that you come out ahead, simply by doubling 
your bet every time you lose. Eventually, you will win and the win will 
outweigh all your previous losses. Furthermore, if this strategy works, it 
seems that you can repeat it infinitely many times, thus guaranteeing 
an infinite profit. 
 Something seems wrong with this. Since the odds on each bet favor 
the house, it seems that the house should come out ahead, particularly 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 219
in an infinitely long series of plays. There is also a decision-theoretic 
puzzle: it appears that each bet is prudentially irrational on your part, 
and rational on the part of the house, independent of what other bets 
have been made; yet the whole series of bets guarantees a net profit for 
you and a net loss for the house. 
 To begin resolving this paradox, note first that the strategy for winning 
an  infinite amount of money from the house does not work: it depends 
upon the possibility of playing the game infinitely many times in a finite 
time period, which depends on the ability to play the game faster and 
faster without limit. This is an ability that no one could have, for the 
same sort of reasons that rule out Thomson’s Lamp and the Littlewood-
Ross Banker (see Sections 12.10.3 and 12.11). 
 Let us then focus on the simple strategy, in which you hope to win 
a single dollar by first betting $1, and then doubling down with each 
loss. Having given up the idea that you could play the game faster and 
faster without limit, we assume that each play of the game takes one 
minute. 
 Now, it is true that, if this game can be continued indefinitely, then 
you will eventually win. However, keep in mind that there is no specific 
time by which you are guaranteed to win. Furthermore, for any given 
time, your expected profit at that time, conditional on your having 
adopted the Martingale betting strategy, is negative, and it becomes 
more negative for later times. This is because, although the probability 
of your coming out ahead by $1 approaches 1, the total amount that 
you will have lost if you  haven’t  yet come out ahead also increases – and 
the amount you stand to lose increases faster than the probability of a 
repeated loss decreases. 
 For illustration, assume that the game is roulette, so you have an 18/37 
probability of winning each time you play. Now consider a time just two 
minutes after you started playing. At this time, you could have played 
the game either one or two times. There are therefore the following 
possible outcomes at this point in time: 19 
 19  Probability values are rounded to the nearest thousandth. To calculate these 
values: the first probability is 18/37, the probability of winning in one round of 
roulette. The second is (19/37)×(18/37), which is the probability of losing in the 
first play times the probability of winning on the second try given a loss the first 
time. The third is (19/37)×(19/37), the probability of losing twice in a row.  
 Outcome  Probability  Net payoff 
W
0.486
$1
LW
0.250
$1
LL
0.264
−$3

220 Approaching Infinity
 The first row of the table represents the possibility that you win in the first 
round, in which case you quit. The second row represents the possibility 
that you lost, then won, then quit. The third row represents the possibility 
that you have so far lost twice in a row, in which case you lost $1, then $2, 
for a total loss of $3. Your expected profit at this point in time is therefore  
 ( .
)( )
( .
)( )
( .
)(
)
.
.
486 1
0
)
(
)
(
264
3)
055
.
)(
0
(
)
−3)
 
 Now consider the situation  three  minutes after you started playing. 
By this time, you might have attained any of the following possible 
outcomes: 
 Your expected profit at this time is therefore 
 ( .
)( )
( .
)( )
( .
)( )
( .
)(
)
.
.
486 1
0
)
(
)
(
128 1
0
)
(
0
)
083
.
)(
0
(
)
)(
.
0
(
 
 Notice that this is not only negative; it is  less  than your expected profit 
after only two minutes. This is a general point: the expected profit at 
time  t is always negative, and it only gets worse, approaching −∞ as  t 
increases. After four minutes, it is −0.113; after five minutes, −0.143; 
and so on. There will never come a point in time at which the expected 
profit of a follower of the Martingale betting system turns positive. 
 Thus, the impression that the Martingale betting system is a rational 
strategy, or that it enables one to circumvent the house’s advantage, is 
an illusion produced by the failure to consider the time required to play 
the game. Since you cannot ever have played infinitely many rounds, 
there is never a time at which all logically possible outcomes of playing 
the game are available to you. The last available outcome at any given 
time is always the one in which you’ve so far lost every time, and this 
outcome gets worse and worse. 
 12.17  The delayed heaven paradox 
 12.17.1  The multi-choice version 
 In the Delayed Heaven Paradox, you are repeatedly offered the chance 
to accept one day in Hell in exchange for two days in Heaven, where 
 Outcome  Probability  Net payoff 
W
0.486
$1
LW
0.250
$1
LLW
0.128
$1
LLL
0.135
−$7

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 221
all the Hell days must be served before any Heaven days. It is always 
rational to accept, so you wind up accepting infinitely many days in 
Hell – the worst possible outcome. The scenario poses a challenge for the 
plausible principle that if each member of a series of decisions is good/
prudent, given all the choices that preceded it, then the series as a whole 
is good/prudent. 
 This paradox can be resolved in a similar manner to the Saint 
Petersburg Paradox (see Sections 12.15.3–12.15.4). At the beginning of 
each day  n , you have 2( n −1) days in heaven already banked, and you are 
asked to choose whether to take the days in heaven, or to take another 
day in hell in order to bank another two days in heaven. In reasoning 
about the choice situation, we have assumed that you always believe, 
with certainty, that you will really get all of the banked days in heaven 
when you finally choose to take them. 
 We could relax this assumption – we could suppose that you merely 
believe with 90% confidence that you will get the banked days when 
you choose to take them. But this is still insufficiently realistic. To take 
account of the arguments in Section 12.15.3 above, we should assume 
that the probability that you will ever really get all of the banked days 
 diminishes  as the number of banked days increases. That is, if God (or 
someone claiming to be God) has promised you  n days in heaven, the 
probability that He will keep that promise diminishes with  n . It is much 
less likely that you will get one trillion years in heaven (if promised) 
than it is that you will get two days in heaven (if promised). 
 More to the point, each time you are offered the choice, the cost you 
are asked to take on (another day in Hell) is imminent – that is, you 
are to go to Hell immediately – but the promised benefit (an extra two 
days in Heaven) becomes increasingly remote. Thus, the first time, the 
promised benefit is just a day away. The second time you are asked to 
choose, the promised benefit is three days away (since the  extra two days 
in heaven that you’re going to get would be enjoyed only after another 
day in Hell followed by the two days in heaven that you already have 
banked). The third time, the benefit is five days away. And so on. The 
 n th time, the benefit is (2 n −1) days away. Because the promised benefit 
becomes increasingly remote, it becomes progressively less likely that it 
would actually be received. Thus, at some point, it becomes rational to 
reject the trade. 
 12.17.2  The single-choice version 
 Here is a simple variation of the paradox: God asks you to name a 
cardinal number, with the promise that whatever number you name, 

222 Approaching Infinity
you will get that many days in Hell, followed by twice as many days 
in Heaven. For present purposes, assume that God will accept  0 as a 
cardinal number. 
 What number should you name? For every natural number  n , it is 
better to pick  n +1 than to pick  n , because the benefit (two more days 
in Heaven) outweighs the cost (one more day in Hell). In general, 
for every natural number  n , you should not pick  n , because it would 
be better to pick a number larger than  n . But nor should you pick 
 0 , since you will then spend an eternity in Hell. (You would also 
be entitled to spend twice eternity in Heaven, but only  after the 
eternity in Hell was over, which would never happen.) This differs 
from the previous version of the paradox in that in this version you 
are asked to directly decide, in a single choice, how many days you 
spend in heaven, whereas in the previous version, you determine 
how many days to spend in heaven by a series of distinct choices. 
This version raises a challenge for the principle that in any given 
choice situation, there is always a best choice (at least a choice tied 
for best). 
 Again, the resolution of the paradox is reminiscent of the resolution of 
the Saint Petersburg Paradox. In the single-choice version of the Delayed 
Heaven Paradox, we assume that you accept a promise from God, to the 
effect that for every  n , if you name  n , then God will give you  n days in 
Hell followed by 2 n days in Heaven. This can be thought of as an infinite 
collection of promises: 
 P 1 
 If you choose 1, then God will give you 1 day in Hell followed 
by 2 days in Heaven. 
 P 2 
 If you choose 2, then God will give you 2 days in Hell followed 
by 4 days in Heaven. 
       ⁝ 
 P  n  
 If you choose  n , then God will give you  n days in Hell followed 
by 2 n days in Heaven. 
       ⁝ 
 But for the reasons discussed earlier (Section 12.15.3), the probability 
that P  n  would be kept diminishes with  n . As a result, it is not always 
better to pick a larger number rather than a smaller one. On any rational 
probability distribution, there will be some optimal number to pick, 
such that larger numbers are worse choices due to the lower probability 
that God would keep his promise. 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 223
 12.18  Comment: shallow and deep impossibilities 
 12.18.1  Solving paradoxes by appeal to impossibility 
 The paradoxes we have discussed involve scenarios in which some sort 
of infinitude makes an appearance, and some seemingly absurd impli-
cation or unanswerable question results. One way of solving such a 
paradox is to explain how the scenario is impossible. Of course, it is not 
sufficient merely to point to the absurd implication or unanswerable 
question as proof of impossibility. Rather, a solution should explain 
how the absurd implication or unanswerable question results from 
a more fundamental impossibility implicit in the description of the 
scenario. 
 But as noted earlier (Section 7.4), there are stronger and weaker kinds 
of impossibility. In what way must a paradox-generating scenario be 
found ‘impossible’ in order for the paradox to be resolved? 
 We can first note that  some  kinds of impossibility would be irrelevant; 
that is, some reasons for counting a scenario impossible would fail to 
resolve a paradox. Take the scenario of Thomson’s Lamp, which leads 
to the unanswerable question of whether the lamp would be on or off 
at the end of the series of switchings. Suppose I could argue, completely 
convincingly, that ( i ) a budget of at least $200 trillion would be required 
to construct a lamp such as the one Thomson describes, and ( ii ) no 
one would ever be able to marshal so many resources for such a frivo-
lous purpose. This would show in  some  sense that the Thomson Lamp 
scenario is impossible – no one is in a position to bring it about. But this 
obviously would not count as a solution to the paradox. We might say: 
this sort of impossibility is too shallow. We need a stronger, deeper sense 
in which the Thomson Lamp is impossible. 
 Even physical impossibility may not be enough. Suppose I had an 
argument that the Thomson Lamp was physically impossible, where my 
argument turned on precise estimates of the value of Coulomb’s constant 
(the proportionality constant that relates electrostatic force to charge 
and distance). (Don’t ask how such an argument would go.) Suppose 
that if Coulomb’s constant were 10% larger than it actually is, then my 
argument would fail and the Thomson Lamp would be constructible; yet 
given the constant’s actual value, the Lamp is unconstructible. Again, 
we would surely say that I had not solved the paradox in any intellectu-
ally satisfying sense. Plausibly, the reason would be that it would remain 
sensible to wonder something like this: ‘If Coulomb’s constant had been 
10% larger, and the Thomson Lamp had been constructed,  then what 

224 Approaching Infinity
state would the lamp have been in at the end of the infinite series of 
switchings?’ 
 By contrast, consider a solution that would be more satisfying: 
suppose I argue that the scenario is impossible because it is impos-
sible, in general, to complete an infinite series of actions, and the 
reason this is impossible is that an infinite series is a series that has no 
end, and it is conceptually impossible to complete a series that has no 
end. I take it that  this impossibility claim is of  the right kind  to solve 
the paradox. This solution fails, not because it appeals to a shallow 
notion of impossibility, but because its impossibility claim is simply 
false (see Section 12.8.1). 
 Why should a paradox be resolved by a ‘deep’ impossibility but not 
by a ‘shallow’ impossibility? There are two important points to make 
here. First, a deep impossibility renders absurd implications expectable, 
whereas a shallow impossibility does not. If we fail to construct a certain 
device due to budgetary limitations, we may still be mystified by an argu-
ment showing that if we had constructed the device, some seemingly 
absurd consequence would have resulted. But if a certain device fails 
to exist due to some deep conceptual, logical, or metaphysical impossi-
bility, then we do not feel mystified by a showing that the device’s exist-
ence would entail (further) absurd consequences. We should expect, in 
particular, that a metaphysically impossible scenario would have meta-
physically impossible consequences. 
 Second, a deep impossibility may render certain counterfactual ques-
tions – questions about what would happen if the scenario obtained – 
moot, either in the sense that the questions would be uninteresting or 
in the sense that they would lack determinate answers. Consider the 
question, ‘If two were equal to three, how much would seven times nine 
be?’ This question is rendered uninteresting by the fact that two really 
could not equal three. The supposition is sufficiently absurd that there 
seems no point to even formulating it. In addition, the question seems 
to lack any determinate answer. 
 Similarly, if the Thomson Lamp is impossible in a deep sense, we may 
think that there is no point to asking what would happen if the lamp 
were to exist, and that there need be no determinate answer to such a 
question. 
 12.18.2  An objection 
 All this is by way of introduction to an objection. Some philosophers may 
be tempted to complain that my solutions to the paradoxes of infinity 
appeal to mere  physical impossibilities, not  metaphysical impossibilities, 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 225
and that a genuine solution must show the problematic scenarios to be 
metaphysically impossible. 
 I have been at pains to emphasize that infinite natural intensive 
magnitudes are not ‘merely physically impossible’; they are metaphys-
ically impossible, because they require there to exist a kind of number 
that does not exist. Compare the strong sense in which it is impossible 
to have more than four cats while also having fewer than three – this is 
deeply impossible because there is no number greater than four and less 
than three. Similarly, an infinite natural intensive magnitude is impos-
sible because there is no infinite number. 
 Some will be tempted to press the objection nonetheless. Several of 
my solutions to the paradoxes take the form:
 1.   Scenario S requires magnitude M to take on an infinite value.  
 2.   M is a natural intensive magnitude. 
 3.   No natural intensive magnitude can assume an infinite value.  
 4.   So S is (metaphysically) impossible. 
 Having found S metaphysically impossible, I conclude that there is no 
need to concern ourselves with what would happen if S occurred. The 
objector might concede that (2) and (3) are each metaphysically neces-
sary, yet challenge whether (1) is metaphysically necessary. 
 Take the case of Thomson’s Lamp, which I claim cannot be switched 
infinitely many times in a finite period due to the impossibility of infinite 
material strength (among other things). One might object that it is only 
a contingent truth of our physics that the infinite switching would 
require the switch to have infinite material strength. Perhaps there is 
some possible world with a different physics, in which a switch can be 
switched infinitely many times in a finite period, while possessing only 
finite material strength. 
 Compare the case where an alleged solution depends on the specific 
value of Coulomb’s constant. In that case, we judged that the solution 
would not succeed, since we could still wonder what would happen if 
Coulomb’s constant were larger. Similarly, since my solution to Thomson’s 
Lamp Paradox depends upon the laws of physics that happen to obtain in 
our world, one could still wonder what would happen if those laws were 
different; thus, my solution does not succeed – or so one might argue.  
 12.18.3  Deep physical impossibilities 
 I think that the preceding objection presupposes a sharper division 
between physical and metaphysical impossibilities than really exists, 

226 Approaching Infinity
and it wrongly treats all physical impossibilities as equally shallow. Some 
‘physical impossibilities’ are sufficiently deep to resolve paradoxes. 
 The specific value of Coulomb’s constant seems like a shallow physical 
necessity. One can easily imagine the constant having a different value, 
and one can predict what would result. 
 By contrast, the physical principles used in my resolution of the 
Thomson Lamp paradox are much deeper principles; it is much harder to 
imagine their being false or to evaluate counterfactuals about what would 
happen if they were false. The objection requires us to suppose an alter-
nate physics in which a switch can be flipped faster and faster without 
limit, and yet the switch need not have infinite material strength. It 
really is extremely unclear how we are supposed to imagine this working. 
Are we to suppose a physics in which an object can somehow be acceler-
ated faster and faster without limit,  without  increasing the force applied 
to it? Or in which an object withstands ever-increasing forces despite 
having only limited material strength? 
 There are three related problems here. First, it isn’t clear that such alter-
native physics are genuinely metaphysically possible. There really is not 
a clear intuitive division between the principles that are generally recog-
nized as metaphysically necessary – such as that nothing can be both 
completely red and completely blue, or that the shortest path between 
two points is a straight line – and the very general, deep physical prin-
ciples involved in this example – such as that moving an object with 
increasing acceleration requires applying increasing force, or that greater 
material strength is required for an object to withstand greater forces. 
 Second, even if an alternate physics that rejects these principles is 
in some sense possible, the injunction to imagine that physics were 
somehow altered so as to allow the Thomson Lamp to exist is not suffi-
ciently determinate to generate answers to counterfactual questions. If, 
that is, someone wants us to imagine a radically alien physics, and then 
say what would happen to a lamp in a world with this alien physics, the 
person proposing this scenario would have to tell us much more about 
what the physics of this hypothetical world would be like. Otherwise, 
there will be no answer to such questions as ‘At the end of one minute, 
what state would the lamp be in?’ The absence of a determinate answer 
to this question would be no more mystifying than the absence of deter-
minate answers to such questions as ‘If the sky were some other color 
than what it is, what color would it be?’ or ‘If someone else were writing 
this chapter, what would that person say?’ 
 Third, even if someone were to describe a specific, alternative physics 
in which it is possible for a lamp to be switched infinitely many times 

Some Paradoxes Mostly Resolved 227
within a minute, such that it was plausible that there should be a deter-
minate answer to what state the lamp would be in at the end of that 
process, this would simply be to describe a  different problem  from the 
original one. Compare this pair of questions:
 a.   If I were to add a teaspoon of salt to this recipe, how would it taste?  
 b.   If I were to add a teaspoon of salt to this recipe, in an alternate possible 
world in which salt is a compound of plutonium and mercury and 
we are sea creatures who evolved living on kelp and plankton, how 
would it taste? 
 Whatever might be said about (b), it is surely a different question from 
(a), and one’s answer to question (a) is not impugned by one’s failure to 
answer (b). Similarly, the original Thomson Lamp problem is different 
from the problem that someone might one day pose in which we have 
to work out the implications of an alien physics (in which perhaps 
forces are unrelated to accelerations, etc.). It is hardly an indictment of 
a theory that it fails to provide answers to hypothetical problems that 
have yet to be clearly posed. It is enough that the original, reasonably 
clear version of the problem has been addressed. 
 12.18.4  Generalizing 
 I have stated the above points in terms of the example of Thomson’s 
Lamp, but I believe similar remarks apply to the other solutions that 
rely on general physical principles. In no case do I rely upon shallow 
or seemingly arbitrary physical principles, such as the specific value of 
a physical constant. In each case, the physical principles I employ are 
general ones that are essential to the nature of the physical phenomena 
of interest – for instance, principles concerning binding energy are 
essential to the distinction between solid and non-solid materials 
(Section 12.9); the relationship between resistivity and current flow is 
essential to the nature of electric circuits (Section 12.10.4); the Beer-
Lambert Law is essential to the nature of transparency and opacity 
(Section 12.12.3). To suppose these principles false is to suppose a 
fundamentally alien physics – perhaps even one with alien proper-
ties, not really solidity, electricity, and opacity as we understand those 
terms. 
 It is really not so clear that one could describe a coherent, metaphysi-
cally possible physics without these principles. Even if that would be 
possible, counterfactual questions about what would happen in an 
alternate world in which these fundamental physical principles failed 

228 Approaching Infinity
probably do not have determinate answers – at least, not until one speci-
fies in some detail the alternative physics that would obtain. If someone 
did so, this would really be introducing a different set of puzzles, rather 
than impugning my solutions to the original paradoxes, as those para-
doxes were posed in Chapter 3.  
 

229
 13.1  The problem of identifying vicious regresses 
 A common form of argument in philosophy claims that some philo-
sophical thesis, T, generates an infinite regress, whereupon the reader is 
supposed to see that T must therefore be rejected (see Chapter 2). Such 
arguments often prove controversial, and the controversy usually centers 
on whether the infinite regress in question is vicious or benign. In this 
chapter, I offer an account of when an infinite regress is vicious, which I 
deploy to assess the six infinite regresses discussed in Chapter 2. 
 To review, in Chapter 2 we discussed the following six infinite regresses 
and/or regress arguments:
 1.   The Cosmological Argument (concerning the Regress of Causes):  This argu-
ment claims that because an infinite regress of causes is impossible, 
the universe must have a first cause, that is, something that was not 
itself caused by anything but that caused everything else.  
 2.   The Regress Argument for   Foundationalism (the Regress of Reasons):  This 
argument claims that because there cannot be an infinite series of 
reasons for any belief, there must be some beliefs that are justified in 
a way that does not depend on reasons. These ‘foundational’ beliefs 
would be the source of the justification for all other justified beliefs.  
 3.   The Third Man Argument (the Regress of Forms):  This argument claims 
that Plato’s theory of the Forms should be rejected because it entails 
that there is an infinite series of Forms for any property – for example, 
that there is an infinite series of Forms of Man. 
 4.   The Regress Argument against Resemblance   Nominalism (the Regress of 
Resemblances): This argument claims that resemblance nominalism 
should be rejected because it entails the existence of an infinite series 
of resemblance relations. 
 13 
 Assessing Infinite Regress 
Arguments 

230 Approaching Infinity
 5.   McTaggart’s Argument against the Reality of Time (the Regress of Temporal 
Properties):  This argument claims that time must be unreal, because 
the reality of time requires an infinite series of ever more complex 
temporal properties (for example, the presentness of  e , the present-
ness of the presentness of  e , and so on). 
 6.   The Truth Regress:  P entails that it is true that P, which in turn entails 
that it is true that it is true that P, and so on. Unlike the previous 
cases, no one claims that this regress is vicious, so no infinite regress 
 argument has been advanced based on this regress. 
 In the first five of these cases, an important philosophical argument 
hinges on the claim that the infinite regress in question is ‘vicious’. But 
those who advance these arguments are rarely clear about what would 
make a regress vicious. 
 There seem to be at least three main ways that an infinite regress might 
be problematic (perhaps there are more, but these are the three obvious 
ways). The three problems are: metaphysical impossibility, extreme 
implausibility, and explanatory failure. 1 Let us discuss these in turn. 
 13.2  Viciousness through metaphysical impossibility 
 Let us begin with the problem of  metaphysical impossibility . This is the 
alleged problem that motivates the Cosmological Argument. It is said 
that an infinite regress of causes is metaphysically impossible, either 
because it is in principle impossible to complete an infinite series, or 
because it is impossible for there to be an ‘actual infinity’. 
 My account of metaphysically impossible infinities is by now familiar; 
I have nothing substantive to add to it here. On my account, an infinite 
regress would be vicious by virtue of a metaphysically impossible form 
of infinity only if it somehow implicated an infinite natural intensive 
magnitude. No such impossibility is involved in the regress of causes. 
The infinite series of causes would be an example of infinite  cardinality 
(infinitely many causes). If we assume that each cause must have at least 
some minimum duration and that the causes are sequentially arranged, 
 1  This taxonomy draws on the work of Nolan (2001) and Bliss (2013). Nolan 
recognizes four problems that infinite regresses may have: contradiction, failure 
of intended reduction, conflict with the known finitude of a domain, and quan-
titative extravagance. The first corresponds (but only loosely) to my category 
of metaphysical impossibility, the second to my category of explanatory failure, 
and the third and fourth to my category of implausibility. Bliss emphasizes the 
problem of explanatory failure. 

Assessing Infinite Regress Arguments 231
or if we simply assume that there is no beginning of time, then we also 
have an example of an infinite  extensive magnitude  (the duration of the 
universe’s history). On my view, neither of these things is problematic, 
and there is no need for any intensive magnitude to be infinite. In short, 
the Cosmological Argument fails when understood as an appeal to meta-
physical impossibility. 
 Similar remarks apply to the regresses of Forms, resemblances, temporal 
properties, and truths. Each of these, like any infinite series, involves an 
infinite cardinality; none involve an infinite intensive magnitude. 
 The status of the regress of reasons is open to debate. Suppose we accepted 
the following principles about reasons for belief: ( i ) all justification for belief 
is provided by reasons; ( ii ) a reason provides justification for a belief only 
if it is itself a justified belief. These principles generate an infinite regress of 
reasons, all of which must be justified beliefs. It is plausible to think that, 
for a subject to have all of these justified beliefs, the subject must instan-
tiate some infinite intensive magnitude – for instance, the person must 
have infinite intelligence, or infinite mental capacity in some sense, where 
this mental capacity would be an intensive magnitude. 
 Here is one way to avoid that conclusion. First we must distinguish 
dispositional from occurrent beliefs: a belief is ‘occurrent’ at a given 
time iff the subject is actually thinking that belief at the moment. 
‘Dispositional’ beliefs are those that one is not thinking at the moment. 
For example, most readers, I presume, believe that seven is greater 
than four. Before reading that sentence, you probably believed [seven 
is greater than four] dispositionally; upon reading the sentence, your 
belief became occurrent. Now, to have an infinite collection of occur-
rent beliefs, one might well need to possess some sort of infinite mental 
capacity of a sort that would be metaphysically impossible. 
 However, to have an infinite collection of merely  dispositional beliefs 
may not require one to have an infinite mental capacity. Note that some 
dispositional beliefs seem to be things that a subject has never expli-
citly, occurrently thought; instead, they seem to be merely things that 
are obviously entailed by other things the subject believes (where the 
subject would immediately accept the entailment upon consideration). 
For instance, a normal person might count as believing that 6,387 is 
greater than 1, despite never having thought that specific proposition, 
simply because the person believes things about the number system that 
obviously entail that 6,387 is greater than 1. If we accept this sort of 
dispositional belief, it then becomes plausible that one could have infin-
itely many dispositional beliefs without manifesting an infinite mental 
capacity in any problematic sense. 

232 Approaching Infinity
 However, it is highly implausible that  such  beliefs could be related in 
the right way to provide an infinite series of justifying reasons for any 
proposition. Suppose I believe an infinite series of propositions, P 1 , P 2 , 
P 3 , ... , where all of the propositions after a certain point are believed 
only dispositionally, and only in the sense that they are obvious logical 
consequences of earlier propositions in the series that I believe. It just 
is not plausible that in such a case, these propositions might be related 
in such a way that for every  n , P  n +1 provides a non-question-begging 
reason for P  n  . 
 Now here is another way to avoid the requirement of an infinite 
mental capacity while still embracing an infinite series of reasons in some 
sense. We could hold that for a belief to be justified, it is only required 
that the subject  could come up with a reason (which would itself then 
be justifiable), not that the subject presently has such a reason among 
his beliefs.  2 That is, justifying reasons need only be potential beliefs, 
not actual beliefs. On this view, it would be plausible to claim that no 
infinite intelligence, or other infinite mental capacity, is required in 
order to have justified beliefs. To be sure, the view might be implaus-
ible for other reasons: if a belief needs a reason in order to be justified, 
then I think it implausible that the mere potential to come up with a 
reason, which the subject does not actually believe, would suffice for 
justification. But the view does not suffer from the particular problem of 
invoking a metaphysically impossible kind of infinity. 
 13.3  Viciousness through implausibility 
 13.3.1  The regress of reasons 
 Sometimes, we find that a certain infinite series, even if it is not strictly, 
metaphysically  impossible , is extremely implausible. This is the usual 
charge against the infinite regress of reasons. Perhaps there  could be a 
being with an infinite series of reasons for one of its beliefs; perhaps not. 
Be that as it may, it is extremely, empirically implausible that humans 
are such beings. Even among those few philosophers who defend 
 2  It is unclear whether Peter Klein’s well-known infinitist view is to be under-
stood thus, as requiring only the ability to devise a reason, or rather as requiring 
an actual (albeit dispositional) belief that serves as a reason. Klein says only that 
a reason must be a proposition that is ‘available’ to the subject, and that to be 
thus available, a proposition need not be occurrently believed, but that it must be 
‘appropriately “hooked up” to S’s beliefs and other mental contents’ – thus leaving 
it open whether the proposition must be dispositionally believed (2005, 136).  

Assessing Infinite Regress Arguments 233
the possibility of an infinite series of reasons, none has provided any 
examples to show how such a series would go. 
 In fairness, publisher-imposed length limits prevent a philosopher 
from stating an infinitely long argument. If, however, someone were 
to state even the first  fifty  steps in the infinitely long chain of reasons 
that justifies the proposition [I exist], this would go a long way toward 
convincing me that there might be such an infinite chain. No one has 
done anything like that; indeed, no one seems able to provide even the 
first  ten steps. 
 This sort of extreme implausibility applies to most (perhaps all) other 
infinite regresses that involve human beings. For instance, suppose one 
held that in order for any choice to be truly free, the agent must freely 
choose the motives for which the original choice was made. This leads 
to an infinite regress of choices, and whether or not it is metaphysically 
 possible , it is extremely implausible that any human being ever performs 
such an infinite series of choices. Similarly for the idea that all words, to be 
understood, must be defined in terms of other words that are understood.  
 13.3.2  Regresses of abstract objects 
 Infinite regresses that involve only abstract objects are generally much 
less implausible. Witness the truth regress, which almost everyone accepts 
as benign. There is an infinite series of true propositions, but no human 
(or other) being need entertain all of them, so there is not the same kind 
of empirically implausible demand as there is in the case of an infinite 
series of reasons or choices. Abstract objects in general have a habit of 
being infinitely numerous, as in the cases of numbers, sets (if such exist), 
geometric points (if such exist), properties, and propositions. 
 In my judgment, the infinite regresses of resemblances and temporal 
properties are similarly untroubling. In the case of the regress of Forms, 
I think it implausible that the series of Forms exists, but this implaus-
ibility is not something about the  infinitude of the series. Rather, even 
the existence of a  second Form of Man strikes me as extremely implaus-
ible and as betokening some confusion in the theory. Of course, some 
find the very idea of the Forms implausible from the start. But even for 
those who are initially willing to entertain the idea, surely by the time 
the second Form of Man arrives on the scene, it is clear that something 
has gone off the rails. 3 
 3  Of course, what has gone wrong is (perhaps among other things) the self-
predication assumption: the idea that a property possesses itself – for example, 
that the property of Manhood is itself a man – is extremely confused.  

234 Approaching Infinity
 13.3.3  The regress of causes 
 What about the regress of causes addressed by the Cosmological 
Argument? I detect no similar implausibility here. The idea that the 
chain of causes and effects in the universe’s history stretches back infi-
nitely into the past – once we have overcome the mistaken view that 
an ‘actual infinity’ is impossible or that an infinite series can never be 
completed – just does not seem to reveal any sort of confusion in the 
way that the idea of there being more than one Form of Man reveals 
a confusion. It is also not empirically implausible in the way that it is 
implausible to ascribe an infinite series of reasons to a human being. 
 But one might think that the regress of causes is improbable because 
of its ‘quantitative extravagance’ – that is, because it so blatantly violates 
Occam’s Razor, the principle that other things being equal, simpler 
explanations are to be preferred over more complex explanations. To 
explain the current state of the universe, or to explain any current event, 
we postulate an infinite number of past states or events: this seems 
to be the least simple sort of explanation one could give. It would be 
much simpler if we could cite some entity, such as God, that ultimately 
explains all the events in the universe. 
 I think this reasoning, though superficially plausible, is incorrect for 
at least two reasons. The first reason is that the theory of an infinite 
past (that is, a chain of past causes and effects with an infinite duration) 
does not actually require a greater number of entities than the theory 
of a finite past. This is because on any reasonable view, there are infin-
itely many events in the history of the universe, even if we look at only 
a finite duration. This is because time is infinitely divisible, as are the 
processes that take place in time. If, for example, an object moves from 
point A to point B, this motion can, with equal scientific validity, be 
regarded either as a single event or as an infinite series of events (for 
instance, moving the first half of the distance, moving the next quarter 
of the distance, and so on). If the latter seems to you an arbitrary way of 
dividing up the motion, keep in mind that  all ways of dividing up the 
universe’s history into events are equally arbitrary from the standpoint 
of physics. When one speaks of an object moving from point A to point 
B, this just signals that one has chosen two points in the history of the 
object – the point when the object was at A and the point when it was at 
B – as the boundaries of an ‘event’; one could equally well have chosen 
an earlier or a later stage of the object’s history. So we have infinitely 
many events, whether the universe’s history is finite or infinite. On the 
other hand, if we postulate a supernatural entity, God, as the cause of 

Assessing Infinite Regress Arguments 235
the rest of the universe, we will be introducing a new  kind of entity not 
present in a purely naturalistic worldview; thus, in one respect we will 
be making our theory more complex. 
 My second point is more interesting. It is that the argument from 
quantitative extravagance rests on a confusion about the theoretical 
virtue of parsimony. I have discussed this issue at greater length else-
where; here I just give a very brief, dogmatic statement of my view.  4 
 It is frequently but not always true that the simpler explanation of a 
phenomenon is more likely to be true. But most who invoke this prin-
ciple have no account of why this should be; as a result, they also have 
no idea of  when the principle applies. 
 Here is why simpler theories tend to be better than more complex 
theories. A simpler theory, typically, has fewer  adjustable parameters than 
a more complex theory. These ‘adjustable parameters’ are places where 
assumptions of the theory could be varied, without thereby making it into 
a different theory; for example, the gravitational constant is an adjust-
able parameter in Newtonian gravitational theory. Because a complex 
theory has more adjustable parameters, it is typically capable in principle 
of accommodating a wider range of possible data than a simple theory. 
As a result, the complex theory makes  weaker predictions than the simple 
theory. In probabilistic terms, what this means is that if theories C and 
S both accommodate some evidence E, and C is more complex than E, 
then typically the probability of E given S is higher than the probability 
of E given C (P(E|S) > P(E|C)). Therefore, if and when E is discovered to be 
true, it acts as a stronger confirmation of S than of C. 
 Thus, suppose we are trying to fit a curve to some number of data 
points. If the data can be accommodated either by the hypothesis of a 
linear relation (an equation of the form  y = A x + B) or by the hypoth-
esis of a cubic relation (an equation of the form  y = A x 3 + B x 2 + C x + D), 
the former is more likely to be correct. The reason is that the range of 
data that can be accommodated by a linear relation is a very tiny subset 
of the range of data that can be accommodated by a cubic relation. 
Therefore, intuitively, if the true relationship between  x and  y is cubic, 
then it would be an amazing coincidence that the data happen also to 
fit a linear relation. Essentially this sort of reasoning, I maintain, can be 
given for all the other clear cases in which a simpler theory is more likely 
to be correct than a complex theory. 
 Notice that on this account, the virtue of parsimony does not mean 
that a simple theory has a higher  a priori  probability than a complex 
 4  For elaboration, see Huemer 2009. 

236 Approaching Infinity
theory. Rather, the virtue of parsimony consists in the fact that a simple 
theory is  more easily confirmed  than a complex theory – that is, when 
both theories accommodate some data, that data will provide more 
support to the simple theory than to the complex theory. Thus, the 
virtue of parsimony only applies when we have two theories, differing 
in complexity, that both accommodate some data, and the question is 
which theory is better supported by that data. Notice also that on this 
account, the virtue of parsimony only applies in cases where the more 
complex theory accommodates a wider range of possible data than the 
simpler theory. On this showing, nearly all appeals to simplicity in phil-
osophy are fallacious – almost never can a philosophical theory lay claim 
to accommodating a narrower range of possible data than its rivals. Most 
philosophical theories in fact accommodate either every metaphysically 
possible data set, or none of them. 
 Be that as it may, the appeal to simplicity fails, in particular, in the case 
of the Cosmological Argument. The theory that God created the universe 
does not accommodate a narrower range of data than the theory that 
the universe always existed. No matter what we had observed (given that 
we could not have observed the infinitude of the universe’s history), it 
would have been consistent with the hypothesis of a universe created by 
God. Proponents of the first-cause theory cannot explain what different 
evidence we might have expected to observe if there had been an infi-
nite series of causes rather than a first cause. It thus appears that we have 
again failed to find anything vicious about the regress of causes.  
 13.4  Viciousness through explanatory failure 
 13.4.1  Two fictitious scientific theories 
 The third way that an infinite regress can be vicious is that it indicates a 
theory’s failure to explain what it is intended to explain. Following are 
two examples of this problem. 
 First, the homuncular theory of perception: this theory holds that for 
a person to see an object is for the person to have an internal image, 
which is seen by a tiny person inside the first person’s head. 
 Leave aside the general ridiculousness of a tiny person inside your 
head, and focus instead on the infinite regress: the homunculus inside 
the first observer’s head will need another homunculus inside its head, 
and so on. This regress arises out of the same feature of the theory that 
prevents the theory from being genuinely explanatory, namely, that the 
thing to be explained (vision) reappears within the proposed explanation. 
Notice that the problem is not merely that it is impossible for a person to 

Assessing Infinite Regress Arguments 237
contain an infinite series of persons. Even if we accepted that there might 
be an infinite series of persons within a given person, the homuncular 
theory still would not explain vision; it tells us only that whenever vision 
occurs, an infinite series of instances of vision occur. Compare this case: 
suppose I tell you that to flub is to have another person inside of you 
who flubs. Even if you believe that there could be an infinite series of 
persons inside you, this still does not tell you what flubbing is. 
 My second example concerns a certain chelonian theory of cosmology. 
According to a popular story, a philosopher (sometimes identified as 
Bertrand Russell, sometimes William James) once gave a lecture on 
astronomy, describing how the Earth flies through space in its orbit 
around the sun. After the lecture, an old woman told the speaker that 
his theory was rubbish; in fact, she maintained, the Earth rests upon 
the back of a giant turtle. And what supports the turtle? the speaker 
wondered. Another giant turtle. But what holds up the last turtle in the 
series? Answer: ‘It’s turtles all the way down.’ 
 What is wrong with such a theory? Leave aside the modern scientific 
evidence and the general implausibility of a world turtle. Leave aside 
also the questions of why any explanation is needed for why the Earth 
does not fall, and how we know that the Earth is not presently falling. 
Focus instead on the theory’s  explanatory strategy : the theory aims to 
explain why the Earth does not fall. It postulates a World Turtle under-
neath the Earth, but the World Turtle itself must be supposed to have 
the very same property (that of remaining suspended without falling) 
that we wanted explained for the Earth. So the postulation of the World 
Turtle does not seem to make any explanatory advance at all. 
 But what if there were infinitely many turtles – wouldn’t this at last 
explain the Earth’s stationariness, if only we could believe in such a 
chelonian series? Not really. For even if there were an infinite series of 
world turtles, it could just as easily be an infinite series of  falling turtles 
as an infinite series of  stationary  turtles. Some explanation is thus needed 
for why the whole system, including the Earth together with all the 
turtles, remains suspended rather than falling. 
 No one holds either the homuncular theory of perception or the 
chelonian theory of cosmology, so refuting these theories is not particu-
larly important per se. What is of interest is the types of explanatory 
failure that these theories exhibit. When we come to considering more 
controversial theories, we must be on guard against these types of 
explanatory failure, namely, those in which the explanans contains the 
explanandum, or in which the infinite series as a whole stands in need 
of explanation in the same way as its first member did. 

238 Approaching Infinity
 13.4.2  The regress of causes 
 Proponents of the Cosmological Argument believe that the theory of 
an infinite series of causes suffers from the same sort of problems as 
the theories of the homunculi and the world turtles. To begin with, we 
seek an explanation for the occurrence of some present event. This is 
explained by citing its cause, which is another, earlier event. But this 
earlier event must also have occurred; thus, the same question arises 
with it as arose with the original event. This seems analogous to citing 
a World Turtle that stands just as much in need of support as the Earth. 
And just as we can ask why the entire series of world turtles does not 
fall, we can ask why the entire series of causes and effects in the world’s 
history occurred, rather than none of it occurring. 5 
 I think there is something to these observations, but the argument is 
not as strong as its proponents make it out to be. The regress of causes is 
not as bad as the homuncular theory of perception. For as we described 
it, the aim of the homuncular theory was to explain what vision is. The 
aim of the theory of the regress of causes, however, is not to explain what 
an event is, or what causation is, or what anything else is. In both cases, 
there is a failure to explain the nature of something: the homuncular 
theory fails to explain what vision is; just so, the causal regress theory 
fails to explain what events are and what causation is. But since the 
causal regress theory was never intended to explain those things, this is 
not a failure of the theory. 
 The causal regress theory is meant to explain, for each event, why that 
event occurred. And the theory succeeds on that score – or at least, if 
one succeeds in identifying the cause of a given event, one succeeds in 
explaining (causally) why that event occurred. The theory fails, however, 
to explain why  the entire series  occurred rather than none of the events in 
the series occurring. This question is a slightly more specific version of 
Leibniz’ famous metaphysical question, ‘Why is there something rather 
than nothing?’  6 Leibniz and other proponents of the Cosmological 
Argument are correct so far: the infinite series of causes fails to answer 
 5  Clarke 1998, section 2, 10. 
 6  From ‘The Principles of Nature and of Grace, Based on Reason’: ‘[N]ow we 
must advance to metaphysics, making use of the  great principle  [ ... ] that  nothing 
happens without a sufficient reason ; that is to say, that nothing happens without 
its being possible for him who should sufficiently understand things, to give a 
reason sufficient to determine why it is so and not otherwise. This principle laid 
down, the first question which should rightly be asked, will be,  Why is there some-
thing rather than nothing? ’ ([1714] 1908, 303; emphasis in original) 

Assessing Infinite Regress Arguments 239
Leibniz’ question, just as the turtle theory fails to explain what holds up 
the entire series of turtles. 
 But the causal regress theory is in better shape than the turtle theory, 
for at least two important reasons. First, the turtle theory must compete 
with a rival theory, modern astronomy, that is supported by a great deal 
of evidence, and this rival theory avoids the problem facing the turtle 
theory (modern astronomy does not have to explain, for example, what 
‘holds up’ the solar system). By contrast, the causal regress theory faces 
a much weaker rival. The theory of theism is much less well supported 
than modern astronomy, or so I would argue. The theistic theory also 
fails to offer a coherent explanation of the fact that supposedly needs 
explaining: if the question is why there is something rather than 
nothing, then to say that God created the rest of the cosmos does not 
answer the question, for it does not explain why there was God rather 
than nothing. 
 Leibniz has an answer to this: God, he claims, is a ‘necessary being’, 
that is, a being who could not possibly have failed to exist. Thus, unlike 
the universe, there is no need to wonder why  God exists. Assessing this 
claim in detail would take us too far afield. Here, I will baldly assert my 
view that the idea of God as a necessary being is incoherent and that it 
rests on the infamous Ontological Argument, one of the most patent 
sophisms in the history of philosophy. 7 
 Be that as it may, the current version of the Cosmological Argument 
does something akin to begging the question. If we already accept the 
 Ontological Argument for the existence of God, then we don’t need 
the Cosmological Argument, because we’ve already established the 
conclusion that God exists. If, on the other hand, we do not accept 
the Ontological Argument, then we should not accept the Cosmological 
Argument either (in the version currently under consideration), because 
there is no reason to think that God would be any less in need of expla-
nation than the universe; the theistic theory thus could not claim an 
explanatory advantage over the causal regress theory. 
 The second reason why the causal regress theory is in better shape 
than the turtle theory is this: the turtle theory is only motivated to 
begin with if one accepts some general principle, roughly to the effect 
that all material things have a natural tendency to fall; only thus is 
 7  The Ontological Argument claims, in essence, that God must exist because 
existence is built into the definition of ‘God’. For classic statements, see Anselm 
1926, Chapter 2; Descartes 1984, 5th Meditation. For a review of the literature, 
including the problems with the argument, see Oppy 2014. 

240 Approaching Infinity
there a need to explain why the Earth is not falling. But if one accepts 
that principle, there is no reason why the material object consisting of 
the entire collection of turtles should not fall. (One might say: ‘Maybe 
the whole system  is falling; how would we know?’ Or: ‘Falling can only 
be defined relative to other objects.’ Yes, but then there would be no 
need to posit any of the turtles in the first place.) By contrast, the causal 
regress theory need not be motivated by any analogous principle – one 
need not, for example, think that events have a ‘natural tendency 
to not happen’, nor need one accept the general claim, advanced by 
Leibniz and many other theists, that everything has an explanation. 
One can reasonably suppose that some things simply have no explan-
ation – including, perhaps, the fact that there is something rather than 
nothing. 
 But, one might wonder, if one thinks that the universe as a whole 
requires no explanation, then why posit any causes in the first place; 
why not stop with the present state of the universe and claim that 
 it  needs no explanation? I think the answer is, essentially, that we 
have empirical reasons, not a priori reasons, to think that events in 
the observable universe have causes. We have experience of many 
regularities in nature that lead us to believe that there are causal laws, 
and there are no confirmed cases of any events not governed by such 
laws. It is reasonable to hypothesize that all events have always been 
governed by these laws. Given the law of conservation of energy, it 
is also reasonable to suppose that the energy existing in the universe 
has always existed. We do not know for certain that these things are 
the case, but they are reasonable hypotheses given our evidence. The 
fact that we lack an explanation for why in general there is something 
rather than nothing does not remove the evidence that we have for 
the laws of nature. 
 My conclusion is that the regress of causes is not vicious by reason 
of explanatory failure. It indeed fails to explain why the universe 
as a whole exists, but the belief in such a series of causes was never 
intended to explain that in the first place, and the belief is moti-
vated independently of any such explanatory claim. Nevertheless, if 
a theistic account could explain why there is something rather than 
nothing, this would be a definite advantage of theism. I rather doubt, 
however, that any theory can explain why there is something rather 
than nothing.  8  
 8  For a review of some failed attempts to answer the question, see Kusch 1990.  

Assessing Infinite Regress Arguments 241
 13.4.3  The regress of reasons 
 The regress of epistemic reasons for belief seems to suffer from a problem 
akin to that of the turtle regress. We start out wanting to know what 
makes a particular belief justified. We are told that this belief is justified 
by virtue of its being supported by an available reason. But it seems that 
this reason could only explain the first belief’s justification if the reason 
is itself justified. The reason, in turn, is supported by a second reason, 
but this would only render the first reason justified if the second reason 
was justified. So far, then, we would seem to have made no progress.  9 
 Ah, but what if there were an  infinite  series of reasons?  Then  we could 
see why the original belief was justified, couldn’t we? 
 Not really, no. Given an infinite series of reasons, there are two possi-
bilities: ( i ) each reason in the chain is justified because the next reason 
in the chain is justified; ( ii ) each reason in the chain is  un justified 
because the next reason in the chain is unjustified. This is analogous to 
the fact that, in the case of turtle cosmology, we saw two possibilities: 
an infinite series of stationary turtles, and an infinite series of falling 
turtles. We would still need an explanation for why the whole chain of 
reasons was a chain of justified reasons, rather than a chain of unjusti-
fied reasons. The theory of an infinite chain of reasons does not answer 
the question of why any of one’s beliefs should be justified, rather than 
all being unjustified. This is a troubling explanatory failure, because this 
is precisely the sort of question that a theory about reasons for belief 
should address.  10 And it does not seem at all plausible – as it might have 
been plausible to maintain that there is no explanation for the exist-
ence of the universe – to claim that there is no explanation for why our 
 9  Klein (2003, 722–3) addresses objections in this neighborhood, claiming 
that the justification for the original belief is explained in terms of there being an 
infinite series of available reasons, where one can give purely descriptive condi-
tions for a reason’s ‘availability’ (though he does not specify these conditions). 
My reply:  if the conditions for ‘availability’ do not include that a reason must be 
justified in order to be ‘available’, then one’s having a series (whether finite or 
infinite) of available reasons for a given belief does not explain why the belief 
is justified, since one’s having this series is compatible with none of the reasons 
being justified, in which case the original belief would not be justified.  
 10  Klein (2003, 729) seems to suggest that infinitism is only intended to 
explain, for each belief, why that belief is justified, not to explain why any of our 
beliefs are justified rather than all being unjustified. This is unsatisfying, since 
rival theories (foundationalism, coherentism)  do  explain why any of our beliefs 
are justified. If we must adopt some rival theory to account for why any of our 
beliefs are justified, we should also use that theory to explain why any given 
belief is justified. 

242 Approaching Infinity
belief systems are justified. The regress of reasons therefore appears to be 
vicious by reason of explanatory failure. 
 13.4.4  The regress of universals 
 Our paradigm of a benign regress, the Truth Regress, does not suffer 
from explanatory failure because it is not intended to explain anything 
to begin with. More precisely, the thesis that P entails [P is true] indeed 
fails to explain anything, but this is not a problem because that thesis 
is motivated independently of any explanatory claim. We do not think 
that P entails [P is true] because this somehow explains what ‘P’ means 
or explains the nature of propositions. We think that P entails [P is true] 
because this just follows from the meaning of the word ‘true’. 
 The regress of Platonic Forms, on the other hand, appears vicious. The 
theory of Forms is apparently meant to explain what it is for a number 
of objects to share a property or belong to a common kind. The theory 
holds that this consists in the objects’ resembling or ‘participating in’ 
a Form, which itself has the relevant property or belongs to the rele-
vant kind, only in a more perfect manner than ordinary objects. This 
explanans contains the explanandum: if we thought it needed explana-
tion how an ordinary object can have a property, or what it is to have a 
property, then we should equally well demand an explanation of how 
the Form can have a property. The regress of Forms is analogous to the 
regress of homunculi: just as we fail to explain what vision is by invoking 
an infinite series of acts of seeing, so we fail to explain what having a 
property is by invoking an infinite series of objects with properties. 
 Would the problem go away if we simply dropped the self-predication 
assumption? That is, suppose we give up the confused idea that the Form of 
Man is itself a man; does this enable the theory of Forms to avoid a vicious 
regress? Not really; it avoids the infinite regress of Forms of Man, but the 
theory will still be saddled with another infinite regress: to explain what 
makes a particular man a man, we postulate that the individual ‘partici-
pates in’ the Form of Man (whatever that means). But this ‘participation’ 
is itself a universal, since there can be multiple different instances of it. 
Therefore, we must explain what it is for an individual to participate in a 
Form: presumably, it is for the pair (the individual and the Form) to partici-
pate in the Form of Participation. And for this to occur is for the individual 
and the first Form, together with the Form of Participation, to participate 
again in the Form of Participation ... . This is not a satisfactory explanation. 
 What goes for Forms goes for Resemblances. If resemblance nominalism 
is meant to explain what it is, in general, for something to have some prop-
erty (where relations count as properties), it fails because it requires a prior 

Assessing Infinite Regress Arguments 243
understanding of what it is for a pair of objects to  resemble , and this is an 
example of the very thing the theory is supposed to explain. The hypoth-
esis of an infinite series of relations, even if we believe such a series exists, 
does not explain what it is for a pair of things to stand in a relation. 
 At this point, one might well wonder: do  all solutions to the Problem 
of Universals similarly fail?  If the problem is to explain predication, or 
to explain in general what it is for a thing to be some way, then yes, all 
solutions fail. For suppose this is our theory:
 Predicate P applies to object  x if and only if φ(P, x ). 
 φ can be any condition, it doesn’t matter what. Some possible candi-
dates are: 
 φ(P, x ) =  x participates in the Form of P-ness. 
 φ(P, x ) =  x resembles the paradigms of P-ness at least as much as they 
resemble each other. 
 φ(P, x ) =  x is a member of the set of P’s. 
 Whatever φ is, the statement of this condition will contain at least one 
predicate (‘participates in’, ‘resembles’, ‘is a member of’, etc.). So an 
understanding of predication will be presupposed in the theory. 
 There is therefore no solution to the ‘problem’ of universals, on this 
interpretation of the problem. It is not possible to explain in general 
what it is for something to be a certain way. But this is hardly troubling; 
if anything qualifies as a basic notion, the notion of a thing being a 
certain way seems to be one. 
 This does not mean that all theories about universals are false; it only 
means that no such theory can explain predication in general, and thus 
any such theory must be motivated by considerations other than the 
claim to explain predication. For example, Platonism might be true 
(as I believe), in the sense that universals exist necessarily. This thesis 
would have to be motivated by reasons other than the claim to explain 
predication. If it is so motivated, then the theory avoids vicious regress. 
Whenever  x is F, where  x is some object and F is some property, there will 
be an infinite series of facts: 
 x instantiates Fness. 
 〈 x , Fness〉 instantiates Instantiation. 
 〈〈  x , Fness〉, Instantiation〉 instantiates Instantiation. 
 ⁝ 

244 Approaching Infinity
 But as long as we don’t claim that any of this  explains what it is to be F, 
this regress is as benign as the truth regress. 
 13.4.5  The regress of temporal properties 
 According to McTaggart, the reality of time requires the existence of an 
infinite series of temporal properties. For any given event,  e , when  e is 
present, the presentness of  e is also present, and so on. At first glance, 
there is no case for explanatory failure here: the presentness of  e is not 
being used to  explain e , nor is the presentness of the presentness of  e 
used to explain the presentness of  e . 
 McTaggart might claim, however, that there is an explanatory task 
that needs doing: the passage of time  seems contradictory, he would 
claim, because it involves a given event possessing two or more incom-
patible properties. We thus need to explain why the notion of the 
passage of time is not contradictory. The proposed explanation is: 
because the event possesses these incompatible properties  at different 
times . Allegedly, this introduces a second temporal series, about which 
the same problem can be raised again. McTaggart’s picture seems to 
be something like this: we  start out  with a contradiction (the same 
event can be past, present, and future), and we have to introduce a 
second time series to  resolve  the contradiction, but the second time 
series introduces its own contradiction (similarly for a third time 
series, and so on), so that there is ultimately no way of expunging all 
contradictions. 
 McTaggart’s argument relies on the law of non-contradiction. 
Understandably, he does not attempt to  argue for the law of non-contra-
diction but instead takes it for granted as a starting premise. But how is 
he understanding this law? Here are two readings of it: 
 The Qualified Law of   Non-Contradiction:  Nothing can have two or more 
incompatible properties at the same time. 
 The Unqualified Law of   Non-Contradiction:  Nothing can have two or 
more incompatible properties,  regardless  of whether they be possessed 
at the same time or at different times. 
 If McTaggart is relying on the Qualified Law, then his argument does not 
get off the ground. To claim that the idea of the passage of time involves 
a contradiction, he must claim that, for time to pass, a given event must 
possess incompatible properties  at the same time . But there is no basis for 
that claim. 

Assessing Infinite Regress Arguments 245
 If, on the other hand, McTaggart is relying on the Unqualified Law, 
then his opponents (all those sane people who believe that time passes) 
have a ready response. We should not respond by appealing to an infinite 
series of temporal properties. We should simply reject the Unqualified 
Law of Non-Contradiction. The Unqualified version of the law seems 
obviously false, and McTaggart says nothing to support it. 
 Of course McTaggart’s argument does not succeed.  If McTaggart were 
correct in thinking that we start out with a burden of explaining away 
a contradiction implicit in the notion of time, then I think he would 
also be correct in thinking that the infinite regress of temporal prop-
erties is vicious. However, if there is no such initial burden, then the 
regress of temporal properties is benign. And the defender of time in 
fact faces no initial burden of explaining away a contradiction, since 
either (a) the notion of a ‘contradiction’ includes cases in which a thing 
possesses incompatible properties at different times, in which case we 
should happily embrace the possibility of true ‘contradictions’, or (b) 
‘contradiction’ does not cover such cases, in which case McTaggart in 
fact never pointed out any contradiction in the first place.  
 13.5  Conclusion 
 What have we learned about assessing infinite regress arguments? When 
faced with an infinite regress, there are three problems to look for:
First, metaphysical impossibility. This problem is vastly overdiagnosed, 
owing to mistaken Aristotelian and Kantian notions about the impos-
sibility of actual or completed infinities. The metaphysically impossible 
infinities are just those that require infinite natural, intensive magni-
tudes, and these hardly ever appear in philosophical arguments. 
 Second, implausibility. This problem is more likely to afflict theories 
about some type of human action, state, or capacity (for example, theo-
ries about the nature of knowledge, intentional action, or free will) than 
theories about more abstract matters, because human beings are notori-
ously limited. 
 Third, explanatory failure. This problem is the most difficult to diag-
nose. Proper diagnosis requires answering the following questions: (a) Is 
there a valid explanatory demand? That is, can the theory under discus-
sion fairly be required to explain something, or can the theory reason-
ably be embraced even if it does not explain anything? (b) If there is a 
valid explanatory demand, does the theory’s explanation generate an 
infinite regress? (c) If so, does the original explanatory demand apply to 
the infinite series as a whole? A special case of this is the case in which 

246 Approaching Infinity
a thing to be analyzed appears infinitely many times in the full anal-
ysis. In most cases, avoiding a charge of explanatory failure will depend 
upon a judicious rejection of the initial explanatory demand, as when 
we reject the demand to explain why anything exists, or what predica-
tion is, or why the passage of time is not contradictory.  
 

247
 In this final chapter, I offer a summary restatement of the main ideas of 
the book, followed by a discussion of where I think further research and 
refinement may be called for. 
 14.1  Why study infinity? 
 Infinity has puzzled philosophers and mathematicians for at least two 
millennia. It has given rise to numerous paradoxes – by my count, at 
least seventeen – from Zeno’s paradoxes in ancient Greek philosophy 
to Benardete’s paradoxes in the twentieth century. Paradox is just what 
we’ve come to expect whenever infinity enters the parlor. In some cases, 
there is no accepted resolution to the paradox; in others, the dominant 
view seems to be a bullet-biting response, that is, to simply acquiesce in 
whatever crazy conclusion infinity seems to have brought in the door 
with her. 
 This situation might not be so disturbing if we could pass off infinity 
as a mere human construct; yet we seem to find infinity intertwined 
with some of the most fundamental, pervasive aspects of the world – 
from the infinite divisibility and infinite extent of both space and time, 
to the infinitude of numbers and other abstract objects. 
 In addition, infinity appears in numerous philosophical arguments, 
in which profound philosophical conclusions are supposed to be 
mandated by the need to avoid vicious infinite regresses. Regress argu-
ments have been used to establish theism, foundationalism in episte-
mology, the unreality of time, the falsity of Plato’s theory of universals, 
and the falsity of nominalist theories of universals – and that is only a 
sampling from the genre of philosophical infinite regress arguments. 
A common pattern is that the author of the regress argument insists 
 14 
 Conclusion 

248 Approaching Infinity
that the discovered regress is ‘vicious’, while opponents insist that it 
is a ‘virtuous’ regress, with neither party having any clear and well-
 motivated account of the difference. 
 14.2  Troubles with traditional approaches 
 Traditional discussion of the infinite has been dominated by the debate 
over whether the infinite may ever be ’actual’ or ‘completed’, or whether 
infinity must instead be always relegated to some kind of mere potenti-
ality. The potentiality view is motivated by Aristotle’s observation that 
to be infinite is to lack a definite quantity, and that all actual things 
must be fully determinate. Around the turn of the twentieth century, 
defenders of actual infinities acquired a powerful new ally, when Georg 
Cantor invented set theory and proposed to use it to found a theory of 
numbers, which turned out to include an infinite hierarchy of infinite 
cardinal numbers. 
 Each side in the traditional debate misses something crucial. The 
Aristotelians simply cannot account for the instances of infinity that 
we find in reality – the infinite divisibility of space and time, the infi-
nite extension of space and time (especially the infinite past), and the 
infinite number of abstract objects of various kinds. Those who claim 
that an infinite series can never be completed are skewered by Zeno’s 
paradox, for every time an object moves, it must complete an infinite 
series of sub-motions. 
 On the other hand, the Cantorians, with their unhesitating embrace 
of the actual infinite, can offer us no resolution of the paradoxes of 
the infinite. In some cases (Hilbert’s Hotel, Galileo’s paradox), the 
Cantorians happily propound the conclusions that we find paradoxical. 
In other cases, we would intuitively like to say that an infinite series 
is impossible (Thomson’s Lamp, Benardete’s Paradox, the Littlewood-
Ross Banker, and others) – but the Cantorians have no principled way of 
rejecting these infinities. 
 14.3  A new approach to infinity 
 Aristotle is correct in thinking that infinity is no determinate quan-
tity. He is also correct to ban the indeterminate from actuality. But the 
right conclusion is not that infinity can never be  actual  or  completed . 
The right conclusion is, in a sense, that infinity can never be  localized ; 
there cannot be any single individual or limited region that exemplifies 
infinitude. 

Conclusion 249
 Strictly speaking, there are no infinite quantities: there is no cardinal 
number greater than all the natural numbers, nor is there any number 
larger than all the real numbers. Any ascription of infinitude must 
therefore be able to be paraphrased in such a way that the paraphrase 
ascribes only finite quantities to any individual. In the case of infinite 
cardinality, such a paraphrase can be given: we can say that the F’s are 
infinitely numerous, provided that for every natural number  n , there 
exist more than  n F’s.  1 This paraphrase only makes reference to natural 
numbers. It assumes that for every natural number  n , there is a number 
larger than  n – but it expressly avoids assuming that there is a number 
larger than every natural number. When asked what is the number that 
applies to all the F’s taken together, we should reply that there is no such 
number; the F’s are literally numberless. 
 So too, an adequate paraphrase can be given for ascriptions of infi-
nite extensive magnitudes. For example, space is infinitely extended, 
provided that for every (finite) volume  v , there exist regions larger than 
 v . This paraphrase only makes reference to finite volumes. It assumes 
that for every size, there is a larger size; but it does not assume that 
there is a size larger than every other size. If asked what is the size of all 
of space, we should deny that there is any such size. Similarly, time has 
infinite extent, in the sense that for any chosen temporal interval, there 
are intervals longer than it. 
 But no such paraphrase can be given for an ascription of infinite 
intensive magnitude. If an object is ascribed an infinite intensive magni-
tude – for instance, an infinite mass density, or an infinite temperature – 
this can only mean that the object possesses some one magnitude that 
exceeds all other possible magnitudes of its type. This is metaphysically 
impossible. 
 14.4  Some controversial views about sets, 
numbers, and points 
 There are reasons to doubt that sets exist. No one seems to be able to 
explain what they are, they do not correspond to the ordinary notion 
of a collection, and core intuitions about sets, particularly the naive 
comprehension axiom, lead to contradictions. It is therefore prudent 
to attempt to phrase whatever claims we want to make so as to avoid 
alluding to sets. 
 1  If one believes in sets, one can say that a set is of infinite cardinality provided 
that for every  n , it contains a subset with more than  n elements. 

250 Approaching Infinity
 Numbers are not sets as the followers of Cantor claim. Cardinal 
numbers are  properties – for instance, two is the property that is instan-
tiated by any two things. Twoness is what my hands have in common 
with the sun and the moon, and with the Empire State Building and 
the Chrysler building, and with the colors red and yellow, and so on. 
Real numbers, on the other hand, are relationships that may obtain 
between specific magnitudes and units – for instance, in saying that 
the Eiffel Tower is  324  meters tall, one is describing the relationship 
between a certain magnitude (the height of the Tower) and a certain 
unit (the meter). 
 On the standard conception of geometry, extended regions are 
composed of points, which are understood as infinitely small, indivis-
ible atoms of space. This notion is problematic for a variety of reasons: 
First, points seem to be unimaginable, as they are parts of space with no 
shape and zero size. Second, if we ask  how much  space a point consists 
of, the answer has to be ‘zero’, which means that it does not consist of 
any space. But a spatial region cannot be composed of things that do not 
consist of any space. Third, intuitively, the size of a region should be the 
sum of the sizes of its parts. Since points each have a size of zero, every 
region should also have a size of zero, if regions are composed entirely 
of points. Fourth, if there are measure-zero regions, then there would be 
a distinction between a ‘closed’ object (which contains its own surface) 
and an ‘open’ object (which occupies all the space inside a certain closed 
surface but not the surface itself), and it would be metaphysically impos-
sible for two open objects to ever come in contact, or for two closed 
objects to come in contact. Fifth, if there were points, then it would 
be metaphysically impossible for an object that completely fills a given 
region to be divided into two identical parts; instead, after any division, 
one object would have to be ‘open’ and the other ‘closed’ at the place 
where the two had been joined. 
 What goes for points goes also for lines, planes, and other alleged 
parts of space that have a size of zero. 
 14.5  Solving the paradoxes 
 The above views help to resolve the paradoxes of the infinite. For 
example, since there are no infinite numbers, it does not make sense 
to apply arithmetical operations to infinity. We can thus avoid various 
spurious calculations in which one derives that 1=0 and the like. We can 
similarly avoid Galileo’s Paradox. In answer to the question ‘which are 
more numerous: the natural numbers or the perfect squares?’, we should 

Conclusion 251
say, with Galileo, that neither are more numerous, nor are they equally 
numerous; both are simply infinite, and hence numberless. 
 By denying the existence of points, we avoid the paradox in which 
it is said that an object composed of pointlike parts could be converted 
into two objects, each qualitatively identical to the original, merely by 
moving around the object’s parts. 
 We can resolve Zeno’s Paradox by recognizing,  pace Zeno, that an infi-
nite series  can  be completed. Here we note that the Zeno series involves 
an infinite  cardinal number  of stages, but that its completion requires no 
infinite  intensive magnitudes ; there is thus no objection to the comple-
tion of the Zeno series from within our theory of the infinite. 
 On the other hand, a variety of other paradoxes  do require infinite 
intensive magnitudes, including Thomson’s Lamp, Smullyan’s Rod, 
Benardete’s Paradox (including both the infinite series of walls and the 
infinite pile of slabs), the Littlewood-Ross Banker, the Spaceship, and 
Laraudogoitia’s Marbles. These scenarios require such things as infinite 
material strengths, infinite energy density, infinite electrical resistivity, 
and infinite attenuation coefficient (opacity). Each of these paradoxes 
thus posits a metaphysically impossible scenario, on my account. There 
is therefore no need to answer what would happen if such scenarios 
occurred. 
 The Saint Petersburg Paradox can be resolved by noting that the para-
doxical reasoning requires ascribing a nonzero probability to a certain 
infinite conjunction. But the conjuncts in that conjunction should in 
fact be assigned diminishing probabilities – or at least should not be 
assigned ever increasing probabilities, approaching probability one. As 
a result, the probability of the infinite conjunction is zero. The Delayed 
Heaven Paradox similarly depends on ascribing a nonzero probability to 
an infinite conjunction that should really be assigned probability zero. 
 The puzzle about the Martingale betting system is resolved when we 
note that at any given time, the expected amount of money the gambler 
will have won by that time will be negative, and the expected winnings 
only decrease (that is, become more negative) as one considers longer 
finite time periods. Since it is not possible to have played infinitely 
many times, the strategy never yields an expected profit. 
 14.6  For further reflection, or: what is wrong 
with this book? 
 I am persuaded that the views advanced in this book are by and large 
correct, or close enough to correct to advance our understanding. 

252 Approaching Infinity
Nevertheless, probably some of this book is wrong; of course, I do not 
know exactly which parts. In addition, there are some interesting ques-
tions about the infinite that I have not answered because I do not know 
the answers. I use this final section of the book to point out some of 
the less satisfactory parts of this book, as well as some of the interesting 
questions or issues that I have failed to address. 
 14.6.1  The dense divided stick 
 In Section 10.5.2, I discussed a hypothetical Newtonian world in which 
there exists a series of objects of increasing density, arranged in a line as 
depicted in Figure 14.1. 
 The objects all have the same mass but have ever-decreasing sizes and 
hence increasing densities. In addition, they have ever-increasing right-
ward velocities, such that, after one second, all the objects should simul-
taneously collide within a finite region. The result would be that, at the 
moment of the collision, there would be a spatial region containing an 
infinite amount of mass. But because mass density is a natural, inten-
sive magnitude, on my view no finite region can contain infinite mass. 
I thus claimed that the laws of nature must somehow prevent such a 
scenario from taking place – perhaps because there is a finite limit to 
how fast an object may move or to how densely matter may be packed 
within a region. 
 This treatment of the scenario is not very satisfying. I suppose that 
the laws (in fact, any metaphysically possible set of natural laws) must 
somehow prohibit the scenario – but I have hardly explained how or 
why this is so. Usually, when a scenario contains an impossible form of 
infinitude, we can explain its impossibility by saying that some infinite 
intensive magnitude must be postulated  in order  for the scenario to take 
place – that is, the infinite intensive magnitude would be a necessary 
causal factor, or in some other sense a  precondition , for the scenario to 
play out as initially imagined. For example, a lamp cannot be switched 
off and on infinitely many times as in Thomson’s scenario, unless we 
first have a switch with infinite material strength. 
4 m/s
•  •  •  
3 m/s
2 m/s
1 m/s
O2
O1
O3
O4
O5
 Figure 14.1  An impossible Newtonian scenario 

Conclusion 253
 What is unsatisfying about my treatment of the Dense Divided Stick 
example is that I rule out the initial conditions on the grounds, not that 
they contain or presuppose the initial existence of some infinite inten-
sive magnitude, but that they  lead to  an infinite intensive magnitude as 
a final state of the system. The claim, ‘This event cannot occur because 
some impossible initial conditions would be required in order for it to 
occur’ is more persuasive than the claim ‘These initial conditions are 
impossible because if they occurred some impossible final conditions 
would ensue.’ It would thus be desirable to have a better account of why 
the dense divided stick scenario is impossible. 
 14.6.2  Gunky time 
 I have argued that space is not composed of geometric points. At least 
one of my arguments can also be used to reject the existence of  temporal 
points, that is, instants. Adapting the Zero Argument from Section 11.3:
 1.   The duration of  x is how much time  x takes up or consists of. 
 2.   To have zero of something is to fail to have any of that thing.  
 3.   Therefore, to have a duration of zero is to fail to take up or consist of 
any time. 
 4.   If instants exist, they are parts of time with zero duration.  
 5.   There cannot be a part of time that does not consist of any time.  
 6.   Therefore, instants do not exist. 
 This suggests that time is gunky, just as space is; there are only 
extended intervals, no single instants. This conclusion is at least some-
what less plausible than the gunky conception of space. One reason is 
that there is some intuitive plausibility to  presentism in the philosophy 
of time, that is, the view that only the present is real. Furthermore, even 
if one is unsympathetic to presentism, there is still more plausibility to 
the weaker view that the present is in some sense at least  more  real than 
either the past or the future. But ‘the present’ is generally taken to refer 
to a single instant of time, not an extended interval. So the gunky view 
of time would seemingly require us to hold  anti- presentism, the view 
that the present does not exist. 
 Of course, if one holds a gunky conception of time, one might wish to 
claim that the English expression ‘the present’ actually refers to a small 
but nonzero temporal interval. But there is no non-arbitrary answer to 
what is the duration of ‘the present’. 
 All this might make one suspicious of the Zero Argument, even as 
applied to space. However, even if that argument is misguided, there 

254 Approaching Infinity
remain other arguments against pointy space that do not transfer to 
time.  
 14.6.3  Points as locations 
 Some say that points exist, but that they simply are not the  parts of 
space. Instead, points are merely ‘locations’. 2 
 I do not have any argument against this view. My arguments against 
points are only arguments against the notion that space is  comprised of 
points. For instance, only if points are supposed to be parts of space does 
the Zero Argument apply. 
 However, I also have not endorsed the ‘location’ theory of points, 
because I do not understand it. If a location is not a part of space, then I 
do not know what it is. Should we think that locations are a completely 
separate kind of thing from space and spatial regions? Could one have 
existed without the other? Unfortunately, I have found no clear expla-
nation of the view. But this does not mean the view is incorrect.  
 14.6.4  Counting to and from infinity 
 A number of variations on the idea of counting to or from infinity have 
been discussed, particularly by Wittgenstein. Thus, one may ask:
(a) Is it possible to count to infinity? To do so, one would have to count 
ever faster: with each natural number that one names, one doubles 
one’s speed of counting, so that in a finite time, one would have 
counted every natural number. 
 
  This, in my view, is impossible, because as the numbers one 
counts become ever larger, a larger memory and a faster informa-
tion processing capacity is required. Counting to infinity would 
thus require infinite information processing capability. 
 (b) Wittgenstein reportedly once asked an audience to imagine meeting 
a man who, as one approaches, is just saying: ‘ ... 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0. 
Finished!’ The person explains that he has just counted backwards 
from infinity. He has been engaged in this task for all of past time, 
having never begun but having just now finished. Is this possible?  3 
 
  Leave aside the extreme  implausibility  of the claim. It seems to 
me that there  could (metaphysically) be someone who has always 
existed; at least, I know of no reason why there could not. And if 
 2  Angelo 2014; Bogomolny 2015. 
 3  Oppy (2006, 10, 60) ascribes this example to Wittgenstein. Of course, I mean 
to ask whether it is possible that what the man claims is true, not whether it is 
possible to meet someone who makes such a claim. 

Conclusion 255
there were such a being, I can think of no reason why that being 
should not have always been counting, having been employed 
about naming ever larger natural numbers the further into the past 
one looks. 
 
  Why does this scenario not require infinite information processing 
ability as in scenario (a) above? Because there is no need to carry out 
infinitely many operations  in a finite time  (nor within a finite space). 
Thus, the man could have used an infinitely large piece of paper to 
write down the numbers and to perform his calculations (namely, 
subtracting one in each stage), and he could have used longer and 
longer time periods for counting off numbers, as one looks further 
and further into the past. 
 
  To make the idea clearer, imagine the symmetrical case in which 
a person starts at 0, and writes down all the natural numbers in 
sequence, taking more and more time to write down numbers as 
the series proceeds. He spends eternity writing. Every number will 
be written down at some time, and at every future time he will be 
writing some number. This does not seem impossible. Scenario (b) is 
just a time-reversed version of this. It is also a version of the hypoth-
esis of an infinite chain of causes: at each stage, the person would be 
caused to name the number  n by the immediately preceding event 
of his naming the number  n +1. His naming  n would in turn cause 
him next to name  n −1. 
 
  I must say, however, that scenario (b) seems very suspect (as its 
temporal mirror image does not), as though it ought to be somehow 
impossible; yet I can find no principled grounds for rejecting its 
possibility. Perhaps what is suspicious about it is merely its extreme 
improbability. 
 (c) Similarly, imagine meeting a man who says, ‘ ... 5, 1, 4, 1, 3. Finished’, 
then explains that he has just recited the decimal expansion of pi 
backwards, having been engaged in this task for all of past time. Is 
this possible? 4 
 
  We might wish to argue that  this  scenario is impossible because 
in order to recite the decimal expansion of pi backwards, one would 
have to first know the complete decimal expansion, but in order to 
have this knowledge, one would first have to complete an infinitely 
long calculation. Why is this different from scenario (b)? Because in 
scenario (b), the man could always ‘calculate’ the next number he 
 4  Moore (1990, 44) ascribes this example to Wittgenstein, in an unidentified 
lecture. 

256 Approaching Infinity
has to recite on the basis of the number he just finished reciting. 
But one cannot calculate the  n th digit of pi on the basis of the ( n +1) th 
digit. 
 
  It  is possible, however, to directly calculate the  n th digit of pi 
without first knowing any of the other digits.  5 Therefore, we can 
imagine that at each stage, when he is to recite the  n th digit, the 
man directly calculates this digit. He knows that he is to recite the 
 n th digit, because he just previously recited the ( n +1) th digit. As we 
look further and further into the past, we see the man taking more 
and more time for each digit recital. But since he has always existed, 
there is for each digit in the complete decimal expansion some time 
at which he recited it. None of this requires the man to have held 
the complete expansion in mind at any particular time. 
 
  Again, this scenario strikes me as very suspect, but I can think of 
no reason why it is not metaphysically possible. 
 (d) Finally, Wittgenstein asks us to imagine someone who claims to 
have counted all the digits of pi  forwards . He has been counting for 
all of past time, and he has just gotten to the end; the final digit of 
pi, he announces, is 2. Is this possible? 
 
  Certainly not, but this impossibility does not, as Wittgenstein 
claims, constitute a ‘ reductio ad absurdum  of the concept of an infi-
nite  totality ’. 6 The reason the man’s claim cannot be true is that pi 
does not have a last digit. It does not follow from this that there is 
nothing infinite, nor even that the infinite fails to be a ‘totality’, 
whatever that might mean. 
 14.6.5  The eternal watch 
 In the course of motivating his famous Argument from Design, William 
Paley asks readers to imagine walking through a wilderness area, where 
you happen to hit your foot against a stone.  7 You wonder how the 
stone got there. Assuming that this scenario is taking place in a time 
 5  This can be done in base 16 using Bailey, Borwein, and Plouffe’s (1997) formula, 
π =
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
−
−
−
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎝
⎛
⎞
⎠
⎞
⎠
⎞
=
∞
∑
1
16
4
8
1
2
8
4
+
1
8
5
1
8
6
+
0
k
k
k
k
1
+
8
k
k
5
+
8
.
 
 6  Wittgenstein 1975, 166. 
 7  Paley 1802, 1ff. Compare Leibniz’ (1908, p. 106) example of the geometry 
book that was copied from an earlier geometry book, which was copied from 
a still earlier book, and so on. Leibniz says that even if we postulate an infinite 
series of books, we would still be in need of an explanation for why the books 
exist at all, rather than none of them existing. 

Conclusion 257
when such things as the history of the Earth and the origin of rocks are 
unknown, it would not be unreasonable to hypothesize that perhaps the 
stone had  always been there. 
 But now suppose that, a little farther along, you come upon what 
looks like a watch sitting on the ground. Again you wonder how it came 
to be there. But in this case, it would be laughable to hypothesize that 
perhaps the watch simply was  always  there. Instead, Paley notes, you 
would assume that the watch must have been made by someone. This 
would be true even if you had no background knowledge about watches, 
even if, let us say, this was the first time you had ever seen or heard of 
such a device. Paley then leads into his argument for the existence of 
God (the rest of which does not concern us here). 
 Paley’s remarks thus far seem right: it would be crazy to explain the 
presence of the watch by the hypothesis that it was always there, in a 
way in which it would  not  be crazy to explain the stone’s presence by 
the hypothesis that it was always there. What is the difference between 
these two hypotheses? 
 It seems to me that it cannot be that the one hypothesis is metaphysi-
cally possible while the other is not – if it is possible for a rock to have 
always existed, then it has to be possible for a watch to have always 
existed. Nevertheless, ‘it always existed’ seems to provide a better expla-
nation for the presence of a rock than it would for the presence of a 
watch. Why is this? 
 One might think the two explanations should be equally good or 
bad. In both cases, the presence of the object at time  t is explained 
by that very object’s existence a moment before  t , with the previous 
moment’s existence explained by the object’s existence at a still earlier 
moment, and so on  ad infinitum . Or perhaps more precisely (because 
a moment of time doesn’t really have one immediately preceding 
moment), it is supposed that the object’s existence at any given time 
may be explained by its existence at any earlier time. If this sort of 
explanation works for rocks, then it ought to work equally for watches, 
universes, or anything else. 
 Perhaps the explanation fails in the case of watches only because of the 
existence of a better, competing explanation: that the watch was made 
by an intelligent being. The hypothesis of intelligent design is a better 
explanation for the existence of an object exhibiting a high degree of 
order and complexity than it is for the existence of an object exhibiting 
little order or little complexity. Thus, the hypothesis of eternal existence 
is not  intrinsically  worse for the watch than it is for the rock; it is merely 
 comparatively  worse. In the case of the watch, the ‘eternal existence’ 

258 Approaching Infinity
hypothesis loses out decisively to the ‘intelligent design’ hypothesis, 
whereas in the case of the rock, the ‘eternal existence’ hypothesis is 
perhaps on a par with (or at least does not lose so badly to) the ‘intel-
ligent design’ hypothesis. This would presumably be because intelligent 
design raises the probability of complex order, compared to the hypoth-
esis of no design. 
 The next question that seems naturally to arise is whether the  universe 
is more like a watch or like a rock – and that turns on whether the 
universe as a whole exhibits complex order. My inclination would be 
to say that the  initial conditions  of the universe, going back as far as 
we can (that is, to the time of the Big Bang) exhibit  simple order, not 
complex order, and that for this reason intelligent design does not seem 
to be required, even if  later stages of the universe exhibit complex order. 
However, now we are straying beyond the scope of this book. 
 A further question puzzles me. As we have seen, it appears that the 
adequacy of an ‘eternal existence’ explanation (a theory that says some-
thing always existed) depends upon whether the thing to be explained 
exhibits complex order or not. Now suppose that the universe has a 
cyclical history: it expands from a Big Bang for some billions of years, 
then collapses back into a singularity, whereupon another Big Bang 
occurs. Suppose that this cycle has happened at least once. This of course 
is speculation. But now suppose also that the universe exhibits complex 
order in  some parts of the cycle, but that in  other parts of the cycle the 
universe is either simple or disorderly. In that case, would it be a reason-
able explanation to hypothesize that the universe has always been going 
through these cycles? I don’t know. 
 14.6.6  Sets revisited 
 Perhaps I have been too hard on sets. Perhaps a set is after all just a 
collection, and collections exist. Perhaps the notions of the empty set 
and of singleton sets are simply mistakes; alternately, perhaps they are 
permissible  extensions of the notion of a collection, in the same way that 
(as I allowed in Section 9.5) the concept of zero is a permissible exten-
sion of the concept of a number. 8 
 I am skeptical of treating the empty set and singletons as acceptable 
extensions of the notion of a collection. Extending the number system 
to include ‘zero’ is permissible, I believe, because we can explain the 
meanings of various statements that contain the symbol ‘0’ without 
 8  I thank an anonymous referee who I assume to be Adrian Moore for raising 
this issue. 

Conclusion 259
assuming that that symbol refers to anything – for example, we can say 
that ‘4+0 = 4’ means something like: if you have 4 things, and you fail to 
have any additional things, then you have a total of four things. 
 Similarly,  some uses of ‘the empty set’ can be given acceptable para-
phrases. For instance, ‘the set of all purple unicorns is the empty set’ 
really just means ‘there aren’t any purple unicorns.’ But when the empty 
set itself is allowed to be a  member  of other sets (as in the set {{ }, {{ }}}), 
I no longer see any ontologically innocent way of interpreting this; I 
think this requires ‘{ }’ to have a referent. Similarly, when, in set theory, 
we treat {Sue} and {{Sue}} as two distinct sets, I see no ontologically inno-
cent way of understanding the singleton. 
 What about a version of set theory that simply does away with the 
empty set and singleton sets, so that all sets are required to have at 
least two members? This strikes me as less objectionable. However, 
this sort of theory would still be subject to the standard paradoxes 
of set theory. And the fundamental idea of set theory still strikes me 
as metaphysically very suspect – that if there are two things,  a and  b , 
then, automatically, there has to be some  third thing, which ‘contains’ 
the first two. But this third thing is not a composite object literally 
composed of  a and  b . If  a and  b are physical objects, the third thing 
is not a physical object but an ‘abstract particular’. Why must this 
strange thing exist? 
 Another idea: perhaps sets are just a  façon de   parler , a device for 
making statements about multiple things at once. Thus, ‘the set of cats 
is a subset of the set of furry things’ is perhaps just a fancy way of saying 
‘all cats are furry’, with no more genuine ontological import than the 
latter statement. This would be fine, except that many statements of set 
theory (including the ones that lead to the set theoretic paradoxes) lack 
any such innocent paraphrases. Once we start talking about sets that 
contain other sets as members, it becomes very hard to see how this talk 
could be paraphrased in a way that does not sound as though we are 
positing a special sort of object called a ‘set’. 
 Complete rejection of sets is not entirely satisfactory either, because 
it looks as though there are legitimate facts whose description requires 
us to speak of sets, or set-like entities. For instance, one might want 
to explain the meaning of the statement ‘4×3=12’ by saying: ‘Suppose 
there are four non-overlapping groups, each containing three objects. 
Then there will be a total of twelve objects.’ The mentioned groups 
seem to be functionally equivalent to sets (perhaps without some of the 
more bizarre aspects, such as an ‘empty group’ or ‘singleton groups’), 
and it is hard to see how to paraphrase the statement without seeming 

260 Approaching Infinity
to posit some setlike entities. Conclusion: it is hard to know what to 
say about sets. 
 This concludes my approach to the subject of infinity. As the fore-
going remarks indicate, I continue to find much in this area unclear. 
Nevertheless, I hope the reader will now find the infinite at least some-
what less puzzling than it was at the end of Chapter 3.   
 

261
 References 
 Albert, David Z. 1994.  Quantum Mechanics and Experience . Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press. 
 Allis, Victor and Teunis Koetsier. 1991. ‘On Some Paradoxes of the Infinite’,  British 
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 42: 187–94. 
 Angelo, Robert Wesley. 2014. ‘The Philosophy of Geometry’, < http://www.
roangelo.net/logwitt/logwit19.html >, accessed June 17, 2015. 
 Anselm, St. 1926.  Anselm’s   Proslogium or Discourse on the Existence of God , in 
 Anselm: Basic Writings , tr. Sidney Norton Deane. Chicago: Open Court. Available 
at < http://www.ccel.org/ccel/anselm/basic_works >, accessed June 17, 2015. 
Originally published in 1078. 
 Aquinas, Thomas. 1981.  Summa   Theologica , tr. by Fathers of the English Dominican 
Province. Westminster, Md.: Christian Classics. Available at < http://sacred-
texts.com/chr/aquinas/summa/ >. 
 Aristotle. 1936.  Aristotle’s Physics , tr. W.D. Ross. Oxford: Clarendon. 
 Aristotle. 1941.  The Basic Works of Aristotle , ed. Richard McKeon. New York: 
Random House. 
 Aristotle. 2005.  Physics, or Natural Hearing , tr. Glen Coughlin. South Bend, Ind.: 
St. Augustine’s Press. 
 Armstrong, David. 1978.  Nominalism and Realism . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Armstrong, David. 1989.  Universals: An Opinionated Introduction . Boulder, Colo.: 
Westview. 
 Arntzenius, Frank. 2008. ‘Gunk, Topology, and Measure’, pp. 225–47 in  Oxford 
Studies in Metaphysics , vol. 4, ed. Dean Zimmerman. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Ayer, Alfred Jules. 1952.  Language, Truth and Logic . New York: Dover. 
 Baez, John. 2002. ‘The Octonions’,  Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 
39: 145–205. Available at < http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/octonions/oct.
pdf >, accessed June 16, 2015. 
 Bailey, David, Peter Borwein, and Simon Plouffe. 1997. ‘On the Rapid Computation 
of Various Polylogarithmic Constants’,  Mathematics of Computation 66: 903–13. 
 Banach, Stefan and Alfred Tarski. 1924. ‘Sur la Décomposition des Ensembles de 
Points en Parties Respectivement Congruentes’,  Fundamenta   Mathematicae 6: 
244–77. 
 Barrett, Jeffrey and Frank Arntzenius. 1999. ‘An Infinite Decision Puzzle’,  Theory 
and Decision 46: 101–3. 
 Bays, Timothy. 2014. ‘Skolem’s Paradox’,  The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 
ed. Edward N. Zalta, < http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/para-
dox-skolem/ >, accessed June 30, 2014. 
 Bealer, George. 1992. ‘The Incoherence of Empiricism’,  Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society 66, supplement: 99–138. 
 Bealer, George. 1999. ‘A Theory of the A Priori’, pp. 29–55 in  Philosophical Perspectives 
13:  Epistemology , ed. James Tomberlin. Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell. 

262 References
 Benacerraf, Paul. 1962. ‘Tasks, Super-Tasks, and the Modern Eleatics’,  Journal of 
Philosophy 59: 765–84. 
 Benardete, J. 1964.  Infinity: An Essay in Metaphysics . Oxford: Clarendon. 
 Beresford, Geoffrey C. 1981. ‘A Note on Thomson’s Lamp “Paradox”’,  Analysis 
41: 1–3. 
 Bernoulli, Daniel. 1954. ‘Exposition of a New Theory on the Measurement of 
Risk’, tr. Louise Sommer.  Econometrica 22: 23–36. Originally published in 1738. 
 Bliss, Ricki Leigh. 2013. ‘Viciousness and the Structure of Reality’,  Philosophical 
Studies 166: 399–418. 
 Bogomolny, Alexander. 2015. ‘What Is Point?’ from Interactive Mathematics 
Miscellany and Puzzles, < http://www.cut-the-knot.org/WhatIs/WhatIsPoint.
shtml >, accessed June 17, 2015. 
 BonJour, Laurence. 1998.  In Defense of Pure Reason . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Brentano, Franz. 1988.  Philosophical Investigations on Space, Time, and the 
Continuum , tr. Barry Smith. London: Croom Helm. 
 Cameron, Ross P. 2008. ‘Turtles All the Way Down: Regress, Priority and 
Fundamentality’,  Philosophical Quarterly 58: 1–14. 
 Cantor, Georg. 1915.  Contributions to the Founding of the Theory of Transfinite 
Numbers , tr. Philip E.B. Jourdain. Chicago: Open Court. 
 Cantor, Georg. 1932.  Gesammelte   Abhandlungen , ed. Ernst Zermelo and Adolf 
Fraenkel. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
 Carnap, Rudolf. 1932. ‘The Elimination of Metaphysics through Logical Analysis 
of Language’, trans. Arthur Pap, pp. 60–81 in  Logical Positivism , ed. A.J. Ayer. 
New York: Free Press. 
 Clarke, Samuel. 1998.  A Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God and Other 
Writings , ed. Ezio Vailati. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Cortzen, Allan and Weisstein, Eric W. 2015. ‘Measure’, from Wolfram MathWorld. 
Available at < http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Measure.html >, accessed June 
16, 2015. 
 Courant, Richard and Herbert Robbins. 1996.  What Is Mathematics? An Elementary 
Approach to Ideas and Methods , second edition. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Craig, William Lane. 1991. ‘The Existence of God and the Beginning of the 
Universe’,  Truth: A Journal of Modern Thought  3: 85–96. Available at < http://
www.leaderu.com/truth/3truth11.html >, accessed June 25, 2014. 
 Craig, William Lane. 2010. ‘Taking Tense Seriously in Differentiating Past and 
Future: A Response to Wes Morriston’,  Faith and Philosophy 27: 451–6. 
 Dainton, Barry. 2001.  Time and Space . Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press. 
 Dedekind, Richard. 1901. ‘Continuity and Irrational Numbers’, pp. 1–13 in 
 Essays on the Theory of Numbers , tr. by Wooster Woodruf Beman. Chicago: Open 
Court. 
 Descartes, René. 1984.  The Philosophical Writings of Descartes . Edited by John 
Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Dyson, Frank, Arthur Eddington, and Charles Davidson. 1920. ‘A Determination 
of the Deflection of Light by the Sun’s Gravitational Field, from Observations 
Made at the Total Eclipse of May 29, 1919’,  Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 220: 291–333. 

References 263
 e Silva, Tomás Oliveira. 2014. ‘Goldbach Conjecture Verification’, < http://sweet.
ua.pt/tos/goldbach.html >, accessed June 28, 2014. 
 Ebbinghaus, Heinz-Dieter. 2007. ‘Löwenheim-Skolem Theorems’, pp. 587–614 in 
 Philosophy of Logic , ed. Dale Jacquette. London: Elsevier. 
 Einstein, Albert. 1961.  Relativity: The Special and the General Theory , tr. Robert W. 
Lawson. New York: Bonanza Books. 
 Enderton, Herbert. 1977.  Elements of Set Theory . San Diego, Calif.: Academic Press. 
 Euclid. 1998.  Euclid’s Elements , ed. David Joyce, < http://aleph0.clarku.edu/~djoyce/
java/elements/ >, accessed June 26, 2014. 
 Fraenkel, Abraham. 1967. ‘Set Theory’, pp. 420–7 in  The Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 
vol. 7, ed. Paul Edwards. New York: Macmillan. 
 Frege, Gottlob. 1972. ‘Review of Dr. E. Husserl’s Philosophy of Arithmetic’, tr. 
E.W. Kluge,  Mind 81: 321–37. 
 Frege, Gottlob. 1980.  The Foundations of Arithmetic . Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern 
University Press. 
 Galilei, Galileo. 1914.  Dialogues Concerning Two New Sciences by Galileo   Galilei , tr. 
Henry Crew and Alfonso de Salvio. New York: Macmillan. Available at < http://
oll.libertyfund.org/titles/753 >. 
 Gamow, George. 1947.  One, Two, Three ... Infinity: Facts and Speculations of Science . 
New York: Viking Press. 
 Giancoli, Douglas C. 1988.  Physics for Scientists and Engineers , second edition. 
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall. 
 Gillett, Carl. 2003. ‘Infinitism Redux? A Response to Klein’,  Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 66: 709–17. 
 Greene, Brian. 2011.  The Hidden Reality: Parallel Universes and the Deep Laws of the 
Cosmos . New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 
 Grünbaum, Adolf. 1957. ‘The Philosophical Retention of Absolute Space in 
Einstein’s General Theory of Relativity’,  Philosophical Review 66: 525–34. 
 Grünbaum, Adolf. 1968. ‘Are “Infinity Machines” Paradoxical?’  Science  159: 
396–406. 
 Halmos, Paul R. 1974.  Naive Set Theory . New York: Springer-Verlag. 
 Hamade, Rufus. 1996. ‘Black Holes and Quantum Gravity’, Cambridge Relativity 
and Cosmology, University of Cambridge. Available at < http://www.damtp.
cam.ac.uk/research/gr/public/bh_hawk.html >, accessed June 25, 2014. 
 Hamilton, William R. 1837 (based on a lecture first given in 1833). ‘Theory of 
Conjugate Functions, or Algebraic Couples; With a Preliminary and Elementary 
Essay on Algebra as the Science of Pure Time’,  Transactions of the Royal Irish 
Academy 17, part 1: 293–422. Available at < http://www.maths.tcd.ie/pub/
HistMath/People/Hamilton/PureTime/ > (edited by David R. Wilkins), accessed 
June 16, 2015. 
 Hawthorne, John. 2000. ‘Before-Effect and Zeno Causality’,  Noûs 34: 622–33. 
 Hawthorne, John and Brian Weatherson. 2004. ‘Chopping up Gunk’,  The Monist 
87: 339–50. 
 Helmenstine, Anne Marie. 2014. ‘Table of Electrical Resistivity and Conductivity: 
Flow of Electric Current through Materials’, About.com Chemistry, < http://
chemistry.about.com/od/moleculescompounds/a/Table-Of-Electrical-
Resistivity-And-Conductivity.htm >, accessed July 30, 2014. 
 Hilbert, David. 1967. ‘On the Infinite’, tr. Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg, pp. 367–92 in 
 From  Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic 1879–1931 , ed. Jean van 

264 References
Heijenoort. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Originally published 
as ‘Über das Unendliche’ in  Mathematische  Annalen 95 (1926): 161–90. 
 Hilbert, David. 2013.  David Hilbert’s Lectures on the Foundations of   Arithmetics and 
Logic 1917–1933 , eds. William Ewald and Wilfried Sieg. Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag. 
 Hobbes, Thomas. 1996.  Leviathan , ed. Richard Tuck. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. Originally published in 1651. 
 Hochberg, Herbert. 1999.  Complexes and Consciousness . Stockholm: Thales. 
 Howell, Elizabeth. 2014. ‘How Many Stars Are in the Universe?’ Space.com, 
 http://www.space.com/26078-how-many-stars-are-there.html , accessed June 
19, 2014. 
 Hrbacek, Karel and Thomas Jech. 1999.  Introduction to Set Theory , third edition. 
New York: Marcel Dekker. 
 Huemer, Michael. 2001.  Skepticism and the Veil of Perception . Lanham, Md.: 
Rowman & Littlefield. 
 Huemer, Michael. 2006. ‘Phenomenal Conservatism and the Internalist Intuition’, 
 American Philosophical Quarterly 43: 147–58. 
 Huemer, Michael. 2007. ‘Compassionate Phenomenal Conservatism’,  Philosophy 
& Phenomenological Research 74: 30–55. 
 Huemer, Michael. 2009. ‘When Is Parsimony a Virtue?’  Philosophical Quarterly  59: 
216–36. 
 Huemer, Michael. 2010. ‘Foundations and Coherence’, pp. 22–33 in  A Companion 
to Epistemology , second edition, ed. Jonathan Dancy, Ernest Sosa, and Matthias 
Steup. Malden, Mass.: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Huemer, Michael. 2016. ‘Inferential Appearances’, pp. 144–60 in  Intellectual 
Assurance: Essays on Traditional Epistemic   Internalism , ed. Brett Coppenger and 
Michael Bergmann. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Hume, David. 1975.  Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding . Reprinted in 
 Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals , 
ed. P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon. Originally published in 1758. 
 Hume, David. 1992.  Treatise of Human Nature . Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus. 
 Husserl, Edmund. 2003.  Philosophy of Arithmetic: Psychological and Logical 
Investigations with Supplementary Texts from 1887–1901 , tr. Dallas Willard. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer. 
 Kant, Immanuel. 1965.  Critique of Pure Reason , tr. Norman Kemp Smith. New 
York: St. Martin’s Press. 
 Kenna, Aaron. 2011. ‘Logical Positivism and the Copenhagen Interpretation of 
Quantum Mechanics’, < http://unfspb.wordpress.com/2011/07/12/logical-posi-
tivism-and-the-copenhagen-interpretation/ >, accessed June 29, 2014. 
 Klein, Peter. 1999. ‘Human Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of Reasons’, 
pp. 297–325 in  Philosophical Perspectives , vol. 13, ed. James E. Tomberlin. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
 Klein, Peter. 2003. ‘When Infinite Regresses Are Not Vicious’,  Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 66: 718–29. 
 Klein, Peter. 2005. ‘Infinitism Is the Solution to the Regress Problem’, pp. 131–40 
in  Contemporary Debates in Epistemology , ed. Matthias Steup and Ernest Sosa. 
Malden, Mass.: Blackwell. 
 Knuth, Donald E. 1976. ‘Mathematics and Computer Science: Coping with 
Finiteness’,  Science 194: 1235–42. 

References 265
 Kragh, Helge. 2014. ‘The True (?) Story of Hilbert’s Infinite Hotel’, < http://arxiv.
org/abs/1403.0059v2> [physics.hist-ph] , accessed June 26, 2014. 
 Kunen, Kenneth. 1980.  Set Theory: An Introduction to Independence Proofs . 
Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
 Kusch, Martin. 1990. ‘Why Is There Something Rather than Nothing?’  American 
Philosophical Quarterly 27: 253–7. 
 Laraudogoitia, Jon Perez. 1996. ‘A Beautiful Supertask’,  Mind 105: 81–3. 
 Laraudogoitia, Jon Perez. 2003. ‘A Variant of Benardete’s Paradox’,  Analysis  63: 
124–31. 
 Leibniz, G.W.F. 1908.  The Philosophical Works of Leibniz , second edition, tr. and ed. 
George Martin Duncan. New Haven, Conn.: Tuttle, Morehouse, and Taylor. 
 Leibniz, G.W.F. and Samuel Clarke. 2007.  Exchange of Papers between Leibniz and 
Clarke , tr. Jonathan Bennett. Available at < http://www.earlymoderntexts.com/
pdfs/leibniz1715_1.pdf >, accessed June 27, 2014. 
 Littlewood, J.E. 1986.  Littlewood’s Miscellany , ed. Béla Bollobás. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Locke, John. 1975.  An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , ed. Peter H. 
Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon. Originally published in 1689. 
 Mach, Ernst. 1919.  The Science of Mechanics: A Critical and Historical Account of Its 
Development , tr. Thomas McCormack. Chicago, Ill.: Open Court. Available at 
< http://archive.org/stream/scienceofmechani005860mbp >, accessed June 27, 
2014. 
 Maddy, Penelope. 1990.  Realism in Mathematics . Oxford: Clarendon. 
 Maudlin, Tim. 1993. ‘Buckets of Water and Waves of Space: Why Spacetime Is 
Probably a Substance’,  Philosophy of Science 60: 183–203. 
 Maudlin, Tim. 2002.  Quantum  Nonlocality and Relativity . Malden, Mass.: 
Blackwell. 
 McTaggart, J.M.E. 1908. ‘The Unreality of Time’,  Mind: A Quarterly Review of 
Psychology and Philosophy 17: 456–73. 
 Milewski, Emil. 1989.  The Essentials of Set Theory . Piscataway, N.J.: Research and 
Education Association. 
 Moore, Adrian. 1990.  The Infinite . London: Routledge. 
 Newton, Isaac. 1846.  The Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy , tr. Andrew 
Motte. New York: Daniel Adee. Available at < http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_
Mathematical_Principles_of_Natural_Philosophy_(1846) >, accessed June 24, 
2014. Originally published as  Philosophiæ   Naturalis Principia   Mathematica , 1687. 
 Nolan, Daniel. 2001. ‘What’s Wrong with Infinite Regresses?’  Metaphilosophy  32: 
523–38. 
 O’Connor, John J. and Edmund F. Robertson. 2000. ‘A History of Zero’, The 
MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St. Andrews, < http://
www-history.mcs.st-and.ac.uk/HistTopics/Zero.html >, accessed July 3, 2014. 
 Ockham, William. 1994. ‘Five Questions on Universals’ from his  Ordinatio , d. 
2, qq. 4–8; pp. 114–231 in  Five Texts on the Mediaeval Problem of Universals: 
Porphyry, Boethius, Abelard, Duns   Scotus, Ockham , tr. and ed. by Paul Vincent 
Spade. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett. 
 Oppy, Graham. 1995. ‘Inverse Operations with Transfinite Numbers and the Kalam 
Cosmological Argument’,  International Philosophical Quarterly 35: 219–21. 
 Oppy, Graham. 2006.  Philosophical Perspectives on Infinity . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 

266 References
 Oppy, Graham. 2014. ‘Ontological Arguments’,  Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 
ed. Edward N. Zalta, < http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2014/entries/
ontological-arguments/ >. 
 Paley, William. 1802.  Natural Theology: Or, Evidences of the Existence and Attributes 
of the Deity Collected from the Appearances of Nature . London: Wilks and Taylor. 
 Peijnenburg, Jean and David Atkinson. 2010. ‘Lamps, Cubes, Balls and Walls: 
Zeno Problems and Solutions’,  Philosophical Studies 150: 49–59. 
 Perls, Frederick S. 1969.  Gestalt Therapy Verbatim , ed. John O. Stevens. Lafayette, 
Calif.: Real People Press. 
 Perls, Frederick S. 1947.  Ego, Hunger, and Aggression: The Beginning of Gestalt 
Psychotherapy . New York: Random House. 
 Plato. 1931.  The Dialogues of Plato , third edition, vol. 4, tr. Benjamin Jowett. London: 
Oxford University Press. Available at < http://oll.libertyfund.org/titles/768 >. 
 Plato. 1974.  Plato’s Republic , tr. G.M.A. Grube. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett. 
 Plato. 
2012. 
 Meno , 
tr. 
Cathal 
Woods. 
Available 
at 
< http://ssrn.com/
abstract=1910945 >, accessed June 26, 2014. 
 Price, H. H. 1953.  Thinking and Experience . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press. 
 Putnam, Hilary. 1975. ‘The Meaning of “Meaning”’, pp. 131–93 in  Language, 
Mind, and Knowledge: Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science , vol. 7, ed. 
Keith Gunderson. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
 Quantum Munich. 2014. ‘Negative Absolute Temperature’, < http://www.quantum-
munich.de/research/negative-absolute-temperature/ >, accessed August 2, 2014. 
 Quine, Willard van Orman. 1936. ‘Truth by Convention’, pp. 77–106 in  The Ways 
of Paradox and Other Essays . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. 
 Quine, Willard van Orman. 1951. ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism’,  Philosophical 
Review 60: 20–43. 
 Reichenbach, Hans. 1957.  The Philosophy of Space and Time , tr. Maria Reichenbach 
and John Freund. New York: Dover. 
 Robinson, Abraham. 1966.  Non-standard Analysis . Amsterdam: North Holland 
Publishing. 
 Rodriguez-Pereyra, Gonzalo. 2002.  Resemblance   Nominalism: A Solution to the 
Problem of Universals . Oxford: Clarendon. 
 Ross, Sheldon. 1976.  A First Course in Probability . New York: Macmillan. 
 Russell, Bertrand. 1920.  Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy . London: Allen & 
Unwin. Available at < http://people.umass.edu/klement/imp/imp.html >. 
 Russell, Bertrand. 1961. ‘Why I Am Not a Christian’, pp. 585–97 in  The Basic 
Writings of Bertrand Russell , ed. Robert Egner and Lester Dennon. New York: 
Simon & Schuster. 
 Sider, Ted. 2005.  Set Theory  (class notes), available at < http://tedsider.org/teaching/
st/st_notes.pdf >, accessed June 30, 2014. 
 Smith, Quentin. 1986. ‘The Infinite Regress of Temporal Attributions’,  Southern 
Journal of Philosophy 24: 383–96. 
 Smullyan, Raymond. 2008. ‘Memories and Inconsistencies’, pp. 245–52 in 
 A Lifetime of Puzzles , ed. Erik Demaine, Martin Demaine, and Tom Rodgers. 
Wellesley, Mass.: A K Peters. 
 The Writer (screen name). 2003. ‘Layman’s Guide to the Banach-Tarski Paradox’, 
Kuro5hin, < http://www.kuro5hin.org/story/2003/5/23/134430/275 >, accessed 
August 28, 2015. 

References 267
 Thomson, James. 1954. ‘Tasks and Super-Tasks’,  Analysis 15: 1–13. 
 Thomson, James. 2001. ‘Comments on Professor Benacerraf’s Paper’, pp. 130–8 in 
 Zeno’s Paradoxes , ed. Wesley C. Salmon. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett. 
 Tooley, Michael. 1997.  Time, Tense, and Causation . Oxford: Clarendon. 
 Tucker, Chris, ed. 2013.  Seemings and Justification: New Essays on Dogmatism and 
Phenomenal Conservatism . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 Turri, John and Peter Klein, eds. 2014.  Ad Infinitum: New Essays on Epistemological 
 Infinitism . Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 van Bendegem, Jean Paul. 1994. ‘Ross’ Paradox Is an Impossible Super-task’, 
 British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 45: 743–8. 
 van Inwagen, Peter. 1983.  An Essay on Free Will . Oxford: Clarendon. 
 Villanueva, John Carl. 2009. ‘Atoms in the Universe’,  Universe Today , July 30, 
< http://www.universetoday.com/36302/atoms-in-the-universe/ >, 
accessed 
June 30, 2014. 
 von Mises Richard. 1957.  Probability, Statistics and Truth , revised English edition. 
New York: Macmillan. 
 Wald, Robert M. 1984.  General Relativity . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Whitehead, Alfred N. 1917.  The  Organisation of Thought, Educational and Scientific . 
London: Williams and Norgate. 
 Whitehead, Alfred North. 1929.  Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology . New 
York: Macmillan. 
 Wildberger, Norman J. 2006. ‘Set Theory: Should You Believe?’ < http://web.
maths.unsw.edu.au/~norman/papers/SetTheory.pdf >, accessed June 30, 2014. 
 Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1975.  Philosophical Remarks , ed. Rush Rhees, tr. Raymond 
Hargreaves and Roger White. New York: Harper & Row. 
 Yi, Byeong-uk. 1999. ‘Is Two a Property?’  Journal of Philosophy 96: 163–90. 
 Yi, Byeong-Uk. 2002.  Understanding the Many . New York: Routledge. 
 Zimmerman, Dean W. 1996. ‘Could Extended Objects Be Made Out of Simple 
Parts? An Argument for “Atomless Gunk”’,  Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 56: 1–29. 
 

269
Index
a priori knowledge, 68, 94, 98–100, 
103–4, 106, 122, 158, 235, 240
abstract objects. See objects: abstract
acceleration, 64–5
actual infinity, 8, 23, 41, 49–53, 55–7, 
60–2, 65–71, 86, 89, 147–53, 179, 
186, 230, 234, 245, 248
addition, 11, 90, 113, 117, 122–3, 127, 
140–1, 144–5, 176, 180
analogy, argument by, 105
analytic a priori knowledge, 99
analytic philosophy, 95
analytic statements, 97
appearances: species of, 96, 100; 
undefeated, 96
Aquinas, Saint Thomas, 50, 52
argument by analogy, 105
Argument from Design, 256
Aristotle, 49–54, 57–8, 62, 65, 68–71, 
86, 147–9, 151, 153, 186, 245, 248
arithmetic, 56, 75, 88, 107, 117–19, 
122, 124, 141, 144; laws of, 116, 
123–4; transfinite, 87. See also 
infinity: arithmetic of
Armstrong, David, 13–14
artificial magnitudes. See magnitudes: 
artificial vs. natural
Associative Law, 116, 123–4, 180
astronomy, 237, 239
astrophysics, 159
atomic theory, 27, 164, 192
atoms, 127, 135, 192, 207, 250
attenuation coefficient, 209–11
Axiom of Choice, 84, 109
axioms: of arithmetic, 116; of set 
theory, 84
Beer-Lambert Law, 210, 227
begging the question, 142, 232, 239
beliefs, 5, 10, 47, 96, 99, 195, 229, 
231–2, 240–1; actual vs. potential, 
232; dispositional vs. occurrent, 11, 
231; foundational, 11, 229; justified, 
10–11, 45, 96, 100, 229, 231–2, 241; 
philosophical, 96
Benacerraf, Paul, 195–7
Bernadete, José, 66, 209
Bernadete’s Paradox, 31–2, 85, 207, 
209–11, 247–8, 251
Bernoulli, Daniel, 213
Big Bang, 7, 68, 258
binding energy, 192–4, 207, 227
black hole, 7, 61, 159, 198, 202
Bolzano, Bernard, 71
brain in a vat, 98–9
branching timelines theory, 102–3
calculus, 26, 141, 179–80
Cantor Lines, 173–4
Cantor Set, 173–5
Cantor, Georg, 71–5, 79, 82, 86–9, 108, 
111–13, 116, 120, 143, 146, 149, 176, 
179–82, 248, 250
Cantor’s Paradox, 83, 85, 113
Cantor’s Theorem, 71, 80–2, 85–6
Cantorians, 71, 89, 146, 176, 182, 248
causation, 10, 63, 98, 136, 138, 
154–6, 166, 168, 214, 238; causal 
explanation, 136, 238; causal laws, 
136, 158, 169, 240; causal relevance, 
207; first cause, 10, 47, 229, 236; 
regress of causes, 9–10, 44, 46–7, 
229–30, 234, 236, 238–40
Celsius temperature scale, 137–8
centrifugal force, 63–4
chelonian cosmology, 237
choices, infinite regress of, 233
collections, 18, 66, 75, 107, 109, 146, 
177, 179, 181, 189–90, 209, 211, 240; 
infinite, 20, 22, 26, 68, 75, 78, 147, 
178, 181, 216, 222, 231; relation to 
sets, 72–3, 107–8, 110, 112, 249, 258
Commutative Law, 116, 123, 124, 180
Compactness Theorem, 110
completed infinity, 245, 248
Comprehension Axiom 90, 113, 249

270 Index
conceivability, 101–2
concept, empty, 143
conceptual truth, 42
concrete world, 139
contact, 168
Copenhagen Interpretation of 
quantum mechanics, 69, 95
Cosmological Argument. See First 
Cause Argument
Coulomb’s Constant, 223, 225–6
countable additivity, 177
countable infinity, 77, 190–1
countable model, 110
Critique of Pure Reason, 41
decision theoretic paradox, 36, 206, 
219
Delayed Heaven Paradox, 36, 85, 
220–2, 251
density, 135–6, 153–4, 159–60, 170, 
177, 203, 206, 211, 252; infinite, 7, 
154, 159–60, 211
Descartes, René, 6
desire-frustration, 37
desire-satisfaction, 36
determinate answers, 196, 224, 
226–8
determinate quantities, 52, 147–8, 248
Diagonalization Argument, 78–9, 81, 
181
diminishing marginal utility, 213–15
Distributive Law, 116, 123–4
Divided Stick Paradox, 27–8, 42, 85, 
88–9, 188–9, 192, 253
divisibility, infinite, 52–4, 57, 153, 
234, 247–8
division, 53–4, 87–8, 122, 126, 145, 
170, 190, 225–6, 250; infinite, 42, 
90, 145, 188–9
efficacy, lack of, 154–5
Einstein, Albert, 3–4. See also relativity
electromagnetic force, 191
empirical hypothesis, 94
empiricism, 93–5, 99, 104, 106–7
empty set, 80, 108, 112–14, 133–4, 
258–9
entropy, 155–8
epiphenomena, 136
epistemology, 93, 95, 98, 107, 117, 
214, 247
equality, 75
equinumerousness, 75, 114–15
ethics, 94
Euler’s number, 210
evidence: empirical, 104; inductive, 
216; scientific, 237
expected utility, 214–15
experience: memory, 96; sensory, 
96–7
explanatory condition, 45
exponentiation, 127
extension of a concept, 125, 145
extensive magnitudes. See magnitudes: 
extensive
façon de parler, 51, 141, 259
final conditions, 158, 253
finitism, 50
First Cause Argument, 9–10, 47, 
229–31, 234, 236, 238–9
first order logic, 110
formalism, 107
Forms, Platonic, 11–12, 229, 242, 247; 
regress of, 11–12, 16, 45–6, 229, 
231, 233–4, 242
foundationalism, 11, 247
Frege, Gottlob, 80, 108, 112, 117, 120, 
125, 129
Gabriel’s Horn, 23–4, 86, 183
Galileo, 21–2, 86–7, 146, 251
Galileo’s Paradox, 21–2, 86, 89, 146, 
180, 182, 248, 250
game theory, 107
Gauss, Carl Friedrich, 51
general relativity. See relativity
geometric points. See points
geometry, 18, 55–6, 60, 107, 162–3, 
250
God, 6, 9–10, 37, 71, 104, 128, 
214–18, 221–2, 234, 236, 239, 
257
Gödel’s Theorem, 110
Goldbach’s Conjecture, 103–4, 171
Greek philosophy, 247
gunk 162–3, 170–5, 253. See also 
points

Index 271
Hilbert, David, 71, 82
Hilbert’s Hotel, 22–3, 85–7, 89, 182, 
248
Hobbes, Thomas, 50
homuncular theory of perception, 
236–8
Hume, David, 94
Husserl, Edmund, 125
Ideal Gas Law, 138
identity, 121
impossibility: conceptual, 3, 26, 42–3, 
136, 224; logical, 120, 167, 224; 
metaphysical, 103, 105–6, 136, 
158–60, 169–72, 189, 197, 207, 209, 
211, 214–15, 217, 224–5, 230–2, 
245, 249, 250–1; physical, 61, 
160–1, 223, 225; shallow vs. deep, 
223–4, 226
inconsistency puzzle, 194–6
indeterminancy puzzle, 194–9
infinite cardinality. See number: 
infinite
infinite collections. See collections: 
infinite
infinite conjunction, 216, 251
infinite divisibility. See divisibility: 
infinite
infinite magnitudes, 50, 85–6, 134, 
143, 147, 153, 155, 198. See also 
infinite quantities; infinitude
infinite potentiality, 49
infinite product, 216
infinite quantities, 7, 141, 147–8, 
249; area, 23, 86, 183; attenuation 
coefficient, 251; binding energy, 
184, 189, 207; compressive strength, 
184, 209; density, 7, 154, 159–60, 
211, 249; distance, 189–90, 198–9, 
201, 212; energy, 187–9, 199, 202; 
energy density, 158, 187, 190, 194, 
198, 202, 251; expected utility, 214; 
extent, 57, 247–9; force, 160, 184; 
heat, 198; inertia, 184; information 
processing capacity, 202, 254–5; 
intelligence, 231–2; kinetic energy, 
155; mass, 51–2, 151, 159–60, 184, 
189, 252; material strength, 184, 
187, 189–90, 198–9, 201, 207, 
213, 225–6, 251–2; momentum, 
160; memory, 202; money, 30, 32, 
35–6, 43, 218–19; resistivity, 200–1, 
251; space, 57–8, 150, 160–1, 247; 
spacetime curvature, 158–9, 190; 
temperature, 155–8, 249; time, 31, 
47, 57, 151, 234, 247–8; torque, 
184; value, 186, 225; velocity, 33, 
42, 152, 160, 182, 201–2, 212
infinite regress. See infinite series
infinite regress arguments. See regress 
arguments
infinite series, 26–7, 38, 41–3, 179–80, 
185–6, 188, 196, 211, 219, 224, 
229–37, 242, 245, 247–8, 251; of 
actions, 224; benign/virtuous, 9, 
44–45, 229, 233, 242, 244–5, 248; of 
causes, 10, 44, 47, 229–30, 236, 238; 
of choices, 233; of conditions, 45–6; 
of events, 47, 54, 234; of facts, 243; 
of Forms, 12, 46–7, 229, 233, 242; of 
line segments, 175; of mathematical 
operations, 127; of motions, 54, 
202, 248; of numbers, 42, 175, 178; 
of objects, 47, 159, 242; of persons, 
237; of propositions, 232–3; of 
reasons, 11, 45, 229, 231–4, 241; of 
relations, 243; of resemblances, 229, 
231, 233; of temporal properties, 
14, 230–3, 244; of turtles, 237, 241; 
vicious, 9, 11, 16, 44–5, 229–30, 
236, 240, 242–3, 245, 247–8
infinite sets, 80, 87, 115–16, 131, 146–7
infinite sums, 20, 26, 174–5, 177–80, 
199, 215
infinitesimal points, 141
infinitism, 11
infinitude, 62, 65, 107, 143, 147–8, 
150–1, 155, 223, 233, 236, 247–9; 
of abstract objects, 248; impossible 
forms of, 44–6, 49, 70, 186, 203, 
232, 252; of natural numbers, 65, 
148, 150; of past states or events, 
234; of rational numbers, 76
infinity, 3–260; arithmetic of, 
17–18, 87, 89, 90, 144–5, 176; in 
mathematics, 4–5; as a number, 133, 
145, 180; in philosophy, 5–6; in the 
physical world, 6–7

272 Index
initial conditions, 158–60, 206, 212, 
253, 258
instrumental rationality, 107
intensive magnitudes. See magnitudes: 
intensive
intuitions, 96, 100, 113
Iskra, v, 122n6
James, William, 237
Kant, Immanuel, 41–3, 217, 245
Kelvin temperature scale, 138
kinetic energy, 33, 155
kinetic theory of gases, 155
knowledge: a priori, 97, 103–4, 106–7; 
analytic, 99; empirical, 97; synthetic 
a priori, 97–100, 104
Laraudogoitia, Jon Perez, 211
Laraudogoitia’s marbles, 32–3, 42, 85, 
211, 251
law of non–contradiction, 244–5
laws: of arithmetic, 116, 123–4; causal, 
136, 158, 169, 240; of nature, 
101–2, 138, 153, 158, 160, 240, 252; 
of physics, 58, 102, 225
Leibniz, G.W.F., 62, 238–40
line segment, 6–7, 18–19, 46, 50, 55, 
134, 141
Littlewood-Ross Paradox, 29–30, 38, 
42, 85–6, 89, 179, 201, 204–5, 219, 
248, 251
Littlewood, J.E., 204
location theory of points, 254
Locke, John, 51
logical positivism, 94–5, 106
loop quantum gravity, 159
Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem, 110–11
magnitudes, 51, 65, 129–38, 140, 143, 
150, 152, 155, 157, 166, 177, 180, 
182–3, 193, 198, 200, 207, 218, 
225, 249–50; artificial vs. natural, 
135–6, 138, 152, 157, 166, 168, 
207; dimensions vs. values, 129–30, 
134–5, 153, 155; extensive, 134–5, 
151, 154–5; finite, 152, 153, 155, 
183; fundamental vs. derived, 136; 
infinite, 50, 85–6, 134, 143, 147, 
153, 155, 198; infinite extensive, 
150, 154–5, 231, 249; infinite 
intensive, 151, 153–5, 158–60, 
184, 187, 194, 197–8, 201–2, 206, 
218, 225, 230–1, 245, 249, 251–3; 
intensive, 134–5, 151–2, 154–5, 
157–8, 182, 184, 186, 189, 201, 
207, 211–12, 225, 231, 252; natural, 
physical, 204
many regarded as one, 111–13
mapping. See one-to-one function
Martingale betting system, 29, 43, 85, 
218, 220, 251
mass, 32, 52, 67, 69, 89, 129, 137, 
149, 151, 153, 158, 160, 166, 177, 
189, 204–6, 211, 252; critical, 136; 
extensive or intensive, 135
mass density. See density
mathematical systems, argument 
from, 105
mathematics, 4, 42, 51, 67, 69, 71–2, 
89, 93–5, 106–8, 114, 116–18, 132, 
138, 179; formalist approach to, 95; 
pure, 122; transfinite, 107, 179
McTaggart, J.M.E., 14–15, 45, 244–5; 
argument against the reality of 
time, 230
measure theory, 132–3
Meno, 56
mental states, 96
metaphysical indeterminacy, 149
metaphysical necessity, 103–4, 106, 
153, 170, 173, 225–6
metaphysical contingency, 103, 106, 
212, 225
metaphysics, 94
minimum distance theory of space, 
55–6
Minkowski spacetime, 64
models, 110
multiplication, 116–17, 122–4, 127, 
140–1, 145
natural magnitudes. See magnitudes: 
artificial vs. natural
naturalism, 95
necessary truths, 103–4, 106, 124, 
153, 170–1, 173, 200, 225–6
Newton, Isaac, 62

Index 273
Newtonian gravitational theory, 235
Newtonian mechanics, 33, 211
Newtonian world, 32, 101, 159, 252
nominalism, 12–13, 247; resemblance, 
13–14, 229, 242
non-standard analysis, 141, 180
nonzero quantities: deformation, 
209; depth, 211; distance, 55, 169, 
193, 200, 209; mass, 189, 211; 
probability, 211, 215, 217, 251; 
thickness, 165, 190; time interval, 
253; volume, 162, 164
numbers: anthropocentric conception 
of, 65; bifurcated account of, 131; 
cardinal, 73–4, 85–6, 119–20, 125, 
129, 143–4, 221–2, 230–1, 248–51; 
determinate, 149; finite, 18, 50, 
87–8, 128, 141, 143, 152, 180, 190; 
hyperreals, 4; imaginary, 4, 140; 
indexing use of, 137–8; ineffability 
of, 127–9; infinite, 4, 51, 71, 74, 80, 
87, 89, 104, 141–5, 149–51, 154–5, 
176, 179–80, 225, 250; infinitesimal, 
4, 105, 141–2; infinitude of, 50, 148, 
150; irrational, 139, 188; natural, 
50, 65, 67, 69–70, 74, 76–9, 82, 
86, 88, 114–15, 117, 121, 127–32, 
143–6, 148–52, 154, 180–1, 202, 
206, 222, 249–50, 254–5; negative, 
4, 133, 139–40; non–natural, 148; 
prime, 103, 153, 171; probability, 
167; as properties, 120, 129–32, 144; 
rational, 76–7, 116, 130, 139, 188–9; 
real, 4, 78–9, 88, 116, 129–34, 137, 
139, 140–4, 150, 166, 168, 181, 
188–9, 250; as sets, 73–4, 114–18
objective reality, 107, 171
objects, 73; abstract, 4–5, 11–12, 
66–7, 109, 154, 162, 233, 247–8; 
composite, 31, 121, 209, 259; 
concrete, 66–7, 112–13, 120–1, 129, 
166; geometric, 162, 164–5; infinite, 
148; mathematical, 107, 138–9, 
162–3; non-physical, 109, 138; 
non-spatial, 124, 163, 166; open vs. 
closed, 168–9, 250; size-zero, 190; 
solid, 161, 171, 191–4, 208; spatial, 
163–4; three-dimensional, 172
Occam’s Razor, 234
Ohm’s Law, 200–1
omnipotence, 218
one-to-one function, 75, 77–9, 
114–16, 144, 146, 181
ontology, 66, 110, 112, 117, 120, 259
Ontological Argument, 239
ordered pairs, 115–16, 130, 140–1
ostensive definition, 99, 119
Paley, William, 256–7
Paradox of Contact, 168
paradox, defined, 17
parallel universes, 68
Parmenides, 25
parsimony, 235–6
pentation, 127
Perls, Frederick, 3
Phenomenal Conservatism, 95–7, 100
philosophy of mathematics, 95, 107
philosophy of science, 95
photons, 210–11
physical necessity, 226
physical principles, 226–7
physics, 7, 24, 58, 64–5, 68, 102, 155, 
158, 192–3, 225–8, 234; Aristotelian, 
51; laws of, 58, 102, 225
Plato, 11–12, 45, 56, 229; theory of 
universals, 11, 107, 138, 243, 247
pointless space. See gunk
points, 18–19, 55, 85, 162–5, 168–9, 
171–2, 174–6, 178, 233, 250–1, 
253–4; fusions of, 162, 173; 
infinitesimal, 141; paradox of, 18, 
85, 141, 176; sets of, 162, 173
pointy space, 162–3, 168, 170–1, 254
possibility: degrees of, 167; logical, 
101, 104–6, 197, 200, 220; 
metaphysical, 61, 100–6, 131, 159, 
161, 168, 172–3, 177, 183, 199, 204, 
226–7, 233, 236, 256–7; ontological, 
66; physical, 101, 158–9, 177
possible worlds, 131, 136, 153, 160–1, 
172, 225, 227
potential infinity, 49–50, 53, 57, 62, 
69, 149, 186
potentiality, ontological, 66
Powerset Axiom, 84
powerset, 80, 82–3

274 Index
presentism, 253
Principia Mathematica, 62
probabilities, 27, 107, 141, 167, 182, 
210, 213–16, 219, 221–2, 235, 251, 
258; infinitesimal, 142; rational 
distribution of, 216, 222
problem of universals, 243
property theory of numbers, 131, 144
pure sets, 108–9
quantum mechanics, 7, 52, 68–9, 95, 
155
quasi-Kantian theory, 41–3
question-begging, 142, 232, 239
rationalism, 93
reasons: a priori vs. empirical, 240; 
infinite series of, 11, 45, 229, 231–4, 
241; justified vs. unjustified, 241
referent, 116, 126, 259
regress arguments, 9–15, 229–46; for 
foundationalism, 10–11; against 
Platonism, 11–12; against reality of 
time, 14–15; against resemblance 
nominalism, 12–14; for theism, 
9–10
regress, infinite. See infinite series
relational theory of space, 62, 64–5
relationship theory of numbers, 131–2
relativity, theory of: general, 7, 64, 95, 
158–9, 190; special, 50
resemblances. See nominalism; 
infinite series: of resemblances
Robinson, Abraham, 141–2, 180
Ross, Sheldon, 204
Russell, Bertrand, 108, 112, 114, 116, 
120, 237
Russell Set, 83–5
Russell’s Paradox, 82, 85, 113
Saint Petersburg Paradox, 26, 85–6, 
213, 221–2, 251
Schrödinger’s Cat, 69
science, 49, 93–5
scientism, 94
semantics, 113–14
series: beginningless, 27, 45, 48, 55, 
186; endless, 27, 46, 48, 53, 55, 
184–6. See also infinite series
set theory, 71–3, 80, 82–5, 108–18, 
132, 149, 179, 248, 259
sets, 4, 71–4, 108–18, 120–1, 130, 
133, 143, 147–50, 154, 162, 166, 
178, 181, 233, 249–50, 258–60; 
countable, 110; defined, 71–3; 
finite, 80; infinite, 80, 87, 115–16, 
131, 146–7; open vs. closed, 169; 
Russell, 83–5; set of all sets, 74, 
82–3, 90, 113–15, 120, 134, 144; 
singleton, 80, 108, 112, 120, 258–9
Smullyan’s infinite rod, 24–5, 86, 94, 
184, 189, 251
solidity, 191–4
sophistry, 59, 94, 239
space: absolute, 64; empty, 19, 58, 
62, 169, 200; gunky, 162–3, 170–1, 
173–4, 253; higher-dimensional, 60, 
68, 172; infinitude of, 3, 6, 150–1, 
153–5, 161; minimum distance 
theory of, 55–6; pointy, 162–3, 168, 
170–1, 254; relational, 61; round, 
58–60; structure of as precluding 
contact, 169; three-dimensional, 
172–3; volume as measure of, 
164–5, 169, 249
spaceship, 33, 42, 85–6, 211–12, 
251
staccato run, 186–8
string theory, 68, 159, 172
Subset Axiom, 84
subtraction, 90, 122, 140, 145
successive synthesis, 41, 43
sums, infinite, 20, 26, 174–5, 177–80, 
199, 215
synthetic a priori knowledge, 97–100, 
104
synthetic statements, 97, 99, 104
temperature, 58, 130, 132, 134–8, 
155–8, 166; Celsius scale of, 
137–8; infinite, 155–8, 249; Kelvin 
scale of, 138; negative, 155–7; 
thermodynamic definition of, 156, 
158
temporal points (instants), 253
temporal properties, regress of, 14, 
230, 233, 244–5
tetration, 127

Index 275
theism, 239–40, 247
theology, 94
thermal equilibrium, 157–8
thermal motion, 166
thermodynamics, 155–8
Third Man Argument, 12, 229
Thomson, James, 195–7
Thomson’s Lamp, 28–9, 38, 42–3, 
85–6, 89, 194–6, 200, 202, 219, 
223–7, 248, 251–2
time, 7, 47, 57, 69–70, 105, 125; 
gunky, 253; infinite vs. finite, 231, 
234; infinite series of temporal 
properties, 14, 230–3, 244–5; 
reality of, 14–15, 230, 244, 247; 
reversibility, 33
transfinite numbers. See numbers: 
infinite
truth regress, 15–6, 45, 230–1, 233, 
242, 244
uncountable infinity, 77, 80
Union Axiom, 84
Universal Set, 83–5
universals, 5–6, 12, 107, 120, 131, 
242–3; Plato’s theory of, 11–12, 229, 
242, 247
Unordered Pair Axiom, 84
utility functions, 205–6
utils, 35
van Inwagen, Peter, 94
velocity, 32, 64, 152, 157, 182, 187, 
191, 212
voltage, 200
volume, 18–19, 23–4, 56, 135–6, 139, 
148, 150–1, 163–6, 176–7, 183, 211, 
249
Weierstrass, Karl, 180
Whitehead, Alfred North, 26n11
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 49n1, 254, 
255n4, 256
Zeno series, 69–70, 186–7, 251; 
beginningless, 27, 45, 48, 55, 186; 
endless, 27, 46, 48, 53, 55, 184–6
Zeno, 25–7, 38, 43–4, 52–4, 186, 251; 
Aristotle’s response to, 52–5, 57; 
and Cantor’s theory, 85, 86, 89; first 
paradox of motion, 25–27, 52–6, 
248; second paradox of motion, 27; 
solution to paradoxes, 185–8, 251; 
and theory of infinite sums, 26, 180; 
third paradox of motion, 25n10
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory (ZF), 84, 
111
Zero Argument, 164–5, 253–4
zero, 18–20, 124–27; as complete 
absence, 164–8; duration, 253; and 
extension of concept of number, 
258; mass, 27–8, 88, 189; measure 
of, 172; probability, 141, 167, 183, 
215, 251; ratio, 168; real number, 
164; size, 7, 18–19, 27–8, 133, 
150, 163, 165, 176, 178, 189–90, 
205, 250; temperature, 138, 156, 
158, 166; thickness, 88, 170, 184, 
188–90, 193; utility, 215; velocity, 
24, 160; voltage, 201

