Royal Bank of Canada
Annual Report 2021

Helping clients thrive and 
communities prosper
Guided by our Vision to be among the world’s most 
trusted and successful financial institutions, and driven 
by our Purpose, we aim to be: 
>	 The undisputed financial services leader in Canada
>	 The preferred partner to corporate, institutional and 
high net worth clients and their businesses in the U.S.
>	 A leading financial services partner valued for our 
expertise in select global financial centres
We are guided by our Values:
>	 Client First
>	 Collaboration
>	 Accountability
>	 Diversity & Inclusion
>	 Integrity
	 facebook.com/rbc
	 instagram.com/rbc
	 twitter.com/@RBC
	 www.youtube.com/user/RBC
	 linkedin.com/company/rbc
	 rbc.com/ar2021
Connect with us:
Table of contents
2021 Highlights	
2
CEO Letter	
7
Chair Letter	
12
Management’s Discussion 
and Analysis	
13
Enhanced Disclosure Task Force 
Recommendations Index	
123
Reports and Consolidated 
Financial Statements	
124
Ten-Year Statistical Review	
226
Shareholder Information	
228
OUR PURPOSE

Royal Bank of Canada is a global financial 
institution with a purpose-driven, principles-led 
approach to delivering leading performance. Our 
success comes from the 87,000+ employees who 
leverage their imaginations and insights to bring 
our vision, values and strategy to life so we can 
help our clients thrive and communities prosper. 
As Canada’s biggest bank, and one of the largest 
in the world based on market capitalization, we 
have a diversified business model with a focus on 
innovation and providing exceptional experiences 
to our 17 million clients in Canada, the U.S. and 
27 other countries.
How we create value has always been as 
important as what we achieve. Guided by our 
Purpose, we are focused on delivering long-term, 
differentiated value for our clients, employees, 
communities, and shareholders. In our annual 
report, you’ll read about how RBC continues 
to demonstrate forward momentum and an 
unwavering commitment to creating long-term, 
sustainable value for those we serve.
Who we are
Why invest? 
>	 Diversified business model with scale and market-
leading franchises that provide a full suite of 
products, advice and services for clients
>	 Leading presence in Canada and an established 
multi-platform U.S. strategy with a long runway for 
premium growth
>	 Differentiated technology and innovation 
investments that go beyond banking 
>	 Premium ROE and disciplined expense management 
>	 Strong balance sheet and prudent risk management
>	 Well-positioned to benefit from evolving macro 
environment
>	 Recognized leader in ESG and corporate citizenship
By the numbers 
17 million
clients
87,000+
employees
29
countries
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
 1
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021

2021 HIGHLIGHTS ACROSS OUR BALANCED SCORECARD 
Clients
Market-Leading Client Franchises 
#1 and #2 market share in all 
key product categories across 
Canadian Banking
#1 in market share for High 
Net Worth/Ultra High Net 
Worth in Canada
11th largest global investment 
bank with #1 market share 
in Canada and #1 Canadian 
investment bank in the 
United States(1)
Largest retail fund company in 
Canada based on assets under 
management (AUM)(2)
Average volume growth of 15% 
in loans and 29% in deposits at 
City National Bank(3)
(1)	 Dealogic, fiscal 2021
(2)	 Refer to the Glossary definition on page 121
(3)	 US$; loan growth includes $2 billion relating to PPP loans
(4)	Private Banker International Global Wealth Awards 2021
(5)	 90-day active mobile users in Canadian Banking only
Customer Service 
Award Winner among 
the Big Five Banks – 
Recognized in all 11 
categories of the 2021 
Ipsos Financial Service 
Excellence Awards 
RBC Global Asset 
Management named 
TopGun Investment 
Team of the Year 
(Brendan Wood 
International)
Celent Model Winner 
in three categories – 
demonstrating 
industry-leading 
practices in our 
Capital Markets 
and Personal & 
Commercial Banking 
businesses that 
enhance clients’ 
digital experiences
 
Outstanding Global 
Private Bank
Outstanding Global 
Private Bank in North 
America for the sixth 
year in a row(4)
Highest in Customer 
Satisfaction among the Big 
Five Retail Banks, 5 out of the 
last 6 years (J.D. Power)

Enabled 5.5 million active 
mobile users as clients’ 
digital adoption accelerated, 
with mobile sessions up 
15% YoY to over 114 million(5)

14 Ventures in market as 
part of our strategy to go 
beyond banking by creating 
meaningful solutions and 
value-added experiences 
Launched RBC VantageTM: 
Transformed our core 
Everyday Banking value 
proposition for our Canadian 
Banking clients and advisors, 
providing them with a 
comprehensive and seamless 
banking experience
We are united in our commitment to delivering exceptional client experiences. 
RBC is uniquely positioned to create long-term value for our clients through the 
power of our ideas, investments in talent and technology, and our differentiated 
advice, products and services.
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
2

Employees
Our 87,000+ employees live our Purpose and values every day in delivering for our clients and 
communities. We remain focused on ensuring employees feel supported, trusted and engaged, 
while creating opportunities to learn and innovate. As we adapt to an ever-changing world 
of work and a competitive talent landscape, we’ll continue to enable an inclusive, always-
learning culture as we attract, inspire and grow talent to set RBC apart.
#2 globally and the top Canadian company and financial 
institution in the 2021 Refinitiv Diversity & Inclusion Index, 
ranking more than 11,000 publicly listed companies, 
up from #4 in 2020
2021 Catalyst Award winner
for accelerating the advancement 
of women and elevating inclusion, 
the second time RBC has been 
honoured with this award
Welcomed 1,400+ 
summer students 
across the globe, 
50% were BIPOC
Accelerating our progress in 
Diversity & Inclusion 
Black, Indigenous and 
People of Colour (BIPOC) 
represented:
37% of new hires(1)
43% of promotions(1)(2)
43% of new executive 
appointments, surpassing our 
goal of 30% for the year(3)
Women represented:
51% new hires(4) 
54% of promotions(2)(4)
44% of executives(3)
18% young people(5)

94% of RBC employees 
and contractors have 
completed Anti-Racism 
Awareness Training
2021 Employee Engagement 
Survey(6) found that employees 
remain highly engaged and 
proud to be part of RBC
94% of employees feel 
they contribute to the 
overall success of RBC
91% feel proud to be 
part of RBC
90% willing to go above 
and beyond
$16.5 billion in competitive 
compensation and benefits
Great Place 
to Work – Best 
Workplaces 
for Mental 
Wellness 2021
Expanded our 
technology 
teams, including 
the creation 
of 300 roles at 
a new Calgary 
Innovation Hub
Recognized 
as one of 
Canada’s 
Top 100 
Employers
(1)	 Based on self-identification; Canada and United States only; excludes summer interns, students and co-ops
(2)	 Defined as upward change in position level or HR Class
(3)	 Represents data for our businesses in Canada governed by the Employment Equity Act 
(4)	Global; excludes summer interns, students and co-ops
(5)	 Headcount under 30 globally, excluding City National and BlueBay Asset Management employees
(6)	 Employee Engagement Survey conducted between April 21-May 5, 2021; participation rate was 76%
Invested in our 
employees’ well-
being through a 
paid subscription 
to Headspace, the 
mindfulness and 
meditation app, 
and an additional 
day off
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
 3

$265+ million
provided through RBC Future 
Launch® reaching over 3.6 million 
Canadian youth through 875+ partner 
programs since 2017
By investing $5 million into the RBC 
Future Launch® suite of scholarships 
over three years, 1,600+ young 
Canadians will benefit from these 
awards, including resources tailored 
to their needs through input from 
diverse business, academic, and 
non-profit leaders

$23 million
Our annual Employee Giving 
Campaign went virtual and achieved 
record participation results with 82% 
of employees taking part, raising 
$23 million for 5,000+ charities 
across Canada
$100 million
commitment to help Black 
entrepreneurs reach their full 
potential through the RBC Black 
Entrepreneur Program providing 
access to capital and resources 
necessary to start and grow a 
successful business
$2 million
donation from the RBC Foundation 
to help launch first-ever Brain 
Canada Youth Mental Health 
Platform Program, powered by the 
RBC Future Launch® program
Communities
When our communities prosper, we all do. Through our partnerships, volunteering 
and employee giving initiatives, and donations, we are committed to supporting the 
communities around the world where we live and work. Our approach is aligned to 
our priority pillars, including youth, climate and diversity & inclusion, with the goal of 
building vibrant, socially inclusive and sustainable communities.
(1)	 Refer to page 97 of the 2021 Annual Report for additional information
(2)	 Includes employee volunteer grants and gifts in kind, as well as contributions to non-profits and non-registered charities. Figure includes sponsorships
$8 billion(1)
in support of our communities as one 
of the largest taxpayers in Canada, and 
as a taxpayer in other countries where 
we operate

$140+ million(2)
given globally through cash donations 
and community investments, including 
support to mitigate the human 
and economic impacts of the 
COVID-19 pandemic
RBC Charity Day for 
the Kids donated 
US$5 million to more 
than 50 youth-focused 
charities around 
the globe

Launched the RBC 
Community Junior Golf 
Program, an initiative that 
will focus on building greater 
diversity and equity in golf 
by enabling affordable 
access to the game for 
youth in underrepresented 
communities in Canada
In 2021, RBC Race 
for the Kids’ 35,000+ 
participants raised 
$8+ million for 35 youth-
focused charities in 
19 countries 
Since it began in 2009, the 
RBC Race for the Kids event 
series has hosted 325,000 
participants and raised over 
$73 million for youth-focused 
causes around the world

2021 HIGHLIGHTS ACROSS OUR BALANCED SCORECARD
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
4

Committed to 
net-zero emissions in our 
lending by 2050, aligned with 
the principles of 
the Paris Agreement
[RBC’s InvestEase Responsible 
Investing Portfolio saw an increase xx ]
Committed to net-zero 
emissions in our lending 
by 2050, aligned with 
the principles of the 
Paris Agreement
Committed to reducing 
our own global emissions 
by 70% and sourcing 
100% of our electricity 
from renewable and non-
emitting sources by 2025
Launched our first ESG equity-linked GIC, 
RBC ESG Market-Linked GIC, built for 
environmentally and socially-focused investors
RBC Tech for Nature™ 
supports partners leveraging 
technology and innovation 
capabilities to solve climate 
change and other pressing 
environmental challenges through a 
multi-year commitment. Since 2019, 
more than 100 organizations have 
benefitted from over $27 million in 
community investments
Empowering our clients 
on their journey to net-zero 
emissions with solutions, 
products and advice, 
highlighted by our $500 billion 
sustainable financing target
(1)	 Reflects enhancements in data collection methodology in fiscal 2021
Issued second Green Bond, 
a US$750 million issue in 
partnership with a syndicate 
that included diverse-owned 
broker dealers
$597+ billion in AUM that integrate 
material ESG factors in 2021

1.6 billion tonnes of carbon 
traded in 2021

RBC InvestEase® saw a 145% increase 
in funded accounts with a Responsible 
Investing portfolio YoY. AUM growth 
continues to accelerate with a 131% 
increase YoY driven by strong growth in 
new deposits and new funded accounts

$33+ billion in financing for sustainable 
bonds and loans(1)
Joined the Partnership for Carbon 
Accounting Financials (PCAF) and RMI’s 
Center for Climate-Aligned Finance
RBC joined the Net-Zero 
Banking Alliance (NZBA), a 
global, industry-led initiative 
to accelerate and support 
efforts to address climate 
change and drive credible 
progress toward achieving 
net-zero emissions by 2050
For more stories on how we lead 
with Purpose in creating value for 
our clients, communities, employees, 
and shareholders, please visit our 
newly launched RBC Stories site
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
 5

(1) Average percentile ranking compiled from our four top-
tier ESG ratings/rankings, including Sustainalytics, MSCI 
ESG Rating, FTSE4Good and RobecoSAM’s Corporate 
Sustainability Assessment (informing the DJSI)
(2) Includes dividends paid on both common and preferred 
shares. Dividends were $XX billion on common shares and 
$XX billion on preferred shares
Medium-Term Objectives(2)
3-Year
5-Year
Diluted EPS growth of 7%+ 
10%
10%
ROE of 16%+
16.5%
16.8%
Strong capital ratio (CET1)
12.8%
12.1%
Dividend payout ratio of 40%–50%
47%
46%
3-Year
5-Year
RBC 
16%
13%
Global peer average
14%
12%
Total shareholder return(3)
$18.3
P&CB
$13.3
Wealth 
Management
$5.6
Insurance 
$2.2
I&TS 
$10.2
Capital 
Markets
Annualized Dividend 
Increase of:
6%
Five year(5)
8%
Ten year(5)
Earnings
net income (C$ billion)
2020
2021
$16.1
$11.4
Financial performance metrics
Shareholders
18.6% return on 
common equity(1), 
up from 14.2% 
in 2020
$9.6 billion 
remainder of our 
profit available 
to reinvest in 
future growth
$4.32 dividends 
declared per share
85(6)
average percentile ranking 
on priority ESG indices
13.7%
robust common equity 
tier 1 (CET1) ratio, 
up 120 bps from 2020

40%(7) 
of profits returned to 
our shareholders 
through dividends
$11.06 
diluted earnings per share 
(EPS), up from $7.82 in 2020
2021 HIGHLIGHTS ACROSS OUR BALANCED SCORECARD
(1)	 Refer to the Glossary for definition on page 121
(2)	 A medium-term (3-5 year) objective is considered to be achieved when the performance goal is met in either a 3- or 5-year period. These objectives 
assume a normal business environment and our ability to achieve them in a period may be adversely affected by extraordinary developments such 
as the COVID-19 pandemic and the current low interest rate environment
(3)	 Annualized TSR is calculated based on the TSX common share price appreciation plus reinvested dividend income. Source: Bloomberg, as at 
October 31, 2021. Please refer to page 16-17
(4)	Excludes Corporate Support
(5)	 Compound Annual Growth Rate
(6)	 Average percentile ranking compiled from our four top-tier ESG ratings/rankings, including Sustainalytics, MSCI ESG Rating, FTSE4Good and 
S&P Global’s Corporate Sustainability Assessment (informing the DJSI) – FTSE4Good and MSCI ratings reflect 2020 scores
(7)	 Includes dividends paid on both common and preferred shares. Dividends were $6.2 billion on common shares and dividends on preferred shares 
and distributions on other equity instruments were $0.3 billion
Revenue by segment(4)
(C$ billion)
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
6

2021 Reflections 
2021 was another year defined by 
the pandemic and it presented both 
challenges and opportunities for RBC 
and those we serve in ways we couldn’t 
have predicted as the year began. 
We executed very well in support of our medium-term objectives 
and vision of the future, and against our balanced scorecard. 
This meant bringing all our stakeholders – clients, employees, 
communities, and shareholders – along with us as we helped build 
a stronger and more sustainable future.
Our balanced scorecard: Purpose drives performance
Looking back on the year, I’m most proud of the ways our over 
87,000 employees led RBC through significant disruption and 
uncertainty, and responded to our clients and communities while 
supporting each other. Despite navigating a working environment 
largely defined by lockdowns, their empathy, care and commitment 
to those we serve was the most powerful reflection of our culture 
and Purpose – to help clients thrive and communities prosper. 
Nowhere was this truer than RBC’s annual Employee Giving 
Campaign which broke previous fundraising records with a 
combined total of $23 million raised, supporting more charities 
than ever before. 
Thanks to our teams, we accelerated our vision to 
transform our bank for the future while executing 
and growing through the global pandemic. RBC kept 
investing in people and technology at a time when 
others pulled back, and continued building more 
value for our clients. This is emblematic of how we 
run the bank, delivering in the short-term while 
continuing to build for the long-term.
To support our employees, we doubled down on our commitment to 
their physical and mental health and well-being, including through 
new benefits, initiatives and resources for those working on-site, 
from home or returning to premises. We also gave employees 
an additional day off and provided them with a mindfulness and 
meditation app to help manage the mental fatigue of the pandemic.
We also engaged employees for input on the future of work at 
RBC. In actively surveying our employees for feedback on their 
experiences, 88% told us their engagement remained high, and they 
felt well-supported by RBC leaders. Over 90% said they were proud 
to be part of RBC. I was also proud RBC continued to be recognized 
externally as an employer of choice in 2021.
The rollout of multiple vaccines marked an important step forward 
in society’s collective efforts to slow the spread of COVID-19 and 
a path towards ending the global pandemic. As some normality 
returned, many of us began to look to the future with greater hope 
and confidence. Improving business and consumer sentiment 
spurred on economic activity, reinforcing RBC’s view that better 
days were ahead of us. 
At the same time, however, we learned that progress against the 
virus didn’t follow a predictable or straight line. Successive waves 
of the virus were devastating in some regions and continued to 
disrupt lives and livelihoods, and rising cases coupled with an 
uneven vaccination rollout led to significant market volatility and 
uncertainty for businesses and consumers.
And after more than a year of social distancing and isolation, many 
people felt fatigued and affected by uncertain times, marked by a 
rising need to support mental health and well-being.
Geopolitical divisions intensified, and systemic barriers and 
inequalities exposed by the pandemic became more pronounced, 
reinforcing the need for meaningful change across our society 
and institutions. Several events, including the tragic discovery of 
unmarked Indigenous children’s graves at former residential school 
sites in Canada, only added to the urgency.
Moreover, the frequent impacts of climate change were ever-
present as many countries and communities experienced 
devastating heat waves, floods and other extreme weather events. 
In 2021, it was never more evident that urgent action is needed to 
place our planet on a more sustainable path. This will come with 
significant new costs, and require all of us to understand and make 
tough choices as society adapts and we all adopt new behaviours.
It also became clear that the pandemic has accelerated 
and reshaped our world and our future in permanent ways – 
transforming the way we live, work, shop, and connect with each 
other. These changes represent tectonic shifts that won’t revert 
back to the way things were. 
Within this uncertain and rapidly evolving context, society and 
economies showed incredible resilience, backed by significant 
financial support from governments – facilitated by financial 
institutions, including RBC, which worked extensively with clients 
across the spectrum – to help manage through a very challenging 
first half of the year until we started to see progressive re-opening. 
These conditions supported increasingly strong client activity and 
demand throughout 2021, in what was a defining year for RBC.
MESSAGE FROM DAVE McKAY
David McKay
President and 
Chief Executive Officer
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
 7

This recognition also included the bank’s leadership on diversity 
and inclusion, which is a cornerstone of RBC’s values. RBC was 
awarded the global Catalyst Award in 2021 for the second time 
in our history. Furthermore, we ranked second in Refinitiv’s Top 
100 Company Diversity & Inclusion Index, making RBC the top-
ranked company in Banking Services globally and the top ranked 
organization in Canada. While we are honoured by this recognition 
and have made good progress, we know there is more to be done 
and we’re committed to accelerating change.
The biggest testament to our culture and strong employee 
engagement is how our people have gone above and beyond to 
serve our 17 million clients, and attract new ones. 
Our Canadian Personal & Commercial Banking businesses grew 
volumes and gained market share in lending, deposits and 
investments. As a result of this client activity, in Canada, we 
maintained or extended our #1 and #2 share in key categories of 
our Personal & Commercial Banking businesses. We also achieved 
progress in deepening client relationships, both within Canadian 
Banking, where nearly 19% of clients have all four of transaction 
accounts, credit cards, investments, and borrowing products with 
RBC, and between segments. And for the fifth time in six years, 
J.D. Power ranked RBC highest in retail customer satisfaction in 
2021, among our peer banks.
We also saw strong client activity across our wealth management 
franchises. In Canadian Wealth Management, we grew assets under 
administration (AUA) by 26% and, for the 15th consecutive year, RBC 
Dominion Securities was ranked #1 in advisor satisfaction amongst 
bank-owned wealth management firms in the 2021 Investment 
Executive Brokerage Report Card. RBC Global Asset Management 
gained $45 billion of total net sales with 17% market share of 
Canadian retail long-term mutual fund flows.
In the U.S., City National Bank continued to see strong momentum 
with double-digit growth in loans and deposits. Our U.S. Wealth 
Management franchise also achieved strong asset growth, in part 
by hiring experienced advisor teams who are attracted to our client-
first culture coupled with the capabilities and resources of a large 
bank, including an integrated technology platform.
Our global Capital Markets businesses generated strong advisory 
and underwriting activity, deepening client relationships, including 
financing in support of their strategic objectives. Strong Corporate 
and Investment Banking results more than offset normalizing 
Global Markets performance, and robust M&A activity propelled an 
increase in loan syndication across our core regions. RBC Capital 
Markets’ solid overall business performance in 2021 also helped to 
offset interest rate pressures in our other businesses, which further 
reinforces the importance of our diversified model.
Collectively, the growth in our core client franchises speaks to the 
success of our longstanding strategy to harness the power of our 
talent and technology with our scale and distribution power to 
deliver differentiated advice, insights and experiences that create 
value for clients and deepen relationships across our businesses. 
 
In the communities where we live and work, RBC stood tall as an 
active corporate citizen through the more than $140 million in 
donations and investments our bank directed throughout 2021 to 
local community organizations and causes. During the year, we 
were particularly proud of our initiatives that broaden economic 
opportunity amongst youth and underrepresented groups, 
foster community spirit and encourage innovation to address 
climate change.
A great example of this is RBC Future Launch®, our 10-year, $500 
million commitment to preparing youth for the jobs of tomorrow. 
With a focus on networking, skills development, practical work 
experience, and mental well-being supports and services, RBC 
Future Launch® is helping prepare youth in critical ways to address 
the skills shortage and build more inclusive workforces. More than 
three million young people across Canada have already benefitted 
from the program run by our 500+ community partners. In 2021, 
the program relaunched three scholarship programs to support 
Indigenous, Black and all youth. The scholarships will benefit over 
500 youth with tailored resources developed with input from diverse 
business, academic and non-profit leaders. 
More broadly, RBC used our leadership voice and took action 
in response to several global events in 2021. We spoke out and 
supported truth and reconciliation efforts following the tragic 
discoveries of unmarked graves at residential schools in Canada, 
and condemned the tragic anti-Muslim hate crime in London, 
Ontario. In the year’s ongoing fight against COVID-19, we provided 
much needed relief funding through the WHO Foundation when 
India experienced unparalleled challenges. And we made important 
donations to humanitarian efforts and disaster relief following the 
historic power outage in Texas, the wildfires and floods in British 
Columbia, the Iqaluit water crisis, and the devastating impacts of 
Hurricane Ida on Haiti. In times of need, RBC was there. 
From a shareholder’s perspective, RBC’s overall performance 
in 2021 demonstrated very strong results, premium shareholder 
performance, and highlighted our superior ability to manage 
through a complex and uncertain operating environment while 
remaining focused on the long-term and investing for future growth. 
Notably, we have been growing our investments in people and 
technology throughout the pandemic.
MESSAGE FROM DAVE McKAY
The biggest testament to our 
culture and strong employee 
engagement is how our people 
have gone above and beyond to 
serve our 17 million clients.
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
8

During the year, we generated earnings of $16.1 billion and an 
ROE of 18.6%. Our CET1 ratio stood at 13.7% at year-end, maintaining 
a strong capital base. Earnings per share grew by 41%, reflecting 
strong underlying business growth and an improving credit 
environment, and we delivered $6.2 billion in dividends to our 
common shareholders. In terms of Total Shareholder Return, 
RBC outperformed our global peer group over the three- and 
five-year periods.
Following the easing of regulatory restrictions on dividend 
increases and share buybacks in late 2021, we were pleased to 
increase our quarterly dividend by 11% and announce our 
intention to repurchase up to 45 million outstanding common 
shares, in line with our commitment to create long-term value for 
our shareholders.
A complex macro backdrop defines our 
operating environment
As the past several years have shown, and 2021 reinforced, the pace 
of change and disruption in our world has accelerated significantly, 
in part due to COVID-19, the effect of technology platforms, and 
evolving consumer expectations. As a result, the context in 
which we serve and advise clients continues to be defined by an 
increasingly complex world and big forces of change over the near- 
and longer-term.
For example, economies are experiencing a series of supply and 
demand imbalances that are all happening simultaneously, causing 
uncertainty and also inflation risk. 
Impacting factors include: skills and labour shortages; housing 
supply; energy supply and prices; changing client preferences; and, 
unprecedented liquidity and wealth creation. These imbalances add 
complexity to a smooth transition to a new normal economy.
Notwithstanding these short- to medium-term challenges, I remain 
cautiously optimistic that we’ll see global economic growth through 
an ongoing recovery over the next 12–24 months based on trends 
we’ve experienced in credit card spending, business investment in 
term assets, and utilization of working capital. 
Confidence in RBC’s strategy
Our outlook for the future is bolstered by the combination of 
several strengths RBC possesses. We have a strong balance sheet, 
capital and liquidity positions, and our risk and cost discipline as 
foundational pillars.
Next, the size, scale and reach of our diversified business model 
and market-leading franchises have significant momentum and 
focused growth strategies. Our businesses are supported by more 
than $4 billion in annual technology spend, our great people and 
investments in talent, backed by our world-class brand.
We have also been anticipating a more open market with disruptive 
technology platforms for some time, and have been actively 
preparing for these competitive forces by continuously evolving our 
client value proposition and investing in talent and technology. 
 
These strengths enable differentiation in our markets and reflect 
how we allocate capital in smart and balanced ways to manage the 
short-term context and build future growth horizons.
Looking forward, we’re adapting RBC for long-term success and 
executing on our vision for the future by focusing on four key 
strategic priorities:
•	
Creating a broader value equation for clients and extending 
our lead in Canada 
•	
Accelerating growth in the U.S. – our second home market
•	
Investing in talent and enhancing our brand as an employer 
of choice
•	
Playing an active leadership role in accelerating the transition 
to net-zero emissions 
Delivering on these priorities while continuing to manage expenses 
and improve our efficiency will support our transformation and 
ongoing investments to future proof our bank and widen the gap 
with the competition.
Creating a broader value equation for clients, 
underpinned by significant digital investment, 
and extending our lead in Canada 
At RBC, we have a strong vision for the future. We know that to 
remain successful requires us to operate in two worlds – our 
traditional businesses and the pivot to a far more digital world. 
Doing so takes more innovation, integration, and breaking down 
business silos of what we do so we can redefine relationships and 
create more value for our clients and deepen relationships. We do 
this in three main ways: 
•	 Digitally enabled, client-centric advice and insights
As a leader in harnessing the power of artificial intelligence (AI) 
solutions, for years we’ve been empowering clients, simplifying 
and digitizing their interactions with us – saving them time, adding 
convenience and delivering meaningful value and insights which 
has fostered stronger relationships. 
AI-based solutions like NOMI® deliver personalized services tailored 
to individual banking needs and NOMI Find & Save®, for instance, 
has helped clients save an average of more than $420 per month 
in fiscal 2021. Since the launch of NOMI®, close to 2 billion insights 
have been viewed by clients through RBC’s mobile app. 
MyAdvisor® is our online financial planning platform that enables 
our clients to receive insights and counsel in real time. Since its 
launch in 2017, more than 2.8 million clients have activated their 
personalized investment plans. 
For our institutional clients, Capital Markets’ AI-based electronic 
platform, Aiden™, executes trades based on live market data, and 
dynamically adjusts to new information and learnings from each of 
its previous actions. Since its inception in March 2018, there have 
been more than four billion shares and US$158 billion of notional 
volumes traded through Aiden™.
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
 9

MESSAGE FROM DAVE McKAY
•	 Delivering more value
We are continually focused on providing clients with more value 
for money, and rewarding them for the depth and breadth of their 
relationship with us, and extending unique offers through the power 
of our partnerships.
Through RBC Vantage™, our enhanced everyday banking value 
proposition in Canada, clients can use their personal debit cards to 
earn RBC Rewards® points and have more ways to save on monthly 
account fees. 
RBC Ampli™, our consumer cash-back app, allows us to increasingly 
partner with merchants across Canada to provide even more value 
to our retail and business clients. We have expanded our slate of 
partners who continue to be a differentiator for RBC, adding 43 new 
merchants in 2021, including Lyft, McDonald’s, Lowe’s, and other 
leading retailers. 
•	 Moving Beyond Banking
Another differentiated element of our strategy is building 
ecosystems that go beyond banking to enable RBC to participate in 
a broader part of the client journey and value chain – reimagining 
our business and the role we play. 
In 2021, we continued the momentum in our RBC 
Ventures business, with 14 Ventures in market, 
six moved to national scale, and several others in 
validation mode or development. These Ventures 
have attracted over four million registered users, 
or new connections with RBC that go beyond 
banking in three core ecosystems – business, 
home and new to banking. 
One example is in the increasingly competitive Canadian 
commercial and small business segment. Several of these 
capabilities are made in RBC proprietary solutions. Ownr®, an 
RBC Venture, has helped over 55,000 entrepreneurs launch their 
businesses using its online platform, including over 26,000 this 
year, while driving a significant proportion of our small business 
acquisition. With RBC Insight Edge™, our business clients can 
leverage aggregated data to gain relevant insights into their 
markets to enable them to attract more clients. 
We have also made investments in building a digital platform with 
enriched payments and cash management capabilities for our 
business clients. RBC PayEdge™ helps our clients save time and 
money with a secure solution for automating the accounts payable 
and reconciliation process. 
This expanded ecosystem approach and continuum of offerings 
allows us to support our clients and attract new ones with 
differentiated advice and solutions, and creates competitive 
advantages for RBC that will help enable us to extend our lead in 
Canada and grow at a premium to peers.
Accelerating growth in the U.S. – our second home market
RBC has a unique and differentiated strategy in the U.S. – to be the 
preferred partner to corporate, institutional and high net worth 
clients and their businesses through our core client franchises – 
City National Bank, U.S. Wealth Management and Capital Markets. 
We’ve been consistently executing on our client-centric approach, 
leveraging the strength of RBC’s balance sheet to support clients 
and making ongoing investments in talent and technology to 
support future growth.
For example, at City National, we’ve added US$14 billion in loans 
over the last two years, including over US$5 billion in mortgages. In 
U.S. Wealth Management, we’re the sixth largest advisory firm by 
AUA and we added over US$130 billion of AUA, growing client assets 
30% year-over-year and surpassing US$550 billion for the first time. 
And, in Capital Markets, we’re the 11th largest global investment 
bank by fees and continue to deepen relationships with clients and 
earn high-quality mandates. 
Throughout, we’ve consistently added talent to our platform, 
including ultra high net worth private banking teams in high growth 
regions, including on the U.S. east coast and in our core California 
markets, experienced financial advisors, and investment bankers in 
key verticals, such as technology, healthcare and aerospace.
Looking forward, we believe we are well-positioned to accelerate 
growth by deepening relationships in our core franchises to deliver 
our full expertise to all our clients, including in key sectors like 
entertainment. We will also focus on driving greater cross-sell, 
such as through mortgages and banking into wealth management, 
and expanding other growth vectors such as our recently launched 
mid-market corporate banking strategy which has already booked 
US$1.8 billion in new commitments in the first year. Finally, as we 
pursue our growth ambitions in the U.S., RBC will also consider 
highly targeted acquisitions to augment our strong organic growth 
strategies or enhance our existing capabilities, provided there is a 
near- and long-term view to shareholder value creation. 
Investing in talent and enhancing our brand as an 
employer of choice 
Our focus on attracting and retaining the people and capabilities 
needed to propel us forward in the world of work is underpinned by 
our Purpose-led values and unique culture.
Key to our success is continuing to foster a diverse and inclusive 
culture that celebrates unique perspectives and embraces the 
power of diversity to drive innovation and growth. We have 
established ourselves as a change leader on diversity and are 
exceeding the goals we set for hiring BIPOC youth and investing 
in Black entrepreneurship. We’ve made significant progress 
on BIPOC executive appointments, which represented 43% of 
appointments in 2021, up from 23% in 2020, surpassing our goal 
of 30% for the year. And we’ve focused on advancing women 
in leadership, with women representing 41% of executive 
appointments and 54% of promotions. 
 
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
10

Our success as a leading digitally enabled relationship bank means 
building and hiring skills, such as data, design, app development 
and product ownership, enabling RBC to create seamless and 
exceptional client experiences. Through the pandemic, it has 
become even more important to attract and retain these skills, 
and our efforts resulted in over 600 digital hires in 2021, with an 
offer acceptance rate of 95%. We also expanded our existing Tech 
Hubs and announced plans to welcome 300 tech employees over 
the next three years to a new Calgary Innovation Hub. 
As we transition into the future world of work, we’re increasing 
our investments in talent, including leadership growth and 
development, and enhancing the overall employee experience. This 
includes challenging assumptions about how and where work is 
done. Teams across RBC are establishing work arrangements that 
best match their needs and strategies, with an objective to hold 
onto the best of everything we’ve learned over the past 18 months, 
while recapturing what we’ve missed from our pre-pandemic world. 
We’re also transforming the way we deliver learning experiences 
and development programs by expanding virtual offerings and 
micro-learning resources, along with creating more meaningful 
connections through coaching and mentoring opportunities. 
Underpinning our commitment to supporting our people is a greater 
focus on mental health and well-being to enable employees to 
achieve their goals and thrive in an increasingly complex world. 
Finally, as a strong believer in the power of work-integrated 
learning, RBC provides meaningful, paid work experiences to 
students from high school to post-graduate programs. More than 
2,000 students joined us in 2021, and we remain committed to 
continuing to grow the next generation of talent. 
Playing an active leadership role in accelerating 
the transition to net-zero emissions 
Climate is a complex issue and one of the most pressing of our age. 
It presents risk but also opportunity. Global plans to drastically 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions down to net-zero by 2050 requires 
the largest change to our economies in our lifetime, change that 
RBC is fully committed to supporting. RBC believes we need to 
make this transition in an orderly fashion so we create prosperity 
for society rather than destroy industries and sectors that our 
economies and social fabric rely upon. 
RBC will engage through our people and capabilities in every 
sector and community to address climate change in four key ways: 
eliminate our own emissions; support our clients with transition 
financing; monitor and measure our clients’ progress; and, be 
a leader within Canada to advance climate solutions through 
thought leadership and policy for change and active partnerships 
across public and private sectors, technology experts and 
Indigenous leadership.
We have committed $500 billion in sustainable financing by 2025 
and are well on our way to meeting this commitment. Through a 
wide range of products, services and advice, we will continue to 
help our personal, commercial and institutional clients across all 
sectors and regions where we operate, establish and accelerate 
their climate plans, achieve their goals and adapt to net-zero. 
How we collectively make the transition is just as important as 
the destination itself. Getting this transition right will not be easy, 
but we must move forward together with a sense of urgency and 
thoughtful action.
RBC is well-positioned to build on our Purpose 
and performance
RBC enters 2022 with market-leading client franchises in our core 
businesses and key markets. A world-renowned brand, an engaged 
workforce, and a culture recognized for elevating the performance 
of our people. And our financial discipline, risk management culture 
and robust capital position provides the foundation to deliver 
sustainable growth for the long-term. 
We will continue to align our Purpose with performance to grow 
RBC in a more inclusive, sustainable world, and create value for 
all of our stakeholders – clients, employees, communities, and 
shareholders.
As we move forward, we will continue to leverage the size and 
strength of our balance sheet to support our clients. And we believe 
that our “bionic” blend of great people and technology will remain 
a key success factor, creating differentiated offerings and solutions 
that attract new clients and deepen existing relationships. 
We will continue to prioritize a disciplined focus on expense 
management to remain financially and strategically flexible. We will 
also continue to prioritize investments to accelerate growth, and 
sustain leadership in areas of strategic focus. By doing so, we can 
find new and engaging ways to fulfill our Purpose.
Our continued momentum is the result of our tremendous 
employees, and the oversight and counsel of our Board. I am so 
thankful for everything they do.

David McKay
President and Chief Executive Officer
Accelerating growth in the U.S.
Looking forward, we’re well 
positioned to accelerate growth 
by deepening relationships in our 
core franchises to deliver our full 
expertise to all our clients.
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
 11

In a year largely defined by the ongoing uncertainty of the global 
pandemic, RBC’s performance revealed its core strengths and 
competitive advantages. 
A mix of industry-leading franchises, diversified across business 
segments and geographies, generated earnings of $16.1 billion 
for fiscal 2021. The bank’s financial discipline, risk management 
culture as well as robust capital position provided a solid 
foundation for growth today and into the future. RBC’s talented 
team of more than 87,000 people around the world — inspired 
by Purpose, guided by values and empowered by technology — 
created the differentiated client experiences that the bank is 
known for. Their efforts also helped to fulfill the promises RBC 
makes in the communities in which it serves. 
Providing this kind of certainty to all of our stakeholders, especially 
in a time of great change and disruption, reinforced the trust and 
confidence our stakeholders have in the bank.
Indeed, over the past year RBC employees could count on the 
bank’s unwavering commitment to prioritize their safety, health 
and well-being, and to sustain a work environment that empowers 
people to be their best. Millions of clients also relied on RBC to 
place their wants and needs at the centre of everything we do, and 
to find new ways to create value for them. Indeed, as Dave McKay 
points out in his letter, in a year of uncertain and rapidly evolving 
circumstances, client activity levels were strong and demand high 
across business lines, reflecting the trust they placed in RBC in 2021. 
And, at the same time thousands of communities looked to RBC to 
help create a more inclusive, sustainable and prosperous future. 
We are especially proud of the bank’s conscious choice to lead 
on issues that matter most to those we serve. In particular, 
Dave McKay has been a catalyst for important policy discussions 
on re-imagining the post-pandemic economy, a vocal advocate for 
small- and medium-sized businesses, and a strong promoter of an 
orderly transition to a net-zero world.
In combination, these commitments help explain why the bank’s 
engaged workforce continued to earn high satisfaction levels with 
clients, deliver market-leading results in business volume and 
market share growth, and build momentum in areas of strategic 
importance, including in the United States. These efforts have also 
driven superior shareholder returns. Indeed, over three- and five- 
year periods, the bank’s Total Shareholder Return has outperformed 
its global peers.
For the Board, the vast majority of our work was still done remotely 
in 2021, as we stayed agile to support management in the first 
full year of the pandemic. But importantly, we never lost sight of 
our agenda and core responsibilities to ensure RBC has the right 
strategy and execution, talent and risk management to deliver value 
in the near- and longer-term. 
We engaged with management on all businesses and, in some 
cases, subset of businesses to ensure plans were carefully 
developed. The bank’s approach to its climate action plan was an 
important area of focus in 2021. This included evaluating the bank’s 
strategy and ensuring its clarity and viability. It also included an 
assessment of the measurement and milestones necessary to 
gauge meaningful progress in the years ahead. In aligning the 
net-zero ambitions of the bank with the needs of society, we are 
collectively in a better position to serve the broader goal of an 
orderly — and inclusive — transition to a cleaner economy. To this 
end, the central tenets of our plan are designed to support clients in 
their own net-zero journey, be publicly accountable for our actions, 
including financed emissions, and contribute ideas on how we can 
move forward together in a coordinated way. 
MESSAGE FROM KATIE TAYLOR
The Board continued its work on succession planning for senior 
management. Directors regularly engaged with senior managers to 
maintain our connection with high-potential leaders, either through 
special Board presentations or dedicated sessions. Last year, we 
also focused on the orderly transition of the bank’s new Chief 
Financial Officer, the assumption of responsibilities for RBC Ventures 
by the Group Head, Personal & Commercial Banking, as well as the 
appointment of a Chief Legal Officer, reporting to our CEO. These 
changes build strength and capacity in our senior executive team 
while reinforcing the bank’s ongoing efforts to enhance its diversity. 
On matters related to diversity and inclusion, the symmetry between 
management and the Board is paramount, as it helps create a holistic 
approach to advance the bank’s goals. In 2021, the appointment 
of Roberta Jamieson to our Board underscores the inherent value 
in bringing more voices from different backgrounds to our table. 
Heading into 2022, I am proud to say 46% of Board members are 
women, and 23% are Black, Indigenous and People of Colour. 
Promoting strong risk conduct and embedding a risk management 
culture throughout RBC are also key priorities for the Board. In 
2021, the Board carefully assessed whether management’s plans 
appropriately balance strategic opportunities with risk discipline 
and we continued to provide oversight on key regulatory matters 
where RBC operates. The overall strength of our portfolios speak to 
the soundness of our risk strategy and execution. 
An array of awards and accolades highlight the success of the bank’s 
efforts last year, some of which are cited in the preceding pages. I 
am most proud of what these recognitions say about how the bank’s 
highly engaged teams make meaning of RBC’s Purpose every day. 
Our gratitude goes out to each and every employee, especially 
those on the frontlines, who never lost focus on serving others, 
even as the global pandemic continued to pose risks to them and 
their communities. Indeed, the collective actions reveal the kind of 
organization RBC is and aspires to be – ever-present, empathic and 
responsive to help our clients thrive and communities prosper. I join 
Dave in saying the collective response of RBC employees was my 
greatest point of pride in 2021.
I also want to express my gratitude to each RBC Director for their 
invaluable insight and counsel, and acknowledge the important 
contributions of Alice Laberge, Michael McCain and Heather 
Munroe-Blum, who retired from our Board in 2021.
On behalf of the RBC Board, I also want to convey our confidence 
in, and support for, Dave McKay and his executive team. In 2021, 
their leadership reinforced the considerable strengths RBC 
possesses to create value for its clients, employees, communities, 
and shareholders as the bank brings its Purpose to life in everything 
it does.
Kathleen Taylor
Chair of the Board
Kathleen Taylor
Chair of the Board
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
12

 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) is provided to enable a reader to assess our results of operations and financial condition for the fiscal 
year ended October 31, 2021, compared to the preceding fiscal year. This MD&A should be read in conjunction with our 2021 Annual Consolidated 
Financial Statements and related notes and is dated November 30, 2021. All amounts are in Canadian dollars, unless otherwise specified, and are based 
on financial statements presented in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as issued by the International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB), unless otherwise noted. 
Additional information about us, including our 2021 Annual Information Form, is available free of charge on our website at rbc.com/investorrelations, on 
the Canadian Securities Administrators’ website at sedar.com and on the EDGAR section of the United States (U.S.) Securities and Exchange 
Commission’s (SEC) website at sec.gov. 
Information contained in or otherwise accessible through the websites mentioned herein does not form part of this report. All references in this report to 
websites are inactive textual references and are for your information only. 
Table of contents 
Caution regarding forward-looking 
statements 
13 
Overview and outlook 
14 
Selected financial and other highlights 14 
About Royal Bank of Canada 
15 
Vision and strategic goals 
15 
Economic, market and regulatory 
review and outlook 
15 
Defining and measuring success 
through total shareholder returns 
16 
Impact of COVID-19 pandemic 
17 
Financial performance 
20 
Overview 
20 
Impact of foreign currency translation 20 
Total revenue 
21 
Provision for credit losses 
22 
Insurance policyholder benefits, claims 
and acquisition expense 
22 
Non-interest expense 
22 
Income and other taxes 
23 
Client assets 
23 
Business segment results 
24 
Results by business segment 
24 
How we measure and report our 
business segments 
25 
Key performance and non-GAAP 
measures 
26 
Personal & Commercial Banking 
27 
Wealth Management 
32 
Insurance 
38 
Investor & Treasury Services 
41 
Capital Markets 
43 
Corporate Support 
47 
Quarterly financial information 
47 
Fourth quarter performance 
47 
Quarterly results and trend analysis 
48 
Financial condition 
49 
Condensed balance sheets 
49 
Off-balance sheet arrangements 
50 
Risk management 
52 
Top and emerging risks 
52 
Overview 
55 
Enterprise risk management 
56 
Transactional/positional risk drivers 
60 
Credit risk 
60 
Market risk 
72 
Liquidity and funding risk 
78 
Insurance risk 
91 
Operational/regulatory compliance 
risk drivers 
91 
Operational risk 
91 
Regulatory compliance risk 
93 
Strategic risk drivers 
93 
Strategic risk 
93 
Reputation risk 
93 
Legal and regulatory environment risk 94 
Competitive risk 
95 
Macroeconomic risk drivers 
96 
Systemic risk 
96 
Overview of other risks 
96 
Capital management 
100 
Accounting and control matters 
109 
Critical accounting policies and 
estimates 
109 
Controls and procedures 
112 
Related party transactions 
113 
Supplementary information 
113 
Glossary 
121 
Enhanced Disclosure Task Force 
recommendations index 
123 
Caution regarding forward-looking statements 
From time to time, we make written or oral forward-looking statements within the meaning of certain securities laws, including the “safe harbour” provisions 
of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and any applicable Canadian securities legislation. We may make forward-looking 
statements in this 2021 Annual Report, in other filings with Canadian regulators or the SEC, in other reports to shareholders, and in other communications. 
Forward-looking statements in this document include, but are not limited to, statements relating to our financial performance objectives, vision and strategic 
goals, climate related goals, the Economic, market, and regulatory review and outlook for Canadian, U.S., European and global economies, the regulatory 
environment in which we operate, the Strategic priorities and Outlook sections for each of our business segments, the risk environment including our credit 
risk, market risk, liquidity and funding risk, and the potential continued impacts of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic on our business operations, 
financial results, condition and objectives and on the global economy and financial market conditions and includes our President and Chief Executive 
Officer’s statements. The forward-looking information contained in this document is presented for the purpose of assisting the holders of our securities and 
financial analysts in understanding our financial position and results of operations as at and for the periods ended on the dates presented, as well as our 
financial performance objectives, vision and strategic goals, and may not be appropriate for other purposes. Forward-looking statements are typically 
identified by words such as “believe”, “expect”, “foresee”, “forecast”, “anticipate”, “intend”, “estimate”, “goal”, “plan” and “project” and similar expressions of 
future or conditional verbs such as “will”, “may”, “should”, “could” or “would”. 
By their very nature, forward-looking statements require us to make assumptions and are subject to inherent risks and uncertainties, which give rise to 
the possibility that our predictions, forecasts, projections, expectations or conclusions will not prove to be accurate, that our assumptions may not be 
correct and that our financial performance objectives, vision and strategic goals will not be achieved. We caution readers not to place undue reliance on 
these statements as a number of risk factors could cause our actual results to differ materially from the expectations expressed in such forward-looking 
statements. These factors – many of which are beyond our control and the effects of which can be difficult to predict – include: credit, market, liquidity and 
funding, insurance, operational, regulatory compliance (which could lead to us being subject to various legal and regulatory proceedings, the potential 
outcome of which could include regulatory restrictions, penalties and fines), strategic, reputation, competitive, legal and regulatory environment, and 
systemic risks and other risks discussed in the risk sections and Impact of COVID-19 pandemic section of this 2021 Annual Report including business and 
economic conditions, information technology and cyber risks, environmental and social risk (including climate change), digital disruption and innovation, 
Canadian housing and household indebtedness, geopolitical uncertainty, privacy, data and third-party related risks, regulatory changes, culture and 
conduct, the business and economic conditions in the geographic regions in which we operate, the effects of changes in government fiscal, monetary and 
other policies, tax risk and transparency, and the emergence of widespread health emergencies or public health crises such as pandemics and epidemics, 
including the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the global economy, financial market conditions and our business operations, and financial results, 
condition and objectives. In addition, as we work to advance our climate goals, external factors outside of RBC’s reasonable control may act as constraints 
on their achievement, including varying decarbonization efforts across economies, the need for thoughtful climate policies around the world, more and 
better data, reasonably supported methodologies, technological advancements, the evolution of consumer behaviour, the challenges of balancing interim 
emissions goals with an orderly and just transition, and other significant considerations such as legal and regulatory obligations. 
We caution that the foregoing list of risk factors is not exhaustive and other factors could also adversely affect our results. When relying on our forward-
looking statements to make decisions with respect to us, investors and others should carefully consider the foregoing factors and other uncertainties and 
potential events. Material economic assumptions underlying the forward-looking statements contained in this 2021 Annual Report are set out in the Economic, 
market and regulatory review and outlook section and for each business segment under the Strategic priorities and Outlook headings. Except as required by 
law, we do not undertake to update any forward-looking statement, whether written or oral, that may be made from time to time by us or on our behalf. 
Additional information about these and other factors can be found in the risk sections and Impact of COVID-19 pandemic section of this 2021 Annual 
Report. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
13 
 

Overview and outlook 
Selected financial and other highlights
 
 
 
 
Table 1  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except per share, number of and percentage amounts)  
2021 
2020 
2021 vs. 2020 
Increase (decrease) 
Total revenue 
$
49,693 $
47,181 $
2,512 
5.3% 
Provision for credit losses (PCL) 
(753) 
4,351 
(5,104) 
(117.3)% 
Insurance policyholder benefits, claims and acquisition expense (PBCAE) 
3,891 
3,683 
208 
5.6% 
Non-interest expense 
25,924 
24,758 
1,166 
4.7% 
Income before income taxes 
20,631 
14,389 
6,242 
43.4% 
Net income 
$
16,050 $
11,437 $
4,613 
40.3% 
Segments – net income 
 
 
 
 
Personal & Commercial Banking 
$
7,847 $
5,087 $
2,760 
54.3% 
Wealth Management (1) 
2,626 
2,154 
472 
21.9% 
Insurance 
889 
831 
58 
7.0% 
Investor & Treasury Services 
440 
536 
(96) 
(17.9)% 
Capital Markets 
4,187 
2,776 
1,411 
50.8% 
Corporate Support (1) 
61 
53 
8 
n.m. 
Net income 
$
16,050 $
11,437 $
4,613 
40.3% 
Selected information 
 
 
 
 
Earnings per share (EPS) – basic 
$
11.08 $
7.84 $
3.24 
41.3% 
– diluted 
11.06 
7.82 
3.24 
41.4% 
Return on common equity (ROE) (2) 
18.6% 
14.2% 
n.m. 
440 bps 
Average common equity (2) 
$
84,850 $
78,800 $
6,050 
7.7% 
Net interest margin (NIM) – on average earning assets, net (3) 
1.48% 
1.55% 
n.m. 
(7) bps 
PCL on loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances 
(0.10)% 
0.63% 
n.m. 
(73) bps 
PCL on performing loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances 
(0.20)% 
0.39% 
n.m. 
(59) bps 
PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances 
0.10% 
0.24% 
n.m. 
(14) bps 
Gross impaired loans (GIL) as a % of loans and acceptances 
0.31% 
0.47% 
n.m. 
(16) bps 
Liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) (4) 
123% 
145% 
n.m. 
(2200) bps 
Net stable funding ratio (NSFR) (5) 
116% 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
Capital ratios and Leverage ratio (6) 
 
 
 
 
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio 
13.7% 
12.5% 
n.m. 
120 bps 
Tier 1 capital ratio 
14.9% 
13.5% 
n.m. 
140 bps 
Total capital ratio 
16.7% 
15.5% 
n.m. 
120 bps 
Leverage ratio 
4.9% 
4.8% 
n.m. 
10 bps 
Selected balance sheet and other information (7) 
 
 
 
 
Total assets 
$ 1,706,323 $
1,624,548 $
81,775 
5.0% 
Securities, net of applicable allowance 
284,724 
275,814 
8,910 
3.2% 
Loans, net of allowance for loan losses 
717,575 
660,992 
56,583 
8.6% 
Derivative related assets 
95,541 
113,488 
(17,947) 
(15.8)% 
Deposits 
1,100,831 
1,011,885 
88,946 
8.8% 
Common equity 
91,983 
80,719 
11,264 
14.0% 
Total risk-weighted assets 
552,541 
546,242 
6,299 
1.2% 
Assets under management (AUM) (3) 
1,008,700 
843,600 
165,100 
19.6% 
Assets under administration (AUA) (3), (8) 
6,347,300 
5,891,200 
456,100 
7.7% 
Common share information 
 
 
 
 
Shares outstanding (000s) – average basic 
1,424,343 
1,423,915 
428 
0.0% 
– average diluted 
1,426,735 
1,428,770 
(2,035) 
(0.1)% 
– end of period 
1,424,525 
1,422,473 
2,052 
0.1% 
Dividends declared per common share 
$
4.32 $
4.29 $
0.03 
0.7% 
Dividend yield (3) 
3.8% 
4.7% 
n.m. 
(90) bps 
Dividend payout ratio (3) 
39% 
55% 
n.m. 
(1600) bps 
Common share price (RY on TSX) (9) 
$
128.82 $
93.16 $
35.66 
38.3% 
Market capitalization (TSX) (9) 
183,507 
132,518 
50,989 
38.5% 
Business information (number of) 
 
 
 
 
Employees (full-time equivalent) (FTE) 
85,301 
83,842 
1,459 
1.7% 
Bank branches 
1,295 
1,329 
(34) 
(2.6)% 
Automated teller machines (ATMs) 
4,378 
4,557 
(179) 
(3.9)% 
Period average US$ equivalent of C$1.00 (10) 
$
0.796 $
0.744 $
0.052 
7.0% 
Period-end US$ equivalent of C$1.00 
$
0.808 $
0.751 $
0.057 
7.5% 
(1) 
Effective Q4 2021, gains (losses) on economic hedges of our U.S. share-based compensation plans, which are reflected in revenue, and related variability in share-based 
compensation expense driven by changes in the fair value of liabilities relating to our U.S. share-based compensation plans have been reclassified from our Wealth 
Management segment to Corporate Support. Comparative amounts have been reclassified to conform with this presentation. 
(2) 
Average amounts are calculated using methods intended to approximate the average of the daily balances for the period. This includes average common equity used in 
the calculation of ROE. For further details, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures section. 
(3) 
See Glossary for composition of this measure. 
(4) 
LCR is the average for the three months ended for each respective period and is calculated in accordance with the Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions’ 
(OSFI) Liquidity Adequacy Requirements (LAR) guidance. For further details, refer to the Liquidity and funding risk section. 
(5) 
Beginning in Q1 2021, OSFI requires Canadian Domestic Systemically Important Banks (D-SIBs) to disclose the NSFR on a prospective basis. The NSFR is calculated in 
accordance with OSFI’s Liquidity Adequacy Requirements (LAR) guideline. For further details, refer to the Liquidity and funding risk section. 
(6) 
Capital ratios are calculated using OSFI’s Capital Adequacy Requirements (CAR) guideline and the Leverage ratio is calculated using OSFI’s Leverage Requirements (LR) 
guideline. 
(7) 
Represents year-end spot balances. 
(8) 
AUA includes $15 billion and $3 billion (2020 – $16 billion and $7 billion) of securitized residential mortgages and credit card loans, respectively. 
(9) 
Based on TSX closing market price at period-end. 
(10) 
Average amounts are calculated using month-end spot rates for the period. 
n.a. 
not applicable 
n.m. not meaningful 
14
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

About Royal Bank of Canada 
Royal Bank of Canada is a global financial institution with a purpose-driven, principles-led approach to delivering leading 
performance. Our success comes from the 87,000+ employees who leverage their imaginations and insights to bring our vision, 
values and strategy to life so we can help our clients thrive and communities prosper. As Canada’s biggest bank, and one of the 
largest in the world based on market capitalization, we have a diversified business model with a focus on innovation and 
providing exceptional experiences to our 17 million clients in Canada, the U.S. and 27 other countries. Learn more at rbc.com. 
Our business segments are described below. 
Personal & 
Commercial Banking 
Provides a broad suite of financial products and services in Canada, the Caribbean and the U.S. 
Our commitment to building and maintaining deep and meaningful relationships with our clients 
is underscored by the breadth of our product suite, our depth of expertise, and the features of our 
digital solutions. 
 
 
Wealth 
Management 
Serves affluent, high net worth (HNW) and ultra-high net worth (UHNW) clients from our offices in 
key financial centres mainly in Canada, the U.S., the United Kingdom (U.K.), Europe, and Asia. We 
offer a comprehensive suite of investment, trust, banking, credit and other advice-based 
solutions. We also provide asset management products to institutional and individual clients 
through our distribution channels and third-party distributors. 
 
 
Insurance 
Offers a wide range of life, health, home, auto, travel, wealth, annuities, reinsurance advice and 
solutions, as well as business insurance solutions, to individual, business and group clients. 
 
 
Investor & Treasury 
Services 
Provides asset servicing, custody, payments and treasury services to financial and other 
investors worldwide. Trusted with over $4 trillion in assets under administration, and with offices 
in 16 countries in North America, Europe, the U.K., and Asia-Pacific, our focus is on safeguarding 
client assets and simplifying our clients’ operations in support of their growth. 
 
 
Capital Markets 
Provides expertise in advisory & origination, sales & trading, and lending & financing to 
corporations, institutional investors, asset managers, private equity firms and governments 
globally. We serve clients from 58 offices in 14 countries across North America, the U.K. & Europe, 
and Australia, Asia & other regions. 
 
 
Corporate Support 
Corporate Support consists of Technology & Operations, which provides the technological and 
operational foundation required to effectively deliver products and services to our clients, 
Functions, which includes our finance, human resources, risk management, internal audit and 
other functional groups, as well as our Corporate Treasury function. 
Vision and strategic goals 
Our business strategies and actions are guided by our vision, “To be among the world’s most trusted and successful financial 
institutions.” Our three strategic goals are: 
•
In Canada, to be the undisputed leader in financial services; 
•
In the U.S., to be the preferred partner to corporate, institutional and high net worth clients and their businesses; and 
•
In select global financial centres, to be a leading financial services partner valued for our expertise. 
For our progress in 2021 against our business strategies and strategic goals, refer to the Business segment results section. 
Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook – data as at November 30, 2021 
The predictions and forecasts in this section are based on information and assumptions from sources we consider reliable. If this 
information or these assumptions are not accurate, actual economic outcomes may differ materially from the outlook presented 
in this section. 
Economic and market review and outlook 
While the global economic recovery has continued, momentum has waned amid ongoing uncertainty regarding the extent and 
duration of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Reopening of economies and the significant fiscal and monetary policy 
stimulus put in place to support the recovery are contributing to stronger GDP growth and improved labour market conditions 
globally, though this remains uneven. Although increasing vaccination rates are expected to support a continued economic 
recovery, exceptional government support programs have begun to wind down, and uncertainty remains regarding the emergence 
and progression of new variants of COVID-19 and the potential impact of vaccine hesitancy. Supply chain disruptions, rising 
business input costs, and labour shortages are also limiting the pace of further improvement, particularly in goods-producing 
industries, and adding to rising inflation concerns. 
Canada 
Canadian GDP is expected to increase by 5.1% in calendar 2021 following a 5.2% contraction in calendar 2020. Activity in high-
contact service sectors like restaurants and accommodations improved over the summer as provincial economies reopened, 
although travel-related industries remain depressed relative to pre-pandemic levels. Output on the goods-producing side of the 
economy is being constrained by ongoing supply chain disruptions. Consumer price growth has accelerated as the economy 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
15 
 

reopened, and higher business input costs driven by rising demand and supply chain disruptions are threatening further 
increases at above pre-pandemic rates through calendar 2022. Although the unemployment rate remained above pre-pandemic 
levels at 6.7% in October, labour markets have improved substantially since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and are expected 
to continue to improve into 2022. While government support programs have begun to wind down, household purchasing power 
continues to be supported by large amounts of savings. An improved economic growth backdrop and above-target inflation rates 
are expected to prompt the Bank of Canada (BoC) to begin raising interest rates in calendar 2022. GDP is expected to increase a 
further 4.3% in calendar 2022. Despite substantial improvement to date, the economy has yet to fully recover from the impacts of 
the pandemic, particularly in the high-contact and travel service sectors. 
U.S. 
U.S. GDP is expected to increase 5.5% in calendar 2021 after a 3.4% contraction in calendar 2020. The pace of the economic 
recovery slowed over the summer amid ongoing supply chain disruptions and the continued spread of COVID-19 in some regions. 
While employment remains well below pre-pandemic levels, labour markets have continued to improve with the unemployment 
rate declining to 4.6% in October, down from 6.9% a year earlier. Consumer spending on goods has declined from elevated levels 
in the spring of 2021 but spending on services has increased as spending rotates away from merchandise and back to leisure and 
hospitality services that have been in many cases unavailable through the pandemic. Households have accumulated substantial 
savings, in part due to exceptional government income transfers, to support a further recovery in spending as the virus threat 
continues to ease. Consumer prices have increased sharply as the economy has re-opened. Higher business input costs and 
expected further growth in household demand are increasing the risk that inflation growth will persist at rates above pre-
pandemic levels for longer than expected. The Federal Reserve (Fed) has committed to maintaining extraordinary policy support 
until the economic slack is fully absorbed and the labour market has recovered. The Fed is expected to begin the process of 
raising interest rates in calendar 2022. 
Europe 
Euro area GDP is expected to rise by 5.2% in calendar 2021 following a 6.5% drop in calendar 2020, amid lifting of most 
containment measures across member states. Similarly, U.K. GDP is projected to rise by 7.1% in calendar 2021 after a larger 9.7% 
decline in 2020. Labour market conditions also improved throughout the year, both in the U.K. and Euro area. While labour 
shortages and supply chain challenges continue to curtail businesses’ abilities to increase production to meet rising demand, 
leading to inflation concerns, a further economic rebound in both the Euro area and the U.K. is expected in calendar 2022, though 
likely at a slower pace relative to 2021 in light of these challenges. In the U.K., the Bank of England is expected to begin raising 
interest rates before the end of calendar 2021, while the European Central Bank (ECB) is expected to hold policy rates through 
calendar 2022. 
Financial markets 
Government bond yields remain low but have risen in the latter half of calendar 2021 as the global economic recovery has 
continued and inflation rates have risen. Equity markets have broadly continued to improve, supported by the positive economic 
outlook, and prices for some raw materials, including crude oil, have increased to well above pre-pandemic levels reflecting 
limited supply and rising demand as the virus threat eases globally. 
Regulatory environment 
We continue to monitor and prepare for regulatory developments and changes in a manner that seeks to ensure compliance with 
new requirements, while mitigating adverse business or financial impacts. Such impacts could result from new or amended laws 
or regulations and the expectations of those who enforce them. A high level summary of the key regulatory changes that have the 
potential to increase or decrease our costs and the complexity of our operations is included in the Legal and regulatory 
environment risk section of this 2021 Annual Report. A summary of the additional regulatory changes instituted by governments 
globally and by OSFI in response to the COVID-19 pandemic are included in the Impact of COVID-19 pandemic and Capital 
management sections of this 2021 Annual Report. 
For a discussion on risk factors resulting from these and other developments which may affect our business and financial 
results, refer to the risk sections of this 2021 Annual Report. For further details on our framework and activities to manage risks, 
refer to the Impact of COVID-19 pandemic, risk and Capital management sections of this 2021 Annual Report. 
Defining and measuring success through total shareholder returns 
Our focus is to maximize total shareholder returns (TSR) through the achievement of top half performance compared to our 
global peer group over the medium-term (3-5 years), which we believe reflects a longer-term view of strong and consistent 
financial performance. 
Maximizing TSR is aligned with our three strategic goals discussed earlier and we believe represents the most appropriate 
measure of shareholder value creation. TSR is a concept used to compare the performance of our common shares over a period 
of time, reflecting share price appreciation and dividends paid to common shareholders. The absolute size of TSR will vary 
depending on market conditions, and the bank’s position reflects the market’s perception over a period of time of our overall 
performance relative to our peers. 
Financial performance objectives are used to measure our performance against our medium-term TSR objectives and are 
used as goals as we execute against our strategic priorities. We review and revise these financial performance objectives as 
economic, market and regulatory environments change. 
16
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

The following table provides a summary of our 3-year and 5-year performance against our medium-term financial 
performance objectives: 
Financial performance compared to our medium-term objectives 
Table 2  
Medium-term objectives (1) 
 3-year (2) 
5-year (2) 
Diluted EPS growth of 7% + 
 
10% 
10% 
ROE of 16% + 
 
16.5% 
16.8% 
Strong capital ratio (CET1) (3) 
 
12.8% 
12.1% 
Dividend payout ratio 40% – 50% 
 
47% 
46% 
(1) 
A medium-term (3-5 year) objective is considered to be achieved when the performance goal is met in either a 3- or 5-year period. These objectives assume a normal 
business environment and our ability to achieve them in a period may be adversely affected by extraordinary developments such as the COVID-19 pandemic and the 
current low interest rate environment. 
(2) 
Diluted EPS growth is calculated using a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR). ROE, CET1 and dividend payout ratio are calculated using an average. 
(3) 
For further details on the CET1 ratio, refer to the Capital management section. 
Our 3-year and 5-year medium-term financial performance objectives will remain unchanged in fiscal 2022. 
We compare our TSR to that of a global peer group approved by our Board of Directors (the Board). The global peer group 
consists of the following 9 financial institutions: 
•
Canadian financial institutions: Bank of Montreal, Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, Manulife Financial Corporation, 
National Bank of Canada, The Bank of Nova Scotia, and Toronto-Dominion Bank. 
•
U.S. banks: JPMorgan Chase & Co. and Wells Fargo & Company. 
•
International banks: Westpac Banking Corporation. 
Medium-term objectives – 3- and 5-year TSR vs. peer group average  
Table 3  
 
3-year TSR (1) 
5-year TSR (1) 
Royal Bank of Canada 
16% 
13% 
 
Top half 
Top half 
Peer group average (excluding RBC) 
14% 
12% 
(1) 
The 3- and 5-year annualized TSR are calculated based on our common share price appreciation as per the TSX closing market price plus reinvested dividends for the 
period October 31, 2018 to October 31, 2021 and October 31, 2016 to October 31, 2021. 
Common share and dividend information 
Table 4  
For the year ended October 31 
2021 
2020 
2019 
2018 
2017 
Common share price (RY on TSX) – close, end of period 
$
128.82 
$
93.16 
$
106.24 
$
95.92 
$
100.87 
Dividends paid per share 
4.32 
4.26 
4.00 
3.70 
3.40 
Increase (decrease) in share price 
38.3% 
(12.3)% 
10.8% 
(4.9)% 
20.4% 
Total shareholder return 
43.8% 
(8.4)% 
15.2% 
(1.0)% 
25.0% 
Impact of COVID-19 pandemic 
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a strain of novel coronavirus disease, COVID-19, a 
global pandemic. The breadth and depth of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy and financial markets 
has continued to evolve with disruptive effects in countries in which we operate and beyond, while also contributing to increased 
market volatility and changes to the macroeconomic environment. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has continued to affect 
our employees, clients and communities, with resultant impacts on our operations, financial results and present and future risks 
to our business. 
Measures to contain the spread of COVID-19, including business closures, social distancing protocols, travel restrictions, 
school closures, quarantines, and restrictions on gatherings and events, have been widespread. These measures have had and 
continue to have extensive implications for the global economy, including the pace and magnitude of recovery, as well as on 
related market functions, unemployment rates, inflation, fiscal and monetary policies and supply chains. As the COVID-19 
pandemic evolves, including through the emergence and progression of new variants of COVID-19 in different regions, 
governments continue to adjust their response and approach to the pandemic. While rising vaccination rates have supported a 
substantial or full easing of containment measures in some regions, progress towards re-opening has been accompanied by 
resurgences in the spread of COVID-19 and the re-imposition of restrictions in other regions. Consequently, the extent of 
containment measures and progress towards reopening continues to vary and fluctuate across regions. Despite positive 
developments, uncertainty remains regarding new variants of COVID-19, the potential impact of vaccine hesitancy, and global 
vaccine supply and availability, including uneven vaccine access across regions. All of these factors contribute to the uncertainty 
regarding the timing of a full recovery. Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic, the containment measures and the phased reopening 
approach taken in many regions could have longer-term effects on economic and commercial activity and consumer behaviour 
after the COVID-19 pandemic recedes and containment measures are fully lifted. In conjunction with the COVID-19 pandemic 
containment measures, governments, regulatory bodies, central banks and private organizations around the globe have 
provided and continue to provide unprecedented relief programs and temporary measures to facilitate the continued operation 
of the global economy and financial system, all of which are intended to provide support to individuals and businesses. While 
some programs and temporary measures have come to an end, others remain in place or have continued to be developed in an 
effort to support the overall economy. We expect that governments, regulatory bodies, central banks and private organizations 
will continue to assess the need for these programs and measures. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
17 
 

For further details on these measures and their impact on us, refer to Impact of pandemic risk factor and Relief program 
sections outlined below as well as the risk and Capital management sections of this 2021 Annual Report. 
In addition to the broad impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees, clients, communities and operations, the 
COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and may continue to impact our financial results. Results across all of our business segments 
have been and continue to be impacted to varying degrees by downstream implications from changes in the macroeconomic 
environment, including lower interest rates, changes in consumer spending patterns, market volatility, fluctuations in credit 
spreads, as well as other impacts including changes in credit risk, increased client-driven volumes and changes in operating 
costs. Notwithstanding these challenges, our financial results and condition amid these challenges demonstrate the resilience of 
our capital and liquidity positions, which have been bolstered by our position of strength at the time of entering this crisis and 
throughout fiscal 2020 and 2021. 
We are closely monitoring the potential effects and impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Given the uncertainty of the extent 
and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impacts on the economy and society as a whole, as well as the timeline of the 
transition to a fully reopened economy, the future impact on our businesses and our financial results and condition remains 
uncertain. 
Impact of pandemic risk factor 
Pandemics, epidemics or outbreaks of an infectious disease in Canada or worldwide could have an adverse impact on our 
business, including changes to the way we operate, and on our financial results and condition. The spread of the COVID-19 
pandemic, given its severity and scale, has affected and may continue to adversely affect our business and our clients to varying 
degrees, and also continues to pose risks to the global economy. At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, governments and 
regulatory bodies in affected areas imposed a number of measures designed to contain the COVID-19 pandemic, including 
widespread business closures, social distancing protocols, travel restrictions, school closures, quarantines, and restrictions on 
gatherings and events. While rising vaccination rates have supported a substantial or full easing of containment measures in a 
number of regions, the extent of containment measures and progress towards reopening continues to vary and fluctuate across 
different regions. As a result, containment measures continue to impact the macroeconomic environment and global economic 
activity, including the pace and magnitude of recovery. As the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to evolve, the 
prolonged effects of the disruption continue to have an impact on our business strategies and initiatives, and could adversely 
affect our financial results. 
Governments, monetary authorities, regulators and financial institutions, including us, have taken and continue to take 
actions in support of the economy and financial system. These actions include fiscal, monetary and other financial measures to 
increase liquidity, and provide financial aid to individual, small business, commercial and corporate clients. We expect that these 
governments, monetary authorities, regulators, and institutions will continue to assess the need for these programs and measures. 
Additionally, we implemented various temporary relief programs beyond the available government programs to further support 
our clients in financial need. Although the temporary relief programs have largely concluded, we have assessed and will continue 
to assess the needs of each individual client and continue to provide support to clients on a case by case basis. For more 
information on these programs, refer to the Relief programs, Liquidity and funding risk and Capital management sections. 
Uncertainty remains as to the full impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global economy, financial markets, and us, 
including on our financial results, regulatory capital and liquidity ratios and ability to meet regulatory and other requirements. 
The ultimate impacts will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the scope, 
severity, duration and additional subsequent waves of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the effectiveness of actions and 
measures taken by government, monetary and regulatory authorities and other third parties. Despite positive developments, 
uncertainty remains regarding new variants of COVID-19, the potential impact of vaccine hesitancy, and global vaccine supply 
and availability, including uneven vaccine access. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to result in disruptions to some of our clients and the way in which we conduct our 
business and could continue to adversely impact our business operations and the quality and continuity of service to clients. We 
have taken proactive measures through our business continuity plans to adapt to the ongoing work from home arrangements 
and carefully plan the return to premise for some of our employees, and are maintaining our focus on the well-being of our 
employees and our ability to serve clients.  
In addition to the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic has had and continues to have on our business, it may also continue to 
increase financial stress, possibly arising from support programs coming to an end, on some of our clients. This, in conjunction 
with operational constraints due to the impacts of social distancing, could lead to increased pressure on the financial 
performance of some of our clients, which, to some extent, creates uncertainty around potential future expected credit losses for 
us. 
If the COVID-19 pandemic is further prolonged, including the possibility of additional subsequent waves, or further diseases 
emerge that give rise to similar effects, the adverse impact on the economy could deepen and could potentially result in volatility 
and declines in financial markets. Moreover, it remains uncertain how the macroeconomic environment, and societal and 
business norms will be impacted following the COVID-19 pandemic. Unexpected developments in financial markets, regulatory 
environments, or consumer behaviour and confidence may also have adverse impacts on our financial results and condition, 
business operations and reputation, for a substantial period of time. 
We are closely monitoring the potential continued effects and impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, which continues to be an 
evolving situation. 
In virtually all aspects of our operations, our view of risks is not static as our business activities expose us to a wide variety of 
risks. Consistent with our Enterprise Risk Management Framework (ERMF), we actively manage our risks to help protect and 
enable our businesses. Additionally, we continue to evaluate the impacts that the COVID-19 pandemic has had and continues to 
have on our business, including the impact on our top and emerging risks, operational and reputational risks as well as credit, 
market and liquidity and funding risks. For further details on our Top and emerging and Operational risks, refer to the risk 
sections in this 2021 Annual Report. 
Relief programs 
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, several government programs have been developed to provide financial aid to individuals 
and businesses, which include wage replacement for individuals, wage subsidies and rent relief for businesses, and lending 
18
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

programs for businesses, which we are administering for our clients. To further support our clients in financial need, various 
temporary relief programs were launched beyond the available government programs. 
RBC relief programs 
During the second quarter of 2020, we announced the RBC Client Relief program which aimed to provide relief for clients 
impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. The RBC Client Relief program for the majority of our commercial and small business clients 
closed on June 30, 2020 and loan deferrals within the program closed for retail clients on September 30, 2020. Payment deferral 
periods for clients that participated in these programs largely concluded by the end of the second quarter of 2021, however we 
have assessed and will continue to assess the needs of each individual client and continue to provide support to clients on a 
case by case basis. 
Government programs in response to the COVID-19 pandemic 
Government of Canada 
Commencing in the second quarter of 2020, the Department of Finance Canada announced new programs and revisions to 
existing programs to help support the functioning of markets and finance businesses while ensuring the financial sector remains 
sound, well-capitalized and resilient, in light of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. To support businesses experiencing cash 
flow challenges during this unprecedented time, the Canadian Federal government established the following significant 
programs in which Canadian financial institutions are assisting with financial relief: 
•
The Canada Emergency Business Account (CEBA) – Under this program, Canadian banks were able to facilitate interest-free 
loans of up to $60,000 to existing eligible small business clients as a source of liquidity for immediate operating costs. The 
loans were funded by the Government of Canada, with the Canadian banks retaining no credit risk. The application window 
for the CEBA program closed on June 30, 2021. 
•
Export Development Canada (EDC) Business Credit Availability Program Guarantee – Under this program, Canadian banks 
are able to provide existing eligible mid-sized and large business clients, focused on both export oriented and domestic 
sales-based businesses, with loans of up to $6.25 million to support short-term liquidity needs. These loans must be used for 
certain operating costs and are 80% guaranteed by the EDC. On June 2, 2021, the EDC announced that the application 
deadline for this program has been extended to December 31, 2021. 
•
Business Development Canada (BDC) Co-Lending Program – Under this program, the BDC and Canadian banks jointly 
provide loans, which are funded based on an 80%/20% split, respectively, to eligible business clients of up to $6.25 million to 
meet their operational and liquidity needs. The maximum loan varies by the size of the business and may be structured with 
an interest-only payment obligation for the first year. On June 2, 2021, the BDC announced that the application deadline for 
this program has been extended to December 31, 2021. 
•
BDC Mid-Market Financing Program – Under this program, the BDC and Canadian banks provide loans, which are funded 
based on a 90%/10% split, respectively, to eligible mid-sized business clients ranging between $12.5 million and $60 million to 
meet their operational and liquidity needs. On June 2, 2021, the BDC announced that the application deadline for this 
program has been extended to December 31, 2021. 
•
EDC Mid-Market Guarantee and Financing Program – Under this program, Canadian banks are able to provide existing 
eligible mid-sized and large business clients, focused on both export oriented and domestic sales-based businesses, with 
loans ranging from $12.5 million to a maximum of $80 million for terms up to 5 years, to support their liquidity needs. These 
loans must be used for certain operating costs and are 75% guaranteed by the EDC. On June 2, 2021, the EDC announced that 
the application deadline for this program has been extended to December 31, 2021. 
•
On January 26, 2021, the Canadian Federal government announced the BDC Highly Affected Sectors Credit Availability 
Program (HASCAP). Under this program, Canadian banks are able to provide low-interest loans ranging from $25,000 to 
$1 million to businesses that have been heavily impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic to cover operational cash flow needs. 
Loans funded under this program are fully guaranteed by the BDC. The application deadline for this program has been 
extended from June 30, 2021 to December 31, 2021. 
As at October 31, 2021, we have facilitated the administration of relief to more than 203,100 clients (July 31, 2021 – 200,900) who 
have enrolled in the Canadian federal government programs, with corresponding exposures of $12 billion (July 31, 2021 – $12 
billion), of which $11 billion (July 31, 2021 – $11 billion) was funded. For further details, refer to Note 6 of our 2021 Annual 
Consolidated Financial Statements. 
U.S. Government 
In March 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act was signed into law, which is in addition to other 
programs that were enacted by the U.S. Federal Government. As part of the CARES Act, the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) 
offers small businesses with loans, guaranteed by the U.S. Federal Government, to support the payment of payroll costs, interest 
on mortgages, rent, and utilities. Through this program, we have provided loans directly to our clients based on their assessment 
of certain eligibility requirements and failure to meet these requirements will result in recourse actions for the borrower. In some 
cases, the U.S. Small Business Administration may forgive all or a portion of the loan. 
On June 5, 2020, the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act of 2020 (Flexibility Act) was signed into law, which amends 
the CARES Act and is intended to provide additional relief from the original terms of the PPP, including but not limited to, the 
extension of the period available for support payments from 8 to 24 weeks after PPP loan origination, the extension of the 
maturity of PPP loans granted from two to five years and the modification of eligibility requirements. Applications for the PPP 
closed on August 8, 2020. 
In January 2021, the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA), in consultation with the U.S. Treasury Department, pursuant to 
the “Economic Aid to Hard-Hit Small Businesses, Nonprofits, and Venues Act” (Economic Aid Act) relaunched the PPP, extending it 
through March 31, 2021, and announced a number of updates to the PPP for current and future loans. The expanded program 
includes new categories of eligible expenses, including operating expenditures, property damage costs, supplier costs and 
worker protection expenditures, in addition to payroll costs, utilities and mortgage interest. Borrowers are also provided with 
additional flexibility, including the ability to set their covered period for forgivable expenditures to be any length between 8 and 
24 weeks. Certain borrowers with existing PPP loans may qualify for a second draw loan and may be eligible for a supplemental 
increase to their first draw. On March 30, 2021, the “PPP Extension Act” was signed into law, extending the PPP for an additional 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
19 
 

two months to May 31, 2021, and providing an additional 30-day period for the SBA to process pending applications. The 
application window for the PPP closed on May 31, 2021. 
As at October 31, 2021, loans outstanding under the PPP were $2 billion (US$2 billion) (July 31, 2021 – $3 billion, (US$3 billion)) to 
10,441 clients (July 31, 2021 – 12,220 clients). 
Programs in support of liquidity and funding 
Commencing in the second quarter of 2020, governments and federal agencies expanded the eligibility criteria to existing funding 
programs and announced new programs to provide further liquidity to banks as well as providing additional sources to access 
funding to support clients during this time of uncertainty. The majority of these measures or programs have been discontinued or 
are winding down and we expect that governments and federal agencies will continue to assess the need for these programs as 
the global economy continues to recover from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
For further details on how we are managing our liquidity and funding profile, refer to the Liquidity and funding risk section of this 
2021 Annual Report. 
Financial performance 
Overview 
2021 vs. 2020 
Net income of $16,050 million increased $4,613 million or 40% from last year. Diluted EPS of $11.06 was up $3.24 or 41% and ROE of 
18.6% was up 440 bps. Our Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio was 13.7%, up 120 bps from last year. 
Our results reflected higher earnings in Personal & Commercial Banking, Capital Markets, Wealth Management, and 
Insurance, partially offset by lower earnings in Investor & Treasury Services. The prior year reflected elevated provisions on 
performing loans due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which unfavourably impacted results in Personal & Commercial 
Banking, Capital Markets and Wealth Management, whereas current year results reflect releases of provisions on performing 
loans primarily driven by improvements in our macroeconomic and credit quality outlook. 
For further details on our business segment results and CET1 ratio, refer to the Business segment results and Capital 
management sections, respectively. 
Impact of foreign currency translation 
The following table reflects the estimated impact of foreign currency translation on key income statement items: 
Table 5 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except per share amounts) 
2021 vs. 2020 
Increase (decrease): 
 
Total revenue 
$
(977) 
PCL 
28 
Non-interest expense 
(707) 
Income taxes 
(50) 
Net income 
(248) 
Impact on EPS 
 
Basic 
$
(0.17) 
Diluted 
(0.17) 
The relevant average exchange rates that impact our business are shown in the following table: 
Table 6  
(Average foreign currency equivalent of C$1.00) (1) 
2021 
2020 
U.S. dollar 
0.796 
0.744 
British pound 
0.579 
0.579 
Euro 
0.668 
0.658 
(1) 
Average amounts are calculated using month-end spot rates for the period. 
20
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Total revenue 
Table 7  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
2021 
2020 
Interest and dividend income 
$
28,145 
$
34,883 
Interest expense 
8,143 
14,048 
Net interest income 
$
20,002 
$
20,835 
NIM 
1.48% 
1.55% 
Insurance premiums, investment and fee income 
$
5,600 
$
5,361 
Trading revenue 
1,183 
1,239 
Investment management and custodial fees 
7,132 
6,101 
Mutual fund revenue 
4,251 
3,712 
Securities brokerage commissions 
1,538 
1,439 
Service charges 
1,858 
1,842 
Underwriting and other advisory fees 
2,692 
2,319 
Foreign exchange revenue, other than trading 
1,066 
1,012 
Card service revenue 
1,078 
969 
Credit fees 
1,530 
1,321 
Net gains on investment securities 
145 
90 
Share of profit in joint ventures and associates 
130 
77 
Other 
1,488 
864 
Non-interest income 
$
29,691 
$
26,346 
Total revenue 
$
49,693 
$
47,181 
2021 vs. 2020 
Total revenue increased $2,512 million or 5% from last year, largely due to higher investment management and custodial fees, 
other revenue, mutual fund revenue, and underwriting and other advisory fees. Higher insurance premiums, investment and fee 
income (Insurance revenue) and credit fees also contributed to the increase. These factors were partially offset by a decrease in 
net interest income. The impact of foreign exchange translation decreased total revenue by $977 million. 
Net interest income decreased $833 million or 4%, largely reflecting lower trading revenue in Capital Markets and the impact 
of foreign exchange translation. In Canadian Banking and U.S. Wealth Management (including City National), volume growth 
more than offset the impact of lower spreads. 
NIM was down 7 bps compared to last year, largely reflecting lower spreads in U.S. Wealth Management (including City 
National) driven by the impact of lower interest rates and changes in average earning assets mix, and lower spreads in Canadian 
Banking primarily due to the impact of lower interest rates and changes in product mix. 
Insurance revenue increased $239 million or 4%, mainly reflecting higher group annuity sales as well as business growth, 
both of which are largely offset in PBCAE. These factors were partially offset by the change in fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities and the impact of realized investment gains in the prior year. 
Investment management and custodial fees increased $1,031 million or 17%, primarily driven by higher average fee-based 
client assets reflecting market appreciation and net sales, partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Mutual fund revenue increased $539 million or 15%, primarily due to higher average fee-based client assets reflecting market 
appreciation and net sales in Wealth Management, and higher average mutual fund balances driving higher distribution fees in 
Canadian Banking. 
Underwriting and other advisory fees increased $373 million or 16%, mainly due to higher M&A activity and higher equity 
origination, across most regions. 
Credit fees increased $209 million or 16%, primarily driven by higher loan syndication activity across most regions. 
Other revenue increased $624 million or 72%, largely attributable to changes in the fair value of the hedges related to our 
U.S. share-based compensation plans, which was largely offset in Non-interest expense, and the impact of economic hedges. 
Additional trading information 
Table 8  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Net interest income (1) 
$
2,623 
$
3,459 
Non-interest income 
1,183 
1,239 
Total trading revenue 
$
3,806 
$
4,698 
Total trading revenue by product 
 
 
Interest rate and credit 
$
1,948 
$
2,838 
Equities 
1,285 
1,234 
Foreign exchange and commodities 
573 
626 
Total trading revenue 
$
3,806 
$
4,698 
(1) 
Reflects net interest income arising from trading-related positions, including assets and liabilities that are classified or 
designated at fair value through profit or loss (FVTPL). 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
21 
 

2021 vs. 2020 
Total trading revenue of $3,806 million, which is comprised of trading-related revenue recorded in Net interest income and 
Non-interest income, decreased $892 million or 19% from last year, mainly reflecting lower fixed income trading across all regions 
due to spread compression in repo and secured financing products and reduced client activity. 
Provision for credit losses 
2021 vs. 2020 
Total PCL decreased $5,104 million from last year, primarily reflecting elevated provisions on performing loans in the prior year 
due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and releases in the current year primarily driven by improvements in our 
macroeconomic and credit quality outlook. The PCL on loans ratio of (10) bps decreased 73 bps. 
For further details on PCL, refer to Credit quality performance in the Credit risk section. 
Insurance policyholder benefits, claims and acquisition expense (PBCAE) 
2021 vs. 2020 
PBCAE of $3,891 million increased $208 million or 6% from last year, mainly reflecting higher group annuity sales and business 
growth, both of which are largely offset in revenue. Lower favourable investment-related experience and a lower impact from 
reinsurance contract renegotiations also contributed to the increase. These factors were partially offset by the change in fair 
value of investments backing policyholder liabilities, favourable annual actuarial assumption updates in the current year largely 
related to mortality and economic assumptions, and lower claims costs mainly in our travel and disability products. 
Non-interest expense 
Table 9  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
2021 
2020 
Salaries 
$
6,724 
$
6,758 
Variable compensation 
7,145 
6,040 
Benefits and retention compensation 
2,053 
1,994 
Share-based compensation 
617 
460 
Human resources 
16,539 
15,252 
Equipment 
1,986 
1,907 
Occupancy 
1,584 
1,660 
Communications 
931 
989 
Professional fees 
1,351 
1,330 
Amortization of other intangibles 
1,287 
1,273 
Other 
2,246 
2,347 
Non-interest expense 
$
25,924 
$
24,758 
Efficiency ratio (1) 
52.2% 
52.5% 
Efficiency ratio adjusted (2) 
52.2% 
52.8% 
(1) 
Efficiency ratio is calculated as Non-interest expense divided by Total revenue. 
(2) 
This is a non-GAAP ratio. This measure has been adjusted by excluding the change in fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities from total revenue. For further details, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures 
section. 
2021 vs. 2020 
Non-interest expense increased $1,166 million or 5% from last year, primarily attributable to higher variable compensation on 
improved results. Higher staff-related costs and the change in the fair value of our U.S share-based compensation plans, which 
was largely offset in Other revenue, also contributed to the increase. These factors were partially offset by the impact of foreign 
exchange translation. 
Our efficiency ratio of 52.2% decreased 30 bps from last year. Excluding the change in fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities, our efficiency ratio of 52.2% decreased 60 bps from last year. 
Efficiency ratio excluding the change in fair value of investments backing policyholder liabilities is a non-GAAP ratio. For further 
details, including a reconciliation, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures section. 
22
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Income and other taxes 
Table 10  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
2021 
2020 
Income taxes 
$
4,581 
$
2,952 
Other taxes 
 
 
Value added and sales taxes 
443 
496 
Payroll taxes 
810 
771 
Capital taxes 
73 
52 
Property taxes 
140 
140 
Insurance premium taxes 
31 
29 
Business taxes 
39 
43 
 
1,536 
1,531 
Total income and other taxes 
$
6,117 
$
4,483 
Income before income taxes 
$
20,631 
$
14,389 
Effective income tax rate 
22.2% 
20.5% 
Effective total tax rate (1) 
27.6% 
28.2% 
(1) 
Total income and other taxes as a percentage of income before income taxes and other taxes. 
2021 vs. 2020 
Income tax expense increased $1,629 million or 55% from last year, primarily due to higher income before income taxes. 
The effective income tax rate of 22.2% increased 170 bps, as the prior year reflected a higher proportion of income from lower 
tax rate jurisdictions and tax exempt income relative to the decline in earnings experienced last year. 
Other taxes increased $5 million from last year, mainly due to higher payroll taxes driven by higher staff-related costs and 
higher capital taxes, largely offset by lower value added and sales taxes commensurate with reduced purchase activity. 
Client assets 
Assets under administration 
Assets under administration (AUA) are assets administered by us which are beneficially owned by our clients. We provide 
services that are administrative in nature, including safekeeping, collecting investment income, settling purchase and sale 
transactions, and record keeping. Underlying investment strategies within AUA are determined by our clients and generally do 
not impact the administrative fees that we receive. Administrative fees can be impacted by factors such as asset valuation level 
changes from market movements, types of services administered, transaction volumes, geography and client relationship pricing 
based on volumes or multiple services. 
Our Investor & Treasury Services business is the primary business segment that has AUA with approximately 73% of total 
AUA, as at October 31, 2021, followed by our Wealth Management and Personal & Commercial Banking businesses with 
approximately 21% and 6% of total AUA, respectively. 
2021 vs. 2020 
AUA increased $456 billion or 8% from last year, primarily reflecting market appreciation, partially offset by lower client activity 
in Investor & Treasury Services and the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
The following table summarizes AUA by geography and asset class: 
AUA by geographic mix and asset class 
Table 11  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Canada (1) 
 
 
Money market 
$
42,700 
$
42,800 
Fixed income 
772,400 
763,500 
Equity 
781,400 
591,200 
Multi-asset and other 
1,150,400 
954,800 
Total Canada 
2,746,900 
2,352,300 
U.S. (1) 
 
 
Money market 
49,800 
40,100 
Fixed income 
90,400 
107,300 
Equity 
256,000 
195,400 
Multi-asset and other 
324,600 
256,000 
Total U.S. 
720,800 
598,800 
Other International (1) 
 
 
Money market 
32,800 
40,700 
Fixed income 
308,200 
375,400 
Equity 
865,000 
837,200 
Multi-asset and other 
1,673,600 
1,686,800 
Total International 
2,879,600 
2,940,100 
Total AUA 
$
6,347,300 
$
5,891,200 
(1) 
Geographic information is based on the location from where our clients are serviced. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
23 
 

Assets under management 
Assets under management (AUM) are assets managed by us which are beneficially owned by our clients. Management fees are 
paid by the investment funds and other clients for the investment capabilities of an investment manager and can also cover 
administrative services. Management fees may be calculated daily, monthly or quarterly as a percentage of the AUM, depending 
on the distribution channel, product and investment strategies. In general, equity strategies carry a higher fee rate than fixed 
income or money market strategies. Fees are also impacted by asset mix and relationship pricing for clients using multiple 
services. Higher risk assets generally produce higher fees, while clients using multiple services can take advantage of synergies 
which reduce the fees they are charged. Certain funds may have performance fee arrangements where fees are recorded when 
certain benchmarks or performance targets are achieved. These factors could lead to differences in fees earned by product and 
therefore net return by asset class may vary despite similar average AUM. Our Wealth Management segment is the primary 
business segment that has AUM with approximately 99% of total AUM as at October 31, 2021. 
2021 vs. 2020 
AUM increased $165 billion or 20% from last year, primarily due to market appreciation and net sales, partially offset by the 
impact of foreign exchange translation. 
The following table presents the change in AUM for the year ended October 31, 2021: 
Client assets – AUM 
Table 12  
 
2021 
 
2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Money market Fixed income 
Equity 
Multi-asset 
and other 
Total  
Total 
AUM, beginning balance 
$
48,900 
$ 227,600 
$
96,000 
$
471,100 
$
843,600  $
762,300 
Institutional inflows 
20,200 
55,000 
12,300 
10,500 
98,000  
106,700 
Institutional outflows 
(16,300) 
(42,200) 
(6,300) 
(8,900) 
(73,700)  
(80,300) 
Personal flows, net 
(2,400) 
3,300 
3,500 
47,100 
51,500  
31,600 
Total net flows 
1,500 
16,100 
9,500 
48,700 
75,800  
58,000 
Market impact 
– 
(300) 
33,400 
90,700 
123,800  
17,900 
Acquisition/dispositions 
(4,500) 
– 
– 
– 
(4,500)  
700 
Foreign exchange 
(2,400) 
(8,000) 
(1,300) 
(18,300) 
(30,000)  
4,700 
Total market, acquisition/dispositions 
and foreign exchange impact 
(6,900) 
(8,300) 
32,100 
72,400 
89,300  
23,300 
AUM, balance at end of year 
$
43,500 
$ 235,400 
$ 137,600 
$
592,200 
$ 1,008,700  $
843,600 
Business segment results 
Results by business segments 
 
Table 13  
 
2021 
 
2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, 
except percentage amounts) 
Personal & 
Commercial 
Banking 
Wealth 
Management Insurance 
Investor & 
Treasury 
Services 
Capital 
Markets (1) 
Corporate 
Support (1) 
Total  
Total 
Net interest income 
$
12,621 $
2,689 $
– $
460 $
4,553 $
(321) $
20,002  $
20,835 
Non-interest income 
5,725 
10,607 
5,600 
1,704 
5,634 
421 
29,691  
26,346 
Total revenue 
18,346 
13,296 
5,600 
2,164 
10,187 
100 
49,693  
47,181 
PCL 
(187) 
(47) 
(1) 
(8) 
(509) 
(1) 
(753)  
4,351 
PBCAE 
– 
– 
3,891 
– 
– 
– 
3,891  
3,683 
Non-interest expense 
7,978 
9,929 
596 
1,589 
5,427 
405 
25,924  
24,758 
Income before income taxes 
10,555 
3,414 
1,114 
583 
5,269 
(304) 
20,631  
14,389 
Income taxes 
2,708 
788 
225 
143 
1,082 
(365) 
4,581  
2,952 
Net income 
$
7,847 $
2,626 $
889 $
440 $
4,187 $
61 $
16,050  $
11,437 
ROE (2) 
32.0% 
15.9% 
37.4% 
14.0% 
18.3% 
n.m. 
18.6%  
14.2% 
Average assets 
$ 527,100 $
136,000 $ 21,600 $235,400 $710,200 $ 47,900 $ 1,678,200  $ 1,636,700 
(1) 
Net interest income, Non-interest income, Total revenue, Income before income taxes, and Income taxes are presented in Capital Markets on a taxable equivalent basis 
(teb). The teb adjustment is eliminated in the Corporate Support segment. For a further discussion, refer to the How we measure and report our business segments 
section. 
(2) 
For further details, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures section. 
n.m. not meaningful 
24
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

How we measure and report our business segments 
Our management reporting framework is intended to measure the performance of each business segment as if it were a stand-
alone business and reflects the way that the business segment is managed. This approach is intended to ensure that our 
business segments’ results include all applicable revenue and expenses associated with the conduct of their business and 
depicts how management views those results. 
Key methodologies 
The following outlines the key methodologies and assumptions used in our management reporting framework. These are 
periodically reviewed by management to ensure they remain valid. 
Expense and tax allocation 
To ensure that our business segments’ results include expenses associated with the conduct of their business, we allocate costs 
incurred or services provided by Technology & Operations and Functions, which are directly undertaken or provided on the 
business segments’ behalf. For other costs not directly attributable to our business segments, including overhead costs and 
other indirect expenses, we use our management reporting framework for allocating these costs to each business segment in a 
manner that is intended to reflect the underlying benefits. 
Capital attribution 
Our management reporting framework also determines the attribution of capital to our business segments in a manner that is 
intended to consistently measure and align economic costs with the underlying benefits and risks associated with the activities 
of each business segment. The amount of capital assigned to each business segment is referred to as attributed capital. 
Unattributed capital and associated amounts are reported in Corporate Support. For further information, refer to the Capital 
management section. 
Funds transfer pricing 
Funds transfer pricing refers to the pricing of intra-company borrowing or lending for management reporting purposes. We 
employ a funds transfer pricing process to enable risk-adjusted management reporting of segment results. This process 
determines the costs and revenue for intra-company borrowing and lending of funds after taking into consideration our interest 
rate risk and liquidity risk management objectives, as well as applicable regulatory requirements. 
Provisions for credit losses 
PCL is recorded to recognize estimated credit losses on all financial assets, except for financial assets classified or designated as 
FVTPL and equity securities designated as fair value through other comprehensive income (FVOCI), which are not subject to 
impairment assessment. For details on our accounting policy on Allowance for credit losses (ACL), refer to Note 2 of our 2021 
Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
PCL is included in the results of each business segment to fully reflect the appropriate expenses related to the conduct of 
each business segment. 
In addition to the key methodologies described above, the following components of our management reporting framework also 
impact how our business segments are managed and reported: 
•
Wealth Management results include disclosure in U.S. dollars, primarily for U.S. Wealth Management (including City 
National) as we review and manage the results of this business largely in this currency. 
•
Capital Markets results are reported on a teb basis, which grosses up total revenue from certain tax-advantaged sources 
(Canadian taxable corporate dividends and the U.S. tax credit investment business) to their effective taxable equivalent 
value with a corresponding offset recorded in the provision for income taxes. We record the elimination of the teb 
adjustments in Corporate Support. We believe these adjustments are useful and reflect how Capital Markets manages its 
business, since it enhances the comparability of revenue and related ratios across taxable revenue and our principal tax-
advantaged sources of revenue. The use of teb adjustments and measures may not be comparable to similar GAAP measures 
or similarly adjusted amounts disclosed by other financial institutions. 
•
Corporate Support results include all enterprise level activities that are undertaken for the benefit of the organization that 
are not allocated to our five business segments, such as certain treasury and liquidity management activities, including 
amounts associated with unattributed capital, and consolidation adjustments, including the elimination of the teb gross-up 
amounts. In addition, we record gains (losses) on economic hedges of our U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) 
share-based compensation plans, which are reflected in revenue, and related variability in share-based compensation 
expense driven by changes in the fair value of liabilities relating to these plans in Corporate Support as we believe this 
presentation more closely aligns with how we view business performance and manage the underlying risks. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
25 
 

Key performance and non-GAAP measures 
Performance measures 
We measure and evaluate the performance of our consolidated operations and each business segment using a number of 
financial metrics, such as net income and ROE. Certain financial metrics, including ROE, do not have a standardized meaning 
under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and may not be comparable to similar measures disclosed by other 
financial institutions. 
Return on common equity 
We use ROE, at both the consolidated and business segment levels, as a measure of return on total capital invested in our 
business. Management views the business segment ROE measure as a useful measure for supporting investment and resource 
allocation decisions because it adjusts for certain items that may affect comparability between business segments and certain 
competitors. 
Our consolidated ROE calculation is based on net income available to common shareholders divided by total average 
common equity for the period. Business segment ROE calculations are based on net income available to common shareholders 
divided by average attributed capital for the period. For each segment, average attributed capital includes the capital required to 
underpin various risks as described in the Capital management section and amounts invested in goodwill and intangibles. 
The attribution of capital involves the use of assumptions, judgments and methodologies that are regularly reviewed and 
revised by management as deemed necessary. Changes to such assumptions, judgments and methodologies can have a material 
effect on the business segment ROE information that we report. Other companies that disclose information on similar 
attributions and related return measures may use different assumptions, judgments and methodologies. 
Calculation of ROE 
Table 14  
 
2021 
2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, 
except percentage amounts) 
Personal & 
Commercial 
Banking 
Wealth 
Management Insurance 
Investor & 
Treasury 
Services 
Capital 
Markets 
Corporate 
Support 
Total  
Total 
Net income available to 
common shareholders 
$
7,761 $
2,577 $
882 $
431 $
4,119 $
11 $ 15,781  $ 11,164 
Total average common 
equity (1), (2) 
24,200 
16,200 
2,350 
3,100 
22,550 
16,450 
84,850  
78,800 
ROE (3) 
32.0% 
15.9% 
37.4% 
14.0% 
18.3% 
n.m. 
18.6%  
14.2% 
(1) 
Total average common equity represents rounded figures. 
(2) 
The amounts for the segments are referred to as attributed capital. 
(3) 
ROE is based on actual balances of average common equity before rounding. 
n.m. not meaningful 
Non-GAAP measures 
We believe that certain non-GAAP measures described below are more reflective of our ongoing operating results and provide 
readers with a better understanding of management’s perspective on our performance. These measures also enhance the 
comparability of our financial performance for the year ended October 31, 2021 with the results from last year. Non-GAAP 
measures (including non-GAAP ratios) do not have a standardized meaning under GAAP and may not be comparable to similar 
measures disclosed by other financial institutions. 
The following discussion describes the non-GAAP measures we use in evaluating our operating results. 
Adjusted efficiency ratio 
Our efficiency ratio is impacted by the change in fair value of investments backing policyholder liabilities, which is reported in 
revenue and largely offset in PBCAE. The adjusted efficiency ratio is a non-GAAP ratio and is calculated using adjusted total 
revenue, which is a non-GAAP measure as it excludes the impact from the change in fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities. We believe the adjusted efficiency ratio is a useful measure as changes in the fair value of investments 
backing policyholder liabilities can lead to volatility in total revenue that could obscure trends in underlying business 
performance and reduce comparability with prior periods. 
Consolidated non-GAAP efficiency ratio 
Table 15  
 
2021 
 
2020 
 
 
Item excluded 
 
 
 
Item excluded 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, 
except percentage amounts) 
As reported 
Change in fair value 
of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities 
Adjusted  
As reported 
Change in fair value 
of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities 
Adjusted 
Total revenue 
$ 49,693 
$
13 
$ 49,706  $ 47,181 
$
(277) 
$
46,904 
Non-interest expense 
25,924 
– 
25,924  
24,758 
– 
24,758 
Efficiency ratio 
52.2% 
 
52.2%  
52.5% 
 
52.8% 
26
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Personal & Commercial Banking 
Personal & Commercial Banking provides a broad suite of financial products and services to individuals and businesses for their 
day-to-day banking, investing and financing needs. We are focused on building deep and meaningful relationships with our 
clients, underscored by our exceptional client experience, the breadth of our product suite, our depth of expertise, and the 
features of our digital solutions. 
> 14 million 
 8 million 
 36,675 
Number of clients 
 
Active digital users in Canada1 
 
Employees 
 
 
 
 
Revenue by business lines 
 
We operate through two businesses – Canadian Banking and Caribbean & U.S. 
Banking. Canadian Banking serves our home market in Canada, where we 
maintain top (#1 or #2) rankings in market share for all key retail and business 
products. We have the largest branch network, the most ATMs and one of the 
largest mobile sales forces across Canada. In Caribbean & U.S. Banking, we 
offer a broad range of financial products and services in targeted markets. 
In Canada, we compete with other Schedule 1 banks, independent trust 
companies, foreign banks, credit unions, caisses populaires, and auto financing 
companies. 
In the Caribbean, our competition includes banks, trust companies and 
investment management companies serving retail and corporate clients, as well 
as public institutions. In the U.S., we compete primarily with other Canadian 
banking institutions that have U.S. operations. 
Total revenue
$18.3 billion
 73% Personal Banking
 23% Business Banking
 4% Caribbean and U.S. Banking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2021 Operating environment 
› While impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic continued to persist, client activity improved driving strong volume and fee-based 
revenue growth throughout fiscal 2021 as economies re-opened due to progress on vaccination distribution, reduced 
containment measures and continued government support. Further, as businesses began re-opening, unemployment rates also 
improved. 
› Improvements in the credit environment, driven by the economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, led to favourable 
changes in our macroeconomic and credit quality outlook, resulting in releases of provisions on performing assets. Lower 
provisions on impaired loans in our Canadian Banking retail portfolios also reflected the economic recovery underway and the 
continued impact of the COVID-19 related government support programs. 
› Personal and business deposits continued to see significant growth throughout fiscal 2021, reflecting clients’ preference for the 
safety of higher cash balances amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. 
› Housing activity was strong with record levels of mortgage originations in fiscal 2021. Despite the industry-wide tightening of 
mortgage lending criteria in the third quarter, low interest rates and demand for housing continued to support strong growth in 
residential mortgages. 
› Throughout fiscal 2021, we saw favourable market conditions resulting in solid growth in mutual fund balances from a 
combination of market appreciation and strong net sales. We also saw significant market activity in the first half of the fiscal 
year which benefitted our Direct Investing business. While market activity moderated in the second half of the fiscal year, 
average trading volumes remained above pre-pandemic levels. 
› The ongoing low interest rate environment continued to be a headwind in fiscal 2021, resulting in a further decline in NIM. NIM 
was also negatively impacted by changes in product mix and competitive pricing pressures. 
› Client preferences for digital offerings continue to evolve and this shift has been accelerated due to the impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic. We continued to invest in digital solutions to improve the client experience and deliver personalized advice. 
› Our Caribbean Banking business continued to be negatively impacted by the ongoing low interest rate environment; however, 
we also saw releases of provisions on performing assets. We also closed the sale of our Eastern Caribbean operations in the 
second quarter of 2021. 
› In the U.S., earnings were unfavourably impacted by the low interest rate environment and severe limitations on cross-border 
travel, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
1 
Represents 90-day active clients 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
27 
 

Strategic priorities 
OUR STRATEGY 
PROGRESS IN 2021 
PRIORITIES IN 2022 
Transform how we serve our clients 
Enabled the expedited digital processing of nearly 200,000 
small business loans under the CEBA program since inception 
of the program 
Opened new format branches to address the needs of specific 
client segments including students and newcomers to Canada 
Introduced RBC VantageTM that allows clients to unlock 
rewards, savings, insights and more with any eligible bank 
account 
Provide flexibility by continuing to deliver anytime, anywhere 
solutions to our clients across all channels, seamlessly 
integrating mobile and digital services into our clients’ lives 
Continue to reimagine our branch network to meet the 
evolving needs of our clients 
Accelerate our growth 
Continued to provide personalized advice and valued banking 
solutions to our clients 
Maintained our focus on key high-growth and high-value 
segments such as retirees, youth, newcomers, business 
owners, high net worth clients, and healthcare professionals 
Continued to further our partnerships, including helping our 
clients realize over $90 million in fuel savings with Petro 
Canada, a Suncor business 
Partnered with DoorDash to bring eligible RBC credit cardholders 
additional value through savings and special offers 
Established a new partnership with GrantMatch, leveraging its 
Funding Assessment & Strategy Tool to make it easy for 
business owners to pursue government funding that matches 
their business needs 
Launched the RBC ESG Market-Linked GIC which allows 
investors to support a global portfolio of companies that 
follow a set of rigorous ESG standards 
Offered Responsible Investing Portfolios through RBC 
InvestEase®, which are built with a focus on companies that score 
highest on a wide range of ESG factors, including carbon 
emissions, product safety and quality, and business ethics 
Focus on engaging key high-growth client segments and 
enabling our advisors to build new and deeper relationships 
and achieve industry-leading volume growth 
Establish key partnerships to continue to add value for our 
clients 
Build a suite of best-in-class value propositions, digital 
experiences and Beyond Banking ventures 
Continue to invest in RBC Ventures by working to scale 
Ventures and accelerate client acquisition 
Rapidly deliver digital solutions to 
our clients 
Continued to deliver leading digital capabilities and 
functionalities through our award-winning RBC mobile app 
Enhanced our Direct Investing client experience by launching 
a customizable, web-based Trading Dashboard, free for all 
clients 
Introduced NOMI® Forecast, the latest capability in our award-
winning NOMI® offering, which gives clients a view into their future 
cash flow by forecasting upcoming preauthorized payment 
withdrawals from their deposit account 
Continued to expand the capabilities of MyAdvisor®, an online 
advice platform that digitally connects our clients to an 
advisor, resulting in over 2.8 million clients activating their 
personalized investment plans since its launch in 2017 
Launched RBCxTM, a full-service platform designed to provide 
our business clients with access to capital solutions, 
innovative products and services, and operational expertise to 
help technology companies scale 
Expanded RBC Insight EdgeTM, our Beyond Banking solution, to 
provide direct access through a subscription to small and 
medium retail business and commercial clients 
Launched an integrated accounts payable solution for 
business clients through RBC PayEdgeTM, which helped us 
earn the 2021 Celent Model Bank Award for Payments 
Transformation 
Launched a new way for Canadians to pay for their purchases 
through PayPlan which offers clients a transparent and 
convenient pay-over-time solution for big-ticket purchases at 
participating retailers and merchants throughout Canada 
Deliver more personalized insights to improve the client 
experience while continuing to simplify and digitize everyday 
banking 
Enhance the digital experience for our small business and 
commercial clients and make it easier for them to transact 
with us 
Lead in mobile capabilities, enable fulfillment of servicing 
through digital channels, and move towards a higher degree 
of agile delivery to transform end-to-end client experience 
Innovate to become a more agile and 
efficient bank 
Continued to invest in solutions that simplify, digitize and 
automate experiences for clients and employees, and enable 
employees to deliver relevant and expert advice 
Continued to help small businesses thrive by simplifying and 
automating business formation and everyday legal work with 
Ownr®, Canada’s leading business and legal management 
platform 
Invest in new tools and capabilities and proactively seek ways 
to simplify and streamline both our internal processes and the 
end to end client experience at an accelerated speed 
In the Caribbean 
Continued transforming the business and overall client 
experience while driving profitability, simplifying operations, 
and strategically navigating the COVID-19 pandemic and its 
continued impact on our clients and employees 
Successfully executed Eastern Caribbean divestiture which 
included the sale of 11 branches in 7 countries. This transaction 
aligns our investments and resources into markets where our 
vision can be executed more successfully 
Remain focused on becoming the premier digitally-enabled 
relationship bank by transforming the client experience 
through automation, digitization and process simplification, 
and enabling our employees for success 
In the U.S. 
Despite travel restrictions associated with the COVID-19 
pandemic, continued to attract new clients and drive record 
real estate lending 
Made focused investments in digital capabilities to improve 
productivity, offer a more digitally-enabled client experience, 
and enhance small business services to support Canadian 
businesses needing U.S. payment and collection services 
Drive accelerated cross-border client growth leading with real 
estate financing tailored specifically for Canadians, offering 
advice, tools and resources, value offers and discounts, and 
access to cross-border experts to guide clients through the 
full life cycle of owning U.S. property 
Ongoing digitization of end-to-end processes and controls to 
enhance client self-serve capabilities and improve 
operational scalability 
28
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Outlook 
While uncertainty remains regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect the global economic recovery to continue in 2022, though 
this could vary or be uneven across different regions. The BoC and other central banks are expected to begin raising interest 
rates in fiscal 2022. Ongoing inflationary pressures also have the potential to impact our results in fiscal 2022. We will continue to 
pursue industry-leading volume growth, operational efficiency efforts and channel transformation to achieve our vision of being 
a digitally-enabled relationship bank. 
In the Caribbean, an economic recovery is expected as travel and tourism continue to improve, supported by rising vaccination 
rates. Continued fiscal stimulus and accommodative monetary conditions in some countries are expected to bolster consumer 
spending and unemployment relief. We will continue to focus on growth strategies in our target markets, improving operational 
efficiency, and adding value for our clients. 
For further details on our general economic review and outlook, refer to the Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook 
section. 
Personal & Commercial Banking 
Table 16  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted) 
2021 
2020 
Net interest income 
$
12,621 
$
12,568 
Non-interest income 
5,725 
5,163 
Total revenue 
18,346 
17,731 
PCL on performing assets 
(909) 
1,818 
PCL on impaired assets 
722 
1,073 
PCL 
(187) 
2,891 
Non-interest expense 
7,978 
7,946 
Income before income taxes 
10,555 
6,894 
Net income 
$
7,847 
$
5,087 
Revenue by business 
 
 
Canadian Banking 
$
17,570 
$
16,838 
Personal Banking 
13,337 
12,703 
Business Banking 
4,233 
4,135 
Caribbean & U.S. Banking 
776 
893 
Key ratios 
 
 
ROE 
32.0% 
21.7% 
NIM 
2.51% 
2.67% 
Efficiency ratio 
43.5% 
44.8% 
Operating leverage (1) 
3.1% 
(3.1)% 
Selected balance sheet information 
 
 
Average total assets 
$
527,100 
$
494,600 
Average total earning assets, net 
502,000 
470,200 
Average loans and acceptances, net 
505,600 
473,400 
Average deposits 
504,300 
447,300 
Other information 
 
 
AUA (2), (3) 
$
367,700 
$
292,800 
Average AUA 
340,800 
287,600 
AUM (3) 
5,400 
5,300 
Number of employees (FTE) 
36,675 
35,964 
Credit information 
 
 
PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances 
0.14% 
0.23% 
Other selected information – Canadian Banking 
 
 
Net income 
$
7,620 
$
5,077 
NIM 
2.50% 
2.64% 
Efficiency ratio 
42.0% 
43.2% 
Operating leverage 
2.9% 
(3.3)% 
(1) 
See Glossary for composition of this measure. 
(2) 
AUA includes securitized residential mortgages and credit card loans as at October 31, 2021 of $15 billion and $3 billion, respectively (October 31, 2020 – $16 billion and 
$7 billion). 
(3) 
Represents year-end spot balances. 
Financial performance 
2021 vs. 2020 
Net income increased $2,760 million or 54% from last year, primarily attributable to lower PCL. Average volume growth of 10% in 
Canadian Banking and higher non-interest income also contributed to the increase. These factors were partially offset by lower 
spreads. 
Total revenue increased $615 million or 3%, largely due to average volume growth in Canadian Banking of 7% in loans and 
13% in deposits, and higher average mutual fund balances driving higher distribution fees. Increased client activity also 
contributed to higher card service revenue, securities brokerage commissions and foreign exchange revenue. These factors were 
partially offset by lower spreads. 
NIM decreased 16 bps, primarily due to the impact of lower interest rates and changes in product mix. 
PCL decreased $3,078 million, as last year reflected elevated provisions on performing loans due to the impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic as compared to releases in the current year primarily driven by improvements in our macroeconomic and credit quality 
outlook. Lower provisions on impaired loans in our Canadian Banking retail portfolios also contributed to the decrease, resulting in a 
decrease of 9 bps in the PCL on impaired loans ratio. For further details, refer to Credit quality performance in the Credit risk section. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
29 
 

Non-interest expense increased $32 million, largely due to higher staff-related costs, partially offset by the prior year impact 
of additional compensation for certain employees, primarily those client facing amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, and lower other 
operating costs. 
Average loans and acceptances increased $32 billion or 7%, driven by growth in residential mortgages. 
Average deposits increased $57 billion or 13%, reflecting growth in business and personal deposits. 
Business line review 
In Canada, we operate through two business lines: Personal Banking and Business Banking. 
Personal Banking 
Personal Banking offers a full range of products focused on meeting the needs of our individual Canadian clients at every stage 
of their lives through a wide range of financing and investment products and services. This includes home equity financing, 
personal lending, chequing and savings accounts, private banking, indirect lending (including auto financing), mutual funds and 
self-directed brokerage accounts, Guaranteed Investment Certificates (GICs), credit cards, and payment products and solutions. 
We rank #1 or #2 in market share for all key Personal Banking products in Canada and our retail banking network is the 
largest in Canada with 1,182 branches and 4,032 ATMs. 
Financial performance 
Total revenue increased $634 million or 5% compared to last year, largely reflecting average volume growth of 8% and higher 
average mutual fund balances of 17% driving higher distribution fees. Increased client activity also contributed to higher card 
service revenue, securities brokerage commissions and foreign exchange revenue. These factors were partially offset by lower 
spreads driven by the ongoing impact of the low interest rate environment and changes in product mix. 
Average residential mortgages increased 12% compared to last year, largely driven by strong housing activity driving record 
mortgage originations, partially offset by higher mortgage prepayment activity. 
Average deposits increased 9% from last year, largely driven by clients’ preference for the safety of higher cash balances 
amidst the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Selected highlights 
Table 17  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except number of) 
2021 
2020 
Total revenue 
$
13,337 
$
12,703 
Other information 
 
 
Average residential mortgages 
305,400 
273,200 
Average other loans and acceptances, net 
74,800 
77,800 
Average deposits 
270,500 
248,100 
Average credit card balances 
16,600 
18,100 
Credit card purchase volumes 
132,400 
118,100 
Branch mutual fund balances (1) 
205,500 
166,000 
Average branch mutual fund balances 
191,300 
163,600 
AUA – Self-directed brokerage (1) 
135,900 
96,400 
Number as at October 31: 
 
 
Branches 
1,182 
1,201 
ATMs 
4,032 
4,182 
(1) 
Represents year-end spot balances. 
0
40,000
80,000
120,000
320,000
280,000
200,000
240,000
160,000
2021
Other loans and
acceptances, net
Residential mortgages
Deposits
Average residential mortgages, loans and deposits 
(Millions of Canadian dollars)
2020
 
30
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Business Banking 
Business Banking offers a wide range of lending, leasing, deposit, investment, foreign exchange, cash management, auto dealer 
financing, trade products, and services to small and medium-sized commercial businesses across Canada. With one of the 
largest teams of relationship managers and specialists in the industry, our commitment to client experience and trusted advice 
has earned us leading market share in business lending and deposits. 
Financial performance 
Total revenue increased $98 million or 2% compared to last year, largely due to average volume growth of 14% and higher credit 
fees reflecting increased client activity. These factors were partially offset by lower spreads, primarily driven by the impact of 
lower interest rates. 
Average loans and acceptances increased 5%, due to the deepening of our existing client relationships. 
Average deposits increased 19% from last year, mainly reflecting higher liquidity maintained by our clients amidst the COVID-
19 pandemic. 
Selected highlights 
Table 18  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Total revenue 
$
4,233 
$
4,135 
Other information (average) 
 
 
Loans and acceptances, net 
99,800 
94,600 
Deposits 
215,200 
180,800 
2020
Loans and acceptances, net
Deposits
Average loans and acceptances and deposits
(Millions of Canadian dollars)
0
100,000
150,000
175,000
125,000
25,000
50,000
75,000
225,000
200,000
2021
 
Caribbean & U.S. Banking 
Our Caribbean Banking business offers a comprehensive suite of banking products and services, as well as international 
financing and trade promotion services through extensive branch, ATM, online, and mobile banking networks. 
Our U.S. Banking business serves the needs of our Canadian retail and small business clients through banking solutions 
which help to enable a cross-border lifestyle in the U.S. across all 50 states. 
Financial performance 
Total revenue was down $117 million or 13% from last year, primarily due to lower spreads and the impact of foreign exchange 
translation. Reduced revenue due to the sale of our Eastern Caribbean operations also contributed to the decrease. 
Average loans and acceptances decreased 6% primarily due to the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Average deposits increased 2%. 
Selected highlights 
Table 19  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, 
except number of and percentage amounts) 
2021 
2020 
Total revenue 
$
776 
$
893 
Other information 
 
 
NIM 
2.85% 
3.46% 
Average loans and acceptances, net 
9,100 
9,700 
Average deposits 
18,700 
18,400 
AUA (1) 
5,700 
5,900 
Average AUA 
5,700 
6,400 
AUM (1) 
5,100 
5,200 
Number as at October 31: 
 
 
Branches 
38 
51 
ATMs 
271 
298 
(1) 
Represents year-end spot balances. 
2020
Loans and acceptances, net
Deposits
Average loans and deposits (Millions of Canadian dollars)
0
10,000
15,000
5,000
20,000
2021
 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
31 
 

Wealth Management 
Wealth Management is a global business serving clients in key financial centres. We serve HNW and UHNW individual and 
institutional clients with a comprehensive suite of advice-based solutions and strategies to help them achieve their financial goals. 
$13.3 billion 
 > 5,500 
 > $53 billion 
 > $75 billion 
Total revenue 
 Client-facing advisors 
 AUA net flows 
 AUM net flows 
 
 
 
 
 
Assets under Administration 
(AUA) 
Total AUA
$1,322 billion
 5% Institutional
 94% Personal
 1% Mutual Funds
 
 
 
Assets under Management 
(AUM) 
Total AUM
$1,001 billion
 41% Personal
 30% Mutual Funds
 29% Institutional
 
 
Our lines of business include Canadian Wealth 
Management, U.S. Wealth Management (including 
City National), Global Asset Management (GAM), 
and International Wealth Management. 
• Canadian Wealth Management is the largest 
full-service wealth advisory business in 
Canada, as measured by AUA, serving HNW and 
UHNW clients 
• U.S. Wealth Management (including City 
National) also encompasses our private client 
group (PCG) and clearing and custody (C&C) 
businesses. PCG is the 7th largest full-service 
wealth advisory firm in the U.S., as measured by 
number of advisors, and City National is a 
premier U.S. private and commercial bank 
serving HNW, UHNW and commercial clients 
• GAM is the largest retail fund company in 
Canada as measured by AUM, as well as a 
leading institutional asset manager 
• International Wealth Management serves HNW 
and UHNW clients, primarily through key 
financial centres in the U.K., Channel Islands 
and Asia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2021 Operating environment 
› Earnings in the current fiscal year benefitted from a strong rebound in equity markets, which reached record highs after a 
sharp decline in the prior fiscal year due to global impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic, while the ongoing low interest rate 
environment unfavorably impacted our earnings throughout fiscal 2021. 
› Our core businesses performed well with continued volume growth in City National, strong sales in GAM, as well as strong 
inflows of fee-generating client assets in our wealth advisory businesses reflecting the strength of our business driven by the 
quality of our advice, the breadth of our investment and holistic wealth planning solutions and clients’ trust in our brand. 
› We continued to invest in our people and technology to maintain our competitive advantage and increase efficiencies in an 
environment characterized by market volatility, rapidly changing client preferences and increasing regulatory requirements. 
› Improvements in the credit environment, driven by the economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, led to favourable 
changes in our macroeconomic and credit quality outlook, resulting in releases of provisions on performing assets and lower 
provisions on impaired loans. 
32
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Strategic priorities 
OUR STRATEGY 
PROGRESS IN 2021 
PRIORITIES IN 2022 
In Canada, be the premier service provider 
for HNW and UHNW clients 
Further extended our position as industry leader 
in our full-service private wealth business 
Continued to focus on holistic wealth planning, 
including advisor training on intergenerational 
and business wealth transfer 
Continued to expand RBC® Premier Banking to 
deepen banking relationships with Wealth 
Management clients 
Enhanced our digital and data capabilities to 
drive increased client satisfaction and advisor 
productivity, including the integration of Wealth 
Management Online with the RBC Mobile app 
Continue to retain and attract top-performing and 
new advisors to strengthen our talent advantage 
Deliver a differentiated client experience through 
enriched advisor-client interactions and seamless 
digital experiences 
Broaden and deepen client relationships by 
leveraging combined strengths across our other 
business segments 
Continue to invest in digital solutions to 
streamline and simplify the business and improve 
efficiency and advisor productivity 
Renew legacy infrastructure to ensure ongoing 
resiliency in our technology platforms 
In the U.S., become the leading private and 
commercial bank and wealth manager in 
our key markets 
Invested in key areas needed to grow our U.S. 
Wealth Management business, including 
substantial financial advisor recruitment, solid 
execution on our technology transformation and 
provided proactive liquidity to our clients via a 
revamped securities-based lending platform 
In City National, we continued to focus on our 
core high-growth banking businesses, bolstered 
our footprint in the entertainment industry, 
expanded our digital capabilities, and invested in 
productivity and efficiency programs 
Continue to deliver an exceptional client 
experience for targeted HNW, UHNW, middle 
market, and business banking segments 
Leverage the combined strengths within U.S. 
Wealth Management (including City National) and 
Capital Markets with a view to further accelerate 
growth in the U.S. 
Further build out our personal banking business 
through new client acquisition strategies, diverse 
lending programs, and mortgage-led growth 
In select global financial centres, become 
the most trusted regional private bank 
Continued to deliver on successful growth 
initiatives, bringing the full strength and breadth 
of RBC to our clients 
Focused on delivering a differentiated client 
experience by leveraging our global capabilities 
In Asia, made significant progress in execution of 
our strategy, reflected by strong growth in AUA 
and AUM 
Focus on growing market share in target markets 
Continue to leverage our global strengths to 
better serve clients 
Continue to deliver an exceptional client 
experience 
Continue to increase business effectiveness and 
talent capabilities 
Focus on growing the business in Asia by 
attracting new advisors, enhancing digital 
capabilities, expanding the product suite, and 
deepening cross–business collaboration 
In asset management, be a leading, 
diversified asset manager focused on 
global institutional and North American 
retail clients 
Maintained #1 market share in Canadian mutual 
fund AUM 
RBC® iShares strategic alliance maintained #1 
market share in Canadian ETFs and continued to 
accelerate sales growth 
Published RBC GAM’s first annual Task Force on 
Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) 
report 
Continue to expand our investment capabilities to 
meet evolving client needs in our target 
distribution regions 
Continue shift to a more unified asset 
management operating model to take better 
advantage of enterprise and GAM global scale, 
resources and infrastructure 
Outlook 
While uncertainty remains regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, we expect the global economic recovery to continue in 2022, though 
this could vary or be uneven across different regions. The U.S. Fed and other central banks are expected to begin raising interest 
rates in fiscal 2022. Ongoing inflationary pressures also have the potential to impact our results in fiscal 2022. 
We believe our diversified businesses are well-positioned to continue growing our leading position in Canada and increasing 
our market share in the HNW and UHNW client segments globally, leveraging the strength of our brand, reputation and solid 
financial position. Our strategy remains unchanged as we continue to focus on delivering an unmatched client experience 
through holistic goals-based advice, attracting and retaining top-performing advisors, and collaborating across the enterprise to 
bring our full breadth of capabilities to our clients. We will continue to invest in our people and technology to improve client and 
advisor experiences, drive operational efficiencies, and further strengthen our risk, compliance and controls infrastructure to 
meet heightened regulatory requirements. 
For further details on our general economic review and outlook, refer to the Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook 
section. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
33 
 

Wealth Management 
Table 20  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except number of, percentage amounts and as otherwise noted) 
2021 
2020 
Net interest income 
$
2,689 
$
2,860 
Non-interest income (1) 
10,607 
9,270 
Total revenue (1) 
13,296 
12,130 
PCL on performing assets 
(33) 
157 
PCL on impaired assets 
(14) 
57 
PCL 
(47) 
214 
Non-interest expense (1) 
9,929 
9,123 
Income before income taxes (1) 
3,414 
2,793 
Net income (1) 
$
2,626 
$
2,154 
Revenue by business 
 
 
Canadian Wealth Management 
$
3,908 
$
3,319 
U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) (1) 
6,320 
6,116 
U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) (US$ millions) (1) 
5,035 
4,553 
Global Asset Management 
2,726 
2,308 
International Wealth Management 
342 
387 
Key ratios 
 
 
ROE 
15.9% 
13.1% 
NIM 
2.25% 
2.79% 
Pre-tax margin (1), (2) 
25.7% 
23.0% 
Selected balance sheet information 
 
 
Average total assets 
$
136,000 
$
119,500 
Average total earning assets, net 
119,500 
102,600 
Average loans and acceptances, net 
84,000 
76,700 
Average deposits 
143,000 
122,000 
Other information 
 
 
AUA (3), (4) 
$
1,322,300 
$
1,100,000 
AUM (3) 
1,000,600 
836,400 
Average AUA 
1,242,400 
1,082,000 
Average AUM 
937,200 
801,500 
PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances 
(0.02)% 
0.07% 
Number of employees (FTE) 
19,486 
18,978 
Number of advisors (5) 
5,548 
5,428 
Estimated impact of U.S. dollar, British pound and Euro translation on key income statement items 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
2021 vs. 2020 
 
Increase (decrease): 
 
 
Total revenue 
$
(468) 
 
PCL 
3 
 
Non-interest expense 
(390) 
 
Net income 
(66) 
 
Percentage change in average U.S. dollar equivalent of C$1.00 
7% 
 
Percentage change in average British pound equivalent of C$1.00 
– 
 
Percentage change in average Euro equivalent of C$1.00 
2% 
 
(1) 
Effective Q4 2021, gains (losses) on economic hedges of our U.S. share-based compensation plans, which are reflected in revenue, and related variability in share-based 
compensation expense driven by changes in the fair value of liabilities relating to our U.S. share-based compensation plans have been reclassified from our Wealth 
Management segment to Corporate Support. Comparative amounts have been reclassified to conform with this presentation. 
(2) 
Pre-tax margin is defined as Income before income taxes divided by Total revenue. 
(3) 
Represents year-end spot balances. 
(4) 
In addition to Canadian Wealth Management, U.S. Wealth Management (including City National), and International Wealth Management, AUA includes $7,100 million 
(2020: $6,100 million) related to GAM. 
(5) 
Represents client-facing advisors across all our wealth management businesses. 
Client assets – AUA 
Table 21  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
AUA, beginning balance 
$
1,100,000 
$
1,062,200 
Asset inflows 
352,800 
356,800 
Asset outflows 
(299,200) 
(345,400) 
Total net flows 
53,600 
11,400 
Market impact 
235,900 
17,500 
Acquisitions/dispositions 
(12,100) 
– 
Foreign exchange 
(55,100) 
8,900 
Total market, acquisition/dispositions and foreign exchange impact 
168,700 
26,400 
AUA, balance at end of year 
$
1,322,300 
$
1,100,000 
34
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Client assets – AUM  
Table 22  
 
2021 
2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Money 
market 
Fixed 
income 
Equity 
Multi-asset 
and other 
Total 
Total 
AUM, beginning balance 
$ 48,800 
$225,400 
$
95,800 
$
466,400 $
836,400 
$
755,700 
Institutional inflows 
20,200 
55,000 
12,200 
10,500 
97,900 
106,700 
Institutional outflows 
(16,300) 
(42,100) 
(6,300) 
(8,900) 
(73,600) 
(80,300) 
Personal flows, net 
(2,400) 
3,300 
3,400 
46,700 
51,000 
31,300 
Total net flows 
1,500 
16,200 
9,300 
48,300 
75,300 
57,700 
Market impact 
– 
(400) 
33,400 
90,200 
123,200 
17,700 
Acquisition/dispositions 
(4,500) 
– 
– 
– 
(4,500) 
700 
Foreign exchange 
(2,400) 
(7,900) 
(1,300) 
(18,200) 
(29,800) 
4,600 
Total market, acquisition/dispositions and 
foreign exchange impact 
(6,900) 
(8,300) 
32,100 
72,000 
88,900 
23,000 
AUM, balance at end of year 
$ 43,400 
$233,300 
$ 137,200 
$
586,700 $ 1,000,600 
$
836,400 
AUA by geographic mix and asset class 
Table 23  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Canada (1) 
 
 
Money market 
$
24,700 $
25,900 
Fixed income 
29,200 
32,000 
Equity 
91,300 
68,800 
Multi-asset and other 
377,400 
288,800 
Total Canada 
522,600 
415,500 
U.S. (1) 
 
 
Money market 
49,500 
39,700 
Fixed income 
90,300 
107,300 
Equity 
256,000 
195,400 
Multi-asset and other 
308,400 
241,400 
Total U.S. 
704,200 
583,800 
Other International (1) 
 
 
Money market 
15,300 
17,400 
Fixed income 
8,100 
10,100 
Equity 
37,700 
38,800 
Multi-asset and other 
34,400 
34,400 
Total International 
95,500 
100,700 
Total AUA 
$ 1,322,300 $
1,100,000 
(1) 
Geographic information is based on the location from where our clients are served. 
Financial performance 
2021 vs. 2020 
Net income increased $472 million or 22% from last year, mainly due to higher average fee-based client assets and average 
volume growth. These factors were partially offset by higher variable compensation and the impact of lower spreads. 
Total revenue increased $1,166 million or 10%, mainly due to higher average fee-based client assets reflecting market 
appreciation and net sales, as well as average volume growth of 10% in loans and 17% in deposits. These factors were partially 
offset by lower spreads and the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
PCL decreased $261 million in U.S. Wealth Management (including City National), as last year reflected elevated provisions 
on performing loans due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic as compared to releases in the current year primarily driven by 
improvements in our macroeconomic and credit quality outlook. Provisions on impaired loans in the prior year as compared to 
recoveries in the current year also contributed to the decrease, resulting in a decrease of 9 bps in the PCL on impaired loans 
ratio. For further details, refer to Credit quality performance in the Credit risk section. 
Non-interest expense increased $806 million or 9%, mainly due to higher variable compensation commensurate with 
improved results. A legal provision in U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) as well as higher technology and staff-
related costs also contributed to the increase. These factors were partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
AUA and AUM increased $222 billion or 20% and $164 billion or 20%, respectively, primarily due to market appreciation and 
net sales, partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Business line review 
Canadian Wealth Management 
Canadian Wealth Management includes our full-service Canadian wealth advisory business, which is the largest in Canada as 
measured by AUA, with over 1,900 investment advisors providing comprehensive financial solutions with a focus on HNW and 
UHNW clients. Additionally, we provide discretionary investment management and estate and trust services to our clients 
through over 100 investment counsellors and over 100 trust professionals across Canada. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
35 
 

We compete with domestic banks and trust companies, investment counselling firms, bank-owned full-service brokerages 
and boutique brokerages, mutual fund companies, and global private banks. In Canada, bank-owned wealth managers continue 
to be the major players. 
Financial performance 
Revenue increased $589 million or 18% from last year, primarily due to higher average fee-based client assets reflecting market 
appreciation and net sales. 
Selected highlights 
Table 24  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Total revenue 
$
3,908 $
3,319 
Other information 
 
 
Average loans and acceptances, net 
4,600 
3,900 
Average deposits 
26,200 
21,900 
AUA (1) 
524,200 
416,700 
AUM (1) 
168,900 
125,700 
Average AUA 
486,100 
410,300 
Average AUM 
151,900 
121,600 
(1) 
Represents year-end spot balances. 
0
200,000
100,000
300,000
400,000
500,000
2021
2020
AUA
AUM
Average AUA and AUM (Millions of Canadian dollars)
 
U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) 
U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) also encompasses PCG and our C&C businesses. PCG is the 7th largest full-
service wealth advisory firm in the U.S., as measured by number of advisors, with over 2,100 financial advisors. Our C&C business 
delivers clearing and execution services for small to mid-sized independent broker-dealers and registered investment advisor 
firms. City National provides comprehensive financial solutions to affluent individuals, entrepreneurs, professionals, their 
businesses, and their families, and provides a premier banking and financial experience through a high-touch service model, 
proactive advice and financial solutions. City National offers a broad range of lending, deposit, cash management, equipment 
financing, wealth management, and other products and services. In the U.S., we operate in a fragmented and highly competitive 
industry. Our competitors include other broker-dealers, commercial banks and other financial institutions that service HNW and 
UHNW individuals, entrepreneurs and their businesses. 
Financial performance 
Revenue increased $204 million or 3% from last year. In U.S. dollars, revenue increased $482 million or 11%, primarily due to 
higher average fee-based client assets reflecting market appreciation and net sales, as well as average volume growth of 17% in 
loans and 28% in deposits. These factors were partially offset by lower spreads. 
Lower spreads, mainly driven by the impact of lower interest rates and changes in average earning assets mix, resulted in 
NIM compression of 48 bps compared to the prior year. 
Selected highlights 
Table 25  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, 
except as otherwise noted) 
2021 
2020 
Total revenue (1) 
$
6,320 $
6,116 
Other information 
(Millions of U.S. dollars) 
 
 
Total revenue (1) 
5,035 
4,553 
NIM 
2.17% 
2.65% 
Average earning assets, net 
86,300 
68,900 
Average loans, guarantees and 
letters of credit, net 
60,200 
51,600 
Average deposits 
83,000 
64,700 
AUA (2) 
568,800 
438,200 
AUM (2) 
182,100 
137,300 
Average AUA 
525,300 
424,600 
Average AUM 
165,600 
130,200 
(1) 
Effective Q4 2021, gains (losses) on economic hedges of our U.S. share-based 
compensation plans, which are reflected in revenue, and related variability in 
share-based compensation expense driven by changes in the fair value of 
liabilities relating to our U.S. share-based compensation plans have been 
reclassified from our Wealth Management segment to Corporate Support. 
Comparative amounts have been reclassified to conform with this 
presentation. 
(2) 
Represents year-end spot balances. 
0
200,000
100,000
300,000
400,000
600,000
500,000
2021
2020
AUA
AUM
Average AUA and AUM (Millions of U.S. dollars)
 
36
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Global Asset Management 
GAM provides global investment management services and solutions for individual and institutional investors in Canada, the 
U.K., the U.S., Europe, and Asia. We provide a broad range of investment management services through mutual, pooled and 
private funds, fee-based accounts, and separately managed portfolios. We distribute our investment solutions through a broad 
network of bank branches, our self-directed and full-service wealth advisory businesses, independent third-party advisors and 
private banks, and directly to individual clients. We also provide investment solutions directly to institutional clients, including 
pension plans, insurance companies, corporations, and endowments and foundations. 
We are the largest retail fund company in Canada measured by AUM, as well as a leading institutional asset manager. We 
face competition in Canada from banks, insurance companies and asset management organizations. The Canadian fund 
management industry is large and mature, but remains a relatively fragmented industry. 
In the U.S., our asset management business offers investment management solutions and services, primarily to institutional 
investors, and competes with independent asset management firms, as well as those that are part of national and international 
banks and insurance companies. 
Internationally, through our global capabilities of BlueBay and RBC Global Asset Management®, we offer investment 
management solutions for institutions and, through private banks including RBC Wealth Management®, to HNW and UHNW 
investors. We face competition from asset managers that are owned by international banks, as well as national and regional 
asset managers in the geographies where we serve clients. 
Financial performance 
Revenue increased $418 million or 18% from last year, primarily due to higher average fee-based client assets reflecting market 
appreciation and net sales. 
Selected highlights 
Table 26  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Total revenue 
$
2,726 
$
2,308 
Other information 
 
 
Canadian net long-term mutual 
fund sales (1) 
21,830 
7,710 
Canadian net money market mutual 
fund sales (redemptions) (1) 
(2,757) 
1,323 
AUM (2) 
597,300 
518,500 
Average AUM 
568,200 
496,000 
(1) 
As reported to the Investment Funds Institute of Canada. Includes all 
prospectus-based mutual funds across our Canadian GAM businesses. 
(2) 
Represents year-end spot balances. 
0
600,000
2021
2020
Average AUM (Millions of Canadian dollars)
100,000
200,000
300,000
500,000
400,000
 
International Wealth Management 
International Wealth Management includes operations in the U.K., Channel Islands and Asia. We provide customized and 
integrated trust, banking, credit, and investment solutions to HNW, UHNW and corporate clients in key financial centres. 
Competitors to our International Wealth Management business include global wealth managers, traditional offshore private 
banks and domestic wealth managers. 
Financial performance 
Revenue decreased $45 million or 12% from last year, mainly attributable to a decline in net interest income reflecting lower 
spreads. 
Selected highlights 
Table 27  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Total revenue 
$
342 
$
387 
Other information 
 
 
Average loans, guarantees and 
letters of credit, net 
4,600 
4,400 
Average deposits 
12,500 
13,000 
AUA (1) 
86,800 
93,400 
AUM (1) 
8,900 
9,200 
Average AUA 
90,500 
95,500 
Average AUM 
9,300 
9,000 
(1) 
Represents year-end spot balances. 
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
2021
2020
AUA
AUM
Average AUA and AUM (Millions of Canadian dollars)
 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
37 
 

Insurance 
RBC Insurance® offers a wide range of life, health, home, auto, travel, wealth, annuities, reinsurance advice and solutions, as well 
as business insurance solutions, to individual, business and group clients. 
$5.6 billion 
 > 4.8 million 
 2,573 
Total revenue 
 
Number of clients 
 
Employees 
 
 
 
 
 
Premiums and Deposits 
Total premiums
and deposits
$5.7 billion
 44% Life and Health
55%   Annuity and Segregated
 
 Fund Deposits
 1% Property and Casualty
 
 
RBC Insurance® is the largest Canadian bank-owned insurance organization on 
a total revenue basis and operates under two business lines: Canadian 
Insurance and International Insurance. 
In Canada, we offer life, health, travel, home, and auto insurance products, 
wealth accumulation solutions, annuities, advice, and services through a wide 
variety of channels: advice centres, RBC Insurance® stores, mobile advisors, 
digital, mobile and social platforms, independent brokers, and travel partners. 
Outside Canada, we operate globally in the reinsurance and retrocession 
markets offering life, disability and longevity reinsurance products. 
 
 
 
 
 
2021 Operating environment 
› During fiscal 2021 the COVID-19 pandemic continued to amplify interest in insurance, increasing the need for information and 
advice, changing client preferences and behaviours, and challenging traditional operating models. We remained focused on 
strengthening our client-first culture, investing in new ways for clients to do business with us, enhancing access and 
convenience through digitization, and delivering increased value to clients beyond our products and pricing. 
› In Canada, regulators maintained their focus on fair treatment of customers, capital adequacy, insurer solvency, and data 
privacy. As a result, we continued to evolve our robust frameworks, controls and risk culture to protect clients and meet the 
expectations of both federal and provincial regulators. 
› In the U.K., there was a strong and sustained appetite for longevity risk transfer as companies continued to actively manage 
longevity risk. As a result, the longevity reinsurance market remained highly competitive in fiscal 2021. We continued to achieve 
strong growth in this market, within our risk limits. 
38
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Strategic priorities 
OUR STRATEGY 
PROGRESS IN 2021 
PRIORITIES IN 2022 
Deepen client relationships 
Launched a new whole life insurance product 
RBC Growth Insurance™ offering the benefits of 
tax-deferred growth to our clients 
Enhanced our RBC® Guaranteed Investment 
Funds product with a new option that provides 
clients with greater flexibility to access their 
funds at any time without paying extra fees 
Introduced a wellness spending account for our 
group insurance clients that provides flexible 
coverage for a variety of wellness-related 
expenses including stress management, 
personal development, and family care 
Expanded our reach to home and auto clients 
through digital campaigns to ensure that they 
received assistance during the COVID-19 
pandemic 
Continue to be an innovative, client-focused 
provider of a full suite of insurance solutions for 
mass underserved, mass affluent and high net 
worth clients 
Simplify.Agile.Innovate 
Launched a new simplified electronic 
application process for some of our life 
insurance products to facilitate quicker 
decisions on applications and reduced time to 
purchase, making it easier to do business with 
us 
Added Maple’s virtual primary care services as 
part of our offering for group insurance clients, 
providing a platform for our clients to consult 
with a physician at their convenience 
Continued to innovate by investing in research 
and development to understand and meet the 
changing needs and expectations of 
underinsured Canadians 
Simplify and innovate by continuing to 
accelerate our investments in digital initiatives, 
improving quality and cost effectiveness 
Improve distribution effectiveness and 
efficiency 
Enabled our agents and advisors with tools and 
technology to continue providing trusted advice 
in a virtual setting 
Reduced wait times for our clients by simplifying 
and automating the underwriting processes for 
RBC Simplified Term 
Continued to enhance the client experience by 
launching digital signature technology for our 
life insurance products, enabling clients to use 
their own personal devices to sign applications 
remotely 
Continue to improve our distribution 
effectiveness and efficiency by enhancing both 
our proprietary and independent channels, and 
focusing on the delivery of technology and 
operational solutions 
Grow the longevity business in Canada and the 
U.K. 
Achieved strong growth in our longevity 
reinsurance business, largely due to our 
relationships within the U.K. reinsurance 
market, our longevity operations, and our 
underwriting expertise 
Pursue niche opportunities to grow our 
longevity product lines within our risk limits 
Outlook 
The insurance industry is expected to continue experiencing change in the coming fiscal year driven by the ongoing impacts of 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Forces of change include evolving client expectations, accelerated digital disruption, and distribution 
innovation. Government and regulatory pressures are also expected to continue into fiscal 2022. As consumers focus more 
attention on overall health and well-being, we will continue to deliver services and create industry partnerships to assist our 
clients. In this rapidly evolving industry and economic environment, we will seek to maintain our strength through investments in 
technology, product and service innovation, efficient distribution channels, and a strong risk culture. We will also continue to re-
define how we advise our clients and seek to provide them peace of mind. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic has created more 
awareness of the importance of financial security and has prompted people to take a closer look at their insurance coverage. We 
see this renewed demand continuing to drive growth opportunities. We believe that delivering on our business strategy will allow 
us to continue to thrive in this changing environment. 
For further details on our general economic review and outlook, refer to the Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook 
section. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
39 
 

Insurance 
Table 28  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted) 
2021 
2020 
Non-interest income 
 
 
Net earned premiums 
$
4,840 
$
4,267 
Investment Income, gains/(losses) on assets supporting insurance policyholder liabilities (1) 
577 
938 
Fee income 
183 
156 
Total revenue 
5,600 
5,361 
PCL 
(1) 
– 
Insurance policyholder benefits and claims (1) 
3,547 
3,384 
Insurance policyholder acquisition expense 
344 
299 
Non-interest expense 
596 
592 
Income before income taxes 
1,114 
1,086 
Net income 
$
889 
$
831 
Revenue by business 
 
 
Canadian Insurance 
$
2,917 
$
2,974 
International Insurance 
2,683 
2,387 
Key ratios 
 
 
ROE 
37.4% 
36.1% 
Selected balance sheet information 
 
 
Average total assets 
$
21,600 
$
20,300 
Other information 
 
 
Premiums and deposits (2) 
$
5,721 
$
4,950 
Canadian Insurance 
3,162 
2,493 
International Insurance 
2,559 
2,457 
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities 
12,816 
12,215 
Fair value changes on investments backing policyholder liabilities (1) 
(13) 
277 
Number of employees (FTE) 
2,573 
2,772 
(1) 
Includes unrealized gains and losses on investments backing policyholder liabilities attributable to fluctuation of assets designated as FVTPL. The investments which 
support actuarial liabilities are predominantly fixed income assets designated as FVTPL. Consequently, changes in the fair values of these assets are recorded in 
Insurance premiums, investment and fee income in the Consolidated Statements of Income and are largely offset by changes in the fair value of the actuarial liabilities, 
the impact of which is reflected in PBCAE. 
(2) 
Premiums and deposits include premiums on risk-based insurance and annuity products, and individual and group segregated fund deposits, consistent with insurance 
industry practices. 
Financial performance 
2021 vs. 2020 
Net income increased $58 million or 7% from last year, largely due to favourable annual actuarial assumption updates and lower 
claims costs. These factors were partially offset by lower favourable investment-related experience, including the impact of 
realized investment gains in the prior year, as well as a lower impact from reinsurance contract renegotiations. 
Total revenue increased $239 million or 4%, mainly reflecting higher group annuity sales as well as business growth, both of 
which are largely offset in PBCAE as indicated below. These factors were partially offset by the change in fair value of 
investments backing policyholder liabilities and the impact of realized investment gains in the prior year. 
PBCAE increased $208 million or 6%, mainly reflecting higher group annuity sales and business growth, both of which are 
largely offset in revenue. Lower favourable investment-related experience and a lower impact from reinsurance contract 
renegotiations also contributed to the increase. These factors were partially offset by the change in fair value of investments 
backing policyholder liabilities, favourable annual actuarial assumption updates in the current year largely related to mortality 
and economic assumptions, and lower claims costs mainly in our travel and disability products. 
Non-interest expense increased $4 million or 1%, as higher legal costs were largely offset by the benefit of ongoing efficiency 
initiatives. 
Business line review 
Canadian Insurance 
We offer life, health, travel, home, and auto insurance products (in partnership agreement with Aviva Canada), wealth 
accumulation solutions, and payout annuities to individual, group, HNW, and business clients across Canada. Our life and health 
portfolio includes participating whole life, universal life, term life, critical illness, disability, and group benefits such as long-term 
disability, and health and dental. Wealth solutions include a family of segregated funds as well as individual payout annuities. 
Our travel products include out-of-province/country medical coverage, and trip cancellation and interruption insurance. 
Our group annuities business helps defined benefit pension plan sponsors better manage and control risk. RBC Insurance 
has a set of strategies and initiatives aimed at building our momentum and positioning us for growth in this product line where 
companies are increasingly looking to transfer the risks associated with their pension obligations to insurance companies – 
either through group annuity contracts or longevity swap products. 
In Canada, many of our competitors specialize in life and health or property and casualty products. As a multi-line carrier, 
we offer a broad suite of solutions for individuals and businesses, including disability, life, home, auto and travel products along 
with wealth, group health and dental and pension solutions. Within these product lines, we hold market leadership positions in 
disability insurance and wealth products. 
Financial performance 
Total revenue decreased $57 million or 2% from last year, mainly due to the change in fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities and the impact of realized investment gains in the prior year. These factors were partially offset by higher 
group annuity sales and business growth, primarily in segregated fund and individual life products, both of which are largely 
offset in PBCAE. 
40
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Premiums and deposits increased $669 million or 27%, mainly due to group annuity, segregated fund and individual life 
products. 
Selected highlights 
Table 29  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Total revenue 
$ 2,917 
$ 2,974 
Other information 
 
 
Premiums and deposits 
 
 
Life and health 
1,434 
1,397 
Property and casualty 
77 
98 
Annuity and segregated fund 
deposits 
1,651 
998 
Fair value changes on investments 
backing policyholder liabilities 
(119) 
351 
0
1,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
Annuity and segregated
fund
Property and
casualty
Life and health
2021
2020
Premiums and deposits (Millions of Canadian dollars) 
 
International Insurance 
International Insurance is primarily comprised of our reinsurance businesses which insure risks of other insurance and 
reinsurance companies. We offer life, disability and longevity reinsurance products. 
The global reinsurance market is competitive and reflects significant market share in the U.S., U.K, and Europe being held by 
a small number of reinsurers. 
Financial performance 
Total revenue increased $296 million or 12% from last year, mainly due to the change in fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities and business growth in longevity reinsurance. 
Premiums and deposits increased $102 million or 4% as growth in longevity reinsurance was partially offset by declining 
volumes in International life and life retrocession products. 
Selected highlights 
Table 30  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Total revenue 
$ 2,683 
$ 2,387 
Other information 
 
 
Premiums and deposits 
 
 
Life and health 
1,050 
1,144 
Annuity 
1,509 
1,313 
Fair value changes on investments 
backing policyholder liabilities 
106 
(74) 
0
1,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
Life and health
2021
2020
Premiums and deposits (Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Annuity
 
Investor & Treasury Services 
Investor & Treasury Services provides asset servicing, custody, payments and treasury services to financial and other investors 
worldwide. We are a trusted partner with offices in 16 countries in North America, Europe, the U.K., and Asia-Pacific. Our focus is 
on safeguarding client assets and simplifying our clients’ operations in support of their growth. 
$4.6 trillion 
 14.0% 
 $64.4 billion 
Assets under administration 
 
Return on equity 
 
Average client deposits 
 
 
 
 
 
Revenue by Geography 
Total revenue
$2.2 billion
 39% North America
33%  Europe (Ex. U.K.)
 17% U.K.
 11% Asia-Paciﬁc
 
 
Our product and service offering includes custody, fund and investment 
administration, shareholder services, private capital services, performance 
measurement and compliance monitoring, distribution, transaction banking, and 
treasury and market services (including cash and liquidity management, foreign 
exchange services and global securities finance). We deliver digitally-enabled 
products and services which continue to be enhanced and evolved in line with our 
clients’ changing needs. 
We compete against the world’s largest custodians in selected countries in North 
America, Europe, the U.K., and Asia-Pacific. 
 
 
 
 
 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
41 
 

2021 Operating environment 
› Results for our asset services business were impacted by industry headwinds such as persistent low interest rates and 
continued pricing pressure. 
› Our funding and liquidity business also managed through revenue headwinds from the ongoing low interest rate environment, 
including compressed spreads. 
› We continued to execute on initiatives to improve our cost structure and upgrade our technology capabilities. 
Strategic priorities 
OUR STRATEGY 
PROGRESS IN 2021 
PRIORITIES IN 2022 
Be the #1 asset services provider in Canada 
Our AUA in Canada grew by 12% year-over-year 
Continue to grow income and market share 
among Canadian asset managers, investment 
counsellors, pension funds, insurance 
companies and transaction banking clients 
Compete in selected fast growing asset 
servicing segments and markets 
Achieved higher Fund Finance sales, driven by 
strong brand recognition and cross-segment 
collaboration 
Focus on fast growing markets and products 
where we have competitive advantages 
Complete the execution of our ongoing 
repositioning initiatives by exiting non-core 
operations 
Deliver seamless client experiences and 
employ technology to enable our clients’ 
success 
Evolved our digital offering, improving interactive 
applications to increase clients’ digital self-
service capacity and reduce operational risk 
Continue to deliver seamless digital client 
experiences 
Continue to invest in technology to enable our 
clients’ success 
Outlook 
In fiscal 2022, we expect the global asset services industry will remain challenging. While we expect some benefit from rising 
interest rates in fiscal 2022, ongoing fee reductions, competition from global custody providers in key markets and the impact of 
reduced client activities are expected to constrain revenue growth. Ongoing inflationary pressures also have the potential to 
impact our results in fiscal 2022. Improving operational efficiency and completing ongoing repositioning initiatives will continue 
to be a priority. We will focus on business opportunities in our chosen fast-growing markets and segments where we have 
competitive advantages, and leveraging our investment in technology to enable our clients’ success. 
We will continue to prioritize prudent risk and funding management amidst an evolving interest rate and liquidity 
environment. Market liquidity levels are anticipated to remain elevated as monetary policy is expected to remain accommodative. 
For further details on our general economic review and outlook, refer to the Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook section. 
Investor & Treasury Services 
Table 31  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted) 
2021 
2020 
Net interest income 
$
460 
$
329 
Non-interest income 
1,704 
1,982 
Total revenue 
2,164 
2,311 
PCL on performing assets 
(8) 
6 
PCL on impaired assets 
– 
– 
PCL 
(8) 
6 
Non-interest expense 
1,589 
1,589 
Income before income taxes 
583 
716 
Net income 
$
440 
$
536 
Key ratios 
 
 
ROE 
14.0% 
15.9% 
Selected balance sheet information 
 
 
Average total assets 
$
235,400 
$
204,300 
Average deposits 
219,800 
187,900 
Average client deposits 
64,400 
63,000 
Average wholesale funding deposits 
155,400 
124,900 
Other information 
 
 
AUA (1) 
$ 4,640,900 
$ 4,483,500 
Average AUA 
4,634,900 
4,386,300 
Number of employees (FTE) (2) 
3,718 
3,851 
Estimated impact of U.S. dollar, British pound and Euro translation on key income statement items 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
2021 vs. 2020 
 
Increase (decrease): 
 
 
Total revenue 
$
(22) 
 
PCL 
– 
 
Non-interest expense 
(15) 
 
Net income 
(9) 
 
Percentage change in average U.S. dollar equivalent of C$1.00 
7% 
 
Percentage change in average British pound equivalent of C$1.00 
– 
 
Percentage change in average Euro equivalent of C$1.00 
2% 
 
(1) 
Represents year-end spot balances. 
(2) 
Effective Q1 2021, certain employees have been reclassified from Investor & Treasury Services to Corporate Support. Prior period amounts have been reclassified to 
conform with this presentation. 
42
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Financial performance 
2021 vs. 2020 
Net income decreased $96 million or 18% from last year, primarily driven by lower revenue from client deposits and funding and 
liquidity. 
Total revenue decreased $147 million or 6%, mainly due to lower client deposit revenue largely driven by lower interest rates. 
Lower funding and liquidity revenue also contributed to the decrease, mainly reflecting net favourable impacts from market 
volatility and interest rate movements in the prior year, as well as the impact of lower interest rates and lower gains from the 
disposition of securities, partially offset by a greater impact in the prior year from elevated enterprise liquidity. 
Non-interest expense remained relatively flat as higher technology-related costs and higher net costs associated with 
ongoing efficiency initiatives were largely offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Capital Markets 
RBC Capital Markets® is a premier global investment bank providing expertise in advisory & origination, sales & trading, and 
lending & financing to corporations, institutional investors, asset managers, private equity firms and governments globally. Our 
professionals ensure that clients receive the advice, products, and services their businesses need from 58 offices in 14 countries. 
Our presence extends across North America, the U.K. & Europe, and Australia, Asia & other regions. 
>15,500 
 #11 
 6,414 
Number of clients 
 
Global league table rankings1 
 
Employees 
 
 
Revenue by Geography 
Total revenue
$10.2 billion
55%  U.S.
25%  Canada
15%  U.K. & Europe
5%  Australia, Asia &
        other regions
 
 
We operate two main business lines, Corporate and Investment Banking and 
Global Markets. 
In North America, we offer a full suite of products and services which include 
equity and debt origination and distribution, advisory services, and sales & 
trading. In Canada, we are a market leader with a strategic presence in all lines 
of capital markets businesses. In the U.S., where our competitors include large 
global investment banks, we have a full industry sector coverage and investment 
banking product range, as well as capabilities in credit, secured lending, 
municipal finance, fixed income, currencies & commodities, and equities. 
Outside North America, we have a targeted strategic presence in the U.K. & 
Europe, Australia, Asia & other markets aligned to our global expertise. In the 
U.K. & Europe, we offer a diversified set of capabilities in key industry sectors of 
focus. In Australia and Asia, we compete with global and regional investment 
banks in targeted areas aligned to our global expertise, including fixed income 
distribution and currencies trading, secured financing, as well as corporate and 
investment banking. 
 
  
2021 Operating environment 
› The fiscal 2021 operating environment was characterized by a rebound in investment banking activity as a result of robust deal 
flow commensurate with global investment banking fee pool growth of 37%1. Equity Capital Markets (ECM), M&A, and loan 
syndication fee pools reached record highs during the fiscal year, benefitting from the re-opening of economies resulting in 
strong deal flow, compared to a muted environment in the prior fiscal year against an uncertain economic outlook and 
backdrop. 
› Trading activity was elevated in the first quarter of the fiscal year as markets continued to benefit from volatility-driven 
tailwinds that characterized the second half of 2020. However, toward the end of the second quarter of fiscal 2021, trading 
results began to be impacted by market normalization, albeit remaining above pre-pandemic levels. This was particularly 
prevalent in fixed income trading which saw results impacted by reduced client activity. Repo–related financing also decreased 
driven by spread compression as the market became more liquid and client demand for secured funding declined. 
› Improvements in the credit environment, driven by the economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, led to favourable 
changes in our macroeconomic and credit quality outlook, resulting in releases of provisions on performing assets and lower 
provisions on impaired loans. 
1 
Source: Dealogic, based on global investment bank fees, Fiscal 2021 as of November 21, 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
43 
 

Strategic priorities 
OUR STRATEGY 
PROGRESS IN 2021 
PRIORITIES IN 2022 
Build Deep, Multi-Product Client 
Relationships 
Continued to deepen relationships with clients 
resulting in high quality mandates in Corporate 
and Investment Banking and numerous franchise 
firsts in Global Markets 
Acted as lead-left bookrunner on Alexandria Real 
Estate’s US$1.3 billion equity follow-on offering 
which was the largest REIT equity offering since 
2013 
Maintain our leadership position in Canada and 
our position as the Canadian leader in the U.S., 
our largest market with the best opportunity for 
growth 
Continue to be a leader in targeted areas in the 
U.K., Europe and Australia, Asia & other regions 
aligned with our global expertise 
Expand client coverage in underpenetrated 
sectors and products 
Lead with Advice, Solutions and Innovation 
Drove higher levels of client engagement through 
the provision of differentiated insights and 
services 
Reorganized our Global Markets business, 
elevating our research platform and embedding 
electronic and digital capabilities across sales & 
trading businesses 
Acted as lead structuring agent and joint 
bookrunner on Telus’ C$750 million sustainability-
linked bond which was the first of its kind in the 
Canadian Market 
Grow advisory & origination and accelerate 
Sustainable Finance across all business areas 
and continue to provide Environmental, Social 
and Governance (ESG) related and sustainability 
advice to clients 
Enhance sales & trading client value and insights 
from scaled electronic and digital strategy 
Leverage Cross Platform Collaboration 
Further aligned our delivery capabilities with how 
our clients do business 
Shifted to global business structures to improve 
collaboration and drive enhanced client coverage 
Advised Blackstone on its US$5.6 billion 
acquisition of U.K. company Signature Aviation 
Continue to drive cross-platform and geographic 
collaboration across businesses and asset 
classes 
Invest in, Engage and Enable our Talent 
Engaged and developed our talent at all levels, 
with numerous key senior hires made across 
businesses while championing internal mobility 
Advanced our Diversity & Inclusion strategy and 
continued to improve representation of diverse 
talent 
Renew focus on talent development programs 
and accelerate Diversity & Inclusion strategy 
Simplify, Prioritize and Leverage our Scale 
Focused on productivity and efficiency measures, 
supported by key performance indicators to 
monitor progress 
Continue to optimize balance sheet utilization 
and strategically reallocate resources 
Evolve our Brand as an Innovative, Trusted 
Partner 
Successfully maintained #1 market share position 
in Canada1 and ranked as #1 Canadian Investment 
Bank in the U.S.1 and continued to be viewed as a 
trusted advisor / financer in the U.K., Europe, Asia 
and Australia 
Recognized by Greenwich Associates2 as a market 
leader in Canada for equities trading and 
research and won the Celent Model Sell Side 
Award 20213 for Aiden®4 
Advised Australia’s New South Wales government 
on its A$11.1 billion sale of WestConnex Motorway 
to Sydney Transport Partners  
Be recognized by our clients as an innovative, 
trusted partner with best in class capabilities 
Outlook 
In fiscal 2022, we see constructive markets as a potential tailwind for M&A activity. We will continue to pursue market share 
growth opportunities in our Investment Banking business, with a focus on targeted sectors and investment in talent. While we 
anticipate our trading businesses will continue to be impacted by normalization, our focus remains on delivering robust results 
across our Global Markets franchise through continued resource optimization, acceleration of cross-selling activities, further 
deployment of electronic and digital capabilities, and building on our strong risk management practices. In Corporate Banking, 
we will continue to pursue a moderate growth approach consistent with our focus on our balance sheet-enabled strategy to 
deepen relationships with lending clients in order to drive growth in our non-lending businesses. This strategy will continue to be 
underpinned by strong credit risk management practices, optimization of risk-weighted assets (RWA), and supporting our clients 
in the execution of their strategies. 
For further details on our general economic review and outlook, refer to the Economic, market and regulatory review and outlook 
section. 
1 
Source: Dealogic, based on global investment bank fees, Fiscal 2021 
2 
Source: Greenwich Associates Awards, Fiscal 2021 
3 
Source: Celent Model, Fiscal 2021 
4 
Aiden® is an AI-based electronic trading platform that uses the computational power of deep reinforcement learning in its pursuit of improved trading results and insights 
for clients. 
44
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Capital Markets 
Table 32  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted) 
2021 
2020 
Net interest income (1) 
$
4,553 
$
5,135 
Non-interest income (1) 
5,634 
4,749 
Total revenue (1) 
10,187 
9,884 
PCL on performing assets 
(476) 
750 
PCL on impaired assets 
(33) 
489 
PCL 
(509) 
1,239 
Non-interest expense 
5,427 
5,362 
Income before income taxes 
5,269 
3,283 
Net income 
$
4,187 
$
2,776 
Revenue by business 
 
 
Corporate and Investment Banking 
$
4,823 
$
4,031 
Global Markets 
5,542 
6,251 
Other 
(178) 
(398) 
Key ratios 
 
 
ROE 
18.3% 
11.7% 
Selected balance sheet information 
 
 
Average total assets 
$
710,200 
$
755,400 
Average trading securities 
122,900 
108,300 
Average loans and acceptances, net 
100,000 
108,700 
Average deposits 
73,500 
76,800 
Other information 
 
 
Number of employees (FTE) (2) 
6,414 
6,258 
Credit information 
 
 
PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances 
(0.04)% 
0.44% 
Estimated impact of U.S. dollar, British pound and Euro translation on key income statement items 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
2021 vs. 2020 
 
Increase (decrease): 
 
 
Total revenue 
$
(423) 
 
PCL 
25 
 
Non-interest expense 
(219) 
 
Net income 
(187) 
 
Percentage change in average U.S. dollar equivalent of C$1.00 
7% 
 
Percentage change in average British pound equivalent of C$1.00 
– 
 
Percentage change in average Euro equivalent of C$1.00 
2% 
 
(1) 
The teb adjustment for 2021 was $518 million (2020 – $513 million). For further discussion, refer to the How we measure and report our business segments section. 
(2) 
Amounts have been revised from those previously presented. 
10,500
7,500
9,000
4,500
6,000
3,000
1,500
0
2021
2020
Revenue by region (Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Australia, Asia & other regions
U.K. & Europe
U.S.
Canada  
Financial performance 
2021 vs. 2020 
Net income increased $1,411 million or 51% from last year, primarily driven by lower PCL and higher revenue in Corporate and 
Investment Banking. These factors were partially offset by higher taxes reflecting an increase in the proportion of earnings from 
higher tax rate jurisdictions, and lower revenue in Global Markets. 
Total revenue increased $303 million or 3%, mainly due to higher M&A and loan syndication activity, as well as higher equity 
trading revenue, across most regions. Lower residual funding costs, higher revenue associated with certain non-trading 
portfolios, higher equity origination across most regions, and gains from the disposition of certain investment securities also 
contributed to the increase. These factors were partially offset by lower fixed income trading revenue across all regions due to 
spread compression in repo and secured financing products and reduced client activity, as well as the impact of foreign 
exchange translation. 
PCL decreased $1,748 million, as last year reflected elevated provisions on performing assets due to the impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic as compared to releases in the current year primarily driven by improvements in our macroeconomic and 
credit quality outlook. Provisions on impaired loans in the prior year as compared to recoveries in the current year, largely in the 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
45 
 

oil and gas sector, also contributed to the decrease, resulting in a decrease of 48 bps in the PCL on impaired loans ratio. For 
further details, refer to Credit quality performance in the Credit risk section. 
Non-interest expense increased $65 million or 1%, as higher compensation on improved results was largely offset by the 
impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Business line review 
Corporate and Investment Banking 
Corporate and Investment Banking comprises our corporate lending, municipal finance, loan syndication, debt and equity 
origination, and M&A advisory services. For debt and equity origination, revenue is allocated between Corporate and Investment 
Banking and Global Markets based on the contribution of each group in accordance with an established agreement. 
Financial performance 
Corporate and Investment Banking revenue of $4,823 million increased $792 million or 20% from last year. 
Investment Banking revenue increased $802 million or 46%, primarily due to higher M&A and loan syndication activity across 
most regions. Higher fixed income trading revenue in the U.S. and Europe, reflecting the impact of loan underwriting markdowns 
in the prior year, higher equity origination across most regions, and higher revenue associated with certain non-trading 
portfolios also contributed to the increase. These factors were partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Lending and other revenue remained relatively flat. 
Selected highlights 
Table 33  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Total revenue (1) 
$
4,823 $
4,031 
Breakdown of revenue (1) 
 
 
Investment banking 
2,559 
1,757 
Lending and other (2) 
2,264 
2,274 
Other information 
 
 
Average assets 
81,400 
92,600 
Average loans and acceptances, net 
73,300 
83,000 
(1) 
The teb adjustment for the year ended October 31, 2021 was $37 million 
(October 31, 2020 – $56 million). For further discussion, refer to the How we 
measure and report our business segments section. 
(2) 
Comprises our corporate lending, client securitization, and global credit 
businesses. 
0
1,000
5,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
2021
2020
Lending and other
Investment banking
Breakdown of total revenue (Millions of Canadian dollars)  
 
Global Markets 
Global Markets comprises our sales and trading businesses including fixed income, foreign exchange, commodities, and equities, 
as well as our repo and secured financing products. 
Financial performance 
Global Markets revenue of $5,542 million decreased $709 million or 11% from last year. 
Revenue in our Fixed income, currencies and commodities business decreased $365 million or 11%, largely driven by lower 
fixed income trading revenue across all regions due to reduced client activity, and the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
These factors were partially offset by gains from the disposition of certain investment securities. 
Revenue in our Equities business increased $128 million or 9%, primarily due to higher equity trading revenue across all 
regions, partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Revenue in our Repo and secured financing business decreased $472 million or 29%, mainly due to spread compression and 
reduced client activity driven by increased market liquidity. 
Selected highlights 
Table 34  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Total revenue (1) 
$
5,542 $
6,251 
Breakdown of revenue (1) 
 
 
Fixed income, currencies 
and commodities 
2,878 
3,243 
Equities 
1,531 
1,403 
Repo and secured financing (2) 
1,133 
1,605 
Other information 
 
 
Average assets 
626,500 
667,900 
(1) 
The teb adjustment for the year ended October 31, 2021 was $481 million 
(October 31, 2020 – $457 million). For further discussion, refer to the How we 
measure and report our business segments section. 
(2) 
Comprises our secured funding businesses for internal businesses and 
external clients. 
0
1,000
2,000
7,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
2021
2020
Repo and secured
ﬁnancing
Global equities
Fixed income, currencies
and commodities
Breakdown of total revenue (Millions of Canadian dollars)  
 
Other 
Other includes our legacy portfolio, which mainly consists of our U.S. commercial mortgage-backed securities (MBS), bank-
owned life insurance (BOLI) derivative contracts and structured rates in Asia. 
46
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Financial performance 
Revenue increased $220 million from last year, largely due to lower residual funding costs. 
Corporate Support 
Corporate Support consists of Technology & Operations, which provides the technological and operational foundation required 
to effectively deliver products and services to our clients, Functions, which includes our finance, human resources, risk 
management, internal audit and other functional groups, as well as our Corporate Treasury function. Reported results for 
Corporate Support mainly reflect certain activities related to monitoring and oversight of enterprise activities which are not 
allocated to business segments. For further details, refer to the How we measure and report our business segments section. 
Corporate Support 
Table 35  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Net interest income (loss) (1) 
$
(321) 
$
(57) 
Non-interest income (loss) (1), (2) 
421 
(179) 
Total revenue (1), (2) 
100 
(236) 
PCL 
(1) 
1 
Non-interest expense (2) 
405 
146 
Income (loss) before income taxes (1), (2) 
(304) 
(383) 
Income taxes (recoveries) (1), (2) 
(365) 
(436) 
Net income (loss) (2) 
$
61 
$
53 
(1) 
Teb adjusted. 
(2) 
Effective Q4 2021, gains (losses) on economic hedges of our U.S. share-based compensation plans, which are reflected in revenue, and related variability in share-based 
compensation expense driven by changes in the fair value of liabilities relating to our U.S. share-based compensation plans have been reclassified from our Wealth 
Management segment to Corporate Support. Comparative amounts have been reclassified to conform with this presentation. 
Due to the nature of activities and consolidation adjustments reported in this segment, we believe that a comparative period 
analysis is not relevant. The following identifies material items affecting the reported results in each year. 
Total revenue and Income taxes (recoveries) in each period in Corporate Support include the deduction of the teb adjustments 
related to the gross-up of income from Canadian taxable corporate dividends and the U.S. tax credit investment business 
recorded in Capital Markets. The amount deducted from revenue was offset by an equivalent increase in Income taxes 
(recoveries). 
The teb amount for the year ended October 31, 2021 was $518 million and was $513 million last year. For the year ended October 31, 
2021, revenue included gains of $394 million (October 31, 2020: gains of $90 million) on economic hedges of our U.S. Wealth 
Management (including City National) share-based compensation plans, and non-interest expense included $382 million 
(October 31, 2020: $89 million) of share-based compensation expense driven by changes in the fair value of liabilities relating to 
our U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) share-based compensation plans. 
The following identifies the material items, other than the teb impacts noted previously, affecting the reported results in each 
year. 
2021 
Net income was $61 million, primarily due to asset/liability management activities and residual unallocated items, partially offset 
by net unfavourable tax adjustments. 
2020 
Net income was $53 million, largely due to asset/liability management activities, partially offset by net unfavourable tax 
adjustments and residual unallocated costs. 
Quarterly financial information 
Fourth quarter performance 
Q4 2021 vs. Q4 2020 
Fourth quarter net income of $3,892 million was up $646 million or 20% from a year ago. Diluted earnings per share (EPS) of $2.68 
was up $0.45 and return on common equity (ROE) of 16.9% was up 90 bps. Our Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) ratio of 13.7% was up 
120 bps from a year ago. Our results reflected higher earnings across all of our business segments. 
Total revenue increased $1,284 million or 12%, mainly due to higher group annuity sales, which is largely offset in PBCAE as 
indicated below, and higher average fee-based client assets reflecting market appreciation and net sales. Higher M&A activity 
across all regions and higher revenue associated with certain non-trading portfolios in Capital Markets also contributed to the 
increase. In Canadian Banking and U.S. Wealth Management (including City National), volume growth more than offset the 
impact of lower spreads. These factors were partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation, and lower fixed 
income trading revenue across all regions as the prior year benefitted from increased client activity amidst elevated market 
volatility. 
Total PCL decreased $654 million and the PCL on loans ratio of (12) bps decreased 35 bps from last year, due to lower 
provisions in Personal & Commercial Banking, Capital Markets and Wealth Management. 
PBCAE increased $571 million, primarily due to higher group annuity sales, which is largely offset in revenue. Lower 
favourable investment-related experience and business growth, primarily in longevity reinsurance, also contributed to the 
increase. These factors were partially offset by favourable annual actuarial assumption updates in the current year largely 
related to mortality and economic assumptions. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
47 
 

Non-interest expense increased $525 million or 9%, mainly attributable to higher variable compensation on improved results 
and higher staff-related costs. A legal provision in U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) also contributed to the 
increase. These factors were partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Income tax expense increased $196 million or 22%, primarily due to higher income before income taxes in the current 
quarter. The effective income tax rate of 22.0% increased 30 bps from last year, mainly due to the impact of changes in earnings 
mix. 
Q4 2021 vs. Q3 2021 
Net income of $3,892 million was down $404 million or 9% compared to last quarter, primarily due to lower releases of PCL, lower 
spreads in Canadian Banking and U.S. Wealth Management (including City National), and a legal provision in U.S. Wealth 
Management (including City National). These factors were partially offset by lower variable compensation. 
Quarterly results and trend analysis 
Our quarterly results are impacted by a number of trends and recurring factors, which include seasonality of certain businesses, 
general economic and market conditions, and fluctuations in the Canadian dollar relative to other currencies. The following table 
summarizes our results for the last eight quarters (the period): 
Quarterly results (1) 
Table 36  
 
2021 
2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except per 
share and percentage amounts) 
Q4 
Q3 
Q2 
Q1  
Q4 
Q3 
Q2 
Q1 
Personal & Commercial Banking 
$ 4,605 
$
4,651 
$
4,527 
$
4,563  $
4,373 
$
4,348 
$ 4,400 
$ 4,610 
Wealth Management (2) 
3,444 
3,373 
3,260 
3,219  
3,061 
3,008 
2,955 
3,106 
Insurance 
1,501 
1,754 
536 
1,809  
958 
2,212 
197 
1,994 
Investor & Treasury Services 
548 
517 
534 
565  
521 
484 
709 
597 
Capital Markets (3) 
2,298 
2,463 
2,718 
2,708  
2,275 
2,748 
2,313 
2,548 
Corporate Support (2), (3) 
(20) 
(2) 
43 
79  
(96) 
120 
(241) 
(19) 
Total revenue 
12,376 
12,756 
11,618 
12,943  
11,092 
12,920 
10,333 
12,836 
PCL 
(227) 
(540) 
(96) 
110  
427 
675 
2,830 
419 
PBCAE 
1,032 
1,304 
149 
1,406  
461 
1,785 
(177) 
1,614 
Non-interest expense 
6,583 
6,420 
6,379 
6,542  
6,058 
6,380 
5,942 
6,378 
Income before income taxes 
4,988 
5,572 
5,186 
4,885  
4,146 
4,080 
1,738 
4,425 
Income taxes 
1,096 
1,276 
1,171 
1,038  
900 
879 
257 
916 
Net income 
$ 3,892 
$
4,296 
$
4,015 
$
3,847  $
3,246 
$
3,201 
$ 1,481 
$ 3,509 
EPS – basic 
$
2.68 
$
2.97 
$
2.76 
$
2.66  $
2.23 
$
2.20 
$
1.00 
$
2.41 
 – diluted 
2.68 
2.97 
2.76 
2.66  
2.23 
2.20 
1.00 
2.40 
Effective income tax rate 
22.0% 
22.9% 
22.6% 
21.2%  
21.7% 
21.5% 
14.8% 
20.7% 
Period average US$ equivalent 
of C$1.00 
$ 0.796 
$
0.812 
$
0.798 
$
0.779  $
0.756 
$
0.737 
$ 0.725 
$ 0.760 
(1) 
Fluctuations in the Canadian dollar relative to other foreign currencies have affected our consolidated results over the period. 
(2) 
Effective Q4 2021, gains (losses) on economic hedges of our U.S. share-based compensation plans, which are reflected in revenue, and related variability in share-based 
compensation expense driven by changes in the fair value of liabilities relating to our U.S. share-based compensation plans have been reclassified from our Wealth 
Management segment to Corporate Support. Comparative amounts have been reclassified to conform with this presentation. 
(3) 
Teb adjusted. For further discussion, refer to the How we measure and report our business segments section of this 2021 Annual Report. 
Seasonality 
Seasonal factors may impact our results in certain quarters. The first quarter has historically been stronger for our Capital 
Markets businesses. The second quarter has fewer days than the other quarters, which generally results in a decrease in net 
interest income and certain expense items. The third and fourth quarters include the summer months which generally results in 
lower client activity and may negatively impact the results of our Capital Markets trading business. 
Trend analysis 
Earnings have generally trended upward over the period. However, earnings in the second quarter of 2020 reflected the impact of 
the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic across all of our business segments which resulted in a significant increase in PCL and 
fluctuations in revenue from the impact of market volatility, including interest rates and credit spreads, as well as client activity. 
Market conditions subsequently improved, and while impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic and its associated downstream 
implications persist, earnings have increased since the second quarter of 2020. Quarterly earnings are also affected by the 
impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Personal & Commercial Banking revenue has benefitted from solid volume growth over the period. NIM has been negatively 
impacted by margin compression over the period from the lower interest rate environment, mainly reflecting cumulative BoC rate 
cuts of 150 bps in the second quarter of 2020. 
Wealth Management revenue has benefitted from growth in average-fee based client assets, as well as volume growth over 
the period. The lower interest rate environment, mainly reflecting the cumulative U.S. Fed rate cuts of 150 bps in the second 
quarter of 2020, has negatively impacted revenue over the period.  
Insurance revenue has fluctuated over the period, primarily due to the impact of changes in the fair value of investments 
backing policyholder liabilities as well as the timing of group annuity sales, both of which are largely offset in PBCAE. The first 
quarters of 2020 and 2021 as well as Q4 2021 reflect higher group annuity sales. 
Investor & Treasury Services revenue has been impacted by interest rate movements, market volatility and client activity 
over the period, which resulted in heightened fluctuations in the second and third quarters of 2020 following the onset of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. 
48
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Capital Markets revenue is influenced, to a large extent, by market conditions that impact client activity, with first quarter 
results generally stronger than those in the remaining quarters. Markets experienced significant levels of volatility following the 
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, which resulted in increased client activity and fluctuations in trading revenue, including higher 
trading revenue in the third quarter of 2020 and the first quarter of 2021. Elevated market volatility in the second quarter of 2020 
also resulted in loan underwriting markdowns, with partial reversals in the latter half of 2020. 2021 generally saw strong results 
from M&A and loan syndication activity as well as equity origination. 
PCL on assets is comprised of provisions taken on performing assets and provisions taken on impaired assets. PCL on 
performing assets has fluctuated over the period as it is impacted by macroeconomic conditions, changes in exposures and 
credit quality. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a significant increase in provisions in 2020, largely in the second 
quarter. Throughout 2021, we saw improvements in our macroeconomic and credit quality outlook resulting in releases of 
provisions on performing assets. PCL on impaired assets trended lower over the period. The recovery that has been underway 
since the sharp drop of economic activity in calendar Q2 2020 as well as the impact of the COVID-19 related government support 
and calendar 2020 payment deferral programs, resulted in lower provisions, largely in our Canadian Banking retail portfolios 
beginning the second half of 2020. We saw higher provisions on impaired loans in Capital Markets, largely in the oil and gas 
sector, over the majority of 2020. Throughout 2021, we saw lower provisions on impaired loans in Capital Markets, largely due to 
recoveries in the oil and gas sector. 
PBCAE has fluctuated over the period as it includes the impact of changes in the fair value of investments backing 
policyholder liabilities and the impact of group annuity sales, both of which are largely offset in Revenue. The fair value of 
investments backing policyholder liabilities is impacted by changes in market conditions. PBCAE has also fluctuated due to the 
impact of investment-related experience and claims costs over the period. Actuarial adjustments, which generally occur in the 
fourth quarter of each year, also impact PBCAE. 
Non-interest expense has generally trended upwards over the period. Variable compensation has fluctuated over the period, 
commensurate with fluctuations in revenue and earnings, including the impact of decreased results in the second quarter of 
2020. Changes in the fair value of our U.S. share-based compensation plans, which are largely offset in revenue, have also 
contributed to fluctuations over the period and are impacted by market conditions. While we continue to focus on efficiency 
management activities, expenses over the period reflect our ongoing investments in people and technology, including digital 
initiatives. Beginning in the second quarter of 2020, Non-interest expense also reflected incremental COVID-19 related costs, 
though these costs have subsided in 2021. 
Our effective income tax rate has fluctuated over the period, mostly due to varying levels of tax adjustments and changes in 
earnings mix. The second quarter of 2020 saw a decrease mainly due to a higher proportion of tax exempt income and income 
from lower tax rate jurisdictions relative to lower earnings in that quarter. 
Financial condition 
Condensed balance sheets 
Table 37  
As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
Assets 
 
 
Cash and due from banks 
$
113,846 
$
118,888 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
79,638 
39,013 
Securities, net of applicable allowance (1) 
284,724 
275,814 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed 
307,903 
313,015 
Loans 
 
 
Retail 
503,598 
457,976 
Wholesale 
218,066 
208,655 
Allowance for loan losses 
(4,089) 
(5,639) 
Other – Derivatives 
95,541 
113,488 
– Other (2) 
107,096 
103,338 
Total assets 
$
1,706,323 
$
1,624,548 
Liabilities 
 
 
Deposits 
$
1,100,831 
$
1,011,885 
Other – Derivatives 
91,439 
109,927 
– Other (2) 
405,698 
406,102 
Subordinated debentures 
9,593 
9,867 
Total liabilities 
1,607,561 
1,537,781 
Equity attributable to shareholders 
98,667 
86,664 
Non-controlling interests 
95 
103 
Total equity 
98,762 
86,767 
Total liabilities and equity 
$
1,706,323 
$
1,624,548 
(1) 
Securities are comprised of trading and investment securities. 
(2) 
Other – Other assets and liabilities include Segregated fund net assets and liabilities, respectively. 
2021 vs. 2020 
Total assets increased $82 billion or 5% from last year. Foreign exchange translation decreased total assets by $68 billion. 
Cash and due from banks was down $5 billion or 4%, primarily due to lower deposits with central banks, reflecting our short 
term cash management activities. The impact of foreign exchange translation also contributed to the decrease. 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks increased $41 billion, primarily due to higher deposits with central banks, reflecting our 
short term cash and liquidity management activities. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
49 
 

Securities, net of applicable allowance, were up $9 billion or 3%, mainly due to higher equity trading securities reflecting 
favourable market conditions and higher corporate debt securities, partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation 
and lower government securities. 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements (reverse repos) and securities borrowed decreased $5 billion or 2%, 
largely due to the impact of foreign exchange translation and our liquidity management activities, partially offset by increased 
client demand. 
Loans (net of Allowance for loan losses) were up $57 billion or 9%, largely due to volume growth in residential mortgages and 
wholesale loans. These factors were partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Derivative assets were down $18 billion or 16%, mainly attributable to the impact of foreign exchange translation and lower 
fair values on interest rate contracts. These factors were partially offset by higher fair values on foreign exchange contracts. 
Other assets were up $4 billion or 4%, largely reflecting higher commodity trading receivables and increased employee 
benefit assets. These factors were largely offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Total liabilities increased $70 billion or 5% from last year. Foreign exchange translation decreased total liabilities by $68 billion. 
Deposits increased $89 billion or 9%, mainly due to higher business and retail deposits driven by both higher liquidity 
maintained by our clients amidst the COVID-19 pandemic and higher client activity. Higher issuances of short-term notes also 
contributed to the increase. These factors were partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Derivative liabilities were down $18 billion or 17%, mainly attributable to the impact of foreign exchange translation and 
lower fair values on interest rate contracts. These factors were partially offset by higher fair values on foreign exchange 
contracts. 
Other liabilities remained flat as higher obligations related to securities sold short were fully offset by the impact of foreign 
exchange translation. 
Total equity increased $12 billion or 14% primarily reflecting earnings, net of dividends. 
Off-balance sheet arrangements 
In the normal course of business, we engage in a variety of financial transactions that, for accounting purposes, are not recorded 
on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Off-balance sheet transactions are generally undertaken for risk, capital and funding 
management purposes which benefit us and our clients. These include transactions with structured entities and may also include 
the issuance of guarantees. These transactions give rise to, among other risks, varying degrees of market, credit, liquidity and 
funding risk, which are discussed in the Risk management section. 
We use structured entities to securitize our financial assets as well as assist our clients in securitizing their financial assets. 
These entities are not operating entities, typically have no employees, and may or may not be recorded on our Consolidated 
Balance Sheets. 
In the normal course of business, we engage in a variety of financial transactions that may qualify for derecognition. We 
apply the derecognition rules to determine whether we have transferred substantially all the risks and rewards or control 
associated with the financial assets to a third party. If the transaction meets specific criteria, it may qualify for full or partial 
derecognition from our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Securitizations of our financial assets 
We periodically securitize our credit card receivables and residential and commercial mortgage loans primarily to diversify our 
funding sources, enhance our liquidity position and for capital purposes. We also securitize residential and commercial 
mortgage loans as part of our sales and trading activities. 
We securitize our credit card receivables, on a revolving basis, through a consolidated structured entity. We securitize single 
and multiple-family residential mortgages through the National Housing Act Mortgage-Backed Securities (NHA MBS) program. 
The majority of our securitization activities are recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets as we do not meet the 
derecognition criteria. During 2021 and 2020, we did not derecognize any mortgages securitized through the NHA MBS program. 
For further details, refer to Note 6 and Note 7 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
We also periodically securitize commercial mortgage loans by selling them in collateral pools, which meet certain 
diversification, leverage and debt coverage criteria, to structured entities, one of which is sponsored by us. Securitized 
commercial mortgage loans are derecognized from our Consolidated Balance Sheets as we have transferred substantially all of 
the risks and rewards of ownership of the securitized assets. During the year ended October 31, 2021, we did not securitize any 
commercial mortgages (October 31, 2020 – $469 million). Our continuing involvement with the transferred assets is limited to 
servicing certain of the underlying commercial mortgages sold. As at October 31, 2021, there was $2 billion of commercial 
mortgages outstanding that we continue to service related to these securitization activities (October 31, 2020 – $2 billion). 
Involvement with unconsolidated structured entities 
In the normal course of business, we engage in a variety of financial transactions with structured entities to support our 
customers’ financing and investing needs, including securitization of our clients’ financial assets, creation of investment 
products, and other types of structured financing. 
We have the ability to use credit mitigation tools such as third-party guarantees, credit default swaps, and collateral to 
mitigate risks assumed through securitization and re-securitization exposures. The process in place to monitor the credit quality 
of our securitization and re-securitization exposures involves, among other things, reviewing the performance data of the 
underlying assets. We affirm our ratings each quarter and formally confirm or assign a new rating at least annually. For further 
details on our activities to manage risks, refer to the Risk management section. 
Below is a description of our activities with respect to certain significant unconsolidated structured entities. For a complete 
discussion of our interests in consolidated and unconsolidated structured entities, refer to Note 7 of our 2021 Annual 
Consolidated Financial Statements. 
RBC-administered multi-seller conduits 
We administer multi-seller conduits which are used primarily for the securitization of our clients’ financial assets. Our clients 
primarily use our multi-seller conduits to diversify their financing sources and to reduce funding costs by leveraging the value of 
high-quality collateral. The conduits offer us a favourable revenue stream and risk-adjusted return. 
50
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

We provide services such as transaction structuring, administration, backstop liquidity facilities and partial credit 
enhancements to the multi-seller conduits. Revenue for all such services amounted to $304 million during the year (October 31, 
2020 – $277 million). 
Our total commitment to the conduits in the form of backstop liquidity and credit enhancement facilities is shown below. The 
total committed amount of these facilities exceeds the total amount of the maximum assets that may have to be purchased by 
the conduits under the purchase agreements. As a result, the maximum exposure to loss attributable to our backstop liquidity 
and credit enhancement facilities is less than the total committed amounts of these facilities. 
Liquidity and credit enhancement facilities 
Table 38  
 
2021 
2020 
As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Notional of 
committed 
amounts (1) 
Allocable 
notional 
amounts 
Maximum 
exposure 
to loss (2) 
Notional of 
committed 
amounts (1) 
Allocable 
notional 
amounts 
Maximum 
exposure 
to loss (2) 
Backstop liquidity facilities 
$ 40,876 
$ 38,330 
$ 38,330 
$ 42,803 
$ 40,137 $ 40,137 
Credit enhancement facilities (3) 
2,546 
2,546 
2,546 
2,666 
2,666 
2,666 
Total 
$ 43,422 
$ 40,876 
$ 40,876 
$ 45,469 
$ 42,803 $ 42,803 
(1) 
Based on total committed financing limit. 
(2) 
Not presented in the table above are derivative assets with a fair value of $17 million (October 31, 2020 – $60 million) which are a component of our total maximum 
exposure to loss from our interests in the multi-seller conduits. Refer to Note 7 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements for more details. 
(3) 
Includes $9 million (October 31, 2020 – $2 million) of Financial standby letters of credit. 
As at October 31, 2021, the notional amount of backstop liquidity facilities we provide decreased by $1,927 million or 5% from last 
year, primarily due to the impact of foreign exchange translation. The notional amount of partial credit enhancement facilities we 
provide decreased by $120 million or 5% from last year, primarily due to the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Maximum exposure to loss by client type 
Table 39  
 
2021 
2020 
As at October 31 (Millions of dollars) 
US$ 
C$ 
Total C$ 
US$ 
C$ 
Total C$ 
Outstanding securitized assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Auto and truck loans and leases 
$ 11,546 
$
3,752 
$ 18,048 $
10,163 
$
3,738 
$
17,277 
Consumer loans 
2,466 
– 
3,054 
2,869 
– 
3,823 
Credit cards 
3,876 
510 
5,309 
4,070 
510 
5,932 
Dealer floor plan receivables 
906 
770 
1,892 
889 
858 
2,042 
Equipment receivables 
2,227 
– 
2,757 
2,349 
– 
3,129 
Fleet finance receivables 
366 
213 
667 
715 
245 
1,197 
Insurance premiums 
170 
428 
638 
216 
428 
716 
Residential mortgages 
– 
873 
873 
– 
864 
864 
Student loans 
1,587 
– 
1,965 
1,956 
– 
2,606 
Trade receivables 
2,337 
– 
2,893 
2,445 
– 
3,258 
Transportation finance 
2,163 
102 
2,780 
1,394 
102 
1,959 
Total 
$ 27,644 
$
6,648 
$ 40,876 $
27,066 
$
6,745 
$
42,803 
Canadian equivalent 
$ 34,228 
$
6,648 
$ 40,876 $
36,058 
$
6,745 
$
42,803 
Our overall exposure decreased by 5% compared to last year primarily due to the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
Correspondingly, total assets of the multi-seller conduits decreased by $1,890 million or 5% from last year. All of the multi-seller 
conduits assets were internally rated A or above. All transactions funded by the unconsolidated multi-seller conduits are 
internally rated using a rating system as outlined in the internal ratings map in the credit risk section. 
Multiple independent debt rating agencies review all of the transactions in the multi-seller conduits. Transactions financed 
in the U.S. multi-seller conduits are reviewed by Moody’s Investors Service (Moody’s), Standard & Poor’s (S&P) and Fitch Ratings 
(Fitch). Transactions in two of the Canadian multi-seller conduits are reviewed by Dominion Bond Rating Service (DBRS) and 
Moody’s while one of the Canadian multi-seller conduits is also reviewed by S&P. Each applicable rating agency also reviews 
ongoing transaction performance on a monthly basis and may publish reports detailing portfolio and program information 
related to the conduits. 
As at October 31, 2021, the total asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) issued by the conduits amounted to $25 billion, an 
increase of $1,488 million or 6% from last year, primarily due to higher client usage. The rating agencies that rate the ABCP rated 
100% (October 31, 2020 – 100%) of the total amount issued within the top ratings category. 
Structured finance 
We provide liquidity facilities to certain municipal bond Tender Option Bond (TOB) trusts in which we have an interest but do not 
consolidate because the residual certificates issued by the TOB trusts are held by third parties. As at October 31, 2021, our 
maximum exposure to loss from these unconsolidated municipal bond TOB trusts was $3 billion (October 31, 2020 – $3 billion).  
We provide senior warehouse financing to unaffiliated structured entities that are established by third parties to acquire 
loans and issue term collateralized loan obligations (CLO). A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the term CLO is used to 
fully repay the senior warehouse financing that we provide. As at October 31, 2021, our maximum exposure to loss associated with 
the outstanding senior warehouse financing facilities was $951 million (October 31, 2020 – $88 million). The increase in our 
maximum exposure to loss from last year was driven by increased client utilization and the addition of new financing facilities. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
51 
 

We provide senior financing to unaffiliated structured entities that are established by third parties to acquire loans. These 
facilities tend to be longer in term than the CLO warehouse facilities and benefit from credit enhancement designed to cover a 
multiple of historical losses. As at October 31, 2021, our maximum exposure to loss associated with the outstanding senior 
financing facilities was $4 billion (October 31, 2020 – $3 billion). The increase in our maximum exposure to loss from last year was 
driven by the addition of new financing facilities partially offset by the repayment and termination of existing financing facilities. 
Investment funds 
We invest in hedge funds primarily to provide clients with desired exposures to reference funds. As we make investments in the 
reference funds, exposures to the funds are simultaneously transferred to clients through derivative transactions. Our maximum 
exposure to loss in the reference funds is limited to our investments in the funds. As at October 31, 2021, our maximum exposure 
to loss was $3 billion (October 31, 2020 – $2 billion). The increase in our maximum exposure to loss from last year was due to 
increased holdings in third-party investment funds. 
We also provide liquidity facilities to certain third-party investment funds. The funds issue unsecured variable-rate preferred 
shares and invest in portfolios of tax exempt bonds. As at October 31, 2021, our maximum exposure to loss on these funds was 
$606 million (October 31, 2020 – $278 million). The increase in our maximum exposure to loss from last year was driven by the 
addition of new financing facilities. 
Third-party securitization vehicles 
We hold interests in certain unconsolidated third-party securitization vehicles, which are structured entities. We, as well as other 
financial institutions, are obligated to provide funding to these entities up to our maximum commitment level and are exposed to 
credit losses on the underlying assets after various credit enhancements. As at October 31, 2021, our maximum exposure to loss in 
these entities was $12 billion (October 31, 2020 – $10 billion). The increase in our maximum exposure to loss compared to last year 
reflects an increase in client activity with third-party securitization vehicles partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange 
translation. Interest and non-interest income earned in respect of these investments was $89 million (October 31, 2020 – 
$112 million). 
Guarantees, retail and commercial commitments 
We provide our clients with guarantees and commitments that expose us to liquidity and funding risks. Our maximum potential 
amount of future payments in relation to our commitments and guarantee products as at October 31, 2021 amounted to $414 
billion compared to $387 billion last year. The increase compared to last year was primarily driven by growth in securities lending 
indemnifications and other commitments to extend credit partly offset by decreases in back stop liquidity facilities and 
sponsored repo guarantees. Refer to Liquidity and funding risk and Note 23 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements 
for details regarding our guarantees and commitments. 
Risk management 
We are in the business of managing the risks inherent to the financial services industry as we aim to create maximum value for 
our shareholders, clients, employees and communities. The ability to manage risk is a core competency of the bank, and is 
supported by our risk-aware culture and risk management approach. Our view of risks is dynamic, and reflects the pace of 
change in the financial services industry. 
Top and emerging risks 
An important component of our risk management approach is to ensure that top and emerging risks, as they evolve, are 
identified, managed, and incorporated into our existing risk management assessment, measurement, monitoring and escalation 
processes and addressed in our risk frameworks and policies. These practices are intended to ensure a forward-looking risk 
assessment is maintained by management in the course of business development and as part of the execution of ongoing risk 
oversight responsibilities. Top and emerging risks are discussed by senior management and the Board on a regular basis. 
52
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

We have developed supplementary internal guidance to support enterprise-wide identification and assessment of all 
material risks, including those that are not readily apparent. Top and emerging risks encompass those that could materially 
impact our financial results, financial and operational resilience, reputation, business model, or strategy, as well as those that 
could potentially materially impact us as the risks evolve. In addition to the Impact of pandemic risk factor outlined in the Impact 
of COVID-19 pandemic section, the following represents our top and emerging risks: 
Top & emerging risks 
Description 
Business and economic 
conditions 
 
Our financial results may be affected to varying degrees by the general business and economic 
conditions in the geographic regions in which we operate. These conditions may include factors such as 
consumer saving, spending habits and sentiment, as well as consumer borrowing and repayment 
patterns, unemployment rates, the differing paths to economic recovery among nations across the 
globe, particularly in light of the prolonged COVID-19 pandemic and range of containment measures, the 
level of business investment and overall business sentiment, the long-term impact from the pandemic on 
vulnerable sectors, the level of government spending as well as fiscal and monetary policy, the level of 
activity and volatility of the financial markets, supply chain challenges and labour shortages affecting 
certain sectors, and inflation or possible stagflation. Moreover, interest rate changes and actions taken 
by central banks to manage inflation or the broader economy would have implications for us. Our 
financial results are sensitive to changes in interest rates, as described in the Systemic risk section. 
For example, a slowdown in economic growth or an economic downturn could adversely impact 
employment rates and household incomes, consumer spending, corporate earnings and business 
investment and could adversely affect our business, including but not limited to the demand for our loan 
and other products, and result in lower earnings, including higher credit losses. Additional risks are 
emerging around governments’ withdrawal of COVID-19 pandemic support measures, and how they will 
seek to recoup the unprecedented levels of support. This may include, for example, changes to tax policy 
to address fiscal capacity concerns and to balance budgets in the future. 
There are also emerging risks related to changing demographics as well as the potential implications 
that a prolonged low interest rate environment will have, for example, on increasing wealth inequality 
and delayed retirement ages, among others. 
For details on how we are managing our risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, refer to the 
Impact of pandemic risk factor in the Impact of COVID-19 pandemic section of this 2021 Annual Report. 
Information technology and 
cyber risks 
 
Information technology (IT) and cyber risks remain top risks, not only for the financial services sector, 
but for other industries worldwide. We continue to be subject to heightened risks in the form of cyber-
attacks, data breaches, cyber extortion and similar compromises, due to: (i) the size, scale, and global 
nature of our operations; (ii) our heavy reliance on the internet to conduct day-to-day business 
activities; (iii) our intricate technological infrastructure; and (iv) our use of third-party service providers. 
Additionally, clients’ use of personal devices can create further avenues for potential cyber-related 
incidents, as the bank has little or no control over the safety of these devices. Ransomware threats are 
growing in sophistication and being used to launch major supply chain attacks. IT and cyber risks have 
also increased during the COVID-19 pandemic, as increased malicious activities are creating more 
threats for cyberattacks including COVID-19 phishing emails, malware-embedded mobile apps that 
purport to track infection rates, and targeting of vulnerabilities in remote access platforms as companies 
continue to operate with work from home arrangements. Resulting implications could include business 
interruptions, service disruptions, financial loss, theft of intellectual property and confidential 
information, litigation, enhanced regulatory attention and penalties, as well as reputational damage. 
Furthermore, the adoption of emerging technologies, such as cloud computing, AI and robotics, call for 
continued focus and investment to manage risks effectively. For more details on how we are managing 
these risks, refer to the Operational risk section. 
Environmental and 
social risk 
(including climate change) 
 
We, like other organizations, are increasingly under scrutiny to address social and racial inequality and 
human rights issues, and failure to do so may result in strategic, reputational and regulatory risks. 
Risks associated with climate change are evolving as it relates to the global transition to a net-zero 
economy and physical climate risks (e.g., extreme weather events), which could result in a broad range 
of impacts including potential strategic, reputational, regulatory, compliance, operational and credit 
related risks for us and our clients. For details on how we are managing these risks, refer to the Overview 
of other risks section. 
Digital disruption 
and innovation 
 
The COVID-19 pandemic has changed the way consumers interact with financial services providers. 
Demand for digital banking services has increased, and while this represents an opportunity for us to 
leverage our technological advantage, the need to meet the rapidly evolving needs of clients and 
compete with non-traditional competitors has increased our strategic and reputational risks. Additional 
risks also continue to emerge as demographic trends, evolving client expectations, the increased power 
to analyze data and the emergence of disruptors are creating competitive pressures across a number of 
sectors. Moreover, established technology companies, newer competitors, and regulatory changes 
continue to foster new business models that could challenge traditional banks and financial products. 
Finally, while the adoption of new technologies, such as AI and machine learning, presents opportunities 
for us, it could result in new and complex strategic, reputational, operational, regulatory and compliance 
risks that would need to be managed effectively. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
53 
 

Top & emerging risks 
Description 
Canadian housing and 
household indebtedness 
 
Canadian housing and household indebtedness risks remain elevated, but have moderated as 
restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic have eased and employment has rebounded. However, the 
unemployment rate remains above pre-pandemic levels. Concerns related to housing affordability in 
certain markets and levels of mortgage-related Canadian household debt – which were already elevated 
before and during the COVID-19 pandemic – could escalate if additional waves of the COVID-19 pandemic 
emerge, if the period of economic recovery is prolonged, or if the lending environment changes, 
potentially resulting in, among other things, higher credit losses. 
While real estate rental activity has rebounded in certain markets, changing consumer preferences and 
work arrangements, and the impact from possible future waves of the COVID-19 pandemic, may continue 
to have an impact on future real estate investment and demand. 
Geopolitical uncertainty 
 
Persistent trade tensions, supply chain disruptions, policy changes, COVID-19 vaccine nationalism and 
vaccine diplomacy continue to impact global economic growth prospects and market sentiment. The 
Canadian economy is vulnerable to continued trade tensions given the country’s trading relationships 
with the U.S. and China. Tensions remain elevated between China and the U.S. and its allies over a 
number of issues, including trade, technology, human rights, Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan. Tensions 
between China and its neighbours over territorial claims add further global and economic uncertainty. In 
addition, tensions with Russia remain high over allegations of cyber-attacks, election interference, 
adventurism, and the mistreatment of anti-corruption and pro-democracy activists. Other geopolitical 
tensions could also add to economic and market uncertainties. 
More broadly, the post-pandemic future of global trade remains uncertain, as countries look to decrease 
reliance on the global supply chain. Increased protectionism and economic nationalism could reshape 
global alliances as a steady COVID-19 vaccine supply and the supply of other critical goods of economic 
and national importance (e.g., semiconductors) remain one of the top priorities of governments. We will 
continue to monitor these developments and others, and will assess the implications they have on us. 
Privacy, data and third-party 
related risks 
 
The protection and responsible use of personal information are critical to maintaining our clients’ trust. 
In addition, the management and governance of our data also remains a top risk given the high value 
attributed to our data for the insights it can generate for clients and communities. Resulting implications 
from failing to manage data and privacy risks could include financial loss, theft of intellectual property 
and/or confidential information, litigation, enhanced regulatory attention and penalties, as well as 
reputational damage. Effective privacy and information management practices continue to grow in 
importance, as demonstrated by the continued development of complex regulations in the jurisdictions 
in which we operate. Our potential exposure to these risks increases as we continue to partner with 
third-party service providers and adopting new business models and technologies (e.g., cloud 
computing, AI and machine learning). Attackers gravitate towards vulnerabilities in an ecosystem, and 
the weakest link in the supply chain can be a supplier or third-party service provider, who may not have 
sufficiently robust controls. Privacy, data and third-party related risks have been heightened as the use 
of work from home arrangements remains common practice. Third-party providers critical to our 
operations are monitored for any impact on their ability to deliver services, including vendors of our 
third-party providers. For details on how we are managing these risks, refer to the Operational risk 
section. 
Regulatory changes 
 
The ongoing introduction of new or revised regulations will continue to lead to increasing focus across 
the organization on meeting additional regulatory requirements across the multiple jurisdictions in 
which we operate. Financial and other reforms that have or are coming into effect, across multiple 
jurisdictions, such as anti-money laundering regulations, interest rate benchmark reform, as well as 
privacy, climate and consumer protection, continue to impact our operations and strategies. For more 
details, refer to the Legal and regulatory environment risk section. 
Culture and conduct risks 
 
Our purpose, values and risk principles are key dimensions of our culture. We demonstrate our culture 
through our conduct – the behaviours, judgments, decisions, and actions of the organization and our 
employees. Culture and conduct risks are considered top risks for the financial services industry due to 
the impact our choices, behaviours, and overall risk governance can have on outcomes for our 
stakeholders. We embed client considerations into our decision-making processes and aim to focus on 
the fair treatment of clients, and continue to implement regulatory changes that align with this objective. 
We are responsive to evolving employee needs while expecting employees to always act with integrity. 
Canadian, U.S. and global regulators have been increasingly focused on conduct matters and risks, and 
heightened expectations generally from regulators could lead to investigations, remediation 
requirements, and higher compliance costs. While we take steps to continue to strengthen our conduct 
practices, and prevent and detect outcomes which could potentially harm clients, employees or the 
integrity of the markets, such outcomes may not always be prevented or detected. For more details, refer 
to the Culture and conduct risk section. 
54
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Overview 
As a global financial institution with a diversified business model, we actively manage a variety of risks to help protect and 
enable our businesses by following these risk management principles: 
Risk management principles 
•
Effectively balance risk and reward to enable sustainable growth. 
•
Collectively share the responsibility for risk management. 
•
Undertake only risks we understand and make thoughtful and future-focused risk decisions. 
•
Always uphold our Purpose and Vision, and consistently abide by our Values and Code of Conduct to maintain our 
reputation and the trust of our clients, colleagues and communities. 
•
Maintain a healthy and robust control environment to protect our stakeholders. 
•
Use judgment and common sense. 
•
Always be operationally prepared and financially resilient for a potential crisis. 
The dynamic nature of the financial services industry, and technological innovation, necessitate that our processes, tools and 
practices are continuously improving and responding to the changing landscape and emerging risks. We seek to accomplish this 
through an effective and evolving risk management approach. All risk-taking activities and exposures are within the Board-
approved risk appetite, and corresponding capital and liquidity requirements. We seek to ensure that our business activities and 
transactions provide an appropriate balance of return for the risks assumed and the costs incurred. Our organizational design 
and governance processes are intended to ensure that our Group Risk Management (GRM) function is independent from the 
businesses it supports. 
Risk drivers 
We define risk as the potential vulnerabilities in the short-, medium- or long-term that may impact our financial results, financial 
and operational resilience, reputation, business model, or strategy. Risk can be realized through losses, or an undesirable 
outcome with respect to volatility of earnings in relation to expected earnings, capital adequacy, or liquidity. Our principal risks 
include credit, market, liquidity, insurance, operational, regulatory compliance, strategic, reputation, legal and regulatory 
environment, competitive, and systemic risks, that have been classified into four categories based on the level of control and 
influence that we can exert against these risks. These categories are maintained by GRM and reviewed regularly to ensure all 
principal risks are reflected. This classification methodology provides a common language and discipline for the identification 
and assessment of risk in existing businesses, new businesses, products or initiatives, as well as acquisitions and alliances. 
Transactional /
Positional
Control and inﬂuence
Macroeconomic
Strategic
Operational /
Regulatory
Compliance
More
More
Less
Less
Adverse changes in the macroeconomic environment can lead to a material impact on the real economy or
the ﬁnancial system in any of the regions in which we operate. 
 – Examples include deterioration in the Canadian housing market, abrupt changes in the geopolitical
    environment, unfavourable global trade agreements or the outbreak of a pandemic or other health crises.
Macroeconomic risk is the least controllable type of risk arising from the business environment in which we
operate.
However, we have in place a number of controls to mitigate the impacts of systemic risk, including our
diversiﬁed business model and funding sources, ﬁnancial crisis management strategies and protocols,
stress testing programs, and product and geographic diversiﬁcation.
Resultant impacts can materialize as loss of revenue, as well as the realization of credit, market or
operational risk losses.
Business strategy is a major driver of our risk appetite, including acquisitions and dispositions, responses to
threats posed by non-traditional competitors and responses to proposed changes in the regulatory
environment.
Choosing the wrong strategy, or poorly executing on the correct strategy, could result in reputational risk
consequences, impact our revenue mix, and/or affect our exposure to earnings volatility and loss absorption
capacity.
There is a fair degree of control and inﬂuence that we can exert in managing strategic and reputation risk. 
While the legal and regulatory environment and competitive risks are less controllable, we seek to inﬂuence
them through our role as a corporate entity and as an active participant in the Canadian and global ﬁnancial
services industry.
The complexity and scope of our operations across the globe exposes us to operational and regulatory
compliance risks.
We have a certain level of control over these risks through our people and systems, as well as how we
respond to external events.
Credit, market, liquidity and insurance risks are an integral part of our day-to-day business activities.
We earn revenue by taking these transactional / positional risks.
We understand these risks well and have the greatest level of control and inﬂuence over them.
 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
55 
 

Enterprise risk management 
Under the oversight of the Board and senior management, the Enterprise Risk Management Framework (ERMF) provides an 
overview of our enterprise-wide programs for managing risk, including identifying, assessing, measuring, controlling, monitoring 
and reporting on the significant risks that face the organization. 
Risk governance 
We have an effective and well-established governance framework in place to ensure that risks impacting our businesses are 
identified, appropriately categorized, assessed, managed and communicated to the Board in a timely manner. The risk 
governance framework has been established, and is maintained in alignment with, the expectations of OSFI, the Basel Committee 
on Banking Supervision’s (BCBS) corporative governance principles, and the requirements and expectations of other regulators 
in the jurisdictions and businesses in which we conduct business, and in accordance with industry best practices. The Board 
oversees the implementation of our risk management framework, while employees at all levels of the organization are 
responsible for managing the day-to-day risks that arise in the context of their mandates. As illustrated below, we use the three 
lines of defence governance model which is intended to ensure that risks are appropriately and adequately managed throughout 
the enterprise to achieve our strategic objectives. 
The Board establishes the tone from above and sets the standards of conduct and champions our values as set out in our Code of Conduct. The Board also
approves our risk appetite, provides oversight and carries out its risk management mandate primarily through its committees:
The Risk Committee oversees our risk management program which is designed to ensure that the policies, procedures and controls used by management are
sufﬁcient to keep risks within our risk appetite. The Risk Committee’s oversight role is designed to ensure that the risk management function is adequately
independent from the businesses whose activities it reviews. Its oversight activities include the review of the GRM function which evaluates GRM’s success
against its key priorities, the mandate of the Chief Risk Ofﬁcer (CRO), the GRM organizational structure, and the function’s budget and resources.
The Audit Committee assists the Board in its oversight of (i) the integrity of our ﬁnancial statements; (ii) the qualiﬁcations, performance and
independence of our external auditors; (iii) the performance of our internal audit function and internal controls; and (iv) compliance with legal and
regulatory requirements.
The Governance Committee recommends individuals for Board member election or re-election, oversees the process for evaluating Board Committee and
director effectiveness, and oversees management of culture and conduct, including breaches of our Code of Conduct. Additional responsibilities include (i) 
developing and recommending governance frameworks, principles and policies to the Board; (ii) overseeing corporate citizenship matters; (iii) monitoring
developments in corporate governance and adapting best practices; and (iv) reviewing shareholder proposals and recommending responses to the Board.
The Human Resources Committee assists the Board in its oversight of compensation policies and programs, compensation for the CEO and Group Executives
(GE), as well as compensation risk management. It also oversees our pension plans, key talent management strategies and practices, and management
succession plans for key senior leadership roles.
AUDIT COMMITTEE
RISK COMMITTEE
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
GOVERNANCE COMMITTEE
HUMAN RESOURCES COMMITTEE
Actively shapes enterprise risk appetite and recommends it for Board approval.
Visibly supports and communicates enterprise risk appetite, ensuring that sufﬁcient resources and expertise are in place to help provide
effective oversight of adherence to the enterprise risk appetite.
Seeks to ensure principles, policies, authorities, resources, responsibilities and reporting are in place to support the control infrastructure
necessary for an effective enterprise-wide risk management program.  
Oversees culture and conduct strategy and key activities.
The Compensation Risk Management Oversight Committee (CRMOC) oversees the design of major compensation programs in an effort to ensure
alignment with sound risk management principles, and that risks that may not be fully captured in our current ﬁnancial performance are
appropriately considered in variable compensation payouts, including our enterprise risk proﬁle relative to risk appetite. The CRMOC has 
responsibility for ensuring our compensation programs align with the Financial Stability Board (FSB) Principles for Sound Compensation
Practices and Implementation Standards and other applicable guidance and best practices.
THE GROUP EXECUTIVE AND GROUP RISK COMMITTEE
All employees across our businesses
and functional areas
Accountable for:
 
 Identiﬁcation;
 
 Assessment;
 
 Measurement;
 
 Mitigation;
 
 Monitoring; and
 
 Reporting of risk against approved
 
 policies and appetite
FIRST LINE OF DEFENCE
RISK OWNERS
RISK OWNERS
The CRO has direct access to the
Risk Committee
The Chief Compliance Ofﬁcer (CCO) and the
Chief Anti-Money Laundering Ofﬁcer (CAMLO)
have direct access to the Audit Committee
Establishes risk management practices and
provides risk guidance
Provides oversight of the effectiveness of
First Line risk management practices
Monitors and independently reports on the
level of risk against established risk appetite
SECOND LINE OF DEFENCE
RISK OVERSIGHT
RISK OVERSIGHT
RISK
MANAGEMENT
GLOBAL
COMPLIANCE AND
ANTI-MONEY
LAUNDERING
Internal Audit
Independent assurance to management
and the Board on the effectiveness of
risk management practices
THIRD LINE OF DEFENCE
INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE
INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE
 
56
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Risk appetite 
Effective risk management protects us from unacceptable 
losses or undesirable outcomes with respect to earnings 
volatility, capital adequacy or liquidity, reputation risk or other 
risks while supporting and enabling our overall business 
strategy. It requires the clear articulation of our risk appetite, 
which is the amount and type of risk that we are able and willing 
to accept in the pursuit of our business objectives. It reflects our 
self-imposed upper bound to risk-taking, set at levels inside of 
regulatory limits and constraints, and influences our risk 
management philosophy, Code of Conduct, business practices 
and resource allocation. It provides clear boundaries and sets 
an overall tone for balancing risk-reward trade-offs to ensure 
the long-term viability of the organization. 
Our risk appetite is integrated into our strategic, financial, 
and capital planning processes, as well as ongoing business 
decision-making processes and is reviewed and approved 
annually by the Board. 
Our Enterprise Risk Appetite Framework (ERAF) outlines the 
foundational aspects of our approach to risk appetite, 
articulates our quantitative and qualitative risk appetite 
statements and their supporting measures and associated 
constraints, which can be applied at the enterprise, business 
segment, business unit and legal entity level, and describes our 
requirements and expectations to embed effective risk appetite 
practices throughout the organization. 
R
is
k 
A
p
p
e
ti
t
e 
C
o
m
p
o
n
e
n
t
s
Risk Capacity
Risk Proﬁle 
Management Delegated
Authorities & Risk Limits
Risk Posture
Risk Appetite &
Board Delegated Authorities
 
 
Risk appetite statements 
 
 
Quantitative statements 
 
Qualitative statements 
 
 
•
Manage earnings volatility and exposure to future 
losses under normal and stressed conditions. 
•
Avoid excessive concentrations of risk. 
•
Ensure capital adequacy and sound management of 
liquidity and funding risk. 
•
Ensure sound management of operational and 
regulatory compliance risk. 
•
Maintain strong credit ratings and a risk profile in the 
top half of our peer group. 
 •
Always uphold our Purpose and Vision and 
consistently abide by our Values and Code of Conduct 
to maintain our reputation and the trust of our 
clients, colleagues, and communities. 
•
Undertake only risk we understand. Make thoughtful 
and future-focused risk decisions, taking 
environmental and social considerations into 
account. 
•
Effectively balance risk and reward to enable 
sustainable growth. 
•
Maintain a healthy and robust control environment to 
protect our stakeholders. 
•
Always be operationally prepared and financially 
resilient for a potential crisis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The allocation of our risk appetite across the bank is supported by the establishment of delegated authorities or risk limits. 
These delegated authorities or risk limits represent the maximum level of risk permitted for a line of business, portfolio, 
individual or group and are used to govern ongoing operations. Risk posture, the anticipated shift in risk profile as a result of 
changes in objectives, strategies, and external factors, is used to provide insights on key areas that may require management 
attention to ensure strategies are able to be executed successfully within our risk appetite. 
Risk measurement 
Quantifying risk is a key component of our enterprise-wide risk and capital management processes. Risk measurement and 
planning processes are integrated across the enterprise, especially in regards to forward-looking projections and analyses, 
including but not limited to, stress testing, recovery and resolution planning, and credit provisioning. The degree of integration 
across our Finance and Risk functions continues to increase in measuring both financial and risk performance. 
Certain risks, such as credit, market, liquidity and insurance risks, can be more easily quantified than others, such as 
operational, reputation, strategic, legal, and regulatory compliance risks. For the risks that are more difficult to quantify, greater 
emphasis is placed on qualitative risk factors and assessment of activities to gauge the overall level of risk. In addition, 
judgmental risk measures and techniques such as stress testing, and scenario and sensitivity analyses can be used to assess and 
measure risks, and we are continuously evolving our risk measures and techniques to manage our risks. Our primary methods for 
measuring risk include: 
•
Quantifying expected loss: losses that are statistically expected to occur as a result of conducting business in a given time 
period; 
•
Quantifying unexpected loss: an estimate of the deviation of actual earnings from expected earnings, over a specified time 
horizon; 
•
Stress testing: evaluates, from a forward looking perspective, the potential effects of a set of specified changes in risk 
factors, corresponding to exceptional but plausible adverse economic and financial market events; and 
•
Back-testing: the realized values are compared to the parameter estimates that are currently used in an effort to ensure the 
parameters remain appropriate for regulatory and economic capital calculations. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
57 
 

Stress testing 
Stress testing is an important component of our risk management framework. Stress testing results are used for: 
•
Assessing the viability of long-term business plans and strategies; 
•
Monitoring our risk profile relative to our risk appetite in terms of earnings and capital at risk; 
•
Setting limits; 
•
Identifying key risks to, and potential shifts in, our capital and liquidity levels, as well as our financial position; 
•
Enhancing our understanding of available mitigating actions in response to potential adverse events; and 
•
Assessing the adequacy of our capital and liquidity levels. 
Our enterprise-wide stress tests evaluate key balance sheet, income statement, leverage, capital, and liquidity impacts arising 
from risk exposures and changes in earnings. The results are used by the Board, Group Risk Committee (GRC) and senior 
management risk committees to understand our performance drivers under stress, and review stressed capital, leverage, and 
liquidity ratios against regulatory thresholds and internal limits. The results are also incorporated into our Internal Capital 
Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP) and capital plan analyses. 
We evaluate a number of enterprise-wide stress scenarios over a multi-year horizon, featuring a range of severities. Our 
Board reviews the recommended scenarios, and GRM leads the scenario assessment process. Results from across the 
organization are integrated to develop an enterprise-wide view of the impacts, with input from subject matter experts in GRM, 
Corporate Treasury, Finance, and Economics. Generally, our stress testing scenarios evaluate global recessions, equity market 
corrections, elevated debt levels, trade policies, changes in interest rates, real estate price corrections, and shocks to credit 
spreads and commodity markets, among other factors. During our fiscal 2021 stress testing exercises, we addressed several 
emerging risks inclusive of further waves of the COVID-19 pandemic, inflation risk as well as physical and transitional climate risk, 
with a focus on the impacts of these risks on revenue, net income and capital projections. 
Ongoing stress testing and scenario analyses within specific risk types, such as market risk (including Interest Rate Risk in 
the Banking Book (IRRBB)), liquidity risk, retail and wholesale credit risk, operational risk, and insurance risk, supplement and 
support our enterprise-wide analyses. Results from these risk-specific programs are used in a variety of decision-making 
processes including risk limit setting, portfolio composition evaluation, risk appetite articulation and business strategy 
implementation. 
In addition to ongoing enterprise-wide and risk specific stress testing programs, we use ad hoc and reverse stress testing to 
deepen our knowledge of the risks we face. Ad hoc stress tests are one-off analyses used to investigate developing conditions or 
to stress a particular portfolio in more depth. Reverse stress tests, starting with a severe outcome and aiming to reverse-
engineer scenarios that might lead to it, are used in risk identification and understanding of risk/return boundaries. 
In addition to internal stress tests, we participate in a number of regulator-required stress test exercises, on a periodic basis, 
across several jurisdictions. 
Model governance and validation 
Quantitative models are used for many purposes including, but not limited to, the valuation of financial products, the 
identification, measurement and management of different types of risk, stress testing, assessing capital adequacy, informing 
business and risk decisions, measuring compliance with internal limits, meeting financial reporting and regulatory requirements, 
and issuing public disclosures. 
Model risk is the risk of adverse financial and/or reputational consequences to the enterprise arising from the use or misuse 
of a model at any stage throughout its life cycle and is managed through our model risk governance and oversight structure. The 
governance and oversight structure, which is implemented through our three lines of defence governance model, is founded on 
the basis that model risk management is a shared responsibility across the three lines spanning all stages of the model’s life 
cycle. We continue to evolve our governance model to take into account any new risk considerations that may emerge from the 
growing use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) methods and applications in our models across our organization. 
Prior to being used, models are subject to an independent validation and approval by our enterprise model risk management 
function, a team of modelling professionals with reporting lines independent of those of the model owners, developers and users. 
The validation seeks to ensure that models are sound and capable of fulfilling their intended use. In addition to independently 
validating models prior to use, our enterprise model risk management function provides controls that span the life-cycle of a 
model, including model change management procedures, requirements for ongoing monitoring, and annual assessments to 
ensure each model continues to serve its intended purpose. 
Risk control 
Our enterprise-wide risk management approach is supported by a comprehensive set of risk controls that are defined in our 
ERMF. The ERMF serves as the foundation for our approach to risk management and sets the expectations for the development 
and communication of policies, the establishment of formal independent risk review and approval processes, and the 
establishment of delegated authorities and risk limits. The ERMF is further reinforced and supported by a number of additional 
Board-approved risk frameworks, various policies thereunder and a comprehensive set of risk controls. Together, our risk 
frameworks and supporting policies provide direction and insight on how respective risks are identified, assessed, measured, 
managed, mitigated, monitored and reported. The enterprise-wide policies are considered our minimum requirements, 
articulating the parameters within which business groups and employees must operate. 
58
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Enterprise Risk Management
Framework 
Enterprise Risk Appetite
Framework
Enterprise Culture and
Conduct Risks
Framework
Enterprise-Wide Policies for Multiple Risk Types
(e.g. Product and Suitability Risk Policy; Policy on Risk Limits and Risk Approval Authorities; Stress-Testing Policy)
Segment or Region Speciﬁc Risk Policy and Procedures
The approval hierarchy for risk frameworks and policy documents:
Board of Directors or Board Committees
Senior Management Committees (e.g. Policy Review Committee, Operational Risk Committee, Asset Liability Committee) for most policies.
Board or Board Committee approval is required in some instances (e.g. RBC Code of Conduct, Dividend Policy)
Generally by business or Functional Unit management/committees. Group Risk Management approval is required if there are signiﬁcant
risk implications
Enterprise Risk Policy Architecture
Data Policy
Credit Risk
Mitigation
Policy
Dividend
Policy
Internal
Controls
Management
Policy
Market Risk
Policy
Privacy Risk
Management
Policy
Liquidity
Risk Policy
Insurance
Risk
Mitigation
Policy
Information
Security
Policy
Fiduciary
Risk Policy
Supporting Risk-Speciﬁc Enterprise-Wide Policies (examples)
Data
Management
Framework
Credit Risk
Management
Framework
Capital
Management
Framework
Operational
Risk
Management
Framework
Market Risk
Management
Framework
Regulatory
Compliance
Management
Framework
Liquidity
Risk
Management
Framework
Insurance
Risk
Management
Framework
Information
Technology
Risk
Management
Framework
Reputation
Risk
Management
Framework
 
Delegated authorities and risk limits 
Risk appetite is designed to account for strategic and forward-looking considerations whereas authorities and risk limits are 
used to govern and monitor our day-to-day business activities. Risk Appetite is supported by Risk Approval Authorities delegated 
by the Board to senior management which provide thresholds for escalation of exposures and transactions to the Risk 
Committee of the Board for review and approval. The allocation of Risk Appetite and Board Delegated Authorities may be 
supported by the establishment of management delegated authorities and/or risk limits. These represent the maximum level of 
risk permitted for a line of business, portfolio, individual or other group, and are used to implement risk management strategies 
and govern ongoing operations. Senior management can then delegate some or all of their authorities onwards to others in the 
organization. The delegated authorities enable the approval of single name, geographic and industry sectors, and product and 
portfolio exposures within defined parameters and limits. They are also used to manage concentration risk, establish 
underwriting and inventory limits for trading and investment banking activities and set market risk tolerances. 
Risk review and approval processes 
Risk review and approval processes provide an important control mechanism and are established by GRM based on the nature, 
size and complexity of the risk involved. In general, the risk review and approval process involves a formal review and approval 
by an individual, group or committee that is independent from the originator. The approval responsibilities are governed by 
delegated authorities and risk limits are based on the following categories: transactions, projects and initiatives, and new 
products and services. 
Risk monitoring and reporting 
Enterprise and business segment level risk monitoring and internal reporting are critical components of our enterprise risk 
management program and support the ability of senior management and the Board to effectively perform their risk management 
and oversight responsibilities. In addition, we publish a number of external reports on risk matters to comply with regulatory 
requirements. The Risk Committee of the Board receives a CRO report at each meeting that has been reviewed by senior 
management, and which includes, among others, top and emerging risks, industry trends or other notable items. On a quarterly 
basis, we provide our Enterprise Risk Report to senior management and the Risk Committee of the Board which includes, among 
others, top and emerging risks, risk profile relative to our risk appetite, portfolio quality metrics and a range of risks we face 
along with an analysis of the related issues, key trends and, when required, management actions. On an annual basis, we provide 
a benchmarking review to the Board which compares our performance to peers across a variety of risk metrics and includes a 
composite risk scorecard which provides an objective measure of our ranking relative to the peer group. In addition to our 
regular risk monitoring, other risk specific presentations are provided to, and discussed with, senior management and the Board 
on top and emerging risks or changes in our risk profile. 
Culture and conduct risk 
Our values set the tone of our organizational culture and translate into desired behaviours as articulated in our Code of Conduct 
and leadership model. We define conduct as the manifestation of culture through the behaviours, judgment, decisions, and 
actions of the organization and its individuals. Our organizational direction establishes the expectation of good conduct 
outcomes as the operating norm for the organization, all employees, and third-party service providers operating on our behalf to 
drive positive outcomes for our clients, employees, stakeholders, financial markets and our reputation. We hold ourselves to the 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
59 
 

highest standards of conduct to build the trust of our clients, investors, colleagues and community. The desired outcomes from 
effective culture and conduct practices align with our purpose and values and support our risk appetite statements. 
Risk culture is a subset of our overall culture that influences how, individually and collectively, we take and manage risks. 
Our risk culture helps us identify and understand risks, openly discuss risks, and act on the organization’s current and perceived 
future risks. Our risk culture practices are grounded in our existing risk management and human resource disciplines and 
protocols. When combined with the elements of effective leadership and values, these practices provide a base from which the 
resulting risk culture and conduct can be assessed, monitored, sustained and subjected to ongoing enhancement. 
Our Board-approved Enterprise Culture and Conduct Risks Framework provides organizational direction and describes our 
approach to a set of related topics applicable to all risk categories such as fair outcomes for clients and other stakeholders, 
culture, including accountability and risk culture, conduct risk, sales conduct and client practices, and misconduct. 
On a regular basis, management communicates behavioural expectations to our employees with an emphasis on conduct 
and values. Our leadership model also supports and encourages effective challenge between the businesses and control 
functions. These behavioural expectations are supported by tools and resources which are designed to help employees live our 
values, report misconduct and raise concerns, including those that might have ethical implications. We are committed to 
fostering an environment where employees feel safe to speak up without retaliation. Employees have the ability to report 
matters through a global anonymous Conduct Hotline. In addition, our Code of Conduct outlines an employee’s responsibility to 
be truthful, respect others, and comply with laws, regulations and our policies. Anyone who breaches or fails to report an actual 
or possible breach of the Code of Conduct is subject to corrective or disciplinary action. This can range from reprimands and 
impacts on performance ratings and compensation, to termination of employment relationships with the organization. 
Organizational Direction
articulated through:
Values
Leadership Model
Code of Conduct
Risk Appetite
Risk Principles
Outcomes for
Stakeholders
Clients
Employees
Financial Markets
Regulators
Our Reputation
Shareholders
Individual &
Collective Conduct
exhibited through:
Behaviours
Judgment
Decisions
Actions 
Drives
Apply lessons learned
Sets expected
Inﬂuences
Shapes
Culture Factors
Inﬂuential to Managing
Conduct Risk
Tone from Above
Accountability
Speaking Up
Incentives
Risk Awareness
 
The shaded text along with the tables specifically marked with an asterisk (*) in the following sections of the MD&A represent 
our disclosures on credit, market and liquidity and funding risks in accordance with IFRS 7, Financial Instruments: Disclosures, 
and include discussion on how we measure our risks and the objectives, policies and methodologies for managing these risks. 
Therefore, these shaded text and marked tables represent an integral part of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial 
Statements. 
Transactional/positional risk drivers 
Credit risk 
Credit risk is the risk of loss associated with an obligor’s potential inability or unwillingness to fulfill its contractual obligations 
on a timely basis and may arise directly from the risk of default of a primary obligor (e.g., issuer, debtor, counterparty, 
borrower or policyholder), indirectly from a secondary obligor (e.g., guarantor or reinsurer), through off-balance sheet 
exposures, contingent credit risk, associated credit risk and/or transactional risk. Credit risk includes counterparty credit risk 
arising from both trading and non-trading activities. 
The responsibility for managing credit risk is shared broadly following the three lines of defence governance model. The 
Board delegates credit risk approval authorities through risk appetites to the President & CEO and CRO. Credit transactions in 
excess of these authorities must be approved by the Risk Committee of the Board. To facilitate day-to-day business activities, the 
CRO has been empowered to further delegate credit risk approval authorities to individuals within GRM, the business segments, 
and functional units as necessary. 
60
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

We balance our risk and return by setting the following objectives for the management of credit risk: 
•
Ensuring credit quality is not compromised for growth; 
•
Mitigating credit risk in transactions, relationships and portfolios; 
•
Using our credit risk rating and scoring systems or other approved credit risk assessment or rating methodologies, 
policies and tools; 
•
Pricing appropriately for the credit risk taken; 
•
Detecting and preventing inappropriate credit risk through effective systems and controls; 
•
Applying consistent credit risk exposure measurements; 
•
Ongoing credit risk monitoring and administration; 
•
Transferring credit risk to third parties where appropriate through approved credit risk mitigation techniques (e.g., sale, 
hedging, insurance, securitization); and 
•
Avoiding activities that are inconsistent with our values, Code of Conduct or policies. 
The Enterprise Credit Risk Management Framework (ECRMF) describes the principles, methodologies, systems, roles and 
responsibilities, reports and controls that exist for managing credit risk within the enterprise. Additional supporting policies 
exist that are designed to provide further clarification of roles and responsibilities, acceptable practices, limits and key 
controls within the enterprise. 
Credit risk measurement 
We quantify credit risk at both the individual obligor and portfolio levels to manage expected credit losses and minimize 
unexpected losses to limit earnings volatility and ensure we are adequately capitalized. 
We employ a variety of risk measurement methodologies to measure and quantify credit risk for our wholesale and retail 
credit portfolios. The wholesale portfolio is comprised of businesses, sovereigns, public sector entities, banks and other 
financial institutions, as well as certain high net worth individuals. The retail portfolio is comprised of residential mortgages, 
personal loans, credit cards, and small business loans. Our credit risk rating systems are designed to assess and quantify the 
risk inherent in credit activities in an accurate and consistent manner. The resulting ratings and scores are then used for both 
client- and transaction-level risk decision-making and as key inputs for our risk measurement and capital calculations. 
Measurement of economic and regulatory capital 
Economic capital, which is our internal quantification of risks, is used for limit setting. It is also used for internal capital 
adequacy and allocation of capital to the Insurance segment. Our methodology for allocating capital to our business 
segments, other than Insurance, is based on regulatory requirements. For further details, refer to the Capital management 
section. 
In measuring credit risk to determine regulatory capital, two principal approaches are available: Internal Ratings Based 
(IRB) Approach and Standardized Approach. 
The Standardized Approach applies primarily to our Caribbean banking operations and City National and is based on risk 
weights prescribed by OSFI that are used to calculate RWA for credit risk exposure. 
The IRB Approach, which applies to most of our credit risk exposures, utilizes three key parameters which form the basis of 
our credit risk measures for both regulatory and economic capital. 
•
Probability of default (PD): An estimated percentage that represents the likelihood of default within a given time period of 
an obligor for a specific rating grade or for a particular pool of exposure. 
•
Exposure at default (EAD): An amount expected to be owed by an obligor at the time of default. 
•
Loss given default (LGD): An estimated percentage of EAD that is not expected to be recovered during the collections and 
recovery process. 
These parameters are determined based primarily on historical experience from internal credit risk rating systems in 
accordance with supervisory standards. 
Each credit facility is assigned an LGD rate that is largely driven by factors that impact the extent of losses anticipated in 
the event the obligor defaults. These factors mainly include seniority of debt, collateral and the industry sector in which the 
obligor operates. Estimated LGD rates draw primarily on internal loss experiences. Where we have limited internal loss data, 
we also refer to appropriate external data to supplement the estimation process. LGD rates are estimated to reflect 
conditions that might be expected to prevail in a period of an economic downturn, with additional conservatism added to 
reflect data limitations and statistical uncertainties identified in the estimation process. 
EAD is estimated based on the current exposure to the obligor and the possible future changes in that exposure driven by 
factors such as the nature of the credit commitment. As with LGD, rates are estimated to reflect an economic downturn, with 
added conservatism to reflect data and statistical uncertainties identified in the modelling process. 
Estimates of PD, LGD and EAD are reviewed, and then validated and back-tested by an independent validation team 
within the bank, on an annual basis. In addition, quarterly monitoring and back-testing is performed by the estimation team. 
These ratings and risk measurements are used to determine our expected losses as well as economic and regulatory capital, 
setting of risk limits, portfolio management and product pricing. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
61 
 

Financial and regulatory measurement distinctions 
Expected loss models are used for both regulatory capital and accounting purposes. Under both models, expected losses are 
calculated as the product of PD, LGD and EAD. However, there are certain key differences under current Basel and IFRS 
reporting frameworks which could lead to significantly different expected loss estimates, including: 
•
Basel PDs are based on long-run averages over an entire economic cycle. IFRS PDs are based on current conditions, 
adjusted for estimates of future conditions that will impact PD under probability-weighted macroeconomic scenarios. 
•
Basel PDs consider the probability of default over the next 12 months. IFRS PDs consider the probability of default over 
the next 12 months only for instruments in stage 1. Expected credit losses for instruments in stage 2 are calculated using 
lifetime PDs. 
•
Basel LGDs are based on severe but plausible downturn economic conditions. IFRS LGDs are based on current conditions, 
adjusted for estimates of future conditions that will impact LGD under probability-weighted macroeconomic scenarios. 
For further details, refer to the Critical accounting policies and estimates section. 
Gross credit risk exposure 
Gross credit risk is categorized as i) lending-related and other credit risk or ii) trading-related credit risk; and is calculated 
based on the Basel III framework. Under this method, EAD for all lending-related and other credit transactions and trading-
related repo-style transactions is calculated before taking into account any collateral and is inclusive of an estimate of 
potential future changes to that credit exposure. EAD for derivatives is calculated inclusive of collateral in accordance with 
regulatory guidelines. 
Lending-related and other credit risk includes: 
•
Loans and acceptances outstanding, undrawn commitments, and other exposures, including contingent liabilities such as 
letters of credit and guarantees, debt securities carried at FVOCI or amortized cost and deposits with financial 
institutions. Undrawn commitments represent an estimate of the contractual amount that may be drawn upon at the time 
of default of an obligor. 
Trading-related credit risk includes: 
•
Repo-style transactions, which include repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements and securities lending and 
borrowing transactions. For repo-style transactions, gross exposure represents the amount at which securities were 
initially financed, before taking collateral into account. 
•
Derivative amounts which represent the credit equivalent amount, as defined by OSFI as the replacement cost plus an 
add-on amount for potential future credit exposure, scaled by a regulatory factor. For further details on replacement cost 
and credit equivalent amounts, refer to Note 8 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Credit risk assessment 
Wholesale credit risk 
The wholesale credit risk rating system is designed to measure the credit risk inherent in our wholesale credit activities. 
Each obligor is assigned a borrower risk rating (BRR), reflecting an assessment of the credit quality of the obligor. Each 
BRR has a PD calibrated against it. The BRR differentiates the riskiness of an obligor and represents our evaluation of the 
obligor’s ability and willingness to meet its contractual obligations on time over a three year time horizon. The assignment of 
BRRs is based on the evaluation of the obligor’s business risk and financial risk through fundamental credit analysis, as well 
as data-driven modelling. The determination of the PD associated with each BRR relies primarily on internal default history 
since 2006. PD estimates are designed to be a long-run average of our experience across the economic cycle in accordance 
with regulatory guidelines. 
Our rating system is designed to stratify obligors into 22 grades. The following table aligns the relative rankings of our 
22-grade internal risk ratings with the external ratings used by S&P and Moody’s. 
62
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Internal ratings map* 
Table 40  
 
PD Bands 
 
 
 
 
Ratings Business and Bank 
Sovereign 
BRR 
S&P 
Moody’s 
Description 
1 
0.0000% – 0.0300% 0.0000% – 0.0150% 
1+ 
AAA 
Aaa 
Investment Grade 
2 
0.0000% – 0.0300% 0.0151% – 0.0250% 
1H 
AA+ 
Aa1 
3 
0.0000% – 0.0350% 0.0251% – 0.0350% 
1M 
AA 
Aa2 
4 
0.0351% – 0.0450% 
1L 
AA- 
Aa3 
5 
0.0451% – 0.0550% 
2+H 
A+ 
A1 
6 
0.0551% – 0.0650% 
2+M 
A 
A2 
7 
0.0651% – 0.0750% 
2+L 
A- 
A3 
8 
0.0751% – 0.0850% 
2H 
BBB+ 
Baa1 
9 
0.0851% – 0.1000% 
2M 
BBB 
Baa2 
10 
0.1001% – 0.1770% 
2L 
BBB- 
Baa3 
11 
0.1771% – 0.3705% 
2-H 
BB+ 
Ba1 
Non-investment 
Grade 
12 
0.3706% – 0.7065% 
2-M 
BB 
Ba2 
13 
0.7066% – 1.1600% 
2-L 
BB- 
Ba3 
14 
1.1601% – 1.6810% 
3+H 
B+ 
B1 
15 
1.6811% – 2.3490% 
3+M 
B 
B2 
16 
2.3491% – 4.4040% 
3+L 
B- 
B3 
17 
4.4041% – 7.0010% 
3H 
CCC+ 
Caa1 
18 
7.0011% – 13.1760% 
3M 
CCC 
Caa2 
19 
13.1761% – 24.9670% 
3L 
CCC- 
Caa3 
20 
24.9671% – 99.9990% 
4 
CC 
Ca 
21 
100% 
5 
D 
C 
Impaired 
22 
100% 
6 
D 
C 
* 
This table represents an integral part of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Counterparty credit risk 
Counterparty credit risk is the risk that a party with whom the bank has entered into a financial or non-financial contract will fail 
to fulfill its contractual agreement and default on its obligation. It incorporates not only the contract’s current value, but also 
considers how that value can move as market conditions change. Counterparty credit risk usually arises from trading-related 
derivative and repo-style transactions. Derivative transactions include forwards, futures, swaps and options, and can have 
underlying references that are either financial (e.g., interest rate, foreign exchange, credit, or equity) or non-financial 
(e.g., precious metal and commodities). For further details on our derivative instruments and credit risk mitigation, refer to Note 
8 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Trading counterparty credit activities are undertaken in a manner consistent with the relevant requirements under the 
ECRMF and the Enterprise Market Risk Management Framework (EMRMF), in line with our credit risk management policy 
documents and with approval in accordance with the appropriate delegated authorities. 
The primary risk mitigation techniques for trading counterparty credit risk are close-out netting and collateralization. Close-
out netting considers the net value of contractual obligations between counterparties in a default situation, thereby reducing 
overall credit exposure. Collateralization is when a borrower pledges assets as security, which provides recourse to the lender in 
the event of default. The policies that we maintain in relation to the recognition of risk mitigation from these techniques 
incorporate such considerations as: 
•
The use of standardized agreements such as the International Swaps and Derivatives Association Master Agreement and 
Credit Support Annex; 
•
Restricting eligible collateral to high quality liquid assets, primarily cash and highly-rated government securities, subject to 
appropriate haircuts; and 
•
The use of initial margin and variation margin arrangements in accordance with regulatory requirements and internal risk 
standards. 
Similarly, for securities finance and repurchase trading activity we mitigate counterparty credit risk via the use of 
standardized securities finance agreements, and by taking collateral generally in the form of eligible liquid securities. 
We also mitigate counterparty credit risk through the use of central counterparties (CCPs). These highly-regulated entities 
intermediate trades between participating bilateral counterparties and mitigate credit risk through the use of initial and 
variation margin and the ability to net offsetting trades amongst participants. The specific structure and capitalization, including 
contingent capital arrangements, of individual CCPs are analyzed as part of assigning an internal counterparty credit risk rating 
and determining appropriate counterparty credit risk limits. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
63 
 

Wrong-way risk 
Wrong-way risk is the risk that exposure to a counterparty is adversely correlated with the credit quality of that counterparty. 
There are two types of wrong-way risk: 
•
Specific wrong-way risk, which exists when our exposure to a particular counterparty is positively correlated with the PD of 
the counterparty due to the nature of our transactions with them (e.g., loans collateralized by shares or debt issued by the 
counterparty or a related party). Specific wrong-way risk over-the-counter (OTC) derivative trades are done on an exception 
basis only, and are permitted only when explicitly pre-approved by GRM. Factors considered in reviewing such trades include 
the credit quality of the counterparty, the nature of the asset(s) underlying the derivative and the existence of credit 
mitigation. 
•
General wrong-way risk, which exists when there is a positive correlation between the PD of the counterparties and general 
macroeconomic or market factors. This typically occurs with derivatives (e.g., the size of the exposure increases) or with 
collateralized transactions (e.g., the value of the collateral declines). We monitor general wrong-way counterparty credit risk 
using a variety of metrics including stress scenarios, investment strategy concentration, the ability of counterparties to 
generate cash and liquidity, liquidity of the collateral and terms of financing. 
Retail credit risk 
Credit scoring is the primary risk rating system for assessing obligor and transaction risk for retail exposures. Scoring models 
use internal and external data to assess and score borrowers, predict future performance and manage limits for existing loans 
and collection activities. Credit scores are one of the factors employed in the acquisition of new clients and management of 
existing clients. The credit score of the borrower is used to assess the predicted credit risk for each independent acquisition 
or account management action, leading to an automated decision or guidance for an adjudicator. Credit scoring improves 
credit decision quality, adjudication timeframes and consistency in the credit decision process and facilitates risk-based 
pricing. Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we adapted our retail credit risk methodology by enhancing our product 
level credit strategies with advanced analytics and portfolio monitoring. 
To arrive at a retail risk rating, borrower scores are categorized and associated with PDs for further grouping into risk 
rating categories. The following table maps PD bands to various summarized risk levels for retail exposures: 
Internal ratings map* 
Table 41  
PD bands 
Description 
0.030% – 3.844% 
Low risk 
3.845% – 6.786% 
Medium risk 
6.787% – 99.99% 
High risk 
100% 
Impaired/Default 
* 
This table represents an integral part of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Credit risk mitigation 
We seek to reduce our exposure to credit risk through a variety of means, including the structuring of transactions and the 
use of collateral. 
Structuring of transactions 
Specific credit policies and procedures set out the requirements for structuring transactions. Risk mitigants include the use 
of guarantees, collateral, seniority, loan-to-value (LTV) requirements and covenants. Product-specific guidelines set out 
appropriate product structuring as well as client and guarantor criteria. 
Collateral 
When we advance credit, we often require obligors to pledge collateral as security. The extent of risk mitigation provided by 
collateral depends on the amount, type and quality of the collateral taken. Specific requirements relating to collateral 
valuation and management are set out in our credit risk management policies. 
The types of collateral used to secure credit or trading facilities within the bank are varied. For example, our securities 
financing and collateralized OTC derivatives activities are primarily secured by cash and highly-rated liquid government and 
agency securities. Wholesale lending to business clients is often secured by pledges of the assets of the business, such as 
accounts receivable, inventory, operating assets and commercial real estate. In Canadian Banking and Wealth Management, 
collateral typically consists of a pledge over a real estate property, or a portfolio of debt securities and equities trading on a 
recognized exchange. 
•
We employ a risk-based approach to property valuation. Property valuation methods include automated valuation 
models (AVM) and appraisals. An AVM is a tool that estimates the value of a property by reference to market data 
including sales of comparable properties and price trends specific to the Metropolitan Statistical Area in which the 
property being valued is located. Using a risk-based approach, we also employ appraisals which can include drive-by or 
full on-site appraisals. 
 
•
We continue to actively manage our entire mortgage portfolio and perform stress testing, based on a combination of 
increasing unemployment, rising interest rates and a downturn in real estate markets. 
•
We are compliant with regulatory requirements that govern residential mortgage underwriting practices, including LTV 
parameters and property valuation requirements. 
 
There were no significant changes regarding our risk management policies on collateral or to the quality of the collateral 
held during the period. 
64
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Credit risk approval 
The Board, GE, GRC and other senior management committees work together to ensure the ECRMF and supporting policies, 
processes and procedures exist to manage credit risk and approve related credit risk limits. Reports are provided to the 
Board, the GRC, and senior executives to keep them informed of our risk profile, including significant credit risk issues, shifts 
in exposures and trending information, to ensure appropriate and timely actions can be taken where necessary. Our 
enterprise-wide credit risk policies set out the minimum requirements for the management of credit risk in a variety of 
borrower, transactional and portfolio management contexts. 
 
Transaction approval 
Credit transactions are governed by our RBC Enterprise Policy on Risk Limits and Risk Approval Authorities that captures the 
limits delegated to management and the credit rules policy, which outlines the minimum standards for managing credit risk 
at the individual client relationship and/or transaction level. The credit rules policy is further supported by business and/or 
product-specific policies and guidelines as appropriate. Transaction approvals are subject to delegated risk approval 
authorities. If a transaction exceeds senior management’s authorities, the approval of the Risk Committee of the Board is 
required. 
 
Product approval 
Proposals for credit products and services are comprehensively reviewed and approved under a risk assessment framework 
and are subject to risk approval authorities which increase as the level of risk increases. New and amended products must 
be reviewed relative to all risk drivers, including credit risk. All existing products must be reviewed following a risk-based 
assessment approach on a regular basis. 
Credit risk limits 
•
The allocation of risk appetite and Board delegated authorities are supported by the establishment of risk limits which 
take into account both regulatory constraints and internal risk management judgment. Risk limits are established at the 
following levels: single name limits, regional, country and industrial sector limits (notional and economic capital), 
regulatory large exposure limits, product and portfolio limits, and underwriting and distribution risk limits. These limits 
apply across all businesses, portfolios, transactions and products. 
•
We actively manage credit exposures and limits to ensure alignment with our risk appetite, to maintain our target 
business mix and to ensure that there is no undue concentration risk. 
•
Concentration risk is defined as the risk arising from large exposures that are highly correlated such that their 
ability to meet contractual obligations could be similarly affected by changes in economic, political or other risk 
drivers. 
•
Credit concentration limits are reviewed on a regular basis after taking into account business, economic, financial 
and regulatory environments. 
 
Credit risk administration 
Loan forbearance 
In our overall management of borrower relationships, economic or legal reasons may necessitate forbearance to certain clients 
with respect to the original terms and conditions of their loans. We have specialized groups and formalized policies that direct 
the management of delinquent or defaulted borrowers. We strive to identify borrowers in financial difficulty early and modify 
their loan terms to maximize collection and to avoid foreclosure, repossession, or other legal remedies. In these circumstances, a 
borrower may be granted concessions that would not otherwise be considered. Examples of such concessions to retail borrowers 
may include rate reduction, payment deferral, principal forgiveness and term extensions. Concessions to wholesale borrowers 
may include payment deferral, restructuring the agreements, modifying the original terms of the agreement and/or relaxation of 
covenants. For both retail and wholesale loans, the appropriate remediation techniques are based on the individual borrower’s 
situation, our policy and the customer’s willingness and capacity to meet the new arrangement. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
65 
 

Credit risk exposure by portfolio, sector and geography 
The following table presents our credit risk exposures under the Basel regulatory defined classes and reflects EAD. The 
classification of our sectors aligns with our view of credit risk by industry. 
Credit risk exposure by portfolio, sector and geography 
Table 42  
 
As at  
 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
 
Credit risk (1), (2) 
 Counterparty credit risk (3) 
  
Credit risk (1)  
 Counterparty credit risk (3) 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
On-balance 
sheet amount 
Off-balance sheet 
amount (4) 
 
 
Repo-style 
transactions 
 
Derivatives 
Total 
exposure  
On-balance 
sheet amount 
Off-balance sheet 
amount (4) 
 
 
Repo-style 
transactions 
 
Derivatives 
Total 
exposure 
Undrawn 
Other (5) 
Undrawn 
Other (5) 
Retail 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Residential secured (6) 
$
362,793 $
96,609 $
–  $
– $
– $
459,402  $
338,653 $
88,728 $
–  $
– $
– $
427,381 
Qualifying revolving (7) 
30,080 
90,932 
–  
– 
– 
121,012  
24,328 
67,779 
–  
– 
– 
92,107 
Other retail 
85,362 
19,422 
146  
– 
– 
104,930  
68,325 
14,183 
67  
– 
– 
82,575 
Total retail 
$
478,235 $ 206,963 $
146  $
– $
– $
685,344  $
431,306 $ 170,690 $
67  $
– $
– $
602,063 
Wholesale (8) 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Agriculture 
$
9,400 $
1,756 $
30  $
– $
84 $
11,270  $
9,562 $
1,854 $
34  $
– $
108 $
11,558 
Automotive 
6,288 
9,184 
173  
– 
1,124 
16,769  
8,464 
7,564 
289  
– 
791 
17,108 
Banking 
37,053 
4,545 
765  
117,996 
30,888 
191,247  
47,547 
5,136 
648  
95,412 
26,069 
174,812 
Consumer discretionary 
14,792 
9,380 
573  
– 
698 
25,443  
15,119 
9,282 
509  
– 
649 
25,559 
Consumer staples 
6,254 
6,949 
180  
– 
1,058 
14,441  
6,303 
6,945 
538  
– 
1,252 
15,038 
Oil and gas 
5,678 
10,328 
1,474  
– 
7,493 
24,973  
7,805 
10,779 
1,600  
– 
2,492 
22,676 
Financial services 
32,977 
19,252 
2,623  
64,593 
16,262 
135,707  
24,623 
18,664 
3,171  
57,105 
14,984 
118,547 
Financing products 
11,277 
2,405 
485  
388 
848 
15,403  
3,755 
1,098 
522  
90 
1,055 
6,520 
Forest products 
969 
991 
201  
– 
17 
2,178  
1,170 
851 
125  
– 
41 
2,187 
Governments 
293,250 
4,794 
1,533  
23,536 
5,692 
328,805  
245,204 
4,727 
1,624  
43,806 
6,963 
302,324 
Industrial products 
7,308 
8,933 
594  
– 
811 
17,646  
7,285 
9,398 
723  
– 
801 
18,207 
Information technology 
3,591 
5,715 
237  
49 
5,447 
15,039  
4,626 
5,065 
257  
13 
3,898 
13,859 
Investments 
22,238 
3,201 
412  
12 
174 
26,037  
17,518 
2,969 
437  
13 
230 
21,167 
Mining and metals 
993 
3,730 
952  
– 
237 
5,912  
1,692 
3,930 
979  
– 
338 
6,939 
Public works and infrastructure 
1,427 
1,963 
391  
– 
239 
4,020  
1,369 
2,007 
340  
– 
239 
3,955 
Real estate and related 
76,141 
14,223 
1,568  
– 
1,176 
93,108  
69,949 
13,712 
1,573  
– 
1,180 
86,414 
Other services 
23,872 
13,362 
1,860  
47 
1,316 
40,457  
25,570 
12,289 
1,336  
5 
1,857 
41,057 
Telecommunication and media 
5,294 
9,748 
598  
– 
1,976 
17,616  
5,104 
7,444 
83  
– 
1,752 
14,383 
Transportation 
6,151 
6,832 
1,319  
– 
1,426 
15,728  
7,516 
5,612 
1,533  
– 
1,714 
16,375 
Utilities 
9,059 
17,152 
4,131  
– 
4,464 
34,806  
8,745 
18,705 
3,849  
– 
3,852 
35,151 
Other sectors 
3,084 
1,139 
7  
7 
6,960 
11,197  
1,699 
647 
1  
17 
9,291 
11,655 
Total wholesale 
$
577,096 $ 155,582 $20,106  $
206,628 $
88,390 $1,047,802  $
520,625 $ 148,678 $ 20,171  $
196,461 $
79,556 $
965,491 
Total exposure (9) 
$1,055,331 $ 362,545 $20,252  $
206,628 $
88,390 $1,733,146  $
951,931 $ 319,368 $ 20,238  $
196,461 $
79,556 $ 1,567,554 
By geography (8), (10) 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Canada 
$
693,700 $ 264,708 $ 9,141  $
88,523 $
27,978 $1,084,050  $
655,560 $ 227,837 $
9,595  $
84,761 $
27,044 $ 1,004,797 
U.S. 
245,929 
69,295 
7,866  
54,617 
27,270 
404,977  
199,705 
63,423 
6,404  
41,938 
23,142 
334,612 
Europe 
62,509 
22,667 
1,991  
42,483 
25,757 
155,407  
50,940 
21,158 
2,312  
43,754 
22,429 
140,593 
Other International 
53,193 
5,875 
1,254  
21,005 
7,385 
88,712  
45,726 
6,950 
1,927  
26,008 
6,941 
87,552 
Total exposure (9) 
$1,055,331 $ 362,545 $20,252  $
206,628 $
88,390 $1,733,146  $
951,931 $ 319,368 $ 20,238  $
196,461 $
79,556 $ 1,567,554 
(1) 
EAD for standardized exposures are reported net of allowance for impaired assets and EAD for IRB exposures are reported gross of all allowance for credit losses and 
partial write-offs as per regulatory definitions. 
(2) 
Commencing Q2 2021, certain exposures are now classified as Retail – Small business and were previously classified as Wholesale, reflecting an alignment with capital 
measurement and reporting. 
(3) 
Counterparty credit risk EAD reflects exposure amounts after netting. Collateral is included in EAD for repo-style transactions to the extent allowed by regulatory 
guidelines. Exchange traded derivatives are included in Other sectors. 
(4) 
EAD for undrawn credit commitments and other off-balance sheet amounts are reported after the application of credit conversion factors. 
(5) 
Includes other off-balance sheet exposures such as letters of credit and guarantees. 
(6) 
Includes residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit. 
(7) 
Includes credit cards, unsecured lines of credit and overdraft protection products. Beginning Q1 2021, we have prospectively implemented the transitional methodology 
changes to the securitization framework under the Capital Adequacy Requirement (CAR) guidelines, which increased undrawn and drawn exposures. 
(8) 
Certain amounts by sector and geography have been revised from those previously presented. 
(9) 
Excludes securitization, banking book equities and other assets not subject to the standardized or IRB approach as well as exposures from the Paycheck Protection 
Program (PPP) instituted by the U.S. government in Q2 2020. For further details on the PPP, refer to the Impact of COVID-19 pandemic section. 
(10) 
Geographic profile is based on country of residence of the borrower. 
2021 vs. 2020 
Total credit risk exposure increased $166 billion or 11% from last year, primarily due to volume growth in loans and acceptances in 
our retail and wholesale portfolios, higher deposits with central banks, an increase in derivatives exposure, and higher repo-style 
transactions, partially offset by the impact of foreign exchange translation. 
66
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Net European exposure by country and client type (1), (2) 
Table 43  
 
As at 
 
October 31 
2021 
 
October 31 
2020 (3) 
 
Asset type 
 
Client type 
 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Loans 
Outstanding Securities (4) 
Repo-style 
transactions 
Derivatives  
Financials 
Sovereign 
Corporate 
Total  
Total 
U.K. 
$ 10,128 $ 20,462 $
652 $
2,833  $ 12,025 $ 11,494 $ 10,556 $ 34,075  $ 26,920 
Germany 
1,582 
7,515 
24 
214  
5,012 
2,382 
1,941 
9,335  
9,811 
France 
1,505 
3,222 
40 
407  
1,981 
2,207 
986 
5,174  
4,629 
Total U.K., Germany, France 
13,215 
31,199 
716 
3,454  
19,018 
16,083 
13,483 
48,584  
41,360 
Ireland 
1,098 
861 
433 
37  
941 
– 
1,488 
2,429  
1,390 
Italy 
94 
328 
– 
10  
159 
83 
190 
432  
273 
Portugal 
1 
11 
– 
–  
10 
– 
2 
12  
20 
Spain 
343 
251 
16 
4  
177 
– 
437 
614  
542 
Total peripheral 
1,536 
1,451 
449 
51  
1,287 
83 
2,117 
3,487  
2,225 
Luxembourg 
3,567 
4,497 
27 
45  
2,532 
3,867 
1,737 
8,136  
9,724 
Netherlands 
872 
847 
62 
244  
807 
– 
1,218 
2,025  
2,534 
Norway 
166 
1,358 
118 
16  
1,296 
142 
220 
1,658  
1,568 
Sweden 
425 
1,666 
9 
14  
826 
1,074 
214 
2,114  
1,874 
Switzerland 
948 
10,557 
235 
86  
888 
10,147 
791 
11,826  
6,466 
Other 
3,251 
2,661 
112 
114  
1,727 
1,493 
2,918 
6,138  
4,443 
Total other Europe 
9,229 
21,586 
563 
519  
8,076 
16,723 
7,098 
31,897  
26,609 
Net exposure to Europe (5), (6) 
$ 23,980 $ 54,236 $
1,728 $
4,024  $ 28,381 $ 32,889 $ 22,698 $ 83,968  $ 70,194 
(1) 
Geographic profile is based on country of risk, which reflects our assessment of the geographic risk associated with a given exposure. Typically, this is the residence of 
the borrower. 
(2) 
Exposures are calculated on a fair value basis and net of collateral, which includes $164 billion against repo-style transactions (October 31, 2020 – $138 billion) and 
$9 billion against derivatives (October 31, 2020 – $14 billion). 
(3) 
Amounts have been revised from those previously presented. 
(4) 
Securities include $12 billion of trading securities (October 31, 2020 – $9 billion), $29 billion of deposits (October 31, 2020 – $19 billion), and $13 billion of investment 
securities (October 31, 2020 – $13 billion). Trading and investment securities amounts have been revised from those previously presented. 
(5) 
Excludes $2 billion (October 31, 2020 – $3 billion) of exposures to supranational agencies, predominantly in Luxembourg. 
(6) 
Reflects $1 billion of mitigation through credit default swaps, which are largely used to hedge single name exposures and market risk (October 31, 2020 – $1 billion). 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
67 
 

Residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit (insured vs. uninsured) 
Residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit are secured by residential properties. The following table presents a 
breakdown by geographic region. 
Residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit 
Table 44  
 
As at October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, 
except percentage amounts) 
Residential mortgages 
 
Home equity 
lines of credit 
Insured (1) 
 
Uninsured 
 
Total 
 
Total 
Region (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canada 
 
  
 
  
  
 
Atlantic provinces 
$
8,407 
48%  $
8,944 
52%  
$
17,351  $
1,602 
Quebec 
12,742 
32  
27,567 
68  
40,309  
3,135 
Ontario 
34,211 
20  
135,767 
80  
169,978  
15,891 
Alberta 
20,680 
50  
20,821 
50  
41,501  
5,343 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba 
9,179 
46  
10,714 
54  
19,893  
1,970 
B.C. and territories 
13,314 
20  
51,823 
80  
65,137  
7,383 
Total Canada (3) 
98,533 
28  
255,636 
72  
354,169  
35,324 
U.S. (4) 
1 
–  
23,422 
100  
23,423  
1,413 
Other International (4) 
– 
–  
2,740 
100  
2,740  
1,518 
Total International 
1 
–  
26,162 
100  
26,163  
2,931 
Total 
$
98,534 
26%  $ 281,798 
74%  
$ 380,332  $
38,255 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, 
except percentage amounts) 
Residential mortgages 
 
Home equity 
lines of credit 
Insured (1) 
 
Uninsured 
 
Total 
 
Total 
Region (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canada 
 
  
 
  
  
 
Atlantic provinces 
$
8,181 
51%  $
7,824 
49%  
$
16,005  $
1,684 
Quebec 
13,265 
36  
24,059 
64  
37,324  
3,300 
Ontario 
37,779 
26  
110,247 
74  
148,026  
16,147 
Alberta 
21,245 
52  
19,300 
48  
40,545  
5,830 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba 
9,350 
48  
10,163 
52  
19,513  
2,148 
B.C. and territories 
14,491 
25  
43,383 
75  
57,874  
7,926 
Total Canada (3) 
104,311 
33  
214,976 
67  
319,287  
37,035 
U.S. (4) 
1 
–  
20,331 
100  
20,332  
1,651 
Other International (4) 
– 
–  
2,978 
100  
2,978  
1,282 
Total International 
1 
–  
23,309 
100  
23,310  
2,933 
Total 
$ 104,312 
30%  $
238,285 
70%  
$
342,597  $
39,968 
(1) 
Insured residential mortgages are mortgages whereby our exposure to default is mitigated by insurance through the Canadian 
Mortgage and Housing Corporation or other private mortgage default insurers. 
(2) 
Region is based upon the address of the property mortgaged. The Atlantic provinces are comprised of Newfoundland and Labrador, 
Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, and B.C. and territories are comprised of British Columbia, Nunavut, Northwest 
Territories and Yukon. 
(3) 
Total consolidated residential mortgages in Canada of $354 billion (October 31, 2020 – $319 billion) includes $11 billion (October 31, 
2020 – $10 billion) of mortgages with commercial clients in Canadian Banking, of which $8 billion (October 31, 2020 – $7 billion) are 
insured mortgages, and $18 billion (October 31, 2020 – $18 billion) of residential mortgages held for securitization purposes in Capital 
Markets. All of the residential mortgages held for securitization purposes are insured (October 31, 2020 – all insured). 
(4) 
Home equity lines of credit include term loans collateralized by residential mortgages. 
Home equity lines of credit are uninsured and reported within the personal loan category. 
68
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Residential mortgages portfolio by amortization period 
The following table provides a summary of the percentage of residential mortgages that fall within the remaining amortization 
periods based upon current customer payment amounts, which incorporate payments larger than the minimum contractual 
amount and/or higher frequency of payments. 
Residential mortgages portfolio by amortization period 
Table 45  
 
As at  
 
October 31 
2021 
 
October 31 
2020 
 
Canada 
U.S. and other 
International 
Total 
 Canada 
U.S. and other 
International (1) 
Total 
Amortization period 
 
 
  
 
 
 
≤ 25 years 
75% 
27% 
71%  
77% 
29% 
74% 
> 25 years ≤ 30 years 
25 
71 
28 
 
22
 
68
 
25
 
> 30 years ≤ 35 years 
– 
2 
1 
 
1
 
3
 
1
 
Total 
100% 
100% 
100%  
100% 
100% 
100% 
(1) 
The percentage amounts of residential mortgages by remaining amortization period have been revised from those previously presented. 
Average LTV ratios 
The following table provides a summary of our average LTV ratios for newly originated and acquired uninsured residential 
mortgages and RBC Homeline Plan® products by geographic region, as well as the respective LTV ratios for our total Canadian 
Banking residential mortgage portfolio outstanding: 
Average LTV ratios 
Table 46  
 
For the year ended 
 
October 31 
2021 
 
October 31 
2020 
 
Uninsured 
 
Uninsured 
 
Residential 
mortgages (1) 
RBC Homeline 
Plan® products (2) 
 
Residential 
mortgages (1) 
RBC Homeline 
Plan® products (2) 
Average of newly originated 
and acquired for the period, 
by region (3) 
 
 
 
 
 
Atlantic provinces 
74% 
75%  
74% 
75% 
Quebec 
72
 
74
  
73
 
73
 
Ontario 
71
 
68
  
71
 
68
 
Alberta 
73
 
72
  
73
 
72
 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba 
74
 
75
  
74
 
75
 
B.C. and territories 
69
 
67
  
69
 
66
 
U.S. 
74
 
n.m.
  
72
 
n.m.
 
Other International 
73
 
n.m.
  
69
 
n.m.
 
Average of newly originated 
and acquired for the 
period (4), (5) 
72% 
69%  
71% 
69% 
Total Canadian Banking 
residential mortgages 
portfolio (6) 
52% 
46%  
57% 
49% 
(1) 
Residential mortgages exclude residential mortgages within the RBC Homeline Plan® products. 
(2) 
RBC Homeline Plan® products are comprised of both residential mortgages and home equity lines of credit. 
(3) 
Region is based upon address of the property mortgaged. The Atlantic provinces are comprised of Newfoundland and Labrador, Prince 
Edward Island, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, and B.C. and territories are comprised of British Columbia, Nunavut, Northwest 
Territories and Yukon. 
(4) 
The average LTV ratio for newly originated and acquired uninsured residential mortgages and RBC Homeline Plan® products is calculated 
on a weighted basis by mortgage amounts at origination. 
(5) 
For newly originated mortgages and RBC Homeline Plan® products, LTV is calculated based on the total facility amount for the residential 
mortgage and RBC Homeline Plan® product divided by the value of the related residential property. 
(6) 
Weighted by mortgage balances and adjusted for property values based on the Teranet – National Bank National Composite House Price 
Index. 
n.m. not meaningful 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
69 
 

Credit quality performance 
The following credit quality performance tables and analysis provide information on loans, which represents loans, acceptances 
and commitments, and other financial assets. 
Provision for credit losses 
Table 47  
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Personal & Commercial Banking 
$
(168) 
$ 2,875 
Wealth Management 
(46) 
212 
Capital Markets 
(453) 
1,140 
Corporate Support and other 
(5) 
4 
PCL – Loans 
(672) 
4,231 
PCL – Other financial assets 
(81) 
120 
Total PCL 
$
(753) 
$ 4,351 
PCL on loans is comprised of: 
 
 
Retail 
$
(684) 
$ 1,071 
Wholesale 
(666) 
1,560 
PCL on performing loans 
(1,350) 
2,631 
Retail 
604 
937 
Wholesale 
74 
663 
PCL on impaired loans 
678 
1,600 
PCL – Loans 
$
(672) 
$ 4,231 
PCL on loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances 
(0.10)% 
0.63% 
PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances 
0.10% 
0.24% 
Additional information by geography (1) 
 
 
Canada 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
$
24 
$
35 
Personal 
254 
395 
Credit cards 
288 
471 
Small business 
31 
49 
Retail 
597 
950 
Wholesale 
86 
163 
PCL on impaired loans 
683 
1,113 
U.S. 
 
 
Retail 
7 
5 
Wholesale 
(10) 
377 
PCL on impaired loans 
(3) 
382 
Other International 
 
 
Retail 
– 
(18) 
Wholesale 
(2) 
123 
PCL on impaired loans 
(2) 
105 
PCL on impaired loans 
$
678 
$ 1,600 
(1) 
Geographic information is based on residence of the borrower. 
2021 vs. 2020 
Total PCL was $(753) million. PCL on loans of $(672) million decreased $4,903 million from last year, due to lower provisions in 
Personal & Commercial Banking, Capital Markets and Wealth Management. The PCL on loans ratio of (10) bps decreased 73 bps. 
PCL on performing loans was $(1,350) million, compared to $2,631 million in the prior year, reflecting elevated provisions in 
Personal & Commercial Banking, Capital Markets and Wealth Management in the prior year due to the impact of the COVID-19 
pandemic and releases in the current year primarily driven by improvements in our macroeconomic and credit quality outlook. 
PCL on impaired loans of $678 million decreased $922 million or 58%, largely reflecting the economic recovery underway in 
the current year. The decrease largely related to provisions taken in the prior year in Capital Markets and Wealth Management as 
compared to recoveries in the current year. Lower provisions in Personal & Commercial Banking also contributed to the 
decrease. 
PCL on loans in Personal & Commercial Banking decreased $3,043 million, primarily reflecting provisions on performing loans in 
our Canadian Banking portfolios in the prior year as compared to releases in the current year, as described above. Lower 
provisions on impaired loans in our Canadian Banking retail portfolios also contributed to the decrease due to the economic 
recovery underway and the continued impact of the COVID-19 related government support programs. 
70
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

PCL on loans in Wealth Management decreased $258 million, due to lower provisions in U.S. Wealth Management (including 
City National). The decrease largely reflected provisions on performing loans in the prior year as compared to releases in the 
current year, as described above. Lower provisions on impaired loans, as described above, also contributed to the decrease, as 
the prior year reflected provisions on impaired loans compared to recoveries in the current year. 
PCL on loans in Capital Markets decreased $1,593 million, mainly reflecting provisions on performing loans in the prior year 
as compared to releases in the current year, as described above. Lower provisions on impaired loans, as described above, also 
contributed to the decrease, as the prior year reflected provisions on impaired loans compared to recoveries in the current year, 
largely in the oil and gas sector. 
Gross impaired loans (GIL) 
Table 48  
 
As at and for the year ended  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Personal & Commercial Banking 
$
1,590 
$
1,645 
Wealth Management 
233 
345 
Capital Markets 
485 
1,205 
Total GIL 
$
2,308 
$
3,195 
Canada (1) 
 
 
Retail 
$
716 
$
692 
Wholesale 
555 
754 
GIL 
1,271 
1,446 
U.S. (1) 
 
 
Retail 
23 
32 
Wholesale 
412 
1,039 
GIL 
435 
1,071 
Other International (1) 
 
 
Retail 
212 
216 
Wholesale 
390 
462 
GIL 
602 
678 
Total GIL 
$
2,308 
$
3,195 
Impaired loans, beginning balance 
$
3,195 
$
2,976 
Classified as impaired during the period (new impaired) (2) 
1,726 
3,837 
Net repayments (2) 
(721) 
(1,498) 
Amounts written off 
(1,169) 
(1,681) 
Other (2), (3) 
(723) 
(439) 
Impaired loans, balance at end of period 
$
2,308 
$
3,195 
GIL as a % of related loans and acceptances 
 
 
Total GIL as a % of related loans and acceptances 
0.31% 
0.47% 
Personal & Commercial Banking 
0.30% 
0.33% 
Canadian Banking 
0.24% 
0.26% 
Caribbean Banking 
4.65% 
4.59% 
Wealth Management 
0.26% 
0.41% 
Capital Markets 
0.45% 
1.22% 
(1) 
Geographic information is based on residence of the borrower. 
(2) 
Certain GIL movements for Canadian Banking retail and wholesale portfolios are generally allocated to new impaired, as 
Net repayments and certain Other movements are not reasonably determinable. Certain GIL movements for Caribbean 
Banking retail and wholesale portfolios are generally allocated to Net repayments and new impaired, as Net repayments 
and certain Other movements are not reasonably determinable. 
(3) 
Includes return to performing status during the period, recoveries of loans and advances previously written off, sold, and 
foreign exchange translation and other movements. 
2021 vs. 2020 
Total GIL of $2,308 million decreased $887 million or 28% from last year and the total GIL ratio of 31 bps decreased 16 bps, due to 
lower impaired loans in Capital Markets, Wealth Management and Personal & Commercial Banking, reflecting the economic 
recovery underway. 
GIL in Personal & Commercial Banking decreased $55 million or 3%, primarily due to lower impaired loans in our Canadian 
Banking commercial portfolios, reflecting the economic recovery underway and the continued impact of the COVID-19 related 
government support programs. 
GIL in Wealth Management decreased $112 million or 32%, primarily due to lower impaired loans in U.S. Wealth Management 
(including City National), as described above, largely in the consumer staples sector. 
GIL in Capital Markets decreased $720 million or 60%, due to lower impaired loans in most sectors, as described above, 
including the oil and gas sector. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
71 
 

Allowance for credit losses 
Table 49  
 
As at  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Personal & Commercial Banking 
$ 3,478 
$ 4,424 
Wealth Management 
320 
404 
Capital Markets 
620 
1,281 
Corporate Support and other 
1 
6 
ACL on loans 
4,419 
6,115 
ACL on other financial assets 
52 
147 
Total ACL 
$ 4,471 
$ 6,262 
ACL on loans is comprised of: 
 
 
Retail 
$ 2,287 
$ 2,932 
Wholesale 
1,435 
2,234 
ACL on performing loans 
$ 3,722 
$ 5,166 
ACL on impaired loans 
697 
949 
Additional information by geography (1) 
 
 
Canada 
 
 
Retail 
$
150 
$
164 
Wholesale 
182 
220 
ACL on impaired loans 
332 
384 
U.S. 
 
 
Retail 
3 
1 
Wholesale 
126 
267 
ACL on impaired loans 
129 
268 
Other International 
 
 
Retail 
107 
116 
Wholesale 
129 
181 
ACL on impaired loans 
236 
297 
ACL on impaired loans 
$
697 
$
949 
(1) 
Geographic information is based on residence of the borrower. 
2021 vs. 2020 
Total ACL of $4,471 million decreased $1,791 million or 29% from last year, primarily reflecting a decrease of $1,696 million in ACL 
on loans. 
ACL on performing loans of $3,722 million decreased $1,444 million or 28%, due to lower ACL in Personal & Commercial 
Banking, Capital Markets and Wealth Management, reflecting improvements in our macroeconomic and credit quality outlook 
driven by the economic recovery underway in the current year. 
ACL on impaired loans of $697 million decreased $252 million or 27%, due to lower ACL in Capital Markets, Wealth 
Management and Personal & Commercial Banking. 
Market risk 
Market risk is defined to be the impact of market prices upon our financial condition. This includes potential gains or losses 
due to changes in market determined variables such as interest rates, credit spreads, equity prices, commodity prices, foreign 
exchange rates and implied volatilities. 
The measures of financial condition impacted by market risk are as follows: 
1. 
Positions whose revaluation gains and losses are reported in Revenue, which includes: 
a) 
Changes in the fair value of instruments classified or designated as FVTPL, and 
b) 
Hedge ineffectiveness. 
2. 
CET1 capital, which includes: 
a) 
All of the above, plus 
b) 
Changes in the fair value of FVOCI securities where revaluation gains and losses are reported as OCI, 
c) 
Changes in the Canadian dollar value of investments in foreign subsidiaries, net of hedges, due to foreign exchange 
translation, and 
d) 
Changes in the fair value of employee benefit plan deficits. 
3. 
CET1 ratio, which includes: 
a) 
All of the above, plus 
b) 
Changes in RWA resulting from changes in traded market risk factors, and 
c) 
Changes in the Canadian dollar value of RWA due to foreign exchange translation. 
4. 
The economic value of the Bank, which includes: 
a) 
Points 1 and 2 above, plus 
b) 
Changes in the economic value of other non-trading positions, net interest income, and fee based income, as a 
result of changes in market risk factors. 
72
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Market risk controls – FVTPL positions 
As an element of the ERAF, the Board approves our overall market risk constraints. GRM creates and manages the control 
structure for FVTPL positions which ensures that business is conducted on a basis consistent with Board requirements. The 
Market and Counterparty Credit Risk function within GRM is responsible for creating and managing the controls and 
governance procedures that ensure that risk taken is consistent with risk appetite constraints set by the Board. These controls 
include limits on probabilistic measures of potential loss such as Value-at-Risk, Stressed Value-at-Risk, Incremental Risk Charge 
and stress tests as defined below: 
Value-at-Risk (VaR) is a statistical measure of potential loss for a financial portfolio computed at a given level of 
confidence and over a defined holding period. We measure VaR at the 99th percentile confidence level for price movements 
over a one-day holding period using historic simulation of the last two years of equally weighted historic market data. 
These calculations are updated daily with current risk positions, with the exception of certain less material positions that 
are not actively traded and are updated on at least a monthly basis. 
Stressed Value-at-Risk (SVaR) is calculated in an identical manner as VaR with the exception that it is computed using a 
fixed historical one-year period of extreme volatility and its inverse rather than the most recent two-year history. The 
stress period used is a one-year period covering the market volatility observed during Q2 2020. SVaR is calculated daily for 
all portfolios, with the exception of certain less material positions that are not actively traded and are updated on at least 
a monthly basis. 
VaR and SVaR are statistical estimates based on historical market data and should be interpreted with knowledge of their 
limitations, which include the following: 
•
VaR and SVaR will not be predictive of future losses if the realized market movements differ significantly from the 
historical periods used to compute them. 
•
VaR and SVaR project potential losses over a one-day holding period and do not project potential losses for risk 
positions held over longer time periods. 
•
VaR and SVaR are measured using positions at close of business and do not include the impact of trading and hedging 
activity over the course of a day. 
We validate our VaR and SVaR measures through a variety of means – including subjecting the models to vetting and 
validation by a group independent of the model developers and by back-testing the VaR against daily marked-to-market 
revenue to identify and examine events in which actual outcomes in trading revenue exceed the VaR projections. 
Incremental Risk Charge (IRC) captures the risk of losses under default or rating changes for issuers of certain traded fixed 
income instruments. IRC is measured over a one year horizon at a 99.9% confidence level, and captures different liquidity 
horizons for instruments and concentrations in issuers under a constant level of risk assumption. Changes in measured risk 
levels are primarily associated with changes in inventory from the applicable fixed income trading portfolios.  
Stress tests – Our market risk stress testing program is used to identify and control risk due to large changes in market 
prices and rates. We conduct stress testing daily on positions that are marked-to-market. The stress tests simulate both 
historical and hypothetical events which are severe and long-term in duration. Historical scenarios are taken from actual 
market events and range in duration up to 90 days. Examples include the Global Pandemic of 2020, Global Financial Crisis of 
2008 and the Taper Tantrum of 2013. Hypothetical scenarios are designed to be forward-looking at potential future market 
stresses, and are designed to be severe but plausible. We are constantly evaluating and refining these scenarios as market 
conditions change. Stress results are calculated assuming an instantaneous revaluation of our positions with no 
management action. 
These measures are computed on all positions that are FVTPL for financial reporting purposes, with the exception of those in a 
designated hedging relationship and those in our insurance businesses. 
Market risk measures – FVTPL positions 
Market risk measures* 
Table 50  
 
October 31, 2021 
October 31, 2020 
 
 
For the year ended 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
As at 
Average 
High 
Low 
As at 
Average 
High 
Low 
Equity 
$
24 
$
20 
$
38 
$
12 
$
23 
$
33 
$
64 
$
13 
Foreign exchange 
4 
4 
6 
2 
3 
3 
6 
1 
Commodities 
3 
3 
4 
2 
3 
3 
7 
1 
Interest rate (1) 
61 
44 
64 
21 
47 
54 
178 
11 
Credit specific (2) 
9 
8 
11 
6 
7 
6 
7 
4 
Diversification (3) 
(51) 
(35) 
n.m. 
n.m. 
(18) 
(25) 
n.m. 
n.m. 
Market risk VaR 
$
50 
$
44 
$
72 
$
23 
$
65 
$
74 
$
232 
$
18 
Market risk Stressed VaR 
$
59 
$
53 
$
101 
$
29 
$
86 
$
109 
$
228 
$
49 
* 
This table represents an integral part of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
(1) 
General credit spread risk and funding spread risk associated with uncollateralized derivatives are included under interest rate VaR. 
(2) 
Credit specific risk captures issuer-specific credit spread volatility. 
(3) 
Market risk VaR is less than the sum of the individual risk factor VaR results due to risk factor diversification. 
n.m. not meaningful 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
73 
 

2021 vs. 2020 
Average market risk VaR of $44 million decreased $30 million and average SVaR of $53 million decreased $56 million from last 
year, as overall market volatility and credit spreads improved in 2021 relative to the market turmoil observed in 2020. Loan 
underwriting commitments as well as fixed income and equity portfolios were impacted by the heightened market volatility last 
year. In 2021, VaR also reflected increased diversification across our trading businesses.  
The following chart displays a bar graph of our daily trading profit and loss and a line graph of our daily market risk VaR. We 
incurred no net trading losses in 2021. 
Trading revenue (teb), (1) and VaR  (Millions of Canadian dollars)
Nov 1, 2020
Jan 31, 2021
Apr 30, 2021
Jul 31, 2021
Oct 31, 2021
80
60
40
20
-60
-20
-40
0
-80
Trading revenue (1)
VaR
 
(1) 
Includes loan underwriting commitments. 
The following chart displays the distribution of daily trading profit and loss in 2021 and 2020 with no net trading losses in 2021 and 
13 days of trading losses in 2020. The largest reported profit was $55 million with an average daily profit of $17 million. 
Frequency in Number of Days
Daily net trading revenue (C$ millions), excluding structured entities
2021
2020
< -100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Trading revenue (teb), (1)
 
(1) 
Includes loan underwriting commitments. 
Market risk measures for assets and liabilities of RBC Insurance® 
We offer a range of insurance products to clients and hold investments to meet the future obligations to policyholders. The 
investments which support actuarial liabilities are predominantly fixed income assets designated as FVTPL. Consequently, 
changes in the fair values of these assets are recorded in the Consolidated Statements of Income and are largely offset by 
changes in the fair value of the actuarial liabilities, the impact of which is reflected in Insurance policyholder benefits, claims and 
acquisition expense. As at October 31, 2021, we held assets in support of $13 billion of liabilities with respect to insurance 
obligations (October 31, 2020 – $12 billion). 
74
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Market risk controls – Interest Rate Risk in the Banking Book (IRRBB) positions1 
IRRBB arises primarily from traditional customer-originated banking products such as deposits and loans, and includes 
related hedges and interest rate risk from securities held for liquidity management purposes. Factors contributing to IRRBB 
include mismatches between asset and liability repricing dates, relative changes in asset and liability rates in response to 
market rate scenarios, and other product features affecting the expected timing of cash flows, such as options to pre-pay 
loans or redeem term deposits prior to contractual maturity. IRRBB sensitivities are regularly measured and reported, and 
subject to limits and controls with independent oversight from GRM. 
The Board approves the risk appetite for IRRBB, and the Asset-Liability Committee (ALCO) and GRM provide ongoing 
governance through IRRBB risk policies, limits, operating standards and other controls. IRRBB reports are reviewed regularly 
by GRM, ALCO, the GRC, the Risk Committee of the Board and the Board. 
IRRBB measurement 
To monitor and control IRRBB, we assess two primary metrics, Net Interest Income (NII) risk and Economic Value of Equity 
(EVE) risk, under a range of market shocks, scenarios, and time horizons. Market scenarios include currency-specific parallel 
and non-parallel yield curve changes, interest rate volatility shocks, and interest rate shock scenarios prescribed by 
regulators. 
In measuring NII risk, detailed banking book balance sheets and income statements are dynamically simulated to 
estimate the impact of market stress scenarios on projected NII. Assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet positions are 
simulated over various time horizons. The simulations incorporate maturities, renewals, and new originations along with 
prepayment and redemption behaviour. Product pricing and volumes are forecast based on past experience to determine 
response expectations under a given market shock scenario. EVE risk captures the market value sensitivity to changes in 
rates. In measuring EVE risk, deterministic (single-scenario) and stochastic (multiple-scenario) valuation techniques are 
applied to spot position data. NII and EVE risks are measured for a range of market risk stress scenarios which include 
extreme but plausible changes in market rates and volatilities. IRRBB measures do not include beneficial management actions 
that could be taken to reduce exposures. 
Management of NII and EVE risk is complementary and supports our efforts to generate a sustainable high-quality NII stream. NII 
and EVE risks for specific units are measured daily, weekly or monthly depending on materiality, complexity and hedge strategy. 
A number of assumptions affecting cash flows, product re-pricing and the administration of rates underlie the models 
used to measure NII and EVE risk. The key assumptions pertain to the expected funding profile of mortgage rate commitments, 
fixed-rate loan prepayment behaviour, term deposit redemption behaviour, and the treatment of non-maturity deposits. All 
assumptions are derived empirically based on historical client behaviour and product pricing with consideration of possible 
forward-looking changes. All models and assumptions used to measure IRRBB are subject to independent oversight by GRM. 
Market risk measures – IRRBB Sensitivities 
The following table shows the potential before-tax impact of an immediate and sustained 100 bps increase or decrease in 
interest rates on projected 12-month NII and EVE, assuming no subsequent hedging. Rate floors are applied within the 
declining rates scenarios which prevent EVE valuation and NII simulation rate levels from falling below a minimum average 
level of negative 25 bps across major currencies. Interest rate risk measures are based on current on and off-balance sheet 
positions which can change over time in response to business activity and management actions. 
Market risk – IRRBB measures* 
Table 51  
 
October 31 
2021 
 
October 31 
2020 
 
EVE risk 
 
NII risk (1) 
 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Canadian 
dollar impact 
U.S. dollar 
impact 
Total  
Canadian 
dollar impact 
U.S. dollar 
impact 
Total  
EVE risk 
NII risk (1) 
Before-tax impact of: 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
100 bps increase in rates 
$
(1,641) $ (368) $(2,009)  $
571 
$
358 
$ 929  $ (1,756) $
818 
100 bps decrease in rates 
1,540 
(3) 
1,537  
(603) 
(318) 
(921)  
1,321 
(621) 
* 
This table represents an integral part of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
(1) 
Represents the 12-month NII exposure to an instantaneous and sustained shift in interest rates. 
As at October 31, 2021, an immediate and sustained -100 bps shock would have had a negative impact to our NII of $921 million, up 
from $621 million last year, and an immediate and sustained +100 bps shock would have had a negative impact to our EVE of 
$2,009 million, up from $1,756 million last year. The year-over-year change in NII sensitivity is largely attributable to continued low 
cost deposit growth, while the year-over-year change in EVE sensitivity is mainly due to overall growth in the balance sheet, in 
particular growth in book capital. During 2021, NII and EVE risks remained within approved limits. 
1 
IRRBB positions include the impact of derivatives in hedge accounting relationships and FVOCI securities used for interest rate risk management. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
75 
 

Market risk measures for other material non-trading portfolios 
Investment securities carried at FVOCI 
We held $78 billion of investment securities carried at FVOCI as at October 31, 2021, compared to $82 billion at the end of the prior 
year. We hold debt securities carried at FVOCI primarily as investments, as well as to manage liquidity risk and hedge interest 
rate risk in our non-trading banking balance sheet. As at October 31, 2021, our portfolio of investment securities carried at FVOCI 
is interest rate sensitive and would impact OCI by a pre-tax change in value of $8 million as measured by the change in the value 
of the securities for a one basis point parallel increase in yields. The portfolio also exposes us to credit spread risk of a pre-tax 
change in value of $14 million, as measured by the change in value for a one basis point widening of credit spreads. The value of 
the investment securities carried at FVOCI included in our IRRBB measures as at October 31, 2021 was $75 billion. Our investment 
securities carried at FVOCI also include equity exposures of $1 billion as at October 31, 2021, compared to $1 billion at the end of 
the prior year. 
Non-trading foreign exchange rate risk 
Foreign exchange rate risk is the potential adverse impact on earnings and economic value due to changes in foreign currency 
rates. Our revenue, expenses and income denominated in currencies other than the Canadian dollar are subject to 
fluctuations as a result of changes in the value of the average Canadian dollar relative to the average value of those 
currencies. Our most significant exposure is to the U.S. dollar, due to our operations in the U.S. and other activities conducted 
in U.S. dollars. Other significant exposures are to the British pound and the Euro, due to our activities conducted 
internationally in these currencies. A strengthening or weakening of the Canadian dollar compared to the U.S. dollar, British 
pound and the Euro could reduce or increase, as applicable, the translated value of our foreign currency denominated 
revenue, expenses and earnings and could have a significant effect on the results of our operations. We are also exposed to 
foreign exchange rate risk arising from our investments in foreign operations. For unhedged equity investments, when the 
Canadian dollar appreciates against other currencies, the unrealized translation losses on net foreign investments decreases 
our shareholders’ equity through the other components of equity and decreases the translated value of the RWA of the foreign 
currency-denominated asset. The reverse is true when the Canadian dollar depreciates against other currencies. 
Consequently, we consider these impacts in selecting an appropriate level of our investments in foreign operations to be 
hedged. 
Derivatives related to non-trading activity 
Derivatives are also used to hedge market risk exposure unrelated to our trading activity. Hedge accounting is elected where 
applicable. These derivatives are included in our IRRBB measures and other internal non-trading market risk measures. We use 
interest rate swaps to manage our IRRBB, funding and investment activities. Interest rate swaps are also used to hedge changes 
in the fair value of certain fixed-rate instruments. We also use foreign exchange derivatives to manage our exposure to equity 
investments in subsidiaries that are denominated in foreign currencies, particularly the U.S. dollar, British Pound, and Euro. 
For further details on the application of hedge accounting and the use of derivatives for hedging activities, refer to Notes 2 and 8 
of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
76
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Linkage of market risk to selected balance sheet items 
The following tables provide the linkages between selected balance sheet items with positions included in our trading market risk 
and non-trading market risk disclosures, which illustrates how we manage market risk for our assets and liabilities through 
different risk measures: 
Linkage of market risk to selected balance sheet items 
Table 52  
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
 
Market risk measure 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Balance sheet 
amount Traded risk (1) 
Non-traded 
risk (2) 
Non-traded risk  
primary risk sensitivity  
Assets subject to market risk 
 
 
 
 
Cash and due from banks 
$
113,846 $
– 
$
113,846 
Interest rate  
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
79,638 
56,896 
22,742 
Interest rate  
Securities 
 
 
 
 
Trading 
139,240 
127,259 
11,981 
Interest rate, credit spread  
Investment, net of applicable allowance 
145,484 
– 
145,484 
Interest rate, credit spread, equity  
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase 
agreements and securities borrowed 
307,903 
265,011 
42,892 
Interest rate  
Loans 
 
 
 
 
Retail 
503,598 
9,231 
494,367 
Interest rate  
Wholesale 
218,066 
9,685 
208,381 
Interest rate  
Allowance for loan losses 
(4,089) 
– 
(4,089) 
Interest rate  
Segregated fund net assets 
2,666 
– 
2,666 
Interest rate  
Other 
 
 
 
 
Derivatives 
95,541 
92,829 
2,712 
Interest rate, foreign exchange  
Other assets 
92,157 
8,615 
83,542 
Interest rate  
Assets not subject to market risk (3) 
12,273 
 
 
 
Total assets 
$
1,706,323 $
569,526 
$
1,124,524 
 
Liabilities subject to market risk 
 
 
 
 
Deposits 
$
1,100,831 $
136,927 
$
963,904 
Interest rate  
Segregated fund liabilities 
2,666 
– 
2,666 
Interest rate  
Other 
 
 
 
 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
37,841 
37,841 
– 
 
Obligations related to assets sold 
under repurchase agreements and 
securities loaned 
262,201 
236,146 
26,055 
Interest rate  
Derivatives 
91,439 
89,290 
2,149 
Interest rate, foreign exchange  
Other liabilities 
87,084 
8,528 
78,556 
Interest rate  
Subordinated debentures 
9,593 
– 
9,593 
Interest rate  
Liabilities not subject to market risk (4) 
15,906 
 
 
 
Total liabilities 
$
1,607,561 $
508,732 
$
1,082,923 
 
Total equity 
98,762 
 
 
 
Total liabilities and equity 
$
1,706,323 
 
 
 
(1) 
Traded risk includes positions that are classified or designated as FVTPL and positions whose revaluation gains and losses are reported in revenue. Market risk 
measures of VaR, SVaR, IRC and stress tests are used as risk controls for traded risk. 
(2) 
Non-traded risk includes positions used in the management of IRRBB and other non-trading portfolios. Other material non-trading portfolios include positions from RBC 
Insurance® and investment securities, net of applicable allowance, not included in IRRBB. 
(3) 
Assets not subject to market risk include physical and other assets. 
(4) 
Liabilities not subject to market risk include payroll related and other liabilities. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
77 
 

 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
 
Market risk measure 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Balance sheet 
amount Traded risk (1) 
Non-traded 
risk (2) 
Non-traded risk  
primary risk sensitivity  
Assets subject to market risk 
 
 
 
 
Cash and due from banks 
$
118,888 $
– 
$
118,888 
Interest rate  
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
39,013 
21,603 
17,410 
Interest rate  
Securities 
 
 
 
 
Trading 
136,071 
124,884 
11,187 
Interest rate, credit spread  
Investment, net of applicable allowance 
139,743 
– 
139,743 
Interest rate, credit spread, equity  
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase 
agreements and securities borrowed 
313,015 
264,394 
48,621 
Interest rate  
Loans 
 
 
 
 
Retail 
457,976 
10,392 
447,584 
Interest rate  
Wholesale 
208,655 
6,855 
201,800 
Interest rate  
Allowance for loan losses 
(5,639) 
– 
(5,639) 
Interest rate  
Segregated fund net assets 
1,922 
– 
1,922 
Interest rate  
Other 
 
 
 
 
Derivatives 
113,488 
109,175 
4,313 
Interest rate, foreign exchange  
Other assets 
90,937 
6,475 
84,462 
Interest rate  
Assets not subject to market risk (3) 
10,479 
 
 
 
Total assets 
$
1,624,548 $
543,778 
$ 1,070,291 
 
Liabilities subject to market risk 
 
 
 
 
Deposits 
$
1,011,885 $
107,450 
$
904,435 
Interest rate  
Segregated fund liabilities 
1,922 
– 
1,922 
Interest rate  
Other 
 
 
 
 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
29,285 
29,285 
– 
 
Obligations related to assets sold 
under repurchase agreements and 
securities loaned 
274,231 
255,922 
18,309 
Interest rate  
Derivatives 
109,927 
108,147 
1,780 
Interest rate, foreign exchange  
Other liabilities 
86,994 
8,977 
78,017 
Interest rate  
Subordinated debentures 
9,867 
– 
9,867 
Interest rate  
Liabilities not subject to market risk (4) 
13,670 
 
 
 
Total liabilities 
$
1,537,781 $
509,781 
$ 1,014,330 
 
Total equity 
86,767 
 
 
 
Total liabilities and equity 
$
1,624,548 
 
 
 
(1) 
Traded risk includes positions that are classified or designated as FVTPL and positions whose revaluation gains and losses are reported in revenue. Market risk 
measures of VaR, SVaR, IRC and stress tests are used as risk controls for traded risk. 
(2) 
Non-traded risk includes positions used in the management of IRRBB and other non-trading portfolios. Other material non-trading portfolios include positions from RBC 
Insurance® and investment securities, net of applicable allowance, not included in IRRBB. 
(3) 
Assets not subject to market risk include physical and other assets. 
(4) 
Liabilities not subject to market risk include payroll related and other liabilities. 
Liquidity and funding risk 
Liquidity and funding risk (liquidity risk) is the risk that we may be unable to generate sufficient cash or its equivalents in a 
timely and cost-effective manner to meet our commitments. Liquidity risk arises from mismatches in the timing and value of 
on-balance sheet and off-balance sheet cash flows. 
Our liquidity profile is structured to ensure that we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy current and prospective 
commitments in both normal and stressed conditions. To achieve this goal, we operate under a comprehensive Liquidity Risk 
Management Framework (LRMF) and Pledging Policy. We also employ several liquidity risk mitigation strategies that include: 
•
Achieving an appropriate balance between the level of exposure allowed under our risk appetite and the cost of risk 
mitigation; 
•
Maintaining broad funding access, including preserving and promoting a reliable base of core client deposits and ongoing 
access to diversified wholesale funding sources; 
•
A comprehensive liquidity stress testing program, contingency, recovery and resolution planning and status monitoring to 
ensure sufficiency of unencumbered marketable securities and demonstrated capacity to monetize specific asset classes; 
•
Governance of pledging activity through limits and liquid asset buffers for potential pledging activity; 
•
Timely and granular risk measurement information; 
•
Transparent liquidity transfer pricing and cost allocation; and 
•
Our three lines of defense governance model. 
78
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Risk control 
Our liquidity risk objectives, policies, models and methodologies are reviewed regularly, and are updated to reflect changing 
market conditions and business mix. This includes aligning with local regulatory developments. We continue to maintain 
liquidity and funding that is appropriate for the execution of our strategy. Liquidity risk remains well within our risk appetite. 
The Board annually approves the enterprise liquidity risk appetite recommended by the Risk Committee of the Board. The 
Risk Committee of the Board reviews and recommends the liquidity risk appetite and approves the LRMF. The Board, the Risk 
Committee of the Board, the GRC and the ALCO regularly review reporting on our consolidated liquidity position. The GRC, the 
Policy Review Committee (PRC) and/or the ALCO also review liquidity documents prepared for the Board or its committees. 
•
The PRC approves the Liquidity Risk Policy, which establishes minimum risk control elements in accordance with the 
Board-approved risk appetite and the LRMF, and the Pledging Policy, which outlines the requirements and authorities for 
the management of our pledging activities. 
•
The ALCO annually approves the Enterprise Liquidity Contingency Plan (ELCP) and provides strategic direction and 
oversight to Corporate Treasury, other functions, and business segments on the management of liquidity. 
These policies are supported by operational, desk and product-level policies that implement risk control elements, such as 
parameters, methodologies, management limits and authorities that govern the measurement and management of liquidity. 
Stress testing is also employed to assess the robustness of the control framework and inform liquidity contingency plans. 
Risk measurement 
Liquidity risk is measured by applying scenario-specific assumptions against our assets and liabilities and off-balance sheet 
commitments to derive expected cash flow profiles over varying time horizons. For example, government bonds generally can 
be quickly and easily converted to cash without significant loss of value regardless of their contractual maturity. Similarly, 
while relationship-based deposits contractually can be withdrawn immediately, in practice, these balances can be relatively 
stable sources of funding depending on several factors, such as the nature of the client and their intended use. Risk 
methodologies and underlying assumptions are periodically reviewed and validated to ensure their alignment with our 
operating environment, expected economic and market conditions, rating agency preferences, regulatory requirements and 
generally accepted industry practices. 
To manage liquidity risk within our liquidity risk appetite, we set limits on various metrics reflecting a range of time horizons 
and severity of stress conditions and develop contingency, recovery and resolution plans. Our liquidity risk measurement and 
control activities are divided into three categories as follows: 
Structural (longer-term) liquidity risk 
To guide our secured and unsecured wholesale term funding activities, we employ both internal and regulatory metrics to 
manage and control the structural alignment between long-term illiquid assets and longer-term funding sourced from 
wholesale investors and core relationship deposits. 
Tactical (shorter-term) liquidity risk 
To address potential immediate cash flow risks in times of stress, we use short-term net cash flow limits to control risk of 
material units, subsidiaries and currencies, and perform stress testing assessments. Net cash flow positions are determined 
by applying internally-derived risk assumptions and parameters to known and anticipated cash flows for all material 
unencumbered assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet activities. Encumbered assets are not considered a source of available 
liquidity. We also control tactical liquidity by adhering to relevant regulatory standards, such as LCR. 
Contingency liquidity risk 
Contingency liquidity risk planning assesses the impact of sudden stress events and our planned responses. Our ELCP, 
maintained and administered by Corporate Treasury, has been developed to guide our potential responses to liquidity crises. 
Under leadership of Corporate Treasury, both enterprise and regional Liquidity Crisis Teams (LCT) meet regularly to assess 
our liquidity status, approve the ELCP, and in times of stress provide valuable linkages to front line and risk functions to 
support the crisis management process. LCT’s include members from key business segments, GRM, Finance, Operations, and 
Communications with relevant subject matter expertise. 
Our stress tests, which include elements of scenario and sensitivity analyses, measure our prospective exposure to systemic 
and RBC-specific events over a period of several weeks. Different levels of severity are considered for each type of crisis with 
some scenarios reflecting multiple-downgrades to our credit ratings. 
The contingency liquidity risk planning process identifies contingent funding needs (e.g., draws on committed credit and 
liquidity lines, demands for more collateral and deposit run-off) and sources (e.g., contingent liquid asset sales and incremental 
wholesale funding capacity) under various stress scenarios, and as a result, informs requirements for our earmarked 
unencumbered liquid asset portfolios. 
Our unencumbered liquid asset portfolios consist of diversified, highly rated and liquid marketable securities, overnight 
government reverse repos and deposits with central banks. These portfolios are subject to minimum asset quality levels and, as 
appropriate, other eligibility guidelines (e.g., maturity, diversification and eligibility for central bank advances) to maximize ready 
access to additional cash should it be required. These securities, when added to other unencumbered liquid assets that we hold 
as a result of capital markets or other activities, contribute to our liquidity reserve, and are reflected in the asset encumbrance 
disclosures shown below. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
79 
 

Liquidity reserve and asset encumbrance 
The following tables provide summaries of our liquidity reserve and asset encumbrance. In both tables, unencumbered assets 
represent, to varying degrees, a ready source of funding. Unencumbered assets are the difference between total and encumbered 
assets from both on- and off-balance sheet sources. The encumbered assets include: (i) bank-owned liquid assets that are either 
pledged as collateral (e.g., repo financing and derivative pledging) or not freely available due to regulatory or internal policy 
requirements (e.g., earmarked to satisfy mandatory reserve or regional capital adequacy requirements and to maintain 
continuous access to payment and settlement systems); (ii) securities received as collateral from securities financing and 
derivative transactions which have either been re-hypothecated where permissible (e.g., to obtain financing through repos or to 
cover securities sold short) or have no liquidity value since re-hypothecation is prohibited; and (iii) illiquid assets that have been 
securitized and sold into the market or that have been pledged as collateral in support of structured term funding vehicles. As 
per our liquidity management framework and practice, encumbered assets are not considered a source of liquidity. 
Liquidity reserve 
Our liquidity reserve consists of available unencumbered liquid assets. Although unused wholesale funding capacity, which is 
regularly assessed, could be another potential source of liquidity to mitigate stressed conditions, it is excluded in the 
determination of the liquidity reserve. Similarly, uncommitted and undrawn central bank borrowing facilities that could be 
accessed subject to satisfying certain preconditions as set by various central banks (e.g., BoC, the Fed, Bank of England, and 
Bank of France), as well as amounts that qualify as eligible collateral at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) and 
Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) are also excluded from the determination of the liquidity reserve. 
Liquidity reserve 
Table 53  
 
As at October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Bank-owned 
liquid assets 
Securities 
received as 
collateral from 
securities 
financing and 
derivative 
transactions 
Total liquid 
assets 
Encumbered 
liquid assets 
Unencumbered 
liquid assets 
Cash and due from banks 
$
113,846 
$
– 
$ 113,846 
$
3,405 
$
110,441 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
79,638 
– 
79,638 
– 
79,638 
Securities issued or guaranteed by sovereigns, central banks 
or multilateral development banks (1) 
214,326 
313,732 
528,058 
357,927 
170,131 
Other securities 
114,692 
115,396 
230,088 
132,360 
97,728 
Other liquid assets (2) 
27,600 
– 
27,600 
25,981 
1,619 
Total liquid assets 
$
550,102 
$ 429,128 
$ 979,230 
$519,673 
$
459,557 
 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Bank-owned 
liquid assets 
Securities 
received as 
collateral from 
securities 
financing and 
derivative 
transactions 
Total liquid 
assets 
Encumbered 
liquid assets 
Unencumbered 
liquid assets 
Cash and due from banks 
$
118,888 
$
– 
$ 118,888 
$
4,022 
$
114,866 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
39,013 
– 
39,013 
– 
39,013 
Securities issued or guaranteed by sovereigns, central banks 
or multilateral development banks (1) 
236,910 
309,512 
546,422 
358,233 
188,189 
Other securities 
93,781 
101,317 
195,098 
89,764 
105,334 
Other liquid assets (2) 
30,305 
– 
30,305 
27,934 
2,371 
Total liquid assets 
$
518,897 
$ 410,829 
$ 929,726 
$ 479,953 
$
449,773 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As at  
 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
 
 
 
Royal Bank of Canada 
$
233,342 
$ 261,940 
 
 
 
Foreign branches 
68,567 
44,037 
 
 
 
Subsidiaries 
157,648 
143,796 
 
 
 
Total unencumbered liquid assets 
$
459,557 
$ 449,773 
 
 
 
(1) 
Includes liquid securities issued by provincial governments and U.S. government-sponsored entities working under U.S. Federal government’s conservatorship (e.g., 
Federal National Mortgage Association and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation). 
(2) 
Encumbered liquid assets amount represents cash collateral and margin deposit amounts pledged related to OTC and exchange-traded derivative transactions. 
The liquidity reserve is typically most affected by routine flows of client banking activity where liquid asset portfolios adjust to 
the change in cash balances, and additionally from capital markets activities where business strategies and client flows may also 
affect the addition or subtraction of liquid assets in the overall calculation of the liquidity reserve. Corporate Treasury also 
affects liquidity reserves through the management of funding issuances where reserves absorb timing mismatches between debt 
issuances and deployment into business activities. 
80
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

2021 vs. 2020 
Total liquid assets increased $50 billion or 5% and total unencumbered liquid assets increased $10 billion or 2% from last year, 
mainly due to an increase in deposits with central banks reflecting higher wholesale funding and deposit levels, and an increase 
in securities received as collateral under collateral swap transactions and reverse repurchase agreements. However, the 
increase in collateral received was offset by an increase in collateral pledged under repurchase and collateral swap 
transactions. 
Asset encumbrance 
The table below provides a summary of our on- and off-balance sheet amounts for cash, securities and other assets, 
distinguishing between those that are encumbered or available for sale or use as collateral in secured funding transactions. 
Other assets, such as mortgages and credit card receivables, can also be monetized, albeit over longer timeframes than those 
required for marketable securities. As at October 31, 2021, our unencumbered assets available as collateral comprised 26% of 
total assets (October 31, 2020 – 28%). 
Asset encumbrance 
Table 54  
 
As at  
 
October 31 
2021 
 
October 31 
2020 
 
Encumbered 
 
Unencumbered 
  
Encumbered 
 
Unencumbered 
 
(Millions of 
Canadian dollars) 
Pledged as 
collateral 
Other (1)  
Available as 
collateral (2) 
Other (3) 
Total  
Pledged as 
collateral 
Other (1)  
Available as 
collateral (2) 
Other (3) 
Total 
Cash and due from banks $
– $
3,405  $
110,441 $
– $
113,846  $
– $
4,022  $
114,866 $
– $
118,888 
Interest-bearing deposits 
with banks 
– 
–  
79,638 
– 
79,638  
– 
–  
39,013 
– 
39,013 
Securities 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Trading 
56,602 
–  
87,311 
3,633 
147,546  
48,505 
–  
91,245 
3,684 
143,434 
Investment, net of 
applicable allowance 
12,055 
–  
133,429 
– 
145,484  
13,337 
–  
126,353 
53 
139,743 
Assets purchased under 
reverse repurchase 
agreements and 
securities borrowed (4) 
437,408 
18,310  
17,436 
5,343 
478,497  
400,807 
17,209  
37,879 
5,037 
460,932 
Loans 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Retail 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Mortgage securities 
29,370 
–  
30,778 
– 
60,148  
31,460 
–  
40,050 
– 
71,510 
Mortgage loans 
46,699 
–  
29,858 
243,627 
320,184  
62,131 
–  
26,389 
182,567 
271,087 
Non-mortgage loans 
3,213 
–  
8,110 
111,943 
123,266  
5,711 
–  
12,006 
97,662 
115,379 
Wholesale 
– 
–  
– 
218,066 
218,066  
– 
–  
– 
208,655 
208,655 
Allowance for loan losses 
– 
–  
– 
(4,089) 
(4,089)  
– 
–  
– 
(5,639) 
(5,639) 
Segregated fund net 
assets 
– 
–  
– 
2,666 
2,666  
– 
–  
– 
1,922 
1,922 
Other 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Derivatives 
– 
–  
– 
95,541 
95,541  
– 
–  
– 
113,488 
113,488 
Others (5) 
25,981 
–  
1,619 
76,830 
104,430  
27,934 
–  
2,371 
71,111 
101,416 
Total assets 
$ 611,328 $ 21,715  $
498,620 $
753,560 $1,885,223  $ 589,885 $ 21,231  $
490,172 $
678,540 $ 1,779,828 
(1) 
Includes assets restricted from use to generate secured funding due to legal or other constraints. 
(2) 
Represents assets that are readily available for use as collateral, including NHA MBS, our unencumbered mortgage loans that qualify as eligible collateral at FHLB, as 
well as loans that qualify as eligible collateral for discount window facility available to us and lodged at the FRBNY. 
(3) 
Other unencumbered assets are not subject to any restrictions on their use to secure funding or as collateral but would not be considered readily available.  
(4) 
Includes bank-owned liquid assets and securities received as collateral from off-balance sheet securities financing, derivative transactions, and margin lending. Includes 
$18 billion (October 31, 2020 – $17 billion) of collateral received through reverse repurchase transactions that cannot be rehypothecated in its current legal form. 
(5) 
The Pledged as collateral amount represents cash collateral and margin deposit amounts pledged related to OTC and exchange-traded derivative transactions. 
Funding 
Funding strategy 
Core funding, comprising capital, longer-term wholesale liabilities and a diversified pool of personal and, to a lesser extent, 
commercial and institutional deposits, is the foundation of our structural liquidity position. 
Deposit and funding profile 
As at October 31, 2021, relationship-based deposits, which are the primary source of funding for retail loans and mortgages, were 
$771 billion or 55% of our total funding (October 31, 2020 – $708 billion or 54%). The remaining portion is comprised of short- and 
long-term wholesale funding. 
Funding for highly liquid assets consists primarily of short-term wholesale funding that reflects the monetization period of 
those assets. Long-term wholesale funding is used mostly to fund less liquid wholesale assets and to support liquid asset buffers. 
Senior long-term debt issued by the bank on or after September 23, 2018, that has an original term greater than 400 days and 
is marketable, subject to certain exceptions, is subject to the Canadian Bank Recapitalization (Bail-in) regime. Under the Bail-in 
regime, in circumstances when the Superintendent of Financial Institutions has determined that a bank may no longer be viable, 
the Governor in Council may, upon a recommendation of the Minister of Finance that he or she is of the opinion that it is in the 
public interest to do so, grant an order directing the Canada Deposit Insurance Corporation (CDIC) to convert all or a portion of 
certain shares and liabilities of that bank into common shares. As at October 31, 2021, the notional value of issued and 
outstanding long-term debt subject to conversion under the Bail-in regime was $53 billion (October 31, 2020 – $37 billion). 
For further details on our wholesale funding, refer to the Composition of wholesale funding tables below. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
81 
 

Long-term debt issuance 
During 2021, we continued to experience favourable unsecured wholesale funding access and pricing. We issued, either directly 
or through our subsidiaries, unsecured long-term funding of $28 billion in various currencies and markets, which was more than 
offset by maturities. 
We primarily use residential mortgage and credit card securitization programs as alternative sources of funding and for 
liquidity and asset/liability management purposes. Our total secured long-term funding includes outstanding MBS sold, 
covered bonds that are collateralized with residential mortgages and securities backed by credit card receivables. 
Compared to 2020, our outstanding MBS sold decreased $1.7 billion. Our covered bonds and securitized credit card 
receivables decreased $2.2 billion and $2.5 billion, respectively. 
For further details, refer to the Off-balance sheet arrangements section. 
Long-term funding sources*(1) 
Table 55  
 
As at  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
 
October 31 
2020 
Unsecured long-term funding 
$
89,447  $
88,055 
Secured long-term funding 
56,688  
63,043 
Subordinated debentures 
9,620  
9,574 
 
$ 155,755  $ 160,672 
* 
This table represents an integral part of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
(1) 
Based on original term to maturity greater than 1 year. 
Our wholesale funding activities are well-diversified by geography, investor segment, instrument, currency, structure and 
maturity. We maintain an ongoing presence in different funding markets which allows us to continuously monitor market 
developments and trends, identify opportunities and risks, and take appropriate and timely actions. We operate long-term debt 
issuance registered programs. The following table summarizes these programs with their authorized limits by geography. 
Programs by geography 
Table 56  
Canada 
U.S. 
Europe/Asia 
• Canadian Shelf Program – $25 billion 
• U.S. Shelf Program – US$50 billion 
• European Debt Issuance Program – US$40 billion 
 
 
• Global Covered Bond Program – €60 billion 
 
 
• Japanese Issuance Programs – ¥1 trillion 
We also raise long-term funding using Canadian Senior Notes, Canadian National Housing Act MBS, Canada Mortgage Bonds, 
credit card receivable-backed securities, Kangaroo Bonds (issued in the Australian domestic market by foreign firms) and Yankee 
Certificates of Deposit (issued in the U.S. domestic market by foreign firms). We continuously evaluate opportunities to expand 
into new markets and untapped investor segments since diversification expands our wholesale funding flexibility, minimizes 
funding concentration and dependency, and generally reduces financing costs. As presented in the following charts, our current 
long-term debt profile is well-diversified by both currency and product. Maintaining competitive credit ratings is also critical to 
cost-effective funding. 
Euro
16%
Other
12%
U.S. dollar
39%
Canadian dollar
33%
Long-term debt (1) – funding mix by currency of issuance
 
Covered Bonds
25%
Unsecured
funding
61%
MBS/CMB (2)
12%
Cards
securitization
2%
Long-term debt (1) – funding mix by product
 
(1) 
Includes unsecured and secured long-term funding with an original 
term to maturity greater than 1 year 
(1) 
Includes unsecured and secured long-term funding with an original 
term to maturity greater than 1 year 
(2) 
Mortgage-backed securities and Canada Mortgage Bonds 
82
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

The following table provides our composition of wholesale funding based on remaining term to maturity: 
Composition of wholesale funding (1) 
Table 57  
 
As at October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Less than 
1 month 
1 to 3 
months 
3 to 6 
months 
6 to 12 
months 
Less than 
1 year 
sub-total 
1 year to 
2 years 
2 years and 
greater 
Total 
Deposits from banks (2) 
$
5,202 $
– $
– $
– $
5,202 $
– $
– $
5,202 
Certificates of deposit and commercial paper 
7,118 
17,013 
19,046 
27,053 
70,230 
918 
– 
71,148 
Asset-backed commercial paper (3) 
2,378 
2,563 
4,076 
3,697 
12,714 
– 
– 
12,714 
Senior unsecured medium-term notes (4) 
27 
939 
8,944 
2,622 
12,532 
16,296 
37,617 
66,445 
Senior unsecured structured notes (5) 
118 
825 
817 
714 
2,474 
2,914 
5,879 
11,267 
Mortgage securitization 
– 
354 
1,302 
917 
2,573 
4,260 
9,729 
16,562 
Covered bonds/asset-backed securities (6) 
– 
847 
495 
5,189 
6,531 
6,087 
27,521 
40,139 
Subordinated liabilities 
– 
– 
– 
188 
188 
165 
9,267 
9,620 
Other (7) 
6,637 
2,194 
1,448 
827 
11,106 
7,531 
466 
19,103 
Total 
$ 21,480 $ 24,735 $ 36,128 $ 41,207 $ 123,550 $ 38,171 $ 90,479 $ 252,200 
Of which: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– Secured 
$
8,467 $
4,017 $
6,108 $
9,803 $
28,395 $ 10,347 $ 37,695 $
76,437 
– Unsecured 
13,013 
20,718 
30,020 
31,404 
95,155 
27,824 
52,784 
175,763 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Less than 
1 month 
1 to 3 
months 
3 to 6 
months 
6 to 12 
months 
Less than 
1 year 
sub-total 
1 year to 
2 years 
2 years and 
greater 
Total 
Deposits from banks (2) 
$
8,681 $
133 $
73 $
– $
8,887 $
– $
– $
8,887 
Certificates of deposit and commercial paper 
2,542 
6,858 
11,145 
23,783 
44,328 
– 
– 
44,328 
Asset-backed commercial paper (3) 
2,618 
2,167 
1,381 
6,081 
12,247 
– 
– 
12,247 
Senior unsecured medium-term notes (4) 
37 
4,466 
9,836 
7,163 
21,502 
9,413 
37,259 
68,174 
Senior unsecured structured notes (5) 
230 
165 
401 
1,136 
1,932 
1,485 
5,333 
8,750 
Mortgage securitization 
– 
1,171 
267 
2,178 
3,616 
2,561 
12,225 
18,402 
Covered bonds/asset-backed securities (6) 
– 
3,688 
5,919 
5,131 
14,738 
6,896 
23,196 
44,830 
Subordinated liabilities 
– 
1,499 
– 
1,000 
2,499 
205 
6,870 
9,574 
Other (7) 
7,906 
892 
1,134 
1,037 
10,969 
624 
6,726 
18,319 
Total 
$
22,014 $
21,039 $
30,156 $
47,509 $
120,718 $
21,184 $
91,609 $
233,511 
Of which: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– Secured 
$
10,089 $
7,508 $
7,643 $
13,573 $
38,813 $
9,457 $
35,421 $
83,691 
– Unsecured 
11,925 
13,531 
22,513 
33,936 
81,905 
11,727 
56,188 
149,820 
(1) 
Excludes bankers’ acceptances and repos. 
(2) 
Excludes deposits associated with services we provide to banks (e.g., custody, cash management). 
(3) 
Only includes consolidated liabilities, including our collateralized commercial paper program. 
(4) 
Includes deposit notes. 
(5) 
Includes notes where the payout is tied to movements in foreign exchange, commodities and equities. 
(6) 
Includes credit card and mortgage loans. 
(7) 
Includes tender option bonds (secured) of $7,020 million (October 31, 2020 – $8,199 million), bearer deposit notes (unsecured) of $3,798 million (October 31, 2020 – $2,036 
million), other long-term structured deposits (unsecured) of $8,285 million (October 31, 2020 – $8,071 million), and FHLB advances (secured) of $nil (October 31, 2020 – 
$13 million). 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
83 
 

Credit ratings 
Our ability to access unsecured funding markets and to engage in certain collateralized business activities on a cost-effective 
basis are primarily dependent upon maintaining competitive credit ratings. Credit ratings and outlooks provided by rating 
agencies reflect their views and methodologies. Ratings are subject to change, based on a number of factors including, but not 
limited to, our financial strength, competitive position, liquidity and other factors not completely within our control. 
The following table presents our major credit ratings: 
Credit ratings (1) 
Table 58  
 
As at November 30, 2021 
 
Short-term debt Legacy senior long-term debt (2) Senior long-term debt (3) 
Outlook 
Moody’s (4) 
P-1 
Aa2 
A2 under review 
Standard & Poor’s (5) 
A-1+ 
AA- 
A 
stable 
Fitch Ratings (6) 
F1+ 
AA 
AA- 
stable 
DBRS (7) 
R-1 (high) 
AA (high) 
AA 
stable 
(1) 
Credit ratings are not recommendations to purchase, sell or hold a financial obligation inasmuch as they do not comment on market price or suitability 
for a particular investor. Ratings are determined by the rating agencies based on criteria established from time to time by them, and are subject to 
revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization. 
(2) 
Includes senior long-term debt issued prior to September 23, 2018 and senior long-term debt issued on or after September 23, 2018 which is excluded from 
the Bail-in regime. 
(3) 
Includes senior long-term debt issued on or after September 23, 2018 which is subject to conversion under the Bail-in regime. 
(4) 
On October 7, 2021, Moody’s placed our long-term ratings and assessments on review for upgrade. Our short-term debt ratings were affirmed. 
(5) 
Standard & Poor’s affirmed our ratings with a stable outlook as of July 19, 2021 in a report published on October 7, 2021. 
(6) 
On July 15, 2021, Fitch Ratings downgraded our legacy senior long-term debt rating to AA from AA+ and our senior long-term debt rating to AA- from AA and 
revised our ratings outlook to stable from negative. 
(7) 
On May 14, 2021, DBRS affirmed our ratings with a stable outlook. 
Additional contractual obligations for rating downgrades 
We are required to deliver collateral to certain counterparties in the event of a downgrade to our current credit rating. The 
following table provides the additional collateral obligations required at the reporting date in the event of a one-, two- or three-
notch downgrade to our credit ratings. These additional collateral obligations are incremental requirements for each successive 
downgrade and do not represent the cumulative impact of multiple downgrades. The amounts reported change periodically as a 
result of several factors, including the transfer of trading activity to centrally cleared financial market infrastructures and 
exchanges, the expiration of transactions with downgrade triggers, the imposition of internal limitations on new agreements to 
exclude downgrade triggers, as well as normal course mark-to-market. There is no outstanding senior debt issued in the market 
that contains rating triggers that would lead to early prepayment of principal. 
Additional contractual obligations for rating downgrades 
Table 59  
 
As at  
 
October 31 
2021 
 
October 31 
2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
One-notch 
downgrade 
Two-notch 
downgrade 
Three-notch 
downgrade  
One-notch 
downgrade 
Two-notch 
downgrade 
Three-notch 
downgrade 
Contractual derivatives funding or margin requirements 
$
312 
$
112 
$
140  
$
318 
$
78 
$
149 
Other contractual funding or margin requirements (1) 
157 
13 
–  
187 
– 
– 
(1) 
Includes GICs issued by our municipal markets business out of New York. 
84
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) 
The LCR is a Basel III metric that measures the sufficiency of high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) available to meet liquidity needs 
over a 30-day period in an acute stress scenario. The BCBS and OSFI regulatory minimum coverage level for LCR is 100%. 
OSFI requires Canadian banks to disclose the LCR using the standard Basel disclosure template and calculated using the 
average of daily LCR positions during the quarter. 
Liquidity coverage ratio (1) 
Table 60  
 
For the three months ended 
 
October 31 
2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
Total unweighted 
value (average) (2) 
Total weighted 
value (average) 
High-quality liquid assets 
 
 
Total high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) 
 
$
351,831 
Cash outflows 
 
 
Retail deposits and deposits from small business customers, of which: 
$
365,319 
$
33,871 
Stable deposits (3) 
127,834 
3,835 
Less stable deposits 
237,485 
30,036 
Unsecured wholesale funding, of which: 
434,693 
203,998 
Operational deposits (all counterparties) and deposits in networks of cooperative banks (4) 
192,918 
45,812 
Non-operational deposits 
211,916 
128,327 
Unsecured debt 
29,859 
29,859 
Secured wholesale funding 
 
25,855 
Additional requirements, of which: 
277,097 
64,671 
Outflows related to derivative exposures and other collateral requirements 
46,158 
16,656 
Outflows related to loss of funding on debt products 
8,558 
8,558 
Credit and liquidity facilities 
222,381 
39,457 
Other contractual funding obligations (5) 
25,405 
25,405 
Other contingent funding obligations (6) 
625,278 
10,012 
Total cash outflows 
 
$
363,812 
Cash inflows 
 
 
Secured lending (e.g., reverse repos) 
$
260,070 
$
41,814 
Inflows from fully performing exposures 
14,648 
8,940 
Other cash inflows 
27,744 
27,744 
Total cash inflows 
 
$
78,498 
 
 
Total adjusted 
value 
Total HQLA 
 
$
351,831 
Total net cash outflows 
 
285,314 
Liquidity coverage ratio 
 
123% 
 
July 31 
2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
 
Total adjusted 
value 
Total HQLA 
 
$
341,167 
Total net cash outflows 
 
271,938 
Liquidity coverage ratio 
 
125% 
(1) 
The LCR is calculated in accordance with OSFI’s LAR guideline, which, in turn, reflects liquidity-related requirements issued by the BCBS. The LCR for the quarter ended 
October 31, 2021 is calculated as an average of 61 daily positions. 
(2) 
With the exception of other contingent funding obligations, unweighted inflow and outflow amounts are items maturing or callable in 30 days or less. Other contingent 
funding obligations also include debt securities with remaining maturity greater than 30 days. 
(3) 
As defined by the BCBS, stable deposits from retail and small business customers are deposits that are insured and are either held in transactional accounts or the bank 
has an established relationship with the client making the withdrawal unlikely. 
(4) 
Operational deposits from customers other than retail and small and medium-sized enterprises, are deposits which clients need to keep with the bank in order to 
facilitate their access and ability to use payment and settlement systems primarily for clearing, custody and cash management activities. 
(5) 
Other contractual funding obligations primarily include outflows from unsettled securities trades and outflows from obligations related to securities sold short. 
(6) 
Other contingent funding obligations include outflows related to other off-balance sheet facilities that carry low LCR runoff factors (0% – 5%). 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
85 
 

We manage our LCR position within a target range that reflects our liquidity risk tolerance and takes into account business mix, 
asset composition and funding capabilities. The range is subject to periodic review in light of changes to internal requirements 
and external developments. 
We maintain HQLAs in major currencies with dependable market depth and breadth. Our treasury management practices 
ensure that the levels of HQLA are actively managed to meet target LCR objectives. Our Level 1 assets, as calculated according to 
OSFI LAR and the BCBS LCR requirements, represent 88% of total HQLA. These assets consist of cash, placements with central 
banks and highly rated securities issued or guaranteed by governments, central banks and supranational entities. 
LCR captures cash flows from on- and off-balance sheet activities that are either expected or could potentially occur within 
30 days in an acute stress scenario. Cash outflows result from the application of withdrawal and non-renewal factors to demand 
and term deposits, differentiated by client type (wholesale, retail and small- and medium-sized enterprises). Cash outflows also 
arise from business activities that create contingent funding and collateral requirements, such as repo funding, derivatives, short 
sales of securities and the extension of credit and liquidity commitments to clients. Cash inflows arise primarily from maturing 
secured loans, interbank loans and non-HQLA securities. 
LCR does not reflect any market funding capacity that we believe would be available in a stress situation. All maturing 
wholesale debt is assigned 100% outflow in the LCR calculation. 
Q4 2021 vs. Q3 2021 
The average LCR for the quarter ended October 31, 2021 was 123%, which translates into a surplus of approximately $67 billion, 
compared to 125% and a surplus of approximately $69 billion in the prior quarter. LCR has remained relatively stable compared to 
the previous quarter as growth in retail and wholesale loans was offset by the issuance of term funding and increases in client 
deposits. 
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) 
NSFR is a Basel III metric that measures the sufficiency of available stable funding relative to the amount of required stable 
funding. The BCBS and OSFI regulatory minimum coverage level for NSFR is 100%. 
Available stable funding is defined as the portion of capital and liabilities expected to be reliable over the time horizon 
considered by the NSFR, which extends to one year. Required stable funding is a function of the liquidity characteristics and 
residual maturities of the various assets held by the bank as well as those of its off-balance sheet exposures. 
Beginning in Q1 2021, OSFI requires Canadian D-SIBs to disclose the NSFR using the standard Basel disclosure template. 
Amounts presented in this disclosure template are determined in accordance with the requirements of OSFI’s Liquidity Adequacy 
Requirements (LAR) guideline and are not necessarily aligned with the classification requirements prescribed under IFRS. 
86
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Net Stable Funding Ratio (1) 
Table 61  
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Unweighted value by residual maturity (2) 
Weighted 
value 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
No maturity 
< 6 months 
6 months to 
< 1 year 
> 1 year 
Available Stable Funding (ASF) Item 
 
 
 
 
 
Capital: 
$
98,657 $
– $
– $
9,780 $ 108,437 
Regulatory Capital 
98,657 
– 
– 
9,780 
108,437 
Other Capital Instruments 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Retail deposits and deposits from small business customers: 
338,850 
56,126 
19,180 
21,077 
402,072 
Stable deposits (3) 
112,745 
27,678 
11,442 
8,284 
152,556 
Less stable deposits 
226,105 
28,448 
7,738 
12,793 
249,516 
Wholesale funding: 
325,980 
380,619 
45,376 
102,542 
304,767 
Operational deposits (4) 
200,589 
– 
– 
– 
100,294 
Other wholesale funding 
125,391 
380,619 
45,376 
102,542 
204,473 
Liabilities with matching interdependent assets (5) 
– 
3,285 
1,823 
25,814 
– 
Other liabilities: 
41,303 
227,149 
12,551 
NSFR derivative liabilities 
 
16,437 
 
All other liabilities and equity not included in the 
above categories 
41,303 
197,838 
646 
12,228 
12,551 
Total ASF 
 
 
 
 $ 827,827 
Required Stable Funding (RSF) Item 
 
 
 
 
 
Total NSFR high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) 
 
 
 
 $
39,600 
Deposits held at other financial institutions for 
operational purposes 
– 
2,296 
– 
– 
1,148 
Performing loans and securities: 
173,103 
263,702 
108,916 
428,508 
580,182 
Performing loans to financial institutions secured by 
Level 1 HQLA 
– 
99,892 
13,113 
1 
12,573 
Performing loans to financial institutions secured by 
non-Level 1 HQLA and unsecured performing loans to 
financial institutions 
4,050 
61,165 
31,185 
21,766 
48,234 
Performing loans to non-financial corporate clients, loans to 
retail and small business customers, and loans to sovereigns, 
central banks and PSEs, of which: 
101,495 
84,678 
35,109 
124,475 
246,561 
With a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under the 
Basel II standardized approach for credit risk 
– 
1,189 
915 
3,800 
3,522 
Performing residential mortgages, of which: 
37,141 
15,776 
29,033 
261,615 
228,078 
With a risk weight of less than or equal to 35% under the 
Basel II standardized approach for credit risk 
37,141 
15,747 
29,002 
260,656 
227,233 
Securities that are not in default and do not qualify as HQLA, 
including exchange-traded equities 
30,417 
2,191 
476 
20,651 
44,736 
Assets with matching interdependent liabilities (5) 
– 
3,285 
1,823 
25,814 
– 
Other assets: 
1,619 
278,154 
68,743 
Physical traded commodities, including gold 
1,619 
 
 
 
1,376 
Assets posted as initial margin for derivative contracts and 
contributions to default funds of CCPs 
 
16,650 
14,153 
NSFR derivative assets 
 
17,103 
666 
NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of variation 
margin posted 
 
34,777 
1,739 
All other assets not included in the above categories 
– 
161,184 
46 
48,394 
50,809 
Off-balance sheet items 
 
649,799 
23,665 
Total RSF 
 
 
 
 $ 713,338 
Net Stable Funding Ratio (%) 
 
 
 
 
116% 
 
As at July 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
 
 
 
 
Weighted 
value 
Total ASF 
 
 
 
 $ 805,804 
Total RSF 
 
 
 
 
695,368 
Net Stable Funding Ratio (%) 
 
 
 
 
116% 
(1) 
The NSFR is calculated in accordance with OSFI’s Liquidity Adequacy Requirements (LAR) guideline, which, in turn, reflects liquidity-related requirements issued by the 
BCBS.  
(2) 
Totals for the following rows encompass the residual maturity categories of less than 6 months, 6 months to less than 1 year, and greater than or equal to 1 year in 
accordance with the requirements of the common disclosure template prescribed by OSFI: Other liabilities, NSFR derivative liabilities, Other assets, Assets posted as 
initial margin for derivative contracts and contributions to default funds of CCPs, NSFR derivative assets, NSFR derivative liabilities before deduction of variation margin 
posted, and Off-balance sheet items. 
(3) 
As defined by the BCBS, stable deposits from retail and small business customers are deposits that are insured and are either held in transactional accounts or the bank 
has an established relationship with the client making the withdrawal unlikely. 
(4) 
Operational deposits from customers other than retail and small and medium-sized enterprises, are deposits which clients need to keep with the bank in order to 
facilitate their access and ability to use payment and settlement systems primarily for clearing, custody and cash management activities. 
(5) 
Interdependent assets and liabilities represent National Housing Act Mortgage-Backed Securities (NHA MBS) liabilities, including liabilities arising from transactions 
involving the Canada Mortgage Bond program and their corresponding encumbered mortgages. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
87 
 

Available stable funding is comprised primarily of a diversified pool of personal and commercial deposits, capital, as well as 
long-term wholesale liabilities. Required stable funding is driven mainly by the bank’s mortgage and loan portfolio, secured loans 
to financial institutions and to a lesser extent by other less liquid assets. NSFR does not reflect any unused market funding 
capacity that we believe is available to the bank. 
Volume and composition of available stable funding is actively managed to optimize our structural funding position and 
meet NSFR objectives. Our NSFR is managed in accordance with our comprehensive LRMF. 
Q4 2021 vs. Q3 2021 
The NSFR as at October 31, 2021 was 116%, which translates into a surplus of approximately $114 billion, compared to 116% and a 
surplus of approximately $110 billion in the prior quarter. NSFR has remained stable compared to the previous quarter as growth 
in retail and wholesale loans was offset by the issuance of term funding and increases in client deposits. 
Contractual maturities of financial assets, financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items 
The following tables provide remaining contractual maturity profiles of all our assets, liabilities, and off-balance sheet items at 
their carrying value (e.g., amortized cost or fair value) at the balance sheet date. Off-balance sheet items are allocated based on 
the expiry date of the contract. 
Details of contractual maturities and commitments to extend funds are a source of information for the management of 
liquidity risk. Among other purposes, these details form a basis for modelling a behavioural balance sheet with effective 
maturities to calculate liquidity risk measures. For further details, refer to the Risk measurement section. 
Contractual maturities of financial assets, financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items 
Table 62  
 
As at October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Less than 
1 month 
1 to 3 
months 
3 to 6 
months 
6 to 9 
months 
9 to 12 
months 
1 year 
to 2 years 
2 years 
to 5 years 
5 years 
and greater 
With no 
specific 
maturity 
Total 
Assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash and deposits with banks 
$ 190,995 $
2 $
1 $
– $
– $
– $
– $
– $
2,486 $
193,484 
Securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trading (1) 
67,655 
46 
87 
41 
6 
20 
169 
9,845 
61,371 
139,240 
Investment, net of applicable 
allowance 
7,220 
4,811 
5,546 
5,832 
5,514 
22,368 
31,393 
62,289 
511 
145,484 
Assets purchased under reverse 
repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed (2) 
104,301 
89,612 
51,664 
22,982 
16,987 
98 
– 
– 
22,259 
307,903 
Loans, net of applicable allowance 
28,517 
21,630 
26,094 
31,910 
26,921 
139,050 
298,659 
62,215 
82,579 
717,575 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Customers’ liability 
under acceptances 
12,654 
7,209 
5 
– 
– 
5 
– 
– 
(75) 
19,798 
Derivatives 
5,325 
10,788 
4,318 
4,334 
3,005 
10,139 
17,890 
39,733 
9 
95,541 
Other financial assets 
33,149 
1,523 
1,942 
145 
135 
270 
277 
2,044 
3,351 
42,836 
Total financial assets 
449,816 
135,621 
89,657 
65,244 
52,568 
171,950 
348,388 
176,126 
172,491 
1,661,861 
Other non-financial assets 
6,079 
1,681 
164 
217 
185 
1,957 
2,377 
5,898 
25,904 
44,462 
Total assets 
$ 455,895 $ 137,302 $ 89,821 $ 65,461 $ 52,753 $
173,907 $ 350,765 $
182,024 $ 198,395 $ 1,706,323 
Liabilities and equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits (3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unsecured borrowing 
$
82,183 $
44,058 $ 56,519 $ 36,342 $ 35,792 $
30,625 $
45,745 $
18,320 $ 661,924 $ 1,011,508 
Secured borrowing 
2,442 
4,244 
7,543 
4,362 
2,804 
9,557 
15,040 
6,118 
– 
52,110 
Covered bonds 
1 
848 
– 
2,693 
1,878 
5,350 
18,321 
8,122 
– 
37,213 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acceptances 
12,653 
7,207 
5 
2 
– 
5 
– 
– 
1 
19,873 
Obligations related to securities 
sold short 
37,841 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
37,841 
Obligations related to assets sold 
under repurchase agreements 
and securities loaned (2) 
168,763 
62,338 
5,610 
4,742 
848 
668 
– 
– 
19,232 
262,201 
Derivatives 
5,456 
9,903 
4,938 
3,747 
2,723 
9,211 
18,727 
36,733 
1 
91,439 
Other financial liabilities 
33,489 
1,299 
1,048 
439 
373 
1,000 
2,115 
10,226 
795 
50,784 
Subordinated debentures 
– 
– 
– 
– 
188 
110 
1,912 
7,383 
– 
9,593 
Total financial liabilities 
342,828 
129,897 
75,663 
52,327 
44,606 
56,526 
101,860 
86,902 
681,953 
1,572,562 
Other non-financial liabilities 
1,663 
6,907 
434 
290 
155 
1,108 
1,172 
13,360 
9,910 
34,999 
Equity 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
98,762 
98,762 
Total liabilities and equity 
$ 344,491 $ 136,804 $ 76,097 $ 52,617 $ 44,761 $
57,634 $ 103,032 $
100,262 $ 790,625 $ 1,706,323 
Off-balance sheet items 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial guarantees 
$
387 $
1,950 $
2,999 $
2,928 $
2,206 $
1,829 $
3,326 $
1,181 $
61 $
16,867 
Commitments to extend credit 
5,964 
5,538 
11,400 
16,231 
12,024 
56,688 
160,789 
16,733 
4,544 
289,911 
Other credit-related commitments 
966 
1,064 
1,569 
1,536 
1,376 
370 
726 
38 
99,815 
107,460 
Other commitments 
101 
11 
20 
21 
21 
64 
144 
278 
618 
1,278 
Total off-balance sheet items 
$
7,418 $
8,563 $ 15,988 $ 20,716 $ 15,627 $
58,951 $ 164,985 $
18,230 $ 105,038 $
415,516 
(1) 
Trading debt securities classified as FVTPL have been included in the less than 1 month category as there is no expectation to hold these assets to their contractual 
maturity. 
(2) 
Open reverse repo and repo contracts, which have no set maturity date and are typically short term, have been included in the with no specific maturity category. 
(3) 
A major portion of relationship-based deposits are repayable on demand or at short notice on a contractual basis while, in practice, these customer balances form a core 
base for our operations and liquidity needs, as explained in the preceding Deposit and funding profile section. 
88
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

 
As at October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Less than 
1 month 
1 to 3 
months 
3 to 6 
months 
6 to 9 
months 
9 to 12 
months 
1 year 
to 2 years 
2 years 
to 5 years 
5 years 
and greater 
With no 
specific 
maturity 
Total 
Assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash and deposits with banks 
$ 155,418 
$
2 
$
– 
$
– 
$
– 
$
– 
$
– 
$
– 
$
2,481 
$
157,901 
Securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trading (1) 
82,486 
51 
49 
25 
80 
50 
98 
9,615 
43,617 
136,071 
Investment, net of applicable 
allowance 
3,213 
4,762 
6,445 
10,765 
9,079 
26,313 
25,315 
53,355 
496 
139,743 
Assets purchased under reverse 
repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed (2), (3) 
147,453 
62,905 
47,211 
25,083 
9,990 
2 
– 
– 
20,371 
313,015 
Loans, net of applicable allowance 
24,334 
21,593 
24,742 
28,236 
25,951 
132,783 
266,935 
56,253 
80,165 
660,992 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Customers’ liability 
under acceptances 
12,157 
6,402 
50 
– 
– 
– 
5 
– 
(107) 
18,507 
Derivatives 
5,035 
10,946 
4,932 
3,433 
2,726 
13,550 
20,205 
52,650 
11 
113,488 
Other financial assets 
32,713 
2,741 
1,520 
499 
71 
323 
257 
2,099 
2,692 
42,915 
Total financial assets 
462,809 
109,402 
84,949 
68,041 
47,897 
173,021 
312,815 
173,972 
149,726 
1,582,632 
Other non-financial assets 
4,540 
1,411 
97 
860 
234 
1,939 
1,802 
5,988 
25,045 
41,916 
Total assets 
$ 467,349 
$ 110,813 
$ 85,046 
$ 68,901 
$ 48,131 
$ 174,960 
$ 314,617 
$
179,960 
$ 174,771 
$ 1,624,548 
Liabilities and equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits (4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Unsecured borrowing (3) 
$
75,380 
$
36,569 
$ 56,348 
$ 35,881 
$ 30,676 
$
23,293 
$
52,029 
$
15,360 
$ 590,020 
$
915,556 
Secured borrowing 
2,794 
6,605 
4,022 
6,242 
4,142 
7,400 
18,705 
6,427 
– 
56,337 
Covered bonds 
– 
1,942 
5,412 
1,295 
2,501 
3,707 
16,195 
8,940 
– 
39,992 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acceptances 
12,158 
6,401 
50 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
9 
18,618 
Obligations related to securities 
sold short 
29,285 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
29,285 
Obligations related to assets sold 
under repurchase agreements 
and securities loaned (2), (3) 
215,814 
19,396 
20,606 
376 
1,492 
4,971 
– 
– 
11,576 
274,231 
Derivatives 
4,467 
11,553 
4,423 
3,355 
2,709 
11,900 
20,985 
50,396 
139 
109,927 
Other financial liabilities (3) 
34,768 
2,187 
1,140 
477 
430 
851 
2,180 
10,994 
563 
53,590 
Subordinated debentures 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
205 
110 
9,552 
– 
9,867 
Total financial liabilities 
374,666 
84,653 
92,001 
47,626 
41,950 
52,327 
110,204 
101,669 
602,307 
1,507,403 
Other non-financial liabilities 
1,053 
5,395 
209 
212 
193 
951 
1,010 
11,910 
9,445 
30,378 
Equity 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
86,767 
86,767 
Total liabilities and equity 
$ 375,719 
$
90,048 
$ 92,210 
$ 47,838 
$ 42,143 
$
53,278 
$ 111,214 
$
113,579 
$ 698,519 
$ 1,624,548 
Off-balance sheet items 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial guarantees 
$
401 
$
1,745 
$
2,186 
$
3,137 
$
3,004 
$
700 
$
4,529 
$
1,383 
$
56 
$
17,141 
Commitments to extend credit 
5,285 
4,803 
14,821 
16,163 
12,306 
45,633 
161,524 
16,876 
4,828 
282,239 
Other credit-related commitments 
1,982 
903 
1,634 
1,745 
1,400 
260 
623 
10 
78,768 
87,325 
Other commitments 
7 
14 
20 
20 
20 
82 
209 
344 
551 
1,267 
Total off-balance sheet items 
$
7,675 
$
7,465 
$ 18,661 
$ 21,065 
$ 16,730 
$
46,675 
$ 166,885 
$
18,613 
$
84,203 
$
387,972 
(1) 
Trading debt securities classified as FVTPL have been included in the less than 1 month category as there is no expectation to hold these assets to their contractual 
maturity. 
(2) 
Open reverse repo and repo contracts, which have no set maturity date and are typically short term, have been included in the with no specific maturity category. 
(3) 
Amounts previously presented were reclassified to reflect the contractual maturities of certain financial assets and liabilities. 
(4) 
A major portion of relationship-based deposits are repayable on demand or at short notice on a contractual basis while, in practice, these customer balances form a core 
base for our operations and liquidity needs, as explained in the preceding Deposit and funding profile section. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
89 
 

Contractual maturities of financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items – undiscounted basis 
The following tables provide remaining contractual maturity analysis of our financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items. The 
amounts disclosed in the following table are the contractual undiscounted cash flows of all financial liabilities (e.g., par value or 
amount payable upon maturity). The amounts do not reconcile directly with those in our consolidated balance sheets as the table 
incorporates only cash flows relating to payments on maturity and do not recognize premiums, discounts or mark-to-market 
adjustments recognized in the instruments’ carrying values as at the balance sheet date. Financial liabilities are based upon the 
earliest period in which they are required to be paid. For off-balance sheet items, the undiscounted cash flows potentially payable 
under financial guarantees and commitments to extend credit are classified on the basis of the earliest date they can be called. 
Contractual maturities of financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items – undiscounted basis* 
Table 63  
 
As at October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
On 
demand 
Within 
1 year 
1 year 
to 2 years 
2 years 
to 5 years 
5 years 
and greater 
Total 
Financial liabilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits (1) 
$ 576,161 $ 367,389 $ 44,951 $ 78,071 $
33,063 $ 1,099,635 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acceptances 
1 
19,867 
5 
– 
– 
19,873 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
– 
37,462 
– 
– 
– 
37,462 
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase 
agreements and securities loaned 
19,234 
242,314 
669 
– 
– 
262,217 
Other liabilities 
620 
35,984 
384 
544 
7,873 
45,405 
Lease liabilities 
– 
631 
582 
1,522 
2,342 
5,077 
Subordinated debentures 
– 
188 
110 
1,916 
7,392 
9,606 
 
596,016 
703,835 
46,701 
82,053 
50,670 
1,479,275 
Off-balance sheet items 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial guarantees (2) 
$
16,867 $
– $
– $
– $
– $
16,867 
Other commitments (3) 
– 
81 
82 
209 
344 
716 
Commitments to extend credit (2) 
248,594 
41,238 
77 
2 
– 
289,911 
 
265,461 
41,319 
159 
211 
344 
307,494 
Total financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items 
$ 861,477 $ 745,154 $ 46,860 $ 82,264 $
51,014 $ 1,786,769 
 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
On 
demand 
Within 
1 year 
1 year 
to 2 years 
2 years 
to 5 years 
5 years 
and greater 
Total 
Financial liabilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits (1), (4) 
$
510,849 $
350,298 $
34,618 $
85,198 $
29,832 $
1,010,795 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acceptances 
9 
18,609 
– 
– 
– 
18,618 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
– 
29,121 
– 
– 
– 
29,121 
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase 
agreements and securities loaned (4) 
11,576 
257,684 
4,971 
– 
– 
274,231 
Other liabilities 
199 
37,681 
188 
358 
8,678 
47,104 
Lease liabilities 
– 
633 
604 
1,545 
2,575 
5,357 
Subordinated debentures 
– 
– 
205 
110 
9,552 
9,867 
 
522,633 
694,026 
40,586 
87,211 
50,637 
1,395,093 
Off-balance sheet items 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial guarantees (2) 
$
17,141 $
– $
– $
– $
– $
17,141 
Other commitments (3) 
– 
81 
82 
209 
344 
716 
Commitments to extend credit (2) 
239,212 
43,025 
2 
– 
– 
282,239 
 
256,353 
43,106 
84 
209 
344 
300,096 
Total financial liabilities and off-balance sheet items 
$
778,986 $
737,132 $
40,670 $
87,420 $
50,981 $
1,695,189 
* 
This table represents an integral part of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
(1) 
A major portion of relationship-based deposits are repayable on demand or at short notice on a contractual basis while, in practice, these customer balances form a core 
base for our operations and liquidity needs, as explained in the preceding Deposit and funding profile. 
(2) 
We believe that it is highly unlikely that all or substantially all of these guarantees and commitments will be drawn or settled within one year, and contracts may expire 
without being drawn or settled. The management of the liquidity risk associated with potential extensions of funds is outlined in the preceding Risk measurement section. 
(3) 
Includes commitments related to short-term and low-dollar value leases, leases not yet commenced, and lease payments related to non-recoverable tax. 
(4) 
Amounts previously presented were reclassified to reflect the contractual maturities of certain financial liabilities. 
90
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Insurance risk 
Insurance risk refers to the potential financial loss that may arise where the amount, timing and/or frequency of benefit and/or 
premium payments under insurance and reinsurance contracts are different than expected. Insurance risk is distinct from those 
risks covered by other parts of our risk management framework (e.g., credit, market and operational risk) where those risks are 
ancillary to, or accompany, the risk transfer. The five insurance sub-risks are: morbidity, mortality, longevity, policyholder 
behaviour (lapse), and travel risk. 
Our Insurance Risk Management Framework provides an overview of our processes and tools for identifying, assessing, 
managing, mitigating and reporting on the insurance risks that face the organization. These are also supported by our robust 
three lines of defence governance structure, which is consistent with our Enterprise Risk Management Framework. 
Operational/regulatory compliance risk drivers 
Operational risk 
Operational risk is the risk of loss or harm resulting from people, inadequate or failed internal processes, controls and systems 
or from external events. Operational risk is inherent in all of our activities and third-party activities and failure to manage 
operational risk can result in direct or indirect financial loss, reputational impact or regulatory scrutiny and proceedings in the 
various jurisdictions where we operate. 
Our management of operational risk follows the three lines of defence governance model, encompassing the organizational roles 
and responsibilities for a coordinated enterprise-wide approach. For further details, refer to the Risk management – Enterprise 
risk management section. 
Operational risk framework 
We have an Enterprise Operational Risk Framework which sets out the processes to identify, assess, monitor, measure, report 
and communicate on operational risk. The processes are established through the following: 
•
Risk identification and assessment tools, including the collection and analysis of risk event data, help risk owners 
understand and proactively manage operational risk exposures. Risk assessments are intended to ensure alignment 
between risk exposures and efforts to manage them. Management uses outputs of these tools to make informed risk 
decisions. 
•
Risk monitoring tools alert management to changes in the operational risk profile. When paired with escalation and 
monitoring triggers, risk monitoring tools can identify risk trends, warn management of risk levels that approach or exceed 
defined limits, as well as prompt actions and mitigation plans to be undertaken. 
•
Risk capital measurement provides credible estimation of potential risk exposure, including surfaces risk vulnerabilities, and 
informs strategic and capital planning decisions, which are ultimately intended to ensure that the bank is sufficiently 
resilient to withstand operational risk losses both in normal times and under stress situations. 
•
Risk reporting and communication processes ensure that relevant operational risk information is made available to 
management in a timely manner to support risk-informed business decisions. 
Conclusions from our operational risk programs enable learning based on what has happened to us, whether it could happen 
elsewhere in the organization, and what controls we need to amend or implement. These conclusions support the articulation of 
our operational risk appetite and are used to inform the overall level of operational risk exposure which thereby defines our 
operational risk profile. This profile includes significant operational risk exposures, potential new and emerging exposures and 
trends, and overall conclusions on the control environment and risk outlook. We proactively identify and investigate corporate 
insurance opportunities to mitigate and reduce potential future impacts of operational risk. 
We consider the potential risks and rewards of our decisions to strike a balance between accepting potential losses versus 
incurring costs of mitigation, the expression of which is in the form of our operational risk appetite. Our operational risk appetite 
is established at the Board level and cascaded throughout each of our business segments. 
Management reports have been implemented at various levels to support proactive management of operational risk and 
transparency of risk exposures. These reports are provided to senior management on a regular basis and provide detail on the 
main drivers of the risk status and trend for each of our business segments and the bank overall. In addition, changes to the 
operational risk profile that are not aligned to our business strategy or operational risk appetite are identified and discussed at 
GRC and the Risk Committee of the Board. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
91 
 

Our operations expose us to many different operational risks, which may adversely affect our businesses and financial 
results. The following list is not exhaustive, as other factors could also adversely affect our results. 
 Operational risk 
Management strategy 
Cybersecurity risk 
 
Cybersecurity risk is the risk to the business associated with cyber-attacks initiated to disrupt or 
disable our operations or to expose or damage data. We have a dedicated team of technology and 
cybersecurity professionals that manage a comprehensive program to help protect the 
organization against breaches and other incidents by ensuring appropriate security and 
operational controls are in place. We continue to strengthen our cyber-control framework and to 
improve our resilience and cybersecurity capabilities including 24 hour monitoring, cyber 
intelligence analysis of internal and external threats and alerting of potentially suspicious security 
events and incidents. Throughout the year, we continued to invest in our cybersecurity program, 
and multiple scenarios, assessments and simulations were conducted to test our resiliency 
strategy. 
Data management and 
privacy risk 
 
Data management risk is the risk of failing to manage information appropriately throughout its 
lifecycle due to inadequate processes and controls, resulting in legal or regulatory consequences, 
reputational damage or financial loss. Privacy risk is the risk of improper creation or collection, 
use, disclosure, retention or destruction of information. The collection, use and sharing of data, as 
well as the management and governance of data, are increasingly important as we continue to 
invest in digital solutions and innovation, as well as, expanding our business activities. This is also 
reflected through regulatory developments relating to data privacy. The Chief Privacy Office and 
the Chief Data Office partner with cross-functional teams to develop and implement enterprise-
wide standards and practices that describe how data is used, protected, managed and governed. 
Money laundering and 
Terrorist financing risk 
 
Money laundering and Terrorist financing risk is the risk that our products and services are used to 
facilitate the laundering of proceeds of crime, including the financing of terrorist activity. We 
maintain an enterprise-wide program designed to deter, detect and report suspected money 
laundering and terrorist financing activities across our organization, while seeking to ensure 
compliance with the laws and regulations of the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Our 
Global AML Compliance Group is dedicated to the continuous development and maintenance of 
robust policies, guidelines, training and risk-assessment tools and models to help our employees 
deal with ever-evolving money laundering and terrorist financing risks. The global anti-money 
laundering/anti-terrorist financing program is regularly evaluated in an effort to ensure it remains 
aligned with industry standards, best practices and all applicable laws, regulations and guidance. 
Risks of non-compliance include enforcement actions, criminal prosecutions and reputational 
damage. 
Third-party risk 
 
Third-party risk is the risk of failure to effectively manage third parties which may expose us to 
service disruptions, regulatory action, financial loss, litigation or reputational damage. We have a 
risk-based enterprise-wide program designed to provide oversight for third-party relationships 
that enables us to respond effectively to events that can cause service disruptions, financial loss 
or various other risks that could impact us. Our approach to third-party risk mitigation is outlined 
in policies and standards that establish the minimum requirements for identifying and managing 
risks throughout the engagement with a third party, while ensuring compliance with global 
regulatory expectations. We monitor third-party providers that we consider critical to our 
operations for any impact on their ability to deliver services to us, including vendors of our 
third-party providers. 
Business continuity risk 
 
Business continuity risk is the risk of being unable to maintain, continue or restore essential 
business operations during and/or after an event that prevents us from conducting business in the 
normal course. Exposure to disruptive operational events interrupts the continuity of our business 
operations and could negatively impact our financial results, reputation, client outcomes and/or 
result in harm to our employees. These operational events could result from the impact of severe 
weather, pandemics, failed processes, technology failures or cyber threats. Our risk-based 
enterprise-wide business continuity management program considers multiple scenarios to 
address the consequences of a disruption and its effects on the availability of our people, 
processes, facilities, technology, and third-party arrangements. Our approach to business 
continuity management is outlined in policies and standards embedded across the organization 
and the related risks are regularly measured, monitored, reported and integrated in our 
operational risk management and control framework. 
Operational risk capital 
Requirements for operational risk capital are determined in accordance with OSFI issued guidelines. Currently, our operational 
risk capital is assessed using the Standardized Approach (TSA) which is a formula-based calculation predicated on gross income. 
Upon implementation of final Basel III reforms, OSFI will require deposit-taking institutions to adopt a new Standardized 
Approach (SA) for measurement of operational risk capital. The SA methodology is based on the Business Indicator Component 
(BIC), which is a financial statement-based proxy for operational risk, and the Internal Loss Multiplier, a scaling factor that is 
based on the historical internal loss average relative to the BIC. Once implemented, SA will replace TSA. For further details on 
operational risk capital, refer to the Capital management section. 
Operational risk loss events 
As at October 31, 2021, our operational risk losses remain within our risk appetite. For further details on our contingencies, 
including litigation, refer to Notes 23 and 24 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
92
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Regulatory compliance risk 
Regulatory compliance risk is the risk of potential non-conformance with laws, rules, regulations and prescribed practices in any 
jurisdiction in which we operate. Issues regarding compliance with laws and regulations can arise in a number of areas in large 
complex financial institutions, such as ourselves, and are often the result of inadequate or failed internal processes, controls, 
people or systems. We currently are, and may be at any given time, subject to a number of legal and regulatory proceedings and 
subject to numerous governmental and regulatory examinations, investigations and other inquiries. 
Laws and regulations are in place to protect the financial and other interests of our clients, investors and the public. As a 
large-scale global financial institution, we are subject to numerous laws and extensive and evolving regulation by governmental 
agencies, supervisory authorities and self-regulatory organizations in Canada, the U.S., the U.K., Europe and other jurisdictions in 
which we operate. Such regulation continues to become increasingly extensive and complex. In addition, regulatory scrutiny and 
expectations in Canada, the U.S., the U.K., Europe and other jurisdictions for large financial institutions with respect to, among 
other things, governance, risk management practices and controls, and conduct, as well as the enforcement of regulatory 
compliance matters, has intensified. Failure to comply with these regulatory requirements and expectations or to resolve any 
identified deficiencies could result in increased regulatory oversight and restrictions. Resolution of such matters can also result 
in the payment of substantial penalties, agreements with respect to future operation of their business, actions with respect to 
relevant personnel, admission of wrongdoing, and guilty pleas with respect to criminal charges. 
Operating in this increasingly complex regulatory environment and intense regulatory enforcement environment, we are and 
have been subject to a variety of legal proceedings, including civil claims and lawsuits, criminal charges, regulatory scrutiny, 
examinations and proceedings, investigations, audits and requests for information by various governmental regulatory agencies 
and law enforcement authorities in various jurisdictions, and we anticipate that our ongoing business activities will give rise to 
such matters in the future. The global scope of our operations also means that a single issue may give rise to overlapping 
regulatory investigations, regulatory proceedings and or civil litigation claims in different jurisdictions. RBC can be subject to 
such proceedings due to alleged violations of law or, if determined by regulators, allegedly inadequate policies, procedures, 
controls or remediation of deficiencies. Changes to laws, including tax laws, regulations or regulatory policies, as well as the 
changes in how they are interpreted, implemented or enforced, could adversely affect us, for example, by lowering barriers to 
entry in the businesses in which we operate, increasing our costs of compliance, or limiting our activities and ability to execute 
our strategic plans. In addition, the severity of the remedies sought in legal and regulatory proceedings to which RBC is subject 
have increased. Further, there is no assurance that we always will be, or be deemed to be, in compliance with laws, regulations or 
regulatory policies or expectations. Accordingly, it is possible that we could receive a judicial or regulatory enforcement 
judgment or decision that results in significant fines, damages, penalties, and other costs or injunctions, criminal convictions, or 
loss of licenses or registrations that would damage our reputation, and negatively impact our earnings and ability to conduct 
some of our businesses. We are also subject to litigation arising in the ordinary course of our business and the adverse 
resolution of any litigation could have a significant adverse effect on our results or could give rise to significant reputational 
damage, which in turn could impact our future business prospects. 
Our Regulatory Compliance Management Framework outlines how we manage and mitigate the regulatory compliance risks 
associated with failing to comply with, or adapt to, current and changing laws and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we 
operate. 
Regulatory compliance risk includes the regulatory risks associated with financial crimes (which include, but are not limited 
to, money laundering, bribery, and sanctions), privacy, market conduct, consumer protection, business conduct, as well as 
prudential and other generally applicable non-financial requirements. Specific compliance policies, procedures and supporting 
frameworks have been developed to manage regulatory compliance risk. 
Strategic risk drivers 
Strategic risk 
Strategic risk is the risk that the enterprise or particular business areas will make inappropriate strategic choices, or will be 
unable to successfully implement selected strategies or achieve the expected benefits. Business strategy is a major driver of our 
risk appetite and consequently the strategic choices we make in terms of business mix determine how our risk profile changes. 
Responsibility for selecting and successfully implementing business strategies is mandated to the individual heads of each 
business segment. Oversight of strategic risk is the responsibility of the heads of the business segments and their operating 
committees, the Enterprise Strategy group, the GE, and the Board. The Enterprise Strategy group supports the management of 
strategic risk through the strategic planning process, articulated within our Enterprise Strategic Planning Policy, ensuring 
alignment across our business, financial, capital and risk planning. 
Our annual business portfolio review and project approval request processes help to identify and mitigate strategic risk by 
ensuring strategies for new initiatives, lines of business, and the enterprise as a whole align with our risk appetite and risk 
posture. GRM provides oversight of strategic risk by providing independent reviews of these processes, establishing enterprise 
risk frameworks, and independently monitoring and reporting on the level of risk established against our risk appetite metrics in 
accordance with the three lines of defence governance model. 
For details on the key strategic priorities for our business segments, refer to the Business segment results section. 
Reputation risk 
Reputation risk is the risk of an adverse impact on stakeholders’ perception of the bank due to i) the actions or inactions of the 
bank, its employees, third-party service providers, or clients, ii) the perceived misalignment of these actions or inactions with 
stakeholder expectations of the bank, or iii) negative public sentiment towards a global or industry issue. Our reputation is 
rooted in the perception of our stakeholders, and the trust and loyalty they place in us is core to our purpose as a financial 
services organization. A strong and trustworthy reputation will generally strengthen our market position, reduce the cost of 
capital, increase shareholder value, strengthen our resiliency, and help attract and retain top talent. Conversely, damage to our 
reputation can result in reduced share price and market capitalization, increased cost of capital, loss of strategic flexibility, 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
93 
 

inability to enter or expand into markets, loss of client loyalty and business, regulatory fines and penalties, restrictive 
agreements with regulators or prosecutors, or criminal prosecutions. The sources of reputation risk are widespread; risk to our 
reputation can occur in connection with credit, regulatory, legal and operational risks. We can also experience reputation risk 
from a failure to maintain an effective control environment, exhibit good conduct and maintain appropriate culture practices. 
Managing our reputation risk is an integral part of our organizational culture and our overall enterprise risk management 
approach, as well as a priority for employees and our Board. Our Board-approved Reputation Risk Management Framework 
provides an overview of our approach to identify, assess, manage, monitor and report on reputation risk. This framework outlines 
governance authorities, roles and responsibilities, and controls and mechanisms to manage our reputation risk, including our 
culture of integrity, compliance with our Code of Conduct and operating within our risk appetite. 
Our governance of reputation risk aims to be holistic and provides an integrated view of potential reputation issues across 
the organization. This governance structure is designed to ensure that ownership and accountability for reputation risk are 
understood across the enterprise, both proactive and reactive reputation risk decisions are escalated to senior management for 
review and evaluation, and reporting on reputation risk is comprehensive and integrated. 
Legal and regulatory environment risk 
Legal and regulatory environment risk is the risk that new or modified laws and regulations, and the interpretation or application 
of laws and regulations, will negatively impact the way in which we operate, both in Canada and in the other jurisdictions in 
which we conduct business. The full impact of some of these changes on our business will not be known until final rules are 
implemented and market practices have developed in response. We continue to respond to these and other developments and 
are working to minimize any potential adverse business or economic impact. The following provides a high-level summary of 
some of the key regulatory changes that have potential to increase or decrease our costs, impact our profitability and increase 
the complexity of our operations. A summary of the additional regulatory changes instituted by governments globally and by 
OSFI in response to the COVID-19 pandemic are included in the Impact of COVID-19 pandemic and Capital management sections 
of this 2021 Annual Report. 
Global uncertainty 
Significant uncertainty about the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, supply chain disruptions, trade policy and geopolitical 
tensions continue to pose risks to the global economic outlook. In October 2021, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projected 
global growth of 5.9% in calendar 2021, down 0.1% from its July forecast, reflecting supply chain disruptions in advanced 
economies and limited vaccine access in developing countries. Despite largely positive economic developments throughout the 
year, uncertainty remains regarding new variants of COVID-19 and the potential impacts of uneven vaccine access and vaccine 
hesitancy. Trade policy also remains a source of global uncertainty as countries consider ways to incorporate climate policy into 
trade policy and the U.K. continues to develop its post-Brexit international trade policies. Finally, global financial markets remain 
vulnerable to geopolitical tensions, such as those between the U.S. and China, many of which center around trade and 
technology. Our diversified business model, as well as our product and geographic diversification, continue to help mitigate the 
risks posed by global uncertainty. 
Consumer protection 
On August 18, 2021, the Canadian federal government published the Financial Consumer Protection Framework Regulations which 
are the underlying regulations to support the new Financial Consumer Protection Framework (FCPF). The FCPF encompasses a 
number of new consumer protection requirements, including complaint handling, access to banking services, and disclosures. 
We will be required to comply with the regulations by June 30, 2022 and we expect to be in compliance by the effective date. 
Minimum qualifying rates for insured and uninsured mortgages in Canada 
Effective June 1, 2021, the proposed minimum qualifying rate for uninsured mortgages is the greater of the mortgage contract rate 
plus 2% or 5.25%. OSFI also announced that it will review and communicate the qualifying rate at a minimum annually, every 
December. The Department of Finance Canada, who is responsible for setting the benchmark rate for qualifying insured 
mortgages, also announced that it would align the rate for insured mortgages with the rate set by OSFI for uninsured mortgages 
and that this new rate would apply to insured mortgages approved on June 1, 2021 or later. The minimum qualifying rate for 
insured mortgages will be subject to review and periodic adjustment. 
Interest rate benchmark reform 
London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) is the most widely referenced benchmark interest rate across the globe for derivatives, 
bonds, loans and other floating rate instruments; however, there is a regulator-led push to transition the market away from 
LIBOR and certain other benchmark rates to alternative benchmark rates (ABRs) that are based on actual overnight transactions. 
On March 5, 2021, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), the regulator of the ICE Benchmark Administration (IBA) which 
administers LIBOR, announced the permanent cessation or loss of representativeness of all 35 LIBOR benchmark settings 
currently published by the IBA as of December 31, 2021 or June 30, 2023. 
Details related to certain settings to which we are exposed are noted below. 
•
Publication of the 1-week and 2-month USD LIBOR settings will cease immediately after December 31, 2021. Publication of 
the overnight and 12-month USD LIBOR settings will cease immediately after June 30, 2023, while the 1-month, 3-month 
and 6-month USD LIBOR settings will no longer be representative of the underlying market and economic reality they are 
intended to measure after June 30, 2023. The FCA may consult on requiring the IBA to publish 1-month, 3-month and 
6-month USD LIBOR settings after the end of June 2023 on a non-representative “synthetic” basis. 
•
Publication of the overnight, 1-week, 2-month and 12-month GBP LIBOR settings will cease immediately after 
December 31, 2021, while the 1-month, 3-month and 6-month GBP LIBOR settings will no longer be representative of the 
underlying market and economic reality they are intended to measure after December 31, 2021. The FCA will require the 
IBA to continue to publish 1, 3 and 6 month GBP LIBOR settings until the end of 2022 on a non-representative “synthetic” 
basis. 
94
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

The FCA announcement engaged contractual triggers for the calculation and future application of fallback provisions related to 
our LIBOR linked products, including certain loans, bonds and derivatives. 
Additionally, on June 22, 2021, OSFI issued a letter setting out their expectation that Federally Regulated Financial Institutions 
(FRFIs) will stop using USD LIBOR settings as soon as possible and will not enter into new transactions referencing these rates 
after December 31, 2021. OSFI further expects FRFIs to prioritize system and model updates to accommodate ABRs by 
December 31, 2021, and be fully prepared to transact in ABRs that are available in markets in which the FRFI operates by 
December 31, 2021. 
To manage our transition away from LIBOR, we have implemented a comprehensive enterprise-wide program and governance 
structure that addresses the key areas of impact including contract remediation, funding and liquidity planning, risk 
management, financial reporting and valuation, systems, processes and client education and communication. Transition 
activities are focused on two broad streams of work: (i) developing new ABR linked products, and (ii) conversion of existing 
LIBOR based contracts to ABRs. Our program timelines are ultimately dependent on broader market acceptance of products that 
reference the new ABRs and our clients’ readiness and ability to adopt the replacement products. Significant matters that we 
continue to evaluate include client product offerings, short and long-term funding strategies, and our hedging programs. We 
continue to work towards the recommended target dates for the cessation of LIBOR-based products provided by our regulators 
and are on track with our transition activities to move to ABRs. 
For further details, refer to the Critical accounting policies and estimates section in this 2021 Annual Report and Note 2 of our 
2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Client Focused Reforms 
The Canadian Securities Administrators published amendments to National Instrument 31-103 to implement the Client Focused 
Reforms (Reforms), which are intended to increase the standard of conduct required for Canadian securities registrants. The 
Reforms enhance core requirements relating to conflicts of interest, suitability, know-your-product and know-your-client 
requirements, and also introduce new requirements relating to relationship disclosure, training and recordkeeping. The changes 
are coming into effect in two phases: the first phase relating to conflicts of interest and the related disclosure requirements came 
into effect on June 30, 2021, and the second phase relating to the remaining requirements comes into effect on December 31, 2021. 
The requirements primarily impact our Personal & Commercial Banking and Wealth Management platforms. We are well 
positioned to comply with the requirements. 
U.S. regulatory initiatives 
Policymakers continue to evaluate and implement reforms to various U.S. financial regulations, which could result in either 
expansion or reduction to the U.S. regulatory requirements and associated changes in compliance costs. On January 1, 2021, the 
U.S. Congress enacted the Anti-Money Laundering Act of 2020 (AMLA) which represents a comprehensive set of reforms to U.S. 
anti-money laundering laws. Regulations pertaining to this legislation have yet to be issued; the extent, timing and impact of 
which are unknown at this time. We will continue to monitor developments and any resulting implications for us. 
U.K. and European regulatory reform 
EU Sustainability-Related Disclosures Regulation requires financial services firms to disclose their approaches to considering 
environmental, social and governance factors as part of their advice and investment decision processes. These requirements 
were effective on March 10, 2021 and to date there has been no material impact on us; however, we will continue to monitor future 
guidance and the impact, if any, on us. 
For further details on regulatory capital and related requirements, refer to the risk and Capital management sections of this 2021 
Annual Report. 
Competitive risk 
Competitive risk is the risk of an inability to build or maintain a sustainable competitive advantage in a given market or markets, 
and includes the potential for loss of market share due to competitors offering superior products and services. Competitive risk 
can arise within or outside the financial sector, from traditional or non-traditional competitors, domestically or globally. There is 
intense competition for clients among financial services companies in the markets in which we operate. Client loyalty and 
retention can be influenced by a number of factors, including new technology used or services offered by our competitors, 
relative service levels and prices, product and service attributes, our reputation, actions taken by our competitors, and 
adherence with competition and anti-trust laws. Other companies, such as insurance companies and non-financial companies, as 
well as new technological applications, are increasingly offering services traditionally provided by banks. This competition could 
also reduce our revenue which could adversely affect our results. 
We identify and assess competitive risks as part of our overall risk management process. Our products and services are 
regularly benchmarked against existing and potential competitors. In addition, we regularly conduct risk reviews of our products, 
services, mergers and acquisitions strategy, as well as we seek to ensure adherence to competition and anti-trust laws. Our 
annual strategy-setting process also plays an integral role in managing competitive risk. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
95 
 

Macroeconomic risk drivers 
Systemic risk 
Systemic risk is the risk that the financial system as a whole, or a major part of it – either in an individual country, a region, or 
globally – is put in real and immediate danger of collapse or serious damage due to an unforeseen event causing a substantive 
shock to the financial system with the likelihood of material damage to the economy, and which would result in financial, 
reputation, legal or other risks for us. 
Systemic risk is considered to be the least controllable risk facing us, leading to increased vulnerabilities as experienced 
during the 2008 global financial crisis and the COVID-19 pandemic. Our ability to mitigate systemic risk when undertaking 
business activities is limited, other than through collaborative mechanisms between key industry participants, and, as 
appropriate, the public sector and regulators to reduce the frequency and impact of these risks. The two most significant 
measures in mitigating the impact of systemic risk are diversification and stress testing. 
Our diversified business model, portfolios, products, activities and funding sources help mitigate the potential impacts from 
systemic risk as well as having established risk limits to ensure our portfolio is diversified, and concentration risk is reduced and 
remains within our risk appetite. 
Stress testing involves consideration of the simultaneous movements in a number of risk factors. It is used to ensure our 
business strategies and capital planning are robust by measuring the potential impacts of credit, market, liquidity, and 
operational risks on us, under adverse economic conditions. Our enterprise-wide stress testing program evaluates the potential 
effects of a set of specified changes in risk factors, corresponding to exceptional but plausible adverse economic and financial 
market events. These stress scenarios are evaluated across the organization, and results are integrated to develop an 
enterprise-wide view of the impacts on our financial results and capital requirements. For further details on our stress testing, 
refer to the Enterprise risk management section. 
Our financial results are affected by the business and economic conditions in the geographic regions in which we operate. 
These conditions include consumer saving and spending habits as well as consumer borrowing and repayment patterns, 
business investment, government spending, exchange rates, sovereign debt risks, the level of activity and volatility of the capital 
markets, strength of the economy and inflation. Given the importance of our Canadian and U.S. operations, an economic 
downturn may largely affect our personal and business lending activities and may result in higher provisions for credit losses. 
Deterioration and uncertainty in global capital markets could result in continued high volatility that would impact results in 
Capital Markets, while in Wealth Management weaker market conditions could lead to lower average fee-based client assets and 
transaction volumes. In addition, worsening financial and credit market conditions may adversely affect our ability to access 
capital markets on favourable terms and could negatively affect our liquidity, resulting in increased funding costs and lower 
transaction volumes in Capital Markets and Investor & Treasury Services. 
Our financial results are also sensitive to changes in interest rates. Central banks globally reduced benchmark interest rates 
in 2020, largely in response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in an effort to provide support to maintain the resilience and 
stability of the financial systems. With interest rates remaining low throughout 2021, and expected to continue to remain low into 
fiscal 2022, we could see net interest income continuing to be unfavourably impacted by spread compression across many of our 
businesses while an increase in interest rates would benefit our businesses. However, a significant increase in interest rates 
could also adversely impact household balance sheets, leading to credit deterioration which could negatively impact our 
financial results, particularly in some of our Personal & Commercial Banking and Wealth Management businesses. 
Overview of other risks 
In addition to the risks described in the risk sections, there are other risk factors, described below, which may affect our 
businesses and financial results. The following discussion is not exhaustive as other factors could also adversely affect our 
results. 
Government fiscal, monetary and other policies 
Our businesses and earnings are affected by monetary policies that are adopted by the BoC, the Fed in the U.S., the ECB in the 
EU and monetary authorities in other jurisdictions in which we operate, as well as the fiscal policies of the governments of 
Canada, the U.S., Europe and such other jurisdictions. Such policies can also adversely affect our clients and counterparties in 
Canada, the U.S. and internationally, which may increase the risk of default by such clients and counterparties. 
Tax risk and transparency 
Tax risk refers to the risk of loss related to unexpected tax liabilities. The tax laws and systems that are applicable to us are 
complex and wide-ranging. As a result, we ensure that any decisions or actions related to tax always reflect our assessment of 
the long-term costs and risks involved, including their impact on our reputation and our relationship with clients, shareholders, 
and regulators. 
Our approach to taxation is grounded in principles which are reflected in our Code of Conduct, is governed by our Enterprise 
Tax Risk Management Policy, and incorporates the fundamentals of our risk drivers. Oversight of our tax policy and the 
management of tax risk is the responsibility of the GE, the CFO and the Senior Vice President, Taxation. We discuss our tax 
strategy with the Audit Committee annually and provide updates on our tax position on a regular basis. 
Our tax strategy is designed to provide transparency and support our business strategy, and is aligned with our corporate 
vision and values. We seek to maximize shareholder value by structuring our businesses in a tax-efficient manner while 
considering reputational risk by being in compliance with all laws and regulations. Our policy requires that we: 
•
Act with integrity and in a straightforward, open and honest manner in all tax matters; 
•
Ensure tax strategy is aligned with our business strategy supporting only bona fide transactions with a business purpose 
and economic substance; 
•
Ensure all intercompany transactions are conducted in accordance with applicable transfer pricing requirements; 
•
Ensure our full compliance and full disclosure to tax authorities of our statutory obligations; and 
•
Endeavour to work with the tax authorities to build positive long-term relationships and where disputes occur, address 
them constructively. 
96
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

With respect to assessing the needs of our clients, we consider a number of factors including the purpose of the transactions. We 
seek to ensure that we only support bona fide client transactions with a business purpose and economic substance. Should we 
become aware of client transactions that are aimed at evading their tax obligations, we will not proceed with the transactions. 
We operate in 29 countries worldwide. Our activities in these countries are subject to both Canadian and international tax 
legislation and other regulations, and are fully disclosed to the relevant tax authorities. The Taxation group and GRM both 
regularly review the activities of all entities in an effort to ensure compliance with tax requirements and other regulations. 
Given that we operate globally, complex tax legislation and accounting principles have resulted in differing legal 
interpretations between the respective tax authorities we deal with and ourselves, and we are at risk of tax authorities 
disagreeing with prior positions we have taken for tax purposes. When this occurs, we are committed to an open and transparent 
dialogue with the tax authorities to facilitate a quick assessment and prompt resolution of the issues where possible. Failure to 
adequately manage tax risk and resolve issues with tax authorities in a satisfactory manner could adversely impact our results, 
potentially to a material extent in a particular period, and/or significantly impact our reputation. 
Tax contribution 
In 2021, total income and other tax expense, including income taxes in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income 
and Changes in Equity, to various levels of governments globally totalled $8 billion (2020 – $4 billion). In Canada, total income 
and other tax expense for the year ended October 31, 2021 to various levels of government totalled $7 billion (2020 – $3 billion). 
Payroll taxes
Income taxes
Value added and
sales taxes
Capital taxes
Property taxes
Insurance premium taxes
Business taxes
0
2,000
1,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2021
2020
Income and other tax expense – by category
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
  
0
2,000
1,000
8,000
7,000
6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
Other International
U.S.
Canada
2021
2020
Income and other tax expense – by geography
(Millions of Canadian dollars)
 
For further details on income and other tax expense, refer to the Financial performance section. 
Environmental and social risk 
Environmental and Social (E&S) risk is the potential for an E&S issue associated with us, a client, transaction, product, supplier 
or activity, to have a negative impact on our financial position, operations, legal and regulatory compliance, or reputation. E&S 
issues include, but are not limited to, site contamination, waste management, land and resource use, biodiversity, water quality 
and availability, climate change, environmental regulation, human rights (including, but not limited to, Indigenous Peoples’ 
rights), and community engagement. GRM is responsible for developing and maintaining policies to identify, assess, monitor and 
report on E&S risk, and to regularly review and update E&S risk policies. These policies seek to identify sectors, clients and 
business activities that may expose us to E&S risk, establish requirements to manage, mitigate and monitor E&S risk, including 
when to apply enhanced due diligence and escalation procedures. Business segments and functional areas are responsible for 
incorporating E&S risk management requirements within their operations. 
We recognize the importance of E&S risk management practices and processes and are committed to regular and 
transparent disclosures. Global practices in the identification, assessment and management of climate-related risks and 
opportunities are rapidly evolving. We are working to advance our climate risk measurement, management, monitoring and 
reporting capabilities and to advance our understanding of the impact climate-related risks may have on our business and our 
clients’ businesses. The TCFD Disclosure section below discusses our participation in climate initiatives and industry working 
groups. In addition, as a signatory to the Equator Principles (EP), we report annually on projects assessed according to the EP 
framework. RBC Global Asset Management (GAM)1 and BlueBay Asset Management LLP are signatories to the United Nations 
Principles for Responsible Investment (UN PRI) and report annually on their responsible investment activities to the UN PRI. RBC 
Europe Limited (RBCEL), a wholly owned subsidiary of the bank, is a member of the Green Bond Principles and reports annually 
on its green bond underwriting activities. Our annual ESG Performance Report provides disclosure on our approach and 
performance towards addressing significant E&S and human rights issues. We published our Human Rights Position Statement in 
October 2020, recognizing the need to consider human rights impacts in our business activities. The Human Rights Position 
Statement sets out our commitment to respect internationally-recognized human rights in line with the United Nations Guiding 
Principles on Business and Human Rights. We also publish an annual Modern Slavery Act Statement, which sets out the policies 
and processes that are in place to prevent slavery and human trafficking from taking place in our operations and supply chains, 
and climate-related disclosures that consider the recommendations of the FSB’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD). 
We also continue to explore opportunities to expand the products and services we provide to respond to the evolving ESG 
landscape, help our clients navigate the transition to a net-zero economy, and advance their sustainability strategies. The TCFD 
Disclosure section below discusses a number of products and services that we provide to respond to climate-related 
opportunities and these offerings also often address broader ESG-related considerations. 
1 
RBC GAM includes the following affiliates: BlueBay Asset Management LLP (BlueBay), RBC Global Asset Management Inc. (including Phillips, Hager & North Investment 
Management), RBC Global Asset Management (U.S.) Inc., RBC Global Asset Management (UK) Limited, and RBC Global Asset Management (Asia) Limited, which are 
separate, but affiliated subsidiaries of RBC. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
97 
 

TCFD Disclosure 
Governance 
The Board of Directors and its Committees oversee senior management, who is responsible for managing E&S risks and 
opportunities, which include climate change. The Board provides oversight of our strategic approach to climate change and our 
E&S risks, which includes how we manage climate-related risks and opportunities. Each of the four Committees of the Board, the 
Risk Committee, the Governance Committee, the Audit Committee and the Human Resources Committee, have oversight of 
climate-related risks and opportunities that are specific to their respective oversight responsibilities. The Board reviewed our 
updated climate strategy, RBC’s Climate Blueprint, in February 2021. The Board and its Committees also received reports on a 
range of climate change-related issues, which included our climate change strategy, climate risks including physical and 
transition risk in our enterprise-wide stress testing, measurement and reporting of emissions, the regulatory landscape and 
regulatory initiatives, increasing stakeholder focus, as well as our engagement with stakeholders. We have established a Climate 
Strategy Steering Committee and a Climate Strategy & Governance Team, focused on providing enterprise-wide strategic 
direction on advancing our understanding and developing strategies to address climate-related risks and opportunities for us 
and our clients. GRM has senior executive representation on the Climate Strategy Steering Committee and also has a dedicated 
E&S risk team that develops approaches to identify, assess, monitor and report on climate-related risks, as appropriate.  
Strategy 
We recognize we have a role to play in accelerating the transition to a net-zero economy and mitigating the risks associated with 
climate change. Our RBC Climate Blueprint outlines our climate strategy and includes our commitment to net-zero emissions in 
our lending by 2050, beginning with measuring and reporting our financed emissions for key sectors. Our enterprise strategy for 
addressing climate-related opportunities includes supporting our clients in the net-zero transition, advancing our capabilities in 
climate risk measurement and management, reducing emissions from our own operations, speaking up for smart climate 
solutions, and investing in technology to address complex environmental challenges. RBC GAM published its approach to climate 
change that lays out its commitments and actions related to climate change. 
We are working to develop products, solutions and advice to assist our clients as they transition to a net-zero economy. In 
2021, we committed to achieving $500 billion in sustainable financing by 2025, and we issued a 5-year US$750 million green bond, 
our second green bond offering and our first issuance through our Sustainable Bond Framework which was launched in 2020. Our 
participation in the rapidly evolving sustainable finance and green bond market helps to enable and advance the net-zero 
transition. 
We are active participants in industry groups that support the development of strategies and plans to transition to a net-
zero economy. In 2021: 
•
We joined the Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials (PCAF) and have begun work to measure and report our 
financed emissions for key sectors. 
•
We joined RMI’s Center for Climate-Aligned Finance to convene stakeholders and advance progress on sector-based 
decarbonisation pathways. 
•
We pledged to join the Net-Zero Banking Alliance (NZBA) as part of a global, industry-led initiative to accelerate and 
support efforts to address climate change. 
Risk Management 
We regard climate risk as a transverse risk, which impacts all the other risk categories for which we have established limits, and 
requires us to consider how financial and non-financial factors may impact us and our clients. We initially identified climate 
change as an emerging risk in 2017 and, as such, our approach to managing it is reported on a regular basis to senior 
management and to the Risk Committee of the Board. We define climate risk as risk related to the transition to a net-zero 
economy (transition risk) and risk related to the physical impacts of climate change (physical risk), which includes both chronic 
and acute risks. We continue to advance our capabilities and approach to climate risk management: 
•
We conduct portfolio, client and scenario analyses to assess our exposure to, and the impact of, climate-related risks. 
•
We participated in a climate scenario analysis pilot project with the Bank of Canada and OSFI to build our climate scenario 
analysis knowledge and understanding of our potential exposure to climate-related transition risks. 
•
We have committed to refining our climate risk appetite and setting interim reduction goals on our path to net-zero 
emissions in our lending by 2050. 
•
We are building out climate-related scenario analysis and stress testing capabilities. As part of our annual stress testing and 
analysis, we incorporated components of climate risk through transition and physical risk stresses and assessed its impact 
on our key portfolios. 
•
With the potential for climate risk to translate to increased credit risk, we have done work to identify those sectors within 
our wholesale portfolio that are most affected by physical and transition risk, which allows us to better focus ongoing 
monitoring of climate risk. 
As with risk appetite, as we continue to develop our climate risk measurement capabilities this will inform the steps we take to 
further the implementation of climate-related risk limits and advance the integration of climate risks into our policies and 
procedures. 
98
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

We may be exposed to climate risk through emerging regulatory and legal requirements, disruptions to our operations and 
services, and the products and services we provide to our clients. Both we and our clients may also be exposed to climate risk 
through technological and societal change and market forces, in addition to the factors outlined above. Additionally, we and our 
clients may also be vulnerable to physical climate risk. We regularly review the risks that we face and reflect on those that affect 
our clients, considering: 
Emerging 
regulatory and 
legal 
requirements 
 
• Climate change regulations, frameworks, and guidance that apply to banks, insurers and asset managers 
are rapidly evolving. Several central banks and regulators have taken steps towards introducing or have 
already introduced rules to address the financial and economic risks of climate change. As regulations 
and formal requirements evolve, we will monitor such developments and update our risk management 
practices and disclosures as necessary. 
• For clients in RBC’s Corporate Client Group and Capital Markets that are in sectors categorized as high 
environmental risk, such as those in carbon-intensive sectors, we evaluate whether clients have 
assessed and quantified the regulatory impacts of climate change as part of our due diligence and risk 
assessment process. 
Disruptions to 
operations 
and client 
services 
 
• We identify properties that we lease or own, which contain business processes and supporting applica-
tions that require enhanced facility infrastructure to mitigate site disruptions, such as those caused by 
extreme weather events. We classify critical environment sites based on our business risk tolerance for 
site-specific downtime and, among other things, site location, power supply, exposure to flooding, 
geological stability and other hazards. 
• We take steps to mitigate and adapt to climate change through our building design and our purchasing 
decisions. 
• As required, we assess the impact of climate-related events (e.g., floods, hurricanes) on our businesses 
and client operations. 
Products and 
services we 
provide 
 
• We maintain a diversified lending portfolio, which improves our resilience to geographic or sectoral 
downturns and minimizes concentrations of credit exposure. 
• Each business segment is responsible for identifying material climate-related risks and opportunities, 
which are integrated into risk management processes as necessary. 
• We deliver advice and solutions to our clients to support their transition to a net-zero economy and the 
advancement of their sustainability strategies. For example, we provide sustainable finance products 
such as green, social and sustainability bond underwriting, sustainability-linked bonds and loans as well 
as advisory services to integrate ESG factors for companies that are in the pre-initial public offering or 
pre-acquisition stage. In addition, our offerings include ESG-integrated investment solutions, structured 
products, carbon trading services, ESG research and thought leadership. 
• RBC GAM integrates material environmental, social and governance (ESG) factors in its investment 
processes to help mitigate risk and/or enhance long-term, risk-adjusted returns. 
• RBC Insurance® (through its insurance agency) sells property and casualty insurance products that are 
underwritten and insured by Aviva Canada Inc. As such, RBC Insurance is not directly exposed to climate-
related risks associated with these products. The property and casualty insurance industry as a whole 
has exposure to longer-term shifts in climate patterns, such as rising temperatures and hurricanes, 
which may indirectly impact our Insurance business results. We are working to advance our under-
standing of the impact of acute and longer term weather events on travel insurance, and for life and 
health insurance products sold to group/business clients. 
Metrics & Targets 
We have committed to net-zero emissions in our lending by 2050 and also have commitments associated with financing, 
investments, risk management and carbon reduction in our operations, research, partnerships, and philanthropy. Performance is 
reported on in our annual TCFD Report and in the RBC GAM TCFD Report. The first RBC GAM TCFD report was published in April 
2021. We have commenced efforts to measure our financed emissions in accordance with the PCAF methodology. As a signatory 
to the Carbon Disclosure Project, we have publicly reported climate-related data since 2003, including multi-year data in 
accordance with the Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Protocol. We also receive third-party limited assurance on our energy and emissions 
metrics. 
Other factors 
Other factors that may affect our results include changes in government trade policy, changes in accounting standards and their 
effect on our accounting policies, estimates and judgments, currency and interest rate movements in Canada, the U.S., and other 
jurisdictions in which we operate or conduct business, changes to our credit ratings, the timely and successful development of 
new products and services, technological changes, effective design, implementation and execution of processes and their 
associated controls, fraud by internal and external parties, the possible impact on our business from disease or illness that 
affects local, national or global economies, disruptions to public infrastructure, including transportation, communication, power 
and water, international conflicts and other political developments and our success in anticipating and managing the associated 
risks. 
We caution that the foregoing discussion of risk factors, many of which are beyond our control, is not exhaustive and other 
factors could also affect our results. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
99 
 

Capital management 
We actively manage our capital to maintain strong capital ratios and high ratings while providing strong returns to our 
shareholders. In addition to the regulatory requirements, we consider the expectations of credit rating agencies, depositors and 
shareholders, as well as our business plans, stress tests, peer comparisons and our internal capital ratio targets. Our goal is to 
optimize our capital usage and structure, and to provide support for our business segments and clients. We also aim to generate 
optimal returns for our shareholders, while protecting depositors and creditors. 
Capital management framework 
Our capital management framework establishes policies and processes for defining, measuring, raising and investing all forms of 
capital in a coordinated and consistent manner. It sets our overall approach to capital management, including guiding principles 
and roles and responsibilities relating to capital adequacy and transactions, dividends, solo capital and management of RWA 
and leverage ratio exposures. We manage and monitor capital from several perspectives, including regulatory capital and solo 
capital. 
Our capital planning process is dynamic and involves various teams including Finance, Corporate Treasury, GRM, Economics 
and our businesses, and covers internal capital ratio targets, potential capital transactions as well as projected dividend payouts 
and share repurchases. This process considers our business operating plans, enterprise-wide stress testing and Internal Capital 
Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP), regulatory capital changes and requirements, accounting changes, internal capital 
requirements, rating agency metrics and solo capital. 
Our capital plan is established on an annual basis and is aligned with the management actions included in the annual 
business operating plan, which includes forecast growth in assets and earnings taking into account our business strategies, the 
projected market and economic environment, and peer positioning. This includes incorporating potential capital transactions 
based on our projected internal capital generation, business forecasts, market conditions and other developments, such as 
accounting and regulatory changes that may impact capital requirements. All of the components in the capital plan are 
monitored throughout the year and are revised as deemed appropriate. 
Total capital requirements
Capital available and target
capital ratios
Capital impacts of
stress scenarios
Enterprise-wide
Stress Testing
ICAAP 
Capital Plan and
Business
Operating Plan
Capital impacts of stress scenarios
 
Our enterprise-wide stress testing and annual ICAAP processes provide key inputs for capital planning, including setting 
internal capital ratio targets. The stress scenarios are evaluated across the organization, and results are integrated to develop 
an enterprise-wide view of financial impacts and capital requirements, which in turn facilitate the planning of mitigating actions 
to absorb adverse events. ICAAP assesses capital adequacy and requirements covering all material risks, with a cushion for 
plausible contingencies. In accordance with OSFI guidelines, major components of our ICAAP process include comprehensive risk 
assessment, stress testing, capital assessment and planning, Board and senior management oversight, monitoring and reporting 
and internal control review. 
Our internal capital targets are established to maintain robust capital positions in excess of OSFI’s Basel III regulatory 
targets. The results of our enterprise-wide stress testing and ICAAP processes are incorporated into the OSFI Capital Buffers, D-
SIB/Globally Systemically Important Banks (G-SIB) surcharge, and Domestic Stability Buffer (DSB), with a view to ensure that the 
bank has adequate capital to underpin risks and absorb losses under all plausible stress scenarios, including the COVID-19 
pandemic, given our risk profile and appetite. In addition, we include a discretionary cushion on top of OSFI’s regulatory targets 
to reflect our risk appetite, our forecasts of potential negative downturns and to maintain our capital strength for forthcoming 
regulatory and accounting changes, peer comparatives, rating agencies sensitivities and solo capital level. 
The Board is responsible for the ultimate oversight of capital management, including the annual review and approval of the 
capital plan. ALCO and Group Executive (GE) share responsibility for capital management and receive regular reports detailing 
our compliance with approved limits and guidelines. The Audit and Risk Committees jointly approve the ICAAP process. 
Basel III 
Our consolidated regulatory capital requirements are determined by guidelines issued by OSFI, which are based on the minimum 
Basel III capital ratios adopted by the BCBS. 
Under Basel III, banks select from two main approaches, the Standardized Approach (SA) or the IRB Approach, to calculate 
their minimum regulatory capital required to support credit, market and operational risks. We adopted the Basel III IRB approach 
to calculate credit risk capital for consolidated regulatory reporting purposes. While the majority of our credit risk exposures are 
reported under the Basel III IRB Approach for regulatory capital purposes, certain portfolios continue to use the Basel III 
Standardized Approach for credit risk (for example, our Caribbean Banking operations and City National). For consolidated 
regulatory reporting of market risk capital, we use both the Internal Models-based and Standardized Approaches, and for 
consolidated regulatory reporting of operational risk capital we use the Standardized Approach. We determine our regulatory 
leverage ratio based on OSFI’s Leverage Requirements (LR) Guideline, which reflects the BCBS Basel III leverage ratio 
requirements.  
100
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

All federally regulated banks with a Basel III leverage ratio total exposure exceeding €200 billion at their financial year-end 
are required, at a minimum, to publicly disclose in the first quarter following their year-end, the twelve indicators used in the 
G-SIB assessment methodology, with the goal of enhancing the transparency of the relative scale of banks’ potential global 
systemic importance and data quality. The FSB publishes an updated list of G-SIBs annually. On November 23, 2021, we were 
re-designated as a G-SIB by the FSB. This designation requires us to maintain a higher loss absorbency requirement (common 
equity as a percentage of RWA) of 1% consistent with the D-SIB requirement. 
On April 18, 2018, OSFI released its final guideline on Total Loss Absorbing Capacity (TLAC), which applies to Canadian D-SIBs 
as part of the Federal Government’s Bail-in regime. The guideline is consistent with the TLAC standard released on November 9, 
2015 by the FSB for institutions designated as G-SIBs, but tailored to the Canadian context. The TLAC requirement is intended to 
address the sufficiency of a systemically important bank’s loss absorbing capacity in supporting its recapitalization in the event 
of its failure. TLAC is defined as the aggregate of Tier 1 capital, Tier 2 capital, and other TLAC instruments, which allow conversion 
in whole or in part into common shares under the CDIC Act and meet all of the eligibility criteria under the guideline. 
TLAC requirements established two minimum standards, which are required to be met effective November 1, 2021: the risk-
based TLAC ratio, which builds on the risk-based capital ratios described in the Capital Adequacy Requirements (CAR) guideline, 
and the TLAC leverage ratio, which builds on the leverage ratio described in OSFI’s LR guideline. As at October 31, 2021, our TLAC 
ratio of 25.7% was above the minimum TLAC ratio requirement of 24%, which includes the DSB requirement of 2.5% mentioned 
below, and our TLAC leverage ratio of 8.6% was above the minimum requirement of 6.75%. We do not anticipate any challenges in 
complying with these requirements. 
OSFI requires all D-SIBs to publicly disclose their Pillar 2 DSB as part of their quarterly disclosures, similar to other current 
capital-related disclosure requirements. The level of the Pillar 2 buffer ranges between 0% and 2.5% of the entity’s total RWA for 
each of the six systemically important banks in Canada. The DSB requirements must be met at the CET1 capital level. OSFI 
undertakes a review of the DSB on a semi-annual basis, in June and December, and will publicly announce any changes at that 
time. However, on March 13, 2020, OSFI announced a decrease in the DSB from 2.25% to 1.0% of total RWA, with the buffer 
decrease effective immediately, in response to the disruption related to the COVID-19 pandemic and in support of the banks’ 
ability to supply additional credit to the economy. At that time, OSFI also committed to not increasing the DSB for a period of 18 
months and also announced its expectation that all banks should not increase their dividend payments and should stop any 
share buybacks. On June 17, 2021, OSFI announced an increase in the DSB from 1.0% to 2.5% of total RWA effective October 31, 
2021. The 2.5% reflects the highest DSB requirement under OSFI capital requirements. On November 4, 2021, OSFI announced that 
banks are permitted to increase their dividend payments and to execute share buybacks, once approved. 
In Q2 2020, OSFI announced a series of regulatory adjustments and guidance to support the financial and operational resilience 
of the banking sector in response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, and continues, as needed, to release regulations 
implementing, clarifying, updating or unwinding certain aspects or requirements. Such measures and guidance include: 
•
Regulatory adjustments to RWA, including temporary measures to reduce stressed VaR multipliers from three to one and the 
permanent exclusion of Funding Valuation Adjustment hedges from market risk. 
O
Effective May 1, 2021, OSFI unwound the temporary measures to reduce SVaR multipliers, requiring banks to revert to pre-
pandemic levels. 
•
Modifications for increases in expected credit loss provisions on CET1 capital by applying a 70% after-tax exclusion rate for 
growth in Stage 1 and Stage 2 allowances between Q1 2020 and the respective quarters of fiscal 2020. The exclusion rate was 
reduced to the current 50% in fiscal 2021 and will be reduced to 25% in fiscal 2022. These modifications are not available for a 
financial institution’s IRB portfolio in any quarter in which the financial institution has a shortfall in allowances. 
•
Exclusion of central bank reserves and sovereign-issued securities that qualify as HQLA from leverage ratio exposure 
amounts until December 31, 2021. 
O
On August 12, 2021, OSFI announced that the exclusion of sovereign-issued securities that qualify as HQLA from the 
leverage ratio exposure measure will not extend beyond December 31, 2021 and that central bank reserves will continue 
to be excluded from the leverage ratio exposure measure. 
•
Reduction in the current regulatory capital floor for financial institutions using the IRB approach from 75% to 70% of RWA 
under the SA. The reduced floor factor will remain in place until the adoption of the Basel III reforms. 
In relation to the relief programs launched by both the Canadian and U.S. federal governments and described in the Impact of 
COVID-19 pandemic section of this 2021 Annual Report, OSFI has provided guidance on the associated capital treatment of these 
programs: 
•
Loans issued under the CEBA program are to be excluded from risk-based capital and leverage ratios as they are fully 
guaranteed by the government. 
•
Risk-weighting for both the guaranteed and unsecured portion of loans issued as part of the EDC BCAP Guarantee program, 
as well as for the BDC Highly Affected Sectors Credit Availability Program (HASCAP), should be in accordance with existing 
regulatory guidelines. The full amount of these loans are required to be included in the leverage ratio calculation. 
•
Risk-based capital and leverage ratio calculations should reflect only the financial institutions’ own proportion of new loans 
issued under the BDC lending programs. 
•
Exclusion of exposures acquired through the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) instituted by the U.S. government from 
RWA and leverage exposure amounts. 
OSFI has assessed and will continue to assess the need for these relief measures. We have incorporated the above adjustments 
and guidance, as applicable, into our results and in our ongoing capital planning activities. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
101 
 

The following table provides a summary of OSFI’s current regulatory target ratios under Basel III and Pillar 2 requirements. We 
are in compliance with all current capital and leverage requirements imposed by OSFI: 
Basel III – OSFI regulatory targets 
Table 64  
Basel III 
capital and 
leverage ratios 
OSFI regulatory target requirements 
for large banks under Basel III 
RBC capital 
and 
leverage 
ratios as at 
October 31, 
2021 
Domestic 
Stability 
Buffer (3) 
Minimum 
including 
Capital 
Buffers, 
D-SIB/G-SIB 
surcharge and 
Domestic 
Stability 
Buffer as at 
October 31, 
2021 
Minimum 
Capital 
Buffers (1) 
Minimum 
including 
Capital 
Buffers 
D-SIB/G-SIB 
surcharge (2) 
Minimum 
including 
Capital 
Buffers and 
D-SIB/G-SIB 
surcharge (2)  
Common Equity Tier 1 
4.5% 
2.5% 
7.0% 
1.0% 
8.0% 
13.7% 
2.5% 
10.5% 
Tier 1 capital 
6.0% 
2.5% 
8.5% 
1.0% 
9.5% 
14.9% 
2.5% 
12.0% 
Total capital 
8.0% 
2.5% 
10.5% 
1.0% 
11.5% 
16.7% 
2.5% 
14.0% 
Leverage ratio 
3.0% 
n.a. 
3.0% 
n.a. 
3.0% 
4.9% 
n.a. 
3.0% 
(1) 
The capital buffers include the capital conservation buffer and the countercyclical capital buffer as prescribed by OSFI. 
(2) 
A capital surcharge, equal to the higher of our D-SIB surcharge and the BCBS’s G-SIB surcharge, is applicable to risk-weighted capital. 
(3) 
The DSB was increased from 1.0% to 2.5% of total RWA effective October 31, 2021.  
n.a. 
not applicable 
Regulatory capital, RWA and capital ratios 
Under Basel III, regulatory capital consists of CET1, Additional Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital. 
CET1 capital comprises the highest quality of capital. Regulatory adjustments under Basel III include full deductions of 
certain items and additional capital components that are subject to threshold deductions. 
Tier 1 capital comprises predominantly CET1 and Additional Tier 1 items including non-cumulative preferred shares and 
limited recourse capital notes (LRCNs) that meet certain criteria. Tier 2 capital primarily includes subordinated debentures that 
meet certain criteria and certain loan loss allowances. Total capital is defined as the sum of Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital. Preferred 
shares, LRCNs, and subordinated debentures issued after January 1, 2013 require Non-viability contingent capital (NVCC) features 
to be included into regulatory capital. NVCC requirements ensure that non-common regulatory capital instruments bear losses 
before banks seek government funding. 
Regulatory capital ratios are calculated by dividing CET1, Tier 1 and Total capital by total RWA. 
The following chart provides a summary of the major components of CET1, Additional Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital. 
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) (1)
Additional Tier 1 Capital
Tier 2 Capital
+
+
Tier 1 Capital
Common shares
Retained earnings
Other components of equity
Non-controlling interests in subsidiaries
CET1 instruments
Goodwill and other intangibles
Deferred tax assets on loss 
carryforwards
Deﬁned beneﬁt pension fund assets
Non-signiﬁcant investments in CET1 
instruments of ﬁnancial institutions (3)
Shortfall of provisions to expected 
losses
Preferred shares
Limited recourse capital notes
Non-signiﬁcant investments in Tier 1
instruments of Financial Institutions (3)
Signiﬁcant investments in other 
Financial Institutions and insurance 
subsidiaries Tier 1 instruments
Non-signiﬁcant investments in Tier 2 
instruments of Financial Institutions (3)
Signiﬁcant investments in other 
Financial Institutions and insurance 
subsidiaries Tier 2 instruments
Signiﬁcant investments in insurance 
subsidiaries and CET1 instruments in 
other ﬁnancial institutions
Mortgage servicing rights
Deferred tax assets relating to 
temporary differences
Total Capital
Subordinated debentures
Certain loan loss allowances
Non-controlling interests in subsidiaries 
Tier 2 instruments
Deductions
Threshold
Deductions (2)
Higher quality
capital
Lower quality
capital 
Non-controlling interests in subsidiaries 
Tier 1 instruments
 
(1) 
In accordance with OSFI’s regulatory adjustments announced in Q2 2020, and as discussed above, includes capital modifications associated with Stage 1 and 2 
allowances which were subject to a 50% after-tax exclusion rate in fiscal 2021 that will be reduced to 25% in fiscal 2022. 
(2) 
First level: The amount by which each of the items exceeds a 10% threshold of CET1 capital (after all deductions but before threshold deductions) will be 
deducted from CET1 capital. Second level: The aggregate amount of the three items not deducted from the first level above and in excess of 15% of CET1 capital 
after regulatory adjustments will be deducted from capital, and the remaining balance not deducted will be risk-weighted at 250%. 
(3) 
Non-significant investments are subject to certain CAR criteria that drive the amount eligible for deduction. 
102
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

The following tables provide details on our regulatory capital, RWA, and capital and leverage ratios. Our capital position remains 
strong and our capital and leverage ratios remain well above OSFI regulatory targets: 
Regulatory capital, risk-weighted assets (RWA) and capital and leverage ratios 
Table 65  
 
As at  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Capital (1) 
 
 
CET1 capital 
$
75,583 
$
68,082 
Tier 1 capital 
82,246 
74,005 
Total capital 
92,026 
84,928 
Risk-weighted assets (RWA) used in calculation of capital ratios (1) 
 
 
Credit risk 
$ 444,142 
$ 448,821 
Market risk 
34,806 
27,374 
Operational risk 
73,593 
70,047 
Total RWA 
$ 552,541 
$ 546,242 
Capital ratios and Leverage ratio (1) 
 
 
CET1 ratio 
13.7% 
12.5% 
Tier 1 capital ratio 
14.9% 
13.5% 
Total capital ratio 
16.7% 
15.5% 
Leverage ratio 
4.9% 
4.8% 
Leverage ratio exposure (billions) 
$
1,662 
$
1,553 
(1) 
Capital, RWA, and capital ratios are calculated using OSFI’s CAR guideline and the Leverage ratio is calculated using OSFI’s Leverage 
Requirements (LR) guideline as updated in accordance with the regulatory guidance issued by OSFI in response to the COVID-19 
pandemic. Both the CAR guideline and LR guideline are based on the Basel III framework. 
Regulatory capital 
Table 66  
 
As at  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
CET1 capital: instruments and reserves and regulatory adjustments 
 
 
Directly issued qualifying common share capital (and equivalent for 
non-joint stock companies) plus related stock surplus 
$
17,887 
$
17,732 
Retained earnings 
71,563 
59,573 
Accumulated other comprehensive income (and other reserves) 
2,533 
3,414 
Directly issued capital subject to phase out from CET1 (only applicable to 
non-joint stock companies) 
– 
– 
Common share capital issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties 
(amount allowed in group CET1) 
11 
12 
Regulatory adjustments applied to CET1 under Basel III 
(16,411) 
(12,649) 
Common Equity Tier 1 capital (CET1) 
$
75,583 
$
68,082 
 
 
 
Additional Tier 1 capital: instruments and regulatory adjustments 
 
 
Directly issued qualifying Additional Tier 1 instruments plus related 
stock surplus 
$
6,661 
$
5,921 
Directly issued capital instruments to phase out from Additional Tier 1 
– 
– 
Additional Tier 1 instruments issued by subsidiaries and held by third 
parties (amount allowed in group AT1) 
2 
2 
Regulatory adjustments applied to Additional Tier 1 under Basel III 
– 
– 
Additional Tier 1 capital (AT1) 
$
6,663 
$
5,923 
Tier 1 capital (T1 = CET1 + AT1) 
$
82,246 
$
74,005 
 
 
 
Tier 2 capital: instruments and provisions and regulatory adjustments 
 
 
Directly issued qualifying Tier 2 instruments plus related stock surplus 
$
8,443 
$
9,049 
Directly issued capital instruments subject to phase out from Tier 2 
448 
488 
Tier 2 instruments issued by subsidiaries and held by third parties 
(amount allowed in group Tier 2) 
26 
29 
Collective allowance 
863 
1,357 
Regulatory adjustments applied to Tier 2 under Basel III 
– 
– 
Tier 2 capital (T2) 
$
9,780 
$
10,923 
 
 
 
Total capital (T1 + T2) 
$
92,026 
$
84,928 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
103 
 

2021 vs. 2020 
October 31,
2020 (1)
12.5%
176 bps
66 bps
21 bps
(145) bps
(19) bps
13.7%
Internal
capital
generation (2)
RWA decrease -
models &
methodology
updates
Capital
modiﬁcation
RWA decrease -
net credit
migration
RWA growth -
business
Other
October 31,
2021 (1)
22 bps
Continuity of CET1 ratio (Basel III)
 
(1) 
Represents rounded figures. 
(2) 
Internal capital generation of $9.6 billion which represents Net income available to shareholders, less common and preferred share dividends and 
distributions on other equity instruments. 
Our CET1 ratio was 13.7%, up 120 bps from last year, mainly reflecting internal capital generation, partially offset by higher RWA 
and the impact of lower capital modification related to eligible Stage 1 and Stage 2 allowances. 
Our Tier 1 capital ratio of 14.9% was up 140 bps, reflecting the factors noted above under the CET1 ratio. Our Tier 1 ratio was 
also positively impacted by the issuance of LRCNs, partially offset by the redemption of preferred shares. 
Our Total capital ratio of 16.7% was up 120 bps, reflecting the factors noted above under the Tier 1 capital ratio.  
Our Leverage ratio of 4.9% was up 10 bps, mainly reflecting internal capital generation and the issuance of LRCNs, partially offset 
by growth in leverage exposures, the redemption of preferred shares and the impact of lower capital modification as noted above 
under the CET1 ratio. 
Leverage exposures increased by $109 billion mainly driven by business growth in loans, interest-bearing deposits with 
banks, securities, undrawn commitments, repo-style transactions and derivatives, partially offset by the impact of foreign 
exchange translation and higher regulatory modifications for central bank reserves and sovereign-issued securities qualifying as 
HQLA. 
Basel III RWA 
OSFI requires banks to meet minimum risk-based capital requirements for exposures to credit risk, operational risk, and where 
they have significant trading activity, market risk. RWA is calculated for each of these risk types and added together to determine 
total RWA. In addition, a minimum capital floor requirement must be maintained as prescribed under OSFI’s CAR guidelines which 
is currently set to 70% of RWA as calculated under current Basel III standardized credit risk and market risk approaches as 
defined in the CAR guidelines. If the capital requirement is less than the required threshold, a floor adjustment to RWA must be 
applied to the reported RWA as prescribed by OSFI CAR guidelines. 
104
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Total risk-weighted assets 
Table 67  
 
2021 
 
2020 
 
 
Average 
of risk-
weights (2) 
Risk-weighted assets 
 
 
As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars, 
except percentage amounts) 
Exposure (1) 
Standardized 
approach 
Advanced 
approach 
Other 
Total  
Total 
Credit risk 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Lending-related and other 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Residential mortgages 
$
328,787 
8% $
9,975 $ 16,768 $
– $ 26,743  $
24,604 
Other retail 
356,586 
20% 
6,548 
65,089 
– 
71,637  
60,544 
Business 
400,607 
50% 
58,233 
142,320 
– 
200,553  
218,803 
Sovereign 
325,994 
4% 
3,640 
10,772 
– 
14,412  
15,371 
Bank 
26,231 
18% 
1,728 
3,028 
– 
4,756  
5,228 
Total lending-related and other 
$1,438,205 
22% $
80,124 $237,977 $
– $318,101  $ 324,550 
Trading-related 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Repo-style transactions 
$
962,491 
1% $
54 $
9,415 $
68 $
9,537  $
9,496 
Derivatives  
104,524 
41% 
2,049 
21,882 
18,446 
42,377  
42,917 
Total trading-related 
$1,067,015 
5% $
2,103 $ 31,297 $18,514 $ 51,914  $
52,413 
Total lending-related and other and trading-
related 
$2,505,220 
15% $
82,227 $269,274 $18,514 $370,015  $ 376,963 
Bank book equities 
3,951 
139% 
- 
5,474 
– 
5,474  
4,931 
Securitization exposures 
63,617 
16% 
5,069 
5,259 
– 
10,328  
11,489 
Regulatory scaling factor 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
16,485 
– 
16,485  
17,385 
Other assets 
29,753 
141% 
n.a. 
n.a. 
41,840 
41,840  
38,053 
Total credit risk 
$2,602,541 
17% $
87,296 $296,492 $60,354 $444,142  $ 448,821 
Market risk 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Interest rate 
 
 $
2,760 
11,620 
– 
14,380  $
7,841 
Equity 
 
 
1,822 
2,356 
– 
4,178  
3,628 
Foreign exchange 
 
 
2,524 
559 
– 
3,083  
2,917 
Commodities 
 
 
692 
70 
– 
762  
287 
Specific risk 
 
 
5,532 
2,069 
– 
7,601  
5,985 
Incremental risk charge 
 
 
– 
4,802 
– 
4,802  
6,716 
Total market risk 
 
 $
13,330 $ 21,476 $
– $ 34,806  $
27,374 
Operational risk 
 
 $
73,593 
– 
n.a. $ 73,593  $
70,047 
Total risk-weighted assets 
$2,602,541 
 $ 174,219 $317,968 $60,354 $552,541  $ 546,242 
(1) 
Total exposure represents EAD which is the expected gross exposure upon the default of an obligor. This amount is before any allowance against impaired loans or 
partial write-offs and does not reflect the impact of credit risk mitigation and collateral held. 
(2) 
Represents the average of counterparty risk weights within a particular category. 
n.a. 
not applicable 
2021 vs. 2020 
During the year, RWA was up $6 billion, mainly reflecting business growth in wholesale lending, including loan underwriting 
commitments, client-driven trading activity, residential mortgages and personal lending. These factors were partially offset by 
the net impact of models and methodology updates, the impact of foreign exchange translation and net credit migration in 
wholesale and retail portfolios. The models and methodology updates mainly include recalibration of the probability of default 
parameters in our wholesale portfolio, partially offset by an increase in SVaR multipliers reflecting the unwinding of temporary 
measures introduced by OSFI in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and transitional methodology changes to the securitization 
framework. The impact of foreign exchange translation on RWA is largely mitigated with economic hedges in our CET1 ratio. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
105 
 

Selected capital management activity 
Selected capital management activity 
Table 68  
 
For the year ended October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except number of shares) 
Issuance or 
redemption date 
Number of 
shares (000s) 
Amount 
Tier 1 capital 
 
 
 
Common shares activity 
 
 
 
Issued in connection with share-based 
compensation plans (1) 
 
1,326 
$
100 
Issuance of LRCN Series 2 (2), (3), (4) 
November 2, 2020 
1,250 
1,250 
Redemption of preferred shares, Series BK (3), (4) 
May 24, 2021 
(29,000) 
(725) 
Issuance of LRCN Series 3 (2), (3), (4) 
June 8, 2021 
1,000 
1,000 
Redemption of preferred shares, Series BM (3), (4) 
August 24, 2021 
(30,000) 
(750) 
Tier 2 capital 
 
 
 
Redemption of January 20, 2026 subordinated 
debentures (4), (5) 
January 20, 2021 
 
$(1,500) 
Issuance of January 28, 2033 subordinated 
debentures (4), (5) 
January 28, 2021 
 
1,000 
Redemption of September 29, 2026 subordinated 
debentures (4), (5) 
September 29, 2021 
 
(1,000) 
Issuance of November 3, 2031 subordinated 
debentures (4), (5) 
October 14, 2021 
 
1,750 
(1) 
Amounts include cash received for stock options exercised during the period and fair value adjustments to stock options. 
(2) 
For the LRCNs, the number of shares represent the number of notes issued. 
(3) 
For further details, refer to Note 19 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
(4) 
NVCC instruments. 
(5) 
For further details, refer to Note 18 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
On February 27, 2020, we announced a normal course issuer bid (NCIB) to purchase up to 20 million of our common shares. This 
NCIB expired on March 1, 2021, with 0.4 million common shares repurchased and cancelled at a cost of $39 million. In accordance 
with OSFI’s announcement on March 13, 2020 of its expectation that share buybacks be stopped, we ceased the repurchase of our 
common shares effective March 13, 2020. 
As at October 31, 2021, we did not have an active NCIB. When we do have an active NCIB, we determine the amount and 
timing of purchases under an NCIB, subject to prior consultation with OSFI. Purchases may be made through the TSX, the NYSE 
and other designated exchanges and alternative Canadian trading systems. The price paid for repurchased shares is the 
prevailing market price at the time of acquisition. 
On November 2, 2020, we issued $1,250 million of LRCN Series 2, at a price per note of $1,000. The LRCN Series 2 bear interest 
at a fixed rate of 4.0% per annum until February 24, 2026, and thereafter at a rate per annum, reset every fifth year, equal to the 
5-Year Government of Canada Yield plus 3.617% until maturity on February 24, 2081. 
On January 20, 2021, we redeemed all $1,500 million of our outstanding NVCC 3.31% subordinated debentures due on 
January 20, 2026 for 100% of their principal amount plus interest accrued to, but excluding, the redemption date. 
On January 28, 2021, we issued $1,000 million of NVCC subordinated debentures. The notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 
1.67% per annum until January 28, 2028, and at the three-month Canadian Dollar Offered Rate plus 0.55% thereafter until their 
maturity on January 28, 2033. 
On May 24, 2021, we redeemed all 29 million of our issued and outstanding Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred 
Shares Series BK at a price of $25 per share. 
On June 8, 2021, we issued $1,000 million of LRCN Series 3, at a price per note of $1,000. The LRCN Series 3 bear interest at a 
fixed rate of 3.65% per annum until November 24, 2026, and thereafter at a rate per annum, reset every fifth year, equal to the 
5-Year Government of Canada Yield plus 2.665% until maturity on November 24, 2081. 
On August 24, 2021, we redeemed all 30 million of our issued and outstanding Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First 
Preferred Shares Series BM at a price of $25 per share. 
On September 29, 2021, we redeemed all $1,000 million of our outstanding NVCC 3.45% subordinated debentures due on 
September 29, 2026 for 100% of their principal amount plus interest accrued to, but excluding, the redemption date. 
On October 14, 2021, we issued $1,750 million of NVCC subordinated debentures. The notes bear interest at a fixed rate of 
2.14% per annum until November 3, 2026, and at the three-month Canadian Dollar Offered Rate plus 0.61% thereafter until their 
maturity on November 3, 2031. 
On November 5, 2021, we issued 750 thousand of Non-Cumulative 5-Year Fixed Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BT to 
certain institutional investors at a price of $1,000 per share. 
Dividends 
Our common share dividend policy reflects our earnings outlook, payout ratio objective and the need to maintain adequate 
levels of capital to support business plans. In 2021, our dividend payout ratio was 39%. Common share dividends paid during the 
year were $6 billion. In accordance with OSFI’s announcement on March 13, 2020 of its expectation that all banks should not 
increase their dividend payment, we did not increase our dividend payments in fiscal 2021. OSFI lifted this restriction on 
November 4, 2021. 
106
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Selected share data (1) 
Table 69  
 
2021 
 
2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except number of shares 
and as otherwise noted) 
Number of 
shares (000s) 
Amount 
Dividends
declared
per share  
Number of 
shares (000s) 
Amount 
Dividends 
declared 
per share 
Common shares issued 
1,425,187 
$17,728 
$
4.32  
1,423,861 
$ 17,628 
$
4.29 
Treasury shares – common shares (2) 
(662) 
(73) 
  
(1,388) 
(129) 
 
Common shares outstanding 
1,424,525 
$17,655 
  
1,422,473 
$ 17,499 
 
Stock options and awards 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Outstanding 
7,653 
 
  
7,735 
 
 
Exercisable 
3,273 
 
  
3,314 
 
 
Available for grant 
5,847 
 
  
7,082 
 
 
First preferred shares issued 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Non-cumulative Series AZ (3), (4) 
20,000 
$
500 
$
0.93  
20,000 
$
500 
$
0.93 
Non-cumulative Series BB (3), (4) 
20,000 
500 
0.91  
20,000 
500 
0.91 
Non-cumulative Series BD (3), (4) 
24,000 
600 
0.80  
24,000 
600 
0.85 
Non-cumulative Series BF (3), (4) 
12,000 
300 
0.75  
12,000 
300 
0.90 
Non-cumulative Series BH (4) 
6,000 
150 
1.23  
6,000 
150 
1.23 
Non-cumulative Series BI (4) 
6,000 
150 
1.23  
6,000 
150 
1.23 
Non-cumulative Series BJ (4) 
6,000 
150 
1.31  
6,000 
150 
1.31 
Non-cumulative Series BK (3), (4), (5) 
– 
– 
0.69  
29,000 
725 
1.38 
Non-cumulative Series BM (3), (4), (5) 
– 
– 
1.03  
30,000 
750 
1.38 
Non-cumulative Series BO (3), (4) 
14,000 
350 
1.20  
14,000 
350 
1.20 
Non-cumulative Series C-2 (6) 
15 
23 
US$ 67.50  
15 
23 
US$ 67.50 
Other equity instruments issued 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Limited recourse capital notes 
Series 1 (3), (4), (7), (8) 
1,750 
1,750 
4.50%  
1,750 
1,750 
4.50% 
Limited recourse capital notes 
Series 2 (3), (4), (7), (8) 
1,250 
1,250 
4.00%  
– 
– 
– 
Limited recourse capital notes 
Series 3 (3), (4), (7), (8) 
1,000 
1,000 
3.65%  
– 
– 
– 
Preferred shares and other equity 
instruments issued 
112,015 
$ 6,723 
  
168,765 
$
5,948 
 
Treasury instruments – preferred shares 
and other equity instruments (2) 
(164) 
(39) 
  
(2) 
(3) 
 
Preferred shares and other equity 
instruments outstanding 
111,851 
$ 6,684 
  
168,763 
$
5,945 
 
Dividends on common shares 
 
$ 6,158 
  
 
$
6,111 
 
Dividends on preferred shares and 
distributions on other equity 
instruments (9) 
 
257 
  
 
268 
 
(1) 
For further details about our capital management activity, refer to Note 19 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
(2) 
Positive amounts represent a short position and negative amounts represent a long position. 
(3) 
Dividend rate will reset every five years. 
(4) 
NVCC instruments. 
(5) 
On May 24, 2021, we redeemed all 29 million of our issued and outstanding Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BK at a price of $25 per share. 
On August 24, 2021, we redeemed all 30 million of our issued and outstanding Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BM at a price of $25 per 
share. 
(6) 
Represents 615,400 depositary shares relating to preferred shares Series C-2. Each depositary share represents one-fortieth interest in a share of Series C-2. 
(7) 
For LRCNs, the number of shares represent the number of notes issued and the dividends declared per share represent the annual interest rate percentage applicable to 
the notes issued as at the reporting date.  
(8) 
In connection with the issuance of LRCN Series 1, on July 28, 2020, we issued $1,750 million of First Preferred Shares Series BQ (Series BQ); in connection with the issuance 
of LRCN Series 2, on November 2, 2020, we issued $1,250 million of First Preferred Shares Series BR (Series BR); and in connection with the issuance of LRCN Series 3, on 
June 8, 2021, we issued $1,000 million of First Preferred Shares Series BS (Series BS). The Series BQ, BR and BS preferred shares were issued at a price of $1,000 per share 
and were issued to a consolidated trust to be held as trust assets in connection with the LRCN structure. For further details, refer to Note 19 of our 2021 Annual 
Consolidated Financial Statements. 
(9) 
Excludes distributions to non-controlling interests. 
As at November 26, 2021, the number of outstanding common shares was 1,424,669,359, net of treasury shares held of 609,742, 
and the number of stock options and awards was 7,549,006. 
NVCC provisions require the conversion of the capital instrument into a variable number of common shares in the event that 
OSFI deems a bank to be non-viable or a federal or provincial government in Canada publicly announces that a bank has 
accepted or agreed to accept a capital injection. If a NVCC trigger event were to occur, our NVCC capital instruments as at 
October 31, 2021, which were the preferred shares Series AZ, BB, BD, BF, BH, BI, BJ, BO, LRCN Series 1, LRCN Series 2, LRCN Series 3 
and subordinated debentures due on January 27, 2026, July 25, 2029, December 23, 2029, June 30, 2030, January 28, 2033, and 
November 3, 2031 would be converted into common shares pursuant to an automatic conversion formula with a conversion price 
based on the greater of: (i) a contractual floor price of $5.00, and (ii) the current market price of our common shares at the time 
of the trigger event (10-day weighted average). Based on a floor price of $5.00 and including an estimate for accrued dividends 
and interest, these NVCC capital instruments would convert into a maximum of 4,057 million common shares, in aggregate, which 
would represent a dilution impact of 74.01% based on the number of common shares outstanding as at October 31, 2021. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
107 
 

Attributed capital 
Our methodology for allocating capital to our business segments is based on the Basel III regulatory capital requirements, with 
the exception of Insurance. For Insurance, the allocation of capital is based on fully diversified economic capital. Risk-based 
capital attribution provides a uniform base for performance measurement among business segments, which compares to our 
overall corporate return objective and facilitates management decisions in resource allocation in conjunction with other factors. 
The calculation and attribution of capital involves a number of assumptions and judgments by management which are 
monitored to ensure that the regulatory capital framework remains comprehensive and consistent. The models are benchmarked 
to leading industry practices via participation in surveys, reviews of methodologies and ongoing interaction with external risk 
management industry professionals. 
For additional information on the risks highlighted below, refer to the Risk management section. 
Royal Bank of
Canada
Personal &
Commercial
Banking
Wealth
Management
Insurance
Investor &
Treasury Services
Capital Markets
RWA (C$ millions) (1)
Credit 
$444,142
Market 
 34,806
Operational 
73,593
                                    
                                     
Attributed capital (1)
Credit 
70%
Market  
–
Operational 
12
Goodwill                 
and other 
intangibles             18
Other (2) 
–
Attributed capital (1)
Credit 
65%
Market 
  5
Operational 
11
Goodwill
and other 
intangibles 
17
Other (2) 
 2
RWA (C$ millions) (1)
Credit 
$169,063
Market 
377
Operational 
28,921
                       $198,361
RWA (C$ millions) (1)
Credit 
$80,119
Market 
444
Operational 
20,188
                        $100,751
RWA (C$ millions) (1)
Credit 
$15,278
Market 
1,811
Operational 
4,619
                          $21,708
RWA (C$ millions) (1)
Credit 
$155,815
Market 
30,838
Operational 
19,298
                        $205,951
Attributed capital (1)
Credit 
47%
Market  
–
Operational 
     12
Goodwill                 
and other 
intangibles            41
Other (2) 
–
Attributed capital (1)
Based on Economic
Capital:
Credit 
11%
Market                    12 
Operational 
8
Goodwill
and other 
intangibles 
10
Other (2) 
59
Attributed capital (1)
Credit 
58%
Market  
10
Operational 
15
Goodwill
and other 
intangibles 
17
Other (2) 
–
Attributed capital (1)
Credit 
74%
Market  
 11
Operational 
8
Goodwill
and other 
intangibles 
  7
Other (2) 
  –
RWA (C$ millions) (1), (3)
Credit 
$13,772
Market 
–
Operational 
–
                          $13,772
$552,541
 
(1) 
RWA amount represents period-end spot balances. Attributed Capital represents average balances. 
(2) 
Other includes (a) non-Insurance segments: equity required to underpin Basel III regulatory capital deductions other than Goodwill and other intangibles as well as 
capital modifications for expected loss provisioning and (b) Insurance segment: equity required to underpin risks associated with business, fixed assets and insurance 
risks. 
(3) 
Insurance RWA represents our investments in the insurance subsidiaries capitalized at the regulatory prescribed rate as required under OSFI CAR guideline. 
Other considerations affecting capital 
Capital treatment for equity investments in other entities is determined by a combination of accounting and regulatory 
guidelines based on the size or nature of the investment. Three broad approaches apply as follows: 
•
Consolidation: entities which we control are consolidated on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
•
Deduction: certain holdings are deducted from our regulatory capital. These include all unconsolidated “substantial 
investments,” as defined by the Bank Act (Canada) in the capital of financial institutions, as well as all investments in 
insurance subsidiaries. 
•
Risk-weighting: equity investments that are not deducted from capital are risk-weighted at a prescribed rate for 
determination of capital charges. 
Regulatory capital approach for securitization exposures 
Our securitization regulatory capital approach reflects Chapter 7 of OSFI’s CAR guidelines. For our securitization exposures, we 
use an internal assessment approach (IAA) for exposures related to our ABCP business, and as per regulatory guidelines for 
other securitization exposures we use a combination of approaches including an external ratings based approach, an IRB 
approach and a standardized approach. 
While our IAA rating methodologies are based in large part on criteria that are published by External Credit Assessment 
Institutions (ECAIs) such as S&P and therefore are similar to the methodologies used by these institutions, they are not identical. 
Our ratings process includes a comparison of the available credit enhancement in a securitization structure to a stressed level of 
projected losses. The stress level used is determined by the desired risk profile of the transaction. As a result, we stress the cash 
flows of a given transaction at a higher level in order to achieve a higher rating. Conversely, transactions that only pass lower 
stress levels achieve lower ratings. 
108
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Most of the other securitization exposures (non-ABCP) carry external ratings and we use the external rating for determining 
the proper capital allocation for these positions. We periodically compare our own ratings to ECAIs ratings to ensure that the 
ratings provided by ECAIs are reasonable. 
GRM is responsible for providing risk assessments for capital purposes in respect of all our banking book exposures. GRM is 
independent of the business originating the securitization exposures and performs its own analysis, sometimes in conjunction 
with but always independent of the applicable business. GRM has developed asset class specific criteria guidelines which 
provide the rating methodologies for each asset class. The guidelines are reviewed periodically and are subject to the ratings 
replication process mandated by Pillar I of the Basel rules. 
Regulatory developments 
Basel III reforms 
On March 11, 2021, OSFI launched industry consultations on the adoption of the BCBS Basel III reforms into its existing Capital 
Adequacy Requirements, Leverage Requirements and Liquidity Adequacy Requirements Guidelines and related Pillar 3 disclosure 
requirements. While adopting the international standards, OSFI is also tailoring requirements for the Canadian market. On 
November 29, 2021, OSFI announced a one quarter implementation delay of its adoption timeline for these reforms to April 30, 
2023. 
On June 18, 2021, OSFI launched an industry consultation on proposed regulatory changes to the treatment of credit valuation 
adjustments (CVA) and market risk hedges of other valuation adjustments of over-the-counter derivatives referred to as XVA. The 
proposed changes are a continuation of OSFI’s aforementioned industry consultation announced in March 2021 to incorporate 
the latest and final round of Basel III reforms into its capital, leverage and related disclosure guidelines for banks. These revised 
guidelines will be effective in Q1 2024. 
On November 11, 2021, BCBS finalized the disclosure requirements for the Minimum capital requirements for market risk 
standards published in January 2019. OSFI has not yet released their disclosure requirements; however, OSFI requires 
implementation of the Minimum capital requirements for market risk standards in Q1 2024. 
We expect to continue to engage with OSFI on the domestic implementation of the Basel III reforms and are taking 
appropriate steps to ensure required adoption readiness based on guidance provided to date. 
Global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) 
On August 13, 2021, OSFI released revised G-SIB disclosure requirements which take into consideration the 2022 revised G-SIB 
assessment methodology incorporating a new trading volume indicator and inclusion of insurance activities for certain 
indicators. The new disclosure requirements are effective for us in Q1 2022 and we are well-positioned to comply with the new 
requirements. In addition, we are currently assessing the impact of the revised G-SIB framework and we do not anticipate any 
material impact to our current G-SIB surcharge loss absorbency requirement of 1%. 
On November 9, 2021, the BCBS finalized a technical amendment to the G-SIB methodology to replace the existing three-year 
review cycle requirement with one of ongoing monitoring and review. BCBS will consider updating the G-SIB methodology only if 
monitoring findings suggest material unintended consequences or deficiencies. 
Accounting and control matters 
Critical accounting policies and estimates 
Application of critical accounting policies, judgments, estimates and assumptions 
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain of 
these policies and related estimates are recognized as critical because they require us to make particularly subjective or 
complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain and significantly different amounts could be reported under 
different conditions or using different assumptions. The COVID-19 pandemic has continued to evolve and the economic 
environment in which we operate could continue to be subject to sustained uncertainty, which could continue to impact our 
financial results. While the global economic recovery has continued, momentum has waned amid ongoing uncertainty regarding 
the extent and duration of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to monitor and assess the impacts of the COVID-19 
pandemic on our critical accounting judgments, estimates and assumptions. For further information, refer to our 2021 Annual 
Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Our critical accounting judgments, estimates and assumptions relate to the fair value of financial instruments, allowance for 
credit losses, goodwill and other intangible assets, employee benefits, consolidation, derecognition of financial assets, 
application of the effective interest method, provisions, insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities, and income taxes. Our 
critical accounting policies and estimates have been reviewed and approved by our Audit Committee, in consultation with 
management, as part of their review and approval of our significant accounting policies, judgments, estimates and assumptions. 
Changes in accounting policies 
During the first quarter of 2021, we adopted the revised Conceptual Framework, which replaces the previous version of the 
Conceptual Framework issued in 2010. The Conceptual Framework is not a standard, and does not override the concepts or 
requirements in any standard. It may be used to develop consistent accounting policies where there is no applicable standard in 
place. The revisions include a few new concepts, updated definitions and recognition criteria for assets and liabilities and 
clarifies some important concepts. These amendments had no material impact on our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial 
Statements. 
During the first quarter of 2021, we early adopted the Phase 2 amendments to IFRS 9 Financial Instruments, IAS 39 Financial 
Instruments: Recognition and Measurement, IFRS 7 Financial Instruments: Disclosures, IFRS 4 Insurance contracts, and IFRS 16 
Leases (the Amendments) in response to the market transition away from interbank offered rates (IBORs) to alternative 
benchmark rates (ABRs) as part of the IBOR reform (the Reform). Refer to Note 2 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial 
Statements for details of these changes. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
109 
 

Fair value of financial instruments 
The fair value of a financial instrument is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an 
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We determine fair value by incorporating factors that 
market participants would consider in setting a price, including commonly accepted valuation approaches. 
We give priority to third-party pricing services and valuation techniques with the highest and most consistent accuracy. The 
level of accuracy is determined over time by comparing third-party price values to traders’ or system values, other pricing 
service values and, when available, actual trade data. Other valuation techniques are used when a price or quote is not available. 
Some valuation processes use models to determine fair value. We have a systematic and consistent approach to control the use 
of models. 
In determining fair value, a hierarchy is used which prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques. The fair value hierarchy 
gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs. Fair 
values established based on this hierarchy require the use of observable market data whenever available. Level 1 inputs are 
unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that we have the ability to access at the 
measurement date. Level 2 inputs include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for 
identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, and model inputs that are either observable, or can be 
corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities. Level 3 inputs include one or 
more inputs that are unobservable and significant to the fair value of the asset or liability. Unobservable inputs are used to 
measure fair value to the extent that observable inputs are not available at the measurement date. The availability of inputs for 
valuation may affect the selection of valuation techniques. The classification of a financial instrument in the fair value hierarchy 
for disclosure purposes is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the measurement of fair value. 
Where observable prices or inputs are not available, management judgment is required to determine fair values by 
assessing other relevant sources of information such as historical data, proxy information from similar transactions, and through 
extrapolation and interpolation techniques. For more complex or illiquid instruments, significant judgment is required to 
determine the model used, select the model inputs, and in some cases, apply valuation adjustments to the model value or quoted 
price for inactively traded financial instruments. The selection of model inputs may be subjective and the inputs may be 
unobservable. Unobservable inputs are inherently uncertain as there is little or no market data available from which to 
determine the level at which the transaction would occur under normal business circumstances. Appropriate parameter 
uncertainty and market risk valuation adjustments for such inputs and other model risk valuation adjustments are assessed in all 
such instances. 
Valuation adjustments may be subjective as they require significant judgment in the input selection, such as the probability 
of default and recovery rate, and are intended to arrive at a fair value that is determined based on assumptions that market 
participants would use in pricing the financial instrument. The realized price for a transaction may be different from its recorded 
value that was previously estimated using management judgment, and may therefore impact unrealized gains and losses 
recognized in Non-interest income – Trading revenue or Other. 
For further information on the fair value of financial instruments, refer to Notes 2 and 3 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated 
Financial Statements. 
Allowance for credit losses 
An allowance for credit losses (ACL) is established for all financial assets, except for financial assets classified or designated as 
FVTPL and equity securities designated as FVOCI, which are not subject to impairment assessment. Assets subject to impairment 
assessment include certain loans, debt securities, interest-bearing deposits with banks, customers’ liability under acceptances, 
accounts and accrued interest receivable, and finance and operating lease receivables. Off-balance sheet items subject to 
impairment assessment include financial guarantees and undrawn loan commitments. 
We measure the ACL on each balance sheet date according to a three-stage expected credit loss impairment model: 
•
Performing financial assets 
•
Stage 1 – From initial recognition of a financial asset to the date on which the asset has experienced a significant 
increase in credit risk relative to its initial recognition, a loss allowance is recognized equal to the credit losses 
expected to result from defaults occurring over the 12 months following the reporting date. 
•
Stage 2 – Following a significant increase in credit risk relative to the initial recognition of the financial asset, a loss 
allowance is recognized equal to the credit losses expected over the remaining lifetime of the asset. 
•
Impaired financial assets 
•
Stage 3 – When a financial asset is considered to be credit-impaired, a loss allowance is recognized equal to credit 
losses expected over the remaining lifetime of the asset. Interest income is calculated based on the carrying 
amount of the asset, net of the loss allowance, rather than on its gross carrying amount. 
The ACL is a discounted probability-weighted estimate of the cash shortfalls expected to result from defaults over the relevant 
time horizon. For loan commitments, credit loss estimates consider the portion of the commitment that is expected to be drawn 
over the relevant time period. For financial guarantees, credit loss estimates are based on the expected payments required under 
the guarantee contract. For finance lease receivables, credit loss estimates are based on cash flows consistent with the cash 
flows used in measuring the lease receivable. 
The ACL represents an unbiased estimate of expected credit losses on our financial assets as at the balance sheet date. 
Judgment is required in making assumptions and estimations when calculating the ACL, including movements between the three 
stages, the inclusion of forward looking information and the application of expert credit judgment. The underlying assumptions 
and estimates may result in changes to the provisions from period to period that significantly affect our results of operations. 
For further information on allowance for credit losses, refer to Notes 2, 4 and 5 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial 
Statements. 
Goodwill and other intangible assets 
We allocate goodwill to groups of cash-generating units (CGU). Goodwill is not amortized and is tested for impairment on an 
annual basis, or more frequently if there are objective indications of impairment. We test for impairment by comparing the 
recoverable amount of a CGU with its carrying amount. 
110
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

We estimate the value in use and fair value less costs of disposal of our CGUs primarily using a discounted cash flow method 
which incorporates each CGU’s internal forecasts of revenues and expenses. Significant management judgment is applied in the 
determination of expected future cash flows (uncertainty in timing and amount), discount rates (based on CGU-specific risks) 
and terminal growth rates. CGU-specific risks include country risk, business/operational risk, geographic risk (including political 
risk, devaluation risk and government regulation), currency risk and price risk (including product pricing risk and inflation). If the 
future cash flows and other assumptions in future periods deviate significantly from the current amounts used in our impairment 
testing, the value of our goodwill could become impaired. 
We assess for indicators of impairment of our other intangible assets at each reporting period. If there is an indication that 
an asset may be impaired, an impairment test is performed by comparing the carrying amount of the intangible asset to its 
recoverable amount. Where it is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of an individual asset, we estimate the 
recoverable amount of the CGU to which the asset belongs. Significant judgment is applied in estimating the useful lives and 
recoverable amounts of our intangible assets and assessing whether certain events or circumstances constitute objective 
evidence of impairment. We do not have any intangible assets with indefinite lives. 
For further details, refer to Notes 2 and 10 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Employee benefits 
We sponsor a number of benefit programs for eligible employees, including registered pension plans, supplemental pension 
plans, health, dental, disability and life insurance plans. 
The calculation of defined benefit expenses and obligations depends on various assumptions such as discount rates, 
healthcare cost trend rates, projected salary increases, retirement age, and mortality and termination rates. Discount rates are 
determined using a yield curve based on spot rates from high quality corporate bonds. All other assumptions are determined by 
us and are reviewed by the actuaries. Actual experience that differs from the actuarial assumptions will affect the amounts of 
benefit obligations and remeasurements that we recognize. The weighted average assumptions used and the sensitivity of key 
assumptions are presented in Note 16 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Consolidation of structured entities 
Subsidiaries are those entities, including structured entities, over which we have control. We control an entity when we are 
exposed, or have rights, to variable returns from our involvement with the entity and have the ability to affect those returns 
through our power over the investee. We have power over an entity when we have existing rights that give us the current ability 
to direct the activities that most significantly affect the entity’s returns (relevant activities). Power may be determined on the 
basis of voting rights or, in the case of structured entities, other contractual arrangements. 
We are not deemed to control an entity when we exercise power over an entity as the agent of a third party or parties. In 
determining whether we are acting as an agent, we consider the overall relationship between us, the investee and other parties 
to the arrangement with respect to the following factors: (i) the scope of our decision-making power; (ii) the rights held by other 
parties; (iii) the remuneration to which we are entitled; and (iv) our exposure to variability of returns. 
The determination of control is based on the current facts and circumstances and is continuously assessed. In some 
circumstances, different factors and conditions may indicate that various parties control an entity depending on whether those 
factors and conditions are assessed in isolation or in totality. Significant judgment is applied in determining whether we control 
an entity, specifically, assessing whether we have substantive decision-making rights over the relevant activities and whether we 
are exercising our power as a principal or an agent. 
We consolidate all subsidiaries from the date control is transferred to us, and cease consolidation when an entity is no 
longer controlled by us. Our consolidation conclusions affect the classification and amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and 
expenses reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements. 
For further details, refer to Note 7 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Derecognition of financial assets 
We periodically enter into transactions in which we transfer financial assets such as loans or mortgage-backed securities to 
structured entities or trusts that issue securities to investors. We derecognize the assets when our contractual rights to the cash 
flows from the assets have expired; when we retain the rights to receive the cash flows but assume an obligation to pay those 
cash flows to a third party subject to certain pass-through requirements; or when we transfer our contractual rights to receive 
the cash flows and substantially all of the risks and rewards of the assets have been transferred. When we retain substantially all 
of the risks and rewards of the transferred assets, the transferred assets are not derecognized from our Consolidated Balance 
Sheets and are accounted for as secured financing transactions. When we neither retain nor transfer substantially all risks and 
rewards of ownership of the assets, we derecognize the assets if control over the assets is relinquished. If we retain control over 
the transferred assets, we continue to recognize the transferred assets to the extent of our continuing involvement. 
Management’s judgment is applied in determining whether we have transferred or retained substantially all risk and rewards of 
ownership of the transferred financial asset. 
The majority of assets transferred under repurchase agreements, securities lending agreements, and in our Canadian 
residential mortgage securitization transactions do not qualify for derecognition. As a result, we continue to record the 
associated transferred assets on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and no gains or losses are recognized for those securitization 
activities. Otherwise, a gain or loss is recognized on securitization by comparing the carrying amount of the transferred asset 
with its fair value at the date of the transfer. For further information on derecognition of financial assets, refer to Notes 2 and 6 of 
our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Application of the effective interest method 
Interest is recognized in Interest income and Interest expense in the Consolidated Statements of Income generally for all interest 
bearing financial instruments using the effective interest method. The effective interest rate is the rate that discounts estimated 
future cash flows over the expected life of the financial asset or liability to the net carrying amount upon initial recognition. 
Significant judgment is applied in determining the effective interest rate due to uncertainty in the timing and amounts of future 
cash flows. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
111 
 

Provisions 
Provisions are liabilities of uncertain timing or amount and are recognized when we have a present legal or constructive 
obligation as a result of a past event, it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation, and a 
reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. Provisions are measured as the best estimate of the consideration 
required to settle the present obligation at the reporting date. Significant judgment is required in determining whether a present 
obligation exists and in estimating the probability, timing and amount of any outflows. We record provisions related to litigation, 
asset retirement obligations and other items. 
The forward-looking nature of these estimates requires us to use a significant amount of judgment in projecting the timing 
and amount of future cash flows. We record our provisions on the basis of all available information at the end of the reporting 
period and make adjustments on a quarterly basis to reflect current expectations. Should actual results differ from our 
expectations, we may incur expenses in excess of the provisions recognized. 
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities 
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities represent current claims and estimates for future insurance policy benefits. 
Liabilities for life insurance contracts are determined using the Canadian Asset Liability Method, which incorporates 
assumptions for mortality, morbidity, policy lapses and surrenders, investment yields, policy dividends, operating and policy 
maintenance expenses, and provisions for adverse deviation. Key assumptions are reviewed annually and updated in response 
to actual experience and market conditions. Liabilities for property and casualty insurance represent estimated provisions for 
reported and unreported claims. Liabilities for life and property and casualty insurance are included in Insurance claims and 
policy benefit liabilities. Changes in Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities are included in the Insurance policyholder 
benefits, claims and acquisition expense in our Consolidated Statements of Income in the period in which the estimates change. 
Refer to Note 14 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. 
Income taxes 
We are subject to income tax laws in various jurisdictions where we operate, and the complex tax laws are potentially subject to 
different interpretations by us and the relevant taxation authority. Management’s judgment is applied in interpreting the relevant 
tax laws, in assessing the probability of acceptance of our tax positions by the relevant tax authorities and estimating the 
expected timing and amount of the provision for current and deferred income taxes. A deferred tax asset or liability is determined 
for each temporary difference based on the tax rates that are expected to be in effect in the period that the asset is realized or 
the liability is settled. Where the temporary differences will not reverse in the foreseeable future, no deferred tax amount is 
recognized. 
On a quarterly basis, we review whether it is probable that the benefits associated with our deferred tax assets will be 
realized, using both positive and negative evidence. Refer to Note 21 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements for 
further information. 
Future changes in accounting policy and disclosure 
IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts (IFRS 17) 
In May 2017, the IASB issued IFRS 17 to establish a comprehensive global insurance standard which provides guidance on the 
recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosures of insurance contracts. IFRS 17 requires entities to measure insurance 
contract liabilities at their current fulfillment values using one of three approaches. In June 2020, the IASB issued amendments to 
IFRS 17, including deferral of the effective date by two years. This new standard will be effective for us on November 1, 2023 and 
will be applied retrospectively with restatement of comparatives unless impracticable. We are currently assessing the impact of 
adopting this standard and the amendments on our Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Controls and procedures 
Disclosure controls and procedures 
Our disclosure controls and procedures are designed to provide reasonable assurance that information required to be disclosed 
by us in reports filed or submitted under Canadian and U.S. securities laws is recorded, processed, summarized and reported 
within the time periods specified under those laws and include controls and procedures that are designed to ensure that 
information is accumulated and communicated to management, including the President and Chief Executive Officer, and the 
Chief Financial Officer, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure. 
As of October 31, 2021, management evaluated, under the supervision of and with the participation of the President and Chief 
Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer, the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as defined under 
rules adopted by the U.S. SEC. Based on that evaluation, the President and Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer 
concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were effective as of October 31, 2021. 
Internal control over financial reporting 
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. Internal control 
over financial reporting is designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the 
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with IFRS. However, because of its inherent limitations, 
internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements on a timely basis. See Management’s Report on 
Internal Control over Financial Reporting and the Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm. 
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting during the year ended October 31, 2021 that have 
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting. 
112
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Related party transactions 
In the ordinary course of business, we provide normal banking services and operational services, and enter into other 
transactions with associated and other related corporations, including our joint venture entities, on terms similar to those 
offered to non-related parties. We grant loans to directors, officers and other employees at rates normally accorded to preferred 
clients. In addition, we offer deferred share and other plans to non-employee directors, executives and certain other key 
employees. For further information, refer to Notes 11 and 25 of our audited 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Supplementary information 
Selected annual information 
Table 70  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except per share amounts) 
2021 
2020 
2019 
Total revenue 
$
49,693 
$
47,181 
$
46,002 
Net income attributable to: 
 
 
 
Shareholders 
16,038 
11,432 
12,860 
Non-controlling interest 
12 
5 
11 
 
$
16,050 
$
11,437 
$
12,871 
Basic earnings per share 
$
11.08 
$
7.84 
$
8.78 
Diluted earnings per share 
11.06 
7.82 
8.75 
Dividends declared per common shares 
4.32 
4.29 
4.07 
Total assets 
$1,706,323 
$1,624,548 
$1,428,935 
Deposits 
1,100,831 
1,011,885 
886,005 
 
 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
113 
 

Net interest income on average assets and liabilities 
Table 71  
 
Average balances 
 
Interest 
 
Average rate 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts) (1) 
2021 
2020 
2019  
2021 
2020 
2019  
2021 
2020 
2019 
Assets 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Deposits with other banks 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Canada 
$
10,580 $
13,891 $
10,990  $
106 $
115 $
231  1.00% 
0.83% 
2.10% 
U.S. 
56,973 
36,008 
25,392  
63 
160 
505  
0.11 
0.44 
1.99 
Other International 
22,244 
22,202 
20,463  
136 
32 
(53)  
0.61 
0.14 
(0.26) 
 
89,797 
72,101 
56,845  
305 
307 
683  
0.34 
0.43 
1.20 
Securities 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Trading 
128,977 
131,685 
130,647  
3,736 
4,622 
4,573  
2.90 
3.51 
3.50 
Investment, net of applicable allowance 
131,612 
128,121 
97,764  
1,141 
1,866 
2,254  
0.87 
1.46 
2.31 
 
260,589 
259,806 
228,411  
4,877 
6,488 
6,827  
1.87 
2.50 
2.99 
Asset purchased under reverse repurchase 
agreements and securities borrowed 
317,997 
363,418 
346,173  
1,309 
4,668 
8,960  
0.41 
1.28 
2.59 
Loans (2) 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Canada 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Retail 
441,380 
404,051 
379,853  
13,658 
14,534 
15,352  
3.09 
3.60 
4.04 
Wholesale 
86,978 
93,238 
89,503  
3,557 
4,179 
4,988  
4.09 
4.48 
5.57 
 
528,358 
497,289 
469,356  
17,215 
18,713 
20,340  
3.26 
3.76 
4.33 
U.S. 
110,314 
111,931 
96,492  
2,880 
3,034 
3,099  
2.61 
2.71 
3.21 
Other International 
40,619 
37,985 
32,430  
1,559 
1,673 
1,424  
3.84 
4.40 
4.39 
 
679,291 
647,205 
598,278  
21,654 
23,420 
24,863  
3.19 
3.62 
4.16 
Total interest-earning assets 
1,347,674 
1,342,530 
1,229,707  
28,145 
34,883 
41,333  
2.09 
2.60 
3.36 
Non-interest-bearing deposits with other banks 
120,154 
72,698 
29,430  
– 
– 
–  
– 
– 
– 
Customers’ liability under acceptances 
19,410 
18,572 
17,447  
– 
– 
–  
– 
– 
– 
Other assets 
190,963 
202,893 
159,599  
– 
– 
–  
– 
– 
– 
Total assets 
$1,678,200 $ 1,636,700 $ 1,436,200  $ 28,145 $ 34,883 $ 41,333  1.68% 
2.13% 
2.88% 
Liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Deposits (3) 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Canada 
$ 626,549 $
612,675 $
555,467  $
4,700 $
7,378 $ 10,420  0.75% 
1.20% 
1.88% 
U.S. 
132,833 
105,892 
97,563  
231 
658 
1,524  
0.17 
0.62 
1.56 
Other International 
97,355 
93,597 
83,349  
517 
747 
1,044  
0.53 
0.80 
1.25 
 
856,737 
812,164 
736,379  
5,448 
8,783 
12,988  
0.64 
1.08 
1.76 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
33,566 
35,937 
34,799  
1,809 
2,200 
1,995  
5.39 
6.12 
5.73 
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase 
agreements and securities loaned 
275,870 
308,723 
262,929  
574 
2,622 
6,147  
0.21 
0.85 
2.34 
Subordinated debentures 
9,174 
9,518 
9,405  
179 
280 
365  
1.95 
2.94 
3.88 
Other interest-bearing liabilities 
23,486 
24,957 
16,496  
133 
163 
89  
0.57 
0.65 
0.54 
Total interest-bearing liabilities 
1,198,833 
1,191,299 
1,060,008  
8,143 
14,048 
21,584  
0.68 
1.18 
2.04 
Non-interest-bearing deposits 
202,316 
158,468 
133,702  
– 
– 
–  
– 
– 
– 
Acceptances 
19,516 
18,646 
17,473  
– 
– 
–  
– 
– 
– 
Other liabilities 
165,286 
183,355 
143,948  
– 
– 
–  
– 
– 
– 
Total liabilities 
$1,585,951 $ 1,551,768 $ 1,355,131  $
8,143 $ 14,048 $ 21,584  0.51% 
0.91% 
1.59% 
Equity 
$
92,250 $
84,925 $
81,052  
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a.  
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
Total liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
$1,678,200 $ 1,636,700 $ 1,436,200  $
8,143 $ 14,048 $ 21,584  0.49% 
0.86% 
1.50% 
Net interest income and margin 
$1,678,200 $ 1,636,700 $ 1,436,200  $ 20,002 $ 20,835 $ 19,749  1.19% 
1.27% 
1.38% 
Net interest income and margin (average earning 
assets, net) 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Canada 
$ 793,130 $
779,433 $
700,153  $ 13,947 $ 14,185 $ 14,375  1.76% 
1.82% 
2.05% 
U.S. 
349,840 
356,916 
329,655  
4,447 
4,959 
4,058  
1.27 
1.39 
1.23 
Other International 
204,706 
206,183 
199,898  
1,608 
1,691 
1,316  
0.79 
0.82 
0.66 
Total 
$1,347,676 $ 1,342,532 $ 1,229,706  $ 20,002 $ 20,835 $ 19,749  1.48% 
1.55% 
1.61% 
(1) 
Insurance segment assets and liabilities are included in Other assets and Other liabilities, respectively. 
(2) 
Interest income includes loan fees of $888 million (2020 – $797 million; 2019 – $672 million). 
(3) 
Deposits include personal chequing and savings deposits with average balances of $258 billion (2020 – $218 billion; 2019 – $189 billion), interest expense of $175 million 
(2020 – $498 million; 2019 – $1,051 million) and average rates of 0.07% (2020 – 0.2%; 2019 – 0.6%). Deposits also include term deposits with average balances of $437 billion 
(2020 – $443 billion; 2019 – $421 billion), interest expense of $4,487 million (2020 – $6,774 million; 2019 – $9,205 million) and average rates of 1.03% (2020 – 1.53%; 2019 – 
2.19%). 
n.a. 
not applicable 
114
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Change in net interest income 
Table 72  
 
2021 vs. 2020 
2020 vs. 2019 
 
Net change 
 
Increase (decrease) due 
to changes in 
  
Increase (decrease) due 
to changes in 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) (1) 
Average 
volume (2) 
Average 
rate (2) 
Net change  
Average 
volume (2) 
Average 
rate (2) 
Assets 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Deposits with other banks 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Canada (3) 
$
(27) 
$
18 
$
(9)  
$
61 
$
(177) 
$
(116) 
U.S. (3) 
93 
(190) 
(97)  
211 
(556) 
(345) 
Other international (3) 
– 
104 
104  
(5) 
90 
85 
Securities 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Trading 
(95) 
(791) 
(886)  
36 
13 
49 
Investment, net of applicable allowance 
51 
(776) 
(725)  
700 
(1,088) 
(388) 
Asset purchased under reverse repurchase agreements 
and securities borrowed 
(583) 
(2,776) 
(3,359)  
446 
(4,738) 
(4,292) 
Loans 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Canada 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Retail 
1,343 
(2,219) 
(876)  
978 
(1,796) 
(818) 
Wholesale 
(281) 
(341) 
(622)  
208 
(1,017) 
(809) 
U.S. 
(44) 
(110) 
(154)  
496 
(561) 
(65) 
Other international 
116 
(230) 
(114)  
244 
5 
249 
Total interest income 
$
573 
$ (7,311) 
$ (6,738)  
$ 3,375 
$
(9,825) 
$ (6,450) 
Liabilities 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Deposits 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Canada 
167 
(2,845) 
(2,678)  
1,073 
(4,115) 
(3,042) 
U.S. 
167 
(594) 
(427)  
130 
(996) 
(866) 
Other international 
30 
(260) 
(230)  
128 
(425) 
(297) 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
(145) 
(246) 
(391)  
65 
140 
205 
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase 
agreements and securities loaned 
(279) 
(1,769) 
(2,048)  
1,071 
(4,596) 
(3,525) 
Subordinated debentures 
(10) 
(91) 
(101)  
4 
(89) 
(85) 
Other interest-bearing liabilities 
(10) 
(20) 
(30)  
46 
28 
74 
Total interest expense 
$
(80) 
$ (5,825) 
$ (5,905)  
$ 2,517 
$ (10,053) 
$ (7,536) 
Net interest income 
$
653 
$ (1,486) 
$
(833)  
$
858 
$
228 
$
1,086 
(1) 
Insurance segment assets and liabilities are included in Other assets and Other liabilities, respectively. 
(2) 
Volume/rate variance is allocated on the percentage relationships of changes in balances and changes in rates to the total net change in net interest income. 
(3) 
Geographic classification for selected assets and liabilities is based on the domicile of the booking point of the subject assets and liabilities. 
Loans and acceptances by geography 
Table 73  
As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
2019 
2018 
2017 
Canada (1) 
 
 
 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
$ 354,169 
$ 319,287 
$ 287,767 
$ 265,831 
$ 255,799 
Personal 
78,232 
79,778 
81,547 
82,112 
82,022 
Credit cards 
17,235 
17,060 
19,617 
18,793 
17,491 
Small business (2) 
12,003 
5,742 
5,434 
4,866 
4,493 
Retail 
461,639 
421,867 
394,365 
371,602 
359,805 
Wholesale (2), (3) 
107,750 
106,283 
108,215 
99,530 
94,326 
 
$ 569,389 
$ 528,150 
$ 502,580 
$ 471,132 
$ 454,131 
U.S. (1) 
 
 
 
 
 
Retail 
35,601 
29,721 
24,850 
21,033 
18,100 
Wholesale (3) 
86,041 
85,947 
71,607 
67,894 
57,773 
 
121,642 
115,668 
96,457 
88,927 
75,873 
Other International (1) 
 
 
 
 
 
Retail 
6,358 
6,388 
6,871 
6,817 
7,265 
Wholesale (3) 
44,148 
35,039 
34,134 
28,516 
23,966 
 
50,506 
41,427 
41,005 
35,333 
31,231 
Total loans and acceptances 
$ 741,537 
$ 685,245 
$ 640,042 
$ 595,392 
$ 561,235 
Total allowance for credit losses 
(4,164) 
(5,746) 
(3,124) 
(2,933) 
(2,159) 
Total loans and acceptances, net of allowance for credit losses 
$ 737,373 
$ 679,499 
$ 636,918 
$ 592,459 
$ 559,076 
(1) 
Geographic information is based on residence of borrower. 
(2) 
Commencing Q2 2021, certain loans are now classified as Retail – Small business and were previously classified as Wholesale, reflecting an alignment with capital 
measurement and reporting. 
(3) 
Amounts by geography have been revised from those previously presented. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
115 
 

Loans and acceptances by portfolio and sector 
Table 74  
As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021 
2020 
2019 
2018 
2017 
Residential mortgages 
$ 380,332 
$ 342,597 
$ 308,091 
$ 282,471 
$ 270,348 
Personal 
93,441 
92,011 
92,250 
92,700 
92,294 
Credit cards 
17,822 
17,626 
20,311 
19,415 
18,035 
Small business (1) 
12,003 
5,742 
5,434 
4,866 
4,493 
Retail 
$ 503,598 
$ 457,976 
$ 426,086 
$ 399,452 
$ 385,170 
Agriculture 
9,250 
9,418 
8,951 
8,325 
7,397 
Automotive 
6,198 
8,361 
9,695 
8,761 
8,319 
Banking 
7,734 
8,189 
6,977 
7,620 
6,413 
Consumer discretionary 
14,806 
15,093 
16,448 
15,453 
14,428 
Consumer staples 
6,142 
6,021 
5,395 
4,505 
4,590 
Oil and gas 
5,283 
7,552 
8,126 
6,144 
5,599 
Financial services 
29,192 
22,153 
18,985 
15,567 
10,210 
Financing products 
10,273 
5,827 
6,368 
5,569 
4,475 
Forest products 
931 
1,120 
1,452 
1,101 
913 
Governments 
6,677 
10,409 
4,533 
4,363 
9,884 
Industrial products 
7,193 
6,825 
7,477 
7,615 
5,684 
Information technology 
3,569 
4,591 
4,562 
4,635 
4,086 
Investments 
19,392 
15,232 
14,352 
8,991 
8,871 
Mining and metals 
984 
1,044 
1,175 
1,301 
1,114 
Public works and infrastructure 
1,890 
1,868 
2,208 
2,311 
1,932 
Real estate and related 
66,798 
61,047 
54,353 
48,493 
43,694 
Other services 
20,550 
21,138 
21,086 
18,642 
16,640 
Telecommunication and media 
5,047 
4,851 
4,853 
7,018 
4,867 
Transportation 
6,251 
7,662 
5,539 
5,593 
5,391 
Utilities 
8,699 
8,241 
9,066 
8,382 
6,978 
Other sectors 
1,080 
627 
2,355 
5,551 
4,580 
Wholesale (1), (2) 
$ 237,939 
$ 227,269 
$ 213,956 
$ 195,940 
$ 176,065 
Total loans and acceptances 
$ 741,537 
$ 685,245 
$ 640,042 
$ 595,392 
$ 561,235 
Total allowance for credit losses 
(4,164) 
(5,746) 
(3,124) 
(2,933) 
(2,159) 
Total loans and acceptances, net of allowance for 
credit losses 
$ 737,373 
$ 679,499 
$ 636,918 
$ 592,459 
$ 559,076 
(1) 
Commencing Q2 2021, certain loans are now classified as Retail – Small business and were previously classified as Wholesale, reflecting an alignment with capital 
measurement and reporting. 
(2) 
Certain loan amounts by sector have been revised from those previously presented to align with our view of credit risk by industry. 
116
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Gross impaired loans by portfolio and geography 
Table 75  
As at October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts) 
2021  
2020 
2019 
2018 
2017 
Residential mortgages 
$
645  
$
638 
$
732 
$
725 
$
634 
Personal 
197  
212 
306 
302 
276 
Small business 
109  
90 
57 
44 
38 
Retail 
951  
940 
1,095 
1,071 
948 
Agriculture 
$
11  
$
70 
$
37 
$
29 
$
28 
Automotive 
8  
79 
28 
7 
29 
Banking 
–  
4 
10 
18 
26 
Consumer discretionary 
274  
281 
171 
138 
77 
Consumer staples 
32  
112 
51 
23 
55 
Oil and gas 
131  
552 
509 
230 
318 
Financial services 
77  
81 
81 
80 
113 
Financing products 
–  
– 
– 
– 
– 
Forest products 
4  
13 
35 
9 
7 
Governments 
25  
7 
5 
15 
8 
Industrial products 
35  
57 
92 
42 
34 
Information technology 
5  
14 
16 
2 
70 
Investments 
31  
47 
7 
8 
25 
Mining and metals 
3  
30 
1 
2 
3 
Public works and infrastructure 
6  
8 
12 
3 
4 
Real estate and related 
314  
395 
408 
290 
340 
Other services 
220  
251 
134 
73 
158 
Telecommunication and media 
6  
6 
12 
8 
12 
Transportation 
137  
148 
13 
58 
7 
Utilities 
–  
46 
211 
8 
10 
Other sectors 
32  
45 
35 
48 
48 
Wholesale 
1,351  
2,246 
1,868 
1,091 
1,372 
Acquired credit-impaired loans 
6  
9 
13 
21 
256 
Total GIL (1), (2) 
$
2,308  
$
3,195 
$
2,976 
$
2,183 
$
2,576 
Canada (3) 
  
 
 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
$
443  
$
425 
$
481 
$
431 
$
323 
Personal 
164  
177 
250 
248 
198 
Small business 
109  
90 
57 
44 
38 
Retail 
716  
692 
788 
723 
559 
Agriculture 
11  
69 
36 
29 
22 
Automotive 
5  
20 
18 
5 
4 
Banking 
–  
4 
10 
18 
26 
Consumer discretionary 
107  
117 
71 
62 
54 
Consumer staples 
25  
34 
24 
10 
10 
Oil and gas 
48  
90 
97 
38 
16 
Financial services 
–  
– 
– 
1 
3 
Financing products 
–  
– 
– 
– 
– 
Forest products 
4  
13 
9 
9 
7 
Governments 
25  
2 
5 
11 
2 
Industrial products 
31  
54 
48 
31 
25 
Information technology 
3  
3 
4 
1 
2 
Investments 
–  
– 
2 
– 
1 
Mining and metals 
3  
4 
1 
2 
3 
Public works and infrastructure 
5  
7 
10 
3 
4 
Real estate and related 
157  
233 
195 
134 
182 
Other services 
110  
85 
65 
24 
47 
Telecommunication and media 
5  
4 
11 
7 
10 
Transportation 
16  
15 
13 
11 
7 
Utilities 
–  
– 
59 
– 
1 
Other sectors 
–  
– 
– 
– 
– 
Wholesale 
555  
754 
678 
396 
426 
Total 
$
1,271  
$
1,446 
$
1,466 
$
1,119 
$
985 
U.S. (3) 
  
 
 
 
 
Retail 
$
23  
$
32 
$
36 
$
23 
$
59 
Wholesale 
412  
1,039 
869 
401 
736 
Total 
$
435  
$
1,071 
$
905 
$
424 
$
795 
Other International (3) 
  
 
 
 
 
Retail 
$
212  
$
216 
$
272 
$
327 
$
345 
Wholesale 
390  
462 
333 
313 
451 
Total 
$
602  
$
678 
$
605 
$
640 
$
796 
Total GIL (1), (2) 
$
2,308  
$
3,195 
$
2,976 
$
2,183 
$
2,576 
Allowance on impaired loans (4) 
(697)  
(949) 
(832) 
(700) 
(737) 
Net impaired loans 
$
1,611  
$
2,246 
$
2,144 
$
1,483 
$
1,839 
GIL as a % of loans and acceptances 
  
 
 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
0.17%  
0.19% 
0.24% 
0.26% 
0.23% 
Personal 
0.21%  
0.23% 
0.33% 
0.33% 
0.30% 
Small business 
0.91%  
1.56% 
1.05% 
0.90% 
0.85% 
Retail 
0.19%  
0.21% 
0.26% 
0.27% 
0.25% 
Wholesale 
0.57%  
0.99% 
0.88% 
0.57% 
0.92% 
Total 
0.31%  
0.47% 
0.46% 
0.37% 
0.46% 
Allowance on impaired loans as a % of GIL (4) 
30.21%  
29.71% 
27.96% 
32.08% 
28.61% 
(1) 
Effective November 1, 2017, the definition of gross impaired loans has been shortened for certain products to align with a definition of default of 90 days past due under 
IFRS 9. Past due loans greater than 90 days not included in impaired loans were $137 million in 2021 (2020 – $142 million; 2019 – $189 million; 2018 – $179 million; 2017 – 
$307 million). For further details, refer to Note 5 of our 2021 Annual Consolidated Financial Statements. 
(2) 
Effective November 1, 2017, GIL excludes $229 million of acquired credit impaired loans related to our acquisition of City National that have returned to performing status. 
(3) 
Geographic information is based on residence of borrower. 
(4) 
Effective November 1, 2017, represents Stage 3 ACL on loans, acceptances, and commitments under IFRS 9 and Allowances for impaired loans under IAS 39. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
117 
 

Provision for credit losses by portfolio and geography 
Table 76  
For the year ended October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts) 
2021  
2020 
2019 
2018 
2017 
Residential mortgages 
$
34  
$
28 
$
51 
$
51 
$
56 
Personal 
243  
376 
487 
462 
409 
Credit cards 
296  
484 
518 
468 
435 
Small business 
31  
49 
36 
30 
32 
Retail 
604  
937 
1,092 
1,011 
932 
Agriculture 
$
(5)  
$
14 
$
8 
$
1 
$
4 
Automotive 
(5)  
28 
10 
5 
14 
Banking 
–  
– 
– 
(1) 
3 
Consumer discretionary 
7  
98 
61 
81 
12 
Consumer staples 
(14)  
28 
33 
1 
6 
Oil and gas 
(51)  
305 
98 
1 
(28) 
Financial services 
2  
4 
– 
– 
(18) 
Financing products 
–  
– 
– 
– 
– 
Forest products 
(5)  
2 
9 
3 
3 
Governments 
2  
(2) 
6 
4 
1 
Industrial products 
2  
31 
104 
8 
11 
Information technology 
24  
(7) 
30 
(21) 
4 
Investments 
(3)  
7 
– 
3 
– 
Mining and metals 
(5)  
9 
– 
– 
(4) 
Public works and infrastructure 
2  
(9) 
57 
2 
1 
Real estate and related 
30  
54 
57 
13 
120 
Other services 
53  
89 
35 
22 
20 
Telecommunication and media 
9  
(3) 
7 
– 
8 
Transportation 
32  
8 
9 
32 
1 
Utilities 
(1)  
2 
70 
1 
5 
Other sectors 
(1)  
5 
5 
(8) 
53 
Wholesale 
73  
663 
599 
147 
216 
Acquired credit-impaired loans 
1  
– 
– 
2 
2 
Total PCL on impaired loans (1) 
$
678  
$
1,600 
$
1,691 
$
1,160 
$
1,150 
Canada (2) 
  
 
 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
$
24  
$
35 
$
32 
$
44 
$
33 
Personal 
254  
395 
488 
458 
413 
Credit cards 
288  
471 
505 
456 
426 
Small business 
31  
49 
36 
30 
32 
Retail 
597  
950 
1,061 
988 
904 
Agriculture 
(4)  
10 
8 
1 
2 
Automotive 
(5)  
17 
4 
1 
1 
Banking 
–  
– 
– 
(1) 
3 
Consumer discretionary 
11  
45 
24 
28 
20 
Consumer staples 
–  
8 
14 
2 
3 
Oil and gas 
(19)  
33 
34 
4 
(17) 
Financial services 
–  
1 
– 
– 
– 
Financing products 
–  
– 
– 
– 
– 
Forest products 
(5)  
2 
5 
3 
3 
Governments 
2  
(3) 
4 
1 
1 
Industrial products 
2  
12 
27 
6 
8 
Information technology 
2  
(2) 
28 
1 
1 
Investments 
–  
(2) 
– 
– 
– 
Mining and metals 
–  
– 
– 
– 
1 
Public works and infrastructure 
2  
1 
45 
1 
1 
Real estate and related 
26  
24 
53 
14 
43 
Other services 
62  
25 
29 
17 
15 
Telecommunication and media 
2  
(4) 
5 
– 
9 
Transportation 
10  
(6) 
9 
2 
2 
Utilities 
–  
1 
2 
– 
– 
Other sectors 
–  
1 
1 
– 
(1) 
Wholesale 
86  
163 
292 
80 
95 
Total 
$
683  
$
1,113 
$
1,353 
$
1,068 
$
999 
U.S. (2) 
  
 
 
 
 
Retail 
$
7  
$
5 
$
12 
$
4 
$
3 
Wholesale 
(10)  
377 
223 
64 
117 
Total 
$
(3)  
$
382 
$
235 
$
68 
$
120 
Other International (2) 
  
 
 
 
 
Retail 
$
–  
$
(18) 
$
19 
$
19 
$
25 
Wholesale 
(2)  
123 
84 
5 
6 
Total 
$
(2)  
$
105 
$
103 
$
24 
$
31 
Total PCL on impaired loans (1) 
$
678  
$
1,600 
$
1,691 
$
1,160 
$
1,150 
Total PCL on performing loans (3) 
(1,350)  
2,631 
200 
123 
– 
Total PCL on other financial assets 
(81)  
120 
(27) 
24 
 
Total PCL 
$
(753)  
$
4,351 
$
1,864 
$
1,307 
$
1,150 
PCL on loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances 
(0.10)%  
0.63% 
0.31% 
0.23% 
0.21% 
PCL on impaired loans as a % of average net loans and acceptances (1) 
0.10%  
0.24% 
0.27% 
0.20% 
0.21% 
(1) 
Effective November 1, 2017, represents Stage 3 PCL under IFRS 9 and PCL on impaired loans under IAS 39. 
(2) 
Geographic information is based on residence of borrower. 
(3) 
Effective November 1, 2017, represents Stage 1 and 2 PCL on loans, acceptances, and commitments under IFRS 9 and PCL for loans not yet identified as impaired under IAS 39. 
118
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Allowance on loans by portfolio and geography (1) 
Table 77  
As at and for the year ended October 31 (Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts) 
2021  
2020 
2019 
2018 
2017 
Allowance on loans at beginning of year 
$
6,115  
$
3,419 
$
3,088 
$
2,976 
$
2,326 
PCL 
(672)  
4,231 
1,891 
1,283 
1,150 
Write-offs by portfolio 
  
 
 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
(37)  
(44) 
(45) 
(51) 
(53) 
Personal 
(387)  
(545) 
(600) 
(552) 
(543) 
Credit cards 
(460)  
(617) 
(655) 
(599) 
(565) 
Small business 
(32)  
(38) 
(36) 
(35) 
(38) 
Retail 
$
(916)  
$ (1,244) 
$ (1,336) 
$ (1,237) 
$ (1,199) 
Wholesale 
$
(253)  
$
(437) 
$
(440) 
$
(207) 
$
(226) 
Total write-offs by portfolio 
$ (1,169)  
$ (1,681) 
$ (1,776) 
$ (1,444) 
$ (1,425) 
Recoveries by portfolio 
  
 
 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
$
10  
$
10 
$
8 
$
8 
$
8 
Personal 
140  
134 
126 
121 
116 
Credit cards 
163  
133 
137 
131 
131 
Small business 
9  
7 
8 
7 
9 
Retail 
$
322  
$
284 
$
279 
$
267 
$
264 
Wholesale 
$
53  
$
57 
$
43 
$
65 
$
66 
Total recoveries by portfolio 
$
375  
$
341 
$
322 
$
332 
$
330 
Net write-offs 
$
(794)  
$ (1,340) 
$ (1,454) 
$ (1,112) 
$ (1,095) 
Exchange rate and other 
(230)  
(195) 
(106) 
(59) 
(131) 
Total allowance on loans at end of year 
$
4,419  
$
6,115 
$
3,419 
$
3,088 
$
2,250 
Allowance against impaired loans (2) 
  
 
 
 
 
Canada (3) 
  
 
 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
$
45  
$
53 
$
50 
$
43 
$
31 
Personal 
71  
78 
115 
107 
91 
Small business 
34  
33 
22 
18 
19 
Retail 
$
150  
$
164 
$
187 
$
168 
$
141 
Agriculture 
$
3  
$
10 
$
6 
$
4 
$
5 
Automotive 
1  
12 
3 
4 
4 
Banking 
–  
– 
– 
1 
2 
Consumer discretionary 
9  
35 
11 
22 
18 
Consumer staples 
5  
7 
2 
3 
2 
Oil and gas 
29  
49 
29 
4 
4 
Financial services 
–  
– 
– 
– 
1 
Financing products 
–  
– 
– 
– 
– 
Forest products 
1  
9 
7 
3 
3 
Governments 
3  
2 
5 
1 
1 
Industrial products 
9  
15 
11 
8 
9 
Information technology 
1  
1 
3 
– 
1 
Investments 
–  
– 
2 
– 
– 
Mining and metals 
1  
1 
1 
– 
3 
Public works and infrastructure 
2  
2 
1 
1 
1 
Real estate and related 
27  
36 
35 
28 
47 
Other services 
81  
39 
34 
7 
17 
Telecommunication and media 
1  
– 
11 
3 
4 
Transportation 
9  
2 
10 
3 
2 
Utilities 
–  
– 
1 
– 
– 
Other sectors 
–  
– 
– 
– 
– 
Wholesale 
$
182  
$
220 
$
172 
$
92 
$
124 
Total 
$
332  
$
384 
$
359 
$
260 
$
265 
U.S. (3) 
  
 
 
 
 
Retail 
$
3  
$
1 
$
1 
$
1 
$
1 
Wholesale 
126  
267 
141 
164 
150 
Total 
$
129  
$
268 
$
142 
$
165 
$
151 
Other International (3) 
 
 
Retail 
$
107  
$
116 
$
156 
$
166 
$
168 
Wholesale 
129  
181 
175 
109 
153 
Total 
$
236  
$
297 
$
331 
$
275 
$
321 
Total allowance on impaired loans (2) 
$
697  
$
949 
$
832 
$
700 
$
737 
Allowance on performing loans (4) 
  
 
 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
$
278  
$
366 
$
223 
$
206 
$
128 
Personal 
991  
1,213 
792 
754 
391 
Credit cards 
875  
1,246 
832 
760 
379 
Small business 
143  
107 
39 
33 
37 
Retail 
$
2,287  
$
2,932 
$
1,886 
$
1,753 
$
935 
Wholesale 
$
1,435  
$
2,234 
$
701 
$
635 
$
487 
Off-balance sheet and other items 
  
 
 
 
$
91 
Total allowance on performing loans (4) 
$
3,722  
$
5,166 
$
2,587 
$
2,388 
$
1,513 
Total allowance on loans 
$
4,419  
$
6,115 
$
3,419 
$
3,088 
$
2,250 
Key ratios 
 
Allowance on loans as a % of loans and acceptances 
0.60%  
0.89% 
0.53% 
0.52% 
0.40% 
Net write-offs as a % of average net loans and acceptances 
0.11%  
0.20% 
0.24% 
0.20% 
0.20% 
(1) 
Includes loans, acceptances, and commitments. 
(2) 
Effective November 1, 2017, represents Stage 3 ACL on loans, acceptances and commitments under IFRS 9 and Allowance for impaired loans under IAS 39. 
(3) 
Geographic information is based on residence of borrower. 
(4) 
Effective November 1, 2017, represents Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL on loans, acceptances and commitments under IFRS 9 and Allowance for loans not yet identified as 
impaired under IAS 39. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
119 
 

Credit quality information by Canadian province (1) 
Table 78  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
2021  
2020 
2019 
2018 
2017 
Loans and acceptances (2) 
  
 
 
 
 
Atlantic provinces (3) 
$
29,078  
$
27,615 
$
26,990 
$
25,420 
$
24,589 
Quebec 
68,595  
64,534 
62,286 
58,256 
56,802 
Ontario 
268,317  
240,673 
224,055 
205,792 
196,877 
Alberta 
71,506  
71,161 
70,873 
69,719 
68,122 
Other Prairie provinces (4) 
33,956  
33,758 
33,303 
32,415 
31,649 
B.C. and territories (5) 
97,937  
90,409 
85,073 
79,530 
76,092 
Total loans and acceptances in Canada 
$ 569,389  
$ 528,150 
$ 502,580 
$ 471,132 
$ 454,131 
Gross impaired loans (6) 
  
 
 
 
 
Atlantic provinces (3) 
$
97  
$
111 
$
94 
$
89 
$
77 
Quebec 
198  
271 
250 
185 
176 
Ontario 
379  
393 
290 
227 
213 
Alberta 
321  
386 
448 
335 
284 
Other Prairie provinces (4) 
173  
178 
215 
176 
125 
B.C. and territories (5) 
103  
107 
169 
107 
110 
Total GIL in Canada 
$
1,271  
$
1,446 
$
1,466 
$
1,119 
$
985 
PCL on impaired loans (7) 
  
 
 
 
 
Atlantic provinces (3) 
$
22  
$
43 
$
73 
$
59 
$
66 
Quebec 
22  
95 
104 
94 
85 
Ontario 
483  
710 
844 
678 
617 
Alberta 
83  
151 
175 
116 
112 
Other Prairie provinces (4) 
39  
60 
85 
68 
64 
B.C. and territories (5) 
34  
54 
72 
53 
55 
Total PCL on impaired loans in Canada 
$
683  
$
1,113 
$
1,353 
$
1,068 
$
999 
(1) 
Geographic information is based on residence of borrower. 
(2) 
Certain loan amounts by Canadian province have been revised from those previously presented. 
(3) 
Comprises Newfoundland and Labrador, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick. 
(4) 
Comprises Manitoba and Saskatchewan. 
(5) 
Comprises British Columbia, Nunavut, Northwest Territories and Yukon. 
(6) 
Effective November 1, 2017, the definition of gross impaired loans has been shortened for certain products to align with a definition of default of 90 days past due under 
IFRS 9. 
(7) 
Effective November 1, 2017, represents Stage 3 PCL under IFRS 9 and PCL on impaired loans under IAS 39. 
120
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

Glossary 
Acceptances 
A bill of exchange or negotiable instrument 
drawn by the borrower for payment at 
maturity and accepted by a bank. The 
acceptance constitutes a guarantee of 
payment by the bank and can be traded in the 
money market. The bank earns a “stamping 
fee” for providing this guarantee. 
Allowance for credit losses (ACL) 
The amount deemed adequate by 
management to absorb expected credit losses 
as at the balance sheet date. The allowance is 
established for all financial assets subject to 
impairment assessment, including certain 
loans, debt securities, customers’ liability 
under acceptances, financial guarantees, and 
undrawn loan commitments. The allowance is 
changed by the amount of provision for credit 
losses recorded, which is charged to income, 
and decreased by the amount of write-offs net 
of recoveries in the period. 
Asset-backed securities (ABS) 
Securities created through the securitization 
of a pool of assets, for example auto loans or 
credit card loans. 
Assets under administration (AUA) 
Assets administered by us, which are 
beneficially owned by clients, as at October 31, 
unless otherwise noted. Services provided in 
respect of assets under administration are of 
an administrative nature, including 
safekeeping, collecting investment income, 
settling purchase and sale transactions, and 
record keeping. 
Assets under management (AUM) 
Assets managed by us, which are beneficially 
owned by clients, as at October 31, unless 
otherwise noted. Services provided in respect 
of assets under management include the 
selection of investments and the provision of 
investment advice. We have assets under 
management that are also administered by us 
and included in assets under administration. 
Attributed capital 
Attributed capital is based on the Basel III 
regulatory capital requirements and economic 
capital. 
Auction rate securities (ARS) 
Debt securities whose interest rates are 
regularly reset through an auction process. 
Average earning assets, net 
Average earning assets include interest-
bearing deposits with other banks, securities, 
net of applicable allowance, assets purchased 
under reverse repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed, loans, net of allowance, 
cash collateral and margin deposits. Insurance 
assets, and all other assets not specified are 
excluded. The averages are based on the daily 
balances for the period. 
Basis point (bp) 
One one-hundredth of a percentage point 
(.01%). 
Collateral 
Assets pledged as security for a loan or other 
obligation. Collateral can take many forms, 
such as cash, highly rated securities, property, 
inventory, equipment and receivables. 
Collateralized debt obligation (CDO) 
Securities with multiple tranches that are 
issued by structured entities and 
collateralized by debt obligations including 
bonds and loans. Each tranche offers a varying 
degree of risk and return so as to meet 
investor demand. 
Commercial mortgage-backed securities 
(CMBS) 
Securities created through the securitization 
of commercial mortgages. 
Commitments to extend credit 
Unutilized amount of credit facilities available 
to clients either in the form of loans, bankers’ 
acceptances and other on-balance sheet 
financing, or through off-balance sheet 
products such as guarantees and letters of 
credit. 
Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital 
A regulatory Basel III capital measure 
comprised mainly of common shareholders’ 
equity less regulatory deductions and 
adjustments for goodwill and intangibles, 
defined benefit pension fund assets, shortfall 
in allowances and other specified items. 
Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio 
A risk-based capital measure calculated as 
CET1 capital divided by risk-weighted assets. 
Covered bonds 
Full recourse on-balance sheet obligations 
issued by banks and credit institutions that 
are fully collateralized by assets over which 
investors enjoy a priority claim in the event of 
an issuer’s insolvency. 
Credit default swaps (CDS) 
A derivative contract that provides the 
purchaser with a one-time payment should the 
referenced entity/entities default (or a similar 
triggering event occur). 
Derivative 
A contract between two parties, which 
requires little or no initial investment and 
where payments between the parties are 
dependent upon the movements in price of an 
underlying instrument, index or financial rate. 
Examples of derivatives include swaps, 
options, forward rate agreements and futures. 
The notional amount of the derivative is the 
contract amount used as a reference point to 
calculate the payments to be exchanged 
between the two parties, and the notional 
amount itself is generally not exchanged by 
the parties. 
Dividend payout ratio 
Common dividends as a percentage of net 
income available to common shareholders. 
Dividend yield 
Dividends per common share divided by the 
average of the high and low share price in the 
relevant period. 
Earnings per share (EPS), basic 
Calculated as net income available to common 
shareholders divided by the average number 
of shares outstanding. 
Earnings per share (EPS), diluted 
Calculated as net income available to common 
shareholders divided by the average number 
of shares outstanding adjusted for the dilutive 
effects of stock options and other convertible 
securities. 
Expected credit losses 
The difference between the contractual cash 
flows due to us in accordance with the 
relevant contractual terms and the cash flows 
that we expect to receive, discounted to the 
balance sheet date. 
Fair value 
Fair value of a financial instrument is the price 
that would be received to sell an asset or paid 
to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction 
between market participants at the 
measurement date. 
Funding Valuation Adjustment 
Funding valuation adjustments are calculated 
to incorporate cost and benefit of funding in 
the valuation of uncollateralized and under-
collateralized OTC derivatives. Future 
expected cash flows of these derivatives are 
discounted to reflect the cost and benefit of 
funding the derivatives by using a funding 
curve, implied volatilities and correlations as 
inputs. 
Guarantees and standby letters of credit 
These primarily represent irrevocable 
assurances that a bank will make payments in 
the event that its client cannot meet its 
financial obligations to third parties. Certain 
other guarantees, such as bid and 
performance bonds, represent non-financial 
undertakings. 
Hedge 
A risk management technique used to mitigate 
exposure from market, interest rate or foreign 
currency exchange risk arising from normal 
banking operations. The elimination or 
reduction of such exposure is accomplished by 
establishing offsetting positions. For example, 
assets denominated in foreign currencies can 
be offset with liabilities in the same currencies 
or through the use of foreign exchange 
hedging instruments such as futures, options 
or foreign exchange contracts. 
Hedge funds 
A type of investment fund, marketed to 
accredited high net worth investors, that is 
subject to limited regulation and restrictions 
on its investments compared to retail mutual 
funds, and that often utilize aggressive 
strategies such as selling short, leverage, 
program trading, swaps, arbitrage and 
derivatives. 
High-quality liquid assets (HQLA) 
Assets are considered to be HQLA if they can 
be easily and immediately converted into cash 
at little or no loss of value during a time of 
stress. 
Impaired loans 
Loans are classified as impaired when there 
has been a deterioration of credit quality to 
the extent that management no longer has 
reasonable assurance of timely collection of 
the full amount of principal and interest in 
accordance with the contractual terms of the 
loan agreement. Credit card balances are not 
classified as impaired as they are directly 
written off after payments are 180 days past 
due. 
International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS) 
IFRS are principles-based standards, 
interpretations and the framework adopted by 
the International Accounting Standards Board. 
Leverage Ratio 
A Basel III regulatory measure, the ratio 
divides Tier 1 capital by the sum of total assets 
plus specified off-balance sheet items. 
Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) 
The Liquidity Coverage Ratio is a Basel III 
metric that measures the sufficiency of HQLA 
available to meet net short-term financial 
obligations over a thirty day period in an acute 
stress scenario. 
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
121 

Loan-to-value (LTV) ratio 
Calculated based on the total facility amount 
for the residential mortgage and RBC 
Homeline Plan® product divided by the value 
of the related residential property. 
Master netting agreement 
An agreement between us and a counterparty 
designed to reduce the credit risk of multiple 
derivative transactions through the creation of 
a legal right of offset of exposure in the event 
of a default. 
Net interest income 
The difference between what is earned on 
assets such as loans and securities and what 
is paid on liabilities such as deposits and 
subordinated debentures. 
Net interest margin (on average earning 
assets, net) 
Calculated as net interest income divided by 
average earning assets, net. 
Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) 
The Net Stable Funding Ratio is a Basel III 
metric that measures the sufficiency of 
available stable funding to meet the minimum 
coverage level of required stable funding. 
Normal course issuer bid (NCIB) 
A program for the repurchase of our own 
shares for cancellation through a stock 
exchange that is subject to the various rules of 
the relevant stock exchange and securities 
commission. 
Notional amount 
The contract amount used as a reference point 
to calculate payments for derivatives. 
Off-balance sheet financial instruments 
A variety of arrangements offered to clients, 
which include credit derivatives, written put 
options, backstop liquidity facilities, stable 
value products, financial standby letters of 
credit, performance guarantees, credit 
enhancements, mortgage loans sold with 
recourse, commitments to extend credit, 
securities lending, documentary and 
commercial letters of credit, note issuances 
and revolving underwriting facilities, securities 
lending indemnifications and indemnifications. 
Office of the Superintendent of Financial 
Institutions Canada (OSFI) 
The primary regulator of federally chartered 
financial institutions and federally 
administered pension plans in Canada. OSFI’s 
mission is to safeguard policyholders, 
depositors and pension plan members from 
undue loss. 
Operating leverage 
The difference between our revenue growth 
rate and non-interest expense growth rate. 
Options 
A contract or a provision of a contract that 
gives one party (the option holder) the right, 
but not the obligation, to perform a specified 
transaction with another party (the option 
issuer or option writer) according to specified 
terms. 
Provision for credit losses (PCL) 
The amount charged to income necessary to 
bring the allowance for credit losses to a level 
determined appropriate by management. This 
includes provisions on performing and 
impaired financial assets. 
RBC Homeline Plan® products 
This is comprised of residential mortgages and 
secured personal loans whereby the borrower 
pledges real estate as collateral. 
Repurchase agreements 
These involve the sale of securities for cash 
and the simultaneous repurchase of the 
securities for value at a later date. These 
transactions normally do not constitute 
economic sales and therefore are treated as 
collateralized financing transactions. 
Return on common equity (ROE) 
Net income available to common 
shareholders, expressed as a percentage of 
average common equity. 
Reverse repurchase agreements 
These involve the purchase of securities for 
cash and the simultaneous sale of the 
securities for value at a later date. These 
transactions normally do not constitute 
economic sales and therefore are treated as 
collateralized financing transactions. 
Risk-weighted assets (RWA) 
Assets adjusted by a regulatory risk-weight 
factor to reflect the riskiness of on and off-
balance sheet exposures. Certain assets are 
not risk-weighted, but deducted from capital. 
The calculation is defined by guidelines issued 
by OSFI. For more details, refer to the Capital 
management section. 
Securities lending 
Transactions in which the owner of securities 
agrees to lend it under the terms of a 
prearranged contract to a borrower for a fee. 
Collateral for the loan consists of either high 
quality securities or cash and collateral value 
must be at least equal to the market value of 
the loaned securities. Borrowers pay a 
negotiated fee for loans collateralized by 
securities, whereas for cash collateral lenders 
pay borrowers interest at a negotiated rate 
and reinvest the cash collateral to earn a 
return. An intermediary such as a bank often 
acts as agent lender for the owner of the 
security in return for a share of the revenue 
earned by the owner from lending securities. 
Most often, agent lenders indemnify the owner 
against the risk of the borrower’s failure to 
redeliver the loaned securities – counterparty 
credit risk if a borrower defaults and market 
risk if the value of the non-cash collateral 
declines. The agent lender does not indemnify 
against the investment risk of re-investing 
cash collateral which is borne by the owner. 
Securities sold short 
A transaction in which the seller sells 
securities and then borrows the securities in 
order to deliver them to the purchaser upon 
settlement. At a later date, the seller buys 
identical securities in the market to replace 
the borrowed securities. 
Securitization 
The process by which various financial assets 
are packaged into newly issued securities 
backed by these assets. 
Standardized Approach 
Risk weights prescribed by OSFI are used to 
calculate risk-weighted assets for the credit 
risk exposures. Credit assessments by OSFI-
recognized external credit rating agencies of 
S&P, Moody’s, Fitch and DBRS are used to risk-
weight our Sovereign and Bank exposures 
based on the standards and guidelines issued 
by OSFI. For our Business and Retail 
exposures, we use the standard risk weights 
prescribed by OSFI. 
Structured entities 
A structured entity is an entity in which voting or 
similar rights are not the dominant factor in 
deciding who controls the entity, such as when 
the activities that significantly affect the entity’s 
returns are directed by means of contractual 
arrangements. Structured entities often have 
restricted activities, narrow and well defined 
objectives, insufficient equity to finance their 
activities, and financing in the form of multiple 
contractually-linked instruments. 
Taxable equivalent basis (teb) 
Income from certain specified tax advantaged 
sources (eligible Canadian taxable corporate 
dividends) is increased to a level that would 
make it comparable to income from taxable 
sources. There is an offsetting adjustment in 
the tax provision, thereby generating the same 
after-tax net income. 
Tier 1 capital 
Tier 1 capital comprises predominantly of CET1 
capital, with additional Tier 1 items such as 
preferred shares, limited recourse capital 
notes and non-controlling interests in 
subsidiaries Tier 1 instruments. 
Tier 2 capital 
Tier 2 capital consists mainly of subordinated 
debentures that meet certain criteria, certain 
loan loss allowances and non-controlling 
interests in subsidiaries’ Tier 2 instruments. 
Total capital and total capital ratio 
Total capital is defined as the total of Tier 1 
and Tier 2 capital. The total capital ratio is 
calculated by dividing total capital by risk-
weighted assets. 
Tranche 
A security class created whereby the risks and 
returns associated with a pool of assets are 
packaged into several classes of securities 
offering different risk and return profiles from 
those of the underlying asset pool. Tranches 
are typically rated by ratings agencies, and 
reflect both the credit quality of underlying 
collateral as well as the level of protection 
based on the tranches’ relative subordination. 
Unattributed capital 
Unattributed capital represents common 
equity in excess of common equity attributed 
to our business segments and is reported in 
the Corporate Support segment. 
Value-at-Risk (VaR) 
A generally accepted risk-measurement 
concept that uses statistical models based on 
historical information to estimate within a 
given level of confidence the maximum loss in 
market value we would experience in our 
trading portfolio from an adverse one-day 
movement in market rates and prices. 
122
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Management’s Discussion and Analysis 

EDTF recommendations index 
We aim to present transparent, high-quality risk disclosures by providing disclosures in this 2021 Annual Report and 
Supplementary Financial Information package (SFI), and Pillar 3 Report, in accordance with recommendations from the FSB’s 
Enhanced Disclosure Task Force (EDTF). Information within the SFI and Pillar 3 Report is not and should not be considered 
incorporated by reference into this 2021 Annual Report. 
The following index summarizes our disclosure by EDTF recommendation: 
 
 
 
Location of disclosure 
Type of Risk 
Recommendation Disclosure 
Annual Report page 
SFI page 
General 
1 
Table of contents for EDTF risk disclosure 
123 
1 
2 
Define risk terminology and measures 
55-60, 121-122 
– 
3 
Top and emerging risks 
52-54 
– 
4 
New regulatory ratios 
100-105 
– 
Risk governance, 
risk management 
and business 
model 
5 
Risk management organization 
55-60 
– 
6 
Risk culture 
56-60 
– 
7 
Risk in the context of our business activities 
108 
– 
8 
Stress testing 
57-58, 73 
– 
Capital adequacy 
and risk-weighted 
assets (RWA) 
9 
Minimum Basel III capital ratios and 
Domestic systemically important bank 
surcharge 
100-105 
– 
10 
Composition of capital and reconciliation of 
the accounting balance sheet to the 
regulatory balance sheet 
– 
* 
11 
Flow statement of the movements in 
regulatory capital 
– 
20 
12 
Capital strategic planning 
100-105 
– 
13 
RWA by business segments 
– 
21 
14 
Analysis of capital requirement, and related 
measurement model information 
61-64 
* 
15 
RWA credit risk and related risk 
measurements 
– 
* 
16 
Movement of risk-weighted assets by risk 
type 
– 
21 
17 
Basel back-testing 
57, 61 
32 
Liquidity 
18 
Quantitative and qualitative analysis of our 
liquidity reserve 
80-81, 85-86 
– 
Funding 
19 
Encumbered and unencumbered assets by 
balance sheet category, and contractual 
obligations for rating downgrades 
81, 84 
– 
20 
Maturity analysis of consolidated total 
assets, liabilities and off-balance sheet 
commitments analyzed by remaining 
contractual maturity at the balance 
sheet date 
88-89 
– 
21 
Sources of funding and funding strategy 
81-83 
– 
Market risk 
22 
Relationship between the market risk 
measures for trading and non-trading 
portfolios and the balance sheet 
77-78 
– 
23 
Decomposition of market risk factors 
72-76 
– 
24 
Market risk validation and back-testing 
73 
– 
25 
Primary risk management techniques 
beyond reported risk measures and 
parameters 
72-76 
– 
Credit risk 
26 
Bank’s credit risk profile 
60-72, 170-177 
22-32, * 
 
Quantitative summary of aggregate credit 
risk exposures that reconciles to the 
balance sheet 
115-120 
* 
27 
Policies for identifying impaired loans 
62-65, 110, 143-146 
– 
28 
Reconciliation of the opening and closing 
balances of impaired loans and 
impairment allowances during the year 
– 
24, 29 
29 
Quantification of gross notional exposure 
for OTC derivatives or exchange-traded 
derivatives 
66 
33 
30 
Credit risk mitigation, including collateral 
held for all sources of credit risk 
64-65 
* 
Other 
31 
Other risk types 
91-99 
– 
32 
Publicly known risk events 
94-95, 215-216 
– 
* 
These disclosure requirements are satisfied or partially satisfied by disclosures provided in our Pillar 3 Report for the quarter ended October 31, 2021 and for the year 
ended October 31, 2020. 
Index for Enhanced Disclosure Task Force recommendations
 Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
123 
 

REPORTS AND CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
 
Reports 
 
125 
Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting 
 
125 
Management’s Report on Internal Control over 
Financial Reporting 
 
126 
Independent Auditor’s Report 
 
130 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting 
Firm 
 
Consolidated Financial Statements 
 
133 
Consolidated Balance Sheets 
 
134 
Consolidated Statements of Income  
 
135 
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income 
 
136 
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity  
 
137 
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows  
 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
 
138 
Note 1 
General information 
 
138 
Note 2 
Summary of significant accounting 
policies, estimates and judgments 
 
153 
Note 3 
Fair value of financial instruments 
 
166 
Note 4 
Securities 
 
170 
Note 5 
Loans and allowance for credit losses 
 
177 
Note 6 
Derecognition of financial assets 
 
178 
Note 7 
Structured entities 
 
182 
Note 8 
Derivative financial instruments and 
hedging activities 
 
192 
Note 9 
Premises and equipment 
 
193 
Note 10 
Goodwill and other intangible assets 
 
195 
Note 11 
Joint ventures and associated companies 
 
196 
Note 12 
Other assets 
 
196 
Note 13 
Deposits 
 
197 
Note 14 
Insurance 
 
199 
Note 15 
Segregated funds 
 
200 
Note 16 
Employee benefits – Pension and other 
post-employment benefits 
 
204 
Note 17 
Other liabilities 
 
205 
Note 18 
Subordinated debentures 
 
205 
Note 19 
Equity 
 
208 
Note 20 
Share-based compensation 
 
210 
Note 21 
Income taxes 
 
212 
Note 22 
Earnings per share 
 
213 
Note 23 
Guarantees, commitments, pledged 
assets and contingencies 
 
215 
Note 24 
Legal and regulatory matters 
 
216 
Note 25 
Related party transactions 
 
218 
Note 26 
Results by business segment 
 
220 
Note 27 
Nature and extent of risks arising from 
financial instruments segment 
 
221 
Note 28 
Capital management 
 
221 
Note 29 
Offsetting financial assets and financial 
liabilities 
 
223 
Note 30 
Recovery and settlement of on-balance 
sheet assets and liabilities 
 
224 
Note 31 
Parent company information 
 
225 
Note 32 
Subsequent events 
124
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Management’s Responsibility for Financial Reporting 
The accompanying consolidated financial statements of Royal Bank of Canada were prepared by management, which is 
responsible for the integrity and fairness of the information presented, including the many amounts that must of necessity be 
based on estimates and judgments. These consolidated financial statements were prepared in accordance with the Bank Act 
(Canada) and International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board. Financial 
information appearing throughout our Management’s Discussion and Analysis is consistent with these consolidated financial 
statements. 
Our internal controls are designed to provide reasonable assurance that transactions are authorized, assets are 
safeguarded and proper records are maintained. These controls include quality standards in hiring and training of employees, 
policies and procedures manuals, a corporate code of conduct and accountability for performance within appropriate and well-
defined areas of responsibility. 
The system of internal controls is further supported by a compliance function, which is designed to ensure that we and our 
employees comply with securities legislation and conflict of interest rules, and by an internal audit staff, which conducts periodic 
audits of all aspects of our operations. 
The Board of Directors oversees management’s responsibilities for financial reporting through an Audit Committee, which is 
composed entirely of independent directors. This Committee reviews our consolidated financial statements and recommends 
them to the Board for approval. Other key responsibilities of the Audit Committee include reviewing our existing internal control 
procedures and planned revisions to those procedures, and advising the directors on auditing matters and financial reporting 
issues. Our Chief Compliance Officer and Chief Internal Auditor have full and unrestricted access to the Audit Committee. 
The Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Canada (OSFI) examines and inquires into our business and affairs 
as deemed necessary to determine whether the provisions of the Bank Act are being complied with, and that we are in sound 
financial condition. In carrying out its mandate, OSFI strives to protect the rights and interests of our depositors and creditors. 
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm appointed by our shareholders upon the 
recommendation of the Audit Committee and Board, has performed an independent audit of the consolidated financial statements 
in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards and the standards of the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (United States) as stated in their Independent Auditor’s Report and Report of Independent Registered Public 
Accounting Firm, respectively. The auditors have full and unrestricted access to the Audit Committee to discuss their audit and 
related findings. 
David I. McKay 
President and Chief Executive Officer 
Nadine Ahn 
Chief Financial Officer 
Toronto, November 30, 2021 
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting 
Management of Royal Bank of Canada is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial 
reporting. Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the President and Chief 
Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer and effected by the Board of Directors, management and other personnel to provide 
reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external 
purposes in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards 
Board. It includes those policies and procedures that: 
• Pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions related to and 
dispositions of our assets; 
• Provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in 
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and our receipts and expenditures are made only in accordance 
with authorizations of our management and directors; and 
• Provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of our 
assets that could have a material effect on our financial statements. 
Due to its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements on a timely 
basis. Also, projections of any evaluation of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting to future periods are 
subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance 
with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. 
Management evaluated, under the supervision of and with the participation of the President and Chief Executive Officer and 
Chief Financial Officer, the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of October 31, 2021, based on the 
criteria set forth in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway Commission. Based on that evaluation, management concluded that, as of October 31, 2021, internal control over 
financial reporting was effective based on the criteria established in the Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013). 
The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of October 31, 2021, has been audited by 
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm, as stated in their Report of Independent 
Registered Public Accounting Firm, which appears herein. 
David I. McKay 
President and Chief Executive Officer 
Nadine Ahn 
Chief Financial Officer 
Toronto, November 30, 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
125 
 

Independent Auditor’s Report 
To the Shareholders and Board of Directors of Royal Bank of Canada 
Our opinion 
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position 
of Royal Bank of Canada and its subsidiaries (together, the Bank) as of October 31, 2021 and 2020, and its financial performance 
and its cash flows for the years then ended in accordance with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the 
International Accounting Standards Board (IFRS). 
What we have audited 
The Bank’s consolidated financial statements comprise: 
•
the consolidated balance sheets as of October 31, 2021 and 2020; 
•
the consolidated statements of income for the years then ended; 
•
the consolidated statements of comprehensive income for the years then ended; 
•
the consolidated statements of changes in equity for the years then ended; 
•
the consolidated statements of cash flows for the years then ended; and 
•
the notes to the consolidated financial statements, which include significant accounting policies and other explanatory 
information. 
Certain required disclosures have been presented elsewhere in the Management’s Discussion and Analysis, rather than in the 
notes to the consolidated financial statements. These disclosures are cross-referenced from the consolidated financial 
statements and are identified as audited. 
Basis for opinion 
We conducted our audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards. Our responsibilities under those 
standards are further described in the Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements section of 
our report. 
We believe that the audit evidence we have obtained is sufficient and appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. 
Independence 
We are independent of the Bank in accordance with the ethical requirements that are relevant to our audit of the consolidated 
financial statements in Canada. We have fulfilled our other ethical responsibilities in accordance with these requirements. 
Key audit matters  
Key audit matters are those matters that, in our professional judgment, were of most significance in our audit of the consolidated 
financial statements for the year ended October 31, 2021. These matters were addressed in the context of our audit of the 
consolidated financial statements as a whole, and in forming our opinion thereon, and we do not provide a separate opinion on 
these matters. 
Key audit matter 
How our audit addressed the key audit matter 
Allowance for Credit Losses (ACL) 
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of significant accounting policies, 
estimates and judgments, Note 4 - Securities and Note 5 - Loans 
and allowance for credit losses to the consolidated financial 
statements. 
The Bank’s ACL for financial assets was $4,471 million as of 
October 31, 2021 and represents management’s estimate of 
expected credit losses on financial assets as of the balance 
sheet date. Performing financial assets are categorized as 
Stage 1 from initial recognition to the date on which the asset 
has experienced a significant increase in credit risk relative to 
its initial recognition. Performing financial assets transfer into 
Stage 2 following a significant increase in credit risk relative to 
the initial recognition. Financial assets are categorized as 
Stage 3 when considered to be credit-impaired. As disclosed by 
management, the measurement of expected credit losses is a 
complex calculation that involves a large number of 
interrelated inputs and assumptions such as the financial 
asset’s probability of default, loss given default and exposure 
at default, which are modelled based on macroeconomic 
variables, and discounted to the reporting date. 
Management’s estimation of expected credit losses in Stage 1 
and Stage 2 considers five distinct future macroeconomic 
scenarios, each of which includes a forecast of all relevant 
macroeconomic variables, designed to capture a wide range of 
possible outcomes, and which are probability-weighted 
according to management’s expectation of the relative 
Our approach to addressing the matter included the following 
procedures, amongst others: 
• Testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the 
estimation of the ACL, incorporating consideration of the 
ongoing uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of 
the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including controls 
over: 
O
Probability of default, loss given default and 
exposure at default models. 
O
Design of multiple future macroeconomic scenarios, 
the forecasting of macroeconomic variables, and the 
probability-weighting of these scenarios. 
O
Completeness and accuracy of the data inputs 
underlying the ACL calculation. 
O
Application of expert credit judgment. 
• Testing management’s process for estimating the Stage 1 
and Stage 2 ACL, including their consideration of the 
ongoing uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of 
the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, which consisted of: 
O
Testing the completeness, accuracy, and relevance of 
underlying data. 
O
Using professionals with specialized skill and 
knowledge to assist in evaluating: 
•
Appropriateness of the probability of default, 
loss given default and exposure at default 
models used in the estimation of the Stage 1 and 
Stage 2 ACL. 
126
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Key audit matter 
How our audit addressed the key audit matter 
likelihood of the range of outcomes that each scenario 
represents at the reporting date. As disclosed in Note 5, while 
the global economic recovery has continued throughout fiscal 
2021, momentum has waned over the year amid ongoing 
uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of the impacts of 
the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the estimation of the ACL 
continues to require the application of heightened judgment, 
as there is a higher than usual degree of uncertainty and the 
inputs used are inherently subject to change, which may 
materially change the estimate of Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL in 
future periods. The possibility of a more prolonged recovery 
period, including monetary policy responses to elevated 
inflation rates which may increase credit risk, has been 
reflected in management’s general downside scenario. 
To address the uncertainties inherent in the current and future 
environment and to reflect relevant risk factors not captured in 
the Bank’s modelled results, management applied expert credit 
judgment in quantitative and qualitative adjustments for the 
impacts of the unprecedented macroeconomic environment 
including the impact of government support programs in 
offsetting the effect of COVID-19 related unemployment on the 
economy and on mitigating the losses for the sectors most 
sensitive to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
We considered this a key audit matter due to: 
• Significant judgment required by management when:  
O
Designing future macroeconomic scenarios. 
O
Forecasting macroeconomic variables. 
O
Probability-weighting scenarios. 
O
Applying expert credit judgment to reflect 
characteristics not already considered in the models. 
• High degree of estimation uncertainty due to the ongoing 
uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of the impacts 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to a high degree of 
auditor judgment. 
• Significant audit effort necessary to evaluate audit evidence 
as the estimation of the ACL is a complex calculation that 
involves a large volume of data, interrelated inputs and 
assumptions, some of which are model-based. 
• Audit effort included the use of professionals with 
specialized skill and knowledge. 
•
Reasonableness of significant inputs and 
assumptions used in the estimation of the ACL 
related to: 
•
Design of future macroeconomic 
scenarios. 
•
Forecasted macroeconomic variables. 
•
Probability-weights assigned to the 
scenarios. 
•
Appropriateness of the ACL calculation. 
•
Management’s application of expert credit 
judgment. 
Goodwill Impairment Assessment of the Caribbean Banking 
Cash Generating Unit (CGU) 
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of significant accounting policies, 
estimates and judgments and Note 10 - Goodwill and other 
intangible assets to the consolidated financial statements. 
The goodwill allocated to the Caribbean Banking CGU was 
$1,600 million. Management conducts a goodwill impairment 
test as of August 1 of each year by comparing the carrying 
amount of each Cash Generating Unit (CGU) to its recoverable 
amount. The recoverable amount of a CGU is represented by its 
value in use (VIU), except in circumstances where the carrying 
amount of a CGU exceeds its VIU. In such cases, the greater of 
the CGU’s fair value less costs of disposal (FVLCD) and its VIU 
is the recoverable amount. 
Management estimated the recoverable amount of the 
Caribbean Banking CGU based on its FVLCD. Management 
calculated the FVLCD using a discounted cash flow method 
that projects future cash flows over a 5-year period based on 
management forecasts, adjusted to approximate the 
considerations of a prospective third-party buyer. Cash flows 
beyond the initial 5-year period are assumed by management 
to increase at a constant rate using a nominal long-term 
growth rate. The discount rate used to determine the present 
value of the Caribbean Banking CGU’s projected future cash 
flows is based on the bank-wide cost of capital, adjusted for 
the risks to which the CGU is exposed. 
Our approach to addressing the matter included the following 
procedures, amongst others: 
• Testing the effectiveness of controls relating to 
management’s goodwill impairment test, including controls 
over the determination of the recoverable amount of the 
Caribbean Banking CGU. 
• Testing management’s process for determining the 
recoverable amount of the CGU, which consisted of: 
O
Evaluating the appropriateness of the discounted 
cash flow model. 
O
Testing the completeness, accuracy, and relevance of 
underlying data used in the model.  
O
Evaluating the reasonableness of assumptions used 
by management, related to future cash flows, which 
involved evaluating the consistency with: 
•
Current and past performance of the CGU. 
•
External market data and industry data. 
•
Evidence obtained in other areas of the audit. 
O
Evaluating consistency of the recoverable amount 
with market comparable transactions. 
• Professionals with specialized skill and knowledge assisted 
us in evaluating: 
O
Appropriateness of management’s discounted cash 
flow model. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
127 

Key audit matter 
How our audit addressed the key audit matter 
As disclosed by management, with the improved economic 
environment in 2021, tempered by continued uncertainty 
related to COVID-19, the recoverable amount of the Caribbean 
Banking CGU has increased. As of August 1, 2021, management 
determined that the recoverable amount was 123% of its 
carrying amount. Management also considered reasonably 
possible alternative scenarios, including market comparable 
transactions, which yielded valuations ranging from a material 
surplus to an immaterial deficit. 
Management uses significant judgment to determine inputs to 
the discounted cash flow model. If the future cash flows and 
other assumptions in future periods deviate significantly from 
the current amounts used in management’s impairment 
testing, the value of goodwill could become impaired. 
We considered this a key audit matter due to: 
•
Significant judgment required by management when 
determining the recoverable amount of the CGU, 
including projecting future cash flows. 
•
High degree of auditor judgment and subjectivity in 
performing procedures over management’s 
calculation of the recoverable amount of the CGU, and 
evaluating audit evidence. 
•
Audit effort included the use of professionals with 
specialized skill and knowledge. 
O
Consistency of the recoverable amount of the CGU 
with market comparable transactions. 
Uncertain Tax Positions 
Refer to Note 2 - Summary of significant accounting policies, 
estimates and judgments and Note 21 - Income taxes to the 
consolidated financial statements. 
The Bank is subject to income tax laws in various jurisdictions 
where it operates and the complex tax laws are potentially 
subject to different interpretations by management and the 
relevant taxation authorities. As disclosed by management, 
significant judgment is required in the interpretation of the 
relevant tax laws, and in assessing the probability of 
acceptance of the Bank’s tax positions to determine tax 
provisions, which includes management’s best estimate of 
uncertain tax positions that are under audit or appeal by the 
relevant taxation authorities. Management performs a review 
on a quarterly basis to incorporate its best assessment based 
on information available, but additional liability and income 
tax expense could result based on the acceptance of the Bank’s 
tax positions by the relevant tax authorities. 
In some cases, the Bank has received reassessments denying 
the tax deductibility of dividends from transactions including 
those with Tax Indifferent Investors. 
We considered this a key audit matter due to: 
• Significant judgment required by management, including a 
high degree of estimation uncertainty, when: 
O
Interpreting the relevant tax laws.  
O
Assessing the probability of acceptance of the Bank’s 
tax positions, which includes management’s best 
estimate of tax positions that are under audit or 
appeal by relevant taxation authorities. 
• High degree of auditor judgment and subjectivity in 
performing procedures to evaluate the uncertain tax 
positions.  
• Audit effort included the use of professionals with 
specialized skill and knowledge. 
Our approach to addressing the matter included the following 
procedures, amongst others: 
• Testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the 
evaluation of uncertain tax positions and the impact on tax 
provisions. 
• Testing management’s process used in (i) assessing the 
probability of acceptance of the Bank’s tax positions; and 
(ii) estimating provisions relating to uncertain tax positions, 
if applicable, which reflects management’s best estimate of 
tax positions that are under audit or appeal by relevant 
taxation authorities. This involved: 
•
Evaluating the appropriateness of the methods used. 
•
Testing the completeness, accuracy, and relevance of 
underlying data used. 
•
Reviewing correspondence with relevant taxation 
authorities.  
•
Making inquiries of the Bank’s internal and external 
legal counsel.  
•
Evaluating, with the assistance of professionals with 
specialized skill and knowledge: 
O
Application of relevant tax laws.  
O
Whether it is probable that the relevant tax 
authorities will accept the tax positions.  
O
Evidence used by management. 
Other information 
Management is responsible for the other information. The other information comprises the Management’s Discussion and 
Analysis and the information, other than the consolidated financial statements and our auditor’s report thereon, included in the 
annual report. 
Our opinion on the consolidated financial statements does not cover the other information and we do not express any form of 
assurance conclusion thereon. 
128
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

In connection with our audit of the consolidated financial statements, our responsibility is to read the other information 
identified above and, in doing so, consider whether the other information is materially inconsistent with the consolidated 
financial statements or our knowledge obtained in the audit, or otherwise appears to be materially misstated. 
If, based on the work we have performed, we conclude that there is a material misstatement of this other information, we are 
required to report that fact. We have nothing to report in this regard. 
Responsibilities of management and those charged with governance for the consolidated financial statements 
Management is responsible for the preparation and fair presentation of the consolidated financial statements in accordance 
with IFRS, and for such internal control as management determines is necessary to enable the preparation of consolidated 
financial statements that are free from material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error. 
In preparing the consolidated financial statements, management is responsible for assessing the Bank’s ability to continue as a 
going concern, disclosing, as applicable, matters related to going concern and using the going concern basis of accounting 
unless management either intends to liquidate the Bank or to cease operations, or has no realistic alternative but to do so. 
Those charged with governance are responsible for overseeing the Bank’s financial reporting process. 
Auditor’s responsibilities for the audit of the consolidated financial statements 
Our objectives are to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements as a whole are free from 
material misstatement, whether due to fraud or error, and to issue an auditor’s report that includes our opinion. Reasonable 
assurance is a high level of assurance, but is not a guarantee that an audit conducted in accordance with Canadian generally 
accepted auditing standards will always detect a material misstatement when it exists. Misstatements can arise from fraud or 
error and are considered material if, individually or in the aggregate, they could reasonably be expected to influence the 
economic decisions of users taken on the basis of these consolidated financial statements. 
As part of an audit in accordance with Canadian generally accepted auditing standards, we exercise professional judgment and 
maintain professional skepticism throughout the audit. We also: 
•
Identify and assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to fraud or 
error, design and perform audit procedures responsive to those risks, and obtain audit evidence that is sufficient and 
appropriate to provide a basis for our opinion. The risk of not detecting a material misstatement resulting from fraud is 
higher than for one resulting from error, as fraud may involve collusion, forgery, intentional omissions, misrepresentations, 
or the override of internal control. 
•
Obtain an understanding of internal control relevant to the audit in order to design audit procedures that are appropriate in 
the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Bank’s internal control. 
•
Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used and the reasonableness of accounting estimates and related 
disclosures made by management. 
•
Conclude on the appropriateness of management’s use of the going concern basis of accounting and, based on the audit 
evidence obtained, whether a material uncertainty exists related to events or conditions that may cast significant doubt on 
the Bank’s ability to continue as a going concern. If we conclude that a material uncertainty exists, we are required to draw 
attention in our auditor’s report to the related disclosures in the consolidated financial statements or, if such disclosures are 
inadequate, to modify our opinion. Our conclusions are based on the audit evidence obtained up to the date of our auditor’s 
report. However, future events or conditions may cause the Bank to cease to continue as a going concern. 
•
Evaluate the overall presentation, structure and content of the consolidated financial statements, including the disclosures, 
and whether the consolidated financial statements represent the underlying transactions and events in a manner that 
achieves fair presentation. 
•
Obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence regarding the financial information of the entities or business activities within 
the Bank to express an opinion on the consolidated financial statements. We are responsible for the direction, supervision 
and performance of the group audit. We remain solely responsible for our audit opinion. 
We communicate with those charged with governance regarding, among other matters, the planned scope and timing of the audit 
and significant audit findings, including any significant deficiencies in internal control that we identify during our audit. 
We also provide those charged with governance with a statement that we have complied with relevant ethical requirements 
regarding independence, and to communicate with them all relationships and other matters that may reasonably be thought to 
bear on our independence, and where applicable, related safeguards. 
From the matters communicated with those charged with governance, we determine those matters that were of most 
significance in the audit of the consolidated financial statements of the current period and are therefore the key audit matters. 
We describe these matters in our auditor’s report unless law or regulation precludes public disclosure about the matter or when, 
in extremely rare circumstances, we determine that a matter should not be communicated in our report because the adverse 
consequences of doing so would reasonably be expected to outweigh the public interest benefits of such communication. 
The engagement partner on the audit resulting in this independent auditor’s report is Samuel May. 
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP 
Chartered Professional Accountants, Licensed Public Accountants 
Toronto, Canada 
November 30, 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
129 

Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 
To the Shareholders and Board of Directors of Royal Bank of Canada 
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting 
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of Royal Bank of Canada and its subsidiaries (together, the 
Bank) as of October 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income, changes in 
equity and cash flows for the years then ended, including the related notes (collectively referred to as the consolidated financial 
statements). We also have audited the Bank’s internal control over financial reporting as of October 31, 2021, based on criteria 
established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway Commission (COSO). 
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial 
position of the Bank as of October 31, 2021 and 2020, and its financial performance and its cash flows for the years then ended in 
conformity with International Financial Reporting Standards as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board. Also in 
our opinion, the Bank maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of October 31, 
2021, based on criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO. 
Basis for Opinions 
The Bank’s management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control 
over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the 
accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express opinions on 
the Bank’s consolidated financial statements and on the Bank’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audits. We 
are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are 
required to be independent with respect to the Bank in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules 
and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB. 
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the 
audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, 
whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material 
respects. 
Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement 
of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. 
Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated 
financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by 
management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. Our audit of internal 
control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the 
risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based 
on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the 
circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions. 
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting 
An entity’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles. An entity’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that 
(i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions 
of the assets of the entity; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation 
of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the 
entity are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the entity; and (iii) provide 
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the entity’s 
assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. 
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, 
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate 
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate. 
Critical Audit Matters 
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial 
statements that were communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relate to accounts or 
disclosures that are material to the consolidated financial statements and (ii) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or 
complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated 
financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing separate 
opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or disclosures to which they relate. 
Allowance for Credit Losses (ACL) 
As described in Notes 2, 4 and 5 to the consolidated financial statements, the Bank’s ACL for financial assets was $4,471 million as 
of October 31, 2021 and represents management’s estimate of expected credit losses on financial assets as of the balance sheet 
date. Performing financial assets are categorized as Stage 1 from initial recognition to the date on which the asset has 
experienced a significant increase in credit risk relative to its initial recognition. Performing financial assets transfer into Stage 2 
following a significant increase in credit risk relative to the initial recognition. Financial assets are categorized as Stage 3 when 
considered to be credit-impaired. As disclosed by management, the measurement of expected credit losses is a complex 
130
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

calculation that involves a large number of interrelated inputs and assumptions such as the financial asset’s probability of 
default, loss given default and exposure at default, which are modelled based on macroeconomic variables, and discounted to 
the reporting date. Management’s estimation of expected credit losses in Stage 1 and Stage 2 considers five distinct future 
macroeconomic scenarios, each of which includes a forecast of all relevant macroeconomic variables, designed to capture a 
wide range of possible outcomes, and which are probability-weighted according to management’s expectation of the relative 
likelihood of the range of outcomes that each scenario represents at the reporting date. As disclosed in Note 5, while the global 
economic recovery has continued throughout fiscal 2021, momentum has waned over the year amid ongoing uncertainty 
regarding the extent and duration of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the estimation of the ACL continues to 
require the application of heightened judgment, as there is a higher than usual degree of uncertainty and the inputs used are 
inherently subject to change, which may materially change the estimate of Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL in future periods. The 
possibility of a more prolonged recovery period, including monetary policy responses to elevated inflation rates which may 
increase credit risk, has been reflected in management’s general downside scenario. To address the uncertainties inherent in the 
current and future environment and to reflect relevant risk factors not captured in the Bank’s modelled results, management 
applied expert credit judgment in quantitative and qualitative adjustments for the impacts of the unprecedented macroeconomic 
environment, including the impact of government support programs in offsetting the effect of COVID-19 related unemployment on 
the economy and on mitigating the losses for the sectors most sensitive to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to the ACL is a critical audit matter are: 
(i) there was significant judgment required by management when a) designing future macroeconomic scenarios, b) forecasting 
macroeconomic variables, c) probability-weighting scenarios and d) applying expert credit judgment to reflect characteristics 
not already considered in the models; (ii) there was a high degree of estimation uncertainty due to the ongoing uncertainty 
regarding the extent and duration of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, which also led to a high degree of auditor judgment; 
(iii) there was significant audit effort necessary to evaluate audit evidence as the estimation of the ACL is a complex calculation 
that involves a large volume of data, interrelated inputs and assumptions, some of which are model-based; and (iv) the audit 
effort included the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge. 
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall 
opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the 
estimation of the ACL, incorporating consideration of the ongoing uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of the impacts of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, including controls over: (i) the probability of default, loss given default and exposure at default models; 
(ii) the design of multiple future macroeconomic scenarios, the forecasting of macroeconomic variables, and the probability-
weighting of these scenarios; (iii) the completeness and accuracy of the data inputs underlying the ACL calculation; and (iv) the 
application of expert credit judgment. These procedures also included, among others, testing management’s process for 
estimating the Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL, including their consideration of the ongoing uncertainty regarding the extent and 
duration of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. This consisted of (i) testing the completeness, accuracy, and relevance of 
underlying data; and (ii) with the assistance of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge, evaluating: (a) the 
appropriateness of the probability of default, loss given default and exposure at default models used in the estimation of the 
Stage 1 and Stage 2 ACL, (b) the reasonableness of significant inputs and assumptions used in the estimation of the ACL related 
to: 1) the design of future macroeconomic scenarios, 2) the forecasted macroeconomic variables, 3) the probability-weights 
assigned to the scenarios, (c) the appropriateness of the ACL calculation, and (d) management’s application of expert credit 
judgment.  
Goodwill Impairment Assessment of the Caribbean Banking Cash Generating Unit (CGU) 
As described in Notes 2 and 10 to the consolidated financial statements, the goodwill allocated to the Caribbean Banking CGU 
was $1,600 million. Management conducts a goodwill impairment test as of August 1 of each year by comparing the carrying 
amount of each Cash Generating Unit (CGU) to its recoverable amount. The recoverable amount of a CGU is represented by its 
value in use (VIU), except in circumstances where the carrying amount of a CGU exceeds its VIU. In such cases, the greater of the 
CGU’s fair value less costs of disposal (FVLCD) and its VIU is the recoverable amount. Management estimated the recoverable 
amount of the Caribbean Banking CGU based on its FVLCD. Management calculated the FVLCD using a discounted cash flow 
method that projects future cash flows over a 5-year period based on management forecasts, adjusted to approximate the 
considerations of a prospective third-party buyer. Cash flows beyond the initial 5-year period are assumed by management to 
increase at a constant rate using a nominal long-term growth rate. The discount rate used to determine the present value of the 
Caribbean Banking CGU’s projected future cash flows is based on the bank-wide cost of capital, adjusted for the risks to which 
the CGU is exposed. As disclosed by management, with the improved economic environment in 2021, tempered by continued 
uncertainty related to COVID-19, the recoverable amount of the Caribbean Banking CGU has increased. As of August 1, 2021, 
management determined that the recoverable amount was 123% of its carrying amount. Management also considered reasonably 
possible alternative scenarios, including market comparable transactions, which yielded valuations ranging from a material 
surplus to an immaterial deficit. Management uses significant judgment to determine inputs to the discounted cash flow model. If 
the future cash flows and other assumptions in future periods deviate significantly from the current amounts used in 
management’s impairment testing, the value of goodwill could become impaired. 
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to the goodwill impairment assessment 
of the Caribbean Banking CGU is a critical audit matter are: (i) there was significant judgment required by management when 
determining the recoverable amount of the CGU, including projecting future cash flows; (ii) there was a high degree of auditor 
judgment and subjectivity in performing procedures over management’s calculation of the recoverable amount of the CGU, and 
evaluating audit evidence; and (iii) the audit effort included the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge. 
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall 
opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to 
management’s goodwill impairment test, including controls over the determination of the recoverable amount of the Caribbean 
Banking CGU. These procedures also included, among others, testing management’s process for determining the recoverable 
amount of the CGU, which consisted of, among others: (i) evaluating the appropriateness of the discounted cash flow model 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
131 

(ii) testing the completeness, accuracy, and relevance of underlying data used in the model; (iii) evaluating the reasonableness 
of assumptions used by management, related to future cash flows, which involved evaluating the consistency with (a) current 
and past performance of the CGU, (b) external market data and industry data, and (c) evidence obtained in other areas of the 
audit; and iv) evaluating consistency of the recoverable amount with market comparable transactions. Professionals with 
specialized skill and knowledge were used to assist in evaluating (i) the appropriateness of management’s discounted cash flow 
model; and ii) the consistency of the recoverable amount of the CGU with market comparable transactions. 
Uncertain Tax Positions 
As described in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, the Bank is subject to income tax laws in various jurisdictions 
where it operates and the complex tax laws are potentially subject to different interpretations by management and the relevant 
taxation authorities. As disclosed by management, significant judgment is required in the interpretation of the relevant tax laws, 
and in assessing the probability of acceptance of the Bank’s tax positions to determine tax provisions, which includes 
management’s best estimate of uncertain tax positions that are under audit or appeal by the relevant taxation authorities. 
Management performs a review on a quarterly basis to incorporate its best assessment based on information available, but 
additional liability and income tax expense could result based on the acceptance of the Bank’s tax positions by the relevant tax 
authorities. In some cases, as described in Note 21, the Bank has received reassessments denying the tax deductibility of 
dividends from transactions including those with Tax Indifferent Investors. 
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to the uncertain tax positions is a critical 
audit matter are that: (i) there was significant judgment required by management, including a high degree of estimation 
uncertainty, when a) interpreting the relevant tax laws, and b) assessing the probability of acceptance of the Bank’s tax 
positions, which includes management’s best estimate of tax positions that are under audit or appeal by relevant taxation 
authorities; (ii) there was a high degree of auditor judgment and subjectivity in performing procedures to evaluate the uncertain 
tax positions; and (iii) the audit effort included the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge. 
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall 
opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the 
evaluation of uncertain tax positions and the impact on tax provisions. These procedures also included, among others, testing 
management’s process used in (i) assessing the probability of acceptance of the Bank’s tax positions; and (ii) estimating 
provisions relating to uncertain tax positions, if applicable, which reflects management’s best estimate of tax positions that are 
under audit or appeal by relevant taxation authorities. This involved: (i) evaluating the appropriateness of the methods used; 
(ii) testing the completeness, accuracy, and relevance of underlying data used; (iii) reviewing correspondence with relevant 
taxation authorities; (iv) making inquiries of the Bank’s internal and external legal counsel; and (v) evaluating, with the 
assistance of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge, the application of relevant tax laws, whether it is probable that 
the relevant tax authorities will accept the tax positions, and evidence used by management. 
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP 
Chartered Professional Accountants, Licensed Public Accountants 
Toronto, Canada 
November 30, 2021 
We have served as the Bank’s auditor since 2016. 
132
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Consolidated Balance Sheets 
 
As at
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Assets 
 
 
Cash and due from banks 
$
113,846 
$
118,888 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
79,638 
39,013 
Securities (Note 4) 
 
 
Trading 
139,240 
136,071 
Investment, net of applicable allowance 
145,484 
139,743 
 
284,724 
275,814 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed 
307,903 
313,015 
Loans (Note 5) 
 
 
Retail 
503,598 
457,976 
Wholesale 
218,066 
208,655 
 
721,664 
666,631 
Allowance for loan losses (Note 5) 
(4,089) 
(5,639) 
 
717,575 
660,992 
Segregated fund net assets (Note 15) 
2,666 
1,922 
Other 
 
 
Customers’ liability under acceptances 
19,798 
18,507 
Derivatives (Note 8) 
95,541 
113,488 
Premises and equipment (Note 9) 
7,424 
7,934 
Goodwill (Note 10) 
10,854 
11,302 
Other intangibles (Note 10) 
4,471 
4,752 
Other assets (Note 12) 
61,883 
58,921 
 
199,971 
214,904 
Total assets 
$ 1,706,323 
$ 1,624,548 
Liabilities and equity 
 
 
Deposits (Note 13) 
 
 
Personal 
$
362,488 
$
343,052 
Business and government 
696,353 
624,311 
Bank 
41,990 
44,522 
 
1,100,831 
1,011,885 
Segregated fund net liabilities (Note 15) 
2,666 
1,922 
Other 
 
 
Acceptances 
19,873 
18,618 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
37,841 
29,285 
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase agreements and securities loaned 
262,201 
274,231 
Derivatives (Note 8) 
91,439 
109,927 
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities (Note 14) 
12,816 
12,215 
Other liabilities (Note 17) 
70,301 
69,831 
 
494,471 
514,107 
Subordinated debentures (Note 18) 
9,593 
9,867 
Total liabilities 
1,607,561 
1,537,781 
Equity attributable to shareholders 
 
 
Preferred shares and other equity instruments (Note 19) 
6,684 
5,945 
Common shares (Note 19) 
17,655 
17,499 
Retained earnings 
71,795 
59,806 
Other components of equity 
2,533 
3,414 
 
98,667 
86,664 
Non-controlling interests 
95 
103 
Total equity 
98,762 
86,767 
Total liabilities and equity 
$ 1,706,323 
$ 1,624,548 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 
David I. McKay 
Frank Vettese  
President and Chief Executive Officer 
Director 
 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
133 

Consolidated Statements of Income 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except per share amounts) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Interest and dividend income (Note 3) 
 
 
Loans 
$
21,654 
$
23,420 
Securities 
4,877 
6,488 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed 
1,309 
4,668 
Deposits and other 
305 
307 
 
28,145 
34,883 
Interest expense (Note 3) 
 
 
Deposits and other 
5,448 
8,783 
Other liabilities 
2,516 
4,985 
Subordinated debentures 
179 
280 
 
8,143 
14,048 
Net interest income 
20,002 
20,835 
Non-interest income 
 
 
Insurance premiums, investment and fee income (Note 14) 
5,600 
5,361 
Trading revenue 
1,183 
1,239 
Investment management and custodial fees 
7,132 
6,101 
Mutual fund revenue 
4,251 
3,712 
Securities brokerage commissions 
1,538 
1,439 
Service charges 
1,858 
1,842 
Underwriting and other advisory fees 
2,692 
2,319 
Foreign exchange revenue, other than trading 
1,066 
1,012 
Card service revenue 
1,078 
969 
Credit fees 
1,530 
1,321 
Net gains on investment securities 
145 
90 
Share of profit in joint ventures and associates (Note 11) 
130 
77 
Other 
1,488 
864 
 
29,691 
26,346 
Total revenue 
49,693 
47,181 
Provision for credit losses (Notes 4 and 5) 
(753) 
4,351 
Insurance policyholder benefits, claims and acquisition expense (Note 14) 
3,891 
3,683 
Non-interest expense 
 
 
Human resources (Note 16 and 20) 
16,539 
15,252 
Equipment 
1,986 
1,907 
Occupancy 
1,584 
1,660 
Communications 
931 
989 
Professional fees 
1,351 
1,330 
Amortization of other intangibles (Note 10) 
1,287 
1,273 
Other 
2,246 
2,347 
 
25,924 
24,758 
Income before income taxes 
20,631 
14,389 
Income taxes (Note 21) 
4,581 
2,952 
Net income 
$
16,050 
$
11,437 
Net income attributable to: 
 
 
Shareholders 
$
16,038 
$
11,432 
Non-controlling interests 
12 
5 
 
$
16,050 
$
11,437 
Basic earnings per share (in dollars) (Note 22) 
$
11.08 
$
7.84 
Diluted earnings per share (in dollars) (Note 22) 
11.06 
7.82 
Dividends per common share (in dollars)  
4.32 
4.29 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 
134
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Net income 
$
16,050 
$
11,437 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of taxes (Note 21) 
 
 
Items that will be reclassified subsequently to income: 
 
 
Net change in unrealized gains (losses) on debt securities and loans at fair value through 
other comprehensive income 
 
 
Net unrealized gains (losses) on debt securities and loans at fair value through other 
comprehensive income 
177 
(24) 
Provision for credit losses recognized in income 
(9) 
13 
Reclassification of net losses (gains) on debt securities and loans at fair value through 
other comprehensive income to income 
(117) 
(161) 
 
51 
(172) 
Foreign currency translation adjustments 
 
 
Unrealized foreign currency translation gains (losses) 
(4,316) 
810 
Net foreign currency translation gains (losses) from hedging activities 
1,740 
(397) 
Reclassification of losses (gains) on foreign currency translation to income 
(7) 
(21) 
Reclassification of losses (gains) on net investment hedging activities to income 
(1) 
21 
 
(2,584) 
413 
Net change in cash flow hedges 
 
 
Net gains (losses) on derivatives designated as cash flow hedges 
1,373 
(1,145) 
Reclassification of losses (gains) on derivatives designated as cash flow hedges to income 
272 
72 
 
1,645 
(1,073) 
Items that will not be reclassified subsequently to income: 
 
 
Remeasurements of employee benefit plans 
2,251 
(68) 
Net fair value change due to credit risk on financial liabilities designated at fair value through 
profit or loss 
55 
(263) 
Net gains (losses) on equity securities designated at fair value through other 
comprehensive income 
38 
28 
 
2,344 
(303) 
Total other comprehensive income (loss), net of taxes 
1,456 
(1,135) 
Total comprehensive income (loss) 
$
17,506 
$
10,302 
Total comprehensive income attributable to: 
 
 
Shareholders 
$
17,501 
$
10,295 
Non-controlling interests 
5 
7 
 
$
17,506 
$
10,302 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
135 

Consolidated Statements of Changes in Equity 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other components of equity 
 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Preferred 
shares and 
other equity 
instruments 
Common 
shares 
Treasury – 
preferred 
shares and 
other equity 
instruments 
Treasury – 
common 
shares 
Retained 
earnings 
FVOCI 
securities 
and loans 
Foreign 
currency 
translation 
Cash flow 
hedges 
Total other 
components 
of equity 
Equity 
attributable to 
shareholders 
Non-controlling 
interests 
Total 
equity 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
5,948 $ 17,628 $
(3) $
(129) $ 59,806 
$
(139) $
4,632 $ (1,079) $
3,414 $
86,664 $
103 $ 86,767 
Changes in equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Issues of share capital and other equity instruments 
2,250 
100 
– 
– 
(5) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
2,345 
– 
2,345 
Common shares purchased for cancellation 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Redemption of preferred shares and other equity instruments 
(1,475) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(1,475) 
– 
(1,475) 
Sales of treasury shares and other equity instruments 
– 
– 
647 
4,116 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
4,763 
– 
4,763 
Purchases of treasury shares and other equity instruments 
– 
– 
(683) 
(4,060) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(4,743) 
– 
(4,743) 
Share-based compensation awards 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(6) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(6) 
– 
(6) 
Dividends on common shares 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(6,158) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(6,158) 
– 
(6,158) 
Dividends on preferred shares and distributions on other 
equity instruments 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(257) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(257) 
(3) 
(260) 
Other 
– 
– 
– 
– 
33 
– 
– 
– 
– 
33 
(10) 
23 
Net income 
– 
– 
– 
– 
16,038 
– 
– 
– 
– 
16,038 
12 
16,050 
Total other comprehensive income (loss), net of taxes 
– 
– 
– 
– 
2,344 
51 
(2,577) 
1,645 
(881) 
1,463 
(7) 
1,456 
Balance at end of period 
$
6,723 $ 17,728 $
(39) $
(73) $ 71,795 
$
(88) $
2,055 $
566 $
2,533 $
98,667 $
95 $ 98,762 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other components of equity 
 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Preferred 
shares and 
other equity 
instruments 
Common 
shares 
Treasury – 
preferred 
shares and 
other equity 
instruments 
Treasury – 
common 
shares 
Retained 
earnings 
FVOCI 
securities 
and loans 
Foreign 
currency 
translation 
Cash flow 
hedges 
Total other 
components 
of equity 
Equity 
attributable to 
shareholders 
Non-controlling 
interests 
Total 
equity 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
5,706 $ 17,645 $
1 $
(58) $ 55,874 
$
33 $
4,221 $
(6) $
4,248 $
83,416 $
102 $ 83,518 
Changes in equity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Issues of share capital and other equity instruments 
1,750 
80 
– 
– 
(5) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
1,825 
– 
1,825 
Common shares purchased for cancellation 
– 
(97) 
– 
– 
(717) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(814) 
– 
(814) 
Redemption of preferred shares and other equity instruments 
(1,508) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(1,508) 
– 
(1,508) 
Sales of treasury shares and other equity instruments 
– 
– 
110 
4,668 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
4,778 
– 
4,778 
Purchases of treasury shares and other equity instruments 
– 
– 
(114) 
(4,739) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(4,853) 
– 
(4,853) 
Share-based compensation awards 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(3) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(3) 
– 
(3) 
Dividends on common shares 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(6,111) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(6,111) 
– 
(6,111) 
Dividends on preferred shares and distributions on other 
equity instruments 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(268) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(268) 
(6) 
(274) 
Other 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(93) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(93) 
– 
(93) 
Net income 
– 
– 
– 
– 
11,432 
– 
– 
– 
– 
11,432 
5 
11,437 
Total other comprehensive income (loss), net of taxes 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(303) 
(172) 
411 
(1,073) 
(834) 
(1,137) 
2 
(1,135) 
Balance at end of period 
$
5,948 $ 17,628 $
(3) $
(129) $ 59,806 
$
(139) $
4,632 $
(1,079) $
3,414 $
86,664 $
103 $ 86,767 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 
136
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows 
 
For the year ended 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Cash flows from operating activities 
 
 
Net income 
$
16,050 
$
11,437 
Adjustments for non-cash items and others 
 
 
Provision for credit losses 
(753) 
4,351 
Depreciation 
1,276 
1,333 
Deferred income taxes 
581 
(586) 
Amortization and impairment of other intangibles 
1,316 
1,315 
Net changes in investments in joint ventures and associates 
(127) 
(73) 
Losses (Gains) on investment securities 
(151) 
(218) 
Losses (Gains) on disposition of business 
(26) 
8 
Adjustments for net changes in operating assets and liabilities 
 
 
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities 
601 
814 
Net change in accrued interest receivable and payable 
(509) 
(142) 
Current income taxes 
1,738 
18 
Derivative assets 
17,947 
(11,928) 
Derivative liabilities 
(18,488) 
11,384 
Trading securities 
(3,164) 
10,377 
Loans, net of securitizations 
(54,987) 
(45,639) 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed 
5,112 
(6,054) 
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase agreements and securities loaned 
(12,030) 
47,645 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
8,556 
(5,784) 
Deposits, net of securitizations 
88,876 
126,826 
Brokers and dealers receivable and payable 
35 
2,301 
Other 
9,191 
(8,566) 
Net cash from (used in) operating activities 
61,044 
138,819 
Cash flows from investing activities 
 
 
Change in interest-bearing deposits with banks 
(40,618) 
(676) 
Proceeds from sales and maturities of investment securities 
108,925 
113,286 
Purchases of investment securities 
(123,547) 
(149,516) 
Net acquisitions of premises and equipment and other intangibles 
(2,186) 
(2,629) 
Proceeds from dispositions 
78 
– 
Cash used in acquisitions 
– 
(22) 
Net cash from (used in) investing activities 
(57,348) 
(39,557) 
Cash flows from financing activities 
 
 
Issuance of subordinated debentures 
2,750 
2,750 
Repayment of subordinated debentures 
(2,500) 
(3,000) 
Issue of common shares, net of issuance costs 
90 
70 
Common shares purchased for cancellation 
– 
(814) 
Issue of preferred shares and other equity instruments, net of issuance costs 
2,245 
1,745 
Redemption of preferred shares and other equity instruments 
(1,475) 
(1,508) 
Sales of treasury shares 
4,763 
4,778 
Purchases of treasury shares 
(4,743) 
(4,853) 
Dividends paid on shares and distributions paid on other equity instruments 
(6,420) 
(6,333) 
Dividends/distributions paid to non-controlling interests 
(3) 
(6) 
Change in short-term borrowings of subsidiaries 
(14) 
13 
Repayment of lease liabilities 
(621) 
(588) 
Net cash from (used in) financing activities 
(5,928) 
(7,746) 
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and due from banks 
(2,810) 
1,062 
Net change in cash and due from banks 
(5,042) 
92,578 
Cash and due from banks at beginning of period (1) 
118,888 
26,310 
Cash and due from banks at end of period (1) 
$
113,846 
$
118,888 
Cash flows from operating activities include: 
 
 
Amount of interest paid 
$
7,555 
$
13,058 
Amount of interest received 
26,412 
33,244 
Amount of dividends received 
2,575 
2,753 
Amount of income taxes paid 
4,198 
2,880 
(1) 
We are required to maintain balances with central banks and other regulatory authorities. The total balances were $2 billion as at October 31, 2021 (October 31, 2020 – 
$3 billion; October 31, 2019 – $3 billion). 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
137 

Note 1
General information 
Royal Bank of Canada and its subsidiaries (the Bank) provide diversified financial services including Personal & Commercial 
Banking, Wealth Management, Insurance, Investor & Treasury Services and Capital Markets products and services on a global 
basis. Refer to Note 26 for further details on our business segments. 
The parent bank, Royal Bank of Canada, is a Schedule I Bank under the Bank Act (Canada) incorporated and domiciled in 
Canada. Our corporate headquarters are located at Royal Bank Plaza, 200 Bay Street, Toronto, Ontario, Canada and our head 
office is located at 1 Place Ville-Marie, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Our common shares are listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange 
and New York Stock Exchange with the ticker symbol RY. 
These Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in compliance with International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS) as issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB). Unless otherwise stated, monetary amounts are stated 
in Canadian dollars. Tabular information is stated in millions of dollars, except as noted. These Consolidated Financial 
Statements also comply with Subsection 308 of the Bank Act (Canada), which states that, except as otherwise specified by the 
Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Canada (OSFI), our Consolidated Financial Statements are to be prepared in 
accordance with IFRS. Except where otherwise noted, the accounting policies outlined in Note 2 have been consistently applied 
to all periods presented. 
On November 30, 2021, the Board of Directors authorized the Consolidated Financial Statements for issue. 
Note 2
Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments 
The significant accounting policies used in the preparation of these Consolidated Financial Statements, including the accounting 
requirements prescribed by OSFI, are summarized below. These accounting policies conform, in all material respects, to IFRS. 
Except where otherwise noted, the same accounting policies have been applied to all periods presented. 
General 
Use of estimates and assumptions 
In preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements, management is required to make subjective estimates and assumptions that 
affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, net income and related disclosures. Estimates made by management are based 
on historical experience and other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. Key sources of estimation uncertainty 
include: determination of fair value of financial instruments, the allowance for credit losses, insurance claims and policy benefit 
liabilities, pensions and other post-employment benefits, income taxes, carrying value of goodwill and other intangible assets, 
and litigation provisions. Accordingly, actual results may differ from these and other estimates thereby impacting our future 
Consolidated Financial Statements. Refer to the relevant accounting policies in this Note for details on our use of estimates and 
assumptions. 
Significant judgments 
In preparation of these Consolidated Financial Statements, management is required to make significant judgments that affect 
the carrying amounts of certain assets and liabilities, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses recorded during the 
period. 
The COVID-19 pandemic has continued to evolve and the economic environment in which we operate could continue to be 
subject to sustained uncertainty, which could continue to impact our financial results. While the global economic recovery has 
continued, momentum has waned amid ongoing uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of the impacts of the COVID-19 
pandemic. The current environment requires particularly complex judgments and estimates in certain areas. We are closely 
monitoring the changing conditions and their impacts. 
Significant judgments have been made in the following areas and discussed as noted in the Consolidated Financial 
Statements: 
Consolidation of structured entities 
Note 2 
Note 7 
Application of the effective interest method 
Note 2 
Fair value of financial instruments 
Note 2 
Note 3 
Derecognition of financial assets 
Note 2 
Note 6 
Allowance for credit losses 
Note 2 
Note 4 
Note 5 
Income taxes 
Note 2 
Note 21 
Employee benefits 
Note 2 
Note 16 
Provisions 
Note 2 
Note 23 
Note 24 
Goodwill and other intangibles 
Note 2 
Note 10 
 
 
Basis of consolidation 
Our Consolidated Financial Statements include the assets and liabilities and results of operations of the parent company, Royal 
Bank of Canada, and its subsidiaries including certain structured entities, after elimination of intercompany transactions, 
balances, revenues and expenses. 
138
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Consolidation 
Subsidiaries are those entities, including structured entities, over which we have control. We control an entity when we are 
exposed, or have rights, to variable returns from our involvement with the entity and have the ability to affect those returns 
through our power over the investee. We have power over an entity when we have existing rights that give us the current ability 
to direct the activities that most significantly affect the entity’s returns (relevant activities). Power may be determined on the 
basis of voting rights or, in the case of structured entities, other contractual arrangements. 
We are not deemed to control an entity when we exercise power over an entity in an agency capacity. In determining 
whether we are acting as an agent, we consider the overall relationship between us, the investee and other parties to the 
arrangement with respect to the following factors: (i) the scope of our decision-making power; (ii) the rights held by other 
parties; (iii) the remuneration to which we are entitled; and (iv) our exposure to variability of returns. 
The determination of control is based on the current facts and circumstances and is continuously assessed. In some 
circumstances, different factors and conditions may indicate that different parties control an entity depending on whether those 
factors and conditions are assessed in isolation or in totality. Significant judgment is applied in assessing the relevant factors 
and conditions in totality when determining whether we control an entity. Specifically, judgment is applied in assessing whether 
we have substantive decision-making rights over the relevant activities and whether we are exercising our power as a principal 
or an agent. 
We consolidate all subsidiaries from the date we obtain control and cease consolidation when an entity is no longer 
controlled by us. Our consolidation conclusions affect the classification and amount of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses 
reported in our Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Non-controlling interests in subsidiaries that we consolidate are shown on our Consolidated Balance Sheets as a separate 
component of equity which is distinct from equity attributable to our shareholders. The net income attributable to 
non-controlling interests is separately disclosed in our Consolidated Statements of Income. 
Investments in joint ventures and associates 
Our investments in associated corporations and limited partnerships over which we have significant influence are accounted for 
using the equity method. The equity method is also applied to our interests in joint ventures over which we have joint control. 
Under the equity method of accounting, investments are initially recorded at cost, and the carrying amount is increased or 
decreased to recognize our share of the investee’s net profit or loss, including our proportionate share of the investee’s Other 
comprehensive income (OCI), subsequent to the date of acquisition. 
Non-current assets held for sale and discontinued operations 
Non-current assets (and disposal groups) are classified as held for sale if their carrying amounts will be recovered principally 
through a sale transaction rather than through continuing use. This condition is satisfied when the asset is available for 
immediate sale in its present condition, management is committed to the sale, and it is highly probable to occur within one year. 
Non-current assets (and disposal groups) classified as held for sale are measured at the lower of their previous carrying amount 
and fair value less costs to sell and if significant, are presented separately from other assets on our Consolidated Balance 
Sheets. 
A disposal group is classified as a discontinued operation if it meets the following conditions: (i) it is a component that can 
be distinguished operationally and financially from the rest of our operations and (ii) it represents either a separate major line of 
business or is part of a single coordinated plan to dispose of a separate major line of business or geographical area of 
operations. Disposal groups classified as discontinued operations are presented separately from our continuing operations in 
our Consolidated Statements of Income. 
Changes in accounting policies 
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting (Conceptual Framework) 
During the first quarter of 2021, we adopted the revised Conceptual Framework, which replaces the previous version of the 
Conceptual Framework issued in 2010. The Conceptual Framework is not a standard, and does not override the concepts or 
requirements in any standard. It may be used to develop consistent accounting policies where there is no applicable standard 
in place. The revisions include a few new concepts, updated definitions and recognition criteria for assets and liabilities and 
clarifies some important concepts. These amendments had no material impact on our Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Interest Rate Benchmark Reform 
During the first quarter of 2021, we early adopted the Phase 2 amendments to IFRS 9 Financial Instruments, IAS 39 Financial 
Instruments: Recognition and Measurement, IFRS 7 Financial Instruments: Disclosures, IFRS 4 Insurance contracts, and IFRS 16 
Leases (the Amendments) in response to the market transition away from interbank offered rates (IBORs) to alternative 
benchmark rates (ABRs) as part of the IBOR reform (the Reform). The Amendments provide two key reliefs which are applicable 
to changes undertaken as a direct consequence of the Reform and where the transition from IBOR to ABRs rates are transacted 
on an economically equivalent basis: 
•
For modifications of financial instruments carried at amortized cost resulting from the Reform which are transacted on 
an economically equivalent basis, the Amendments allow the benchmark interest rate change to be reflected 
prospectively in the effective interest rate of the instrument rather than as an immediate gain or loss. 
•
If qualifying criteria are met, hedging relationships that are directly impacted by the Reform would be able to continue 
hedge accounting upon transition to ABRs. 
Progress in and risks arising from the transition to ABRs 
To manage our transition to ABRs, we have implemented a comprehensive enterprise-wide program and governance structure 
that addresses the key areas of impact including contract remediation, funding and liquidity planning, risk management, 
financial reporting and valuation, systems, processes and client education and communication. Transition activities are focused 
on two broad streams of work: (i) developing new ABR linked products, and (ii) conversion of existing LIBOR based contracts to 
ABRs. Our program timelines are ultimately dependent on broader market acceptance of products that reference the new ABRs 
and our clients’ readiness and ability to adopt the replacement products. Significant matters that we continue to evaluate 
include client product offerings, short and long-term funding strategies, and our hedging programs. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
139 

Note 2
Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued) 
We continue to work towards the recommended target dates for the cessation of LIBOR-based products provided by our 
regulators and are on track with our transition activities to move to ABRs. These target dates reflect the announcement made on 
March 5, 2021 when the Financial Conduct Authority, the regulator of the ICE Benchmark Administration (IBA) which administers 
LIBOR, announced the permanent cessation or loss of representativeness of all 35 LIBOR settings currently published by the IBA. 
As a result of this announcement, GBP LIBOR settings to which we have significant exposure will cease or lose their 
representativeness after December 31, 2021. USD LIBOR settings to which we have significant exposure will predominantly cease 
or lose their representativeness after June 30, 2023. 
The following tables show the Bank’s significant exposures to financial instruments referencing benchmark interest rates subject 
to the Reform that have yet to transition to ABRs and maturing after December 31, 2021 for non-USD LIBOR instruments and after 
June 30, 2023 for USD LIBOR instruments. In the normal course of business, our derivative notional amounts may fluctuate with 
minimal impact to our IBOR conversion plans. 
 
As at 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
November 1, 2020 (1) 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Non-derivative 
financial assets (2) 
Non-derivative 
financial liabilities (3) 
Derivative 
notional (4)  
Non-derivative 
financial assets (2) 
Non-derivative 
financial liabilities (3) 
Derivative 
notional (4) 
USD LIBOR 
$
68,325 
$
1,420 
$4,533,965  $
57,432 
$
941 
$ 3,368,307 
GBP LIBOR 
3,250 
1,175 
2,308,125  
7,518 
1,227 
1,773,893 
Other IBOR currencies 
340 
2,260 
92,401  
324 
2,456 
263,299 
 
$
71,915 
$
4,855 
$6,934,491  $
65,274 
$
4,624 
$ 5,405,499 
Cross currency swaps 
 
 
  
 
 
 
USD LIBOR – GBP 
LIBOR 
n.a. 
n.a. 
$
507,437  
n.a. 
n.a. 
$
384,263 
Other combinations 
n.a. 
n.a. 
67,404  
n.a. 
n.a. 
52,875 
 
n.a. 
n.a. 
$
574,841  
n.a. 
n.a. 
$
437,138 
 
$
71,915 
$
4,855 
$7,509,332  $
65,274 
$
4,624 
$ 5,842,637 
(1) 
Amounts have been updated from those previously presented to reflect the regulatory developments related to the USD LIBOR cessation date. 
(2) 
Non-derivative assets represent the drawn outstanding balance of Loans and the fair value of Securities. 
(3) 
Non-derivative liabilities represent Deposits. 
(4) 
The notional amount of derivative instruments excludes cross currency swaps with multiple LIBOR legs, which are presented separately in the Cross currency swaps 
section of this table. 
n.a. 
not applicable 
The following table presents the undrawn balances of loan commitments referencing benchmark interest rates subject to the 
Reform. 
 
As at  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31, 2021  
November 1, 2020 (1) 
Authorized and committed undrawn commitments 
  
 
USD LIBOR 
$
122,437  
$
82,054 
GBP LIBOR 
3,026  
7,533 
Other IBOR currencies 
5  
1,370 
 
$
125,468  
$
90,957 
(1) 
Amounts have been updated from those previously presented to reflect the regulatory developments related to the USD LIBOR cessation date. 
We continue to manage significant exposures to benchmarks that have no announced plans for cessation or further reform, 
including the Canadian Dollar Offered Rate (CDOR), EURO Interbank Offered Rate (EURIBOR) and Australian Bank Bill Swap Rate 
(BBSW), which are excluded from the tables above. 
Financial Instruments 
Classification of financial assets 
Financial assets are measured at initial recognition at fair value, and are classified and subsequently measured at fair value 
through profit or loss (FVTPL), fair value through other comprehensive income (FVOCI) or amortized cost based on our business 
model for managing the financial instruments and the contractual cash flow characteristics of the instrument. 
Debt instruments are measured at amortized cost if both of the following conditions are met and the asset is not designated 
as FVTPL: (a) the asset is held within a business model that is Held-to-Collect (HTC) as described below, and (b) the contractual 
terms of the instrument give rise to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount 
outstanding (SPPI). 
Debt instruments are measured at FVOCI if both of the following conditions are met and the asset is not designated as 
FVTPL: (a) the asset is held within a business model that is Held-to-Collect-and-Sell (HTC&S) as described below, and (b) the 
contractual terms of the instrument give rise, on specified dates, to cash flows that are SPPI. 
All other debt instruments are measured at FVTPL. 
Equity instruments are measured at FVTPL, unless the asset is not held for trading purposes and we make an irrevocable 
election to designate the asset as FVOCI. This election is made on an instrument-by-instrument basis. 
140
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Business model assessment 
We determine our business models at the level that best reflects how we manage portfolios of financial assets to achieve our 
business objectives. Judgment is used in determining our business models, which is supported by relevant, objective evidence 
including: 
•
How the economic activities of our businesses generate benefits, for example through trading revenue, enhancing yields 
or hedging funding or other costs and how such economic activities are evaluated and reported to key management 
personnel; 
•
The significant risks affecting the performance of our businesses, for example, market risk, credit risk, or other risks as 
described in the Risk Management section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis, and the activities undertaken to 
manage those risks; 
•
Historical and future expectations of sales of the loans or securities portfolios managed as part of a business model; 
and 
•
The compensation structures for managers of our businesses, to the extent that these are directly linked to the 
economic performance of the business model. 
Our business models fall into three categories, which are indicative of the key strategies used to generate returns: 
•
HTC: The objective of this business model is to hold loans and securities to collect contractual principal and interest 
cash flows. Sales are incidental to this objective and are expected to be insignificant or infrequent. 
•
HTC&S: Both collecting contractual cash flows and sales are integral to achieving the objective of the business model. 
•
Other fair value business models: These business models are neither HTC nor HTC&S, and primarily represent business 
models where assets are held-for-trading or managed on a fair value basis. 
SPPI assessment 
Instruments held within a HTC or HTC&S business model are assessed to evaluate if their contractual cash flows are comprised 
of solely payments of principal and interest. SPPI payments are those which would typically be expected from basic lending 
arrangements. Principal amounts include par repayments from lending and financing arrangements, and interest primarily 
relates to basic lending returns, including compensation for credit risk and the time value of money associated with the principal 
amount outstanding over a period of time. Interest can also include other basic lending risks and costs (for example, liquidity 
risk, servicing or administrative costs) associated with holding the financial asset for a period of time, and a profit margin. 
Where the contractual terms introduce exposure to risk or variability of cash flows that are inconsistent with a basic lending 
arrangement, the related financial asset is classified and measured at FVTPL. 
Securities 
Trading securities include all securities that are classified as FVTPL by nature and securities designated as FVTPL. Obligations to 
deliver trading securities sold but not yet purchased are recorded as liabilities and carried at fair value. Realized and unrealized 
gains and losses on these securities are generally recorded as Trading revenue or Non-interest income – Other. Dividends and 
interest income accruing on Trading securities are recorded in Interest income. Interest and dividends accrued on interest-
bearing and equity securities sold short are recorded in Interest expense. 
Investment securities include all securities classified as FVOCI and amortized cost. All investment securities are initially 
recorded at fair value and subsequently measured according to the respective classification. 
Investment securities carried at amortized cost are measured using the effective interest method, and are presented net of 
any allowance for credit losses, calculated in accordance with our policy for Allowance for credit losses, as described below. 
Interest income, including the amortization of premiums and discounts on securities measured at amortized cost are recorded in 
interest income. Impairment gains or losses recognized on amortized cost securities are recorded in Provision for credit losses 
(PCL). When a debt instrument measured at amortized cost is sold, the difference between the sale proceeds and the amortized 
cost of the security at the time of the sale is recorded as Net gains on Investment securities in Non-interest income. 
Debt securities carried at FVOCI are measured at fair value with unrealized gains and losses arising from changes in fair value 
included in Other components of equity. Impairment gains and losses are included in PCL and correspondingly reduce the 
accumulated changes in fair value included in Other components of equity. When a debt instrument measured at FVOCI is sold, the 
cumulative gain or loss is reclassified from Other components of equity to Net gains on Investment securities in Non-interest income. 
Equity securities carried at FVOCI are measured at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses arising from changes in fair value 
are recorded in Other components of equity and not subsequently reclassified to profit or loss when realized. Dividends from 
FVOCI equity securities are recognized in Interest income. 
We account for all of our securities using settlement date accounting and changes in fair value between the trade date and 
settlement date are reflected in income for securities measured at FVTPL, and changes in the fair value of securities measured at 
FVOCI between the trade and settlement dates are recorded in OCI except for changes in foreign exchange rates on debt 
securities, which are recorded in Non-interest income-Other. 
Fair value option 
A financial instrument with a reliably measurable fair value can be designated as FVTPL (the fair value option) on its initial 
recognition even if the financial instrument was not acquired or incurred principally for the purpose of selling or repurchasing. 
The fair value option can be used for financial assets if it eliminates or significantly reduces a measurement or recognition 
inconsistency that would otherwise arise from measuring assets or liabilities, or recognizing related gains and losses on a 
different basis (an accounting mismatch). The fair value option can be elected for financial liabilities if: (i) the election eliminates 
an accounting mismatch; (ii) the financial liability is part of a portfolio that is managed on a fair value basis, in accordance with a 
documented risk management or investment strategy; or (iii) there is an embedded derivative in the financial or non-financial 
host contract and the derivative is not closely related to the host contract. These instruments cannot be reclassified out of the 
FVTPL category while they are held or issued. 
Financial assets designated as FVTPL are recorded at fair value and any unrealized gain or loss arising due to changes in fair 
value is included in Trading revenue or Non-interest income – Other, depending on our business purpose for holding the financial 
asset. 
Financial liabilities designated as FVTPL are recorded at fair value and fair value changes attributable to changes in our own 
credit risk are recorded in OCI. Own credit risk amounts recognized in OCI will not be reclassified subsequently to net income. 
The remaining fair value changes not attributable to changes in our own credit risk are recorded in Trading revenue or 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
141 

Note 2
Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued) 
Non-interest income – Other, depending on our business purpose for holding the financial liability. Upon initial recognition, if we 
determine that presenting the effects of own credit risk changes in OCI would create or enlarge an accounting mismatch in net 
income, the full fair value change in our debt designated as FVTPL is recognized in net income. To make that determination, we 
assess whether we expect that the effects of changes in the liability’s credit risk will be offset in profit or loss by a change in the 
fair value of another financial instrument measured at FVTPL. Such an expectation is based on an economic relationship between 
the characteristics of the liability and the characteristics of the other financial instrument. The determination is made at initial 
recognition and is not reassessed. To determine the fair value adjustments on our debt instruments designated as FVTPL, we 
calculate the present value of the instruments based on the contractual cash flows over the term of the arrangement by using 
our effective funding rate at the beginning and end of the period. 
Determination of fair value 
The fair value of a financial instrument is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an 
orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We determine fair value by incorporating all factors 
that market participants would consider in setting a price, including commonly accepted valuation approaches. 
The Board of Directors provides oversight on valuation of financial instruments, primarily through the Audit Committee and 
Risk Committee. The Audit Committee reviews the presentation and disclosure of financial instruments that are measured at fair 
value, while the Risk Committee assesses the adequacy of governance structures and control processes for the valuation of 
these instruments. 
We have established policies, procedures and controls for valuation methodologies and techniques to ensure that fair value is 
reasonably estimated. Major valuation processes and controls include, but are not limited to, profit and loss decomposition, 
independent price verification (IPV) and model validation standards. These control processes are managed by either Finance or 
Group Risk Management and are independent of the relevant businesses and their trading functions. Profit and loss decomposition 
is a process to explain the fair value changes of certain positions and is performed daily for trading portfolios. All fair value 
instruments are subject to IPV, a process whereby trading function valuations are verified against external market prices and other 
relevant market data. Market data sources include traded prices, brokers and price vendors. We give priority to those third-party 
pricing services and prices having the highest and most consistent accuracy. The level of accuracy is determined over time by 
comparing third-party price values to traders’ or system values, to other pricing service values and, when available, to actual trade 
data. Quoted prices for identical instruments from pricing services or brokers are generally not adjusted unless there are issues 
such as stale prices. If multiple quotes for identical instruments are received, fair value is based on an average of the prices 
received or the quote from the most reliable vendor, after the outlier prices that fall outside of the pricing range are removed. 
Other valuation techniques are used when a price or quote is not available. Some valuation processes use models to determine 
fair value. We have a systematic and consistent approach to control the use of models. Valuation models are approved for use 
within our model risk management framework. The framework addresses, among other things, model development standards, 
validation processes and procedures and approval authorities. Model validation ensures that a model is suitable for its intended 
use and sets parameters for its use. All models are revalidated regularly by qualified personnel who are independent of the model 
design and development. Annually our model risk profile is reported to the Board of Directors. 
IFRS 13 Fair Value Measurement permits an exception, through an accounting policy choice, to measure the fair value of a 
portfolio of financial instruments on a net open risk position basis when certain criteria are met. We have elected to use this 
policy choice to determine the fair value of certain portfolios of financial instruments, primarily derivatives, based on a net 
exposure to market or credit risk. 
We record valuation adjustments to appropriately reflect counterparty credit quality of our derivative portfolio, differences 
between the actual counterparty collateral discount curve and standard overnight index swap (OIS) discounting for 
collateralized derivatives, funding valuation adjustments (FVA) for uncollateralized and under-collateralized over-the-counter 
(OTC) derivatives, unrealized gains or losses at inception of the transaction, bid-offer spreads, unobservable parameters and 
model limitations. These adjustments may be subjective as they require significant judgment in the input selection, such as 
implied probability of default (PD) and recovery rate, and are intended to arrive at a fair value that is determined based on 
assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the financial instrument. The realized price for a transaction may be 
different from its recorded value, previously estimated using management judgment. Valuation adjustments may therefore 
impact unrealized gains and losses recognized in Non-interest income – Trading revenue or Other. 
Valuation adjustments are recorded for the credit risk of our derivative portfolios in order to arrive at their fair values. Credit 
valuation adjustments (CVA) take into account our counterparties’ creditworthiness, the current and potential future 
mark-to-market of transactions and the effects of credit mitigants such as master netting and collateral agreements. CVA 
amounts are derived from estimates of exposure at default (EAD), PD, recovery rates on a counterparty basis and market and 
credit factor correlations. EAD is the value of expected derivative related assets and liabilities at the time of default, estimated 
through modelling using underlying risk factors. PD is implied from the market prices for credit protection and the credit ratings 
of the counterparty. When market data is unavailable, it is estimated by incorporating assumptions and adjustments that market 
participants would use for determining fair value using these inputs. Correlation is the statistical measure of how credit and 
market factors may move in relation to one another. Correlation is estimated using historical data. CVA is calculated daily and 
changes are recorded in Non-interest income – Trading revenue. 
FVA are also calculated to incorporate the cost and benefit of funding in the valuation of uncollateralized and under-
collateralized OTC derivatives. Future expected cash flows of these derivatives are discounted to reflect the cost and benefit of 
funding the derivatives by using a funding curve, implied volatilities and correlations as inputs. 
Where required, a valuation adjustment is made to reflect the unrealized gain or loss at inception of a financial instrument 
contract where the fair value of that financial instrument is not obtained from a quoted market price or cannot be evidenced by 
other observable market transactions based on a valuation technique incorporating observable market data. 
A bid-offer valuation adjustment is required when a financial instrument is valued at the mid-market price, instead of the bid 
or offer price for asset or liability positions, respectively. The valuation adjustment takes into account the spread from the 
mid-market price to either the bid or offer price. 
142
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Some valuation models require parameter calibration from such factors as market observable option prices. The calibration 
of parameters may be sensitive to factors such as the choice of instruments or optimization methodology. A valuation 
adjustment is also estimated to mitigate the uncertainties of parameter calibration and model limitations. 
In determining fair value, a hierarchy is used which prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques. The fair value hierarchy 
gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1) and the lowest 
priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3). Determination of fair value based on this hierarchy requires the use of observable market 
data whenever available. Level 1 inputs are unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that we 
have the ability to access at the measurement date. Level 2 inputs include quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active 
markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, and model inputs that are either 
observable, or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities. Level 3 
inputs are one or more inputs that are unobservable and significant to the fair value of the asset or liability. Unobservable inputs 
are used to measure fair value to the extent that observable inputs are not available at the measurement date. The availability of 
inputs for valuation may affect the selection of valuation techniques. The classification of a financial instrument in the hierarchy 
for disclosure purposes is based upon the lowest level of input that is significant to the measurement of fair value. 
Where observable prices or inputs are not available, management judgment is required to determine fair values by assessing 
other relevant sources of information such as historical data, proxy information from similar transactions, and through extrapolation 
and interpolation techniques. For more complex or illiquid instruments, significant judgment is required in the determination of the 
model used, the selection of model inputs, and in some cases the application of valuation adjustments to the model value or quoted 
price for inactively traded financial instruments, as the selection of model inputs may be subjective and the inputs may be 
unobservable. Unobservable inputs are inherently uncertain as there is little or no market data available from which to determine the 
level at which the transaction would occur under normal business circumstances. Appropriate parameter uncertainty and market risk 
valuation adjustments for such inputs and other model risk valuation adjustments are assessed in all such instances. 
Loans 
Loans are debt instruments recognized initially at fair value and are subsequently measured in accordance with the 
Classification of financial assets policy provided above. The majority of our loans are carried at amortized cost using the 
effective interest method, which represents the gross carrying amount less allowance for credit losses. 
Interest on loans is recognized in Interest income using the effective interest method. The estimated future cash flows used 
in this calculation include those determined by the contractual term of the asset and all fees that are considered to be integral to 
the effective interest rate. Also included in this amount are transaction costs and all other premiums or discounts. Fees that 
relate to activities such as originating, restructuring or renegotiating loans are deferred and recognized as Interest income over 
the expected term of such loans using the effective interest method. Where there is a reasonable expectation that a loan will be 
originated, commitment and standby fees are also recognized as interest income over the expected term of the resulting loans 
using the effective interest method. Otherwise, such fees are recorded as other liabilities and amortized into Non-interest income 
over the commitment or standby period. Future prepayment fees on mortgage loans are not included as part of the effective 
interest rate at origination. If prepayment fees are received on a renewal of a mortgage loan before maturity, the fee is included 
as part of the effective interest rate, and if not renewed, the prepayment fee is recognized in interest income at the prepayment 
date. 
For loans carried at amortized cost or FVOCI, impairment losses are recognized at each balance sheet date in accordance 
with the three-stage impairment model outlined below. 
Allowance for credit losses 
An allowance for credit losses (ACL) is established for all financial assets, except for financial assets classified or designated as 
FVTPL and equity securities designated as FVOCI, which are not subject to impairment assessment. Assets subject to impairment 
assessment include loans, debt securities, interest-bearing deposits with banks, customers’ liability under acceptances, accounts 
and accrued interest receivable, and finance and operating lease receivables. ACL on loans measured at amortized cost is 
presented in Allowance for loan losses. ACL on debt securities measured at FVOCI is presented in Other components of equity. 
Other financial assets carried at amortized cost are presented net of ACL on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Off-balance sheet items subject to impairment assessment include financial guarantees and undrawn loan commitments. 
ACL on off-balance sheet items is separately calculated and included in Other Liabilities – Provisions. 
We measure the ACL on each balance sheet date according to a three-stage expected credit loss impairment model: 
•
Performing financial assets 
•
Stage 1 – From initial recognition of a financial asset to the date on which the asset has experienced a significant 
increase in credit risk relative to its initial recognition, a loss allowance is recognized equal to the credit losses 
expected to result from defaults occurring over the 12 months following the reporting date. 
•
Stage 2 – Following a significant increase in credit risk relative to the initial recognition of the financial asset, a loss 
allowance is recognized equal to the credit losses expected over the remaining lifetime of the asset. 
•
Impaired financial assets 
•
Stage 3 – When a financial asset is considered to be credit-impaired, a loss allowance is recognized equal to credit 
losses expected over the remaining lifetime of the asset. Interest income is calculated based on the carrying 
amount of the asset, net of the loss allowance, rather than on its gross carrying amount. 
The ACL is a discounted probability-weighted estimate of the cash shortfalls expected to result from defaults over the relevant 
time horizon. For loan commitments, credit loss estimates consider the portion of the commitment that is expected to be drawn 
over the relevant time period. For financial guarantees, credit loss estimates are based on the expected payments required under 
the guarantee contract. For finance lease receivables, credit loss estimates are based on cash flows consistent with the cash 
flows used in measuring the lease receivable. 
Increases or decreases in the required ACL attributable to model changes and new originations, sales or maturities, and 
changes in risk, parameters and exposures due to changes in loss expectations or stage transfers are recorded in PCL. Write-offs 
and recoveries of amounts previously written off are recorded against ACL. 
The ACL represents an unbiased estimate of expected credit losses on our financial assets as at the balance sheet date. 
Judgment is required in making assumptions and estimations when calculating the ACL, including movements between the three 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
143 

Note 2
Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued) 
stages and the application of forward looking information. The underlying assumptions and estimates may result in changes to 
the provisions from period to period that significantly affect our results of operations. 
Measurement of expected credit losses 
Expected credit losses are based on a range of possible outcomes and consider all available reasonable and supportable 
information including internal and external ratings, historical credit loss experience, and expectations about future cash flows. 
The measurement of expected credit losses is based primarily on the product of the instrument’s PD, loss given default (LGD), 
and EAD discounted to the reporting date. The main difference between Stage 1 and Stage 2 expected credit losses for performing 
financial assets is the respective calculation horizon. Stage 1 estimates project PD, LGD and EAD over a maximum period of 12 
months while Stage 2 estimates project PD, LGD and EAD over the remaining lifetime of the instrument. 
An expected credit loss estimate is produced for each individual exposure. Relevant parameters are modeled on a collective 
basis using portfolio segmentation that allows for appropriate incorporation of forward looking information. To reflect other 
characteristics that are not already considered through modelling, expert credit judgment is exercised in determining the final 
expected credit losses. 
For a small percentage of our portfolios which lack detailed historical information and/or loss experience, we apply 
simplified measurement approaches that may differ from what is described above. These approaches have been designed to 
maximize the available information that is reliable and supportable for each portfolio and may be collective in nature. 
Expected credit losses are discounted to the reporting period date using the effective interest rate. 
Expected life 
For instruments in Stage 2 or Stage 3, loss allowances reflect expected credit losses over the expected remaining lifetime of the 
instrument. For most instruments, the expected life is limited to the remaining contractual life. 
An exemption is provided for certain instruments with the following characteristics: (a) the instrument includes both a loan 
and undrawn commitment component; (b) we have the contractual ability to demand repayment and cancel the undrawn 
commitment; and (c) our exposure to credit losses is not limited to the contractual notice period. For products in scope of this 
exemption, the expected life may exceed the remaining contractual life and is the period over which our exposure to credit losses 
is not mitigated by our normal credit risk management actions. This period varies by product and risk category and is estimated 
based on our historical experience with similar exposures and consideration of credit risk management actions taken as part of 
our regular credit review cycle. Products in scope of this exemption include credit cards, overdraft balances and certain revolving 
lines of credit. Judgment is required in determining the instruments in scope for this exemption and estimating the appropriate 
remaining life based on our historical experience and credit risk mitigation practices. 
Assessment of significant increase in credit risk 
The assessment of significant increase in credit risk requires significant judgment. Movements between Stage 1 and Stage 2 are 
based on whether an instrument’s credit risk as at the reporting date has increased significantly relative to the date it was 
initially recognized. For the purposes of this assessment, credit risk is based on an instrument’s lifetime PD, not the losses we 
expect to incur. The assessment is generally performed at the instrument level. 
Our assessment of significant increases in credit risk is performed at least quarterly based on three factors. If any of the 
following factors indicates that a significant increase in credit risk has occurred, the instrument is moved from Stage 1 to Stage 2: 
(1) We have established thresholds for significant increases in credit risk based on both a percentage and absolute change 
in lifetime PD relative to initial recognition. For our wholesale portfolio, a decrease in the borrower’s risk rating is also 
required to determine that credit risk has increased significantly. 
(2) Additional qualitative reviews are performed to assess the staging results and make adjustments, as necessary, to 
better reflect the positions whose credit risk has increased significantly. 
(3) Instruments which are 30 days past due are generally considered to have experienced a significant increase in credit 
risk, even if our other metrics do not indicate that a significant increase in credit risk has occurred. 
The thresholds for movement between Stage 1 and Stage 2 are symmetrical. After a financial asset has transferred to Stage 2, if 
its credit risk is no longer considered to have significantly increased relative to its initial recognition, the financial asset will 
move back to Stage 1. 
For certain instruments with low credit risk as at the reporting date, it is presumed that credit risk has not increased 
significantly relative to initial recognition. Credit risk is considered to be low if the instrument has a low risk of default, and the 
borrower has the ability to fulfill their contractual obligations both in the near term and in the longer term, including periods of 
adverse changes in the economic or business environment. Certain interest-bearing deposits with banks, assets purchased under 
reverse repurchase agreements, insurance policy loans, and liquidity facilities extended to our multi-seller conduits have been 
identified as having low credit risk. 
Use of forward-looking information 
The measurement of expected credit losses for each stage and the assessment of significant increase in credit risk considers 
information about past events and current conditions as well as reasonable and supportable projections of future events and 
economic conditions. The estimation and application of forward-looking information requires significant judgment. 
The PD, LGD and EAD inputs used to estimate Stage 1 and Stage 2 credit loss allowances are modelled based on the 
macroeconomic variables (or changes in macroeconomic variables) that are most closely correlated with credit losses in the 
relevant portfolio. Each macroeconomic scenario used in our expected credit loss calculation includes a projection of all 
relevant macroeconomic variables used in our models for a five year period, subsequently reverting to long-run averages. 
Macroeconomic variables used in our expected credit loss models include, but are not limited to, unemployment rates, gross 
domestic product growth rates, equity return indices, commodity prices, and Canadian housing prices. Depending on their usage 
in the models, macroeconomic variables may be projected at a country, province/state or more granular level. 
Our estimation of expected credit losses in Stage 1 and Stage 2 is a discounted probability-weighted estimate that considers 
a minimum of three future macroeconomic scenarios. Our base case scenario is based on macroeconomic forecasts published 
144
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

by our internal economics group. Upside and downside scenarios vary relative to our base case scenario based on reasonably 
possible alternative macroeconomic conditions. Additional and more severe downside scenarios are designed to capture a 
broader range of potential credit losses in certain sectors. Scenario design, including the identification of additional downside 
scenarios, occurs at least on an annual basis and more frequently if conditions warrant. 
Scenarios are designed to capture a wide range of possible outcomes and weighted according to our best estimate of the 
relative likelihood of the range of outcomes that each scenario represents. Scenario weights take into account historical 
frequency, current trends, and forward-looking conditions and are updated on a quarterly basis. All scenarios considered are 
applied to all portfolios subject to expected credit losses with the same probabilities. 
Our assessment of significant increases in credit risk is based on changes in probability-weighted forward-looking lifetime 
PDs as at the reporting date, using the same macroeconomic scenarios as the calculation of expected credit losses. 
Definition of default 
The definition of default used in the measurement of expected credit losses is consistent with the definition of default used for 
our internal credit risk management purposes. Our definition of default may differ across products and consider both 
quantitative and qualitative factors, such as the terms of financial covenants and days past due. For retail and wholesale 
borrowers, except as detailed below, default occurs when the borrower is more than 90 days past due on any material obligation 
to us, and/or we consider the borrower unlikely to make their payments in full without recourse action on our part, such as taking 
formal possession of any collateral held. For certain credit card balances, default occurs when payments are 180 days past due. 
For these balances, the use of a period in excess of 90 days past due is reasonable and supported by observable data on write-off 
and recovery rates experienced on historical credit card portfolios. The definition of default used is applied consistently from 
period to period and to all financial instruments unless it can be demonstrated that circumstances have changed such that 
another definition of default is more appropriate. 
Credit-impaired financial assets (Stage 3) 
Financial assets are assessed for credit-impairment at each balance sheet date and more frequently when circumstances 
warrant further assessment. Evidence of credit-impairment may include indications that the borrower is experiencing significant 
financial difficulty, probability of bankruptcy or other financial reorganization, as well as a measurable decrease in the estimated 
future cash flows evidenced by the adverse changes in the payments status of the borrower or economic conditions that 
correlate with defaults. An asset that is in Stage 3 will move back to Stage 2 when, as at the reporting date, it is no longer 
considered to be credit-impaired. The asset will transfer back to Stage 1 when its credit risk at the reporting date is no longer 
considered to have increased significantly from initial recognition, which could occur during the same reporting period as the 
transfer from Stage 3 to Stage 2. 
When a financial asset has been identified as credit-impaired, expected credit losses are measured as the difference 
between the asset’s gross carrying amount and the present value of estimated future cash flows discounted at the instrument’s 
original effective interest rate. For impaired financial assets with drawn and undrawn components, expected credit losses also 
reflect any credit losses related to the portion of the loan commitment that is expected to be drawn down over the remaining life 
of the instrument. 
When a financial asset is credit-impaired, interest ceases to be recognized on the regular accrual basis, which accrues 
income based on the gross carrying amount of the asset. Rather, interest income is calculated by applying the original effective 
interest rate to the amortized cost of the asset, which is the gross carrying amount less the related ACL. Following impairment, 
interest income is recognized on the unwinding of the discount from the initial recognition of impairment. 
ACL for credit-impaired loans in Stage 3 are established at the borrower level, where losses related to impaired loans are 
identified on individually significant loans, or collectively assessed and determined through the use of portfolio-based rates, 
without reference to particular loans. 
Individually assessed loans (Stage 3) 
When individually significant loans are identified as impaired, we reduce the carrying value of the loans to their estimated 
realizable value by recording an individually assessed ACL to cover identified credit losses. The individually assessed ACL 
reflects the expected amount of principal and interest calculated under the terms of the original loan agreement that will not be 
recovered, and the impact of time delays in collecting principal and/or interest (time value of money). The estimated realizable 
value for each individually significant loan is the present value of expected future cash flows discounted using the original 
effective interest rate for each loan. When the amounts and timing of future cash flows cannot be estimated with reasonable 
reliability, the estimated realizable amount may be determined using observable market prices for comparable loans, the fair 
value of collateral underlying the loans, and other reasonable and supported methods based on management judgment. 
Individually-assessed allowances are established in consideration of a range of possible outcomes, which may include 
macroeconomic or non-macroeconomic scenarios, to the extent relevant to the circumstances of the specific borrower being 
assessed. Assumptions used in estimating expected future cash flows reflect current and expected future economic conditions 
and are generally consistent with those used in Stage 1 and Stage 2 measurement. 
Significant judgment is required in assessing evidence of credit-impairment and estimation of the amount and timing of 
future cash flows when determining expected credit losses. Changes in the amount expected to be recovered would have a direct 
impact on PCL and may result in a change in the ACL. 
Collectively assessed loans (Stage 3) 
Loans that are collectively assessed are grouped on the basis of similar risk characteristics, taking into account loan type, 
industry, geographic location, collateral type, past due status and other relevant factors. 
The collectively-assessed ACL reflects: (i) the expected amount of principal and interest calculated under the terms of the 
original loan agreement that will not be recovered, and (ii) the impact of time delays in collecting principal and/or interest (time 
value of money). 
The expected principal and interest collection is estimated on a portfolio basis and references historical loss experience of 
comparable portfolios with similar credit risk characteristics, adjusted for the current environment and expected future 
conditions. A portfolio specific coverage ratio is applied against the impaired loan balance in determining the collectively-
assessed ACL. The time value of money component is calculated by using the discount factors applied to groups of loans sharing 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
145 

Note 2
Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued) 
common characteristics. The discount factors represent the expected recovery pattern of the comparable group of loans, and 
reflect the historical experience of these groups adjusted for current and expected future economic conditions and/or industry 
factors. Significant judgment is required in assessing evidence of impairment and estimation of the amount and timing of future 
cash flows when determining expected credit losses. Changes in the amount expected to be recovered would have a direct 
impact on PCL and may result in a change in the ACL. 
Write-off of loans 
Loans and the related ACL are written off, either partially or in full, when there is no realistic prospect of recovery. Where loans 
are secured, they are generally written off after receipt of any proceeds from the realization of collateral. In circumstances where 
the net realizable value of any collateral has been determined and there is no reasonable expectation of further recovery, write 
off may be earlier. For credit cards, the balances and related ACL are generally written off when payment is 180 days past due. 
Personal loans are generally written off at 150 days past due. 
Modifications 
The original terms of a financial asset may be renegotiated or otherwise modified, resulting in changes to the contractual terms 
of the financial asset that affect the contractual cash flows. The treatment of such modifications is primarily based on the 
process undertaken to execute the renegotiation and the nature and extent of the expected changes. In the normal course of 
business, modifications which are performed for credit reasons, primarily related to troubled debt restructurings, are generally 
treated as modifications of the original financial asset. Modifications which are performed for other than credit reasons are 
generally considered to be an expiry of the original cash flows; accordingly, such renegotiations are treated as a derecognition of 
the original financial asset and recognition of a new financial asset. 
If a modification of terms does not result in derecognition of the financial asset, the carrying amount of the financial asset is 
recalculated as the present value of the renegotiated or modified contractual cash flows, discounted at the original effective 
interest rate and a gain or loss is recognized. The financial asset continues to be subject to the same assessments for significant 
increase in credit risk relative to initial recognition and credit-impairment, as described above. A modified financial asset will 
transfer out of Stage 3 if the conditions that led to it being identified as credit-impaired are no longer present and relate 
objectively to an event occurring after the original credit-impairment was recognized. A modified financial asset will transfer out 
of Stage 2 when it no longer satisfies the relative thresholds set to identify significant increases in credit risk, which are based on 
changes in its lifetime PD, days past due and other qualitative considerations. The financial asset continues to be monitored for 
significant increases in credit risk and credit-impairment. 
If a modification of terms results in derecognition of the original financial asset and recognition of the new financial asset, 
the new financial asset will generally be recorded in Stage 1, unless it is determined to be credit-impaired at the time of the 
renegotiation. For the purposes of assessing for significant increases in credit risk, the date of initial recognition for the new 
financial asset is the date of the modification. 
Derivatives 
When derivatives are embedded in other financial instruments or host contracts, such combinations are known as hybrid 
instruments. Some of the cash flows of a hybrid instrument vary in a way similar to a stand-alone derivative. If the host contract 
is a financial asset within the scope of IFRS 9, the classification and measurement criteria are applied to the entire hybrid 
instrument as described in the Classification of financial assets section of Note 2. If the host contract is a financial liability or an 
asset that is not within the scope of IFRS 9, embedded derivatives are separately recognized if the economic characteristics and 
risks of the embedded derivative are not clearly and closely related to the host contract, unless an election has been made to 
elect the fair value option, as described above. The host contract is accounted for in accordance with the relevant standards. 
Derivatives are primarily used in trading activities. Derivatives are also used to manage our exposure to interest, currency, 
credit and other market risks. The most frequently used derivative products are interest rate and foreign exchange swaps, 
options, futures and forward rate agreements, equity swaps and credit derivatives. All derivative instruments are recorded on our 
Consolidated Balance Sheets at fair value. 
When derivatives are used in trading activities, the realized and unrealized gains and losses on these derivatives are 
recognized in Trading revenue in Non-interest income. Derivatives with positive fair values are reported as Derivative assets and 
derivatives with negative fair values are reported as Derivative liabilities. In accordance with our policy for offsetting financial 
assets and financial liabilities, the net fair value of certain derivative assets and liabilities are reported as an asset or liability, as 
appropriate. Valuation adjustments are included in the fair value of Derivative assets and Derivative liabilities. Premiums paid 
and premiums received are shown in Derivative assets and Derivative liabilities, respectively. 
When derivatives are used to manage our own exposures, we determine for each derivative whether hedge accounting can 
be applied, as discussed in the Hedge accounting section below. 
Derecognition of financial assets 
Financial assets are derecognized from our Consolidated Balance Sheets when our contractual rights to the cash flows from the 
assets have expired, when we retain the rights to receive the cash flows of the assets but assume an obligation to pay those cash 
flows to a third party subject to certain pass-through requirements or when we transfer our contractual rights to receive the cash 
flows and substantially all of the risk and rewards of the assets have been transferred. When we retain substantially all of the 
risks and rewards of the transferred assets, the transferred assets are not derecognized from our Consolidated Balance Sheets 
and are accounted for as secured financing transactions. When we neither retain nor transfer substantially all risks and rewards 
of ownership of the assets, we derecognize the assets if control over the assets is relinquished. If we retain control over the 
transferred assets, we continue to recognize the transferred assets to the extent of our continuing involvement. 
Management’s judgment is applied in determining whether the contractual rights to the cash flows from the transferred 
assets have expired or whether we retain the rights to receive cash flows on the assets but assume an obligation to pay for those 
cash flows. We derecognize transferred financial assets if we transfer substantially all the risks and rewards of the ownership in 
the assets. When assessing whether we have transferred substantially all of the risk and rewards of the transferred assets, 
management considers the Bank’s exposure before and after the transfer with the variability in the amount and timing of the net 
146
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

cash flows of the transferred assets. In transfers in which we retain the servicing rights, management has applied judgment in 
assessing the benefits of servicing against market expectations. When the benefits of servicing are greater than fair value, a 
servicing asset is recognized in Other assets in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. When the benefits of servicing are less than fair 
value, a servicing liability is recognized in Other liabilities in our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Derecognition of financial liabilities 
We derecognize a financial liability from our Consolidated Balance Sheets when our obligation specified in the contract expires, 
or is discharged or cancelled. We recognize the difference between the carrying amount of a financial liability transferred and the 
consideration paid in our Consolidated Statements of Income. 
Interest 
Interest is recognized in Interest income and Interest expense in the Consolidated Statements of Income for all interest-bearing 
financial instruments. The effective interest rate is the rate that discounts estimated future cash flows over the expected life of 
the financial asset or liability to the net carrying amount upon initial recognition. Significant judgment is applied in determining 
the effective interest rate due to uncertainty in the timing and amounts of future cash flows. 
Dividend income 
Dividend income is recognized when the right to receive payment is established. This is the ex-dividend date for listed equity 
securities, and usually the date when shareholders have approved the dividend for unlisted equity securities. 
Transaction costs 
Transaction costs are expensed as incurred for financial instruments classified or designated as FVTPL. For other financial 
instruments, transaction costs are capitalized on initial recognition. For financial assets and financial liabilities measured at 
amortized cost, capitalized transaction costs are amortized through net income over the estimated life of the instrument using 
the effective interest method. For financial assets measured at FVOCI that do not have fixed or determinable payments and no 
fixed maturity, capitalized transaction costs are recognized in net income when the asset is derecognized or becomes impaired. 
Offsetting financial assets and financial liabilities 
Financial assets and financial liabilities are offset on the balance sheet when there exists both a legally enforceable right to 
offset the recognized amounts and an intention to settle on a net basis, or realize the asset and settle the liability 
simultaneously. 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and sold under repurchase agreements 
We purchase securities under agreements to resell (reverse repurchase agreements) and take possession of these securities. We 
monitor the market value of the securities purchased and additional collateral is obtained when appropriate. We have the right 
to liquidate the collateral held in the event of counterparty default. Reverse repurchase agreements are treated as collateralized 
lending transactions. We also sell securities under agreements to repurchase (repurchase agreements), which are treated as 
collateralized borrowing transactions. The securities received under reverse repurchase agreements and securities delivered 
under repurchase agreements are not recognized on, or derecognized from, our Consolidated Balance Sheets, respectively, 
unless the risks and rewards of ownership are obtained or relinquished. 
Reverse repurchase agreements and repurchase agreements are carried on our Consolidated Balance Sheets at the 
amounts at which the securities were initially acquired or sold, except when they are classified or designated as FVTPL and are 
recorded at fair value. Interest earned on reverse repurchase agreements is included in Interest income, and interest incurred on 
repurchase agreements is included in Interest expense in our Consolidated Statements of Income. Changes in fair value for 
reverse repurchase agreements and repurchase agreements designated as FVTPL are included in Trading revenue or Other in 
Non-interest income. 
Hedge accounting 
We have elected to continue to apply the hedge accounting principles under IAS 39 instead of those under IFRS 9.  
We use derivatives and non-derivatives in our hedging strategies to manage our exposure to interest rate, currency, credit 
and other market risks. Where hedge accounting can be applied, a hedge relationship is designated and documented at inception 
to detail the particular risk management objective and strategy for undertaking the hedge transaction. The documentation 
identifies the specific asset, liability or anticipated cash flows being hedged, the risk that is being hedged, the type of hedging 
instrument used and how effectiveness will be assessed. We assess, both at the inception of the hedge and on an ongoing basis, 
whether the hedging instruments are ‘highly effective’ in offsetting changes in the fair value or cash flows of the hedged items. A 
hedge is regarded as highly effective only if the following criteria are met: (i) at inception of the hedge and throughout its life, the 
hedge is expected to be highly effective in achieving offsetting changes in fair value or cash flows attributable to the hedged risk, 
and (ii) actual results of the hedge are within a pre-determined range. We perform effectiveness testing to demonstrate that the 
relationship has been and is expected to be effective over the remaining term of the hedge. In the case of hedging a forecast 
transaction, the transaction must have a high probability of occurring and must present an exposure to variations in cash flows 
that could ultimately affect the reported net profit or loss. Hedge accounting is discontinued when it is determined that the 
hedging instrument is no longer effective as a hedge, the hedging instrument or hedged item is terminated or sold, or the forecast 
transaction is no longer deemed highly probable. Refer to Note 8 for the fair value of derivatives and non-derivative instruments 
categorized by their hedging relationships, as well as derivatives that are not designated in hedging relationships. 
Until the hedging relationships impacted by the Reform fully transition to ABRs, our prospective effectiveness testing is 
based on existing hedged cash flows or hedged risks and any ineffectiveness arising from retrospective testing does not result in 
a discontinuation of the hedge. Additionally, effectiveness testing is applied separately to hedged items referencing IBORs and 
those referencing ABRs, in accordance with the Amendments. Subsequently, when these relationships fully transition to ABRs, 
and provided qualifying criteria are met, we will amend the related hedge documentation for the ABR risk, including 
consequential changes to the description of the hedging instrument(s), the hedged item(s), and the method for assessing hedge 
effectiveness, without discontinuing the existing hedging relationships. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
147 

Note 2
Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued) 
Fair value hedges 
In a fair value hedging relationship, the carrying value of the hedged item is adjusted for changes in fair value attributable to the 
hedged risk and recognized in Non-interest income. Changes in fair value of the hedged item, to the extent that the hedging 
relationship is effective, are offset by changes in the fair value of the hedging derivative, which are also recognized in 
Non-interest income. When hedge accounting is discontinued, the carrying value of the hedged item is no longer adjusted and the 
cumulative fair value adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged items are amortized to Net income over the expected 
remaining life of the hedged items. 
We predominantly use interest rate swaps to hedge our exposure to changes in a fixed interest rate instrument’s fair value 
caused by changes in interest rates. Until the hedging relationships impacted by the Reform fully transition to ABRs, we apply 
hedge accounting to IBOR rates which may not be contractually specified when that rate is separately identifiable and reliably 
measurable at inception of the hedge relationship. 
Cash flow hedges 
In a cash flow hedging relationship, the effective portion of the change in the fair value of the hedging derivative, net of taxes, is 
recognized in OCI and reclassified to profit or loss as the associated hedged forecast transaction occurs, while the ineffective 
portion is recognized in Non-interest income. When hedge accounting is discontinued, the cumulative amounts previously 
recognized in OCI are reclassified to Net interest income during the periods when the variability in the cash flows of the hedged 
item affects Net interest income. Unrealized gains and losses on derivatives are reclassified immediately to Net income when the 
hedged item is sold or terminated early, or when the forecast transaction is no longer expected to occur. 
We predominantly use interest rate swaps to hedge the variability in cash flows related to a variable-rate asset or liability. 
Until the hedging relationships impacted by the Reform fully transition to ABRs, we treat the highly probable hedged IBOR based 
cash flows of groups of similar assets or liabilities with similar risk characteristics as unchanged as a result of the Reform. In 
addition, associated cash flow hedge reserves are not recycled into net income solely due to changes related to the transition 
from IBORs to ABRs. Subsequently, when some items in the group transition to ABRs before other items, the individual hedged 
items are allocated to subgroups based on the benchmark interest rate being hedged. We test hedge effectiveness based on the 
defined subgroups, in accordance with the Amendments, if eligibility requirements are met. If a subgroup fails the eligibility 
requirements, we would discontinue hedge accounting prospectively for the hedging relationship in its entirety. 
Net investment hedges 
In hedging our foreign currency exposure to a net investment in a foreign operation, the effective portion of foreign exchange 
gains and losses on the hedging instruments, net of applicable taxes, is recognized in OCI and the ineffective portion is 
recognized in Non-interest income. The amounts, or a portion thereof, previously recognized in Other components of equity are 
recognized in Net income on the disposal, or partial disposal, of the foreign operation. 
We use foreign exchange contracts and foreign currency-denominated liabilities to manage our foreign currency exposures 
to net investments in foreign operations having a functional currency other than the Canadian dollar. 
Guarantees 
Financial guarantee contracts are contracts that contingently require us to make specified payments (in cash, other assets, our 
own shares or provision of services) to reimburse the holder for a loss it incurs because a specified debtor fails to make payment 
when due in accordance with the original or modified terms of a debt instrument. Liabilities are recognized on our Consolidated 
Balance Sheets at the inception of a guarantee for the fair value of the obligation undertaken in issuing the guarantee. Financial 
guarantees are subsequently remeasured at the higher of (i) the amount of expected credit losses and (ii) the amount initially 
recognized less, when appropriate, the cumulative amount of income recognized. 
If the financial guarantee contract meets the definition of a derivative, it is measured at fair value at each balance sheet 
date and reported under Derivatives on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Insurance and segregated funds 
Premiums from long-duration contracts, primarily life insurance, are recognized when due in Non-interest income – Insurance 
premiums, investment and fee income. Premiums from short-duration contracts, primarily property and casualty, and fees for 
administrative services are recognized in Insurance premiums, investment and fee income over the related contract period. 
Unearned premiums of the short-duration contracts, representing the unexpired portion of premiums, are reported in Other 
liabilities. Investments made by our insurance operations are classified as FVOCI instruments and amortized cost instruments, 
except for investments supporting the policy benefit liabilities on life and health insurance contracts and a portion of property 
and casualty contracts. These are designated as FVTPL with changes in fair value reported in Insurance premiums, investment 
and fee income. 
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities represent current claims and estimates for future insurance policy benefits. 
Liabilities for life insurance contracts are determined using the Canadian Asset Liability Method (CALM), which incorporates 
assumptions for mortality, morbidity, policy lapses and surrenders, investment yields, policy dividends, operating and policy 
maintenance expenses and provisions for adverse deviation. These assumptions are reviewed at least annually and updated in 
response to actual experience and market conditions. Liabilities for property and casualty insurance represent estimated 
provisions for reported and unreported claims. Liabilities for life and property and casualty insurance are included in Insurance 
claims and policy benefit liabilities. Changes in Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities are included in the Insurance 
policyholder benefits, claims and acquisition expense in our Consolidated Statements of Income in the period in which the 
estimates change. 
Premiums ceded for reinsurance and reinsurance recoveries on policyholder benefits and claims incurred are reported in 
income and expense as appropriate. Reinsurance recoverables, which relate to paid benefits and unpaid claims, are included in 
Other assets. 
Acquisition costs for new insurance contracts consist of commissions, premium taxes, certain underwriting costs and other 
costs that vary with the acquisition of new contracts. Deferred acquisition costs for life insurance products are implicitly 
148
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

recognized in Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities by CALM. For property and casualty insurance, these costs are 
classified as Other assets and amortized over the policy term. 
Segregated funds are lines of business in which we issue an insurance contract where the benefit amount is directly linked to 
the market value of the investments held in the underlying fund. The contractual arrangement is such that the underlying 
segregated fund assets are registered in our name but the segregated fund policyholders bear the risks and rewards of the funds’ 
investment performance. Liabilities for these contracts are calculated based on contractual obligations using actuarial 
assumptions and are at least equivalent to the surrender or transfer value calculated by reference to the value of the relevant 
underlying funds or indices. Segregated funds’ assets and liabilities are separately presented on our Consolidated Balance 
Sheets. As the segregated fund policyholders bear the risks and rewards of the funds’ performance, investment income earned by 
the segregated funds and expenses incurred by the segregated funds are offset and are not separately presented in our 
Consolidated Statements of Income. Fee income we earn from segregated funds includes management fees, mortality, policy 
administration and surrender charges, and these fees are recorded in Non-interest income – Insurance premiums, investment 
and fee income. We provide minimum death benefit and maturity value guarantees on segregated funds. The liability associated 
with these minimum guarantees is recorded in Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities. 
Liability adequacy tests are performed for all insurance contract portfolios at each balance sheet date to ensure the 
adequacy of insurance contract liabilities. Current best estimates of future contractual cash flows, claims handling and 
administration costs, and investment returns from the assets backing the liabilities are taken into account in the tests. When the 
test results indicate that there is a deficiency in liabilities, the deficiency is charged immediately to our Consolidated Statements 
of Income by writing down the deferred acquisition costs in Other assets and/or increasing Insurance claims and policy benefit 
liabilities. 
Employee benefits – Pensions and other post-employment benefits 
Our defined benefit pension expense, which is included in Non-interest expense – Human resources, consists of the cost of 
employee pension benefits for the current year’s service, net interest on the net defined benefit liability (asset), past service cost 
and gains or losses on settlement. Remeasurements of the net defined benefit obligation, which comprise actuarial gains and 
losses and return on plan assets (excluding amounts included in net interest on the net defined benefit liability), are recognized 
immediately in OCI in the period in which they occur. Actuarial gains and losses comprise experience adjustments (the effects of 
differences between the previous actuarial assumptions and what has actually occurred), as well as the effects of changes in 
actuarial assumptions. Amounts recognized in OCI will not be reclassified subsequently to net income. Past service cost is the 
change in the present value of the defined benefit obligation resulting from a plan amendment or curtailment and is charged 
immediately to income. 
For each defined benefit pension plan, we recognize the present value of our defined benefit obligations less the fair value of 
the plan assets as a defined benefit liability reported in Other liabilities – Employee benefit liabilities on our Consolidated 
Balance Sheets. For plans where there is a net defined benefit asset, the amount is reported as an asset in Other assets –
Employee benefit assets on our Consolidated Balance sheets. 
The calculation of defined benefit expenses and obligations requires significant judgment as the recognition is dependent on 
discount rates and various actuarial assumptions such as healthcare cost trend rates, projected salary increases, retirement age 
and mortality and termination rates. Due to the long-term nature of these plans, such estimates and assumptions are subject to 
inherent risks and uncertainties. For our pension and other post-employment benefit plans, the discount rate is determined by 
reference to market yields on high quality corporate bonds. Since the discount rate is based on currently available yields, and 
involves management’s assessment of market liquidity, it is only a proxy for future yields. Actuarial assumptions, set in 
accordance with current practices in the respective countries of our plans, may differ from actual experience as country specific 
statistics are only estimates of future employee behaviour. These assumptions are determined by management and are reviewed 
by actuaries at least annually. Changes to any of the above assumptions may affect the amounts of benefits obligations, 
expenses and remeasurements that we recognize. 
Our contributions to defined contribution pension plans are expensed when employees have rendered services in exchange 
for such contributions. Defined contribution pension expense is included in Non-interest expense – Human resources. 
Share-based compensation 
We offer share-based compensation plans to certain key employees and to our non-employee directors. 
To account for stock options granted to employees, compensation expense is recognized over the applicable vesting period 
with a corresponding increase in equity. Fair value is determined by using option valuation models, which take into account the 
exercise price of the option, the current share price, the risk free interest rate, the expected volatility of the share price over the 
life of the option and other relevant factors. When the options are exercised, the exercise price proceeds together with the 
amount initially recorded in equity are credited to common shares. Our other share-based compensation plans include 
performance deferred share plans and deferred share unit plans for key employees (the Plans). The obligations for the Plans are 
accrued over their vesting periods. The Plans are settled in cash. 
For cash-settled awards, our accrued obligations are adjusted to their fair value at each balance sheet date. For share-
settled awards, our expected obligations recognized in equity are based on the fair value of our common shares at the date of 
grant. Changes in our obligations, net of related hedges, are recorded as Non-interest expense – Human resources in our 
Consolidated Statements of Income with a corresponding increase in Other liabilities for cash-settled awards and in Retained 
earnings for share-settled awards. Compensation expense is recognized in the year the awards are earned by plan participants 
based on the vesting schedule of the relevant plans, net of estimated forfeitures. 
The compensation cost attributable to options and awards granted to employees who are eligible to retire or will become 
eligible to retire during the vesting period, is recognized immediately if the employee is eligible to retire on the grant date or over 
the period between the grant date and the date the employee becomes eligible to retire. 
Our contributions to the employee savings and share ownership plans are expensed as incurred. 
Income taxes 
Income tax comprises current tax and deferred tax and is recognized in our Consolidated Statements of Income except to the 
extent that it relates to items recognized directly in equity, in which case it is recognized in equity. 
Current income tax payable on profits is recognized as an expense based on the applicable tax laws in each jurisdiction in 
the period in which profits arise, calculated using tax rates enacted or substantively enacted by the balance sheet date. Deferred 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
149 

Note 2
Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued) 
tax is recognized on temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for accounting and tax 
purposes. A deferred income tax asset or liability is determined for each temporary difference, except for earnings related to our 
subsidiaries, branches, associates and interests in joint ventures where the temporary differences will not reverse in the 
foreseeable future and we have the ability to control the timing of reversal. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined 
based on the tax rates that are expected to be in effect in the period that the asset is realized or the liability is settled, based on 
tax rates and tax laws that have been enacted or substantively enacted at the balance sheet date. Current tax assets and 
liabilities are offset when they are levied by the same taxation authority on either the same taxable entity or different taxable 
entities within the same tax reporting group (which intends to settle on a net basis), and when there is a legal right to offset. 
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are offset when the same conditions are satisfied. Our Consolidated Statements of Income 
include items that are non-taxable or non-deductible for income tax purposes and, accordingly, this causes the income tax 
provision to be different from what it would be if based on statutory rates. 
Deferred income taxes accumulated as a result of temporary differences and tax loss carryforwards are included in Other 
assets and Other liabilities. On a quarterly basis, we review our deferred income tax assets to determine whether it is probable 
that the benefits associated with these assets will be realized; this review involves evaluating both positive and negative 
evidence. 
We are subject to income tax laws in various jurisdictions where we operate, and the complex tax laws are potentially 
subject to different interpretations by us and the relevant taxation authorities. Significant judgment is required in the 
interpretation of the relevant tax laws and in assessing the probability of acceptance of our tax positions to determine our tax 
provision, which includes our best estimate of uncertain tax positions that are under audit or appeal by the relevant tax 
authorities. We perform a review on a quarterly basis to incorporate our best assessment based on information available, but 
additional liability and income tax expense could result based on the acceptance of our tax positions by the relevant tax 
authorities. 
The determination of our deferred tax asset or liability also requires significant management judgment as the recognition is 
dependent on our projection of future taxable profits and tax rates that are expected to be in effect in the period the asset is 
realized or the liability is settled. Any changes in our projection will result in changes in deferred tax assets or liabilities on our 
Consolidated Balance Sheets, and also deferred tax expense on our Consolidated Statements of Income. 
Business combinations, goodwill and other intangibles 
All business combinations are accounted for using the acquisition method. Non-controlling interests, if any, are recognized at 
their proportionate share of the fair value of identifiable assets and liabilities, unless otherwise indicated. Identifiable intangible 
assets are recognized separately from goodwill and included in Other intangibles. Goodwill represents the excess of the price 
paid for the business acquired over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired on the date of acquisition. 
Goodwill 
Goodwill is allocated to cash-generating units or groups of cash-generating units for the purpose of impairment testing, which is 
undertaken at the lowest level at which goodwill is monitored for internal management purposes. Impairment testing is 
performed annually as at August 1, or more frequently if there are objective indicators of impairment, by comparing the 
recoverable amount of a cash-generating unit (CGU) with its carrying amount. The recoverable amount of a CGU is the higher of 
its value in use (VIU) and its fair value less costs of disposal (FVLCD). VIU is the present value of the expected future cash flows 
from a CGU. FVLCD is the amount obtainable from the sale of a CGU in an orderly transaction between market participants, less 
disposal costs. The fair value of a CGU is estimated using valuation techniques such as a discounted cash flow method, adjusted 
to reflect the considerations of a prospective third-party buyer. External evidence such as binding sale agreements or recent 
transactions for similar businesses within the same industry is considered to the extent that it is available. 
Significant judgment is involved in estimating the model inputs used to determine the recoverable amount of our CGUs, in 
particular future cash flows, discount rates and terminal growth rates, due to the uncertainty in the timing and amount of cash 
flows and the forward-looking nature of these inputs. Future cash flows are based on financial plans agreed by management 
which are estimated based on forecast results, business initiatives, planned capital investments and returns to shareholders. 
Discount rates are based on the bank-wide cost of capital, adjusted for CGU-specific risks and currency exposure as reflected by 
differences in expected inflation. Bank-wide cost of capital is based on the Capital Asset Pricing Model. CGU-specific risks include 
country risk, business/operational risk, geographic risk (including political risk, devaluation risk, and government regulation), 
currency risk, and price risk (including product pricing risk and inflation). Terminal growth rates are based on the long-term 
steady state growth expectations in the countries within which the CGU operates. If the future cash flows and other assumptions 
in future periods deviate significantly from the current amounts used in our impairment testing, the value of our goodwill could 
become impaired, with any such impairment loss recognized in Non-interest expense. 
The carrying amount of a CGU includes the carrying amount of assets, liabilities and goodwill allocated to the CGU. If the 
recoverable amount is less than the carrying value, the impairment loss is allocated first to reduce the carrying amount of any 
goodwill allocated to the CGU and then to the other non-financial assets of the CGU proportionately based on the carrying 
amount of each asset. Any impairment loss is charged to income in the period in which the impairment is identified. Goodwill is 
stated at cost less accumulated impairment losses. Subsequent reversals of goodwill impairment are prohibited. 
Upon disposal of a portion of a CGU, the carrying amount of goodwill related to the portion of the CGU sold is included in the 
determination of gains or losses on disposal. The carrying amount is determined based on the relative fair value of the disposed 
portion to the total CGU. 
Other intangibles 
Intangible assets represent identifiable non-monetary assets and are acquired either separately or through a business 
combination, or generated internally. Intangible assets acquired through a business combination are recognized separately from 
goodwill when they are separable or arise from contractual or other legal rights, and their fair value can be measured reliably. 
The cost of a separately acquired intangible asset includes its purchase price and directly attributable costs of preparing the 
asset for its intended use. In respect of internally generated intangible assets, cost includes all directly attributable costs 
necessary to create, produce, and prepare the asset to be capable of operating in the manner intended by management. 
Research and development costs that are not eligible for capitalization are expensed. After initial recognition, an intangible asset 
150
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

is carried at its cost less any accumulated amortization and accumulated impairment losses, if any. Intangible assets with a 
finite-life are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows: computer software – 3 to 10 years; 
and customer relationships – 10 to 20 years. We do not have any intangible assets with indefinite lives. 
Intangible assets are assessed for indicators of impairment at each reporting period. If there is an indication that an 
intangible asset may be impaired, an impairment test is performed by comparing the carrying amount of the intangible asset to 
its recoverable amount. Where it is not possible to estimate the recoverable amount of an individual asset, we estimate the 
recoverable amount of the CGU to which the asset belongs. If the recoverable amount of the asset (or CGU) is less than its 
carrying amount, the carrying amount of the intangible asset is written down to its recoverable amount as an impairment loss. 
An impairment loss recognized previously is reversed if there is a change in the estimates used to determine the recoverable 
amount of the asset (or CGU) since the last impairment loss was recognized. If an impairment loss is subsequently reversed, the 
carrying amount of the asset (or CGU) is revised to the lower of its recoverable amount and the carrying amount that would have 
been determined (net of amortization) had there been no prior impairment. 
Due to the subjective nature of these estimates, significant judgment is required in determining the useful lives and 
recoverable amounts of our intangible assets, and assessing whether certain events or circumstances constitute objective 
evidence of impairment. Estimates of the recoverable amounts of our intangible assets rely on certain key inputs, including 
future cash flows and discount rates. Future cash flows are based on sales projections and allocated costs which are estimated 
based on forecast results and business initiatives. Discount rates are based on the bank-wide cost of capital, adjusted for asset-
specific risks. Changes in these assumptions may impact the amount of impairment loss recognized in Non-interest expense. 
Other 
Translation of foreign currencies 
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies are translated into Canadian dollars at rates prevailing at the 
balance sheet date. Foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from the translation and settlement of these items are 
recognized in Non-interest income in the Consolidated Statements of Income. 
Non-monetary assets and liabilities that are measured at historical cost are translated into Canadian dollars at historical 
rates. 
Assets and liabilities of our foreign operations with functional currencies other than Canadian dollars are translated into 
Canadian dollars at rates prevailing at the balance sheet date, and income and expenses of these foreign operations are 
translated at average rates of exchange for the reporting period. 
Unrealized gains or losses arising as a result of the translation of our foreign operations along with the effective portion of 
related hedges are reported in Other components of equity on an after-tax basis. Upon disposal or partial disposal of a foreign 
operation, an appropriate portion of the accumulated net translation gains or losses is included in Non-interest income. 
Premises and equipment 
Premises and equipment includes land, buildings, leasehold improvements, computer equipment, furniture, fixtures and other 
equipment, and are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation, except for land which is not depreciated, and accumulated 
impairment losses. Cost comprises the purchase price, any costs directly attributable to bringing the asset to the location and 
condition necessary for its intended use, and the initial estimate of any disposal costs. Depreciation is recorded principally on a 
straight–line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which are 25 to 50 years for buildings, 3 to 10 years for computer 
equipment, and 5 to 10 years for furniture, fixtures and other equipment. The amortization period for leasehold improvements is 
the lesser of the useful life of the leasehold improvements or the lease term plus the first renewal period, if reasonably assured 
of renewal, up to a maximum of 10 years. Depreciation methods, useful lives, and residual values are reassessed at each 
reporting period and adjusted as appropriate. Gains and losses on disposal are recorded in Non–interest income. 
Premises and equipment are assessed for indicators of impairment at each reporting period. If there is an indication that an 
asset may be impaired, an impairment test is performed by comparing the asset’s carrying amount to its recoverable amount. 
After the recognition of impairment, the depreciation charge is adjusted in future periods to reflect the asset’s revised 
carrying amount. If an impairment is later reversed, the carrying amount of the asset is revised to the lower of the asset’s 
recoverable amount and the carrying amount that would have been determined (net of depreciation) had there been no prior 
impairment loss. The depreciation charge in future periods is adjusted to reflect the revised carrying amount. 
Right-of-use assets are also included in premises and equipment. 
Leasing 
At inception of a contract, we assess whether a contract is or contains a lease. A contract is, or contains, a lease if the contract 
conveys the right to obtain substantially all of the economic benefits from, and direct the use of, an identified asset for a period 
of time in return for consideration. 
When we are the lessee in a lease arrangement, we initially record a right-of-use asset and corresponding lease liability, 
except for short-term leases and leases of low-value assets. Short-term leases are leases with a lease term of 12 months or less. 
Low-value assets are unspecialized, common, technologically unsophisticated, widely available, and widely used 
non-infrastructure assets. For short-term leases and leases of low-value assets, we record the lease payments as an operating 
expense on a straight-line basis over the lease term. 
Where we are reasonably certain to exercise extension and termination options, they are included in the lease term. 
The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at the commencement 
date, discounted at our incremental borrowing rate. The lease liability is subsequently measured at amortized cost using the 
effective interest method, recorded in Interest expense. 
The right-of-use asset is initially measured based on the initial amount of the lease liability, adjusted for lease payments 
made on or before the commencement date, initial direct costs incurred, and an estimate of costs to dismantle, remove, or 
restore the asset, less any lease incentives received. Costs related to dismantling and removing leasehold improvements are 
capitalized as part of the leasehold improvement asset (rather than the right-of-use asset of the lease) when the leasehold 
improvements are separately capitalized. 
The right-of-use asset is depreciated to the earlier of the lease term and the useful life, unless ownership will transfer to RBC 
or we are reasonably certain to exercise a purchase option, in which case the useful life of the right-of-use asset is used. We 
apply IAS 36 Impairment of assets to determine whether a right-of-use asset is impaired and account for any identified 
impairment loss as described in the premises and equipment accounting policies above. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
151 

Note 2
Summary of significant accounting policies, estimates and judgments (continued) 
Provisions 
Provisions are liabilities of uncertain timing or amount and are recognized when we have a present legal or constructive 
obligation as a result of a past event, it is probable that an outflow of resources will be required to settle the obligation, and a 
reliable estimate can be made of the amount of the obligation. Provisions are measured as the best estimate of the consideration 
required to settle the present obligation at the reporting date. Significant judgment is required in determining whether a present 
obligation exists and in estimating the probability, timing and amount of any outflows. We record provisions related to litigation, 
asset retirement obligations and other items. 
We are required to estimate the results of ongoing legal proceedings, and expenses to be incurred to dispose of capital 
assets. The forward-looking nature of these estimates requires us to use a significant amount of judgment in projecting the 
timing and amount of future cash flows. We record our provisions on the basis of all available information at the end of the 
reporting period and make adjustments on a quarterly basis to reflect current expectations. It may not be possible to predict the 
resolution of these matters or the timing of their ultimate resolution. Should actual results differ from our expectations, we may 
incur expenses in excess of the provisions recognized. Where appropriate, we apply judgment in limiting the extent of our 
provisions-related disclosures as not to prejudice our positions in matters of dispute. 
When some or all of the economic benefits required to settle a provision are expected to be recovered from a third party, 
such as an insurer, a separate asset is recognized if it is virtually certain that reimbursement will be received. 
Commissions and fees 
Commissions and fees primarily relate to Investment management and custodial fees, Mutual fund revenue, Securities brokerage 
commissions, Services charges, Underwriting and other advisory fees, Card service revenue and Credit fees, and are recognized 
based on the applicable service contracts with customers. 
Investment management and custodial fees and Mutual fund revenue are generally calculated as a percentage of daily or 
period-end net asset values (NAV) based on the terms of the contract with customers and are received monthly, quarterly, 
semiannually or annually, depending on the terms of the contract. Investment management and custodial fees are generally 
derived from assets under management (AUM) when our clients solicit the investment capabilities of an investment manager or 
from assets under administration (AUA) where the investment strategy is directed by the client or a designated third-party 
manager. Mutual fund revenue is derived from the daily NAV of the mutual funds. Investment management and custodial fees and 
Mutual fund revenue are recognized over time when the service is provided to the customer, provided that it is highly probable 
that a significant reversal in the amount of revenue recognized will not occur. 
Commissions earned on Securities brokerage services and Service charges that are related to the provision of specific 
transaction-type services are recognized when the service is fulfilled. Where services are provided over time, revenue is 
recognized as the services are provided. 
Underwriting and other advisory fees primarily relate to underwriting of new issuances of debt or equity and various 
advisory services. Underwriting fees are generally expressed as a percentage of the funds raised through issuance and are 
recognized when the service has been completed. Advisory fees vary depending on the scope and type of engagement and can be 
fixed in nature or contingent on a future event. Advisory fees are recognized over the period in which the service is provided and 
are recognized only to the extent that it is highly probable that a significant reversal in the amount of revenue will not occur. 
Card service revenue primarily includes interchange revenue and annual card fees. Interchange revenue is calculated as a 
fixed percentage of the transaction amount and recognized when the card transaction is settled. Annual card fees are fixed fees 
and are recognized over a 12 month period. 
Credit fees are primarily earned for arranging syndicated loans and making credit available on undrawn facilities. The timing 
of the recognition of credit fees varies based on the nature of the services provided. 
When service fees and other costs are incurred in relation to commissions and fees earned, we record these costs on a gross 
basis in either Non-interest expense – Other or Non-interest expense – Human resources based on our assessment of whether we 
have primary responsibility to fulfill the contract with the customer and have discretion in establishing the price for the 
commissions and fees earned, which may require judgment. 
Earnings per share 
Earnings per share is computed by dividing Net income available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of 
common shares outstanding for the period. Net income available to common shareholders is determined after deducting 
dividend entitlements of preferred shareholders and distributions on other equity instruments, any gains (losses) on redemption 
of preferred shares and other equity instruments net of related income taxes and the net income attributable to non-controlling 
interests. 
Diluted earnings per share reflects the potential dilution that could occur if additional common shares are assumed to be 
issued under securities or contracts that entitle their holders to obtain common shares in the future, to the extent such 
entitlement is not subject to unresolved contingencies. For contracts that may be settled in cash or in common shares at our 
option, diluted earnings per share is calculated based on the assumption that such contracts will be settled in shares. Income 
and expenses associated with these types of contracts are excluded from the Net income available to common shareholders, and 
the additional number of shares that would be issued is included in the diluted earnings per share calculation. This included 
certain convertible shares with the conversion assumed to have taken place at the beginning of the period or on the date of 
issue, if later. For stock options whose exercise price is less than the average market price of our common shares, using the 
treasury stock method, they are assumed to be exercised and the proceeds are used to repurchase common shares at the 
average market price for the period. The incremental number of common shares issued under stock options and repurchased 
from proceeds is included in the calculation of diluted earnings per share. 
Share capital and other equity instruments 
We classify a financial instrument that we issue as a financial asset, financial liability or an equity instrument in accordance with 
the substance of the contractual arrangement. 
152
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Our common shares held by us are classified as treasury shares in equity and accounted for at weighted average cost. Upon 
the sale of treasury shares, the difference between the sale proceeds and the cost of the shares is recognized in Retained 
earnings. Financial instruments issued by us are classified as equity instruments when there is no contractual obligation to 
transfer cash or other financial assets. Incremental costs directly attributable to the issue of equity instruments are included in 
equity as a deduction from the proceeds, net of tax. Financial instruments that will be settled by a variable number of our 
common shares upon their conversion by the holders as well as the related accrued distributions are classified as liabilities on 
our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Dividends and yield distributions on these instruments are classified as Interest expense in our 
Consolidated Statements of Income. For compound instruments comprised of both liability and equity components, the liability 
component is initially measured at fair value with any residual amount assigned to the equity component. 
Future changes in accounting policy and disclosure 
The following standards have been issued, but are not yet effective for us. 
IFRS 17 Insurance Contracts (IFRS 17) 
In May 2017, the IASB issued IFRS 17 to establish a comprehensive global insurance standard which provides guidance on the 
recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosures of insurance contracts. IFRS 17 requires entities to measure insurance 
contract liabilities at their current fulfillment values using one of three approaches. In June 2020, the IASB issued amendments to 
IFRS 17, including deferral of the effective date by two years. This new standard will be effective for us on November 1, 2023 and 
will be applied retrospectively with restatement of comparatives unless impracticable. We are currently assessing the impact of 
adopting this standard and the amendments on our Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Note 3
Fair value of financial instruments 
Carrying value and fair value of financial instruments 
The following tables provide a comparison of the carrying and fair values for each classification of financial instruments. 
Embedded derivatives are presented on a combined basis with the host contracts. For measurement purposes, they are carried 
at fair value when conditions requiring separation are met. 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Carrying value and fair value 
 Carrying value  
Fair value 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Financial 
instruments 
classified as 
FVTPL 
Financial 
instruments 
designated as 
FVTPL 
Financial 
instruments 
classified as 
FVOCI 
Financial 
instruments 
designated as 
FVOCI  
Financial 
instruments 
measured at 
amortized cost  
Financial 
instruments 
measured at 
amortized cost 
Total 
carrying 
amount 
Total 
fair value 
Financial assets 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
$
– $
56,896 $
– $
–  $
22,742  $
22,742 $
79,638 $
79,638 
Securities 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Trading 
125,801 
13,439 
– 
–  
–  
– 
139,240 
139,240 
Investment, net of applicable allowance 
– 
– 
77,802 
533  
67,149  
66,823 
145,484 
145,158 
 
125,801 
13,439 
77,802 
533  
67,149  
66,823 
284,724 
284,398 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase 
agreements and securities borrowed 
265,011 
– 
– 
–  
42,892  
42,892 
307,903 
307,903 
Loans, net of applicable allowance 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Retail 
– 
241 
327 
–  
500,621  
502,277 
501,189 
502,845 
Wholesale 
8,428 
2,769 
813 
–  
204,376  
204,683 
216,386 
216,693 
 
8,428 
3,010 
1,140 
—  
704,997  
706,960 
717,575 
719,538 
Other 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Derivatives 
95,541 
– 
– 
–  
–  
– 
95,541 
95,541 
Other assets (1) 
4,109 
– 
– 
–  
58,483  
58,483 
62,592 
62,592 
Financial liabilities 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Deposits 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Personal 
$
321 $
18,328 
 
  $
343,839  $
344,040 $
362,488 $
362,689 
Business and government (2) 
739 
131,630 
 
  
563,984  
565,106 
696,353 
697,475 
Bank (3) 
– 
17,251 
 
  
24,739  
24,743 
41,990 
41,994 
 
1,060 
167,209 
 
  
932,562  
933,889 
1,100,831 
1,102,158 
Other 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
37,841 
– 
 
  
–  
– 
37,841 
37,841 
Obligations related to assets sold under 
repurchase agreements and securities 
loaned 
– 
236,147 
 
  
26,054  
26,054 
262,201 
262,201 
Derivatives 
91,439 
– 
 
  
–  
– 
91,439 
91,439 
Other liabilities (4) 
654 
171 
 
  
64,746  
64,749 
65,571 
65,574 
Subordinated debentures 
– 
– 
 
  
9,593  
9,601 
9,593 
9,601 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
153 

Note 3
Fair value of financial instruments (continued) 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
Carrying value and fair value 
 Carrying value  
Fair value 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Financial 
instruments 
classified as 
FVTPL 
Financial 
instruments 
designated as 
FVTPL 
Financial 
instruments 
classified as 
FVOCI 
Financial 
instruments 
designated as 
FVOCI  
Financial 
instruments 
measured at 
amortized cost  
Financial 
instruments 
measured at 
amortized cost 
Total 
carrying 
amount 
Total 
fair value 
Financial assets 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
$
– $
21,603 $
– $
–  $
17,410  $
17,410 $
39,013 $
39,013 
Securities 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Trading 
126,027 
10,044 
– 
–  
–  
– 
136,071 
136,071 
Investment, net of applicable allowance 
– 
– 
81,395 
525  
57,823  
58,627 
139,743 
140,547 
 
126,027 
10,044 
81,395 
525  
57,823  
58,627 
275,814 
276,618 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase 
agreements and securities borrowed 
264,394 
– 
– 
–  
48,621  
48,621 
313,015 
313,015 
Loans, net of applicable allowance 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Retail 
– 
253 
260 
–  
454,429  
462,884 
454,942 
463,397 
Wholesale 
6,197 
2,363 
744 
–  
196,746  
198,753 
206,050 
208,057 
 
6,197 
2,616 
1,004 
–  
651,175  
661,637 
660,992 
671,454 
Other 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Derivatives 
113,488 
– 
– 
–  
–  
– 
113,488 
113,488 
Other assets (1) 
3,414 
– 
– 
–  
57,065  
57,065 
60,479 
60,479 
Financial liabilities 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Deposits 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Personal 
$
104 $
17,096 
 
  $
325,852  $
324,804 $
343,052 $
342,004 
Business and government (2) 
389 
107,466 
 
  
516,456  
518,501 
624,311 
626,356 
Bank (3) 
– 
18,015 
 
  
26,507  
26,518 
44,522 
44,533 
 
493 
142,577 
 
  
868,815  
869,823 
1,011,885 
1,012,893 
Other 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
29,285 
– 
 
  
–  
– 
29,285 
29,285 
Obligations related to assets sold under 
repurchase agreements and securities 
loaned 
– 
255,922 
 
  
18,309  
18,309 
274,231 
274,231 
Derivatives 
109,927 
– 
 
  
–  
– 
109,927 
109,927 
Other liabilities (4) 
80 
86 
 
  
65,712  
65,719 
65,878 
65,885 
Subordinated debentures 
– 
– 
 
  
9,867  
10,071 
9,867 
10,071 
(1) 
Includes Customers’ liability under acceptances and financial instruments recognized in Other assets. 
(2) 
Business and government deposits include deposits from regulated deposit-taking institutions other than banks. 
(3) 
Bank deposits refer to deposits from regulated banks and central banks. 
(4) 
Includes Acceptances and financial instruments recognized in Other liabilities. 
Financial assets designated as fair value through profit or loss 
For our financial assets designated as FVTPL, we measure the change in fair value attributable to changes in credit risk as the 
difference between the total change in the fair value of the instrument during the period and the change in fair value calculated 
using the appropriate risk-free yield curves. For the year ended October 31, 2021, the change in fair value during the period 
attributable to changes in credit risk for positions still held was a gain of $613 million and the cumulative change in fair value 
attributable to changes in credit risk for positions still held was a gain of $173 million. For the year ended October 31, 2020 the 
change in fair value during the period attributable to changes in credit risk for positions still held was a loss of $379 million and 
the cumulative change in fair value attributable to changes in credit risk for positions still held was a loss of $442 million. As at 
October 31, 2021, the extent to which credit derivatives or similar instruments mitigate the maximum exposure to credit risk was 
$484 million (October 31, 2020 – $520 million). 
Financial liabilities designated as fair value through profit or loss 
For our financial liabilities designated as FVTPL, we take into account changes in our own credit spread and the expected 
duration of the instrument to measure the change in fair value attributable to changes in credit risk. 
 
As at or for the year ended October 31, 2021 (1) 
 
Contractual 
maturity 
amount 
Carrying value 
Difference 
between 
carrying value 
and contractual 
maturity amount 
Changes in fair value attributable 
to changes in credit risk included 
in OCI for positions still held 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
During the period 
Cumulative (2) 
Term deposits 
 
 
 
 
 
Personal 
$
18,205 $
18,328 
$
123 
$
(17) 
$
72 
Business and government (3) 
131,830 
131,630 
(200) 
(75) 
416 
Bank (4) 
17,253 
17,251 
(2) 
– 
– 
 
167,288 
167,209 
(79) 
(92) 
488 
Obligations related to assets sold under 
repurchase agreements and securities loaned 
236,164 
236,147 
(17) 
(8) 
– 
Other liabilities 
171 
171 
– 
– 
– 
 
$
403,623 $ 403,527 
$
(96) 
$
(100) 
$
488 
154
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

 
As at or for the year ended October 31, 2020 (1) 
 
Contractual 
maturity 
amount 
Carrying value 
Difference 
between 
carrying value 
and contractual 
maturity amount 
Changes in fair value attributable 
to changes in credit risk included 
in OCI for positions still held 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
During the period 
Cumulative (2) 
Term deposits 
 
 
 
 
 
Personal 
$
17,279 $
17,096 
$
(183) 
$
67 
$
89 
Business and government (3) 
106,153 
107,466 
1,313 
281 
491 
Bank (4) 
18,016 
18,015 
(1) 
– 
– 
 
141,448 
142,577 
1,129 
348 
580 
Obligations related to assets sold under 
repurchase agreements and securities loaned 
255,908 
255,922 
14 
8 
8 
Other liabilities 
86 
86 
– 
– 
– 
 
$
397,442 $
398,585 
$
1,143 
$
356 
$
588 
(1) 
There are no significant changes in fair value attributable to changes in credit risk included in net income for positions still held. 
(2) 
The cumulative change is measured from the initial designation of the liabilities as FVTPL. For the year ended October 31, 2021, $25 million of fair value losses previously 
included in OCI relate to financial liabilities derecognized during the year (October 31, 2020 – $2 million of fair value gains). 
(3) 
Business and government term deposits include amounts from regulated deposit-taking institutions other than regulated banks. 
(4) 
Bank term deposits refer to amounts from regulated banks and central banks. 
Net gains (losses) from financial instruments classified and designated as fair value through profit or loss 
Financial instruments classified as FVTPL, which includes mainly trading securities, derivatives, trading liabilities, and financial 
assets and liabilities designated as FVTPL are measured at fair value with realized and unrealized gains and losses recognized in 
Non-interest income. 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021  
October 31 
2020 
Net gains (losses) (1) 
  
 
Classified as fair value through profit or loss (2) 
$
3,447  
$
(69) 
Designated as fair value through profit or loss (3) 
(1,407)  
1,533 
 
$
2,040  
$
1,464 
By product line (1) 
  
 
Interest rate and credit (4) 
$
1,033  
$
1,490 
Equities 
57  
(501) 
Foreign exchange and commodities 
950  
475 
 
$
2,040  
$
1,464 
(1) 
Excludes the following amounts related to our insurance operations and included in Insurance premiums, investment and fee income in the Consolidated Statements of 
Income: Net losses from financial instruments designated as FVTPL of $14 million (October 31, 2020 – gains of $329 million). 
(2) 
Excludes derivatives designated in a hedging relationship. Refer to Note 8 for net gains (losses) on these derivatives. 
(3) 
For the year ended October 31, 2021, $1,408 million of net fair value losses on financial liabilities designated as FVTPL, other than those attributable to changes in our own 
credit risk, were included in Non-interest income (October 31, 2020 – gains of $1,532 million). 
(4) 
Includes gains (losses) recognized on cross currency interest rate swaps. 
Net interest income from financial instruments 
Interest and dividend income arising from financial assets and financial liabilities and the associated costs of funding are 
reported in Net interest income. 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021  
October 31 
2020 
Interest and dividend income (1), (2) 
  
 
Financial instruments measured at fair value through profit or loss 
$
4,551  
$
8,480 
Financial instruments measured at fair value through other comprehensive income 
375  
957 
Financial instruments measured at amortized cost 
23,219  
25,446 
 
28,145  
34,883 
Interest expense (1) 
  
 
Financial instruments measured at fair value through profit or loss 
$
2,865  
$
6,065 
Financial instruments measured at amortized cost (3) 
5,278  
7,983 
 
8,143  
14,048 
Net interest income 
$
20,002  
$
20,835 
(1) 
Excludes the following amounts related to our insurance operations and included in Insurance premiums, investment and fee income in the Consolidated Statements of 
Income: Interest income of $576 million (October 31, 2020 – $521 million), and Interest expense of $4 million (October 31, 2020 – $7 million). 
(2) 
Includes dividend income for the year ended October 31, 2021 of $2,436 million (October 31, 2020 – $2,670 million), which is presented in Interest and dividend income in 
the Consolidated Statements of Income. 
(3) 
Includes interest expense on lease liabilities for the year ended October 31, 2021 of $110 million (October 31, 2020 – $123 million). 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
155 

Note 3
Fair value of financial instruments (continued) 
Fee income arising from financial instruments 
For the year ended October 31, 2021, we earned $5,583 million in fees from banking services (October 31, 2020 – $5,134 million). For 
the year ended October 31, 2021, we also earned $15,167 million in fees from investment management, trust, custodial, 
underwriting, brokerage and other similar fiduciary services to retail and institutional clients (October 31, 2020 – $13,166 million). 
These fees are included in Non-interest income. 
Fair value of assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis and classified using the fair value hierarchy 
 
As at 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
 
Fair value 
measurements using 
Netting 
adjustments 
 
Fair value 
 
Fair value 
measurements using 
Netting 
adjustments 
 
Fair value 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Level 1 
Level 2 
Level 3 
 
Level 1 
Level 2 
Level 3 
Financial assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
$
– 
$ 56,896 
$
– 
$ 
$
56,896 
 $
– 
$ 21,603 
$
– 
$ 
$
21,603 
Securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canadian government (1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal 
8,977 
2,380 
– 
 
11,357 
 
12,773 
3,012 
– 
 
15,785 
Provincial and municipal 
– 
11,068 
– 
 
11,068 
 
– 
11,562 
– 
 
11,562 
U.S. federal, state, municipal and agencies (1) 
215 
22,738 
25 
 
22,978 
 
1,508 
35,029 
44 
 
36,581 
Other OECD government (2) 
2,729 
5,730 
– 
 
8,459 
 
3,085 
3,380 
– 
 
6,465 
Mortgage-backed securities (1) 
– 
4 
– 
 
4 
 
– 
39 
– 
 
39 
Asset-backed securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-CDO securities (3) 
– 
891 
2 
 
893 
 
– 
526 
2 
 
528 
Corporate debt and other debt 
– 
23,085 
25 
 
23,110 
 
– 
21,464 
30 
 
21,494 
Equities 
56,826 
3,015 
1,530 
 
61,371 
 
39,795 
2,561 
1,261 
 
43,617 
 
68,747 
68,911 
1,582 
 
139,240 
 
57,161 
77,573 
1,337 
 
136,071 
Investment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canadian government (1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal 
1,973 
1,730 
– 
 
3,703 
 
647 
1,894 
– 
 
2,541 
Provincial and municipal 
– 
3,132 
– 
 
3,132 
 
– 
3,233 
– 
 
3,233 
U.S. federal, state, municipal and agencies (1) 
12 
34,815 
– 
 
34,827 
 
160 
38,364 
– 
 
38,524 
Other OECD government 
– 
5,956 
– 
 
5,956 
 
– 
7,345 
– 
 
7,345 
Mortgage-backed securities (1) 
– 
2,727 
20 
 
2,747 
 
– 
2,343 
27 
 
2,370 
Asset-backed securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CDO 
– 
7,074 
– 
 
7,074 
 
– 
7,414 
– 
 
7,414 
Non-CDO securities 
– 
586 
– 
 
586 
 
– 
854 
– 
 
854 
Corporate debt and other debt 
– 
19,625 
152 
 
19,777 
 
– 
18,954 
160 
 
19,114 
Equities 
46 
153 
334 
 
533 
 
38 
152 
335 
 
525 
 
2,031 
75,798 
506 
 
78,335 
 
845 
80,553 
522 
 
81,920 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed 
– 
265,011 
– 
 
265,011 
 
– 
264,394 
– 
 
264,394 
Loans 
– 
11,501 
1,077 
 
12,578 
 
– 
8,747 
1,070 
 
9,817 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Derivatives 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
– 
33,857 
320 
 
34,177 
 
1 
53,720 
501 
 
54,222 
Foreign exchange contracts 
– 
41,224 
74 
 
41,298 
 
– 
39,246 
57 
 
39,303 
Credit derivatives 
– 
34 
– 
 
34 
 
– 
463 
– 
 
463 
Other contracts 
3,175 
17,955 
26 
 
21,156 
 
4,458 
16,767 
36 
 
21,261 
Valuation adjustments 
– 
(819) 
9 
 
(810)  
– 
(1,112) 
8 
 
(1,104) 
Total gross derivatives 
3,175 
92,251 
429 
 
95,855 
 
4,459 
109,084 
602 
 
114,145 
Netting adjustments 
 
 
 
(314) 
(314)  
 
 
 
(657) 
(657) 
Total derivatives 
 
 
 
 
95,541 
 
 
 
 
 
113,488 
Other assets 
1,474 
2,635 
– 
 
4,109 
 
1,154 
2,207 
53 
 
3,414 
 
$75,427 
$573,003 
$ 3,594 
$
(314) $ 651,710 
 $63,619 
$564,161 
$ 3,584 
$
(657) $ 630,707 
Financial liabilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Personal 
$
– 
$ 18,498 
$
151 
$ 
$
18,649 
 $
– 
$ 17,061 
$
139 
$ 
$
17,200 
Business and government 
– 
132,369 
– 
 
132,369 
 
– 
107,855 
– 
 
107,855 
Bank 
– 
17,251 
– 
 
17,251 
 
– 
18,015 
– 
 
18,015 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
18,345 
19,496 
– 
 
37,841 
 
12,484 
16,801 
– 
 
29,285 
Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase agreements and 
securities loaned 
– 
236,147 
– 
 
236,147 
 
– 
255,922 
– 
 
255,922 
Derivatives 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
– 
28,566 
955 
 
29,521 
 
– 
46,723 
1,089 
 
47,812 
Foreign exchange contracts 
– 
40,484 
27 
 
40,511 
 
– 
38,210 
35 
 
38,245 
Credit derivatives 
– 
120 
– 
 
120 
 
– 
531 
– 
 
531 
Other contracts 
3,699 
17,456 
419 
 
21,574 
 
5,734 
18,041 
337 
 
24,112 
Valuation adjustments 
– 
38 
(11) 
 
27 
 
– 
(84) 
(32) 
 
(116) 
Total gross derivatives 
3,699 
86,664 
1,390 
 
91,753 
 
5,734 
103,421 
1,429 
 
110,584 
Netting adjustments 
 
 
 
(314) 
(314)  
 
 
 
(657) 
(657) 
Total derivatives 
 
 
 
 
91,439 
 
 
 
 
 
109,927 
Other liabilities 
258 
560 
7 
 
825 
 
118 
10 
38 
 
166 
 
$22,302 
$510,985 
$ 1,548 
$
(314) $ 534,521 
 $18,336 
$519,085 
$ 1,606 
$
(657) $ 538,370 
(1) 
As at October 31, 2021, residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities (MBS) included in all fair value levels of trading securities were $13,124 million and $nil 
(October 31, 2020 – $20,520 million and $nil), respectively, and in all fair value levels of Investment securities were $13,542 million and $2,592 million (October 31, 2020 – 
$9,487 million and $2,137 million), respectively. 
(2) 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
(3) 
Collateralized debt obligations (CDO). 
156
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Fair values of our significant assets and liabilities measured on a recurring basis are determined and classified in the fair value 
hierarchy table using the following valuation techniques and inputs. 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
The majority of our Interest-bearing deposits with banks are designated as FVTPL. These FVTPL deposits are composed of short-
dated deposits placed with banks, and are included in Interest-bearing deposits with banks in the fair value hierarchy table. The 
fair values of these instruments are determined using the discounted cash flow method. The inputs to the valuation models 
include interest rate swap curves and credit spreads, where applicable. They are classified as Level 2 instruments in the 
hierarchy as the inputs are observable. 
Government bonds (Canadian, U.S. and other OECD governments) 
Government bonds are included in Canadian government debt, U.S. federal, state, municipal and agencies debt, Other OECD 
government debt and Obligations related to securities sold short in the fair value hierarchy table. The fair values of government 
issued or guaranteed debt securities in active markets are determined by reference to recent transaction prices, broker quotes, 
or third-party vendor prices and are classified as Level 1 in the hierarchy. The fair values of securities that are not traded in 
active markets are based on either security prices, or valuation techniques using implied yields and risk spreads derived from 
prices of actively traded and similar government securities. Securities with observable prices or rate inputs as compared to 
transaction prices, dealer quotes or vendor prices are classified as Level 2 in the hierarchy. Securities where inputs are 
unobservable are classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 
Corporate and U.S. municipal bonds 
The fair values of corporate and U.S. municipal bonds, which are included in Corporate debt and other debt, U.S. federal, state, 
municipal and agencies debt and Obligations related to securities sold short in the fair value hierarchy table, are determined 
using either recently executed transaction prices, broker quotes, pricing services, or in certain instances, the discounted cash 
flow method using rate inputs such as benchmark yields (CDOR, LIBOR and other similar reference rates) and risk spreads of 
comparable securities. Securities with observable prices or rate inputs are classified as Level 2 in the hierarchy. Securities where 
inputs are unobservable are classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 
Asset-backed securities and Mortgage-backed securities 
Asset-backed securities (ABS) and MBS are included in Asset-backed securities, Mortgage-backed securities, Canadian 
government debt, U.S. federal, state, municipal and agencies debt, and Obligations related to securities sold short in the fair 
value hierarchy table. Inputs for valuation of ABS and MBS are, when available, traded prices, dealer or lead manager quotes, 
broker quotes and vendor prices of the identical securities. When prices of the identical securities are not readily available, we 
use industry standard models with inputs such as discount margins, yields, default, prepayment and loss severity rates that are 
implied from transaction prices, dealer quotes or vendor prices of comparable instruments. Where security prices and inputs are 
observable, ABS and MBS are classified as Level 2 in the hierarchy. Otherwise, they are classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 
Equities 
Equities consist of listed and unlisted common shares, private equities, mutual funds and hedge funds with certain redemption 
restrictions and are included in equities and obligations for securities sold short. The fair values of common shares are based on 
quoted prices in active markets, where available, and are classified as Level 1 in the hierarchy. Where quoted prices in active 
markets are not readily available, fair value is determined based on quoted market prices for similar securities or through 
valuation techniques, such as multiples of earnings and the discounted cash flow method with forecasted cash flows and 
discount rate as inputs. Private equities are classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy as their inputs are not observable. Hedge funds 
are valued using Net Asset Values (NAV). If we can redeem a hedge fund at NAV prior to the next quarter end, the fund is 
classified as Level 2 in the hierarchy. Otherwise, it is classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 
Loans 
Loans include base metal loans, corporate loans, banker acceptances and asset-backed financing loans. Fair values are 
determined based on market prices, if available, or discounted cash flow method using the following inputs: market interest 
rates, base metal commodity prices, market based spreads of assets with similar credit ratings and terms to maturity, LGD, 
expected default frequency implied from credit derivative prices, if available, and relevant pricing information such as 
contractual rate, origination and maturity dates, redemption price, coupon payment frequency and day count convention. Loans 
with market prices or observable inputs are classified as Level 2 in the hierarchy and loans with unobservable inputs that have 
significant impacts on the fair values are classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 
Derivatives 
The fair values of exchange-traded derivatives, such as interest rate and equity options and futures, are based on quoted market 
prices and are typically classified as Level 1 in the hierarchy. OTC derivatives primarily consist of interest rate contracts, foreign 
exchange contracts and credit derivatives. The exchange-traded or OTC interest rate, foreign exchange and equity derivatives 
are included in Interest rate contracts, Foreign exchange contracts and Other contracts, respectively, in the fair value hierarchy 
table. The fair values of OTC derivatives are determined using valuation models when quoted market prices or third-party 
consensus pricing information are not available. The valuation models, such as discounted cash flow method or Black-Scholes 
option model, incorporate observable or unobservable inputs for interest and foreign exchange rates, equity and commodity 
prices (including indices), credit spreads, corresponding market volatility levels, and other market-based pricing factors. Other 
adjustments to fair value include bid-offer, CVA, FVA, OIS, parameter and model uncertainties, and unrealized gain or loss at 
inception of a transaction. A derivative instrument is classified as Level 2 in the hierarchy if observable market inputs are 
available or the unobservable inputs are not significant to the fair value. Otherwise, it is classified as Level 3 in the hierarchy. 
Securities borrowed or purchased under resale agreements and securities loaned or sold under repurchase agreements 
In the fair value hierarchy table, these instruments are included in Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed, and Obligations related to assets sold under repurchase agreements and securities loaned. The fair values 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
157 

Note 3
Fair value of financial instruments (continued) 
of these contracts are determined using valuation techniques such as the discounted cash flow method using interest rate 
curves as inputs. They are classified as Level 2 instruments in the hierarchy as the inputs are observable. 
Deposits 
A majority of our deposits are measured at amortized cost but certain deposits are designated as FVTPL. These FVTPL deposits 
include deposits taken from clients, issuances of certificates of deposits and promissory notes, and interest rate and equity 
linked notes. The fair values of these instruments are determined using the discounted cash flow method and derivative option 
valuation models. The inputs to the valuation models include benchmark yield curves, credit spreads, interest rates, equity and 
interest rate volatility, dividends and correlation, where applicable. They are classified as Level 2 or 3 instruments in the 
hierarchy, depending on the significance of the unobservable credit spreads, volatility, dividend and correlation rates. 
Quantitative information about fair value measurements using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3 Instruments) 
The following table presents fair values of our significant Level 3 financial instruments, valuation techniques used to determine 
their fair values, ranges and weighted averages of unobservable inputs. 
As at October 31, 2021 (Millions of Canadian dollars, except for prices, percentages and ratios) 
 
 
Fair value 
 
  
Range of input values (1), (2) 
Products 
Reporting line in the fair value 
hierarchy table 
Assets  Liabilities 
Valuation 
techniques 
Significant 
unobservable 
inputs (3)  
Low 
High 
Weighted 
average / 
Inputs 
distribution 
Corporate debt and related 
derivatives 
 
 
 
Price-based 
Prices  $
29.18 $ 127.09 $
96.36 
Corporate debt and other debt 
$
27 
 
Discounted cash flows 
Credit spread  
1.15% 
6.92% 
4.04% 
 
Loans 
1,077 
 
 
Credit enhancement  
11.92% 
15.90% 
13.25% 
 
Derivative related liabilities 
 
$
9 
 
  
 
 
 
Government debt and 
municipal bonds 
 
 
 
Price-based 
Prices  
n.a. 
n.a.  
n.a.  
Corporate debt and other debt 
150 
 
Discounted cash flows 
Yields  
3.91% 
8.17% 
5.91% 
Private equities, hedge fund 
investments and related 
equity derivatives 
 
 
 
Market comparable 
EV/EBITDA multiples  
8.82X 
26.00X 
9.16X 
Equities 
1,864 
 
Price-based 
P/E multiples  
9.40X 
38.00X 
10.96X 
Derivative related liabilities 
 
2 
Discounted cash flows 
EV/Rev multiples  
1.14X 
20.80X 
5.40X 
 
 
 
 
 
Liquidity discounts (4)  
10.00% 
40.00% 
16.40% 
 
 
 
 
 
Discount rate  
10.65% 
10.65% 
10.65% 
 
 
 
 
 
NAV / prices (5)  
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
Interest rate derivatives and 
interest-rate-linked 
structured notes (6), (7) 
 
 
 
Discounted cash flows 
Interest rates  
0.13% 
2.46% 
High 
Derivative related assets 
367 
 
Option pricing model 
CPI swap rates  
1.76% 
2.42% 
Even 
Derivative related liabilities 
 
974 
 
IR-IR correlations  
19.00% 
67.00% 
Even 
 
 
 
 
 
FX-IR correlations  
29.00% 
56.00% 
Even 
 
 
 
 
 
FX-FX correlations  
68.00% 
68.00% 
Even 
Equity derivatives and equity-
linked structured 
notes (6), (7) 
 
 
 
Discounted cash flows 
Dividend yields  
0.00% 
6.37% 
Lower 
Derivative related assets 
25 
 
Option pricing model 
Equity (EQ)-EQ correlations  
32.00% 
95.00% 
Middle 
 
Deposits 
 
151 
 
EQ-FX correlations  (60.60)% 
27.30% 
Middle 
 
Derivative related liabilities 
 
381 
 
EQ volatilities  
8.00% 128.00% 
Upper 
Other (8) 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Asset-backed securities 
2 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Derivative related assets 
37 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Other assets 
– 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Mortgage-backed securities 
20 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
U.S. state, municipal and 
agencies debt 
25 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Derivative related liabilities 
 
24 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Other liabilities 
 
7 
 
  
 
 
 
Total 
 
$ 3,594 
$ 1,548 
 
  
 
 
 
158
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

As at October 31, 2020 (Millions of Canadian dollars, except for prices, percentages and ratios) 
 
 
Fair value 
 
 
 
Range of input values (1), (2) 
Products 
Reporting line in the fair value 
hierarchy table 
Assets  Liabilities 
Valuation 
techniques 
Significant 
unobservable 
inputs (3) 
Low 
High 
Weighted 
average / 
Inputs 
distribution 
Corporate debt and related 
derivatives 
 
 
 
Price-based 
Prices  $
1.33 $ 136.34 $
94.23 
Corporate debt and other debt 
$
33 
 Discounted cash flows 
Credit spread  
1.75% 
14.10% 
7.93% 
 
Loans 
1,070 
 
 
Credit enhancement  
11.82% 
15.75% 
13.13% 
 
Derivative related liabilities 
 $
25 
 
  
 
 
 
Government debt and 
municipal bonds 
 
 
 
Price-based 
Prices  $
64.62 $
64.62 $
64.62 
Corporate debt and other debt 
157 
 Discounted cash flows 
Yields  
4.21% 
7.89% 
5.88% 
Private equities, hedge fund 
investments and related 
equity derivatives 
 
 
 
Market comparable 
EV/EBITDA multiples  
7.00X 
15.38X 
13.31X 
Equities 
1,596 
 
Price-based 
P/E multiples  
9.40X 
33.47X 
19.10X 
Derivative related liabilities 
 
10 Discounted cash flows 
EV/Rev multiples  
1.61X 
9.10X 
2.04X 
 
 
 
 
Liquidity discounts (4)  
10.00% 
40.00% 
16.40% 
 
 
 
 
Discount rate  
10.52% 
10.52% 
10.52% 
 
 
 
 
NAV / prices (5)  
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
Interest rate derivatives and 
interest-rate-linked 
structured notes (6), (7) 
 
 
 Discounted cash flows 
Interest rates  
1.20% 
1.60% 
Even 
Derivative related assets 
540 
 
Option pricing model 
CPI swap rates  
1.46% 
1.83% 
Even 
Derivative related liabilities 
 
1,103 
 
IR-IR correlations  
19.00% 
67.00% 
Even 
 
 
 
 
FX-IR correlations  
29.00% 
56.00% 
Even 
 
 
 
 
FX-FX correlations  
68.00% 
68.00% 
Even 
Equity derivatives and equity-
linked structured 
notes (6), (7) 
 
 
 Discounted cash flows 
Dividend yields  
0.00% 
11.38% 
Lower 
Derivative related assets 
36 
 
Option pricing model Equity (EQ)-EQ correlations  
21.90% 
97.00% 
Middle 
Deposits 
 
139 
 
EQ-FX correlations  (71.40)% 
45.10% 
Middle 
Derivative related liabilities 
 
238 
 
EQ volatilities  
9.00% 
176.00% 
Upper 
Other (8) 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Asset-backed securities 
2 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Derivative related assets 
26 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Other assets 
53 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Mortgage-backed securities 
27 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
U.S. state, municipal and agencies 
debt 
44 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Derivative related liabilities 
 
53 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Other liabilities 
 
38 
 
  
 
 
 
Total 
 
$
3,584 $
1,606 
 
  
 
 
 
(1) 
The low and high input values represent the actual highest and lowest level inputs used to value a group of financial instruments in a particular product category. These 
input ranges do not reflect the level of input uncertainty, but are affected by the different underlying instruments within the product category. The input ranges will 
therefore vary from period to period based on the characteristics of the underlying instruments held at each balance sheet date. Where provided, the weighted average 
of the input values is calculated based on the relative fair values of the instruments within the product category. The weighted averages for derivatives are not presented 
in the table as they would not provide a comparable metric; instead, distribution of significant unobservable inputs within the range for each product category is 
indicated in the table. 
(2) 
Price-based inputs are significant for certain debt securities and are based on external benchmarks, comparable proxy instruments or pre-quarter-end trade data. For 
these instruments, the price input is expressed in dollars for each $100 par value. For example, with an input price of $105, an instrument is valued at a premium over its 
par value. 
(3) 
The significant unobservable inputs include the following: (i) Enterprise Value (EV); (ii) Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA); (iii) 
Price / Earnings (P/E); (iv) Revenue (Rev); (v) Consumer Price Index (CPI); (vi) Interest Rate (IR); (vii) Foreign Exchange (FX); and (viii) Equity (EQ). 
(4) 
Fair value of securities with liquidity discount inputs totalled $385 million (October 31, 2020 – $286 million). 
(5) 
NAV of a hedge fund is total fair value of assets less liabilities divided by the number of fund units. Private equities are valued based on NAV or valuation techniques. The 
range for NAV per unit or price per share has not been disclosed for the hedge funds or private equities due to the dispersion of prices given the diverse nature of the 
investments. 
(6) 
The level of aggregation and diversity within each derivative instrument category may result in certain ranges of inputs being wide and inputs being unevenly distributed 
across the range. In the table, we indicated whether the majority of the inputs are concentrated toward the upper, middle, or lower end of the range, or evenly distributed 
throughout the range. 
(7) 
The structured notes contain embedded equity or interest rate derivatives with unobservable inputs that are similar to those of the equity or interest rate derivatives. 
(8) 
Other primarily includes certain insignificant instruments such as auction rate securities, commodity derivatives, foreign exchange derivatives, contingent 
considerations, bank-owned life insurance and retractable shares. 
n.a. 
not applicable 
Sensitivity to unobservable inputs and interrelationships between unobservable inputs 
Yield, credit spreads/discount margins 
A financial instrument’s yield is the interest rate used to discount future cash flows in a valuation model. An increase in the yield, 
in isolation, would result in a decrease in a fair value measurement and vice versa. A credit spread/discount margin is the 
difference between a debt instrument’s yield and a benchmark instrument’s yield. Benchmark instruments have high credit 
quality ratings, similar maturities and are often government bonds. The credit spread/discount margin therefore represents the 
discount rate used to determine the present value of future cash flows of an asset to reflect the market return required for 
uncertainty in the estimated cash flows. The credit spread/discount margin for an instrument forms part of the yield used in a 
discounted cash flow method. 
Funding spread 
Funding spreads are credit spreads specific to funding or deposit rates. A decrease in funding spreads, on its own, will increase 
the fair value of our liabilities, and vice versa. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
159 

Note 3
Fair value of financial instruments (continued) 
Default rates 
A default rate is the rate at which borrowers fail to make scheduled loan payments. A decrease in the default rate will typically 
increase the fair value of the loan, and vice versa. This effect will be significantly more pronounced for a non-government 
guaranteed loan than a government guaranteed loan. 
Prepayment rates 
A prepayment rate is the rate at which a loan will be repaid in advance of its expected amortization schedule. Prepayments 
change the future cash flows of a loan. An increase in the prepayment rate in isolation will result in an increase in fair value when 
the loan interest rate is lower than the current reinvestment rate, and a decrease in the prepayment rate in isolation will result in 
a decrease in fair value when the loan interest rate is lower than the current reinvestment rate. Prepayment rates are generally 
negatively correlated with interest rates. 
Recovery and loss severity rates 
A recovery rate is an estimation of the amount that can be collected in a loan default scenario. The recovery rate is the recovered 
amount divided by the loan balance due, expressed as a percentage. The inverse concept of recovery is loss severity. Loss 
severity rate is an estimation of the loan amount not collected when a loan defaults. The loss severity rate is the loss amount 
divided by the loan balance due, expressed as a percentage. Generally, an increase in the recovery rate or a decrease in the loss 
severity rate will increase the loan fair value, and vice versa. 
Volatility rates 
Volatility measures the potential variability of future prices and is often measured as the standard deviation of price movements. 
Volatility is an input to option pricing models used to value derivatives and issued structured notes. Volatility is used in valuing 
equity, interest rate, commodity and foreign exchange options. A higher volatility rate means that the underlying price or rate 
movements are more likely to occur. Higher volatility rates may increase or decrease an option’s fair value depending on the 
option’s terms. The determination of volatility rates is dependent on various factors, including but not limited to, the underlying’s 
market price, the strike price and maturity. 
Dividend yields 
A dividend yield is the underlying equity’s expected dividends expressed as an annual percentage of its price. Dividend yield is 
used as an input for forward equity price and option models. Higher dividend yields will decrease the forward price, and vice 
versa. A higher dividend yield will increase or decrease an option’s value, depending on the option’s terms. 
Correlation rates 
Correlation is the linear relationship between the movements in two different variables. Correlation is an input to the valuation of 
derivative contracts and issued structured notes when an instrument’s payout is determined by correlated variables. When 
variables are positively correlated, an increase in one variable will result in an increase in the other variable. When variables are 
negatively correlated, an increase in one variable will result in a decrease in the other variable. The referenced variables can be 
within a single asset class or market (equity, interest rate, commodities, credit and foreign exchange) or between variables in 
different asset classes (equity to foreign exchange, or interest rate to foreign exchange). Changes in correlation will either 
increase or decrease a financial instrument’s fair value depending on the terms of the instrument. 
Interest rates 
An interest rate is the percentage amount charged on a principal or notional amount. Increasing interest rates will decrease the 
discounted cash flow value of a financial instrument, and vice versa. 
Consumer Price Index swap rates 
A CPI swap rate is expressed as a percentage of an increase in the average price of a basket of consumer goods and services, 
such as transportation, food and medical care. An increase in the CPI swap rate will cause inflation swap payments to be larger, 
and vice versa. 
EV/EBITDA multiples, P/E multiples, EV/Rev multiples, and liquidity discounts 
Private equity valuation inputs include EV/EBITDA multiples, P/E multiples and EV/Rev multiples. These are used to calculate 
either enterprise value or share value of a company based on a multiple of earnings or revenue estimates. Higher multiples 
equate to higher fair values for all multiple types, and vice versa. A liquidity discount may be applied when few or no transactions 
exist to support the valuations. 
Credit Enhancement 
Credit enhancement is an input to the valuation of securitized transactions and is the amount of loan loss protection for a senior 
tranche. Credit enhancement is expressed as a percentage of the transaction sizes. An increase in credit enhancement will cause 
the credit spread to decrease and the tranche fair value to increase, and vice versa. 
Interrelationships between unobservable inputs 
Unobservable inputs, including the above discount margin, default rate, prepayment rate, and recovery and loss severity rates, 
may not be independent of each other. For example, the discount margin can be affected by a change in default rate, prepayment 
rate, or recovery and loss severity rates. Discount margins will generally decrease when default rates decline or when recovery 
rates increase. 
160
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Changes in fair value measurement for instruments measured on a recurring basis and categorized in Level 3 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Fair value 
at beginning 
of period 
Gains 
(losses) 
included in 
earnings 
Gains 
(losses) 
included 
in OCI (1) 
Purchases 
(issuances) 
Settlement 
(sales) and 
other (2) 
Transfers 
into 
Level 3 
Transfers 
out of 
Level 3 
Fair value 
at end of 
period 
Gains 
(losses) included 
in earnings for 
positions still held 
Assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. state, municipal and agencies 
$
44 $
– $
(2) $
– $
(17) $
– $
– $
25 
$
1 
Asset-backed securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-CDO securities 
2 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
2 
– 
Corporate debt and other debt 
30 
(2) 
– 
12 
(5) 
14 
(24) 
25 
(1) 
Equities 
1,261 
96 
(60) 
338 
(125) 
26 
(6) 
1,530 
164 
 
1,337 
94 
(62) 
350 
(147) 
40 
(30) 
1,582 
164 
Investment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mortgage-backed securities 
27 
– 
(7) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
20 
n.a. 
Corporate debt and other debt 
160 
– 
(12) 
– 
4 
– 
– 
152 
n.a. 
Equities 
335 
– 
34 
5 
(2) 
– 
(38) 
334 
n.a. 
 
522 
– 
15 
5 
2 
– 
(38) 
506 
n.a. 
Loans 
1,070 
(5) 
(19) 
264 
(8) 
73 
(298) 
1,077 
30 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net derivative balances (3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
(588) 
84 
(1) 
5 
(109) 
(4) 
(22) 
(635) 
84 
Foreign exchange contracts 
22 
14 
– 
38 
(25) 
7 
(9) 
47 
1 
Other contracts 
(301) 
(20) 
11 
(142) 
102 
(276) 
233 
(393) 
(10) 
Valuation adjustments 
40 
– 
– 
6 
(26) 
– 
– 
20 
– 
Other assets 
53 
(39) 
(2) 
– 
(12) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
 
$
2,155 $
128 $
(58) $
526 $
(223) $
(160) $
(164) $ 2,204 
$
269 
Liabilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits 
$
(139) $
(66) $
5 $
(191) $
51 $
(154) $
343 $
(151) 
$
6 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other liabilities 
(38) 
22 
1 
– 
8 
– 
– 
(7) 
23 
 
$
(177) $
(44) $
6 $
(191) $
59 $
(154) $
343 $
(158) 
$
29 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Fair value 
at beginning 
of period 
Gains 
(losses) 
included in 
earnings 
Gains 
(losses) 
included 
in OCI (1) 
Purchases 
(issuances) 
Settlement 
(sales) and 
other (2) 
Transfers 
into 
Level 3 
Transfers 
out of 
Level 3 
Fair value 
at end of 
period 
Gains 
(losses) included 
in earnings for 
positions still held 
Assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Trading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. state, municipal and agencies 
$
58 $
– $
1 $
– $
(15) $
– $
– $
44 
$
– 
Asset-backed securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-CDO securities 
2 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
2 
– 
Corporate debt and other debt 
21 
(1) 
– 
1 
(3) 
12 
– 
30 
– 
Equities 
1,219 
(126) 
10 
231 
(74) 
3 
(2) 
1,261 
(47) 
 
1,300 
(127) 
11 
232 
(92) 
15 
(2) 
1,337 
(47) 
Investment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mortgage-backed securities 
27 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
27 
n.a. 
Corporate debt and other debt 
153 
– 
4 
– 
3 
– 
– 
160 
n.a. 
Equities 
294 
– 
37 
8 
(4) 
– 
– 
335 
n.a. 
 
474 
– 
41 
8 
(1) 
– 
– 
522 
n.a. 
Loans 
680 
92 
8 
551 
(706) 
624 
(179) 
1,070 
(15) 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Net derivative balances (3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
(585) 
(116) 
(2) 
(31) 
4 
35 
107 
(588) 
(57) 
Foreign exchange contracts 
21 
(7) 
(3) 
23 
– 
(6) 
(6) 
22 
(13) 
Other contracts 
(195) 
(76) 
(1) 
(174) 
44 
(88) 
189 
(301) 
(8) 
Valuation adjustments 
22 
– 
– 
– 
18 
– 
– 
40 
– 
Other assets 
77 
(7) 
2 
– 
(19) 
– 
– 
53 
(7) 
 
$
1,794 $
(241) $
56 $
609 $
(752) $
580 $
109 $
2,155 
$
(147) 
Liabilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits 
$
(156) $
52 $
(3) $
(296) $
30 $
(113) $
347 $
(139) 
$
29 
Other 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other liabilities 
(60) 
5 
(1) 
4 
14 
– 
– 
(38) 
5 
 
$
(216) $
57 $
(4) $
(292) $
44 $
(113) $
347 $
(177) 
$
34 
(1) 
These amounts include the foreign currency translation gains or losses arising on consolidation of foreign subsidiaries relating to the Level 3 instruments, where 
applicable. The unrealized gains on Investment securities recognized in OCI were $46 million for the year ended October 31, 2021 (October 31, 2020 – gains of $32 million) 
excluding the translation gains or losses arising on consolidation. 
(2) 
Other includes amortization of premiums or discounts recognized in net income. 
(3) 
Net derivatives as at October 31, 2021 included derivative assets of $429 million (October 31, 2020 – $602 million) and derivative liabilities of $1,390 million (October 31, 
2020 – $1,429 million). 
n.a. 
not applicable 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
161 

Note 3
Fair value of financial instruments (continued) 
Transfers between fair value hierarchy levels for instruments carried at fair value on a recurring basis 
Transfers between Level 1 and Level 2, and transfers into and out of Level 3 are assumed to occur at the end of the period. For an 
asset or a liability that transfers into Level 3 during the period, the entire change in fair value for the period is excluded from the 
Gains (losses) included in earnings for positions still held column of the above reconciliation, whereas for transfers out of Level 3 
during the period, the entire change in fair value for the period is included in the same column of the above reconciliation. 
Transfers between Level 1 and 2 are dependent on whether fair value is obtained on the basis of quoted market prices in active 
markets (Level 1). 
During the year ended October 31, 2021, transfers out of Level 1 to Level 2 included Obligations related to securities sold short 
of $498 million. During the year ended October 31, 2020, transfers out of Level 1 to Level 2 included Investment U.S. federal, state, 
municipal and agencies debt of $1,200 million, Trading U.S. federal, state, municipal and agencies debt of $1,125 million and 
Obligations related to securities sold short of $804 million. 
During the year ended October 31, 2021, transfers out of Level 2 to Level 1 included Obligations related to securities sold short 
of $130 million. During the year ended October 31, 2020, transfers out of Level 2 to Level 1 included Investment U.S. federal, state, 
municipal and agencies debt of $937 million. 
Transfers between Level 2 and Level 3 are primarily due to either a change in the market observability for an input, or a change in 
an unobservable input’s significance to a financial instrument’s fair value. 
During the year ended October 31, 2021, significant transfers out of Level 2 to Level 3 included: 
•
$277 million of OTC equity options in Other contracts comprised of $17 million of derivative related assets and 
$294 million of derivative related liabilities, due to changes in the market observability of inputs and changes in the 
significance of unobservable inputs. 
•
$154 million of Personal deposits, due to changes in the significance of unobservable inputs. 
During the year ended October 31, 2020, significant transfers out of Level 2 to Level 3 included: 
•
$624 million of Loans, due to changes in the significance of unobservable inputs. 
•
$69 million of OTC equity options in Other contracts comprised of $51 million of derivative related assets and 
$120 million of derivative related liabilities, due to changes in the market observability of inputs. 
•
$113 million of Personal deposits, due to changes in the significance of unobservable inputs. 
During the year ended October 31, 2021, significant transfers out of Level 3 to Level 2 included: 
•
$298 million of Loans, due to changes in the significance of unobservable inputs. 
•
$245 million of OTC equity options in Other contracts comprised of $69 million of derivative related assets and 
$314 million of derivative related liabilities, due to changes in the market observability of inputs and changes in the 
significance of unobservable inputs. 
•
$343 million of Personal deposits, due to changes in the significance of unobservable inputs. 
During the year ended October 31, 2020, significant transfers out of Level 3 to Level 2 included: 
•
$179 million of Loans, due to changes in significance of unobservable inputs. 
•
$107 million of Interest rate contracts comprised of $211 million of derivative related assets and $318 million of derivative 
related liabilities, due to changes in the market observability of inputs. 
•
$109 million of OTC equity options in Other contracts comprised of $76 million of derivative related assets and 
$185 million of derivative related liabilities, due to changes in the market observability of inputs. 
•
$347 million of Personal deposits, due to changes in the significance of unobservable inputs. 
Positive and negative fair value movements of Level 3 financial instruments from using reasonably possible alternative 
assumptions 
A financial instrument is classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy if one or more of its unobservable inputs may 
significantly affect the measurement of its fair value. In preparing the financial statements, appropriate levels for these 
unobservable input parameters are chosen so that they are consistent with prevailing market evidence or management 
judgment. Due to the unobservable nature of the prices or rates, there may be uncertainty about the valuation of these Level 3 
financial instruments. 
162
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

The following table summarizes the impacts to fair values of Level 3 financial instruments using reasonably possible 
alternative assumptions. This sensitivity disclosure is intended to illustrate the potential impact of the relative uncertainty in the 
fair value of Level 3 financial instruments. In reporting the sensitivities below, we offset balances in instances where: (i) the move 
in valuation factors cause an offsetting positive and negative fair value movement, (ii) both offsetting instruments are in Level 3, 
and (iii) exposures are managed and reported on a net basis. With respect to overall sensitivity, it is unlikely in practice that all 
reasonably possible alternative assumptions would simultaneously be realized. 
 
As at  
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Level 3 
fair value 
Positive fair value 
movement from 
using reasonably 
possible 
alternatives 
Negative fair value 
movement from 
using reasonably 
possible 
alternatives  
Level 3 
fair value 
Positive fair value 
movement from 
using reasonably 
possible 
alternatives 
Negative fair value 
movement from 
using reasonably 
possible 
alternatives 
Securities 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Trading 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
  
 
 
 
U.S. state, municipal and 
agencies 
$
 25 $
 –  $
(1)  $
44 $
1 $
(1) 
Asset-backed securities 
2 
–  
–   
2 
– 
– 
Corporate debt and other debt 
25 
1 
(1)  
30 
1 
(1) 
Equities 
1,530 
19 
(16)  
1,261 
15 
(15) 
Investment 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Mortgage-backed securities 
20 
4 
(4)  
27 
3 
(3) 
Corporate debt and other debt 
152 
14 
(13)  
160 
18 
(16) 
Equities 
334 
33 
(34)  
335 
28 
(28) 
Loans 
1,077 
23 
(24)  
1,070 
49 
(49) 
Derivatives 
429 
7 
(5)  
602 
2 
(2) 
Other assets 
–  
–  
–   
53 
– 
– 
 
$
 3,594 $
101 $
(98)  $
3,584 $
117 $
(115) 
Deposits 
$
(151) $
–  $
–   $
(139) $
4 $
(4) 
Derivatives 
(1,390) 
30 
(77)  
(1,429) 
13 
(55) 
Other 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Other liabilities 
(7) 
–  
–   
(38) 
– 
– 
 
$
(1,548) $
30 $
(77)  $
(1,606) $
17 $
(59) 
Sensitivity results 
As at October 31, 2021, the effects of applying other reasonably possible alternative assumptions to the Level 3 asset positions 
would be an increase of $101 million and a reduction of $98 million in fair value, of which $51 million and $51 million would be 
recorded in Other components of equity, respectively. The effects of applying these assumptions to the Level 3 liability positions 
would result in a decrease of $30 million and an increase of $77 million in fair value. 
Level 3 valuation inputs and approaches to developing reasonably possible alternative assumptions 
The following is a summary of the unobservable inputs used in the valuation of the Level 3 instruments and our approaches to 
developing reasonably possible alternative assumptions used to determine sensitivity. 
Financial assets or 
liabilities 
Sensitivity methodology 
Asset-backed securities, 
corporate debt, government 
debt, municipal bonds and 
loans 
Sensitivities are determined based on adjusting, plus or minus one standard deviation, the 
bid-offer spreads or input prices if a sufficient number of prices is received, adjusting input 
parameters such as credit spreads or using high and low vendor prices as reasonably possible 
alternative assumptions. 
Private equities, hedge fund 
investments and related 
equity derivatives 
Sensitivity of direct private equity investments is determined by (i) adjusting the discount rate 
by 2% when the discounted cash flow method is used to determine fair value, (ii) adjusting the 
price multiples based on the range of multiples of comparable companies when price-multiples-
based models are used, or (iii) using an alternative valuation approach. The private equity fund, 
hedge fund and related equity derivative NAVs are provided by the fund managers, and as a 
result, there are no other reasonably possible alternative assumptions for these investments. 
Interest rate derivatives 
Sensitivities of interest rate and cross currency swaps are derived using plus or minus one 
standard deviation of the inputs, and an amount representing model and parameter uncertainty, 
where applicable. 
Equity derivatives 
Sensitivity of the Level 3 position is determined by shifting the unobservable model inputs by 
plus or minus one standard deviation of the pricing service market data including volatility, 
dividends or correlations, as applicable. 
Bank funding and deposits 
Sensitivities of deposits are calculated by shifting the funding curve by plus or minus certain 
basis points. 
Structured notes 
Sensitivities for interest-rate-linked and equity-linked structured notes are derived by adjusting 
inputs by plus or minus one standard deviation, and for other deposits, by estimating a 
reasonable move in the funding curve by plus or minus certain basis points. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
163 

Note 3
Fair value of financial instruments (continued) 
Fair value for financial instruments that are carried at amortized cost and classified using the fair value hierarchy 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Fair value 
approximates 
carrying value (1) 
Fair value may not approximate carrying value 
 
 
Fair value measurements using 
 
Total 
fair value 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Level 1 
Level 2 
Level 3 
Total 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
$
22,742 
$
–  
$
–  
$
–  
$
–  
$
22,742 
Amortized cost securities (2) 
–  
1,025 
65,798 
–  
66,823 
66,823 
Assets purchased under reverse 
repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed 
31,368 
–  
11,524 
–  
11,524 
42,892 
Loans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retail 
68,377 
–  
429,672 
4,228 
433,900 
502,277 
Wholesale 
16,228 
–  
184,055 
4,400 
188,455 
204,683 
 
84,605 
–  
613,727 
8,628 
622,355 
706,960 
Other assets 
57,859 
–  
489 
135 
624 
58,483 
 
196,574 
1,025 
691,538 
8,763 
701,326 
897,900 
Deposits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Personal 
272,675 
–  
70,908 
457 
71,365 
344,040 
Business and government 
418,185 
–  
146,334 
587 
146,921 
565,106 
Bank 
16,943 
–  
7,792 
8 
7,800 
24,743 
 
707,803 
–  
225,034 
1,052 
226,086 
933,889 
Obligations related to assets sold 
under repurchase agreements and 
securities loaned 
26,054 
–  
–  
–  
–  
26,054 
Other liabilities 
55,495 
–  
1,256 
7,998 
9,254 
64,749 
Subordinated debentures 
–  
–  
9,545 
56 
9,601 
9,601 
 
$
789,352 
$
–  
$ 235,835 
$
9,106 
$ 244,941 
$ 1,034,293 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
Fair value 
approximates 
carrying value (1) 
Fair value may not approximate carrying value 
 
 
Fair value measurements using 
 
Total 
fair value 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Level 1 
Level 2 
Level 3 
Total 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
$
17,410 
$
– 
$
– 
$
– 
$
– 
$
17,410 
Amortized cost securities (2) 
– 
502 
58,125 
– 
58,627 
58,627 
Assets purchased under reverse 
repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed 
37,064 
– 
11,557 
– 
11,557 
48,621 
Loans 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retail 
66,151 
– 
392,093 
4,640 
396,733 
462,884 
Wholesale 
11,278 
– 
182,094 
5,381 
187,475 
198,753 
 
77,429 
– 
574,187 
10,021 
584,208 
661,637 
Other assets 
56,484 
– 
450 
131 
581 
57,065 
 
188,387 
502 
644,319 
10,152 
654,973 
843,360 
Deposits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Personal 
245,777 
– 
78,500 
527 
79,027 
324,804 
Business and government 
364,451 
– 
153,395 
655 
154,050 
518,501 
Bank 
19,070 
– 
7,439 
9 
7,448 
26,518 
 
629,298 
– 
239,334 
1,191 
240,525 
869,823 
Obligations related to assets sold 
under repurchase agreements and 
securities loaned 
18,309 
– 
– 
– 
– 
18,309 
Other liabilities 
56,200 
– 
1,004 
8,515 
9,519 
65,719 
Subordinated debentures 
– 
– 
10,012 
59 
10,071 
10,071 
 
$
703,807 
$
– 
$
250,350 
$
9,765 
$
260,115 
$
963,922 
(1) 
Certain financial instruments have not been assigned to a level as the carrying amount approximates their fair values. 
(2) 
Included in Securities – Investment, net of applicable allowance on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Fair values of financial assets and liabilities carried at amortized cost and disclosed in the table above are determined using the 
following valuation techniques and inputs. 
164
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Amortized cost securities 
Fair values of government bonds, corporate bonds, and ABS are based on quoted prices. Fair values of certain Non-OECD 
government bonds are based on vendor prices or the discounted cash flow method with yield curves of other countries’ 
government bonds as inputs. For ABS, where market prices are not available, the fair value is determined using the discounted 
cash flow method. The inputs to the valuation model generally include market interest rates, spreads and yields derived from 
comparable securities, prepayment, and LGD. 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed, and Obligations related to assets sold 
under repurchase agreements and securities loaned 
Valuation methods used for the long-term instruments are described in the Fair value of assets and liabilities measured on a 
recurring basis and classified using the fair value hierarchy section of this note. The carrying values of short-term instruments 
generally approximate their fair values. 
Loans – Retail 
Retail loans include residential mortgages, personal and small business loans and credit cards. For residential mortgages, and 
personal and small business loans, we segregate the portfolio based on certain attributes such as product type, contractual 
interest rate, term to maturity and credit scores, if applicable. Fair values of these loans are determined by the discounted cash 
flow method using applicable inputs such as prevailing interest rates, contractual and posted client rates, client discounts, credit 
spreads, prepayment rates and loan-to-value (LTV) ratios. Fair values of credit card receivables are also calculated based on a 
discounted cash flow method with portfolio yields, write-offs and monthly payment rates as inputs. The carrying values of short-
term and variable rate loans generally approximate their fair values. 
Loans – Wholesale 
Where market prices are available, wholesale loans are valued based on market prices. Otherwise, fair value is determined by 
the discounted cash flow method using the following inputs: market interest rates and market based spreads of assets with 
similar credit ratings and terms to maturity, LGD, expected default frequency implied from credit default swap prices, if available, 
and relevant pricing information such as contractual rate, origination and maturity dates, redemption price, coupon payment 
frequency and date convention. 
Deposits 
Deposits are comprised of demand, notice, and term deposits which include senior deposit notes we have issued to provide us 
with long-term funding. Fair values of term deposits are determined by one of several valuation techniques: (i) for term deposits 
and similar instruments, we segregate the portfolio based on term to maturity. Fair values of these instruments are determined 
by the discounted cash flow method using inputs such as client rates for new sales of the corresponding terms; and (ii) for senior 
deposit notes, we use actual traded prices, vendor prices or the discounted cash flow method using a market interest rate curve 
and our funding spreads as inputs. The carrying values of demand, notice, and short-term term deposits generally approximate 
their fair values. 
Other assets and Other liabilities 
Other assets and Other liabilities include receivables and payables relating to certain commodities. Fair values of the commodity 
receivables and payables are calculated by the discounted cash flow method using applicable inputs such as market interest 
rates, counterparties’ credit spreads, our funding spreads, commodity forward prices and spot prices. 
Subordinated debentures 
Fair values of Subordinated debentures are based on market prices, dealer quotes or vendor prices when available. Where prices 
cannot be observed, fair value is determined using the discounted cash flow method, with applicable inputs such as market 
interest rates and credit spreads. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
165 

Note 4
Securities 
Carrying value of securities 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Term to maturity (1) 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Within 
3 months 
3 months 
to 1 year 
1 year to 
5 years 
5 years to 
10 years 
Over 
10 years 
With no 
specific 
maturity 
Total 
Trading (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canadian government 
$
1,244 
$
4,252 
$ 6,187 
$
3,339 
$ 7,403 
$
– 
$ 22,425 
U.S. federal, state, municipal and 
agencies 
2,381 
1,616 
6,203 
4,092 
8,686 
– 
22,978 
Other OECD government 
2,049 
2,073 
1,231 
294 
2,812 
– 
8,459 
Mortgage-backed securities 
– 
– 
– 
– 
4 
– 
4 
Asset-backed securities 
288 
27 
275 
116 
187 
– 
893 
Corporate debt and other debt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bankers’ acceptances 
316 
135 
– 
– 
– 
– 
451 
Certificates of deposit 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Other (3) 
2,317 
2,526 
5,433 
3,716 
8,667 
– 
22,659 
Equities 
 
 
 
 
 
61,371 
61,371 
 
8,595 
10,629 
19,329 
11,557 
27,759 
61,371 
139,240 
Fair value through other comprehensive 
income (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canadian government 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
161 
1,180 
1,382 
592 
526 
– 
3,841 
Fair value 
161 
1,178 
1,375 
544 
445 
– 
3,703 
Yield (4) 
0.4% 
0.7% 
1.8% 
0.9% 
2.4% 
– 
1.3% 
Provincial and municipal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
3 
283 
1,326 
158 
1,558 
– 
3,328 
Fair value 
3 
283 
1,322 
158 
1,366 
– 
3,132 
Yield (4) 
4.2% 
2.6% 
2.4% 
1.7% 
2.9% 
– 
2.6% 
U.S. federal, state, municipal and 
agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
1,131 
5,010 
7,960 
2,380 
18,197 
– 
34,678 
Fair value 
1,132 
5,013 
7,960 
2,446 
18,276 
– 
34,827 
Yield (4) 
– 
0.9% 
0.4% 
2.6% 
1.3% 
– 
1.1% 
Other OECD government 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
176 
1,274 
4,498 
1 
– 
– 
5,949 
Fair value 
176 
1,274 
4,505 
1 
– 
– 
5,956 
Yield (4) 
1.7% 
1.0% 
1.3% 
3.9% 
– 
– 
1.2% 
Mortgage–backed securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
– 
– 
56 
55 
2,646 
– 
2,757 
Fair value 
– 
– 
56 
55 
2,636 
– 
2,747 
Yield (4) 
– 
– 
1.2% 
1.3% 
1.2% 
– 
1.2% 
Asset–backed securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
– 
– 
– 
4,719 
2,935 
– 
7,654 
Fair value 
– 
– 
– 
4,719 
2,941 
– 
7,660 
Yield (4) 
– 
– 
– 
1.2% 
1.3% 
– 
1.3% 
Corporate debt and other debt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
5,965 
2,597 
9,676 
1,451 
42 
– 
19,731 
Fair value 
5,965 
2,599 
9,699 
1,463 
51 
– 
19,777 
Yield (4) 
0.9% 
1.2% 
1.5% 
0.8% 
3.6% 
– 
1.2% 
Equities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cost 
 
 
 
 
 
242 
242 
Fair value (5) 
 
 
 
 
 
533 
533 
Amortized cost 
7,436 
10,344 
24,898 
9,356 
25,904 
242 
78,180 
Fair value 
7,437 
10,347 
24,917 
9,386 
25,715 
533 
78,335 
Amortized Cost (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canadian government 
453 
2,979 
17,589 
3,601 
194 
– 
24,816 
U.S. federal, state, municipal and 
agencies 
1,093 
274 
3,718 
2,767 
19,559 
– 
27,411 
Other OECD government 
1,914 
1,212 
2,790 
58 
– 
– 
5,974 
Asset-backed securities 
– 
– 
320 
336 
7 
– 
663 
Corporate debt and other debt 
1,133 
2,072 
4,424 
633 
23 
– 
8,285 
Amortized cost, net of allowance 
4,593 
6,537 
28,841 
7,395 
19,783 
– 
67,149 
Fair value 
4,597 
6,567 
28,701 
7,311 
19,647 
– 
66,823 
Total carrying value of securities 
$ 20,625 
$ 27,513 
$73,087 
$ 28,338 
$73,257 
$61,904 
$284,724 
166
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
Term to maturity (1) 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Within 
3 months 
3 months 
to 1 year 
1 year to 
5 years 
5 years to 
10 years 
Over 
10 years 
With no 
specific 
maturity 
Total 
Trading (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canadian government 
$
2,301 
$
7,004 
$
6,054 
$
3,569 
$
8,419 
$
– 
$
27,347 
U.S. federal, state, municipal and 
agencies 
559 
4,532 
12,546 
4,134 
14,810 
– 
36,581 
Other OECD government 
56 
695 
3,010 
584 
2,120 
– 
6,465 
Mortgage-backed securities 
– 
– 
– 
– 
39 
– 
39 
Asset-backed securities 
3 
164 
82 
181 
98 
– 
528 
Corporate debt and other debt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bankers’ acceptances 
65 
227 
– 
– 
– 
– 
292 
Certificates of deposit 
2 
63 
35 
7 
4 
– 
111 
Other (3) 
1,048 
3,472 
5,521 
3,007 
8,043 
– 
21,091 
Equities 
 
 
 
 
 
43,617 
43,617 
 
4,034 
16,157 
27,248 
11,482 
33,533 
43,617 
136,071 
Fair value through other comprehensive 
income (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canadian government 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Federal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
– 
204 
1,689 
272 
397 
– 
2,562 
Fair value 
– 
204 
1,690 
269 
378 
– 
2,541 
Yield (4) 
– 
1.4% 
1.4% 
1.2% 
1.4% 
– 
1.4% 
Provincial and municipal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
5 
908 
629 
7 
1,688 
– 
3,237 
Fair value 
5 
911 
630 
8 
1,679 
– 
3,233 
Yield (4) 
4.5% 
1.3% 
2.7% 
4.3% 
2.6% 
– 
2.2% 
U.S. federal, state, municipal and 
agencies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
1,772 
9,736 
8,777 
2,227 
16,011 
– 
38,523 
Fair value 
1,775 
9,739 
8,779 
2,237 
15,994 
– 
38,524 
Yield (4) 
0.1% 
1.7% 
1.1% 
2.6% 
2.2% 
– 
1.7% 
Other OECD government 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
274 
2,288 
4,773 
1 
– 
– 
7,336 
Fair value 
274 
2,289 
4,781 
1 
– 
– 
7,345 
Yield (4) 
1.7% 
2.4% 
1.8% 
3.6% 
– 
– 
2.0% 
Mortgage-backed securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
– 
– 
– 
192 
2,226 
– 
2,418 
Fair value 
– 
– 
– 
189 
2,181 
– 
2,370 
Yield (4) 
– 
– 
– 
1.2% 
1.2% 
– 
1.2% 
Asset-backed securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
– 
– 
10 
4,294 
4,059 
– 
8,363 
Fair value 
– 
– 
10 
4,247 
4,011 
– 
8,268 
Yield (4) 
– 
– 
1.4% 
1.4% 
1.4% 
– 
1.4% 
Corporate debt and other debt 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amortized cost 
2,670 
5,796 
10,425 
92 
58 
– 
19,041 
Fair value 
2,670 
5,801 
10,466 
106 
71 
– 
19,114 
Yield (4) 
0.9% 
1.6% 
1.5% 
2.1% 
2.4% 
– 
1.5% 
Equities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cost 
 
 
 
 
 
276 
276 
Fair value (5) 
 
 
 
 
 
525 
525 
Amortized cost 
4,721 
18,932 
26,303 
7,085 
24,439 
276 
81,756 
Fair value 
4,724 
18,944 
26,356 
7,057 
24,314 
525 
81,920 
Amortized Cost (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canadian government 
438 
1,862 
16,044 
1,819 
– 
– 
20,163 
U.S. federal, state, municipal and 
agencies 
8 
787 
1,615 
1,622 
18,281 
– 
22,313 
Other OECD government 
2,178 
2,045 
2,643 
– 
– 
– 
6,866 
Asset-backed securities 
– 
1 
159 
– 
– 
– 
160 
Corporate debt and other debt 
625 
2,644 
4,805 
219 
28 
– 
8,321 
Amortized cost, net of allowance 
3,249 
7,339 
25,266 
3,660 
18,309 
– 
57,823 
Fair value 
3,252 
7,392 
25,663 
3,798 
18,522 
– 
58,627 
Total carrying value of securities 
$ 12,007 
$ 42,440 
$ 78,870 
$
22,199 
$ 76,156 
$ 44,142 
$ 275,814 
(1) 
Actual maturities may differ from contractual maturities shown above as borrowers may have the right to extend or prepay obligations with or without penalties. 
(2) 
Trading securities and FVOCI securities are recorded at fair value. Amortized cost securities, included in Investment securities, are recorded at amortized cost and 
presented net of allowance for credit losses. 
(3) 
Primarily composed of corporate debt, supra-national debt, and commercial paper. 
(4) 
The weighted average yield is derived using the contractual interest rate and the carrying value at the end of the year for the respective securities. 
(5) 
Certain equity securities that are not held-for-trading purposes are designated as FVOCI.  
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
167 

Note 4
Securities (continued) 
Unrealized gains and losses on securities at FVOCI (1), (2) 
 
As at 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Cost/ 
Amortized 
cost 
Gross 
unrealized 
gains 
Gross 
unrealized 
losses 
Fair 
value  
Cost/ 
Amortized 
cost 
Gross 
unrealized 
gains 
Gross 
unrealized 
losses 
Fair 
value 
Debt issued or guaranteed by: 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Canadian government 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Federal (3) 
$
3,841 $
1 $
(139) $
3,703  $
2,562 $
1 $
(22) $
2,541 
Provincial and municipal 
3,328 
3 
(199) 
3,132  
3,237 
27 
(31) 
3,233 
U.S. federal, state, municipal 
and agencies (3) 
34,678 
353 
(204) 
34,827  
38,523 
323 
(322) 
38,524 
Other OECD government 
5,949 
8 
(1) 
5,956  
7,336 
11 
(2) 
7,345 
Mortgage-backed securities (3) 
2,757 
2 
(12) 
2,747  
2,418 
5 
(53) 
2,370 
Asset-backed securities 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
CDO 
7,074 
1 
(1) 
7,074  
7,504 
– 
(90) 
7,414 
Non-CDO securities 
580 
6 
– 
586  
859 
2 
(7) 
854 
Corporate debt and other debt 
19,731 
57 
(11) 
19,777  
19,041 
76 
(3) 
19,114 
Equities 
242 
292 
(1) 
533  
276 
253 
(4) 
525 
 
$
78,180 $
723 $
(568) $ 78,335  $
81,756 $
698 $
(534) $ 81,920 
(1) 
Excludes $67,149 million of held-to-collect securities as at October 31, 2021 that are carried at amortized cost, net of allowance for credit losses (October 31, 2020 – $57,823 
million). 
(2) 
Gross unrealized gains and losses includes $(9) million of allowance for credit losses on debt securities at FVOCI as at October 31, 2021 (October 31, 2020 – $8 million) 
recognized in income and Other components of equity. 
(3) 
The majority of the MBS are residential. Cost/Amortized cost, Gross unrealized gains, Gross unrealized losses and Fair value related to commercial MBS are 
$2,603 million, $1 million, $12 million and $2,592 million, respectively as at October 31, 2021 (October 31, 2020 – $2,185 million, $nil, $48 million and $2,137 million, 
respectively). 
Allowance for credit losses on investment securities 
The following tables reconcile the opening and closing allowance for debt securities at FVOCI and amortized cost by stage. 
Reconciling items include the following: 
•
Model changes, which generally comprise the impact of significant changes to the quantitative models used to estimate 
expected credit losses and any staging impacts that may arise. 
•
Transfers between stages, which are presumed to occur before any corresponding remeasurement of the allowance. 
•
Purchases, which reflect the allowance related to assets newly recognized during the period, including those assets that 
were derecognized following a modification of terms. 
•
Sales and maturities, which reflect the allowance related to assets derecognized during the period without a credit loss 
being incurred, including those assets that were derecognized following a modification of terms. 
•
Changes in risk, parameters and exposures, which comprise the impact of changes in model inputs or assumptions, including 
changes in forward-looking macroeconomic conditions; partial repayments; changes in the measurement following a 
transfer between stages; and unwinding of the time value discount due to the passage of time. 
Allowance for credit losses – securities at FVOCI (1) 
 
For the year ended 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
 
Performing 
 
Impaired 
 
 
Performing 
 
Impaired 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Stage 1 
Stage 2  
Stage 3 (2) 
Total  
Stage 1 
Stage 2  
Stage 3 (2) 
Total 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
12 
$
–  
$
(4) 
$
8  
$
4 
$
–  
$
(7) 
$ (3) 
Provision for credit losses 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Model changes 
(4) 
–  
– 
(4)  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 1 
1 
(1)  
– 
–  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 2 
– 
–  
– 
–  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 3 
– 
–  
– 
–  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Purchases 
8 
–  
– 
8  
18 
–  
– 
18 
Sales and maturities 
(10) 
(1)  
– 
(11)  
(13) 
–  
– 
(13) 
Changes in risk, parameters and exposures 
(4) 
3  
(9) 
(10)  
3 
–  
4 
7 
Exchange rate and other 
(1) 
–  
1 
–  
– 
–  
(1) 
(1) 
Balance at end of period 
$
2 
$
1  
$
(12) 
$ (9)  
$
12 
$
–  
$
(4) 
$
8 
(1) 
Expected credit losses on debt securities at FVOCI are not separately recognized on the balance sheet as the related securities are recorded at fair value. The cumulative 
amount of credit losses recognized in income is presented in Other components of equity. 
(2) 
Reflects changes in the allowance for purchased credit impaired securities. 
168
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Allowance for credit losses – securities at amortized cost 
 
For the year ended 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
 
Performing 
 
Impaired 
 
 
Performing 
 
Impaired 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Stage 1 
Stage 2  
Stage 3 
Total 
 
Stage 1 
Stage 2  
Stage 3 
Total 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
10 
$
19  
$
– 
$
29  
$
5 
$
19  
$
– 
$ 24 
Provision for credit losses 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Model changes 
(4) 
–  
– 
(4)  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 1 
– 
–  
– 
–  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 2 
– 
–  
– 
–  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 3 
– 
–  
– 
–  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Purchases 
9 
–  
– 
9  
9 
–  
– 
9 
Sales and maturities 
(1) 
–  
– 
(1)  
(2) 
–  
– 
(2) 
Changes in risk, parameters and exposures 
(9) 
1  
– 
(8)  
(2) 
1  
– 
(1) 
Exchange rate and other 
– 
(2)  
– 
(2)  
– 
(1)  
– 
(1) 
Balance at end of period 
$
5 
$
18  
$
– 
$
23  
$
10 
$
19  
$
– 
$ 29 
Credit risk exposure by internal risk rating 
The following table presents the fair value of debt securities at FVOCI and gross carrying amount of securities at amortized cost. 
Risk ratings are based on internal ratings used in the measurement of expected credit losses, as at the reporting date, as outlined 
in the internal ratings maps in the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. 
 
As at 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
 
Performing 
 
Impaired 
 
 
Performing 
 
Impaired 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Stage 1 
Stage 2  
Stage 3 (1) 
Total  
Stage 1 
Stage 2  
Stage 3 (1) 
Total 
Investment securities 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Securities at FVOCI 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Investment grade 
$ 77,147 
$
82  
$
–  
$ 77,229  $ 80,719 
$
87  
$
– 
$ 80,806 
Non-investment grade 
423 
–   
–  
423  
431 
1  
– 
432 
Impaired 
–  
–   
150 
150  
– 
–  
157 
157 
 
77,570 
82  
150 
77,802  
81,150 
88  
157 
81,395 
Items not subject to impairment (2) 
 
  
 
533  
 
  
 
525 
 
 
  
 
$ 78,335  
 
  
 
$ 81,920 
Securities at amortized cost 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Investment grade 
$ 66,033 
$
–   
$
–  
$ 66,033  $ 56,885 
$
–  
$
– 
$ 56,885 
Non-investment grade 
928 
211  
–  
1,139  
647 
320  
– 
967 
Impaired 
–  
–   
–  
–   
– 
–  
– 
– 
 
66,961 
211  
–  
67,172  
57,532 
320  
– 
57,852 
Allowance for credit losses 
5 
18  
–  
23  
10 
19  
– 
29 
Amortized cost 
$ 66,956 
$ 193  
$
–  
$ 67,149  $ 57,522 
$ 301  
$
– 
$ 57,823 
(1) 
Reflects $150 million of purchased credit impaired securities (October 31, 2020 – $157 million). 
(2) 
Investment securities at FVOCI not subject to impairment represent equity securities designated as FVOCI. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
169 

Note 5
Loans and allowance for credit losses 
Loans by geography and portfolio net of allowance 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Canada 
United 
States 
Other 
International 
Total 
Allowance for 
loan losses (1) 
Total net 
of allowance 
Retail (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
$ 354,169 
$
23,423 
$
2,740 
$ 380,332 
$
(416) $
379,916 
Personal 
78,232 
11,794 
3,415 
93,441 
(973) 
92,468 
Credit cards (3) 
17,235 
384 
203 
17,822 
(852) 
16,970 
Small business (4), (5) 
12,003 
– 
– 
12,003 
(168) 
11,835 
Wholesale (2), (5) 
88,083 
86,028 
43,955 
218,066 
(1,680) 
216,386 
Total loans 
$ 549,722 
$ 121,629 
$
50,313 
$ 721,664 
$
(4,089) $
717,575 
Undrawn loan commitments – Retail 
240,242 
3,713 
1,989 
245,944 
(136) 
 
Undrawn loan commitments – Wholesale 
107,070 
189,177 
75,331 
371,578 
(105) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Canada 
United 
States 
Other 
International 
Total 
Allowance for 
loan losses (1) 
Total net 
of allowance 
Retail (2) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
$
319,287 
$
20,331 
$
2,979 
$
342,597 
$
(515) $
342,082 
Personal 
79,778 
9,050 
3,183 
92,011 
(1,185) 
90,826 
Credit cards (3) 
17,060 
340 
226 
17,626 
(1,211) 
16,415 
Small business (4) 
5,742 
– 
– 
5,742 
(123) 
5,619 
Wholesale (2), (6), (7) 
87,785 
85,941 
34,929 
208,655 
(2,605) 
206,050 
Total loans 
$
509,652 
$
115,662 
$
41,317 
$
666,631 
$
(5,639) $
660,992 
Undrawn loan commitments – Retail 
226,439 
4,314 
1,628 
232,381 
(176) 
 
Undrawn loan commitments – Wholesale (7) 
109,900 
183,847 
67,280 
361,027 
(187) 
 
(1) 
Excludes allowance for loans measured at FVOCI of $14 million (October 31, 2020 – $6 million). 
(2) 
Geographic information is based on residence of the borrower. 
(3) 
The credit cards business is managed as a single portfolio and includes both consumer and business cards. 
(4) 
Includes small business exposure managed on a pooled basis. 
(5) 
Commencing Q2 2021, certain loans are now classified as Retail – Small business and were previously classified as Wholesale, reflecting an alignment with capital 
measurement and reporting. 
(6) 
Includes small business exposure managed on an individual client basis. 
(7) 
Amounts by geography have been revised from those previously presented. 
Loans maturity and rate sensitivity 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Maturity term (1) 
 
Rate sensitivity 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Under 
1 year (2) 
1 to 5 
years 
Over 5 
years 
Total 
Floating 
Fixed 
Rate 
Non-rate- 
sensitive 
Total 
Retail (3) 
$ 249,363 $222,408 $ 31,827 $ 503,598 $ 166,910 $ 329,185 $
7,503 $ 503,598 
Wholesale (3) 
174,345 
33,882 
9,839 
218,066 
36,143 
179,588 
2,335 
218,066 
Total loans 
$ 423,708 $256,290 $ 41,666 $ 721,664 $ 203,053 $ 508,773 $
9,838 $ 721,664 
Allowance for loan losses 
 
 
 
(4,089) 
 
 
 
(4,089) 
Total loans net of allowance for loan losses 
 
 
 $ 717,575 
 
 
 $ 717,575 
 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
Maturity term (1) 
 
Rate sensitivity 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Under 
1 year (2) 
1 to 5 
years 
Over 5 
years 
Total 
Floating 
Fixed 
Rate 
Non-rate- 
sensitive 
Total 
Retail 
$ 213,946 $ 218,342 $ 25,688 $ 457,976 
$ 129,870 $ 322,122 $
5,984 $ 457,976 
Wholesale 
160,031 
37,346 
11,278 
208,655 
34,686 
171,171 
2,798 
208,655 
Total loans 
$ 373,977 $ 255,688 $ 36,966 $ 666,631 
$ 164,556 $ 493,293 $
8,782 $ 666,631 
Allowance for loan losses 
 
 
 
(5,639) 
 
 
 
(5,639) 
Total loans net of allowance for loan losses 
 
 
 $ 660,992 
 
 
 $ 660,992 
(1) 
Generally, based on the earlier of contractual repricing or maturity date. 
(2) 
Includes variable rate loans that can be repriced at the clients’ discretion without penalty. 
(3) 
Commencing Q2 2021, certain loans are now classified as Retail – Small business and were previously classified as Wholesale, reflecting an alignment with capital 
measurement and reporting. 
170
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Allowance for credit losses 
 
For the year ended 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Balance at 
beginning 
of period 
Provision 
for credit 
losses 
Net 
write-offs (1) 
Exchange 
rate and 
other 
Balance 
at end 
of period  
Balance at 
beginning 
of period 
Provision 
for credit 
losses 
Net 
write-offs (1) 
Exchange 
rate and 
other 
Balance 
at end 
of period 
Retail 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Residential mortgages 
$
518 $
(43) $
(27) $
(32) $
416  $
402 $
190 $
(34) $
(40) $
518 
Personal 
1,309 
23 
(247) 
(6) 1,079  
935 
801 
(411) 
(16) 
1,309 
Credit cards 
1,246 
(72) 
(297) 
(2) 
875  
832 
900 
(484) 
(2) 
1,246 
Small business 
140 
12 
(23) 
48 
177  
61 
117 
(31) 
(7) 
140 
Wholesale 
2,795 
(560) 
(200) 
(238) 1,797  
1,165 
2,140 
(380) 
(130) 
2,795 
Customers’ liability under 
acceptances 
107 
(32) 
– 
– 
75  
24 
83 
– 
– 
107 
 
$ 6,115 $ (672) $
(794) $ (230) $4,419  $ 3,419 $ 4,231 $
(1,340) $
(195) $ 6,115 
Presented as: 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Allowance for loan losses 
$ 5,639 
 
 
 $4,089  $ 3,100 
 
 
 $ 5,639 
Other liabilities – Provisions 
363 
 
 
 
241  
295 
 
 
 
363 
Customers’ liability under 
acceptances 
107 
 
 
 
75  
24 
 
 
 
107 
Other components of equity 
6 
 
 
 
14  
– 
 
 
 
6 
(1) 
Loans written-off are generally subject to continued collection efforts for a period of time following write-off. The contractual amount outstanding on loans written-off 
during the year ended October 31, 2021 that are no longer subject to enforcement activity was $93 million (October 31, 2020 – $193 million). 
The following table reconciles the opening and closing allowance for each major product of loans and commitments as 
determined by our modelled, scenario-weighted allowance and the application of expert credit judgment as applicable. 
Reconciling items include the following: 
•
Model changes, which generally comprise the impact of significant changes to the quantitative models used to estimate 
expected credit losses and any staging impacts that may arise. 
•
Transfers between stages, which are presumed to occur before any corresponding remeasurements of the allowance. 
•
Originations, which reflect the allowance related to assets newly recognized during the period, including those assets that 
were derecognized following a modification of terms. 
•
Maturities, which reflect the allowance related to assets derecognized during the period without a credit loss being incurred, 
including those assets that were derecognized following a modification of terms. 
•
Changes in risk, parameters and exposures, which comprise the impact of changes in model inputs or assumptions, including 
changes in forward-looking macroeconomic conditions; partial repayments and additional draws on existing facilities; 
changes in the measurement following a transfer between stages; and unwinding of the time value discount due to the 
passage of time in stage 1 and stage 2. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
171 

Note 5
Loans and allowance for credit losses (continued) 
Allowance for credit losses – Retail and wholesale loans 
 
For the year ended 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
 
Performing 
 
Impaired 
 
 
Performing 
 
Impaired 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Stage 1 
Stage 2  
Stage 3 
Total  
Stage 1 
Stage 2  
Stage 3 
Total 
Residential mortgages 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
206 
$
160  $
152 
$
518  $
146 
$
77  $
179 
$
402 
Provision for credit losses 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Model changes 
(6) 
(5)  
– 
(11)  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 1 
205 
(182)  
(23) 
–  
221 
(186)  
(35) 
– 
Transfers to stage 2 
(14) 
18  
(4) 
–  
(35) 
42  
(7) 
– 
Transfers to stage 3 
(2) 
(44)  
46 
–  
(3) 
(33)  
36 
– 
Originations 
113 
–  
– 
113  
76 
–  
– 
76 
Maturities 
(30) 
(24)  
– 
(54)  
(16) 
(15)  
– 
(31) 
Changes in risk, parameters and 
exposures 
(284) 
178  
15 
(91)  
(180) 
291  
34 
145 
Write-offs 
– 
–  
(37) 
(37)  
– 
–  
(44) 
(44) 
Recoveries 
– 
–  
10 
10  
– 
–  
10 
10 
Exchange rate and other 
(2) 
(9)  
(21) 
(32)  
(3) 
(16)  
(21) 
(40) 
Balance at end of period 
$
186 
$
92  $
138 
$
416  $
206 
$
160  $
152 
$
518 
Personal 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
480 
$
733  $
96 
$
1,309  $
272 
$
520  $
143 
$
935 
Provision for credit losses 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Model changes 
(1) 
–  
– 
(1)  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 1 
710 
(706)  
(4) 
–  
494 
(487)  
(7) 
– 
Transfers to stage 2 
(97) 
97  
– 
–  
(107) 
109  
(2) 
– 
Transfers to stage 3 
(3) 
(58)  
61 
–  
(3) 
(64)  
67 
– 
Originations 
128 
–  
– 
128  
118 
–  
– 
118 
Maturities 
(96) 
(130)  
– 
(226)  
(49) 
(97)  
– 
(146) 
Changes in risk, parameters and 
exposures 
(697) 
633  
186 
122  
(245) 
756  
318 
829 
Write-offs 
– 
–  
(387) 
(387)  
– 
–  
(545) 
(545) 
Recoveries 
– 
–  
140 
140  
– 
–  
134 
134 
Exchange rate and other 
(2) 
–  
(4) 
(6)  
– 
(4)  
(12) 
(16) 
Balance at end of period 
$
422 
$
569  $
88 
$
1,079  $
480 
$
733  $
96 
$
1,309 
Credit cards 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
364 
$
882  $
– 
$
1,246  $
173 
$
659  $
– 
$
832 
Provision for credit losses 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Transfers to stage 1 
723 
(723)  
– 
–  
470 
(470)  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 2 
(105) 
105  
– 
–  
(98) 
98  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 3 
(4) 
(309)  
313 
–  
(2) 
(372)  
374 
– 
Originations 
6 
–  
– 
6  
7 
–  
– 
7 
Maturities 
(7) 
(31)  
– 
(38)  
(8) 
(29)  
– 
(37) 
Changes in risk, parameters and 
exposures 
(742) 
719  
(17) 
(40)  
(177) 
997  
110 
930 
Write-offs 
– 
–  
(460) 
(460)  
– 
–  
(617) 
(617) 
Recoveries 
– 
–  
163 
163  
– 
–  
133 
133 
Exchange rate and other 
(2) 
(1)  
1 
(2)  
(1) 
(1)  
– 
(2) 
Balance at end of period 
$
233 
$
642  $
– 
$
875  $
364 
$
882  $
– 
$
1,246 
Small business 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
78 
$
29  $
33 
$
140  $
29 
$
10  $
22 
$
61 
Provision for credit losses 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Model changes 
3 
1  
– 
4  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 1 
57 
(57)  
– 
–  
12 
(12)  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 2 
(11) 
11  
– 
–  
(11) 
11  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 3 
(1) 
(2)  
3 
–  
– 
(2)  
2 
– 
Originations 
36 
–  
– 
36  
20 
–  
– 
20 
Maturities 
(21) 
(22)  
– 
(43)  
(7) 
(6)  
– 
(13) 
Changes in risk, parameters and 
exposures 
(77) 
64  
28 
15  
35 
28  
47 
110 
Write-offs 
– 
–  
(32) 
(32)  
– 
–  
(38) 
(38) 
Recoveries 
– 
–  
9 
9  
– 
–  
7 
7 
Exchange rate and other 
24 
31  
(7) 
48  
– 
–  
(7) 
(7) 
Balance at end of period 
$
88 
$
55  $
34 
$
177  $
78 
$
29  $
33 
$
140 
Wholesale 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
995 
$
1,132  $
668 
$
2,795  $
281 
$
396  $
488 
$
1,165 
Provision for credit losses 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Model changes 
1 
24  
– 
25  
– 
–  
– 
– 
Transfers to stage 1 
581 
(576)  
(5) 
–  
154 
(149)  
(5) 
– 
Transfers to stage 2 
(132) 
161  
(29) 
–  
(200) 
221  
(21) 
– 
Transfers to stage 3 
(4) 
(60)  
64 
–  
(14) 
(116)  
130 
– 
Originations 
601 
–  
– 
601  
860 
–  
– 
860 
Maturities 
(488) 
(500)  
– 
(988)  
(479) 
(301)  
– 
(780) 
Changes in risk, parameters and 
exposures 
(931) 
689  
44 
(198)  
410 
1,091  
559 
2,060 
Write-offs 
– 
–  
(253) 
(253)  
– 
–  
(437) 
(437) 
Recoveries 
– 
–  
53 
53  
– 
–  
57 
57 
Exchange rate and other 
(57) 
(76)  
(105) 
(238)  
(17) 
(10)  
(103) 
(130) 
Balance at end of period 
$
566 
$
794  $
437 
$
1,797  $
995 
$
1,132  $
668 
$
2,795 
172
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Key inputs and assumptions 
The measurement of expected credit losses is a complex calculation that involves a large number of interrelated inputs and 
assumptions and the allowance is not sensitive to any one single factor alone. The key drivers of changes in expected credit 
losses include the following: 
• Changes in the credit quality of the borrower or instrument, primarily reflected in changes in internal risk ratings; 
• Changes in forward-looking macroeconomic conditions, specifically the macroeconomic variables to which our models are 
calibrated, which are those most closely correlated with credit losses in the relevant portfolio; 
• Changes in scenario design and the weights assigned to each scenario; and 
• Transfers between stages, which can be triggered by changes to any of the above inputs. 
While the global economic recovery has continued throughout fiscal 2021, momentum has waned over the year amid ongoing 
uncertainty regarding the extent and duration of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. The reopening of economies and 
significant fiscal and monetary policy stimulus have generally supported lower defaults, and are contributing to stronger GDP 
growth and improved labour markets globally, though this remains uneven. Though increasing vaccination rates are expected to 
support a continued economic recovery, exceptional government support programs have begun to wind down, and uncertainty 
remains regarding the duration and ultimate impact on future losses from these programs. Supply chain disruptions, rising 
business input costs, and labour shortages are also limiting the pace of further improvement and adding to rising inflation 
concerns. As these factors may impact future losses, our allowances continue to require the application of heightened judgment, 
as there is a higher than usual degree of uncertainty and the inputs used are inherently subject to change, which may materially 
change our estimate of Stage 1 and Stage 2 allowance for credit losses in future periods. 
To address the uncertainties inherent in the current and future environment and to reflect relevant risk factors not captured in 
our modelled results, we applied expert credit judgment in determining significant increases in credit risk since origination and 
our weighted allowance for credit losses. In light of the significant uncertainty on the progress of the economic recovery, the 
impact of expert credit judgment on our allowances remains elevated as compared to pre-pandemic levels. We applied 
quantitative and qualitative adjustments for the impacts of the unprecedented macroeconomic environment, including the 
impact of government support programs in offsetting the effect of COVID-19 related unemployment on the economy and on 
mitigating the losses for the sectors most sensitive to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Internal risk ratings 
Internal risk ratings are assigned according to the risk management framework outlined under the headings “Wholesale credit 
risk” and “Retail credit risk” of the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. Changes in internal risk ratings 
are primarily reflected in the PD parameters, which are estimated based on our historical loss experience at the relevant risk 
segment or risk rating level, adjusted for forward-looking information. 
Forward looking macroeconomic variables 
The PD, LGD and EAD inputs used to estimate stage 1 and stage 2 credit loss allowances are modelled based on the 
macroeconomic variables (or changes in macroeconomic variables) that are most closely correlated with credit losses in the 
relevant portfolio. Each macroeconomic scenario used in our expected credit loss calculation includes a projection of all 
relevant macroeconomic variables used in our models for a five year horizon, reverting to long-run averages generally within the 
2 to 5 year period. Depending on their usage in the models, macroeconomic variables are projected at a country, province/state 
or more granular level. These include one or more of the variables described below, which differ by portfolio and region. 
Our allowance for credit losses reflects our economic outlook as at October 31, 2021. Subsequent changes to this forecast and 
related estimates will be reflected in our allowance for credit losses in future periods. All of our IFRS 9 scenarios are designed to 
include the impact of COVID-19. Despite positive developments and continuous economic improvement, the possibility of a more 
prolonged recovery period, including monetary policy responses to rising inflation rates brought on in part by global supply chain 
disruptions, as well as heightened risk in the real estate sector, have been reflected in our scenario design and weights. 
Our base scenario reflects a continuation of the recovery that has been underway since the sharp drop in economic activity 
in calendar Q2 2020. Canadian and U.S. unemployment rates are expected to remain above pre-shock levels at the end of 
calendar 2021 and we expect GDP to continue growing from Q4 2021 consistent with our expectation that higher vaccination rates 
will enable a more significant and sustainable easing of containment measures. 
Downside scenarios, including two additional and more severe downside scenarios designed for the energy and real estate 
sectors, reflect the possibility of a second macroeconomic shock beginning in calendar 2022, in addition to the first shock in Q2 
2020, with conditions deteriorating from Q4 2021 levels for up to 18 months, followed by a recovery for the remainder of the 
period. These scenarios assume a monetary policy response that returns the economy to a long-run, sustainable growth rate 
within the forecast period. The possibility of a more prolonged recovery period, including monetary policy responses to elevated 
inflation rates which may increase credit risk, have been reflected in our general downside scenario. 
The upside scenario reflects a slightly faster and larger economic recovery than the base scenario, without prompting an 
offsetting monetary policy response, followed by a return to a long-run sustainable growth rate within the forecast period. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
173 

Note 5
Loans and allowance for credit losses (continued) 
The following provides additional detail about our forecasts for certain key macroeconomic variables used in the models to 
estimate ACL on performing loans, commitments and acceptances: 
•
Unemployment – In our base forecast, calendar Q4 2021 unemployment rates are expected to decline to 6.7% in Canada and 
4.7% in the U.S. We expect unemployment rates to continuously improve in both regions for the remainder of the year. We 
expect the Canadian unemployment rate to stabilize around its long run equilibrium by the latter half of calendar 2022 and 
for the U.S. unemployment rate to improve to better than the long run equilibrium beginning in calendar Q2 2022 reverting to 
the long run equilibrium towards the latter end of the forecast horizon. 
3
5
7
11
9
Range of alternative scenarios (October 31, 2021)
Q4-2020
Q1-2021
Q2-2021
Q3-2021
Q4-2021
Q1-2022
Q2-2022
Q3-2022
Q4-2022
Q1-2023
Q2-2023
Q3-2023
Q4-2023
Q1-2024
Q2-2024
Q3-2024
Q4-2024
Q1-2025
Q2-2025
Q3-2025
Q4-2025
Q1-2026
Q2-2026
Q3-2026
Base case (July 31, 2021)
Base case (October 31, 2021)
Base case (October 31, 2020)
%
Canada Unemployment Rate (1)
(1) Represents the average quarterly unemployment level over the calendar quarters presented.
 
2
4
6
8
10
Range of alternative scenarios (October 31, 2021)
Base case (July 31, 2021)
Base case (October 31, 2021)
Base case (October 31, 2020)
%
U.S. Unemployment Rate (1)
(1) Represents the average quarterly unemployment level over the calendar quarters presented.
Q4-2020
Q1-2021
Q2-2021
Q3-2021
Q4-2021
Q1-2022
Q2-2022
Q3-2022
Q4-2022
Q1-2023
Q2-2023
Q3-2023
Q4-2023
Q1-2024
Q2-2024
Q3-2024
Q4-2024
Q1-2025
Q2-2025
Q3-2025
Q4-2025
Q1-2026
Q2-2026
Q3-2026
 
•
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) – In our base forecast, we expect Canadian GDP in calendar Q4 2021 to be 0.5% above pre-
shock levels and 2.7% above such levels in the U.S., with continuous improvement over the forecast horizon. 
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
Range of alternative scenarios (October 31, 2021)
Base case (October 31, 2021)
Base case (July 31, 2021)
Base case (October 31, 2020)
Trillions of Canadian dollars
Canada Real GDP (1)
(1)  Represents the seasonally adjusted annual rate indexed to 2012 Canadian dollar over the calendar
 quarters presented.
Q4-2020
Q1-2021
Q2-2021
Q3-2021
Q4-2021
Q1-2022
Q2-2022
Q3-2022
Q4-2022
Q1-2023
Q2-2023
Q3-2023
Q4-2023
Q1-2024
Q2-2024
Q3-2024
Q4-2024
Q1-2025
Q2-2025
Q3-2025
Q4-2025
Q1-2026
Q2-2026
Q3-2026
 
18.0
18.5
19.5
19.0
20.5
20.0
21.5
21.0
22.5
22.0
Range of alternative scenarios (October 31, 2021)
Base case (October 31, 2021)
Base case (July 31, 2021)
Base case (October 31, 2020)
(1)  Represents the seasonally adjusted annual rate indexed to 2012 U.S. dollars over the calendar
 quarters presented.
Q4-2020
Q1-2021
Q2-2021
Q3-2021
Q4-2021
Q1-2022
Q2-2022
Q3-2022
Q4-2022
Q1-2023
Q2-2023
Q3-2023
Q4-2023
Q1-2024
Q2-2024
Q3-2024
Q4-2024
Q1-2025
Q2-2025
Q3-2025
Q4-2025
Q1-2026
Q2-2026
Q3-2026
Trillions of U.S. dollars
U.S. Real GDP (1)
 
•
Oil price (West Texas Intermediate in US$) – In our base forecast, we expect oil prices to average $71 per barrel over the 
next 12 months and $56 per barrel in the following 2 to 5 years. The range of average prices in our alternative energy 
downside and upside scenarios is $27 to $89 per barrel for the next 12 months and $36 to $61 per barrel for the following 2 to 
5 years. As at October 31, 2020, our base forecast included an average price of $43 per barrel for the next 12 months and $48 
per barrel for the following 2 to 5 years. 
•
Canadian housing price index – In our base forecast, we expect housing prices to grow by 0.1% over the next 12 months, with 
a compound annual growth rate of 4.1% for the following 2 to 5 years. The range of annual housing price growth (contraction) 
in our alternative real estate downside and upside scenarios is (29.6)% to 10.9% over the next 12 months and 4.2% to 9.6% 
for the following 2 to 5 years. As at October 31, 2020, our base forecast included housing price growth of 0.6% for the next 
12 months and 4.5% for the following 2 to 5 years. 
The primary variables driving credit losses in our retail portfolios are Canadian unemployment rates, Canadian GDP and 
Canadian housing price index. The Canadian overnight interest rate also impacts our retail portfolios. Our wholesale portfolios 
are affected by all of the variables discussed above; however, the specific variables differ by sector. Other variables also impact 
our wholesale portfolios including, but not limited to, Canadian and U.S. 10 year BBB corporate bond yield and credit spreads, 
10 year government bond yields, Canadian consumer confidence index, Canadian and U.S. commercial real estate price indices, 
U.S. housing price index, natural gas prices (Henry Hub), and S&P 500 and EuroStoxx equity indices. 
Increases in the following macroeconomic variables will generally correlate with higher expected credit losses: Canadian 
and U.S. unemployment rates, Canadian overnight interest rates, Canadian and U.S. 10 year BBB corporate bond yield and credit 
spreads, and 10 year government bond yields. 
174
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Increases in the following macroeconomic variables will generally correlate with lower expected credit losses: Canadian and 
U.S. housing price indices, Canadian and U.S. GDP, Canadian consumer confidence index, Canadian and U.S. commercial real 
estate price indices, oil and natural gas prices, and S&P 500 and EuroStoxx equity indices. 
Scenario design and weightings 
Our estimation of expected credit losses in Stage 1 and Stage 2 considers five distinct future macroeconomic scenarios. 
Scenarios are designed to capture a wide range of possible outcomes and are weighted according to our expectation of the 
relative likelihood of the range of outcomes that each scenario represents at the reporting date. We then weight each scenario 
to take into account historical frequency, current trends, and forward-looking conditions which will change over time. The base 
case scenario is based on forecasts of the expected rate, value or yield for each of the macroeconomic variables identified 
above. The upside and downside scenarios are set by adjusting our base projections to construct reasonably possible scenarios 
and weightings that are more optimistic and pessimistic, respectively, than the base case. As described above, two additional 
downside scenarios capture the non-linear nature of potential credit losses across our portfolios. 
The impact of each of our five scenarios varies across our portfolios given the portfolios have different sensitivities to 
movements in each macroeconomic variable. As described above, all scenarios are designed to include the impact of the 
COVID-19 pandemic as at October 31, 2021, reflective of current market conditions which have improved relative to the prior year. 
In determining our IFRS 9 allowance for credit losses, and to reflect the continued uncertainty and downside risk of a slower 
recovery than contemplated in our base scenario, we reassessed our scenario weights to more heavily weight the downside 
scenarios relative to October 31, 2020. 
The impact of weighting these multiple scenarios increased our ACL on performing loans, relative to our base scenario, by 
$726 million at October 31, 2021 (October 31, 2020 – $606 million). 
Transfers between stages 
Transfers between stage 1 and stage 2 are based on the assessment of significant increases in credit risk relative to initial 
recognition, as described in Note 2. The impact of moving from 12 months expected credit losses to lifetime expected credit 
losses, or vice versa, varies by product, reflects the economic recovery underway in 2021 following the sharp drop in economic 
activity in 2020 and is dependent on the expected remaining life at the date of the transfer. Stage transfers may result in 
significant fluctuations in expected credit losses. 
The following table illustrates the impact of staging on our ACL by comparing our allowance if all performing loans were in 
stage 1 to the actual ACL recorded on these assets. 
 
As at  
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
 
ACL – All performing 
loans in Stage 1 
Impact of 
staging 
Stage 1 and 2 
ACL  
ACL – All performing 
loans in Stage 1 
Impact of 
staging 
Stage 1 and 2 
ACL 
Performing loans (1) 
$
2,521 
$
1,125 
$
3,646  
$
4,028 
$
1,031 
$
5,059 
(1) 
Represents loans and commitments in stage 1 and stage 2. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
175 

Note 5
Loans and allowance for credit losses (continued) 
Credit risk exposure by internal risk rating 
The following table presents the gross carrying amount of loans measured at amortized cost, and the full contractual amount of 
undrawn loan commitments subject to the impairment requirements of IFRS 9. Risk ratings are based on internal ratings used in 
the measurement of expected credit losses as at the reporting date, as outlined in the internal ratings maps for Wholesale and 
Retail facilities in the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. 
 
As at 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Stage 1 
Stage 2 
Stage 3 (1) 
Total  
Stage 1 
Stage 2 
Stage 3 (1) 
Total 
Retail 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Loans outstanding – Residential 
mortgages 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Low risk 
$ 310,334 $
1,507 $
– $ 311,841  $ 270,396 $
2,848 $
– $ 273,244 
Medium risk 
15,152 
2,051 
– 
17,203  
15,230 
3,307 
– 
18,537 
High risk 
3,343 
634 
– 
3,977  
4,346 
1,467 
– 
5,813 
Not rated (2) 
45,512 
913 
– 
46,425  
43,176 
936 
– 
44,112 
Impaired 
– 
– 
645 
645  
– 
– 
638 
638 
 
374,341 
5,105 
645 
380,091  
333,148 
8,558 
638 
342,344 
Items not subject to impairment (3) 
 
 
 
241  
 
 
 
253 
Total 
 
 
 $ 380,332  
 
 
 $ 342,597 
Loans outstanding – Personal 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Low risk 
$
72,267 $
698 $
– $
72,965  $
71,245 $
1,084 $
– $
72,329 
Medium risk 
4,974 
4,551 
– 
9,525  
3,974 
5,415 
– 
9,389 
High risk 
687 
1,045 
– 
1,732  
817 
1,416 
– 
2,233 
Not rated (2) 
8,934 
88 
– 
9,022  
7,704 
144 
– 
7,848 
Impaired 
– 
– 
197 
197  
– 
– 
212 
212 
Total 
$
86,862 $
6,382 $
197 $
93,441  $
83,740 $
8,059 $
212 $
92,011 
Loans outstanding – Credit cards 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Low risk 
$
12,864 $
24 $
– $
12,888  $
11,824 $
63 $
– $
11,887 
Medium risk 
1,646 
1,645 
– 
3,291  
1,596 
2,360 
– 
3,956 
High risk 
136 
937 
– 
1,073  
132 
1,105 
– 
1,237 
Not rated (2) 
527 
43 
– 
570  
490 
56 
– 
546 
Total 
$
15,173 $
2,649 $
– $
17,822  $
14,042 $
3,584 $
– $
17,626 
Loans outstanding –Small business (4) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Low risk 
$
8,609 $
274 $
– $
8,883  $
2,034 $
172 $
– $
2,206 
Medium risk 
1,583 
979 
– 
2,562  
1,976 
1,143 
– 
3,119 
High risk 
227 
218 
– 
445  
126 
192 
– 
318 
Not rated (2) 
4 
– 
– 
4  
9 
– 
– 
9 
Impaired 
– 
– 
109 
109  
– 
– 
90 
90 
Total 
$
10,423 $
1,471 $
109 $
12,003  $
4,145 $
1,507 $
90 $
5,742 
Undrawn loan commitments – Retail 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Low risk 
$ 229,516 $
574 $
– $ 230,090  $ 214,176 $
887 $
– $ 215,063 
Medium risk 
9,475 
133 
– 
9,608  
10,402 
291 
– 
10,693 
High risk 
1,205 
97 
– 
1,302  
1,141 
129 
– 
1,270 
Not rated (2) 
4,854 
90 
– 
4,944  
5,238 
117 
– 
5,355 
Total 
$ 245,050 $
894 $
– $ 245,944  $ 230,957 $
1,424 $
– $ 232,381 
Wholesale – Loans outstanding (4) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Investment grade 
$
62,975 $
226 $
– $
63,201  $
50,998 $
328 $
– $
51,326 
Non-investment grade 
117,396 
15,146 
– 
132,542  
112,434 
26,575 
– 
139,009 
Not rated (2) 
9,339 
430 
– 
9,769  
7,093 
432 
– 
7,525 
Impaired 
– 
– 
1,357 
1,357  
– 
– 
2,235 
2,235 
 
189,710 
15,802 
1,357 
206,869  
170,525 
27,335 
2,235 
200,095 
Items not subject to impairment (3) 
 
 
 
11,197  
 
 
 
8,560 
Total 
 
 
 $ 218,066  
 
 
 $ 208,655 
Undrawn loan commitments – 
Wholesale 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Investment grade 
$ 246,539 $
1,122 $
– $ 247,661  $ 242,244 $
1,022 $
– $ 243,266 
Non-investment grade 
108,063 
12,377 
– 
120,440  
92,262 
21,581 
– 
113,843 
Not rated (2) 
3,476 
1 
– 
3,477  
3,918 
– 
– 
3,918 
Total 
$ 358,078 $ 13,500 $
– $ 371,578  $ 338,424 $ 22,603 $
– $ 361,027 
(1) 
As at October 31, 2021, 86% of credit-impaired loans were either fully or partially collateralized (October 31, 2020 – 90%). For details on the types of collateral held against 
credit-impaired assets and our policies on collateral, refer to the Credit risk mitigation section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. 
(2) 
In certain cases where an internal risk rating is not assigned, we use other approved credit risk assessments or rating methodologies, policies and tools to manage our 
credit risk. 
(3) 
Items not subject to impairment are loans held at FVTPL. 
(4) 
Commencing Q2 2021, certain loans are now classified as Retail – Small business and were previously classified as Wholesale, reflecting an alignment with capital 
measurement and reporting. 
176
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Loans past due but not impaired (1), (2) 
 
As at 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
30 to 89 days 
90 days 
and greater 
Total  30 to 89 days 
90 days 
and greater 
Total 
Retail 
$
1,105 $
137 $ 1,242  $
1,013 $
129 $ 1,142 
Wholesale 
1,230 
– 
1,230  
574 
13 
587 
 
$
2,335 $
137 $ 2,472  $
1,587 $
142 $ 1,729 
(1) 
Excludes loans less than 30 days past due as they are not generally representative of the borrowers’ ability to meet their payment obligations. 
(2) 
Loans in our payment deferral programs established to help clients manage through the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic have been re-aged to current and are not 
aged further during the deferral period. Subsequent to the payment deferral period, loans will commence re-aging from current. Amounts presented may include loans 
past due as a result of administrative processes, such as mortgage loans on which payments are restrained pending payout due to sale or refinancing. Past due loans 
arising from administrative processes are not representative of the borrowers’ ability to meet their payment obligations. 
Loan modifications 
For the year ended October 31, 2021, the amortized cost of the loans whose contractual terms were modified while in Stage 2 or 
Stage 3 was not material. 
In 2020, we established relief programs to help clients manage through challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic through payment 
deferrals, interest rate reductions, covenant waivers, and refinancing or credit restructuring. In some cases, the original terms of the 
associated loans were renegotiated or otherwise modified, resulting in changes to the contractual terms of the loans that affect the 
contractual cash flows. For the year ended October 31, 2020, the amortized cost of the loans whose contractual terms were modified 
while in Stage 2 or Stage 3 at the quarter ended before the modification was $8,437 million, resulting in no material modification 
losses. The gross carrying amount of loans transferred to Stage 1 as a result of the modification whose contractual terms were 
previously modified while in Stage 2 or Stage 3 was not material for the years ended October 31, 2020 and October 31, 2021. 
Note 6
Derecognition of financial assets 
We enter into transactions in which we transfer financial assets such as loans or securities to structured entities or other third 
parties. The majority of assets transferred under repurchase agreements, securities lending agreements, and in our Canadian 
residential mortgage securitization transactions do not qualify for derecognition as we continue to be exposed to substantially 
all of the risks and rewards of the transferred assets, such as prepayment, credit, price, interest rate and foreign exchange risks. 
Transferred financial assets derecognized 
Government relief programs 
To support our clients through unprecedented times due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we are participating in government relief 
programs in Canada and in the U.S. 
Under the Canadian Emergency Business Account program, we have provided interest-free loans to existing eligible small 
business clients funded by the Export Development Bank of Canada (EDC). As we do not retain substantially all of the risks and 
rewards of the financial assets, and all cash flows are passed through to the EDC, these loans are not recognized on our 
Consolidated Balance Sheets. The application window for the CEBA program closed on June 30, 2021. 
Transferred financial assets not derecognized 
Securitization of Canadian residential mortgage loans 
We periodically securitize insured Canadian residential mortgage loans through the creation of MBS pools under the National 
Housing Act MBS (NHA MBS) program. All loans securitized under the NHA MBS program are required to be insured by the 
Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation or a third-party insurer. We require the borrower to pay for mortgage insurance 
when the loan amount is greater than 80% of the original appraised value of the property (LTV ratio). For residential mortgage 
loans securitized under this program with LTV ratios less than 80%, we are required to insure the mortgages at our own expense. 
Under the NHA MBS program, we are responsible for making all payments due on our issued MBS, regardless of whether we 
collect the necessary funds from the mortgagor or the insurer. When a borrower defaults on a mortgage, we submit a claim to the 
insurer if the amount recovered from the collection or foreclosure process is lower than the sum of the principal balance, 
accrued interest and collection costs on the outstanding loan. The insurance claim process is managed by the insurance provider 
in accordance with the insurer’s policies and covers the entire unpaid loan balance plus generally up to 12 months of interest, 
selling costs and other eligible expenses. If an insurance claim is denied, a loss is recognized in Provision for credit losses in our 
Consolidated Statements of Income. The amount recorded as a loss is not significant to our Consolidated Financial Statements 
and no significant losses were incurred due to legal action arising from mortgage defaults during 2021 and 2020. 
We sell the NHA MBS pools primarily to a government-sponsored structured entity under the Canada Mortgage Bond (CMB) 
program. The entity periodically issues CMBs, which are guaranteed by the government, and sells them to third-party investors. 
Proceeds of the CMB issuances are used by the entity to purchase the NHA MBS pools from eligible NHA MBS issuers who 
participate in the issuance of a particular CMB series. Our continuing involvement includes servicing the underlying residential 
mortgage loans we have securitized, either ourselves or through a third-party servicer. We also act as counterparty in interest 
rate swap agreements where we pay the entity the interest due to CMB investors and receive the interest on the underlying MBS 
and reinvested assets. As part of the swaps, we are also required to maintain a principal reinvestment account for principal 
payments received on the underlying mortgage loans to meet the repayment obligation upon maturity of the CMB. We reinvest 
the collected principal payments in permitted investments as outlined in the swap agreements. 
We have determined that certain of the NHA MBS program loans transferred to the entity do not qualify for derecognition as 
we have not transferred substantially all of the risks and rewards of ownership. As a result, these transferred MBS continue to be 
classified as residential mortgage loans and recognized on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The cash received for these 
transferred MBS is treated as a secured borrowing and a corresponding liability is recorded in Deposits – Business and 
government on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
177 

Note 6
Derecognition of financial assets (continued) 
Securities sold under repurchase agreements and securities loaned 
We also enter into transactions such as repurchase agreements and securities lending agreements where we transfer assets under 
agreements to repurchase them at a future date and retain substantially all of the risks and rewards associated with the assets. These 
transferred assets remain on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and are accounted for as collateralized borrowing transactions. 
The following table provides information on the carrying amount and fair value of the transferred assets that did not qualify for 
derecognition, and their associated liabilities. 
 
As at 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Canadian 
residential 
mortgage 
loans (1), (2) 
Securities 
sold under 
repurchase 
agreements (3) 
Securities 
loaned (3) 
Total  
Canadian 
residential 
mortgage 
loans (1), (2) 
Securities 
sold under 
repurchase 
agreements (3) 
Securities 
loaned (3) 
Total 
Carrying amount of transferred 
assets that do not qualify for 
derecognition 
$
34,052 $
252,920 $
9,281 $296,253  $
35,001 $
267,361 $
6,870 $ 309,232 
Carrying amount of associated 
liabilities 
33,769 
252,920 
9,281 
295,970  
34,805 
267,361 
6,870 
309,036 
Fair value of transferred assets 
$
34,142 $
252,920 $
9,281 $296,343  $
35,293 $
267,361 $
6,870 $ 309,524 
Fair value of associated liabilities 
34,073 
252,920 
9,281 
296,274  
35,957 
267,361 
6,870 
310,188 
Fair value of net position 
$
69 $
– $
– $
69  $
(664) $
– $
– $
(664) 
(1) 
Includes Canadian residential mortgage loans transferred primarily to Canada Housing Trust at the initial securitization and other permitted investments used for 
funding requirements after the initial securitization. 
(2) 
CMB investors have legal recourse only to the transferred assets, and do not have recourse to our general assets. 
(3) 
Does not include over-collateralization of assets pledged. 
Note 7
Structured entities 
In the normal course of business, we engage in a variety of financial transactions with structured entities to support our 
financing and investing needs as well as those of our customers. A structured entity is an entity in which voting or similar rights 
are not the dominant factor in deciding control. Structured entities are generally created to achieve a narrow and well defined 
objective with restrictions around their ongoing activities. We consolidate a structured entity when we control the entity in 
accordance with our accounting policy as described in Note 2. In other cases, we may sponsor or have an interest in such an 
entity but may not consolidate it. 
Consolidated structured entities 
We consolidate the following structured entities, whose assets and liabilities are recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Third-party investors in these structured entities generally have recourse only to the assets of the related entity and do not have 
recourse to our general assets unless we breach our contractual obligations to those entities. In the ordinary course of business, 
the assets of each consolidated structured entity can generally only be used to settle the obligations of that entity. 
RBC-administered multi-seller conduits 
We generally do not maintain ownership in the multi-seller conduits that we administer and generally do not have rights to, or 
control of, their assets. However, we issue asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) through a multi-seller conduit that does not 
have a first loss investor with substantive power to direct the significant operating activities of the conduit. This conduit is 
consolidated because we have exposure to variability of returns from performance in the multi-seller arrangements through 
providing transaction-specific and program-wide liquidity, credit and loan facilities to the conduit and have decision-making 
power over the relevant activities. As of October 31, 2021, $1,076 million of financial assets held by the conduit was included in 
Loans (October 31, 2020 – $957 million) and $665 million of ABCP issued by the conduit was included in Deposits (October 31, 2020 
– $558 million) on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Credit card securitization vehicle 
We securitize a portion of our credit card receivables through a structured entity on a revolving basis. The entity purchases 
co-ownership interests in a pool of credit card receivables and issues senior and subordinated term notes collateralized by that 
co-ownership interest in the underlying pool of credit card receivables. Investors who purchase the term notes have recourse 
only to that co-ownership interest in the underlying pool of credit card receivables. 
We continue to service the credit card receivables and perform an administrative role for the entity. We also retain risk in the 
underlying pool of credit card receivables through our retained interest in the transferred assets, the cash reserve balance we fund 
from time to time, and also through certain subordinated notes which we retain. Additionally, we may own some senior notes as 
investments or for market-making activities and we act as counterparty to interest rate and cross currency swap agreements which 
hedge the entity’s interest rate and currency risk exposure. We have also provided subordinated loans to the entity to pay upfront 
expenses; the loans were fully repaid during the year ended October 31, 2021. 
We consolidate the structured entity because we have decision-making power over the timing and size of future issuances 
and other relevant activities which were predetermined by us at inception. We also obtain significant funding benefits and are 
exposed to variability from the performance of the underlying credit card receivables through our retained interest. As at 
October 31, 2021, $3 billion of notes issued by our credit card securitization vehicle were included in Deposits on our Consolidated 
Balance Sheets (October 31, 2020 – $6 billion). 
178
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Collateralized commercial paper vehicle 
We established a funding vehicle that provides loans to us and finances those loans by issuing commercial paper to third-party 
investors. The structured entity’s commercial paper carries an equivalent credit rating to RBC because we are obligated to 
advance funds to the entity in the event there are insufficient funds from other sources to settle maturing commercial paper. We 
pledge collateral to secure the loans and are exposed to the market and credit risks of the pledged securities. 
We consolidate the structured entity because we have decision-making power over the relevant activities, are the sole 
borrower from the structure, and are exposed to a majority of the residual ownership risks through the credit support provided. 
As at October 31, 2021, $13 billion of commercial paper issued by the vehicle was included in Deposits on our Consolidated 
Balance Sheets (October 31, 2020 – $12 billion). 
Covered bonds 
We periodically transfer mortgages to RBC Covered Bond Guarantor Limited Partnership (the Guarantor LP) to support funding 
activities and asset coverage requirements under our covered bonds program. The Guarantor LP was created to guarantee 
interest and principal payments under the covered bond program. The covered bonds guaranteed by the Guarantor LP are direct, 
unsecured and unconditional obligations of RBC; therefore, investors have a claim against the Bank which will continue if the 
covered bonds are not paid by the Bank and the mortgage assets in the Guarantor LP are insufficient to satisfy the obligations 
owing on the covered bonds. We act as general partner, limited partner, swap counterparty, lender and liquidity provider to the 
Guarantor LP, servicer for the underlying mortgages as well as the registered issuer of the covered bonds. 
We consolidate the Guarantor LP as we have the decision-making power over the relevant activities through our role as 
general partner and are exposed to variability from the performance of the underlying mortgages. As at October 31, 2021, the total 
amount of mortgages transferred and outstanding was $80 billion (October 31, 2020 – $106 billion) and $37 billion of covered 
bonds were recorded as Deposits on our Consolidated Balance Sheets (October 31, 2020 – $40 billion). 
Municipal bond TOB structures 
We sell taxable and tax-exempt municipal bonds into Tender Option Bond (TOB) structures, which consist of a bond that is credit 
enhanced by us and purchased by a TOB trust. The TOB trust finances the purchase from us by issuing floating-rate certificates to 
short-term investors and a residual certificate that is purchased by us. We are the remarketing agent for the floating-rate 
certificates and provide a liquidity facility to the short-term investors which requires us to purchase any certificates tendered but 
not successfully remarketed. We credit enhance the bond purchased by the TOB trust with a letter of credit under which we are 
required to extend funding if there are any losses on the underlying bonds. We earn interest on the residual certificate and 
receive market-based fees for acting as remarketing agent and providing the liquidity facility and letter of credit. 
We consolidate the TOB trust when we are the holder of the residual certificate as we have decision-making power over the 
relevant activities, including the selection of the underlying municipal bonds and the ability to terminate the structure, and are 
exposed to variability from the performance of the underlying municipal bonds. As at October 31, 2021, $7 billion of municipal bonds 
were included in Investment securities related to consolidated TOB structures (October 31, 2020 – $8 billion) and a corresponding 
$7 billion of floating-rate certificates were included in Deposits on our Consolidated Balance Sheets (October 31, 2020 – $8 billion). 
RBC managed investment funds 
We are sponsors and investment managers of mutual and pooled funds, which give us the ability to direct the investment 
decisions of the funds. We consolidate those mutual and pooled funds in which our interests, which include direct investment in 
seed capital plus management or performance fees, indicate that we are acting as a principal. As at October 31, 2021, $514 million 
of Trading securities held in the consolidated funds (October 31, 2020 – $516 million) and $365 million of Other liabilities 
representing the fund units held by third parties (October 31, 2020 – $293 million) were recorded on our Consolidated Balance 
Sheets. 
Unconsolidated structured entities 
We have interests in certain structured entities that we do not consolidate but have recorded assets and liabilities on our 
Consolidated Balance Sheets related to our transactions and involvement with these entities. 
The following table presents the assets and liabilities recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets and our maximum 
exposure to loss related to our interests in unconsolidated structured entities. It also presents the size of each class of 
unconsolidated structured entity, as measured by the total assets of the entities in which we have an interest. 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Multi-seller 
conduits (1) 
Structured 
finance 
Non-RBC 
managed 
investment 
funds 
Third-party 
securitization 
vehicles 
Other 
Total 
On-balance sheet assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Securities 
$
12 $
– $
3,047 $
– $
537 $
3,596 
Loans 
– 
4,569 
– 
6,855 
1,453 
12,877 
Derivatives 
17 
– 
– 
– 
108 
125 
Other assets 
– 
27 
– 
– 
363 
390 
 
$
29 $ 4,596 $
3,047 $
6,855 $
2,461 $
16,988 
On-balance sheet liabilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Derivatives 
$
93 $
– $
– $
– $
– $
93 
Other liabilities 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
 
$
93 $
– $
– $
– $
– $
93 
Maximum exposure to loss (2) 
$
40,893 $ 8,361 $
3,651 $
12,214 $
4,057 $
69,176 
Total assets of unconsolidated structured entities 
$
40,074 $19,881 $506,699 $
80,458 $392,348 $1,039,460 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
179 

Note 7
Structured entities (continued) 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Multi-seller 
conduits (1) 
Structured 
finance 
Non-RBC 
managed 
investment 
funds 
Third-party 
securitization 
vehicles 
Other 
Total 
On-balance sheet assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Securities 
$
138 $
– $
2,297 $
– $
422 $
2,857 
Loans 
– 
2,670 
– 
5,628 
931 
9,229 
Derivatives 
60 
– 
– 
– 
84 
144 
Other assets 
– 
46 
– 
– 
261 
307 
 
$
198 $
2,716 $
2,297 $
5,628 $
1,698 $
12,537 
On-balance sheet liabilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Derivatives 
$
38 $
– $
– $
– $
– $
38 
Other liabilities 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
 
$
38 $
– $
– $
– $
– $
38 
Maximum exposure to loss (2) 
$
42,863 $
6,522 $
2,557 $
10,389 $
2,108 $
64,439 
Total assets of unconsolidated structured entities 
$
41,964 $ 18,200 $ 462,947 $
87,631 $ 286,200 $
896,942 
(1) 
Total assets of unconsolidated structured entities represent the maximum assets that may have to be purchased by the conduits under purchase commitments 
outstanding. Of the purchase commitments outstanding, the conduits have purchased financial assets totalling $25 billion as at October 31, 2021 (October 31, 2020 – 
$23 billion). 
(2) 
The maximum exposure to loss resulting from our interests in these entities consists mostly of investments, loans, fair value of derivatives, liquidity and credit 
enhancement facilities. The maximum exposure to loss of the multi-seller conduits is higher than the on-balance sheet assets primarily because of the notional amounts 
of the backstop liquidity and credit enhancement facilities. Refer to Note 23. 
Below is a description of our involvement with each significant class of unconsolidated structured entity. 
Multi-seller conduits 
We administer multi-seller ABCP conduit programs. Multi-seller conduits primarily purchase financial assets from clients and 
finance those purchases by issuing ABCP. 
In certain multi-seller conduit arrangements, we do not maintain any ownership of the multi-seller conduits that we 
administer and have no rights to, or control of, its assets. As the administrative agent, we earn a residual fee for providing 
services such as coordinating funding activities, transaction structuring, documentation, execution and monitoring. The ABCP 
issued by each multi-seller conduit is in the conduit’s own name with recourse to the financial assets owned by the multi-seller 
conduit, and is non-recourse to us except through our participation in liquidity and/or credit enhancement facilities. 
We provide transaction-specific and program-wide liquidity facilities to the multi-seller conduits. In addition, we provide 
program-wide credit enhancement to the multi-seller conduits which obligate us to purchase assets or advance funds in the 
event the multi-seller conduit does not otherwise have funds from other sources, such as from the liquidity facilities, to settle 
maturing ABCP. In some cases, we or another third party may provide transaction-specific credit enhancement which can take 
various forms. We receive market-based fees for providing these liquidity and credit facilities. 
For certain transactions, we act as counterparty to various hedging contracts to facilitate our clients’ securitization of fixed 
rate and/or foreign currency denominated assets through the conduits. These may take the form of forward contracts, interest 
rate swaps or cross currency swaps. These derivatives expose us to foreign exchange and interest rate risks that are centrally 
managed by our foreign exchange trading and swap desks, respectively, and credit risk on the underlying assets that is mitigated 
by the credit enhancement described below. 
Each transaction is structured with transaction-specific first loss protection provided by the third-party seller. This 
enhancement can take various forms, including but not limited to overcollateralization, excess spread, subordinated classes of 
financial assets, guarantees or letters of credit. The amount of this enhancement varies but is generally designed to cover a 
multiple of historical losses. 
An unrelated third party (expected loss investor) absorbs losses, up to a maximum contractual amount, that may occur in 
the future on the assets in the multi-seller conduits before the multi-seller conduits’ debt holders and us. In return for assuming 
this multi-seller conduit first-loss position, each multi-seller conduit pays the expected loss investor a return commensurate with 
its risk position. The expected loss investor has substantive power to direct the majority of the activities which significantly 
impact the conduit’s economic performance, including initial selection and approval of the asset purchase commitments and 
liquidity facilities, approval of renewal and amendment of these transactions and facilities, sale or transfer of assets, ongoing 
monitoring of asset performance, mitigation of losses, and management of the ABCP liabilities. 
We do not consolidate these multi-seller conduits as we do not control the conduits as noted above. 
Structured finance 
We participate in certain municipal bond TOB structures that we do not consolidate. These structures are similar to those 
consolidated municipal bond TOB structures described above; however, the residual certificates are held by third parties. We 
provide liquidity facilities for the benefit of floating-rate certificate holders which may be drawn if certificates are tendered but 
not able to be remarketed. For a portion of these trusts, we also provide a letter of credit for the underlying bonds held in the 
trust. We do not have decision-making power over the relevant activities of the structures; therefore, we do not consolidate these 
structures. 
We provide senior warehouse financing to structured entities that are established by third parties to acquire loans for the 
purposes of issuing a term collateralized loan obligation (CLO) transaction. Subordinated financing is provided during the 
180
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

warehouse phase by one or more third-party equity investors. We act as the arranger and placement agent for the term CLO 
transaction. Proceeds from the sale of the term CLO are used to repay our senior warehouse financing, at which point we have no 
further involvement with the transaction. We do not consolidate these CLO structures as we do not have decision-making power 
over the relevant activities of the entity, which include the initial selection and subsequent management of the underlying debt 
portfolio. 
We provide senior financing to unaffiliated structured entities that are established by third parties to acquire loans. These 
facilities tend to be longer in term than the CLO warehouse facilities and benefit from credit enhancement generally designed to 
cover a multiple of historical losses. We do not consolidate these structures as we do not have decision-making power over the 
relevant activities of the entity, which include the initial selection and subsequent management of the underlying debt portfolio. 
Non-RBC managed investment funds 
We enter into fee-based equity derivative transactions with third parties including mutual funds, unit investment trusts and other 
investment funds. These transactions provide their investors with the desired exposure to a reference fund, and we economically 
hedge our exposure to these derivatives by investing in those reference funds. We also act as custodian or administrator for 
several funds. We do not consolidate those reference funds that are managed by third parties as we do not have power to direct 
their investing activities. 
We provide liquidity facilities to certain third-party investment funds. The funds issue unsecured variable-rate preferred 
shares and invest in portfolios of tax-exempt municipal bonds. Undrawn liquidity commitments expose us to the liquidity risk of 
the preferred shares and drawn commitments expose us to the credit risk of the underlying municipal bonds. We do not 
consolidate these third-party managed funds as we do not have power to direct their investing activities. 
Third-party securitization vehicles 
We hold interests in securitization vehicles that provide funding to certain third parties on whose behalf the entities were created. The 
activities of these entities are limited to the purchase and sale of specified financial assets from the sponsor. We, as well as other 
financial institutions, are obligated to provide funding up to our maximum commitment level and are exposed to credit losses on the 
underlying assets after various credit enhancements. Enhancements can take various forms, including but not limited to 
overcollateralization, excess spread, subordinated classes of financial assets, guarantees or letters of credit. The amount of this 
enhancement varies but is generally designed to cover a multiple of historical losses. We do not consolidate these entities as we do 
not have decision-making power over the relevant activities, including the entities’ investing and financing activities. 
Other 
Other unconsolidated structured entities include managed investment funds, credit investment products and tax credit funds. 
We are sponsors and investment managers of mutual and pooled funds, which gives us the ability to direct the investment 
decisions of the funds. We do not consolidate those mutual and pooled funds if we exercise our decision-making power as an 
agent on behalf of other unit holders. 
We use structured entities to generally transform credit derivatives into cash instruments, to distribute credit risk and to 
create customized credit products to meet investors’ specific requirements. We enter into derivative contracts, including credit 
derivatives, to purchase protection from these entities (credit protection) and convert various risk factors such as yield, currency 
or credit risk of underlying assets to meet the needs of the investors. We act as sole arranger and swap provider for certain 
entities and, in some cases, fulfill other administrative functions for the entities. We do not consolidate these credit investment 
product entities as we do not have decision-making power over the relevant activities, which include selection of the collateral 
and reference portfolio, and are not exposed to a majority of the benefits or risks of the entities. 
We created certain funds to pass through tax credits received from underlying low-income housing, historic rehabilitation 
real estate projects to third parties, new market tax credits or renewable energy tax credits to third parties (tax credit funds). We 
are sponsors of the tax credit funds as a result of our responsibility to manage the funds, arrange the financing, and perform the 
administrative duties of these tax credit funds. We do not consolidate the tax credit funds as the third-party investors in these 
funds have the decision-making power to select the underlying investments and are exposed to the majority of the residual 
ownership and tax risks of the funds. 
We also purchase passive interests in renewable energy tax credit entities created and controlled by third parties. We do not 
consolidate these third-party funds as we do not have decision-making power over the relevant activities and our investments 
are managed as part of larger portfolios which are held for trading purposes. 
Other interests in unconsolidated structured entities 
In the normal course of business, we buy and sell passive interests in certain third-party structured entities, including mutual 
funds, exchange traded funds, and government-sponsored ABS vehicles. Our investments in these entities are managed as part of 
larger portfolios which are held for trading, liquidity or hedging purposes. We did not create or sponsor these entities and do not 
have any decision-making power over their ongoing activities. Our maximum exposure to loss is limited to our on-balance sheet 
investments in these entities, which are not included in the table above. As at October 31, 2021 and 2020, our investments in these 
entities were included in Trading and Investment securities on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Refer to Note 3 and Note 4 for 
further details on our Trading and Investment securities. 
Sponsored entities 
We are a sponsor of certain structured entities in which we have interests but do not consolidate. In determining whether we are 
a sponsor of a structured entity, we consider both qualitative and quantitative factors, including the purpose and nature of the 
entity, our initial and continuing involvement and whether we hold subordinated interests in the entity. We are considered to be 
the sponsor of certain credit investment products, tax credit entities, RBC managed mutual funds and a commercial mortgage 
securitization vehicle. During the year ended October 31, 2021, we did not transfer any commercial mortgages (October 31, 2020 – 
$469 million) to a sponsored securitization vehicle in which we did not have any interests as at the end of the reporting period. 
Financial support provided to structured entities 
During the years ended October 31, 2021 and 2020, we have not provided any financial or non-financial support to any 
consolidated or unconsolidated structured entities when we were not contractually obligated to do so. Furthermore, we have no 
intention to provide such support in the future. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
181 

Note 8
Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities 
Derivative instruments are categorized as either financial or non-financial derivatives. Financial derivatives are financial 
contracts whose value is derived from an underlying interest rate, foreign exchange rate, credit risk, and equity or equity index. 
Non-financial derivatives are contracts whose value is derived from a precious metal, commodity instrument or index. The 
notional amount of derivatives represents the contract amount used as a reference point to calculate payments. Notional 
amounts are generally not exchanged by counterparties, and do not reflect our EAD. 
Financial derivatives 
Forwards and futures 
Forward contracts are non-standardized agreements that are transacted between counterparties in the OTC market, whereas 
futures are standardized contracts with respect to amounts and settlement dates, and are traded on regular futures exchanges. 
Examples of forwards and futures are described below. 
Interest rate forwards (forward rate agreements) and futures are contractual obligations to buy or sell an interest-rate 
sensitive financial instrument on a predetermined future date at a specified price. 
Foreign exchange forwards and futures are contractual obligations to exchange one currency for another at a specified price 
for settlement at a predetermined future date. 
Equity forwards and futures are contractual obligations to buy or sell at a fixed value (the specified price) of an equity index, 
a basket of stocks or a single stock at a predetermined future date. 
Swaps 
Swaps are OTC contracts in which two counterparties exchange a series of cash flows based on agreed upon rates applied to a 
notional amount. Examples of swap agreements are described below. 
Interest rate swaps are agreements where two counterparties exchange a series of payments based on different interest 
rates applied to a notional amount in a single currency. Certain interest rate swaps are transacted and settled through clearing 
houses which act as central counterparties. Cross currency swaps involve the exchange of fixed payments in one currency for the 
receipt of fixed payments in another currency. Cross currency interest rate swaps involve the exchange of both interest and 
notional amounts in two different currencies. 
Equity swaps are contracts in which one counterparty agrees to pay or receive from the other cash flows based on changes 
in the value of an equity index, a basket of stocks or a single stock. 
Options 
Options are contractual agreements under which the seller (writer) grants the purchaser the right, but not the obligation, either 
to buy (call option) or sell (put option) a security, exchange rate, interest rate, or other financial instrument or commodity at a 
specified price, at or by a predetermined future date. The seller (writer) of an option can also settle the contract by paying the 
cash settlement value of the purchaser’s right. The seller (writer) receives a premium from the purchaser for this right. The 
various option agreements that we enter into include but are not limited to interest rate options, foreign currency options, equity 
options and index options. 
Credit derivatives 
Credit derivatives are OTC contracts that transfer credit risk related to an underlying financial instrument (referenced asset) 
from one counterparty to another. Credit derivatives include credit default swaps, credit default baskets and total return swaps. 
Credit default swaps provide protection against the decline in the value of the referenced asset as a result of specified credit 
events such as default or bankruptcy. They are similar in structure to an option, whereby the purchaser pays a premium to the 
seller of the credit default swap in return for payment contingent on a credit event affecting the referenced asset. 
Credit default baskets are similar to credit default swaps except that the underlying referenced financial instrument is a 
group of assets instead of a single asset. 
Total return swaps are contracts where one counterparty agrees to pay or receive from the other cash amounts based on 
changes in the value of a referenced asset or group of assets, including any returns such as interest earned on these assets, in 
exchange for amounts that are based on prevailing market funding rates. 
Other derivative products 
Other contracts are stable value and equity derivative contracts. 
Non-financial derivatives 
Other contracts also include non-financial derivative products such as precious metal and commodity derivative contracts in 
both the OTC and exchange markets. 
Derivatives issued for trading purposes 
Most of our derivative transactions relate to client-driven sales and trading activities, and associated market risk hedging. Sales 
activities include the structuring and marketing of derivative products to clients, enabling them to modify or reduce risks. Trading 
involves market-making, positioning and arbitrage activities. Market-making involves quoting bid and offer prices to other market 
participants with the intention of generating revenue based on spread and volume. Positioning involves the active management of 
derivative transactions with the expectation of profiting from favourable movements in prices, rates, or indices. Arbitrage 
activities involve identifying and profiting from price differentials between markets and product types. Any realized and unrealized 
gains or losses on derivatives used for trading purposes are recognized immediately in Non-interest income – Trading revenue. 
Derivatives issued for other-than-trading purposes 
We also use derivatives for purposes other than trading, primarily for hedging, in conjunction with the management of interest 
rate, credit, equity and foreign exchange risk related to our funding, lending, investment activities and asset/liability 
management. 
182
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Interest rate swaps are used to manage our exposure to interest rate risk by modifying the repricing or maturity 
characteristics of existing and/or forecasted assets and liabilities, including funding and investment activities. Purchased options 
are used to hedge redeemable deposits and other options embedded in consumer products. We manage our exposure to foreign 
currency risk with cross currency swaps and foreign exchange forward contracts. We predominantly use credit derivatives to 
manage our credit exposures. We mitigate industry sector concentrations and single-name exposures related to our credit 
portfolio by purchasing credit derivatives to transfer credit risk to third parties. 
Certain derivatives and cash instruments are specifically designated and qualify for hedge accounting. From time to time, we 
also enter into derivative transactions to economically hedge certain exposures that do not otherwise qualify for hedge 
accounting, or where hedge accounting is not considered economically feasible to implement. In such circumstances, changes in 
fair value are reflected in Other income in Non-interest income. 
Notional amount of derivatives by term to maturity (absolute amounts) (1) 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Term to maturity 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Within 
1 year 
1 through 
5 years 
Over 
5 years 
Total 
Trading 
Other than 
Trading 
Over-the-counter contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Forward rate agreements 
$
866,704 $
161,835 $
158 $ 1,028,697 $ 1,015,263 $
13,434 
Swaps 
3,936,638 
6,559,032 
4,268,243 
14,763,913 
14,259,757 
504,156 
Options purchased 
266,798 
312,149 
185,547 
764,494 
764,494 
– 
Options written 
271,000 
309,540 
203,665 
784,205 
784,205 
– 
Foreign exchange contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Forward contracts 
1,730,712 
56,335 
2,491 
1,789,538 
1,753,075 
36,463 
Cross currency swaps 
82,316 
57,968 
72,864 
213,148 
204,789 
8,359 
Cross currency interest rate swaps 
439,169 
1,193,669 
776,062 
2,408,900 
2,376,225 
32,675 
Options purchased 
46,060 
16,097 
3,059 
65,216 
65,216 
– 
Options written 
53,342 
16,122 
3,060 
72,524 
72,524 
– 
Credit derivatives (2) 
1,027 
35,759 
6,125 
42,911 
42,428 
483 
Other contracts (3) 
218,270 
98,850 
20,757 
337,877 
325,226 
12,651 
Exchange-traded contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Futures – long positions 
110,285 
148,262 
333 
258,880 
256,020 
2,860 
Futures – short positions 
173,039 
97,364 
126 
270,529 
270,129 
400 
Options purchased 
28,071 
15,250 
– 
43,321 
43,321 
– 
Options written 
22,272 
1,300 
– 
23,572 
23,572 
– 
Foreign exchange contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Futures – long positions 
129 
– 
– 
129 
129 
– 
Other contracts 
391,339 
84,135 
1,175 
476,649 
476,649 
– 
 
$ 8,637,171 $ 9,163,667 $ 5,543,665 $23,344,503 $22,733,022 $ 611,481 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
Term to maturity 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Within 
1 year 
1 through 
5 years 
Over 
5 years 
Total 
Trading 
Other than 
Trading 
Over-the-counter contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Forward rate agreements 
$ 2,782,447 $
427,464 $
340 $
3,210,251 $
3,172,950 $
37,301 
Swaps 
3,409,078 
5,990,160 
3,755,593 
13,154,831 
12,685,595 
469,236 
Options purchased 
282,837 
407,782 
185,667 
876,286 
876,153 
133 
Options written 
303,347 
410,237 
198,222 
911,806 
911,806 
– 
Foreign exchange contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Forward contracts 
1,691,079 
32,474 
1,788 
1,725,341 
1,707,082 
18,259 
Cross currency swaps 
80,186 
56,563 
64,540 
201,289 
194,773 
6,516 
Cross currency interest rate swaps 
412,053 
1,117,048 
633,023 
2,162,124 
2,112,625 
49,499 
Options purchased 
46,719 
13,963 
3,349 
64,031 
64,031 
– 
Options written 
50,099 
13,407 
3,410 
66,916 
66,916 
– 
Credit derivatives (2) 
1,309 
39,877 
7,577 
48,763 
48,244 
519 
Other contracts (3) 
177,220 
94,378 
20,126 
291,724 
282,321 
9,403 
Exchange-traded contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Futures – long positions 
164,925 
112,363 
113 
277,401 
277,401 
– 
Futures – short positions 
205,927 
167,350 
233 
373,510 
373,510 
– 
Options purchased 
74,494 
14,188 
– 
88,682 
88,682 
– 
Options written 
58,116 
10,391 
– 
68,507 
68,507 
– 
Foreign exchange contracts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Futures – long positions 
75 
– 
– 
75 
75 
– 
Other contracts 
179,681 
30,768 
240 
210,689 
210,689 
– 
 
$ 9,919,592 $ 8,938,413 $ 4,874,221 $ 23,732,226 $ 23,141,360 $ 590,866 
(1) 
The derivative notional amounts are determined using the standardized approach for measuring counterparty credit risk (SA-CCR) in accordance with the Capital 
Adequacy Requirements (CAR). 
(2) 
Credit derivatives with a notional value of $1 billion (October 31, 2020 – $1 billion) are economic hedges. Trading credit derivatives comprise protection purchased of 
$25 billion (October 31, 2020 – $26 billion) and protection sold of $17 billion (October 31, 2020 – $22 billion). 
(3) 
Other contracts exclude loan-related commitment derivatives of $9 billion (October 31, 2020 – $2 billion), which are not classified as derivatives under CAR guidelines. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
183 

Note 8
Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities (continued) 
Fair value of derivative instruments (1) 
 
As at 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Positive 
Negative  
Positive 
Negative 
Held or issued for trading purposes 
 
  
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
 
  
 
 
Forward rate agreements 
$
10 
$
11  $
33 $
33 
Swaps 
28,400 
23,136  
44,732 
37,453 
Options purchased 
4,580 
–  
7,498 
– 
Options written 
– 
5,258  
– 
8,916 
 
32,990 
28,405  
52,263 
46,402 
Foreign exchange contracts 
 
  
 
 
Forward contracts 
11,404 
11,515  
10,765 
10,190 
Cross currency swaps  
4,469 
4,929  
5,117 
5,080 
Cross currency interest rate swaps 
23,208 
22,382  
19,880 
21,826 
Options purchased 
1,021 
–  
1,292 
– 
Options written 
– 
978  
– 
910 
 
40,102 
39,804  
37,054 
38,006 
Credit derivatives 
34 
115  
463 
526 
Other contracts 
20,827 
21,253  
21,156 
23,985 
 
93,953 
89,577  
110,936 
108,919 
Held or issued for other-than-trading purposes 
 
  
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
 
  
 
 
Swaps 
1,187 
1,116  
1,959 
1,410 
 
1,187 
1,116  
1,959 
1,410 
Foreign exchange contracts 
 
  
 
 
Forward contracts 
305 
260  
76 
85 
Cross currency swaps 
32 
–  
89 
22 
Cross currency interest rate swaps 
859 
447  
2,084 
132 
 
1,196 
707  
2,249 
239 
Credit derivatives 
– 
5  
– 
5 
Other contracts 
329 
321  
105 
126 
 
2,712 
2,149  
4,313 
1,780 
Total gross fair values before: 
96,665 
91,726  
115,249 
110,699 
Valuation adjustments determined on a pooled basis 
(810) 
27  
(1,104) 
(115) 
Impact of netting agreements that qualify for balance sheet offset 
(314) 
(314)  
(657) 
(657) 
 
$ 95,541 
$ 91,439  $ 113,488 $ 109,927 
(1) 
The fair value reflects the impact of the election to characterize the daily variation margin as settlement of the related derivative fair values as permitted by certain 
central counterparties. 
Fair value of derivative instruments by term to maturity (1) 
 
As at 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Less than 
1 year 
1 through 
5 years 
Over 
5 years 
Total  
Less than 
1 year 
1 through 
5 years 
Over 
5 years 
Total 
Derivative assets 
$ 27,771 
28,029 39,741 $ 95,541  $ 27,072 
33,755 52,661 $ 113,488 
Derivative liabilities 
26,766 
27,938 36,735 
91,439  
26,507 
32,885 50,535 
109,927 
(1) 
The fair value reflects the impact of the election to characterize the daily variation margin as settlement of the related derivative fair values permitted by certain central 
counterparties. 
184
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Interest rate benchmark reform (1) 
We use interest rate contracts in fair value hedges and cash flow hedges to manage our exposure to interest rate risk of our 
existing and/or forecast assets and liabilities. We also use foreign denominated deposit liabilities in net investment hedges to 
manage the foreign exchange risk arising from our investments in foreign operations. The hedging instruments designated to 
manage these risks reference IBORs in multiple jurisdictions and will be affected by the Reform as the markets transition to ABRs 
as discussed in Note 2. 
The following table presents the notional or principal amount of our hedging instruments which reference IBORs that will be 
affected by the Reform as discussed in Note 2. The notional or principal amounts of our hedging instruments also approximates 
the extent of the risk exposure we manage through hedging relationships: 
 
As at
 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 (2) 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Notional/Principal 
amounts  
Notional/Principal 
amounts 
Interest rate contracts 
  
 
USD LIBOR 
$
38,730  
$
22,640 
GBP LIBOR 
290  
591 
Non-derivative instruments 
  
 
USD LIBOR 
215  
231 
GBP LIBOR 
–  
691 
 
$
39,235  
$
24,153 
(1) 
Excludes interest rate contracts and non-derivative instruments which reference rates in multi-rate jurisdictions, including CDOR, EURO Interbank Offered Rate and 
Australian Bank Bill Swap Rate (BBSW). 
(2) 
Amounts have been updated from those previously presented to reflect the regulatory developments related to the USD LIBOR cessation date. 
Derivative-related credit risk 
Credit risk from derivative transactions is generated by the potential for the counterparty to default on its contractual 
obligations when one or more transactions have a positive market value to us. Therefore, derivative-related credit risk is 
represented by the positive fair value of the instrument and is normally a small fraction of the contract’s notional amount. 
We subject our derivative transactions to the same credit approval, limit and monitoring standards that we use for managing 
other transactions that create credit exposure. This includes evaluating the creditworthiness of counterparties, and managing 
the size, diversification and maturity structure of the portfolio. Credit utilization for all products is compared with established 
limits on a continual basis and is subject to a standard exception reporting process. We use a single internal rating system for all 
credit risk exposure, as outlined in the internal ratings maps in the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. 
Offsetting is a technique that can reduce credit exposure from derivatives and is generally facilitated through the use of 
master netting agreements and achieved when specific criteria are met in accordance with our accounting policy in Note 2. A 
master netting agreement provides for a single net settlement of all financial instruments covered by the agreement in the event 
of default. However, credit risk is reduced only to the extent that our financial obligations to the same counterparty can be set off 
against obligations of the counterparty to us. We maximize the use of master netting agreements to reduce derivative-related 
credit exposure. Our overall exposure to credit risk that is reduced through master netting agreements may change substantially 
following the reporting date as the exposure is affected by each transaction subject to the agreement as well as by changes in 
underlying market rates. Measurement of our credit exposure arising out of derivative transactions is reduced to reflect the 
effects of netting in cases where the enforceability of that netting is supported by appropriate legal analysis as documented in 
our trading credit risk policies. 
The use of collateral is another significant credit mitigation technique for managing derivative-related counterparty credit 
risk. Mark-to-market provisions in our agreements with some counterparties, typically in the form of a Credit Support Annex, 
provide us with the right to request that the counterparty pay down or collateralize the current market value of its derivatives 
positions when the value exceeds a specified threshold amount. 
Replacement cost and credit equivalent amounts are determined in accordance with OSFI’s non-modelled regulatory SA-CCR 
under the CAR guidelines. The replacement cost represents the total fair value of all outstanding contracts in a gain position after 
factoring in the master netting agreements and applicable margins, scaled by a regulatory factor. The credit equivalent amount 
is defined as the replacement cost plus an additional amount for potential future credit exposure also scaled by a regulatory 
factor. The risk-weighted equivalent is determined by applying appropriate risk-weights to the credit equivalent amount, 
including those risk weights reflective of model approval under the internal ratings based approach. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
185 

Note 8
Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities (continued) 
Derivative-related credit risk (1) 
 
As at
 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Replacement 
cost 
Credit 
equivalent 
amount 
Risk-weighted 
equivalent (2)  
Replacement 
cost 
Credit 
equivalent 
amount 
Risk-weighted 
equivalent (2) 
Over-the-counter contracts 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Forward rate agreements 
$
9 
$
64 
$
20  
$
30 
$
191 
$
79 
Swaps 
4,519 
16,203 
4,569  
7,112 
17,324 
7,359 
Options purchased 
113 
403 
187  
142 
392 
285 
Options written 
23 
415 
141  
4 
307 
136 
Foreign exchange contracts 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Forward contracts 
3,085 
19,097 
4,232  
2,796 
17,641 
4,537 
Swaps 
2,621 
16,484 
4,092  
2,392 
15,349 
3,997 
Options purchased 
177 
510 
145  
465 
923 
292 
Options written 
2 
196 
43  
1 
155 
59 
Credit derivatives 
913 
2,234 
213  
429 
1,839 
81 
Other contracts 
7,668 
26,567 
10,480  
3,577 
16,455 
7,719 
Exchange-traded contracts 
1,814 
6,218 
124  
3,137 
8,842 
177 
 
$
20,944 
$88,391 
$
24,246  
$
20,085 
$ 79,418 
$
24,721 
(1) 
The amounts presented are net of master netting agreements in accordance with CAR guidelines. 
(2) 
The risk-weighted balances are calculated in accordance with CAR guidelines and exclude CVA of $18 billion (October 31, 2020 – $18 billion). 
Replacement cost of derivative instruments by risk rating and by counterparty type 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Risk rating (1) 
 
Counterparty type (2) 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
AAA, AA 
A 
BBB BB or lower 
Total 
Banks 
OECD 
governments 
Other 
Total 
Gross positive fair values 
$ 22,801 $ 37,938 $ 16,333 $
19,593 $ 96,665 $ 42,361 $
15,964 $ 38,340 $ 96,665 
Impact of master netting agreements and 
applicable margins 
20,545 
33,257 
12,050 
9,869 
75,721 
41,554 
15,731 
18,436 
75,721 
Replacement cost (after netting agreements) 
$
2,256 $
4,681 $
4,283 $
9,724 $ 20,944 $
807 $
233 $ 19,904 $ 20,944 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
Risk rating (1) 
 
Counterparty type (2) 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
AAA, AA 
A 
BBB 
BB or lower 
Total 
Banks 
OECD 
governments 
Other 
Total 
Gross positive fair values 
$ 30,097 $ 44,736 $ 18,392 
$
22,024 $ 115,249 $ 49,146 
$
22,109 $ 43,994 $ 115,249 
Impact of master netting agreements and 
applicable margins 
27,110 
40,359 
14,238 
13,457 
95,164 
48,291 
21,534 
25,339 
95,164 
Replacement cost (after netting agreements) 
$
2,987 $
4,377 $
4,154 
$
8,567 $
20,085 $
855 
$
575 $ 18,655 $
20,085 
(1) 
Our internal risk ratings of AAA, AA, A and BBB represent investment grade ratings and ratings of BB or lower represent non-investment grade ratings, as outlined in the 
internal ratings maps in the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. 
(2) 
Counterparty type is defined in accordance with CAR guidelines. 
Derivatives in hedging relationships 
We apply hedge accounting to minimize volatility in earnings and capital caused by changes in interest rates or foreign exchange 
rates. Interest rate and currency fluctuations will either cause assets and liabilities to appreciate or depreciate in market value 
or cause variability in forecasted cash flows. When a hedging relationship is effective, gains, losses, revenue and expenses of the 
hedging instrument will offset the gains, losses, revenue and expenses of the hedged item. 
Derivatives used in hedging relationships are recorded in Other Assets – Derivatives or Other Liabilities – Derivatives on the 
Balance Sheet. Foreign currency-denominated liabilities used in net investment hedging relationships are recorded in Deposits – 
Business and Government and Subordinated debentures on the Balance Sheet. Gains and losses relating to hedging 
ineffectiveness is recorded in Non-Interest income and amounts reclassified from hedge reserves in OCI to income is recorded in 
Net-interest income for cash flow hedges and Non-interest income for net Investment hedges. 
We assess and measure the effectiveness of a hedging relationship based on the change in the fair value or cash flows of the 
derivative hedging instrument relative to the change in the fair value or cash flows of the hedged item attributable to the hedged 
risk. When cash instruments are designated as hedges of foreign exchange risks, only changes in their value due to foreign 
exchange risk are included in the assessment and measurement of hedge effectiveness. 
Potential sources of ineffectiveness can be attributed to differences between hedging instruments and hedged items: 
•
Mismatches in the terms of hedged items and hedging instruments, for example the frequency and timing of when 
interest rates are reset and frequency of payment. 
•
Difference in the discounting factors between the hedged item and the hedging instrument, taking into consideration the 
different reset frequency of the hedged item and hedging instrument. 
•
Hedging derivatives with a non-zero fair value at inception date of the hedging relationship, resulting in mismatch in 
terms with the hedged item. 
186
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Below is a description of our risk management strategy for each risk exposure that we decide to hedge: 
Interest rate risk 
We use interest rate contracts to manage our exposure to interest rate risk by modifying the repricing characteristics of existing 
and/or forecasted assets and liabilities, including funding and investment activities. The swaps are designated in either a fair 
value hedge or a cash flow hedge and predominantly reference IBORs across multiple jurisdictions. Certain swaps will be 
affected by the Reform as the market transitions to ABRs by the end of 2021 or beyond. 
For fair value hedges, we use interest rate contracts to manage the fair value movements of our fixed-rate instruments due 
to changes in benchmark interest. The interest rate swaps are entered into on a one-to-one basis to manage the benchmark 
interest rate risk, and its terms are critically matched to the specified fixed rate instruments. 
We also use interest rate swaps in fair value hedges to manage interest rate risk from residential mortgage assets and 
funding liabilities. Our exposure from this portfolio changes with the origination of new loans, repayments of existing loans, and 
sale of securitized mortgages. Accordingly, we have adopted dynamic hedging for that portfolio, in which the hedge relationship 
is rebalanced on a more frequent basis, such as on a bi-weekly or on a monthly basis. 
For cash flow hedges, we use interest rate swaps to manage the exposure to cash flow variability of our variable rate 
instruments as a result of changes in benchmark interest rates. The variable rate instruments and forecast transactions which 
reference certain IBORs will be affected by the Reform. Whilst some of the interest rate derivatives are entered into on a 
one-to-one basis to manage a specific exposure, other interest rate derivatives may be entered into for managing interest rate 
risks of a portfolio of assets and liabilities. 
Foreign exchange risk 
We manage our exposure to foreign currency risk with cross currency swaps in a cash flow hedge, and foreign exchange forward 
contracts in a net investment hedge. Certain cash instruments may also be designated in a net investment hedge, where 
applicable. 
For cash flow hedges, we use cross currency swaps and forward contracts to manage the cash flow variability arising from 
fluctuations in foreign exchange rates on our issued foreign denominated fixed rate liabilities and highly probable forecasted 
transactions. The maturity profile and repayment terms of these swaps are matched to those of our foreign denominated 
exposures to limit our cash flow volatility from changes in foreign exchange rates. 
For net investment hedges, we use a combination of foreign exchange forwards and cash instruments, such as foreign 
denominated deposit liabilities, some of which reference IBORs that will be affected by the Reform, to manage our foreign 
exchange risk arising from our investments in foreign operations. Our most significant exposures include USD, GBP and Euro. 
When hedging net investments in foreign operations using foreign exchange forwards, only the undiscounted spot element of the 
foreign exchange forward is designated as the hedging instrument. Accordingly, changes in the fair value of the hedging 
instrument as a result of changes in forward rates and the effects of discounting are not included in the hedging effectiveness 
assessment. Foreign operations are only hedged to the extent of the principal of the foreign denominated deposit liabilities or 
notional amount of the derivative; we generally do not expect to incur significant ineffectiveness on hedges of net investments in 
foreign operations. 
Equity price risk 
We use total return swaps in cash flow hedges to mitigate the cash flow variability of the expected payment associated with our 
cash settled share-based compensation plan for certain key employees by exchanging interest payments for indexed RBC share 
price change and dividend returns. 
Credit risk 
We predominantly use credit derivatives to economically hedge our credit exposures. We mitigate industry sector concentrations 
and single-name exposures related to our credit portfolio by purchasing credit derivatives to transfer credit risk to third parties. 
Derivative instruments designated in hedging relationships 
The following table presents the fair values of the derivative instruments and the principal amounts of the non-derivative 
liabilities, categorized by their hedging relationships, as well as derivatives that are not designated in hedging relationships. 
Derivatives and non-derivative instruments (1) 
 
As at 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
 
Designated as hedging instruments 
in hedging relationships 
Not designated 
in a hedging 
relationship 
 
Designated as hedging instruments 
in hedging relationships 
Not designated 
in a hedging 
relationship 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Fair value Cash flow 
Net 
investment 
 Fair value 
Cash flow 
Net 
investment 
Assets 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Derivative instruments 
$
66 $
9 
$
98 
$
95,368  $
102 $
1 $
19 
$
113,366 
Liabilities 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Derivative instruments 
131 
20 
18 
91,270  
298 
30 
58 
109,541 
Non-derivative instruments 
– 
– 
27,157 
n.a.  
– 
– 
28,702 
n.a. 
(1) 
The fair value reflects the impact of the election to characterize the daily variation margin as settlement of the related derivative fair values as permitted by certain 
central counterparties. 
n.a. 
not applicable 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
187 

Note 8
Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities (continued) 
The following tables provide the remaining term to maturity analysis of the notional amounts and the weighted average rates of 
the hedging instruments and their carrying amounts by types of hedging relationships: 
Fair value hedges 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Notional amounts 
 
Carrying amount (1) 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates) 
Within 
1 year 
1 through 
5 years 
Over 
5 years 
Total  
Assets 
Liabilities 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Hedge of fixed rate assets 
$ 10,503 
$ 25,008 
$ 6,568 
$ 42,079  
$
19 
$
116 
Hedge of fixed rate liabilities 
8,939 
44,870 
11,646 
65,455  
47 
15 
Weighted average fixed interest rate 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Hedge of fixed rate assets 
0.8% 
0.7% 
1.9% 
0.9%  
 
 
Hedge of fixed rate liabilities 
1.5% 
1.2% 
1.5% 
1.3%  
 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
Notional amounts 
 
Carrying amount (1) 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates) 
Within 
1 year 
1 through 
5 years 
Over 
5 years 
Total  
Assets 
Liabilities 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Hedge of fixed rate assets 
$
14,410 
$
28,182 
$ 6,709 
$
49,301  
$
1 
$
298 
Hedge of fixed rate liabilities 
21,207 
38,704 
6,415 
66,326  
101 
– 
Weighted average fixed interest rate 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Hedge of fixed rate assets 
1.5% 
1.0% 
2.0% 
1.3%  
 
 
Hedge of fixed rate liabilities 
1.7% 
1.4% 
1.8% 
1.6%  
 
 
(1) 
The carrying value reflects the impact of the election to characterize the daily variation margin as settlement of the related derivative fair values as permitted by certain 
central counterparties. 
Cash flow hedges 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Notional amounts 
 
Carrying amount (1) 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates) 
Within 
1 year 
1 through 
5 years 
Over 
5 years 
Total  
Assets 
Liabilities 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Hedge of variable rate assets 
$ 57,304 
$ 28,707 
$ 4,112 
$ 90,123  
$
– 
$
– 
Hedge of variable rate liabilities 
16,659 
55,556 
13,784 
85,999  
– 
– 
Weighted average fixed interest rate 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Hedge of variable rate assets 
0.5% 
1.0% 
1.2% 
0.7%  
 
 
Hedge of variable rate liabilities 
0.8% 
1.2% 
1.5% 
1.2%  
 
 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Cross currency swaps 
$
– 
$
183 
$
– 
$
183  
$
9 
$
– 
Weighted average CAD-JPY exchange rate 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a.  
 
 
Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate 
n.a. 
1.52 
n.a. 
1.52  
 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
Notional amounts 
 
Carrying amount (1) 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates) 
Within 
1 year 
1 through 
5 years 
Over 
5 years 
Total  
Assets 
Liabilities 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Interest rate contracts 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Hedge of variable rate assets 
$
15,309 
$
10,663 
$ 1,762 
$
27,734  
$
– 
$
– 
Hedge of variable rate liabilities 
5,616 
61,697 
5,384 
72,697  
– 
– 
Weighted average fixed interest rate 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Hedge of variable rate assets 
0.6% 
1.4% 
1.8% 
1.0%  
 
 
Hedge of variable rate liabilities 
1.9% 
1.5% 
1.4% 
1.5%  
 
 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Cross currency swaps 
$
700 
$
160 
$
– 
$
860  
$
1 
$
2 
Weighted average CAD-JPY exchange rate 
0.01 
n.a. 
n.a. 
0.01  
 
 
Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate 
n.a. 
1.52 
n.a. 
1.52  
 
 
(1) 
The carrying value reflects the impact of the election to characterize the daily variation margin as settlement of the related derivative fair values as permitted by certain 
central counterparties. 
n.a. 
not applicable 
188
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Net investment hedges 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Notional/Principal 
 
Carrying amount 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates) 
Within 
1 year 
1 through 
5 years 
Over 
5 years 
Total  
Assets 
Liabilities 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Foreign currency liabilities 
$
433 
$ 26,294 
$
401 
$ 27,128  
n.a. 
$ 27,157 
Weighted average CAD-USD exchange rate 
1.32 
1.29 
1.30 
1.29  
 
 
Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate 
– 
1.51 
1.48 
1.51  
 
 
Weighted average CAD-GBP exchange rate 
– 
1.72 
– 
1.72  
 
 
Forward contracts 
$ 4,951 
$
– 
$
– 
$
4,951  
$
98 
$
18 
Weighted average CAD-USD exchange rate 
1.26 
n.a. 
n.a. 
1.26  
 
 
Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate 
1.45 
n.a. 
n.a. 
1.45  
 
 
Weighted average CAD-GBP exchange rate 
1.73 
n.a. 
n.a. 
1.73  
 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
Notional/Principal 
 
Carrying amount 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except average rates) 
Within 
1 year 
1 through 
5 years 
Over 
5 years 
Total  
Assets 
Liabilities 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Foreign currency liabilities 
$
7,722 
$
18,706 
$ 2,274 
$
28,702  
n.a. 
$
29,175 
Weighted average CAD-USD exchange rate 
1.29 
1.31 
1.31 
1.30  
 
 
Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate 
– 
1.51 
1.50 
1.51  
 
 
Weighted average CAD-GBP exchange rate 
1.73 
1.65 
– 
1.69  
 
 
Forward contracts 
$
7,869 
$
– 
$
– 
$
7,869  
$
19 
$
58 
Weighted average CAD-USD exchange rate 
1.33 
n.a. 
n.a. 
1.33  
 
 
Weighted average CAD-EUR exchange rate 
1.56 
n.a. 
n.a. 
1.56  
 
 
Weighted average CAD-GBP exchange rate 
1.71 
n.a. 
n.a. 
1.71  
 
 
n.a. 
not applicable 
The following tables present the details of the hedged items categorized by their hedging relationships: 
Fair value hedges – assets and liabilities designated as hedged items 
 
As at and for the year ended October 31, 2021 
 
Carrying amount 
Accumulated amount of fair 
value adjustments on the 
hedged item included in the 
carrying amount 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Assets Liabilities 
Assets Liabilities 
Balance sheet items: 
Changes in fair 
values used for 
calculating hedge 
ineffectiveness 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fixed rate assets (1) 
$42,810 $
– $
(78) $
– 
Securities – Investment, net of 
applicable allowance; Loans – Retail; 
Loans – Wholesale $
(1,027) 
Fixed rate liabilities (1) 
– 
65,355 
– 
(59) 
Deposits – Business and government; 
Subordinated debentures 
1,842 
 
As at and for the year ended October 31, 2020 
 
Carrying amount 
Accumulated amount of fair 
value adjustments on the 
hedged item included in the 
carrying amount 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Assets 
Liabilities 
Assets Liabilities 
Balance sheet items: 
Changes in fair 
values used for 
calculating hedge 
ineffectiveness 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fixed rate assets (1) 
$ 49,272 $
– $ 1,058 $
– 
Securities – Investment, net of 
applicable allowance; Loans – Retail; 
Loans – Wholesale $
879 
Fixed rate liabilities (1) 
– 
68,130 
– 
1,817 
Deposits – Business and government; 
Subordinated debentures 
(1,142) 
(1) 
As at October 31, 2021, the accumulated amount of fair value hedge adjustments remaining in the Balance Sheet for hedged items that have ceased to be adjusted for 
hedging gains and losses is a gain of $125 million for fixed-rate assets and a loss of $62 million for fixed-rate liabilities (October 31, 2020 – gain of $32 million and loss of 
$94 million, respectively). 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
189 

Note 8
Derivative financial instruments and hedging activities (continued) 
Cash flow and net investment hedges – assets and liabilities designated as hedged items 
 
As at and for the year ended October 31, 2021 
 
 
Balance sheet items: 
Changes in fair 
values used for 
calculating hedge 
ineffectiveness 
Cash flow hedge/foreign 
currency translation reserve 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Continuing hedges 
Discontinued 
hedges 
Cash flow hedges 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
 
Variable rate assets 
Securities – Investment, net of 
applicable allowance; Loans – Retail 
$
614 
$
(402) 
$
206 
Variable rate liabilities 
Deposits – Business and government; 
Deposits – Personal 
(2,641) 
1,310 
(399) 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
 
Fixed rate assets 
Securities – Investment, net of 
applicable allowance; Loans – Retail 
(98) 
1 
– 
Fixed rate liabilities 
Deposits – Business and government 
– 
– 
– 
Net investment hedges 
 
 
 
 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
 
Foreign subsidiaries 
n.a. 
(2,331) 
(4,032) 
(421) 
 
As at and for the year ended October 31, 2020 
 
 
Balance sheet items: 
Changes in fair 
values used for 
calculating hedge 
ineffectiveness 
Cash flow hedge/foreign 
currency translation reserve 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Continuing hedges 
Discontinued 
hedges 
Cash flow hedges 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
 
Variable rate assets 
Securities – Investment, net of 
applicable allowance; Loans – Retail 
$
(484) 
$
294 
$
285 
Variable rate liabilities 
Deposits – Business and government; 
Deposits – Personal 
1,839 
(1,540) 
(523) 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
 
Fixed rate assets 
Securities – Investment, net of 
applicable allowance; Loans – Retail 
2 
6 
– 
Fixed rate liabilities 
Deposits – Business and government 
(164) 
– 
– 
Net investment hedges 
 
 
 
 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
 
Foreign subsidiaries 
n.a. 
535 
(6,363) 
(421) 
n.a. 
not applicable 
Effectiveness of designated hedging relationships 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Change in fair value 
of hedging 
instrument 
Hedge 
ineffectiveness 
recognized in 
income (1) 
Changes in the value of 
the hedging instrument 
recognized in OCI 
Amount reclassified 
from hedge reserves 
to income 
Fair value hedges 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts – fixed rate assets 
$
929 
$
(98) 
n.a. 
n.a. 
Interest rate contracts – fixed rate liabilities 
(1,802) 
40 
n.a. 
n.a. 
Cash flow hedges 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts – variable rate assets 
(631) 
(17) $
(497) $
279 
Interest rate contracts – variable rate liabilities 
2,579 
9 
1,949 
(1,024) 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
 
Cross currency swap – fixed rate assets 
98 
– 
98 
103 
Cross currency swap – fixed rate liabilities 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Net investment hedges 
 
 
 
 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
 
Foreign currency liabilities 
1,882 
– 
1,882 
– 
Forward contracts 
449 
– 
449 
1 
190
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

 
For the year ended October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Change in fair value 
of hedging 
instrument 
Hedge 
ineffectiveness 
recognized in 
income (1) 
Changes in the value of 
the hedging instrument 
recognized in OCI 
Amount reclassified 
from hedge reserves 
to income 
Fair value hedges 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts – fixed rate assets 
$
(931) 
$
(52) 
n.a. 
n.a. 
Interest rate contracts – fixed rate liabilities 
1,157 
15 
n.a. 
n.a. 
Cash flow hedges 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate risk 
 
 
 
 
Interest rate contracts – variable rate assets 
501 
16 
$
532 
$
200 
Interest rate contracts – variable rate liabilities 
(1,803) 
1 
(2,127) 
(367) 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
 
Cross currency swap – fixed rate assets 
(2) 
– 
3 
(5) 
Cross currency swap – fixed rate liabilities 
164 
– 
113 
122 
Net investment hedges 
 
 
 
 
Foreign exchange risk 
 
 
 
 
Foreign currency liabilities 
(405) 
5 
(410) 
– 
Forward contracts 
(124) 
1 
(125) 
(28) 
(1) 
Hedge ineffectiveness recognized in income included losses of $101 million that are excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness and are offset by economic 
hedges (October 31, 2020 – $94 million). 
n.a. 
not applicable 
Reconciliation of components of equity 
The following table provides a reconciliation by risk category of each component of equity and an analysis of other 
comprehensive income relating to hedge accounting: 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2021 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Cash flow hedge 
reserve 
Foreign currency 
translation reserve  
Cash flow hedge 
reserve 
Foreign currency 
translation reserve 
Balance at the beginning of the year 
$
(1,079) $
4,632  $
(6) $
4,221 
Cash flow hedges 
 
  
 
 
Effective portion of changes in fair value: 
 
  
 
 
Interest rate risk 
1,452 
  
(1,595) 
 
Foreign exchange risk 
100 
  
115 
 
Equity price risk 
306 
  
(77) 
 
Net amount reclassified to profit or loss: 
 
  
 
 
Ongoing hedges: 
 
  
 
 
Interest rate risk 
505 
  
277 
 
Foreign exchange risk 
(105) 
  
(119) 
 
Equity price risk 
(271) 
  
53 
 
De-designated hedges: 
 
  
 
 
Interest rate risk 
240 
  
(110) 
 
Net gain on hedge of net investment in 
foreign operations 
 
  
 
 
Foreign exchange denominated debt 
 
1,882  
 
(410) 
Forward foreign exchange contracts 
 
449  
 
(125) 
Foreign currency translation differences 
 
  
 
 
for foreign operations 
 
(4,308)  
 
813 
Reclassification of losses (gains) on 
foreign currency translation to income 
 
(7)  
 
(21) 
Reclassification of losses (gains) on net 
investment hedging activities to income 
 
(1)  
 
28 
Tax on movements on reserves during the 
period 
(582) 
(592)  
383 
126 
Balance at the end of the year 
$
566 $
2,055  $
(1,079) $
4,632 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
191 

Note 9
Premises and equipment 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2021 
 
Owned by the Bank (1) 
 
Right-of-use lease assets 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Land Buildings 
Computer 
equipment 
Furniture, 
fixtures 
and other 
equipment 
Leasehold 
improvements 
Work in 
process 
 
 Buildings Equipment 
Total 
Cost 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period $ 152 $
1,416 $
2,222 $
1,684 $
3,383 $
203  $
5,171 $
421 $14,652 
Additions 
1 
– 
28 
6 
94 
388  
379 
109 
1,005 
Transfers from work in process 
– 
13 
180 
47 
170 
(410)  
– 
– 
– 
Disposals 
(2) 
(19) 
(85) 
(21) 
(70) 
(1)  
(49) 
(36) 
(283) 
Foreign exchange translation 
(6) 
(20) 
(46) 
(25) 
(66) 
(5)  
(167) 
(1) 
(336) 
Other 
– 
29 
81 
(85) 
(17) 
(5)  
60 
– 
63 
Balance at end of period 
$ 145 $
1,419 $
2,380 $
1,606 $
3,494 $
170  $
5,394 $
493 $15,101 
Accumulated depreciation 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period $
– $
754 $
1,652 $
1,265 $
2,188 $
–  $
584 $
275 $ 6,718 
Depreciation 
– 
49 
245 
94 
222 
–  
578 
88 
1,276 
Disposals 
– 
(7) 
(83) 
(20) 
(56) 
–  
(5) 
(20) 
(191) 
Foreign exchange translation 
– 
(9) 
(35) 
(16) 
(35) 
–  
(24) 
(1) 
(120) 
Other 
– 
(12) 
59 
(63) 
10 
–  
– 
– 
(6) 
Balance at end of period 
$
– $
775 $
1,838 $
1,260 $
2,329 $
–  $
1,133 $
342 $ 7,677 
Net carrying amount at end of 
period 
$ 145 $
644 $
542 $
346 $
1,165 $
170  $
4,261 $
151 $ 7,424 
 
 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2020 
 
Owned by the Bank (1) 
 
Right-of-use lease assets 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Land 
Buildings 
Computer 
equipment 
Furniture, 
fixtures 
and other 
equipment 
Leasehold 
improvements 
Work in 
process  
Buildings 
Equipment 
Total 
Cost 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
$ 153 $
1,395 $
2,062 $
1,557 $
3,001 $
432  $
4,956 $
363 $ 13,919 
Additions 
– 
26 
82 
42 
14 
623  
281 
115 
1,183 
Transfers from work in process 
– 
9 
279 
93 
449 
(830)  
– 
– 
– 
Disposals 
(1) 
(4) 
(157) 
(42) 
(124) 
(2)  
(58) 
(57) 
(445) 
Foreign exchange translation 
1 
4 
7 
4 
10 
(2)  
38 
1 
63 
Other 
(1) 
(14) 
(51) 
30 
33 
(18)  
(46) 
(1) 
(68) 
Balance at end of period 
$ 152 $
1,416 $
2,222 $
1,684 $
3,383 $
203  $
5,171 $
421 $ 14,652 
Accumulated depreciation 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
– $
703 $
1,553 $
1,137 $
2,074 $
–  $
– $
205 $
5,672 
Depreciation 
– 
47 
267 
109 
224 
–  
600 
86 
1,333 
Disposals 
– 
(3) 
(155) 
(39) 
(112) 
–  
(12) 
(16) 
(337) 
Foreign exchange translation 
– 
1 
4 
3 
3 
–  
(2) 
– 
9 
Other 
– 
6 
(17) 
55 
(1) 
–  
(2) 
– 
41 
Balance at end of period 
$
– $
754 $
1,652 $
1,265 $
2,188 $
–  $
584 $
275 $
6,718 
Net carrying amount at end of 
period 
$ 152 $
662 $
570 $
419 $
1,195 $
203  $
4,587 $
146 $
7,934 
(1) 
As at October 31, 2021, we had total contractual commitments of $162 million to purchase premises and equipment (October 31, 2020 – $94 million). 
Lease payments 
Total lease payments for the year ended October 31, 2021 were $1,259 million, of which $613 million or 49% relates to variable 
payments and $646 million or 51% relates to fixed payments. Total lease payments for the year ended October 31, 2020 were 
$1,338 million, of which $654 million or 49% relates to variable payments and $684 million or 51% relates to fixed payments. 
Total variable lease payments not included in the measurement of lease liabilities were $603 million for the year ended 
October 31, 2021 (October 31, 2020 – $635 million). 
192
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Note 10
Goodwill and other intangible assets 
Goodwill 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2021 
(Millions of 
Canadian dollars) 
Canadian 
Banking 
Caribbean 
Banking 
Canadian 
Wealth 
Management 
Global Asset 
Management 
U.S. Wealth 
Management 
(including 
City National) 
International 
Wealth 
Management Insurance 
Investor & 
Treasury 
Services 
Capital 
Markets 
Total 
Balance at beginning of 
period 
$ 2,557 $
1,719 $
587 $
2,001 $
2,978 $
121 $
112 $
149 $1,078 $11,302 
Acquisitions 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Dispositions 
– 
(3) 
– 
– 
– 
(4) 
– 
– 
– 
(7) 
Currency translations 
– 
(116) 
(10) 
(37) 
(210) 
(2) 
– 
(1) 
(65) 
(441) 
Balance at end of period 
$ 2,557 $
1,600 $
577 $
1,964 $
2,768 $
115 $
112 $
148 $1,013 $10,854 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2020 
(Millions of 
Canadian dollars) 
Canadian 
Banking 
Caribbean 
Banking 
Canadian 
Wealth 
Management 
Global Asset 
Management 
U.S. Wealth 
Management 
(including 
City National) 
International 
Wealth 
Management Insurance 
Investor & 
Treasury 
Services 
Capital 
Markets 
Total 
Balance at beginning of 
period 
$
2,555 $
1,727 $
579 $
1,985 $
2,943 $
120 $
112 $
148 $ 1,067 $ 11,236 
Acquisitions 
2 
– 
6 
– 
1 
– 
– 
– 
– 
9 
Dispositions 
– 
(16) 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(16) 
Currency translations 
– 
8 
2 
16 
34 
1 
– 
1 
11 
73 
Balance at end of period 
$
2,557 $
1,719 $
587 $
2,001 $
2,978 $
121 $
112 $
149 $ 1,078 $ 11,302 
We perform our annual impairment test by comparing the carrying amount of each CGU to its recoverable amount. The 
recoverable amount of a CGU is represented by its VIU, except in circumstances where the carrying amount of a CGU exceeds its 
VIU. In such cases, the greater of the CGU’s FVLCD and its VIU is the recoverable amount. Our annual impairment test is 
performed as at August 1. 
In our 2021 and 2020 annual impairment tests, the recoverable amounts of our Caribbean Banking and International Wealth 
Management CGUs were based on their FVLCD. The recoverable amounts of all other CGUs tested were based on their VIU. 
Value in use 
We calculate VIU using a five-year discounted cash flow method. Future cash flows are based on financial plans agreed by 
management, estimated based on forecast results, business initiatives, capital required to support future cash flows and returns 
to shareholders. Key drivers of future cash flows include net interest margins and average interest-earning assets. The values 
assigned to these drivers over the forecast period are based on past experience, external and internal economic forecasts, and 
management’s expectations of the impact of economic conditions on our financial results. Beyond the initial cash flow projection 
period, cash flows are assumed to increase at a constant rate using a nominal long-term growth rate (terminal growth rate), with 
the exception of our U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) CGU where we applied a mid-term growth rate consistent 
with our growth expectations for this business, reverting to the terminal growth rate after 10 years. Terminal growth rates are 
based on the long-term steady state growth expectations in the countries within which the CGU operates. The discount rates 
used to determine the present value of each CGU’s projected future cash flows are based on the bank-wide cost of capital, 
adjusted for the risks to which each CGU is exposed. CGU-specific risks include: country risk, business/operational risk, 
geographic risk (including political risk, devaluation risk, and government regulation), currency risk, and price risk (including 
product pricing risk and inflation). 
The estimation of VIU involves significant judgment in the determination of inputs to the discounted cash flow model and is 
most sensitive to changes in future cash flows, discount rates and terminal growth rates applied to cash flows beyond the 
forecast period. The sensitivity of the VIU to key inputs and assumptions used was tested by recalculating the recoverable 
amount using reasonably possible changes to those parameters. As at August 1, 2021, no reasonably possible change in an 
individual key input or assumption, as described, would result in a CGU’s carrying amount exceeding its recoverable amount 
based on VIU. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
193 
 

Note 10
Goodwill and other intangible assets (continued) 
The terminal growth rates and pre-tax discount rates used in our discounted cash flow models are summarized below. 
 
As at
 
 
August 1, 2021 
 
August 1, 2020 
 
Discount 
rate (1) 
Terminal 
growth 
rate  
Discount 
rate (1) 
Terminal 
growth 
rate 
Group of cash generating units 
 
  
 
 
Canadian Banking 
9.4% 
3.0%  
9.5% 
3.0% 
Caribbean Banking 
10.9
 
3.5
  
11.4
 
3.7
 
Canadian Wealth Management 
10.5
 
3.0
  
10.4
 
3.0
 
Global Asset Management 
10.5
 
3.0
  
10.5
 
3.0
 
U.S. Wealth Management (including City National) 
11.1
 
3.0
  
10.7
 
3.0
 
International Wealth Management (2) 
n.m.
 
n.m.
  
n.m.
 
n.m.
 
Insurance 
10.2
 
3.0
  
10.2
 
3.0
 
Investor & Treasury Services 
9.9
 
3.0
  
10.2
 
3.0
 
Capital Markets 
11.8
 
3.0
  
12.0
 
3.0
 
(1) 
Pre-tax discount rates are determined implicitly based on post-tax discount rates. 
(2) 
The recoverable amount for our International Wealth Management CGU is determined using a multiples-based approach. 
n.m. not meaningful 
Fair value less costs of disposal – Caribbean Banking 
For our Caribbean Banking CGU, we calculated FVLCD using a discounted cash flow method that projects future cash flows over a 
5-year period. We also considered reasonably possible alternative scenarios, including market comparable transactions, which 
yielded valuations ranging from a material surplus to an immaterial deficit. Cash flows are based on management forecasts, 
adjusted to approximate the considerations of a prospective third-party buyer. Cash flows beyond the initial 5-year period are 
assumed to increase at a constant rate using a nominal long-term growth rate. Future cash flows, terminal growth rates, and 
discount rates are based on the same factors noted above. This fair value measurement is categorized as level 3 in the fair value 
hierarchy as certain significant inputs are not observable. We use significant judgment to determine inputs to the discounted 
cash flow model which are most sensitive to changes in future cash flows, discount rates and terminal growth rates applied to 
cash flows beyond the forecast period. The sensitivity of the FVLCD to key inputs and assumptions was tested by recalculating 
the recoverable amount using reasonably possible change to those parameters. 
With the improved economic environment in 2021, tempered by continued uncertainty related to COVID-19, the recoverable 
amount of our Caribbean Banking CGU has increased. As at August 1, 2021, the recoverable amount of our Caribbean Banking 
CGU, based on FVLCD, was 123% of its carrying amount (August 1, 2020 – the recoverable amount based on FVLCD approximated 
the carrying amount). In determining the recoverable amount, forecast future cash flows were discounted using a pre-tax rate of 
10.9% (August 1, 2020 – 11.4%), reflecting geographic inflation rate expectations, partially offset by a lower terminal growth rate of 
3.5% (August 1, 2020 – 3.7%), reflecting a long-term steady state growth rate for the CGU. A 50 bps change in the terminal growth 
rate would increase and decrease the recoverable amount by $339 million and $289 million, respectively. A 50 bps increase in the 
discount rate would decrease the recoverable amount by $360 million. A reduction in the forecasted cash flows of 10% per annum 
would reduce the recoverable amount by $469 million. Changes in these assumptions have been applied holding other individual 
factors constant. However, changes in one factor may be magnified or offset by related changes in other assumptions as impacts 
to the recoverable amount are highly interdependent and changes in assumptions may not have a linear effect on the 
recoverable amount of the CGU. In aggregate, the range of reasonably possible outcomes would not materially affect the 
recoverable amount of the CGU. 
194
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Other intangible assets 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Internally 
generated 
software 
Other 
software 
Core 
deposit 
intangibles 
Customer 
list and 
relationships 
In process 
software 
Total 
Gross carrying amount 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
7,676 
$
1,901 
$
1,586 
$
1,916 
$
1,241 
$
14,320 
Additions 
48 
15 
– 
– 
1,129 
1,192 
Acquisitions through business combinations 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Transfers 
1,022 
69 
– 
– 
(1,091) 
– 
Dispositions 
(66) 
(87) 
– 
(38) 
(8) 
(199) 
Impairment losses 
(157) 
– 
– 
– 
(9) 
(166) 
Currency translations 
(126) 
(60) 
(112) 
(41) 
(29) 
(368) 
Other changes 
(7) 
8 
– 
5 
3 
9 
Balance at end of period 
$
8,390 
$
1,846 
$
1,474 
$
1,842 
$
1,236 
$
14,788 
Accumulated amortization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
(5,884) 
$ (1,500) 
$
(793) 
$
(1,391) 
$
– 
$
(9,568) 
Amortization charge for the year 
(898) 
(138) 
(150) 
(101) 
– 
(1,287) 
Dispositions 
65 
86 
– 
38 
– 
189 
Impairment losses 
137 
– 
– 
– 
– 
137 
Currency translations 
88 
41 
58 
29 
– 
216 
Other changes 
9 
(13) 
– 
– 
– 
(4) 
Balance at end of period 
$
(6,483) 
$ (1,524) 
$
(885) 
$
(1,425) 
$
– 
$ (10,317) 
Net balance at end of period 
$
1,907 
$
322 
$
589 
$
417 
$
1,236 
$
4,471 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Internally 
generated 
software 
Other 
software 
Core 
deposit 
intangibles 
Customer 
list and 
relationships 
In process 
software 
Total 
Gross carrying amount 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
6,941 
$
1,684 
$
1,567 
$
1,773 
$
1,240 
$
13,205 
Additions 
54 
47 
– 
143 
1,157 
1,401 
Acquisitions through business combinations 
– 
6 
– 
10 
– 
16 
Transfers 
936 
193 
– 
– 
(1,129) 
– 
Dispositions 
(149) 
(13) 
– 
– 
(4) 
(166) 
Impairment losses 
(116) 
(4) 
– 
– 
(10) 
(130) 
Currency translations 
20 
7 
19 
13 
8 
67 
Other changes 
(10) 
(19) 
– 
(23) 
(21) 
(73) 
Balance at end of period 
$
7,676 
$
1,901 
$
1,586 
$
1,916 
$
1,241 
$
14,320 
Accumulated amortization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
$
(5,256) 
$ (1,357) 
$
(627) 
$
(1,291) 
$
– 
$
(8,531) 
Amortization charge for the year 
(855) 
(144) 
(160) 
(114) 
– 
(1,273) 
Dispositions 
147 
12 
– 
– 
– 
159 
Impairment losses 
88 
– 
– 
– 
– 
88 
Currency translations 
(14) 
(6) 
(6) 
(9) 
– 
(35) 
Other changes 
6 
(5) 
– 
23 
– 
24 
Balance at end of period 
$
(5,884) 
$ (1,500) 
$
(793) 
$
(1,391) 
$
– 
$
(9,568) 
Net balance at end of period 
$
1,792 
$
401 
$
793 
$
525 
$
1,241 
$
4,752 
Note 11
Joint ventures and associated companies 
The following table summarizes the carrying value of our interests in joint ventures and associated companies accounted for 
under the equity method as well as our share of the income of those entities. 
 
Joint ventures 
 
Associated companies 
 
As at and for the year ended  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020  
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Carrying amount 
$
223 
$
193  
$
431 
$
459 
Share of: 
 
  
 
 
Net income 
$
107 
$
87  
$
23 
$
(10) 
We do not have any joint ventures or associated companies that are individually material to our financial results. 
Certain of our subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates are subject to regulatory requirements of the jurisdictions in which 
they operate. When these subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates are subject to such requirements, they may be restricted 
from transferring to us our share of their assets in the form of cash dividends, loans or advances. As at October 31, 2021, 
restricted net assets of these subsidiaries, joint ventures and associates were $39 billion (October 31, 2020 – $38 billion). 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
195 

Note 12
Other assets 
 
As at  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Accounts receivable and prepaids 
$
5,056 
$
4,600 
Accrued interest receivable 
2,195 
2,362 
Cash collateral 
14,541 
18,119 
Commodity trading receivables 
6,996 
4,104 
Deferred income tax asset 
2,011 
2,579 
Employee benefit assets 
2,640 
143 
Insurance-related assets 
 
 
Collateral loans 
615 
801 
Policy loans 
87 
97 
Reinsurance assets 
1,032 
949 
Other 
62 
93 
Investments in joint ventures and associates 
654 
652 
Margin deposits 
11,441 
9,816 
Precious metals 
1,619 
2,371 
Receivable from brokers, dealers and clients 
3,395 
2,077 
Taxes receivable 
4,891 
5,487 
Other 
4,648 
4,671 
 
$ 61,883 
$ 58,921 
Note 13
Deposits 
 
As at
 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Demand (1) Notice (2) 
Term (3) 
Total  Demand (1) Notice (2) 
Term (3) 
Total 
Personal 
$ 207,493 $ 64,613 $
90,382 $
362,488  $
182,745 $ 61,761 $
98,546 $
343,052 
Business and government 
356,020 
20,800 
319,533 
696,353  
315,472 
16,585 
292,254 
624,311 
Bank 
12,549 
449 
28,992 
41,990  
12,502 
956 
31,064 
44,522 
 
$ 576,062 $ 85,862 $ 438,907 $ 1,100,831  $
510,719 $ 79,302 $ 421,864 $ 1,011,885 
Non-interest-bearing (4) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Canada 
$ 151,475 $
8,051 $
713 $
160,239  $
123,402 $
7,390 $
368 $
131,160 
United States 
54,021 
– 
– 
54,021  
43,831 
– 
– 
43,831 
Europe (5) 
632 
– 
– 
632  
654 
– 
– 
654 
Other International 
8,002 
– 
– 
8,002  
7,372 
– 
– 
7,372 
Interest-bearing (4) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Canada 
315,464 
19,857 
312,987 
648,308  
287,046 
19,036 
310,492 
616,574 
United States 
6,978 
57,260 
77,597 
141,835  
7,190 
52,046 
57,037 
116,273 
Europe (5) 
34,278 
693 
36,788 
71,759  
33,810 
830 
37,250 
71,890 
Other International 
5,212 
1 
10,822 
16,035  
7,414 
– 
16,717 
24,131 
 
$ 576,062 $ 85,862 $ 438,907 $ 1,100,831  $
510,719 $ 79,302 $ 421,864 $ 1,011,885 
(1) 
Demand deposits are deposits for which we do not have the right to require notice of withdrawal, which include both savings and chequing accounts. 
(2) 
Notice deposits are deposits for which we can legally require notice of withdrawal. These deposits are primarily savings accounts. 
(3) 
Term deposits are deposits payable on a fixed date, and include term deposits, guaranteed investment certificates and similar instruments. 
(4) 
The geographical splits of the deposits are based on the point of origin of the deposits and where the revenue is recognized. As at October 31, 2021, deposits denominated 
in U.S. dollars, British pounds, Euro and other foreign currencies were $399 billion, $35 billion, $43 billion and $27 billion, respectively (October 31, 2020 – $347 billion, 
$32 billion, $47 billion and $33 billion, respectively). 
(5) 
Europe includes the United Kingdom, Luxembourg, the Channel Islands, France and Italy. 
Contractual maturities of term deposits 
 
As at  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 (1) 
Within 1 year: 
 
 
less than 3 months 
$ 133,776 
$ 123,290 
3 to 6 months 
64,062 
65,782 
6 to 12 months 
83,871 
80,737 
1 to 2 years 
45,532 
34,400 
2 to 3 years 
29,204 
42,907 
3 to 4 years 
24,573 
21,136 
4 to 5 years 
25,329 
22,885 
Over 5 years 
32,560 
30,727 
 
$ 438,907 
$ 421,864 
Aggregate amount of term deposits in denominations of one hundred thousand dollars or more 
$ 416,000 
$ 388,000 
(1) 
Amounts previously presented were reclassified to reflect the contractual maturities of certain term deposits. 
196
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Average deposit balances and average rates of interest 
 
For the year ended 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts) 
Average 
balances 
Average 
rates 
 
Average 
balances 
Average 
rates 
Canada 
$
772,875 
0.61% 
 
$
725,021 
1.02% 
United States 
180,230 
0.13
 
 
144,011 
0.46
 
Europe 
77,217 
0.55
 
 
73,317 
0.76
 
Other International 
28,731 
0.33
 
 
28,283 
0.68
 
 
$ 1,059,053 
0.51% 
 
$
970,632 
0.90% 
Note 14
Insurance 
Risk management 
Insurance risk is the risk of fluctuations in the timing, frequency or severity of insured events, relative to our expectations at the 
time of underwriting. We do not have a high degree of concentration risk due to our geographic diversity and business mix. 
Concentration risk is not a major concern for the life and health insurance business as it does not have a material level of region-
specific characteristics. Reinsurance is also used for a majority of our Canadian insurance business to lower our risk profile and 
limit the liability on a single claim. We manage underwriting and pricing risk through the use of underwriting guidelines which 
detail the class, nature and type of business that may be accepted, pricing policies by product line and controls over policy 
wordings. The risk that claims are handled or paid inappropriately is mitigated by using a range of information technology (IT) 
system controls and manual processes conducted by experienced staff. These, together with a range of detailed policies and 
procedures, ensure that all claims are handled in a timely, appropriate and accurate manner. 
Reinsurance 
In the ordinary course of business, our insurance operations reinsure risks to other insurance and reinsurance companies in 
order to lower our risk profile, limit loss exposure to large risks, and provide additional capacity for future growth. These ceding 
reinsurance arrangements do not relieve our insurance subsidiaries from our direct obligations to the insured parties. We 
evaluate the financial condition of the reinsurers and monitor our concentrations of credit risks to minimize our exposure to 
losses from reinsurer insolvency. Reinsurance amounts (ceded premiums) included in Non-interest income are shown in the 
table below. 
Net premiums and claims 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Gross premiums 
$
5,090 $
4,515 
Premiums ceded to reinsurers 
(250) 
(249) 
Net premiums 
$
4,840 $
4,266 
Gross claims and benefits (1) 
$
3,834 $
3,700 
Reinsurers’ share of claims and benefits 
(287) 
(316) 
Net claims 
$
3,547 $
3,384 
(1) 
Includes the change in fair value of investments backing our policyholder liabilities. 
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities 
All actuarial assumptions are set in conjunction with Canadian Institute of Actuaries Standards of Practice and OSFI 
requirements. The assumptions that have the greatest effect on the measurement of insurance liabilities, the processes used to 
determine them and the assumptions used as at October 31, 2021 are as follows: 
Mortality and morbidity – Mortality estimates are based on standard industry insured mortality tables, adjusted where 
appropriate to reflect our own experience. Morbidity assumptions are made with respect to the rates of claim incidence and 
claim termination for health insurance policies and are based on a combination of industry and our own experience. 
Future investment yield – Assumptions are based on the current yield rate, a reinvestment assumption and an allowance for 
future credit losses for each line of business, and are developed using interest rate scenario testing, including prescribed 
scenarios for determination of minimum liabilities as set out in the actuarial standards. 
Policyholder behaviour – Under certain policies, the policyholder has a contractual right to change benefits and premiums, as 
well as convert policies to permanent forms of insurance. All policyholders have the right to terminate their policies through 
lapse. Lapses represent the termination of policies due to non-payment of premiums. Lapse assumptions are primarily based on 
our recent experience adjusted for emerging industry experience where applicable. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
197 

Note 14
Insurance (continued) 
Significant insurance assumptions 
 
As at  
 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Life Insurance 
 
 
Canadian Insurance 
 
 
Mortality rates (1) 
0.12% 
0.11% 
Morbidity rates (2) 
1.78
 
1.81
 
Future reinvestment yield (3) 
3.76
 
3.82
 
Lapse rates (4) 
0.50
 
0.50
 
International Insurance 
 
 
Mortality rates (1) 
0.79
 
0.66
 
Future reinvestment yield (3) 
2.90
 
3.05
 
(1) 
Average annual death rate for the largest portfolio of insured policies. 
(2) 
Average net termination rate for the individual and group disability insurance portfolio. 
(3) 
Ultimate reinvestment rate of the insurance operations. 
(4) 
Ultimate policy termination rate (lapse rate) for the largest permanent life insurance portfolio that relies on a higher termination rate to maintain its profitability (lapse-
supported policies). 
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities 
The following table summarizes our gross and reinsurers’ share of insurance liabilities at the end of the year. 
 
As at  
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Gross 
Ceded 
Net  
Gross 
Ceded 
Net 
Life insurance policyholder liabilities 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Life, health and annuity 
$ 12,775 $
861 $ 11,914  $ 12,089 $
752 $ 11,337 
Investment contracts (1) 
42 
– 
42  
34 
– 
34 
 
$ 12,817 $
861 $ 11,956  $ 12,123 $
752 $ 11,371 
Non-life insurance policyholder liabilities 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Unearned premium provision (1) 
$
6 $
– $
6  $
7 $
– $
7 
Unpaid claims provision 
41 
3 
38  
126 
31 
95 
 
$
47 $
3 $
44  $
133 $
31 $
102 
 
$ 12,864 $
864 $ 12,000  $ 12,256 $
783 $ 11,473 
(1) 
Insurance liabilities for investment contracts and unearned premium provision are reported in Other liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Reconciliation of life insurance policyholder liabilities 
 
For the year ended 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Gross 
Ceded 
Net  
Gross 
Ceded 
Net 
Balances at beginning of period 
$ 12,123 $
752 $ 11,371  $ 11,377 $
601 $ 10,776 
New and in-force policies (1) 
775 
108 
667  
735 
141 
594 
Changes in assumption and methodology 
(89) 
1 
(90)  
15 
10 
5 
Net change in investment contracts 
8 
– 
8  
(4) 
– 
(4) 
Balances at end of period 
$ 12,817 $
861 $ 11,956  $ 12,123 $
752 $ 11,371 
(1) 
Includes the change in fair value of investments backing our policyholder liabilities. 
The net increase in life insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities over the prior year was attributable to business growth and 
market movements on assets backing life and health liabilities, partially offset by asset and liability matching activities. During 
the year, we reviewed all key actuarial methods and assumptions which are used in determining the policy benefit liabilities 
resulting in a $90 million net decrease to insurance liabilities comprised of: (i) a decrease of $94 million for revised actuarial 
reserves on interest rate risk; (ii) a decrease of $5 million due to reinsurance contract renegotiations; (iii) an increase of 
$34 million arising from insurance risk related assumption updates largely due to mortality, morbidity, and expense assumptions; 
and (iv) a decrease of $25 million due to changes to valuation models and related data. 
198
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Sensitivity analysis 
The following table presents the sensitivity of the level of insurance policyholder liabilities disclosed in this note to reasonably 
possible changes in the actuarial assumptions used to calculate them. The percentage change in each variable is applied to a 
range of existing actuarial modelling assumptions to derive the possible impact on net income. The analyses are performed 
where a single assumption is changed while holding other assumptions constant, which is unlikely to occur in practice. 
 
 
Net income impact 
for the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts) 
Change in 
variable 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Increase in market interest rates (1) 
1% $
(14) $
5 
Decrease in market interest rates (1) 
1
 
17 
(11) 
Increase in equity market values (2) 
10
 
8 
8 
Decrease in equity market values (2) 
10
 
(10) 
(22) 
Increase in maintenance expenses (3) 
5
 
(37) 
(37) 
Life Insurance (3) 
 
 
 
Adverse change in annuitant mortality rates 
2
 
(287) 
(278) 
Adverse change in assurance mortality rates 
2
 
(67) 
(70) 
Adverse change in morbidity rates 
5
 
(213) 
(219) 
Adverse change in lapse rates 
10
 
(253) 
(252) 
(1) 
Sensitivities for market interest rates include the expected current period earnings impact of a 100 basis points shift in the yield curve by increasing the current 
reinvestment rates while holding the assumed ultimate rates constant. The sensitivity consists of both the impact on assumed reinvestment rates in the actuarial 
liabilities and any changes in fair value of assets and liabilities from the yield curve shift. 
(2) 
Sensitivities to changes in equity market values are composed of the expected current period earnings impact from differences in the changes in fair value of the equity 
asset holdings and the partially offsetting impact on the actuarial liabilities. 
(3) 
Sensitivities to changes in maintenance expenses and life insurance actuarial assumptions include the expected current period earnings impact from recognition of 
increased liabilities due to an adverse change in the given assumption over the lifetime of all in-force policies. 
Note 15
Segregated funds 
We offer certain individual variable insurance contracts that allow policyholders to invest in segregated funds. The investment 
returns on these funds are passed directly to the policyholders. Amounts invested are at the policyholders’ risk, except where the 
policyholders have selected options providing maturity and death benefit guarantees. A liability for the guarantees is recorded in 
Insurance claims and policy benefit liabilities. 
Segregated funds net assets are recorded at fair value. All of our segregated funds net assets are categorized as Level 1 in 
the fair value hierarchy. The fair value of the segregated funds liabilities is equal to the fair value of the segregated funds net 
assets. Segregated funds net assets and segregated funds liabilities are presented on separate lines on the Consolidated 
Balance Sheets. The following tables present the composition of net assets and the changes in net assets for the year. 
Segregated funds net assets 
 
As at 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Cash 
$
40 $
35 
Investment in mutual funds 
2,625 
1,886 
Other assets (liabilities), net 
1 
1 
 
$
2,666 $
1,922 
Changes in net assets 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Net assets at beginning of period 
$
1,922 $
1,663 
Additions (deductions): 
 
 
Deposits from policyholders 
975 
724 
Net realized and unrealized gains (losses) 
381 
12 
Interest and dividends 
51 
49 
Payment to policyholders 
(604) 
(479) 
Management and administrative fees 
(59) 
(47) 
Net assets at end of period 
$
2,666 $
1,922 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
199 

Note 16
Employee benefits – Pension and other post-employment benefits 
Plan characteristics 
We sponsor a number of programs that provide pension and post-employment benefits to eligible employees. The majority of 
beneficiaries of the pension plans are located in Canada and other beneficiaries of the pension plans are primarily located in the 
U.K. and the Caribbean. The pension arrangements including investment, plan benefits and funding decisions are governed by 
local pension committees or trustees, who are legally segregated from the Bank, or management. Significant plan changes 
require the approval of the Board of Directors.  
Our defined benefit pension plans provide pension benefits based on years of service, contributions and average earnings at 
retirement. Our primary defined benefit pension plans are closed to new members. New employees are generally eligible to join 
defined contribution pension plans. The specific features of these plans vary by location. We also provide supplemental non-
registered (non-qualified) pension plans for certain executives and senior management that are typically unfunded or partially 
funded. 
Our defined contribution pension plans provide pension benefits based on accumulated employee and Bank contributions. 
The Bank contributions are based on a percentage of an employee’s annual earnings and a portion of the Bank contribution may 
be dependent on the amount being contributed by the employee and their years of service. 
Our primary other post-employment benefit plans provide health, dental, disability and life insurance coverage and cover a 
number of current and retired employees who are mainly located in Canada. These plans are unfunded unless required by 
legislation. 
We measure our benefit obligations and pension assets as at October 31 each year. All plans are valued using the projected 
unit-credit method. We fund our registered defined benefit pension plans in accordance with actuarially determined amounts 
required to satisfy employee benefit obligations under current pension regulations. For our principal pension plan, the most 
recent funding actuarial valuation was completed on January 1, 2021, and the next valuation will be completed on January 1, 2022. 
For the year ended October 31, 2021, total contributions to our pension plans (defined benefit and defined contribution plans) 
and other post-employment benefit plans were $456 million and $75 million (October 31, 2020 – $1,024 million and $63 million), 
respectively. For 2022, total contributions to our pension plans and other post-employment benefit plans are expected to be 
$520 million and $84 million, respectively. 
Risks 
By their design, the defined benefit pension and other post-employment benefit plans expose the Bank to various risks such as 
investment performance, reductions in discount rates used to value the obligations, increased longevity of plan members, future 
inflation levels impacting future salary increases as well as future increases in healthcare costs. These risks will reduce over time 
due to the membership closure of our primary defined benefit pension plans and migration to defined contribution pension plans. 
The following table presents the financial position related to all of our material pension and other post-employment benefit plans 
worldwide, including executive retirement arrangements. 
 
As at  
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Defined benefit 
pension plans 
Other post-
employment 
benefit plans  
Defined benefit 
pension plans 
Other post-
employment 
benefit plans 
Canada 
 
  
 
 
Fair value of plan assets 
$
16,698 
$
–  $
15,044 
$
– 
Present value of defined benefit obligation 
14,403 
1,703  
15,408 
1,863 
Net surplus (deficit) 
$
2,295 
$
(1,703)  $
(364) $
(1,863) 
International 
 
  
 
 
Fair value of plan assets 
$
1,005 
$
–  $
980 
$
– 
Present value of defined benefit obligation 
912 
77  
943 
90 
Net surplus (deficit) 
$
93 
$
(77)  $
37 
$
(90) 
Total 
 
  
 
 
Fair value of plan assets 
$
17,703 
$
–  $
16,024 
$
– 
Present value of defined benefit obligation 
15,315 
1,780  
16,351 
1,953 
Total net surplus (deficit) 
$
2,388 
$
(1,780)  $
(327) $
(1,953) 
Effect of asset ceiling 
(6) 
–  
(1) 
– 
Total net surplus (deficit), net of effect of asset ceiling 
$
2,382 
$
(1,780)  $
(328) $
(1,953) 
Amounts recognized in our Consolidated Balance Sheets 
 
  
 
 
Employee benefit assets 
$
2,640 
$
–  $
143 
$
– 
Employee benefit liabilities 
(258) 
(1,780)  
(471) 
(1,953) 
Total net surplus (deficit), net of effect of asset ceiling 
$
2,382 
$
(1,780)  $
(328) $
(1,953) 
200
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

The following table presents an analysis of the movement in the financial position related to all of our material pension and other 
post-employment benefit plans worldwide, including executive retirement arrangements. 
 
As at or for the year ended 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Defined benefit 
pension plans (1) 
Other post-
employment 
benefit plans  
Defined benefit 
pension plans (1) 
Other post-
employment 
benefit plans 
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of period 
$
16,024 
$
–  $
14,785 
$
1 
Interest income 
432 
–  
447 
– 
Remeasurements 
 
  
 
 
Return on plan assets (excluding interest income) 
1,614 
–  
793 
– 
Change in foreign currency exchange rate 
(21) 
–  
17 
– 
Contributions – Employer 
221 
75  
798 
63 
Contributions – Plan participant 
46 
19  
48 
19 
Payments 
(594) 
(94)  
(623) 
(83) 
Payments – amount paid in respect of settlements 
(2) 
–  
(223) 
– 
Business combinations/Disposals 
(4) 
  
 
 
Other 
(13) 
–  
(18) 
– 
Fair value of plan assets at end of period 
$
17,703 
$
–  $
16,024 
$
– 
Benefit obligation at beginning of period 
$
16,351 
$
1,953  $
15,517 
$
1,820 
Current service costs 
359 
46  
367 
46 
Past service costs 
– 
(1)  
– 
(12) 
Gains and losses on settlements 
2 
–  
(5) 
– 
Interest expense 
439 
57  
462 
59 
Remeasurements 
 
  
 
 
Actuarial losses (gains) from demographic 
assumptions 
– 
(6)  
– 
(5) 
Actuarial losses (gains) from financial assumptions 
(1,253) 
(184)  
791 
68 
Actuarial losses (gains) from experience adjustments 
(5) 
(2)  
2 
38 
Change in foreign currency exchange rate 
(24) 
(7)  
15 
3 
Contributions – Plan participant 
46 
19  
48 
19 
Payments 
(594) 
(94)  
(623) 
(83) 
Payments – amount paid in respect of settlements 
(2) 
–  
(223) 
– 
Business combinations/Disposals 
(4) 
(1)  
– 
– 
Benefit obligation at end of period 
$
15,315 
$
1,780  $
16,351 
$
1,953 
Unfunded obligation 
$
26 
$
1,633  $
30 
$
1,792 
Wholly or partly funded obligation 
15,289 
147  
16,321 
161 
Total benefit obligation 
$
15,315 
$
1,780  $
16,351 
$
1,953 
(1) 
For pension plans with funding deficits, the benefit obligations and fair value of plan assets as at October 31, 2021 were $413 million and $155 million, respectively 
(October 31, 2020 – $15,054 million and $14,583 million, respectively). 
Pension and other post-employment benefit expense 
The following table presents the composition of our pension and other post-employment benefit expense related to our material 
pension and other post-employment benefit plans worldwide. 
 
For the year ended 
 
Pension plans 
 
Other post-employment 
benefit plans 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020  
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Current service costs 
$
359 
$
367  
$
46 
$
46 
Past service costs 
– 
–  
(1) 
(12) 
Gains and losses on settlements 
2 
(5)  
– 
– 
Net interest expense (income) 
7 
15  
57 
59 
Remeasurements of other long-term benefits 
– 
–  
(12) 
13 
Administrative expense 
13 
18  
– 
– 
Defined benefit pension expense 
$
381 
$
395  
$
90 
$
106 
Defined contribution pension expense 
235 
226  
– 
– 
 
$
616 
$
621  
$
90 
$
106 
Service costs for the year ended October 31, 2021 totalled $356 million (October 31, 2020 – $363 million) for pension plans in 
Canada and $3 million (October 31, 2020 – $4 million) for International plans. Net interest expense (income) for the year ended 
October 31, 2021 totalled $7 million (October 31, 2020 – $14 million) for pension plans in Canada and $nil (October 31, 2020 – 
$1 million) for International plans. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
201 

Note 16
Employee benefits – Pension and other post-employment benefits (continued) 
Pension and other post-employment benefit remeasurements 
The following table presents the composition of our remeasurements recorded in OCI related to our material pension and other 
post-employment benefit plans worldwide. 
 
For the year ended 
 
Defined benefit pension 
plans 
 
Other post-employment 
benefit plans 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020  
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Actuarial (gains) losses: 
 
  
 
 
Changes in demographic assumptions 
$
– 
$
–  
$
(6) 
$
(14) 
Changes in financial assumptions 
(1,253) 
791  
(177) 
62 
Experience adjustments 
(5) 
2  
3 
40 
Return on plan assets (excluding interest based on discount rate) 
(1,614) 
(793)  
– 
– 
Change in asset ceiling (excluding interest income) 
5 
–  
– 
– 
 
$ (2,867) 
$
–  
$
(180) 
$
88 
Remeasurements recorded in OCI for the year ended October 31, 2021 were gains of $2,819 million (October 31, 2020 – gains of $7 
million) for pension plans in Canada and gains of $48 million (October 31, 2020 – losses of $7 million) for International plans. 
Investment policy and strategies 
Defined benefit pension plan assets are invested prudently in order to meet our longer-term pension obligations. The pension 
plans’ investment strategy is to hold a diversified mix of investments by asset class and geographic location in order to reduce 
investment-specific risk to the funded status while maximizing the expected returns to meet pension obligations. Investment of 
the plan’s assets follows an asset/liability framework as investment is conducted with careful consideration of the pension 
obligation’s sensitivity to interest rates and credit spreads which are key risk factors impacting the obligation’s value. Factors 
taken into consideration in developing our asset mix include but are not limited to the following: 
•
the nature of the underlying benefit obligations, including the duration and term profile of the liabilities; 
•
the member demographics, including expectations for normal retirements, terminations, and deaths; 
•
the financial position of the pension plans; 
•
the diversification benefits obtained by the inclusion of multiple asset classes; and 
•
expected asset returns, including asset and liability correlations, along with liquidity requirements of the plan. 
To implement our asset mix policy, we may invest in debt securities, equity securities, and alternative investments. Our holdings 
in certain investments, including common shares, debt securities rated lower than BBB and residential and commercial 
mortgages, cannot exceed a defined percentage of the market value of our defined benefit pension plan assets. We may use 
derivative instruments as either a synthetic investment to more efficiently replicate the performance of an underlying security, or 
as a hedge against financial risks within the plan. To manage our credit risk exposure, where derivative instruments are not 
centrally cleared, counterparties are required to meet minimum credit ratings and enter into collateral agreements. 
Our defined benefit pension plan assets are primarily comprised of debt and equity securities and alternative investments. 
Our equity securities generally have unadjusted quoted market prices in an active market (Level 1) and our debt securities 
generally have quoted market prices for similar assets in an active market (Level 2). Alternative investments and other includes 
cash, hedge funds, and private fund investments including infrastructure equity, real estate leases and private debt and equity. In 
the case of private fund investments, no quoted market prices are usually available (Level 2 or Level 3). These fund assets are 
either valued by an independent valuator or priced using observable market inputs. 
During the year ended October 31, 2021, the management of defined benefit pension investments continued to focus on an 
increased allocation to risk reducing investments and strategies, improving diversification, while striving to maintain expected 
investment return. Over time, an increasing allocation to debt securities and debt securities sold under repurchase agreements are 
being used to reduce asset/liability duration mismatch and hence variability of the plan’s funded status due to interest rate 
movement. Longer maturity debt securities, given their price sensitivity to movements in interest rates, are considered to be a good 
economic hedge to risk associated with the plan’s liabilities, which are discounted using predominantly long maturity bond interest 
rates as inputs. 
Asset allocation of defined benefit pension plans (1), (2) 
 
As at  
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentages) 
Fair value 
Percentage 
of total 
plan assets 
Quoted 
in active 
market (3)  
Fair value 
Percentage 
of total 
plan assets 
Quoted 
in active 
market (3) 
Equity securities 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Domestic 
$
1,879 
11% 
100%  
$
1,493 
9% 
100% 
Foreign 
4,202 
24 
100 
 
3,859 
24 
100 
Debt securities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Domestic government bonds (4) 
3,766 
21 
– 
 
3,259 
20 
–  
Foreign government bonds 
71 
– 
– 
 
81 
1 
–  
Corporate and other bonds 
3,844 
22 
– 
 
3,701 
23 
–  
Alternative investments and other 
3,941 
22 
12 
 
3,631 
23 
13 
 
$ 17,703 
100% 
37%  
$
16,024 
100% 
36% 
(1) 
The asset allocation is based on the underlying investments held directly and indirectly through the funds as this is how we manage our investment policy and strategies. 
(2) 
Represents the total plan assets held in our Canadian and International pension plans. 
(3) 
If our assessment of whether or not an asset was quoted in an active market was based on direct investments, 41% of our total plan assets would be classified as quoted 
in an active market (October 31, 2020 – 38%). 
(4) 
Amounts are net of securities sold under repurchase agreements. 
202
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

As at October 31, 2021, the plan assets include 1 million (October 31, 2020 – 1 million) of our common shares with a fair value 
of $128 million (October 31, 2020 – $96 million) and $29 million (October 31, 2020 – $32 million) of our debt securities. For the year 
ended October 31, 2021, dividends received on our common shares held in the plan assets were $4 million (October 31, 2020 – 
$4 million). 
Maturity profile 
The following table presents the maturity profile of our defined benefit pension plan obligation. 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except participants and years) 
As at October 31, 2021 
Canada 
International 
Total 
Number of plan participants 
67,580 
5,321 
72,901 
Actual benefit payments 2021 
$
564 
$
32 
$
596 
Benefits expected to be paid 2022 
659 
34 
693 
Benefits expected to be paid 2023 
679 
34 
713 
Benefits expected to be paid 2024 
700 
35 
735 
Benefits expected to be paid 2025 
720 
35 
755 
Benefits expected to be paid 2026 
738 
35 
773 
Benefits expected to be paid 2027-2031 
3,914 
182 
4,096 
Weighted average duration of defined benefit payments 
15.0 years 
20.8 years 
15.3 years 
Significant assumptions 
Our methodologies to determine significant assumptions used in calculating the defined benefit pension and other post-
employment benefit expense are as follows: 
Discount rate 
For the Canadian pension and other post-employment benefit plans, all future expected benefit payments at each measurement 
date are discounted at spot rates from a derived Canadian AA corporate bond yield curve. The derived curve is based on actual 
short and mid-maturity corporate AA rates and extrapolated longer term rates. The extrapolated corporate AA rates are derived 
from observed corporate A, corporate AA and provincial AA yields. For the International pension and other post-employment 
benefit plans, all future expected benefit payments at each measurement date are discounted at spot rates from a local AA 
corporate bond yield curve. Spot rates beyond 30 years are set to equal the 30-year spot rate. The discount rate is the equivalent 
single rate that produces the same discounted value as that determined using the entire discount curve. This valuation 
methodology does not rely on assumptions regarding reinvestment returns. 
Rate of increase in future compensation 
The assumptions for increases in future compensation are developed separately for each plan, where relevant. Each assumption 
is set based on the price inflation assumption and compensation policies in each market, as well as relevant local statutory and 
plan-specific requirements. 
Healthcare cost trend rates 
Healthcare cost calculations are based on both short and long-term trend assumptions established using the plan’s recent 
experience as well as market expectations. 
Weighted average assumptions to determine benefit obligation 
 
As at
 
 
Defined benefit pension 
plans 
 
Other post-employment 
benefit plans 
 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020  
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Discount rate 
3.3% 
2.7%  
3.6% 
3.0% 
Rate of increase in future compensation 
3.0% 
3.3%  
n.a. 
n.a. 
Healthcare cost trend rates (1) 
 
  
 
 
– Medical 
n.a. 
n.a.  
3.4% 
3.5% 
– Dental 
n.a. 
n.a.  
3.1% 
3.1% 
(1) 
For our other post-employment benefit plans, the assumed trend rates used to measure the expected benefit costs of the defined benefit obligations are also the 
ultimate trend rates. 
n.a. 
not applicable 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
203 

Note 16
Employee benefits – Pension and other post-employment benefits (continued) 
Mortality assumptions 
Mortality assumptions are significant in measuring our obligations under the defined benefit pension plans. These assumptions 
have been set based on country specific statistics. Future longevity improvements have been considered and included where 
appropriate. The following table summarizes the mortality assumptions used for material plans. 
 
As at  
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
 
Life expectancy at 65 for a member currently at  
Life expectancy at 65 for a member currently at 
 
Age 65 
 
Age 45 
 
Age 65 
 
Age 45 
(In years) 
Male 
Female  
Male 
Female  
Male 
Female  
Male 
Female 
Country 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Canada 
23.8 
24.2  
24.8 
25.1  
23.8 
24.1  
24.7 
25.1 
United Kingdom 
23.6 
25.4  
25.3 
27.2  
23.5 
25.3  
25.2 
27.1 
Sensitivity analysis 
Assumptions adopted can have a significant effect on the value of the obligations for defined benefit pension and other post-
employment benefit plans and are based on historical experience and market inputs. The increase (decrease) in obligation in the 
following table has been determined for key assumptions assuming all other assumptions are held constant. In practice, this is 
unlikely to occur, as changes in some of the assumptions may be correlated. The following table presents the sensitivity analysis 
of key assumptions for 2021. 
 
Increase (decrease) 
in obligation 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Defined benefit 
pension plans 
Other post- 
employment 
benefit plans 
Discount rate 
 
 
Impact of 100 bps increase in discount rate 
$
(2,113) 
$
(223) 
Impact of 100 bps decrease in discount rate 
2,625 
282 
Rate of increase in future compensation 
 
 
Impact of 50 bps increase in rate of increase in future compensation 
56 
– 
Impact of 50 bps decrease in rate of increase in future compensation 
(62) 
– 
Mortality rate 
 
 
Impact of an increase in longevity by one additional year 
444 
31 
Healthcare cost trend rate 
 
 
Impact of 100 bps increase in healthcare cost trend rate 
n.a. 
64 
Impact of 100 bps decrease in healthcare cost trend rate 
n.a. 
(54) 
n.a. 
not applicable 
Note 17
Other liabilities 
 
As at 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Accounts payable and accrued expenses 
$
1,867 $
1,500 
Accrued interest payable 
2,178 
2,855 
Cash collateral 
16,712 
19,433 
Commodity liabilities 
7,916 
8,354 
Deferred income 
3,518 
2,945 
Deferred income taxes 
74 
52 
Dividends payable 
1,622 
1,611 
Employee benefit liabilities 
2,038 
2,424 
Insurance related liabilities 
366 
341 
Lease liabilities 
5,077 
5,357 
Negotiable instruments 
1,774 
1,676 
Payable to brokers, dealers and clients 
6,461 
5,108 
Payroll and related compensation 
9,340 
7,476 
Precious metals certificates 
613 
623 
Provisions 
601 
618 
Taxes payable 
3,403 
2,209 
Other 
6,741 
7,249 
 
$
70,301 $
69,831 
204
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Note 18
Subordinated debentures 
The debentures are unsecured obligations and are subordinated in right of payment to the claims of depositors and certain other 
creditors. The amounts presented below are net of our own holdings in these debentures, and include the impact of fair value 
hedges used for managing interest rate risk. 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage and foreign currency) 
 
Interest 
rate 
Denominated in 
foreign currency 
(millions) 
As at 
Maturity 
Earliest par value 
redemption date 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
July 15, 2022 
 
5.38% 
US$150 
$
188 $
205 
June 8, 2023 
 
9.30% 
 
110 
110 
January 20, 2026 (1), (2) 
January 20, 2021 
3.31% 
 
– 
1,501 
January 27, 2026 (2) 
 
4.65% 
US$1,500 
1,916 
2,148 
September 29, 2026 (2), (3) 
September 29, 2021 
3.45% 
 
– 
1,017 
November 1, 2027 
November 1, 2022 
4.75% 
TT$300 
55 
59 
July 25, 2029 (2) 
July 25, 2024 
2.74% (4) 
 
1,499 
1,559 
December 23, 2029 (2) 
December 23, 2024 
2.88% (5) 
 
1,489 
1,578 
June 30, 2030 (2) 
June 30, 2025 
2.09% (6) 
 
1,250 
1,247 
November 3, 2031 (2) 
November 3, 2026 
2.14% (7) 
 
1,717 
– 
January 28, 2033 (2) 
January 28, 2028 
1.67% (8) 
 
943 
– 
October 1, 2083 
Any interest payment date 
(9) 
 
224 
224 
June 29, 2085 
Any interest payment date 
(10) 
US$174 
215 
231 
 
 
 
 
$
9,606 $
9,879 
Deferred financing costs 
 
 
 
(13) 
(12) 
 
 
 
 
$
9,593 $
9,867 
The terms and conditions of the debentures are as follows: 
(1) 
On January 20, 2021, we redeemed all $1,500 million of our outstanding non-viability contingency capital (NVCC) 3.31% subordinated debentures due on January 20, 2026 
for 100% of their principal amount plus interest accrued to, but excluding, the redemption date. 
(2) 
The notes include NVCC provisions, necessary for the notes to qualify as Tier 2 regulatory capital under Basel III. NVCC provisions require the conversion of the 
instrument into a variable number of common shares in the event that OSFI deems the Bank non-viable or a federal or provincial government in Canada publicly 
announces that the Bank has accepted or agreed to accept a capital injection. In such an event, each note is convertible into common shares pursuant to an automatic 
conversion formula with a multiplier of 1.5 and a conversion price based on the greater of: (i) a floor price of $5.00 and (ii) the current market price of our common shares 
based on the volume weighted average trading price of our common shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange. The number of shares issued is determined by dividing the 
par value of the note (including accrued and unpaid interest on such note) by the conversion price and then times the multiplier. 
(3) 
On September 29, 2021, we redeemed all $1,000 million of our issued and outstanding NVCC 3.45% subordinated debentures due on September 29, 2026 for 100% of their 
principal amount plus interest accrued to, but excluding, the redemption date. 
(4) 
Interest at stated interest rate until earliest par value redemption date, and thereafter at a rate of 0.98% above the 3-month CDOR. 
(5) 
Interest at stated interest rate until earliest par value redemption date, and thereafter at a rate of 0.89% above the 3-month CDOR. 
(6) 
Interest at stated interest rate until earliest par value redemption date, and thereafter at a rate of 1.31% above the 3-month CDOR. 
(7) 
Interest at stated interest rate until earliest par value redemption date, and thereafter at a rate of 0.61% above the 3-month CDOR. 
(8) 
Interest at stated interest rate until earliest par value redemption date, and thereafter at a rate of 0.55% above the 3-month CDOR. 
(9) 
Interest at a rate of 0.40% above the 30-day Bankers’ Acceptance rate. 
(10) 
Interest at a rate of 0.25% above the U.S. dollar 3-month London Interbank Mean Rate (LIMEAN). In the event of a reduction of the annual dividend we declare on our 
common shares, the interest payable on the debentures is reduced pro rata to the dividend reduction and the interest reduction is payable with the proceeds from the 
sale of newly issued common shares. 
All redemptions, cancellations and exchanges of subordinated debentures are subject to the consent and approval of OSFI, 
except for the debentures maturing July 15, 2022. 
Maturity schedule 
The aggregate maturities of subordinated debentures, based on the maturity dates under the terms of issue, are as follows: 
 
As at 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
Within 1 year 
$
188 
1 to 5 years 
2,026 
5 to 10 years 
4,293 
Thereafter 
3,099 
 
$
9,606 
Note 19
 Equity 
Share capital 
Authorized share capital 
Preferred – An unlimited number of First Preferred Shares and Second Preferred Shares without nominal or par value, issuable in 
series; the aggregate consideration for which all the First Preferred Shares and all the Second Preferred Shares that may be 
issued may not exceed $20 billion and $5 billion, respectively. 
Common – An unlimited number of shares without nominal or par value may be issued. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
205 

Note 19
 Equity (continued) 
Outstanding share capital 
The following table details our common and preferred shares and other equity instruments outstanding. 
 
As at and for the year ended 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except the number 
of shares and as otherwise noted) 
Number of 
shares 
(thousands) 
Amount 
Dividends 
declared 
per share  
Number of 
shares 
(thousands) 
Amount 
Dividends 
declared 
per share 
Common shares issued 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period 
1,423,861 
$ 17,628 
  
1,430,678 
$ 17,645 
 
Issued in connection with share-based 
compensation plans (1) 
1,326 
100 
  
1,043 
80 
 
Purchased for cancellation (2) 
–  
–  
  
(7,860) 
(97) 
 
Balance at end of period 
1,425,187 
$ 17,728 
$
4.32  
1,423,861 
$ 17,628 
$
4.29 
Treasury – common shares 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period (3) 
(1,388) $
(129) 
  
(582) $
(58) 
 
Purchases 
(37,603) 
(4,060) 
  
(58,775) 
(4,739) 
 
Sales 
38,329 
4,116 
  
57,969 
4,668 
 
Balance at end of period (3) 
(662) $
(73) 
  
(1,388) $
(129) 
 
Common shares outstanding 
1,424,525 
$ 17,655 
  
1,422,473 
$ 17,499 
 
Preferred shares and other equity 
instruments issued 
 
 
  
 
 
 
First preferred (4) 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Non-cumulative, fixed rate 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Series BH 
6,000 
$
150 
$
1.23  
6,000 
$
150 
$
1.23 
Series BI 
6,000 
150 
1.23  
6,000 
150 
1.23 
Series BJ 
6,000 
150 
1.31  
6,000 
150 
1.31 
Non-cumulative, 5-Year Rate Reset 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Series AZ 
20,000 
500 
0.93  
20,000 
500 
0.93 
Series BB 
20,000 
500 
0.91  
20,000 
500 
0.91 
Series BD 
24,000 
600 
0.80  
24,000 
600 
0.85 
Series BF 
12,000 
300 
0.75  
12,000 
300 
0.90 
Series BK (5) 
–  
–  
0.69  
29,000 
725 
1.38 
Series BM (6) 
–  
–  
1.03  
30,000 
750 
1.38 
Series BO 
14,000 
350 
1.20  
14,000 
350 
1.20 
Non-cumulative, fixed rate/floating rate 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Series C-2  
15 
23 
US$ 67.50  
15 
23 
US$ 67.50 
Other equity instruments 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Limited recourse capital notes (LRCNs) (7) 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Series 1 (8) 
1,750 
1,750 
4.50%  
1,750 
1,750 
4.50% 
Series 2 (8) 
1,250 
1,250 
4.00%  
– 
– 
– 
Series 3 (8) 
1,000 
1,000 
3.65%  
– 
– 
– 
 
112,015 
$
6,723 
  
168,765 
$
5,948 
 
Treasury – preferred shares and other 
equity instruments 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Balance at beginning of period (3) 
(2) $
(3) 
  
34 
$
1 
 
Purchases 
(6,306) 
(683) 
  
(5,319) 
(114) 
 
Sales 
6,144 
647 
  
5,283 
110 
 
Balance at end of period (3) 
(164) $
(39) 
  
(2) $
(3) 
 
Preferred shares and other equity 
instruments outstanding 
111,851 
$
6,684 
  
168,763 
$
5,945 
 
(1) 
Includes fair value adjustments to stock options of $11 million (October 31, 2020 – $9 million). 
(2) 
During the year ended October 31, 2020, we purchased common shares for cancellation at an average cost of $103.62 per share with a book value of $12.34 per share. 
(3) 
Positive amounts represent a short position and negative amounts represent a long position. 
(4) 
First Preferred Shares were issued at $25 per share with the exception of Non-Cumulative Fixed Rate/Floating Rate First Preferred Shares Series C-2 (Series C-2) which 
were issued at US$1,000 per share (equivalent to US$25 per depositary share). 
(5) 
On May 24, 2021, we redeemed all 29 million of our issued and outstanding Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BK at a price of $25 per share. 
(6) 
On August 24, 2021, we redeemed all 30 million of our issued and outstanding Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BM at a price of $25 per 
share. 
(7) 
Each series of LRCNs (LRCN Series) were issued at a $1,000 per note. The number of shares represent the number of notes issued and the dividends declared per share 
represent the annual interest rate percentage applicable to the notes issued as at the reporting date. 
(8) 
In connection with the issuance of LRCN Series 1, we issued $1,750 million of Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BQ (Series BQ); in 
connection with the issuance of LRCN Series 2, we issued $1,250 million of Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BR (Series BR); in connection 
with the issuance of LRCN Series 3, we issued $1,000 million of Non-Cumulative 5-Year Rate Reset First Preferred Shares Series BS (Series BS).The Series BQ, BR and BS 
preferred shares were issued at a price of $1,000 per share and were issued to a consolidated trust to be held as trust assets in connection with each respective LRCN 
Series. 
206
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Significant terms and conditions of preferred shares and other equity instruments 
As at October 31, 2021 
Current 
annual yield 
Premium 
Current 
dividend 
per share (1) 
Earliest 
redemption 
date (2) 
Issue date 
Redemption 
price (2), (3) 
Preferred shares 
 
 
 
 
 
 
First preferred 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Non-cumulative, fixed rate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Series BH (4) 
4.90% 
 
$
.306250 
November 24, 2020 
June 5, 2015 
$
26.00 
Series BI (4) 
4.90% 
 
.306250 
November 24, 2020 
July 22, 2015 
26.00 
Series BJ (4) 
5.25% 
 
.328125 
February 24, 2021 
October 2, 2015 
26.00 
Non-cumulative, 5-Year 
Rate Reset (5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Series AZ (4) 
3.70% 
2.21% 
.231250 
May 24, 2019 
January 30, 2014 
25.00 
Series BB (4) 
3.65% 
2.26% 
.228125 
August 24, 2019 
June 3, 2014 
25.00 
Series BD (4) 
3.20% 
2.74% 
.200000 
May 24, 2020 
January 30, 2015 
25.00 
Series BF (4) 
3.60% 
2.62% 
.187500 
November 24, 2020 
March 13, 2015 
25.00 
Series BO (4) 
4.80% 
2.38% 
.300000 
February 24, 2024 
November 2, 2018 
25.00 
Non-cumulative, fixed rate/
floating rate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Series C-2 (6) 
6.75% 
4.052% 
US$16.875000 
November 7, 2023 
November 2, 2015 
US$1,000.00 
Other equity instruments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Limited recourse capital notes (7) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Series 1 (8) 
4.50% 
4.137% 
n.a. 
October 24, 2025 
July 28, 2020 
$1,000.00 
Series 2 (9) 
4.00% 
3.617% 
n.a. 
January 24, 2026 
November 2, 2020 
1,000.00 
Series 3 (10) 
3.65% 
2.665% 
n.a. 
October 24, 2026 
June 8, 2021 
1,000.00 
(1) 
Non-cumulative preferential dividends of each Series are payable quarterly, as and when declared by the Board of Directors, on or about the 24th day (7th day for 
Series C-2) of February, May, August and November. 
(2) 
Subject to the consent of OSFI and the requirements of the Bank Act (Canada), we may, on or after the dates specified above, redeem First Preferred Shares. In the case 
of Series AZ, BB, BD, BF, and BO, these may be redeemed for cash at a price per share of $25 if redeemed on the earliest redemption date and on the same date every fifth 
year thereafter. In the case of BH, BI and BJ, these may be redeemed for cash at a price per share of $26 if redeemed during the 12 months commencing on the earliest 
redemption date and decreasing by $0.25 each 12-month period thereafter to a price per share of $25 if redeemed four years from the earliest redemption date or 
thereafter. Series C-2 may be redeemed at a price of US$1,000 on the earliest redemption date and any dividend payment date thereafter. 
(3) 
Subject to the consent of OSFI and the requirements of the Bank Act (Canada), we may purchase the First Preferred Shares of each Series for cancellation at the lowest 
price or prices at which, in the opinion of the Board of Directors, such shares are obtainable. 
(4) 
The preferred shares include NVCC provisions, necessary for the shares to qualify as Tier 1 regulatory capital under Basel III. NVCC provisions require the conversion of 
the instrument into a variable number of common shares in the event that OSFI deems the Bank non-viable or a federal or provincial government in Canada publicly 
announces that the Bank has accepted or agreed to accept a capital injection. In such an event, each preferred share is convertible into common shares pursuant to an 
automatic conversion formula with a multiplier of 1 and with a conversion price based on the greater of: (i) a floor price of $5 and (ii) the current market price of our 
common shares based on the volume weighted average trading price of our common shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange. The number of shares issued is determined 
by dividing the preferred share value ($25 plus declared and unpaid dividends) by the conversion price. 
(5) 
The dividend rate will reset on the earliest redemption date and every fifth year thereafter at a rate equal to the 5-year Government of Canada bond yield plus the 
premium indicated. The holders have the option to convert their shares into non-cumulative floating rate First Preferred Shares subject to certain conditions on the 
earliest redemption date and every fifth year thereafter at a rate equal to the three-month Government of Canada Treasury Bill rate plus the premium indicated. 
(6) 
The dividend rate will change on the earliest redemption date at a rate equal to the 3-month LIBOR plus the premium indicated. Series C-2 do not qualify as Tier 1 
regulatory capital. 
(7) 
The current annual yield on each LRCN Series represents the annual interest rate applicable to the notes issued as at the reporting date. The payments of interest and 
principal in cash on the LRCN Series are made at our discretion, and non-payment of interest and principal in cash does not constitute an event of default. In the event of 
(i) non-payment of interest on any interest payment date, (ii) non-payment of the redemption price in case of a redemption of a LRCN Series, (iii) non-payment of 
principal at the maturity of a LRCN Series, or (iv) an event of default on a LRCN Series, holders of such LRCN Series will have recourse only to the assets (Trust Assets) 
held by a third-party trustee in a consolidated trust in respect of such LRCN Series and each such noteholder will be entitled to receive its pro rata share of the Trust 
Assets. In such an event, the delivery of the Trust Assets for each LRCN Series will represent the full and complete extinguishment of our obligations under the related 
LRCN Series. The LRCNs include NVCC provisions, necessary for the shares to qualify as Tier 1 regulatory capital under Basel III. NVCC provisions require the conversion 
of the instrument into a variable number of common shares in the event that OSFI deems the Bank non-viable or a federal or provincial government in Canada publicly 
announces that the Bank has accepted or agreed to accept a capital injection. In such an event, each note is automatically redeemed and the redemption price will be 
satisfied by the delivery of Trust Assets, which will consist of common shares pursuant to an automatic conversion of the series of preferred shares that were issued 
concurrently with the related LRCN Series. Each series of preferred shares include an automatic conversion formula with a conversion price based on the greater of: (i) a 
floor price of $5 and (ii) the current market price of our common shares based on the volume weighted average trading price of our common shares on the Toronto Stock 
Exchange. The number of common shares issued in respect of each series of preferred shares will be determined by dividing the preferred share value ($1,000 plus 
declared and unpaid dividends) by the conversion price. The number of common shares delivered to each noteholder will be based on such noteholder’s pro rata interest 
in the Trust Assets. Subject to the consent of OSFI, we may purchase LRCNs for cancellation at such price or prices and upon such terms and conditions as we in our 
absolute discretion may determine, subject to any applicable law restricting the purchase of notes. 
(8) 
LRCN Series 1 bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.5% per annum until November 24, 2025, and thereafter at a rate per annum, reset every fifth year, equal to the 5-Year 
Government of Canada Yield plus 4.137% until maturity on November 24, 2080. The interest is paid semi-annually on or about the 24th day of May and November. LRCN 
Series 1 is redeemable during the period from October 24 to and including November 24, commencing in 2025 and every fifth year thereafter to the extent we redeem 
Series BQ pursuant to their terms and subject to the consent of OSFI and requirements of the Bank Act (Canada). 
(9) 
LRCN Series 2 bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.0% per annum until February 24, 2026, and thereafter at a rate per annum, reset every fifth year, equal to the 5-Year 
Government of Canada Yield plus 3.617% until maturity on February 24, 2081. The interest is paid semi-annually on or about the 24th day of February and August. LRCN 
Series 2 is redeemable during the period from January 24 to and including February 24, commencing in 2026 and every fifth year thereafter to the extent we redeem 
Series BR pursuant to their terms and subject to the consent of OSFI and requirements of the Bank Act (Canada). 
(10) 
LRCN Series 3 bear interest at a fixed rate of 3.65% per annum until November 24, 2026, and thereafter at a rate per annum, reset every fifth year, equal to the 5-Year 
Government of Canada Yield plus 2.665% until maturity on November 24, 2081. The interest is paid semi-annually on or about the 24th day of May and November. LRCN 
Series 3 is redeemable during the period from October 24 to and including November 24, commencing in 2026 and every fifth year thereafter to the extent we redeem 
Series BS pursuant to their terms and subject to the consent of OSFI and requirements of the Bank Act (Canada). 
n.a. 
not applicable 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
207 

Note 19
 Equity (continued) 
Restrictions on the payment of dividends 
We are prohibited by the Bank Act (Canada) from declaring any dividends on our preferred or common shares when we are, or 
would be placed as a result of the declaration, in contravention of the capital adequacy and liquidity regulations or any 
regulatory directives issued under the Act. We may not pay dividends on our common shares at any time unless all dividends to 
which preferred shareholders are then entitled have been declared and paid or set apart for payment. 
Currently, these limitations do not restrict the payment of dividends on our preferred or common shares. 
Dividend reinvestment plan 
Our dividend reinvestment plan (DRIP) provides common and preferred shareholders with a means to receive additional 
common shares rather than cash dividends. The plan is only open to shareholders residing in Canada or the United States. The 
requirements of our DRIP are satisfied through either open market share purchases or shares issued from treasury. During 2021 
and 2020, the requirements of our DRIP were satisfied through open market share purchases. 
Shares available for future issuances 
As at October 31, 2021, 42.8 million common shares are available for future issue relating to our DRIP and potential exercise of 
stock options and awards outstanding. In addition, we may issue up to 38.9 million common shares from treasury under the RBC 
Umbrella Savings and Securities Purchase Plan that was approved by shareholders on February 26, 2009. 
Note 20
Share-based compensation 
Stock option plans 
We have stock option plans for certain key employees. Under the plans, options are periodically granted to purchase common 
shares. The exercise price for the majority of the grants is determined as the higher of the volume-weighted average of the 
trading prices per board lot (100 shares) of our common shares on the Toronto Stock Exchange (i) on the day preceding the day 
of grant; and (ii) the five consecutive trading days immediately preceding the day of grant. The exercise price for the remaining 
grants is the closing market share price of our common shares on the New York Stock Exchange on the date of grant. All options 
vest over a four-year period, and are exercisable for a period not exceeding 10 years from the grant date. 
The compensation expense recorded for the year ended October 31, 2021, in respect of the stock option plans was $6 million 
(October 31, 2020 – $7 million). The compensation expense related to non-vested options was $3 million at October 31, 2021 
(October 31, 2020 – $2 million), to be recognized over the weighted average period of 2.0 years (October 31, 2020 – 1.9 years). 
Analysis of the movement in the number and weighted average exercise price of options is set out below: 
A summary of our stock option activity and related information 
 
For the year ended 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Canadian dollars per share except share amounts) 
Number of 
options 
(thousands) 
Weighted 
average 
exercise price (1)  
Number of 
options 
(thousands) 
Weighted 
average 
exercise price (1) 
Outstanding at beginning of period 
6,973 
$
86.02  
6,950 
$
79.88 
Granted 
1,251 
106.00  
1,089 
103.64 
Exercised (2), (3) 
(1,150) 
65.56  
(1,044) 
65.39 
Forfeited in the period 
(19) 
93.23  
(22) 
50.28 
Outstanding at end of period 
7,055 
$
92.27  
6,973 
$
86.02 
Exercisable at end of period 
3,273 
$
80.38  
3,314 
$
71.77 
(1) 
The weighted average exercise prices reflect the conversion of foreign currency-denominated options at the exchange rates as of October 31, 2021 and October 31, 2020. 
For foreign currency-denominated options exercised during the year, the weighted average exercise prices are translated using exchange rates as at the settlement date. 
(2) 
Cash received for options exercised during the year was $75 million (October 31, 2020 – $68 million) and the weighted average share price at the date of exercise was 
$115.11 (October 31, 2020 – $100.20). 
(3) 
New shares were issued for all stock options exercised in 2021 and 2020. 
Options outstanding as at October 31, 2021 by range of exercise price 
 
Options outstanding 
 
Options exercisable 
(Canadian dollars per share except 
share amounts and years) 
Number 
outstanding 
(thousands) 
Weighted 
average 
exercise price (1) 
Weighted 
average 
remaining 
contractual 
life (years)  
Number 
exercisable 
(thousands) 
Weighted 
average 
exercise price (1) 
$36.68 – $71.11 
739 
$
59.67 
1.91  
739 
$
59.67 
$73.14 – $78.59 
968 
75.70 
3.80  
968 
75.70 
$90.23 – $96.55 
2,285 
93.23 
5.66  
1,202 
90.25 
$102.33 – $104.70 
1,818 
103.73 
7.13  
364 
102.35 
$106.00 
1,245 
106.00 
9.12  
– 
– 
 
7,055 
$
92.27 
6.00  
3,273 
$
80.38 
(1) 
The weighted average exercise prices reflect the conversion of foreign currency-denominated options at the exchange rate as of October 31, 2021. 
208
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

The weighted average fair value of options granted during the year ended October 31, 2021 was estimated at $4.65 (October 31, 
2020 – $6.08). This was determined by applying the Black-Scholes model on the date of grant, taking into account the specific 
terms and conditions under which the options are granted, such as the vesting period and expected share price volatility 
estimated by considering the historic average share price volatility over a historical period corresponding to the expected option 
life. The following assumptions were used to determine the fair value of options granted: 
Weighted average assumptions 
 
For the year ended 
(Canadian dollars per share except percentages and years) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Share price at grant date 
$ 104.86 
$104.80 
Risk-free interest rate 
0.48% 
1.64% 
Expected dividend yield 
4.59% 
3.90% 
Expected share price volatility 
14% 
13% 
Expected life of option 
6 Years 
6 Years 
Employee savings and share ownership plans 
We offer many employees an opportunity to own our common shares through savings and share ownership plans. Under these 
plans, the employees can generally contribute between 1% and 10% of their annual salary or benefit base for commission-based 
employees. For each contribution between 1% and 6%, we will match 50% of the employee contributions in our common shares. 
For the RBC Dominion Securities Savings Plan, our maximum annual contribution is $4,500 per employee. For the RBC U.K. Share 
Incentive Plan, our maximum annual contribution is £1,500 per employee. For the year ended October 31, 2021, we contributed 
$123 million (October 31, 2020 – $116 million), under the terms of these plans, towards the purchase of our common shares. As at 
October 31, 2021, an aggregate of 36 million common shares were held under these plans (October 31, 2020 – 36 million common 
shares). 
Deferred share and other plans 
We offer deferred share unit plans to executives, certain key employees and non-employee directors of the Bank. Under these 
plans, participants may choose to receive all or a percentage of their annual variable short-term incentive bonus, commission, or 
directors’ fee in the form of deferred share units (DSUs). The participants must elect to participate in the plan prior to the 
beginning of the year. DSUs earn dividend equivalents in the form of additional DSUs at the same rate as dividends on common 
shares. The participant is not allowed to convert the DSUs until retirement or termination of employment/directorship. The cash 
value of the DSUs is equivalent to the market value of common shares when conversion takes place. 
We also offer unit awards for certain key employees within Capital Markets. The bonus is invested as RBC share units and a 
specified percentage vests on a specified number of anniversary dates each year. Each vested amount is paid in cash and is 
based on the original number of share units granted plus accumulated dividends, valued using the average closing price of RBC 
common shares during the five trading days immediately preceding the vesting date. 
We offer performance deferred share award plans to certain key employees, all of which vest at the end of three years. Upon 
vesting, the award is paid in cash and is based on the original number of RBC share units granted plus accumulated dividends 
valued using the average closing price of RBC common shares during the five trading days immediately preceding the vesting 
date. A portion of the award under certain plans may be increased or decreased up to 25%, depending on our total shareholder 
return compared to a defined peer group of global financial institutions. 
We maintain non-qualified deferred compensation plans for certain key employees in the United States. These plans allow 
eligible employees to defer a portion of their annual income and a variety of productivity and recruitment bonuses and allocate 
the deferrals among specified fund choices, including a RBC Share Accounted fund that tracks the value of our common shares. 
The following table presents the units granted under the deferred share and other plans for the year. 
Units granted under deferred share and other plans 
 
For the year ended  
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Units and per unit amounts) 
Units 
granted 
(thousands) 
Weighted 
average 
fair value 
per unit  
Units 
granted 
(thousands) 
Weighted 
average 
fair value 
per unit 
Deferred share unit plans 
462 
$ 113.34  
503 
$
98.91 
Capital Markets compensation plan unit awards 
4,066 
128.95  
4,796 
92.06 
Performance deferred share award plans 
2,486 
106.10  
2,409 
104.14 
Deferred compensation plans 
87 
104.21  
92 
103.49 
Other share-based plans 
767 
109.24  
759 
100.55 
 
7,868 
$ 118.62  
8,559 
$
96.74 
Our liabilities for the awards granted under the deferred share and other plans are measured at fair value, determined based on 
the quoted market price of our common shares and specified fund choices as applicable. Annually, our obligation is increased by 
additional units earned by plan participants, and is reduced by forfeitures, cancellations, and the settlement of vested units. In 
addition, our obligation is impacted by fluctuations in the market price of our common shares and specified fund units. For 
performance deferred share award plans, the estimated outcome of meeting the performance conditions also impacts our 
obligation. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
209 

Note 20
Share-based compensation (continued) 
The following tables present the units that have been earned by the participants, our obligations for these earned units 
under the deferred share and other plans, and the related compensation expenses (recoveries) recognized for the year. 
Obligations under deferred share and other plans 
 
As at
 
 
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars except units) 
Units 
(thousands) 
Carrying 
amount  
Units 
(thousands) 
Carrying 
amount 
Deferred share unit plans 
5,001 
$
644  
5,221 
$
486 
Capital Markets compensation plan unit awards 
9,925 
1,280  
9,560 
874 
Performance deferred share award plans 
6,216 
801  
5,860 
550 
Deferred compensation plans (1) 
2,574 
331  
2,685 
250 
Other share-based plans 
1,724 
216  
1,828 
167 
 
25,440 
$
3,272  
25,154 
$ 2,327 
(1) 
Excludes obligations not determined based on the quoted market price of our common shares. 
Compensation expenses recognized under deferred share and other plans 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Deferred share unit plans 
$
205 
$
(48) 
Capital Markets compensation plan unit awards 
518 
115 
Performance deferred share award plans 
506 
190 
Deferred compensation plans 
627 
137 
Other share-based plans 
142 
60 
 
$ 1,998 
$
454 
Note 21
Income taxes 
Components of tax expense 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Income taxes (recoveries) in Consolidated Statements of Income 
 
 
Current tax 
 
 
Tax expense for current year 
$ 4,893 
$ 3,673 
Adjustments for prior years 
(92) 
(106) 
Recoveries arising from previously unrecognized tax loss, tax credit or temporary difference 
of a prior period 
(16) 
(25) 
 
4,785 
3,542 
Deferred tax 
 
 
Origination and reversal of temporary difference 
(216) 
(655) 
Effects of changes in tax rates 
(4) 
6 
Adjustments for prior years 
74 
98 
Recoveries arising from previously unrecognized tax loss, tax credit or temporary difference of a prior 
period, net 
(58) 
(39) 
 
(204) 
(590) 
 
4,581 
2,952 
Income taxes (recoveries) in Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income and Changes in Equity 
 
 
Other comprehensive income 
 
 
Net unrealized gains (losses) on debt securities and loans at fair value through other comprehensive 
income 
(35) 
43 
Provision for credit losses recognized in income 
– 
3 
Reclassification of net losses (gains) on debt securities and loans at fair value through other 
comprehensive income to income 
(28) 
(56) 
Unrealized foreign currency translation gains (losses) 
1 
5 
Net foreign currency translation gains (losses) from hedging activities 
591 
(138) 
Reclassification of losses (gains) on net investment hedging activities to income 
–  
7 
Net gains (losses) on derivatives designated as cash flow hedges 
485 
(410) 
Reclassification of losses (gains) on derivatives designated as cash flow hedges to income 
97 
27 
Remeasurements of employee benefit plans 
796 
(20) 
Net fair value change due to credit risk on financial liabilities designated at fair value through profit 
or loss 
20 
(93) 
Net gains (losses) on equity securities designated at fair value through other comprehensive income 
17 
6 
Share-based compensation awards 
(17) 
7 
Distributions on other equity instruments and issuance costs 
(42) 
(12) 
 
1,885 
(631) 
Total income taxes 
$ 6,466 
$ 2,321 
210
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

The effective tax rate of 22.2% increased 170 bps, as the prior year reflected a higher proportion of income from lower tax rate 
jurisdictions and tax exempt income relative to the decline in earnings experienced last year. 
The following is an analysis of the differences between the income tax expense reflected in the Consolidated Statements of 
Income and the amounts calculated at the Canadian statutory rate. 
Reconciliation to statutory tax rate 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except for percentage amounts) 
October 31, 2021 
October 31, 2020 
Income taxes at Canadian statutory tax rate 
$ 5,405 
26.2% 
$
3,799 
26.4% 
Increase (decrease) in income taxes resulting from: 
 
 
 
 
Lower average tax rate applicable to subsidiaries 
(361) 
(1.8) 
(513) 
(3.6) 
Tax-exempt income from securities 
(379) 
(1.8) 
(364) 
(2.5) 
Tax rate change 
(4) 
– 
6 
– 
Other 
(80) 
(0.4) 
24 
0.2 
Income taxes in Consolidated Statements of Income / effective tax rate 
$ 4,581 
22.2% 
$
2,952 
20.5% 
Deferred tax assets and liabilities result from tax loss and tax credit carryforwards and temporary differences between the tax 
basis of assets and liabilities and their carrying amounts on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
Significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities 
 
As at and for the year ended October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Net asset 
beginning of 
period 
Change 
through 
equity 
Change 
through 
profit or loss 
Exchange 
rate 
differences 
Other 
Net asset 
end of 
period 
Net deferred tax asset/(liability) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Allowance for credit losses 
$
1,362 
$
– 
$
(372) 
$
(16) 
$
– 
$
974 
Deferred compensation 
1,269 
17 
396 
(68) 
– 
1,614 
Business realignment charges 
9 
– 
2 
– 
– 
11 
Tax loss and tax credit carryforwards 
204 
– 
40 
(2) 
– 
242 
Deferred (income) expense 
(104) 
6 
205 
3 
– 
110 
Financial instruments measured at fair value 
through other comprehensive income 
(68) 
45 
(1) 
5 
– 
(19) 
Premises and equipment and intangibles 
(784) 
– 
(82) 
30 
– 
(836) 
Pension and post-employment related 
592 
(796) 
45 
(4) 
– 
(163) 
Other 
47 
(12) 
(29) 
3 
(5) 
4 
 
$
2,527 
$
(740) 
$
204 
$
(49) 
$
(5) 
$
1,937 
Comprising 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deferred tax assets 
$
2,579 
 
 
 
 
$
2,011 
Deferred tax liabilities 
(52) 
 
 
 
 
(74) 
 
$
2,527 
 
 
 
 
$
1,937 
 
 
 
As at and for the year ended October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Net asset 
beginning of 
period 
Change 
through 
equity 
Change 
through 
profit or loss 
Exchange 
rate 
differences 
Other 
Net asset 
end of 
period 
Net deferred tax asset/(liability) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Allowance for credit losses 
$
716 
$
– 
$
646 
$
– 
$
– 
$
1,362 
Deferred compensation 
1,246 
(7) 
19 
11 
– 
1,269 
Business realignment charges 
10 
– 
(1) 
– 
– 
9 
Tax loss and tax credit carryforwards 
202 
– 
2 
– 
– 
204 
Deferred (income) expense 
(15) 
5 
(93) 
(1) 
– 
(104) 
Financial instruments measured at fair value 
through other comprehensive income 
(43) 
(23) 
(2) 
– 
– 
(68) 
Premises and equipment and intangibles 
(831) 
– 
60 
(10) 
(3) 
(784) 
Pension and post-employment related 
631 
20 
(59) 
– 
– 
592 
Other 
29 
4 
18 
(4) 
– 
47 
 
$
1,945 
$
(1) 
$
590 
$
(4) 
$
(3) 
$
2,527 
Comprising 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deferred tax assets 
$
2,027 
 
 
 
 
$
2,579 
Deferred tax liabilities 
(82) 
 
 
 
 
(52) 
 
$
1,945 
 
 
 
 
$
2,527 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
211 

Note 21
Income taxes (continued) 
The tax loss and tax credit carryforwards amount of deferred tax assets primarily relates to losses and tax credits in our Canadian, 
U.S., and Caribbean operations. Deferred tax assets of $242 million were recognized at October 31, 2021 (October 31, 2020 – $204 
million) in respect of tax losses and tax credits incurred in current or preceding years for which recognition is dependent on the 
projection of future taxable profits. Management’s forecasts support the assumption that it is probable that the results of future 
operations will generate sufficient taxable income to utilize the deferred tax assets. The forecasts rely on continued liquidity and 
capital support to our business operations, including tax planning strategies implemented in relation to such support. 
As at October 31, 2021, unused tax losses and tax credits of $384 million and $207 million (October 31, 2020 – $389 million and 
$305 million) available to be offset against potential tax adjustments or future taxable income were not recognized as deferred 
tax assets. There are no unused tax losses that will expire within one year (October 31, 2020 – $nil), $2 million that will expire in 
two to four years (October 31, 2020 – $10 million) and $382 million that will expire after four years (October 31, 2020 – 
$379 million). There are no tax credits that will expire in one year (October 31, 2020 – $nil), $115 million that will expire in two to 
four years (October 31, 2020 – $143 million) and $92 million that will expire after four years (October 31, 2020 – $162 million). 
The amount of temporary differences associated with investments in subsidiaries, branches and associates and interests in 
joint ventures for which deferred tax liabilities have not been recognized in the parent bank is $20 billion as at October 31, 2021 
(October 31, 2020 – $22 billion). 
Tax examinations and assessments 
During the year, we received reassessments from the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA), in respect of the 2015 and 2016 taxation 
years, which suggest that Royal Bank of Canada owes additional taxes of approximately $635 million as they denied the 
deductibility of certain dividends. The reassessments received during the year are consistent with the reassessments received 
for taxation years 2012 to 2014 of approximately $756 million of additional income taxes and the reassessments received for 
taxation years 2009 to 2011 of approximately $434 million of additional income taxes and interest in respect of the same matter. 
These amounts represent the maximum additional taxes owing for those years. 
Legislative amendments introduced in the 2015 Canadian Federal Budget resulted in disallowed deduction of dividends from 
transactions with Taxable Canadian Corporations including those hedged with Tax Indifferent Investors, namely pension funds 
and non-resident entities with prospective application effective May 1, 2017. The dividends to which the reassessments relate 
include both dividends in transactions similar to those which are the target of the 2015 legislative amendments and dividends 
which are unrelated to the legislative amendments. 
It is possible that the CRA will reassess us for significant additional income tax for subsequent years on the same basis. In all 
cases, we are confident that our tax filing position was appropriate and intend to defend ourselves vigorously. 
Note 22
 Earnings per share 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except share and per share amounts) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Basic earnings per share 
 
 
Net income 
$
16,050 
$
11,437 
Dividends on preferred shares and distributions on other equity instruments 
(257) 
(268) 
Net income attributable to non-controlling interests 
(12) 
(5) 
Net income available to common shareholders 
$
15,781 
$
11,164 
Weighted average number of common shares (in thousands) 
1,424,343 
1,423,915 
Basic earnings per share (in dollars) 
$
11.08 
$
7.84 
Diluted earnings per share 
 
 
Net income available to common shareholders 
$
15,781 
$
11,164 
Dilutive impact of exchangeable shares 
–  
13 
Net income available to common shareholders including dilutive impact of exchangeable 
shares 
$
15,781 
$
11,177 
Weighted average number of common shares (in thousands) 
1,424,343 
1,423,915 
Stock options (1) 
1,737 
1,054 
Issuable under other share-based compensation plans 
655 
755 
Exchangeable shares 
–  
3,046 
Average number of diluted common shares (in thousands) 
1,426,735 
1,428,770 
Diluted earnings per share (in dollars) 
$
11.06 
$
7.82 
(1) 
The dilutive effect of stock options was calculated using the treasury stock method. When the exercise price of options outstanding is greater than the average market 
price of our common shares, the options are excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share. For the year ended October 31, 2021, no outstanding options 
were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share. For the year ended October 31, 2020, an average of 2,809,041 outstanding options with an average 
exercise price of $100.88 were excluded from the calculation of diluted earnings per share. 
212
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Note 23
 Guarantees, commitments, pledged assets and contingencies 
Guarantees and commitments 
We use guarantees and other off-balance sheet credit instruments to meet the financing needs of our clients. 
The table below summarizes our maximum exposure to credit losses related to our guarantees and commitments provided 
to third parties. The maximum exposure to credit risk relating to a guarantee is the maximum risk of loss if there was a total 
default by the guaranteed parties, without consideration of possible recoveries under recourse provisions, insurance policies or 
from collateral held or pledged. The maximum exposure to credit risk relating to a commitment to extend credit is the full amount 
of the commitment. In both cases, the maximum risk exposure is significantly greater than the amount recognized as a liability in 
our Consolidated Balance Sheets. 
 
Maximum exposure 
to credit losses 
 
As at
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Financial guarantees 
 
 
Financial standby letters of credit 
$ 16,867 
$ 17,141 
Commitments to extend credit 
 
 
Backstop liquidity facilities 
38,405 
40,212 
Credit enhancements 
2,537 
2,664 
Documentary and commercial letters of credit 
447 
286 
Other commitments to extend credit 
248,522 
239,077 
Other credit-related commitments 
 
 
Securities lending indemnifications 
99,797 
77,953 
Performance guarantees 
7,195 
7,040 
Sponsored member guarantees 
142 
1,302 
Other 
326 
1,030 
Our credit review process, our policy for requiring collateral security, and the types of collateral security held are generally the 
same for guarantees and commitments as for loans. Our clients generally have the right to request settlement of, or draw on, our 
guarantees and commitments within one year. However, certain guarantees can only be drawn if specified conditions are met. 
These conditions, along with collateral requirements, are described below. We believe that it is highly unlikely that all or 
substantially all of the guarantees and commitments will be drawn or settled within one year, and contracts may expire without 
being drawn or settled. 
Financial guarantees 
Financial standby letters of credit 
Financial standby letters of credit represent irrevocable assurances that we will make payments in the event that a client cannot 
meet its payment obligations to the third party. For certain guarantees, the guaranteed party can request payment from us even 
though the client has not defaulted on its obligations. The term of these guarantees generally have a term of five to seven years. 
Our policy for requiring collateral security with respect to these instruments and the types of collateral security held is 
generally the same as for loans. When collateral security is taken, it is determined on an account-by-account basis according to 
the risk of the borrower and the specifics of the transaction. Collateral security may include cash, securities and other assets 
pledged. 
Commitments to extend credit 
Backstop liquidity facilities 
Backstop liquidity facilities are provided to ABCP conduit programs administered by us and third parties as an alternative source 
of financing in the event that such programs are unable to access commercial paper markets, or in limited circumstances, when 
predetermined performance measures of the financial assets acquired or financed by these programs are not met. The average 
remaining term of these liquidity facilities is approximately four years. 
The terms of the backstop liquidity facilities do not require us to advance money to these programs in the event of 
bankruptcy or insolvency and generally do not require us to purchase non-performing or defaulted assets. 
Credit enhancements 
We provide partial credit enhancement to multi-seller ABCP programs administered by us to protect commercial paper investors 
in the event that the collections on the underlying assets together with the transaction-specific credit enhancements or the 
liquidity facilities prove to be insufficient to pay for maturing commercial paper. Each of the asset pools is structured to achieve 
a high investment-grade credit profile through credit enhancements required to be provided by the third-party sellers related to 
each transaction. The average remaining term of these credit facilities is approximately three years. 
Documentary and commercial letters of credit 
Documentary and commercial letters of credit, which are written undertakings by us on behalf of a client authorizing a third party 
to draw drafts on us up to a stipulated amount under specific terms and conditions, where some are collateralized based on the 
underlying agreement with the client and others are collateralized by cash deposits or other assets of the client. 
Other commitments to extend credit 
Commitments to extend credit represent unused portions of authorizations to extend credit in the form of loans, reverse 
repurchase agreements, bankers’ acceptances or letters of credit where we do not have the ability to unilaterally withdraw the 
credit extended to the borrower. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
213 
 

Note 23
 Guarantees, commitments, pledged assets and contingencies (continued) 
Other credit-related commitments 
Securities lending indemnifications 
In securities lending transactions, we act as an agent for the owner of a security, who agrees to lend the security to a borrower 
for a fee, under the terms of a pre-arranged contract. The borrower must fully collateralize the security loaned at all times. As 
part of this custodial business, an indemnification may be provided to securities lending customers to ensure that the fair value 
of securities loaned will be returned in the event that the borrower fails to return the borrowed securities and the collateral held 
is insufficient to cover the fair value of those securities. These indemnifications normally terminate without being drawn upon. 
The term of these indemnifications varies, as the securities loaned are recallable on demand. Collateral held for our securities 
lending transactions typically includes cash, securities that are issued or guaranteed by the Canadian government, U.S. 
government or other OECD countries or high quality debt or equity instruments. 
Performance guarantees 
Performance guarantees represent irrevocable assurances that we will make payments to third-party beneficiaries in the event 
that a client fails to perform under a specified non-financial contractual obligation. Such obligations typically include works and 
service contracts, performance bonds, and warranties related to international trade. The term of these guarantees can range up 
to three to seven years. 
Our policy for requiring collateral security with respect to these instruments and the types of collateral security held is 
generally the same as for loans. When collateral security is taken, it is determined on an account-by-account basis according to 
the risk of the borrower and the specifics of the transaction. Collateral security may include cash, securities and other assets 
pledged. 
Sponsored member guarantees 
For certain overnight repurchase and reverse repurchase transactions, we act as a sponsoring member to eligible clients to clear 
transactions through the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation (FICC). We also provide a guarantee to FICC for the prompt and full 
payment and performance of our sponsored member clients’ respective obligations under the FICC rules. The guarantees are 
fully collateralized by cash and securities issued or guaranteed by the U.S. government. 
Indemnifications 
In the normal course of our operations, we provide indemnifications which are often standard contractual terms to 
counterparties in transactions such as purchase and sale contracts, fiduciary, agency, licensing, custodial and service 
agreements, clearing system arrangements, participation as a member of exchanges, director/officer contracts and leasing 
transactions. These indemnification agreements may require us to compensate the counterparties for costs incurred as a result 
of changes in laws and regulations (including tax legislation) or as a result of litigation claims or statutory sanctions that may be 
suffered by the counterparty as a consequence of the transaction. The terms of these indemnification agreements vary based on 
the contract. The nature of the indemnification agreements prevents us from making a reasonable estimate of the maximum 
potential amount we could be required to pay to counterparties. Historically, we have not made any significant payments under 
such indemnifications. 
Uncommitted amounts 
Uncommitted amounts represent undrawn credit facilities for which we have the ability to unilaterally withdraw the credit 
extended to the borrower at any time. These include both retail and commercial commitments. As at October 31, 2021, the total 
balance of uncommitted amounts was $333 billion (October 31, 2020 – $317 billion). 
Other commitments 
We invest in private companies, directly or through third-party investment funds, including Small Business Investment 
Companies, real estate funds and Low Income Housing Tax Credit funds. These funds are generally structured as closed-end 
limited partnerships wherein we hold a limited partner interest. For the year ended October 31, 2021, we have unfunded 
commitments of $1,396 million (October 31, 2020 – $882 million) representing the aggregate amount of cash we are obligated to 
contribute as capital to these partnerships under the terms of the relevant contracts. 
Pledged assets and collateral 
In the ordinary course of business, we pledge assets and enter into collateral agreements with terms and conditions that are 
usual and customary to our regular lending, borrowing and trading activities recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. The 
following are examples of our general terms and conditions on pledged assets and collateral: 
•
The risks and rewards of the pledged assets reside with the pledgor. 
•
The pledged asset is returned to the pledgor when the necessary conditions have been satisfied. 
•
The right of the pledgee to sell or re-pledge the asset is dependent on the specific agreement under which the collateral 
is pledged. 
•
If there is no default, the pledgee must return the comparable asset to the pledgor upon satisfaction of the obligation. 
We are also required to provide intraday pledges to the Bank of Canada when we use a real-time electronic wire transfer system 
that continuously processes all Canadian dollar large-value or time-critical payments throughout the day. The pledged assets 
earmarked for our Canadian dollar large-value or time-critical payments are normally released back to us at the end of the 
settlement cycle each day. Therefore, the pledged assets amount is not included in the following table. For the year ended 
October 31, 2021, we had on average $2 billion of assets pledged intraday to the Bank of Canada on a daily basis 
(October 31, 2020 – $3 billion). There are infrequent occasions where we are required to take an overnight advance from the Bank 
of Canada to cover a settlement requirement, in which case an equivalent value of the pledged assets would be used to secure 
the advance. There were no overnight advances taken on October 31, 2021 and October 31, 2020. 
214
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Assets pledged against liabilities and collateral assets held or re-pledged 
 
As at  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Sources of pledged assets and collateral 
 
 
Bank assets 
 
 
Loans 
$
79,282 
$
99,302 
Securities 
66,277 
59,479 
Other assets 
25,981 
27,934 
 
$ 171,540 
$ 186,715 
Client assets (1) 
 
 
Collateral received and available for sale or re-pledging 
454,844 
438,686 
Less: not sold or re-pledged 
(17,436) 
(37,879) 
 
$ 437,408 
$ 400,807 
 
$ 608,948 
$ 587,522 
Uses of pledged assets and collateral 
 
 
Securities borrowing and lending 
$ 154,699 
$ 127,852 
Obligations related to securities sold short 
46,151 
36,647 
Obligations related to securities lent or sold under repurchase agreements 
263,005 
252,425 
Securitization 
39,687 
45,440 
Covered bonds 
46,699 
62,131 
Derivative transactions 
31,941 
35,044 
Foreign governments and central banks 
7,314 
6,456 
Clearing systems, payment systems and depositories 
3,809 
6,380 
Other 
15,643 
15,147 
 
$ 608,948 
$ 587,522 
(1) 
Primarily relates to Obligations related to securities lent or sold under repurchase agreements, Securities lent and Derivative transactions. 
Note 24
Legal and regulatory matters 
We are a large global institution that is subject to many different complex legal and regulatory requirements that continue to 
evolve. We are and have been subject to a variety of legal proceedings, including civil claims and lawsuits, regulatory 
examinations, investigations, audits and requests for information by various governmental regulatory agencies and law 
enforcement authorities in various jurisdictions. Some of these matters may involve novel legal theories and interpretations and 
may be advanced under criminal as well as civil statutes, and some proceedings could result in the imposition of civil, regulatory 
enforcement or criminal penalties. We review the status of all proceedings on an ongoing basis and will exercise judgment in 
resolving them in such manner as we believe to be in our best interest. This is an area of significant judgment and uncertainty 
and the extent of our financial and other exposure to these proceedings after taking into account current accruals could be 
material to our results of operations in any particular period. The following is a description of our significant legal proceedings. 
London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) litigation 
Royal Bank of Canada and other U.S. dollar panel banks have been named as defendants in private lawsuits filed in the U.S. with 
respect to the setting of U.S. dollar LIBOR including a number of class action lawsuits which have been consolidated before the 
U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York. The complaints in those private lawsuits assert claims against us and 
other panel banks under various U.S. laws, including U.S. antitrust laws, the U.S. Commodity Exchange Act, and state law. 
In addition to the LIBOR actions, in January 2019, a number of financial institutions, including Royal Bank of Canada and RBC 
Capital Markets LLC, were named in a purported class action in New York alleging violations of the U.S. antitrust laws and 
common law principles of unjust enrichment in the setting of LIBOR after the Intercontinental Exchange took over administration 
of the benchmark interest rate from the British Bankers’ Association in 2014. 
On March 26, 2020, Royal Bank of Canada and RBC Capital Markets LLC were dismissed from the purported class action in 
New York alleging violations of the U.S. antitrust laws and common law principles of unjust enrichment in the setting of LIBOR 
after the Intercontinental Exchange took over administration of the benchmark interest rate from the British Bankers’ 
Association in 2014. On April 24, 2020, the plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal. Based on the facts currently known, it is not possible 
at this time for us to predict the ultimate outcome of these proceedings or the timing of their resolution. 
Royal Bank of Canada Trust Company (Bahamas) Limited proceedings 
On April 13, 2015, a French investigating judge notified Royal Bank of Canada Trust Company (Bahamas) Limited (RBC Bahamas) 
of the issuance of an ordonnance de renvoi referring RBC Bahamas and other unrelated persons to the French tribunal 
correctionnel to face the charge of complicity in estate tax fraud relating to actions taken relating to a trust for which RBC 
Bahamas serves as trustee. RBC Bahamas believes that its actions did not violate French law and contested the charge in the 
French court. On January 12, 2017, the French court acquitted all parties including RBC Bahamas and on June 29, 2018, the French 
appellate court affirmed the acquittals. The acquittals were appealed and on January 6, 2021, the French Supreme Court issued a 
judgment reversing the decision of the French Court of Appeal and sent the case back to the French Court of Appeal for 
rehearing. 
On October 28, 2016, Royal Bank of Canada was granted an exemption by the U.S. Department of Labor that allows Royal 
Bank of Canada and its current and future affiliates to continue to qualify for the Qualified Professional Asset Manager (QPAM) 
exemption under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act despite any potential conviction of RBC Bahamas in the French 
proceeding for a temporary one year period from the date of conviction. On November 3, 2020, the Solicitor of Labor of the U.S. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
215 

Note 24
Legal and regulatory matters (continued) 
Department of Labor issued an opinion stating that a conviction under non-U.S. law is not a disqualifying event for purposes of 
the QPAM exemption. Based on that opinion, any conviction in a French court would not trigger disqualification of Royal Bank of 
Canada and its current and future affiliates under the QPAM exemption. 
RBC Bahamas continues to review the trustee’s and the trust’s legal obligations, including liabilities and potential liabilities 
under applicable tax and other laws. Based on the facts currently known, it is not possible at this time to predict the ultimate 
outcome of these matters; however, we believe that the ultimate resolution will not have a material effect on our consolidated 
financial position, although it may be material to our results of operations in the period it occurs. 
Interchange fees litigation 
Since 2011, seven proposed class actions have been commenced in Canada: Bancroft-Snell v. Visa Canada Corporation, et al., 
9085-4886 Quebec Inc. v. Visa Canada Corporation, et al., Coburn and Watson’s Metropolitan Home v. Bank of America 
Corporation, et al. (Watson), Macaronies Hair Club and Laser Centre Inc. v. BofA Canada Bank, et al., 1023926 Alberta Ltd. v. Bank 
of America Corporation, et al., The Crown & Hand Pub Ltd. v. Bank of America Corporation, et al., and Hello Baby Equipment Inc. v. 
BofA Canada Bank, et al. The defendants in each action are VISA Canada Corporation (Visa), MasterCard International 
Incorporated (MasterCard), Royal Bank of Canada and other financial institutions. The plaintiff class members are Canadian 
merchants who accept Visa and/or MasterCard branded credit cards for payment. The actions allege, among other things, that 
from March 2001 to the present, Visa and MasterCard conspired with their issuing banks and acquirers to set default interchange 
rates and merchant discount fees and that certain rules (Honour All Cards and No Surcharge) have the effect of increasing the 
merchant discount fees. The actions include claims of civil conspiracy, breach of the Competition Act (the Act) interference with 
economic relations and unjust enrichment. The claims seek unspecified general and punitive damages. In Watson, a decision to 
partially certify the action as a class proceeding was released on March 27, 2014, and was appealed. On August 19, 2015, the 
British Columbia Court of Appeal struck the plaintiff class representative’s cause of action under section 45 of the Act and 
reinstated the plaintiff class representative’s cause of action in civil conspiracy by unlawful means, among other rulings. In 
October 2016, the trial court in Watson denied a motion by the plaintiff to revive the stricken section 45 Competition Act claim, 
and also denied the plaintiff’s motion to add new causes of action. The Supreme Court of Canada declined the B.C. class action 
plaintiffs’ request to appeal the decision striking the plaintiffs’ cause of action under section 45 of the Competition Act. In 
October 2020, the parties agreed to adjourn the Watson trial. 
In 9085-4886 Quebec Inc. v. Visa Canada Corporation, et al., the Quebec-court dismissed the Competition Act claims by 
Quebec merchants for post-2010 damages and certified a class action as to the remaining claims. The merchants appealed and 
on July 25, 2019, the Quebec Court of Appeal allowed the appeal to also authorize the merchants to proceed under section 45 of 
the Competition Act for claims after March 12, 2010 and for claims under section 49 of the Competition Act. 
A settlement agreement has been reached with class counsel, contingent on court approval. This settlement upon final court 
approval would resolve the claims of all Canadian merchants subject to limited rights to opt-out for Quebec merchants. 
Foreign exchange matters 
Various regulators are conducting inquiries regarding potential violations of antitrust law by a number of banks, including Royal 
Bank of Canada, regarding foreign exchange trading. 
Beginning in 2015, putative class actions were brought against Royal Bank of Canada and/or RBC Capital Markets, LLC in the 
United States, Canada, the United Kingdom and Brazil. These actions were each brought against multiple foreign exchange 
dealers and allege, among other things, collusive behaviour in global foreign exchange trading. In August 2018, the U.S. District 
Court entered a final order approving RBC Capital Markets’ pending settlement with class plaintiffs. In November 2018, certain 
institutional plaintiffs who had previously opted-out of participating in the settlement filed their own lawsuit in U.S. District 
Court. In May 2020, the U.S. District Court dismissed Royal Bank of Canada from the November 2018 lawsuit brought by certain 
institutional plaintiffs who had previously opted-out of participating in the August 2018 settlement with class plaintiffs. The 
plaintiffs refiled their claim and in July 2021, the U.S. District Court granted a motion in favour of RBC Capital Markets to dismiss 
the action, however, denied the motion as to Royal Bank of Canada. 
One other U.S. action that is purportedly brought on behalf of different classes of plaintiffs also remains pending. The 
Canadian class actions have been settled. 
In its discretion Royal Bank of Canada may choose to resolve claims, litigations, or similar matters at any time. Based on the 
facts currently known, it is not possible at this time to predict the ultimate outcome of the Foreign Exchange Matters or the 
timing of their ultimate resolution. 
Other matters 
We are a defendant in a number of other actions alleging that certain of our practices and actions were improper. The lawsuits 
involve a variety of complex issues and the timing of their resolution is varied and uncertain. Management believes that we will 
ultimately be successful in resolving these lawsuits, to the extent that we are able to assess them, without material financial 
impact to the Bank. This is, however, an area of significant judgment and the potential liability resulting from these lawsuits 
could be material to our results of operations in any particular period. 
Various other legal proceedings are pending that challenge certain of our other practices or actions. While this is an area of 
significant judgment and some matters are currently inestimable, we consider that the aggregate liability, to the extent that we 
are able to assess it, resulting from these other proceedings will not be material to our consolidated financial position or results 
of operations. 
Note 25
 Related party transactions 
Related parties 
Related parties include associated companies, post-employment benefit plans for the benefit of our employees, key management 
personnel (KMP), the Board of Directors (Directors), close family members of KMP and Directors, and entities which are, directly 
or indirectly, controlled by, jointly controlled by or significantly influenced by KMP, Directors or their close family members. 
216
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Key management personnel and Directors 
KMP are defined as those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, directing and controlling our activities, 
directly or indirectly. They include the senior members of our organization called the Group Executive (GE). The GE is comprised 
of the President and Chief Executive Officer, and the Chief Officers and Group Heads, who report directly to him. The Directors do 
not plan, direct, or control the activities of the entity; they oversee the management of the business and provide stewardship. 
Compensation of Key management personnel and Directors 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 (1) 
Salaries and other short-term employee benefits (2) 
$
19 
$
21 
Post-employment benefits (3) 
3 
2 
Share-based payments 
35 
32 
 
$
57 
$
55 
(1) 
During the year ended October 31, 2020 certain executives, who were members of the Bank’s Group Executive as at October 31, 2019, left the Bank and therefore, were no 
longer part of KMP. Compensation for the year ended October 31, 2020, attributable to the former executives, including benefits and share-based payments relating to 
awards granted in prior years was $27 million. 
(2) 
Includes the portion of the annual variable short-term incentive bonus that certain executives elected to receive in the form of DSUs. Refer to Note 20 for further details. 
Directors receive retainers but do not receive salaries and other short-term employee benefits. 
(3) 
Directors do not receive post-employment benefits. 
Stock options, stock awards and shares held by Key management personnel, Directors and their close family members 
 
As at  
 
October 31, 2021 (1) 
 
October 31, 2020 (2) 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except number of units) 
No. of 
units held 
Value  
No. of 
units held 
Value 
Stock options (3) 
2,369,659 
$
81  
1,912,482 
$
15 
Other non-option stock based awards (3) 
983,004 
127  
869,756 
81 
RBC common and preferred shares 
183,783 
24  
206,652 
19 
 
3,536,446 
$ 232  
2,988,890 
$
115 
(1) 
During the year ended October 31, 2021 certain directors, who were members of the Board of Directors as at October 31, 2020, retired. Total shareholdings held upon their 
retirement was 21,723 units with a value of $3 million. 
(2) 
During the year ended October 31, 2020 certain executives, who were members of the Bank’s Group Executive as at October 31, 2019, left the Bank and therefore, were no 
longer part of KMP. Total shareholdings and options held upon their departure was 1,600,184 units, with a value of $91 million. 
(3) 
Directors do not receive stock options or any other non-option stock based awards. 
Transactions, arrangements and agreements involving Key management personnel, Directors and their close family 
members 
In the normal course of business, we provide certain banking services to KMP, Directors, and their close family members. These 
transactions were made on substantially the same terms, including interest rates and security, as for comparable transactions 
with persons of a similar standing and did not involve more than the normal risk of repayment or present other unfavourable 
features. 
As at October 31, 2021, total loans to KMP, Directors and their close family members were $14 million (October 31, 2020 – 
$6 million). We have no stage 3 allowance or provision for credit losses relating to these loans as at and for the years ended 
October 31, 2021 and October 31, 2020. No guarantees, pledges or commitments have been given to KMP, Directors or their close 
family members. 
Joint ventures and associates 
In the normal course of business, we provide certain banking and financial services to our joint ventures and associates, 
including loans, interest and non-interest bearing deposits. These transactions meet the definition of related party transactions 
and were made on substantially the same terms as for comparable transactions with third parties. 
As at October 31, 2021, loans to joint ventures and associates were $340 million (October 31, 2020 – $215 million) and deposits 
from joint ventures and associates were $13 million (October 31, 2020 – $15 million). We have no stage 3 allowance or provision for 
credit losses relating to loans to joint ventures and associates as at and for the years ended October 31, 2021 and October 31, 
2020. $1 million of guarantees have been given to joint ventures and associates for the year ended October 31, 2021 (October 31, 
2020 – $1 million). 
Other transactions, arrangements or agreements involving joint ventures and associates 
 
As at or for the year  
ended  
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Commitments and other contingencies 
$ 1,017 
$
589 
Other fees received for services rendered 
48 
43 
Other fees paid for services received 
108 
117 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
217 

Note 26
 Results by business segment 
Composition of business segments 
For management purposes, based on the products and services offered, we are organized into five business segments: 
Personal & Commercial Banking, Wealth Management, Insurance, Investor & Treasury Services and Capital Markets. 
Personal & Commercial Banking provides a broad suite of financial products and services to individuals and businesses for their 
day-to-day banking, investing and financing needs through two businesses: Canadian Banking and Caribbean & U.S. Banking. In 
Canada, we provide a broad suite of financial products and services through our large branch network, automated teller 
machines, and mobile sales network. In the Caribbean and the U.S., we offer a broad range of financial products and services in 
targeted markets. Non-interest income in Personal & Commercial Banking mainly comprises Service charges, Mutual fund 
revenue and Card service revenue. 
Wealth Management serves high net worth and ultra-high net worth individual and institutional clients with a comprehensive 
suite of advice-based solutions and strategies to help them achieve their financial goals through our lines of businesses in 
Canada, the U.S., the U.K., Europe and Asia, including Canadian Wealth Management, U.S. Wealth Management (including City 
National), Global Asset Management, and International Wealth Management. Non-interest income in Wealth Management mainly 
comprises Investment management and custodial fees, Mutual fund revenue and Securities brokerage commissions. 
Insurance has operations in Canada and globally, operating under two business lines: Canadian Insurance and 
International Insurance, providing a wide range of life, health, home, auto, travel, wealth, annuities, reinsurance advice and 
solutions, and business insurance solutions to individual, business and group clients. In Canada, we offer our products and 
services through a wide variety of channels, comprised of mobile advisors, advice centres, RBC insurance stores, and digital, 
mobile and social platforms as well as through independent brokers and travel partners. Outside Canada, we operate in 
reinsurance and retrocession markets globally offering life, disability and longevity reinsurance products. Non-interest income in 
Insurance comprises Insurance premiums, investment and fee income. 
Investor & Treasury Services offers custody, fund and investment administration, shareholder services, private capital services, 
performance measurement and compliance monitoring, distribution, transaction banking, and treasury and market services 
(including cash and liquidity management, foreign exchange services and global securities finance). Non-interest income in 
Investor & Treasury Services mainly comprises Investment management and custodial fees, and Foreign exchange revenue, 
other than trading. 
Capital Markets provides expertise in advisory & origination, sales & trading, and lending & financing to corporations, 
institutional clients, asset managers, private equity firms and governments globally in our two main business lines: Corporate 
and Investment Banking and Global Markets. In North America, we offer a full suite of products and services which include equity 
and debt origination and distribution, advisory services, and sales & trading. Outside North America, we have a targeted strategic 
presence in the U.K. & Europe, Australia, Asia & other markets aligned to our global expertise. In the U.K. & Europe, we offer a 
diversified set of capabilities in key industry sectors of focus. In Australia and Asia, we compete with global and regional 
investment banks in targeted areas aligned to our global expertise, including fixed income distribution and currencies trading, 
secured financing, as well as corporate and investment banking. Non-interest income in Capital Markets mainly includes Trading 
revenue, Underwriting and other advisory fees and Credit fees. 
All other enterprise level activities that are not allocated to these five business segments, such as certain treasury and liquidity 
management activities, including amounts associated with unattributed capital, and consolidation adjustments, including the 
elimination of the Taxable equivalent basis (Teb) gross-up amounts, are included in Corporate Support. Teb adjustments gross 
up income from certain tax-advantaged sources from Canadian taxable corporate dividends and U.S. tax credit investments 
recorded in Capital Markets to their effective tax equivalent value with the corresponding offset recorded in the provision for 
income taxes. Management believes that these Teb adjustments are necessary for Capital Markets to reflect how it is managed 
and enhances the comparability of revenue across our taxable and tax-advantaged sources. Our use of Teb adjustments may not 
be comparable to similarly adjusted amounts at other financial institutions. The Teb adjustment for the year ended October 31, 
2021 was $518 million (October 31, 2020 – $513 million). Gains (losses) on economic hedges of our U.S. Wealth Management 
(including City National) share-based compensation plans, which are reflected in revenue, and related variability in share-based 
compensation expense driven by changes in the fair value of liabilities relating to these plans are also included in Corporate 
Support as this presentation more closely aligns with how we view business performance and manage the underlying risks. 
Geographic segments 
For geographic reporting, our segments are grouped into Canada, United States and Other International. Transactions are 
primarily recorded in the location that best reflects the risk due to negative changes in economic conditions and prospects for 
growth due to positive economic changes. This location frequently corresponds with the location of the legal entity through 
which the business is conducted and the location of our clients. Transactions are recorded in the local currency and are subject 
to foreign exchange rate fluctuations with respect to the movement in the Canadian dollar. 
Management reporting framework 
Our management reporting framework is intended to measure the performance of each business segment as if it were a stand-
alone business and reflects the way that the business segment is managed. This approach is intended to ensure that our 
business segments’ results include all applicable revenue and expenses associated with the conduct of their business and 
depicts how management views those results. We regularly monitor these segment results for the purpose of making decisions 
about resource allocation and performance assessment. These items do not impact our consolidated results. 
The expenses in each business segment may include costs or services directly incurred or provided on their behalf at the 
enterprise level. For other costs not directly attributable to one of our business segments, we use a management reporting 
framework that uses assumptions and methodologies for allocating overhead costs and indirect expenses to our business 
218
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

segments and that assists in the attribution of capital and the transfer pricing of funds to our business segments in a manner that 
consistently measures and aligns the economic costs with the underlying benefits and risks of that specific business segment. 
Activities and business conducted between our business segments are generally at market rates. All other enterprise level 
activities that are not allocated to our five business segments are reported under Corporate Support. 
Our assumptions and methodologies used in our management reporting framework are periodically reviewed by us to 
ensure that they remain valid. The capital attribution methodologies involve a number of assumptions that are revised 
periodically. 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Personal & 
Commercial 
Banking 
Wealth 
Management Insurance 
Investor & 
Treasury 
Services 
Capital 
Markets (1) 
Corporate 
Support (1) 
Total 
Canada 
United 
States 
Other 
International 
Net interest income (2) 
$
12,621 $
2,689 $
–  $
460 $
4,553 $
(321) $
20,002 $ 13,947 $
4,447 $
1,608 
Non-interest income 
5,725 
10,607 
5,600 
1,704 
5,634 
421 
29,691 
15,454 
8,083 
6,154 
Total revenue 
18,346 
13,296 
5,600 
2,164 
10,187 
100 
49,693 
29,401 
12,530 
7,762 
Provision for credit losses 
(187) 
(47) 
(1) 
(8) 
(509) 
(1) 
(753) 
(203) 
(277) 
(273) 
Insurance policyholder 
benefits, claims and 
acquisition expense 
–  
–  
3,891 
–  
–  
–  
3,891 
2,036 
–  
1,855 
Non-interest expense 
7,978 
9,929 
596 
1,589 
5,427 
405 
25,924 
12,897 
9,107 
3,920 
Net income (loss) before 
income taxes 
10,555 
3,414 
1,114 
583 
5,269 
(304) 
20,631 
14,671 
3,700 
2,260 
Income taxes (recoveries) 
2,708 
788 
225 
143 
1,082 
(365) 
4,581 
3,599 
649 
333 
Net income 
$
7,847 $
2,626 $
889 $
440 $
4,187 $
61 $
16,050 $ 11,072 $
3,051 $
1,927 
Non-interest expense 
includes: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Depreciation and 
amortization 
$
923 $
883 $
59 $
197 $
497 $
4 $
2,563 $
1,594 $
728 $
241 
Impairment of other 
intangibles 
5 
3 
1 
2 
18 
–  
29 
16 
11 
2 
Total assets 
$ 549,702 $
148,990 $ 22,724 $240,055 $ 692,278 $
52,574 $1,706,323 $964,747 $454,949 $
286,627 
Total assets include: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additions to premises and 
equipment and 
intangibles 
$
503 $
752 $
48 $
80 $
355 $
459 $
2,197 $
1,238 $
739 $
220 
Total liabilities 
$ 549,619 $
149,096 $ 22,966 $239,960 $ 691,767 $
(45,847) $1,607,561 $866,287 $454,903 $
286,371 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For the year ended October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Personal & 
Commercial 
Banking 
Wealth 
Management (3) 
Insurance 
Investor & 
Treasury 
Services 
Capital 
Markets (1) 
Corporate 
Support (1), (3) 
Total 
Canada 
United 
States 
Other 
International 
Net interest income (2) 
$
12,568 $
2,860 $
– $
329 $
5,135 $
(57) $
20,835 $
14,185 $
4,959 $
1,691 
Non-interest income 
5,163 
9,270 
5,361 
1,982 
4,749 
(179) 
26,346 
13,510 
6,775 
6,061 
Total revenue 
17,731 
12,130 
5,361 
2,311 
9,884 
(236) 
47,181 
27,695 
11,734 
7,752 
Provision for credit losses 
2,891 
214 
– 
6 
1,239 
1 
4,351 
2,881 
949 
521 
Insurance policyholder 
benefits, claims and 
acquisition expense 
– 
– 
3,683 
– 
– 
– 
3,683 
1,993 
– 
1,690 
Non-interest expense 
7,946 
9,123 
592 
1,589 
5,362 
146 
24,758 
12,513 
8,380 
3,865 
Net income (loss) before 
income taxes 
6,894 
2,793 
1,086 
716 
3,283 
(383) 
14,389 
10,308 
2,405 
1,676 
Income taxes (recoveries) 
1,807 
639 
255 
180 
507 
(436) 
2,952 
2,516 
209 
227 
Net income 
$
5,087 $
2,154 $
831 $
536 $
2,776 $
53 $
11,437 $
7,792 $
2,196 $
1,449 
Non-interest expense 
includes: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Depreciation and 
amortization 
$
929 $
879 $
58 $
217 $
517 $
6 $
2,606 $
1,587 $
725 $
294 
Impairment of other 
intangibles 
– 
1 
– 
7 
6 
28 
42 
40 
1 
1 
Total assets 
$ 509,679 $
129,706 $ 21,253 $ 230,695 $
688,054 $
45,161 $ 1,624,548 $ 911,932 $ 431,473 $
281,143 
Total assets include: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additions to premises and 
equipment and 
intangibles 
$
722 $
704 $
46 $
101 $
452 $
559 $
2,584 $
1,454 $
706 $
424 
Total liabilities 
$ 509,682 $
129,673 $ 21,311 $ 230,618 $
688,314 $
(41,817) $ 1,537,781 $ 825,034 $ 431,570 $
281,177 
(1) 
Taxable equivalent basis. 
(2) 
Interest revenue is reported net of interest expense as we rely primarily on net interest income as a performance measure. 
(3) 
Effective Q4 2021, gains (losses) on economic hedges of our U.S. share-based compensation plans, which are reflected in revenue, and related variability in share-based 
compensation expense driven by changes in the fair value of liabilities relating to our U.S. share-based compensation plans have been reclassified from our Wealth 
Management segment to Corporate Support. Comparative amounts have been reclassified to conform with this presentation. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
219 

Note 27
Nature and extent of risks arising from financial instruments 
We are exposed to credit, market and liquidity and funding risks as a result of holding financial instruments. Our risk 
measurement and objectives, policies and methodologies for managing these risks are disclosed in the shaded text along with 
those tables specifically marked with an asterisk (*) in the Credit risk section of Management’s Discussion and Analysis. These 
shaded text and tables are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Concentrations of credit risk exist if a number of our counterparties are engaged in similar activities, are located in the same 
geographic region or have comparable economic characteristics such that their ability to meet contractual obligations would be 
similarly affected by changes in economic, political or other conditions. 
Concentrations of credit risk indicate the relative sensitivity of our performance to developments affecting a particular 
industry or geographic location. The amounts of credit exposure associated with certain of our on- and off-balance sheet 
financial instruments are summarized in the following tables. 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, 
except percentage amounts) 
Canada 
% 
United 
States 
% 
Europe 
% 
Other 
International 
% 
Total 
On-balance sheet assets other 
than derivatives (1) 
$ 701,779 
67% $ 213,389 
20% $
85,271 
8% $
49,001 
5% $ 1,049,440 
Derivatives before master 
netting agreements (2), (3) 
19,927 
21% 
23,910 
25% 
45,717 
47% 
7,111 
7% 
96,665 
 
$ 721,706 
63% $ 237,299 
21% $ 130,988 
11% $
56,112 
5% $ 1,146,105 
Off-balance sheet credit 
instruments (4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committed and uncommitted (5) 
$ 370,479 
59% $ 196,692 
32% $
46,187 
8% $
9,335 
1% $
622,693 
Other 
82,010 
66% 
14,014 
11% 
26,920 
22% 
1,383 
1% 
124,327 
 
$ 452,489 
61% $ 210,706 
28% $
73,107 
10% $
10,718 
1% $
747,020 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, 
except percentage amounts) 
As at October 31, 2020 
Canada 
% 
United 
States 
% 
Europe 
% 
Other 
International 
% 
Total 
On-balance sheet assets other 
than derivatives (1), (6) 
$
650,311 
65% $
222,087 
22% $
78,836 
8% $
47,026 
5% $
998,260 
Derivatives before master 
netting agreements (2), (3) 
22,761 
20% 
28,074 
24% 
56,229 
49% 
8,185 
7% 
115,249 
 
$
673,072 
61% $
250,161 
22% $
135,065 
12% $
55,211 
5% $
1,113,509 
Off-balance sheet credit 
instruments (4) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Committed and uncommitted (5), (6) $
380,352 
63% $
171,922 
29% $
34,785 
6% $
11,689 
2% $
598,748 
Other 
62,329 
60% 
12,697 
12% 
27,232 
26% 
2,208 
2% 
104,466 
 
$
442,681 
63% $
184,619 
26% $
62,017 
9% $
13,897 
2% $
703,214 
(1) 
Includes assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed, loans and customers’ liability under acceptances. The largest concentrations 
in Canada are Ontario at 56% (October 31, 2020 – 56%), the Prairies at 16% (October 31, 2020 – 16%), British Columbia and the territories at 14% (October 31, 2020 – 14%) 
and Quebec at 10% (October 31, 2020 – 10%). No industry accounts for more than 24% (October 31, 2020 – 25%) of total on-balance sheet credit instruments. The 
classification of our sectors aligns with our view of credit risk by industry. 
(2) 
A further breakdown of our derivative exposures by risk rating and counterparty type is provided in Note 8. 
(3) 
Excludes valuation adjustments determined on a pooled basis. 
(4) 
Balances presented are contractual amounts representing our maximum exposure to credit risk. 
(5) 
Represents our maximum exposure to credit risk. Retail and wholesale commitments respectively comprise 45% and 55% of our total commitments (October 31, 2020 – 
46% and 54%). The largest concentrations in the wholesale portfolio relate to Financial services at 13% (October 31, 2020 – 13%), Utilities at 10% (October 31, 2020 – 12%), 
Real estate & related at 10% (October 31, 2020 – 10%), Other services at 8% (October 31, 2020 – 8%), and Oil & gas at 6% (October 31, 2020 – 7%). The classification of our 
sectors aligns with our view of credit risk by industry. Certain sector percentage amounts have been revised from those previously presented. 
(6) 
Amounts and percentage amounts by geography have been revised from those previously presented. 
220
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Note 28
Capital management 
Regulatory capital and capital ratios 
OSFI formally establishes risk-based capital and leverage targets for deposit-taking institutions in Canada. We are required to 
calculate our capital ratios using the Basel III framework. Under Basel III, regulatory capital includes Common Equity Tier 1 
(CET1), Tier 1 and Tier 2 capital. CET1 capital mainly consists of common shares, retained earnings and other components of 
equity. Regulatory adjustments under Basel III include deductions of goodwill and other intangibles, certain deferred tax assets, 
defined benefit pension fund assets, investments in banking, financial and insurance entities, and the shortfall of provisions to 
expected losses. Tier 1 capital comprises predominantly CET1 and Additional Tier 1 items including non-cumulative preferred 
shares and LRCNs that meet certain criteria. Tier 2 capital includes subordinated debentures that meet certain criteria, certain 
loan loss allowances and non-controlling interests in subsidiaries Tier 2 instruments. Total capital is the sum of Tier 1 and Tier 2 
capital. 
Regulatory capital ratios are calculated by dividing CET1, Tier 1 and Total capital by risk-weighted assets. The leverage ratio 
is calculated by dividing Tier 1 capital by an exposure measure. The exposure measure consists of total assets (excluding items 
deducted from Tier 1 capital) and certain off-balance sheet items converted into credit exposure equivalents. Adjustments are 
also made to derivatives and secured financing transactions to reflect credit and other risks. 
During 2021 and 2020, we complied with all capital and leverage requirements, including the domestic stability buffer, imposed by 
OSFI. 
 
As at  
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except percentage amounts and as otherwise noted) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Capital (1) 
 
 
CET1 capital 
$
75,583 
$
68,082 
Tier 1 capital 
82,246 
74,005 
Total capital 
92,026 
84,928 
Risk-weighted assets (RWA) used in calculation of capital ratios (1) 
 
 
Credit risk 
$ 444,142 
$ 448,821 
Market risk 
34,806 
27,374 
Operational risk 
73,593 
70,047 
Total RWA 
$ 552,541 
$ 546,242 
Capital ratios and Leverage ratio (1) 
 
 
CET1 ratio 
13.7% 
12.5% 
Tier 1 capital ratio 
14.9% 
13.5% 
Total capital ratio 
16.7% 
15.5% 
Leverage ratio 
4.9% 
4.8% 
Leverage ratio exposure (billions) 
$
1,662 
$
1,553 
(1) 
Capital, RWA, and capital ratios are calculated using OSFI’s Capital Adequacy Requirements (CAR) guideline and the Leverage ratio is calculated using OSFI’s Leverage 
Requirements (LR) guideline as updated in accordance with the regulatory guidance issued by OSFI in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Both the CAR guideline and LR 
guideline are based on the Basel III framework. 
Note 29
Offsetting financial assets and financial liabilities 
Offsetting within our Consolidated Balance Sheets may be achieved where financial assets and liabilities are subject to master 
netting arrangements that provide the currently enforceable right of offset and where there is an intention to settle on a net 
basis, or realize the assets and settle the liabilities simultaneously. For derivative contracts and repurchase and reverse 
repurchase arrangements, this is generally achieved when there is a market mechanism for settlement (e.g., central counterparty 
exchange or clearing house) which provides daily net settlement of cash flows arising from these contracts. Margin receivables 
and margin payables are generally offset as they settle simultaneously through a market settlement mechanism. 
Amounts that do not qualify for offsetting include master netting arrangements that only permit outstanding transactions 
with the same counterparty to be offset in an event of default or occurrence of other predetermined events. Such master netting 
arrangements include the International Swaps and Derivatives Association Master Agreement or certain derivative exchange or 
clearing counterparty agreements for derivative contracts, global master repurchase agreement and global master securities 
lending agreements for repurchase, reverse repurchase and other similar secured lending and borrowing arrangements. 
The amount of financial collateral received or pledged subject to master netting arrangements or similar agreements but do 
not qualify for offsetting refers to the collateral received or pledged to cover the net exposure between counterparties by 
enabling the collateral to be realized in an event of default or the occurrence of other predetermined events. Certain amounts of 
collateral are restricted from being sold or re-pledged unless there is an event of default or the occurrence of other 
predetermined events. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
221 

Note 29
Offsetting financial assets and financial liabilities (continued) 
The following tables provide the amount of financial instruments that have been offset on the Consolidated Balance Sheets 
and the amounts that do not qualify for offsetting but are subject to enforceable master netting arrangements or similar 
agreements. The amounts presented are not intended to represent our actual exposure to credit risk. 
Financial assets subject to offsetting, enforceable master netting arrangements or similar agreements 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Amounts subject to offsetting and enforceable netting arrangements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amounts subject to master 
netting arrangements or 
similar agreements but do 
not qualify for offsetting on 
the balance sheet (1) 
 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Gross amounts 
of financial 
assets before 
balance sheet 
offsetting 
Amounts of 
financial 
liabilities 
offset on the 
balance sheet 
Net amount of 
financial assets 
presented on the 
balance sheet 
Impact of 
master 
netting 
agreements 
Financial 
collateral 
received (2) 
Net amount 
Amounts not 
subject to 
enforceable 
netting 
arrangements 
Total amount 
recognized 
on the 
balance sheet 
Assets purchased under reverse 
repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed 
$
384,439 
$
77,028 
$
307,411 
$ 
101 
$ 305,071 
$ 
2,239 
$ 
492 
$
307,903 
Derivative assets (3) 
84,595 
314 
84,281 
57,101 
12,978 
14,202 
11,260 
95,541 
Other financial assets 
412 
240 
172 
1 
61 
110 
– 
172 
 
$
469,446 
$
77,582 
$
391,864 
$
57,203 
$ 318,110 
$
16,551 
$
11,752 
$
403,616 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
Amounts subject to offsetting and enforceable netting arrangements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amounts subject to master 
netting arrangements or 
similar agreements but do 
not qualify for offsetting on 
the balance sheet (1) 
 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Gross amounts 
of financial 
assets before 
balance sheet 
offsetting 
Amounts of 
financial 
liabilities 
offset on the 
balance sheet 
Net amount of 
financial assets 
presented on the 
balance sheet 
Impact of 
master 
netting 
agreements 
Financial 
collateral 
received (2) 
Net amount 
Amounts not 
subject to 
enforceable 
netting 
arrangements 
Total amount 
recognized 
on the 
balance sheet 
Assets purchased under reverse 
repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed 
$
347,327 
$
35,783 
$
311,544 
$
36 
$
310,128 
$
1,380 
$
1,471 
$
313,015 
Derivative assets (3) 
99,535 
657 
98,878 
69,300 
18,627 
10,951 
14,610 
113,488 
Other financial assets 
445 
192 
253 
2 
50 
201 
– 
253 
 
$
447,307 
$
36,632 
$
410,675 
$
69,338 
$
328,805 
$
12,532 
$
16,081 
$
426,756 
(1) 
Financial collateral is reflected at fair value. The amount of financial instruments and financial collateral disclosed is limited to the net balance sheet exposure, and any 
over-collateralization is excluded from the table. 
(2) 
Includes cash collateral of $12 billion (October 31, 2020 – $15 billion) and non-cash collateral of $307 billion (October 31, 2020 – $314 billion). 
(3) 
Includes cash margin of $3 billion (October 31, 2020 - $5 billion) which offset against the derivative balance on the balance sheet. 
Financial liabilities subject to offsetting, enforceable master netting arrangements or similar agreements 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
 
Amounts subject to offsetting and enforceable netting arrangements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amounts subject to master 
netting arrangements or 
similar agreements but do 
not qualify for offsetting on 
the balance sheet (1) 
 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Gross amounts 
of financial 
liabilities before 
balance sheet 
offsetting 
Amounts of 
financial 
assets 
offset on the 
balance sheet 
Net amount of 
financial liabilities 
presented on the 
balance sheet 
Impact of 
master 
netting 
agreements 
Financial 
collateral 
pledged (2) 
Net amount 
Amounts not 
subject to 
enforceable 
netting 
arrangements 
Total amount 
recognized 
on the 
balance sheet 
Obligations related to assets sold 
under repurchase agreements 
and securities loaned 
$
338,737 
$
77,028 
$
261,709 
$ 
101 
$ 261,135 
$ 
473 
$ 
492 
$
262,201 
Derivative liabilities (3) 
77,514 
314 
77,200 
57,101 
10,503 
9,596 
14,239 
91,439 
Other financial liabilities 
412 
240 
172 
1 
– 
171 
– 
172 
 
$
416,663 
$
77,582 
$
339,081 
$
57,203 
$ 271,638 
$
10,240 
$
14,731 
$
353,812 
 
 
As at October 31, 2020 
 
Amounts subject to offsetting and enforceable netting arrangements 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amounts subject to master 
netting arrangements or 
similar agreements but do 
not qualify for offsetting on 
the balance sheet (1) 
 
 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Gross amounts 
of financial 
liabilities before 
balance sheet 
offsetting 
Amounts of 
financial 
assets 
offset on the 
balance sheet 
Net amount of 
financial liabilities 
presented on the 
balance sheet 
Impact of 
master 
netting 
agreements 
Financial 
collateral 
pledged (2) 
Net amount 
Amounts not 
subject to 
enforceable 
netting 
arrangements 
Total amount 
recognized 
on the 
balance sheet 
Obligations related to assets sold 
under repurchase agreements 
and securities loaned 
$
309,130 
$
35,783 
$
273,347 
$
36 
$
272,871 
$
440 
$
884 
$
274,231 
Derivative liabilities (3) 
96,138 
657 
95,481 
69,300 
16,232 
9,949 
14,446 
109,927 
Other financial liabilities 
358 
192 
166 
2 
– 
164 
– 
166 
 
$
405,626 
$
36,632 
$
368,994 
$
69,338 
$
289,103 
$
10,553 
$
15,330 
$
384,324 
(1) 
Financial collateral is reflected at fair value. The amount of financial instruments and financial collateral disclosed is limited to the net balance sheet exposure, and any 
over-collateralization is excluded from the table. 
(2) 
Includes cash collateral of $9 billion (October 31, 2020 – $14 billion) and non-cash collateral of $262 billion (October 31, 2020 – $276 billion). 
(3) 
Includes cash margin of $3 billion (October 31, 2020 – $2 billion) which offset against the derivative balance on the balance sheet. 
222
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021 
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Note 30
Recovery and settlement of on-balance sheet assets and liabilities 
The table below presents an analysis of assets and liabilities recorded on our Consolidated Balance Sheets by amounts to be 
recovered or settled within one year and after one year, as at the balance sheet date, based on contractual maturities and 
certain other assumptions outlined in the footnotes below. As warranted, we manage the liquidity risk of various products based 
on historical behavioural patterns that are often not aligned with contractual maturities. Amounts to be recovered or settled 
within one year, as presented below, may not be reflective of our long-term view of the liquidity profile of certain balance sheet 
categories. 
 
As at  
October 31, 2021 
 
October 31, 2020 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
Within one 
year 
After one 
year 
Total  
Within one 
year 
After one 
year 
Total 
Assets 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Cash and due from banks (1) 
$
112,924 $
922 $
113,846  $
117,375 $
1,513 $
118,888 
Interest-bearing deposits with 
banks 
79,638 
– 
79,638  
39,013 
– 
39,013 
Securities 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Trading (2) 
129,206 
10,034 
139,240  
126,309 
9,762 
136,071 
Investment, net of applicable 
allowance 
29,831 
115,653 
145,484  
34,728 
105,015 
139,743 
Assets purchased under reverse 
repurchase agreements and 
securities borrowed 
307,805 
98 
307,903  
313,013 
2 
313,015 
Loans 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Retail 
98,946 
404,652 
503,598  
97,223 
360,753 
457,976 
Wholesale 
60,099 
157,967 
218,066  
51,296 
157,359 
208,655 
Allowance for loan losses 
 
 
(4,089)  
 
 
(5,639) 
Segregated fund net assets 
– 
2,666 
2,666  
– 
1,922 
1,922 
Other 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Customers’ liability under 
acceptances 
19,793 
5 
19,798  
18,507 
– 
18,507 
Derivatives (2) 
93,409 
2,132 
95,541  
110,217 
3,271 
113,488 
Premises and equipment 
28 
7,396 
7,424  
– 
7,934 
7,934 
Goodwill 
– 
10,854 
10,854  
– 
11,302 
11,302 
Other intangibles 
– 
4,471 
4,471  
– 
4,752 
4,752 
Other assets 
47,634 
14,249 
61,883  
46,953 
11,968 
58,921 
 
$
979,313 $
731,099 $
1,706,323  
$
954,634 $
675,553 $
1,624,548 
Liabilities 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Deposits (3), (4) 
$
943,633 $
157,198 $
1,100,831  
$
859,829 $
152,056 $
1,011,885 
Segregated fund net liabilities 
– 
2,666 
2,666  
– 
1,922 
1,922 
Other 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Acceptances 
19,868 
5 
19,873  
18,618 
– 
18,618 
Obligations related to securities 
sold short 
35,524 
2,317 
37,841  
26,754 
2,531 
29,285 
Obligations related to assets sold 
under repurchase agreements 
and securities loaned 
261,533 
668 
262,201  
269,260 
4,971 
274,231 
Derivatives (2) 
89,804 
1,635 
91,439  
108,407 
1,520 
109,927 
Insurance claims and policy 
benefit liabilities 
1,867 
10,949 
12,816  
1,798 
10,417 
12,215 
Other liabilities 
48,901 
21,400 
70,301  
48,844 
20,987 
69,831 
Subordinated debentures 
188 
9,405 
9,593  
– 
9,867 
9,867 
 
$
1,401,318 $
206,243 $
1,607,561  
$ 1,333,510 $
204,271 $
1,537,781 
(1) 
Cash and due from banks are assumed to be recovered within one year, except for cash balances not available for use by the Bank. 
(2) 
Trading securities classified as FVTPL and trading derivatives are presented as within one year as this best represents in most instances the short-term nature of our 
trading activities. Non-trading derivatives are presented according to the recovery or settlement of the hedging transaction. 
(3) 
Demand deposits of $576 billion (October 31, 2020 – $511 billion) are presented as within one year due to their being repayable on demand or at short notice on a 
contractual basis. In practice, these deposits relate to a broad range of individuals and customer-types which form a stable base for our operations and liquidity needs. 
(4) 
Amounts previously presented were reclassified to reflect the contractual maturities of certain term deposits. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
223 
 

Note 31
Parent company information 
The following table presents information regarding the legal entity of Royal Bank of Canada with its subsidiaries presented on an 
equity accounted basis. 
Condensed Balance Sheets 
 
As at 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Assets 
 
 
Cash and due from banks 
$
97,617 $
109,397 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
56,896 
21,603 
Securities 
153,780 
146,524 
Investments in bank subsidiaries and associated corporations (1) 
43,546 
41,029 
Investments in other subsidiaries and associated corporations 
80,216 
76,358 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed 
125,590 
134,037 
Loans, net of allowance for loan losses 
601,742 
554,173 
Other assets 
155,421 
171,622 
 
$
1,314,808 $
1,254,743 
Liabilities and shareholders’ equity 
 
 
Deposits 
$
854,833 $
782,637 
Net balances due to bank subsidiaries (1) 
28,201 
42,157 
Net balances due to other subsidiaries 
38,309 
36,421 
Other liabilities 
285,447 
297,261 
 
1,206,790 
1,158,476 
Subordinated debentures 
9,351 
9,603 
Shareholders’ equity 
98,667 
86,664 
 
$
1,314,808 $
1,254,743 
(1) 
Bank refers primarily to regulated deposit-taking institutions and securities firms. 
Condensed Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Interest and dividend income (1) 
$
19,793 $
23,596 
Interest expense 
5,615 
9,548 
Net interest income 
14,178 
14,048 
Non-interest income (2) 
5,393 
4,792 
Total revenue 
19,571 
18,840 
Provision for credit losses 
(606) 
3,888 
Non-interest expense 
9,466 
9,580 
Income before income taxes 
10,711 
5,372 
Income taxes 
2,088 
1,139 
Net income before equity in undistributed income of subsidiaries 
8,623 
4,233 
Equity in undistributed income of subsidiaries 
7,415 
7,199 
Net income 
$
16,038 $
11,432 
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of taxes 
1,463 
(1,137) 
Total comprehensive income 
$
17,501 $
10,295 
(1) 
Includes dividend income from investments in subsidiaries and associated corporations of $5 million (October 31, 2020 – $27 million). 
(2) 
Includes a nominal share of profit (loss) from associated corporations (October 31, 2020 – nominal). 
224
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Consolidated Financial Statements 

Condensed Statements of Cash Flows 
 
For the year ended 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
October 31 
2021 
October 31 
2020 
Cash flows from operating activities 
 
 
Net income 
$
16,038 $
11,432 
Adjustments to determine net cash from operating activities: 
 
 
Change in undistributed earnings of subsidiaries 
(7,415) 
(7,199) 
Change in deposits, net of securitizations 
72,196 
101,128 
Change in loans, net of securitizations 
(46,194) 
(30,833) 
Change in trading securities 
(8,756) 
404 
Change in obligations related to assets sold under repurchase agreements and 
securities loaned 
5,228 
26,716 
Change in assets purchased under reverse repurchase agreements and securities borrowed 
8,447 
(10,282) 
Change in obligations related to securities sold short 
2,405 
(3,032) 
Other operating activities, net 
6,316 
685 
Net cash from (used in) operating activities 
48,265 
89,019 
Cash flows from investing activities 
 
 
Change in interest-bearing deposits with banks 
(35,293) 
676 
Proceeds from sales and maturities of investment securities 
70,260 
74,849 
Purchases of investment securities 
(73,150) 
(101,551) 
Net acquisitions of premises and equipment and other intangibles 
(1,093) 
(1,243) 
Change in cash invested in subsidiaries 
(3,078) 
1,484 
Change in net funding provided to subsidiaries 
(12,068) 
39,306 
Net cash from (used in) investing activities 
(54,422) 
13,521 
Cash flows from financing activities 
 
 
Issuance of subordinated debentures 
2,750 
2,750 
Repayment of subordinated debentures 
(2,500) 
(3,000) 
Issue of common shares, net of issuance costs 
90 
70 
Common shares purchased for cancellation 
– 
(814) 
Issue of preferred shares and other equity instruments, net of issuance costs 
2,245 
1,745 
Redemption of preferred shares and other equity instruments 
(1,475) 
(1,508) 
Dividends paid on shares and distributions paid on other equity instruments 
(6,420) 
(6,333) 
Repayment of lease liabilities 
(313) 
(317) 
Net cash from (used in) financing activities 
(5,623) 
(7,407) 
Net change in cash and due from banks 
(11,780) 
95,133 
Cash and due from banks at beginning of year 
109,397 
14,264 
Cash and due from banks at end of year 
$
97,617 $
109,397 
Supplemental disclosure of cash flow information 
 
 
Amount of interest paid 
$
6,306 $
10,335 
Amount of interest received 
17,831 
22,340 
Amount of dividends received 
2,185 
1,977 
Amount of income taxes paid 
1,772 
917 
Note 32
Subsequent events 
On November 5, 2021, we issued 750 thousand of Non-Cumulative 5-Year Fixed Rate Reset First Preferred Shares, Series BT 
(Preferred Shares Series BT) to certain institutional investors, at a price of $1,000 per share. The Preferred Shares Series BT will 
bear interest at a fixed rate of 4.2% per annum until February 24, 2027, payable semi-annually, and thereafter, at a rate per 
annum, reset every fifth year, equal to the 5-year Government of Canada Yield plus 2.71%. 
Consolidated Financial Statements
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
225 

Ten-year statistical review 
Condensed Balance Sheets 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) (1) 
2021 
2020 
2019 
2018 
2017 
2016 
2015 
2014 
2013 
2012 
Assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash and due from banks 
$
113,846 
$
118,888 
$
26,310 
$
30,209 
$
28,407 
$
14,929 
$
12,452 
$
17,421 
$
15,550 
$
12,428 
Interest-bearing deposits with banks 
79,638 
39,013 
38,345 
36,471 
32,662 
27,851 
22,690 
8,399 
9,039 
10,246 
Securities, net of applicable allowance (2) 
284,724 
275,814 
249,004 
222,866 
218,379 
236,093 
215,508 
199,148 
182,710 
161,602 
Assets purchased under reverse repurchase 
agreements and securities borrowed 
307,903 
313,015 
306,961 
294,602 
220,977 
186,302 
174,723 
135,580 
117,517 
112,257 
Loans, net of allowance 
717,575 
660,992 
618,856 
576,818 
542,617 
521,604 
472,223 
435,229 
408,850 
378,241 
Other 
202,637 
216,826 
189,459 
173,768 
169,811 
193,479 
176,612 
144,773 
126,079 
149,180 
Total assets 
$1,706,323 
$1,624,548 
$1,428,935 
$1,334,734 
$1,212,853 
$1,180,258 
$1,074,208 
$
940,550 
$
859,745 
$
823,954 
Liabilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deposits (3) 
$1,100,831 
$1,011,885 
$
886,005 
$
836,197 
$
789,036 
$
757,589 
$
697,227 
$
614,100 
$
563,079 
$
512,244 
Other (3) 
497,137 
516,029 
449,490 
409,451 
340,124 
341,295 
305,675 
264,088 
239,763 
259,174 
Subordinated debentures 
9,593 
9,867 
9,815 
9,131 
9,265 
9,762 
7,362 
7,859 
7,443 
7,615 
Total liabilities 
1,607,561 
1,537,781 
1,345,310 
1,254,779 
1,138,425 
1,108,646 
1,010,264 
886,047 
810,285 
779,033 
Equity attributable to shareholders 
98,667 
86,664 
83,523 
79,861 
73,829 
71,017 
62,146 
52,690 
47,665 
43,160 
Non-controlling interest 
95 
103 
102 
94 
599 
595 
1,798 
1,813 
1,795 
1,761 
Total equity 
98,762 
86,767 
83,625 
79,955 
74,428 
71,612 
63,944 
54,503 
49,460 
44,921 
Total liabilities and equity 
$1,706,323 
$1,624,548 
$1,428,935 
$1,334,734 
$1,212,853 
$1,180,258 
$1,074,208 
$
940,550 
$
859,745 
$
823,954 
Condensed Income Statements 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) (1) 
2021 
2020 
2019 
2018 
2017 
2016 
2015 
2014 
2013 
2012 
Net interest income (3) 
$
20,002 
$
20,835 
$
19,749 
$
17,952 
$
16,926 
$
16,531 
$
14,771 
$
14,116 
$
13,249 
$
12,439 
Non-interest income (3), (4) 
29,691 
26,346 
26,253 
24,624 
23,743 
22,264 
20,932 
19,992 
17,433 
16,708 
Total revenue (4) 
49,693 
47,181 
46,002 
42,576 
40,669 
38,795 
35,703 
34,108 
30,682 
29,147 
Provision for credit losses (5) 
(753) 
4,351 
1,864 
1,307 
1,150 
1,546 
1,097 
1,164 
1,237 
1,299 
Insurance policyholder benefits, claims and 
acquisition expense 
3,891 
3,683 
4,085 
2,676 
3,053 
3,424 
2,963 
3,573 
2,784 
3,621 
Non-interest expense (4) 
25,924 
24,758 
24,139 
22,833 
21,794 
20,526 
19,020 
17,661 
16,214 
14,641 
Net income from continuing operations 
16,050 
11,437 
12,871 
12,431 
11,469 
10,458 
10,026 
9,004 
8,342 
7,558 
Net loss from discontinued operations 
–  
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
(51) 
Net income 
$
16,050 
$
11,437 
$
12,871 
$
12,431 
$
11,469 
$
10,458 
$
10,026 
$
9,004 
$
8,342 
$
7,507 
Other Statistics – reported 
 
(Millions of Canadian dollars, except 
percentages and per share amounts) (1) 
2021 
2020 
2019 
2018 
2017 
2016 
2015 
2014 
2013 
2012 
PROFITABILITY MEASURES (6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Earnings per shares – basic 
$
11.08 
$
7.84 
$
8.78 
$
8.39 
$
7.59 
$
6.80 
$
6.75 
$
6.03 
$
5.53 
$
4.96 
– diluted 
$
11.06 
$
7.82 
$
8.75 
$
8.36 
$
7.56 
$
6.78 
$
6.73 
$
6.00 
$
5.49 
$
4.91 
Return on common equity (7), (8) 
18.6% 
14.2% 
16.8% 
17.6% 
17.0% 
16.3% 
18.6% 
19.0% 
19.7% 
19.6% 
Return on risk-weighted assets 
2.90% 
2.10% 
2.52% 
2.55% 
2.49% 
2.34% 
2.45% 
2.52% 
2.67% 
2.70% 
Efficiency ratio (4) 
52.2% 
52.5% 
52.5% 
53.6% 
53.6% 
52.9% 
53.3% 
51.8% 
52.8% 
50.2% 
KEY RATIOS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PCL on impaired loans as a % of average 
net loans and acceptances (9) 
0.10% 
0.24% 
0.27% 
0.20% 
0.21% 
0.28% 
0.24% 
0.27% 
0.31% 
0.35% 
Net interest margin 
(average earning assets, net) (3), (7) 
1.48% 
1.55% 
1.61% 
1.64% 
1.69% 
1.70% 
1.71% 
1.86% 
1.88% 
1.97% 
SHARE INFORMATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Common shares outstanding (000s) 
– end of period 
1,424,525 
1,422,473 
1,430,096 
1,438,794 
1,452,535 
1,484,235 
1,443,955 
1,443,125 
1,441,722 
1,445,846 
Dividends declared per common share 
$
4.32 
$
4.29 
$
4.07 
$
3.77 
$
3.48 
$
3.24 
$
3.08 
$
2.84 
$
2.53 
$
2.28 
Dividend yield (10) 
3.8% 
4.7% 
4.1% 
3.7% 
3.8% 
4.3% 
4.1% 
3.8% 
4.0% 
4.5% 
Dividend payout ratio 
39% 
55% 
46% 
45% 
46% 
48% 
46% 
47% 
46% 
46% 
Book value per share (11) 
$
64.57 
$
56.75 
$
54.41 
$
51.12 
$
46.41 
$
43.32 
$
39.51 
$
33.69 
$
29.87 
$
26.52 
Common share price (RY on TSX) (12) 
$
128.82 
$
93.16 
$
106.24 
$
95.92 
$
100.87 
$
83.80 
$
74.77 
$
80.01 
$
70.02 
$
56.94 
Market capitalization (TSX) (12) 
183,507 
132,518 
151,933 
138,009 
146,554 
124,476 
107,925 
115,393 
100,903 
82,296 
Market price to book value 
2.00 
1.64 
1.95 
1.88 
2.17 
1.93 
1.89 
2.38 
2.34 
2.15 
CAPITAL MEASURES – CONSOLIDATED (13) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio 
13.7% 
12.5% 
12.1% 
11.5% 
10.9% 
10.8% 
10.6% 
9.9% 
9.6% 
n.a. 
Tier 1 capital ratio 
14.9% 
13.5% 
13.2% 
12.8% 
12.3% 
12.3% 
12.2% 
11.4% 
11.7% 
13.1% 
Total capital ratio 
16.7% 
15.5% 
15.2% 
14.6% 
14.2% 
14.4% 
14.0% 
13.4% 
14.0% 
15.1% 
Leverage ratio 
4.9% 
4.8% 
4.3% 
4.4% 
4.4% 
4.4% 
4.3% 
n.a. 
n.a. 
n.a. 
(1) 
Effective November 1, 2019, we adopted IFRS 16 Leases. Results from periods prior to November 1, 2019 are reported in accordance with IAS 17 Leases in this 2021 Annual 
Report. Effective November 1, 2018, we adopted IFRS 15 Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Results from periods prior to November 1, 2018 are reported in 
accordance with IAS 18 Revenue in this 2021 Annual Report. Effective November 1, 2017, we adopted IFRS 9 Financial Instruments (IFRS 9). Results from periods prior to 
November 1, 2017 are reported in accordance with IAS 39 Financial Instruments: Recognition and Measurement (IAS 39) in this 2021 Annual Report. 
(2) 
Securities are comprised of trading and investment securities. Under IFRS 9, investment securities represent debt and equity securities at FVOCI and debt securities at 
amortized cost, net of the applicable allowance. Under IAS 39, investment securities represented available-for-sale securities and held-to-maturity securities. 
(3) 
Commencing Q4 2019, the interest component and the accrued interest payable recorded on certain deposits carried at FVTPL previously presented in trading revenue 
and deposits, respectively are presented in net interest income and other liabilities respectively. As at November 1, 2016, comparative amounts have been reclassified to 
conform with this presentation. 
(4) 
Effective Q4 2017, service fees and other costs incurred in association with certain commissions and fees earned are presented on a gross basis in non-interest expense. 
As at November 1, 2014, comparative amounts have been reclassified to conform with this presentation. 
(5) 
Under IFRS 9, PCL relates primarily to loans, acceptances, and commitments, and also applies to all financial assets except for those classified or designated as FVTPL 
and equity securities designated as FVOCI. Prior to the adoption of IFRS 9, PCL related only to loans, acceptances, and commitments. PCL on loans, acceptances, and 
commitments is comprised of PCL on impaired loans (Stage 3 PCL under IFRS 9 and PCL on impaired loans under IAS 39) and PCL on performing loans (Stage 1 and 
Stage 2 PCL under IFRS 9 and PCL on loans not yet identified as impaired under IAS 39). 
(6) 
Ratios for 2012 represent continuing operations. 
(7) 
Average amounts are calculated using methods intended to approximate the average of the daily balances for the period. This includes Average common equity used in 
the calculation of ROE. For further details, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures section of the MD&A. 
(8) 
These measures may not have a standardized meaning under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) and may not be comparable to similar measures 
disclosed by other financial institutions. For further details, refer to the Key performance and non-GAAP measures section of the MD&A. 
(9) 
PCL on impaired loans represents Stage 3 PCL under IFRS 9 and PCL on impaired loans under IAS 39. Stage 3 PCL under IFRS 9 is comprised of lifetime credit losses of 
credit-impaired loans, acceptances and commitments. 
(10) 
Defined as dividends per common share divided by the average of the high and low share price in the relevant period. 
(11) 
Calculated as common equity divided by the number of common shares outstanding at the end of the period. 
(12) 
Based on TSX closing market price at period-end. 
(13) 
Effective 2013, we calculated the capital and leverage ratios using the Basel III framework unless otherwise stated. 2012 capital and leverage ratios were calculated using 
the Basel II framework. 
n.a. not applicable 
226
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Ten-year statistical review 

Principal subsidiaries 
(Millions of Canadian dollars) 
 
As at October 31, 2021 
Principal subsidiaries (1) 
Principal office address (2) 
Carrying value of 
voting shares owned 
by the Bank (3) 
Royal Bank Holding Inc. 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
$
69,976 
RBC Direct Investing Inc. 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
 
RBC Insurance Holdings Inc. 
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada 
 
RBC Life Insurance Company 
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada 
 
R.B.C. Holdings (Bahamas) Limited 
Nassau, New Providence, Bahamas 
 
RBC Caribbean Investments Limited 
George Town, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands 
 
Royal Bank of Canada Insurance 
Company Ltd. 
Camana Bay, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands 
 
Investment Holdings (Cayman) Limited 
George Town, Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands 
 
RBC (Barbados) Funding Ltd. 
St. Michael, Barbados 
 
Capital Funding Alberta Limited 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
 
RBC Global Asset Management Inc. 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
 
RBC Investor Services Trust 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
 
RBC Investor Services Bank S.A. 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg 
 
RBC (Barbados) Trading Bank Corporation 
St. James, Barbados 
 
RBC U.S. Group Holdings LLC (2) 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
23,691 
RBC USA Holdco Corporation (2) 
New York, New York, U.S. 
 
RBC Capital Markets, LLC (2) 
New York, New York, U.S. 
 
City National Bank 
Los Angeles, California, U.S. 
 
RBC Dominion Securities Limited 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
12,223 
RBC Dominion Securities Inc. 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
 
Royal Bank Mortgage Corporation 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
5,059 
RBC Europe Limited 
London, England 
2,851 
The Royal Trust Company 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
1,090 
Royal Trust Corporation of Canada 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
422 
(1) 
The Bank directly or indirectly controls each subsidiary. 
(2) 
Each subsidiary is incorporated or organized under the laws of the state or country in which the principal office is situated, except for RBC U.S. Group Holdings LLC and 
RBC USA Holdco Corporation which are incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware, U.S. and RBC Capital Markets, LLC, which is organized under the laws of the 
State of Minnesota, U.S. 
(3) 
The carrying value of voting shares is stated as the Bank’s equity in such investments. 
Principal subsidiaries
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
227 

Shareholder Information 
Corporate headquarters 
Street address: 
Royal Bank of Canada 
200 Bay Street 
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2J5 
Canada 
Tel: 1-888-212-5533 
Mailing address: 
P.O. Box 1 
Royal Bank Plaza 
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2J5 
Canada 
website: rbc.com 
Transfer Agent and Registrar 
Main Agent: 
Computershare Trust Company 
of Canada 
1500 Robert-Bourassa Blvd. 
Suite 700 
Montreal, Quebec H3A 3S8 
Canada 
Tel: 1-866-586-7635 (Canada and 
the U.S.) or 514-982-7555 
(International) 
Fax: 514-982-7580 
website: computershare.com/rbc 
Co-Transfer Agent (U.S.): 
Computershare Trust 
Company, N.A. 
250 Royall Street 
Canton, Massachusetts 02021 
U.S.A. 
Co-Transfer Agent (U.K.): 
Computershare Investor 
Services PLC 
Securities Services – Registrars 
P.O. Box 82, The Pavilions, 
Bridgwater Road, 
Bristol BS99 6ZZ 
U.K. 
Stock exchange listings 
(Symbol: RY) 
Common shares are listed on: 
Canada – Toronto Stock 
Exchange (TSX) 
U.S. – New York Stock Exchange 
(NYSE) 
Switzerland – Swiss Exchange 
(SIX) 
Preferred shares AZ, BB, BD, BF, 
BH, BI, BJ and BO are listed on the 
TSX. The related depository 
shares of the series C-2 preferred 
shares are listed on the NYSE. 
Valuation day price 
For Canadian income tax purposes, 
Royal Bank of Canada’s common 
stock was quoted at $29.52 per share 
on the Valuation Day (December 22, 
1971). This is equivalent to $7.38 per 
share after adjusting for the 
two-for-one stock split of March 1981 
and the two-for-one stock split of 
February 1990. The one-for-one stock 
dividends in October 2000 and April 
2006 did not affect the Valuation Day 
amount for our common shares. 
Shareholder contacts 
For dividend information, change 
in share registration or address, 
lost stock certificates, tax forms, 
estate transfers or dividend 
reinvestment, please contact: 
Computershare Trust Company 
of Canada 
100 University Avenue, 8th Floor 
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2Y1 
Canada 
Tel: 1-866-586-7635 (Canada and 
the U.S.) or 514-982-7555 
(International) 
Fax: 1-888-453-0330 (Canada and 
the U.S.) or 416-263-9394 
(International) 
email: service@computershare.com 
Financial analysts, portfolio 
managers, institutional 
investors 
For financial information 
inquiries, please contact: 
Investor Relations 
Royal Bank of Canada 
200 Bay Street 
South Tower 
Toronto, Ontario M5J 2J5 
Canada 
Tel: 416-955-7802 
or visit our website at 
rbc.com/investorrelations 
Direct deposit service 
Shareholders in Canada and the 
U.S. may have their common 
share dividends deposited 
directly to their bank account by 
electronic funds transfer. To 
arrange for this service, please 
contact our Transfer Agent and 
Registrar, Computershare Trust 
Company of Canada. 
Eligible dividend designation 
For purposes of the Income Tax 
Act (Canada) and any 
corresponding provincial and 
territorial tax legislation, all 
dividends (and deemed 
dividends) paid by RBC to 
Canadian residents on both its 
common and preferred shares, 
are designated as “eligible 
dividends”, unless stated 
otherwise. 
Common share repurchases 
As at October 31, 2021, we did 
not have an active normal 
course issuer bid (NCIB). For 
further details, refer to the 
Capital management section. 
2022 Quarterly earnings 
release dates 
First quarter 
February 24 
Second quarter 
May 26 
Third quarter 
August 24 
Fourth quarter 
November 30 
2022 Annual Meeting 
The Annual Meeting of Common 
Shareholders will be held on 
Thursday, April 7, 2022. 
 
Dividend dates for 2022 
Subject to approval by the Board of Directors 
 
 
 
 
Record 
dates 
Payment 
dates 
Common and preferred shares series 
AZ, BB, BD, BF, BH, BI, BJ and BO 
January 26 
April 25 
July 26 
October 26 
February 24 
May 24 
August 24 
November 23 
Preferred shares series C-2 
(US$) 
January 28 
April 26 
July 29 
October 28 
February 7 
May 6 
August 8 
November 7 
Preferred shares series BT  
February 16 
August 17* 
February 24 
August 24 
* Record date is subject to change. 
Governance 
Summaries of the significant ways in which corporate governance 
practices followed by RBC differ from corporate governance 
practices required to be followed by U.S. domestic companies under 
the NYSE listing standards are available on our website at rbc.com/
governance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information contained in or otherwise accessible through the websites mentioned in this report to shareholders does not form a part of this report. All references 
to websites are inactive textual references and are for your information only. 
Trademarks used in this report include the LION & GLOBE Symbol, ROYAL BANK OF CANADA, RBC, RBC AMPLI, RBC CAPITAL MARKETS, RBC FUTURE LAUNCH, RBC 
GLOBAL ASSET MANAGEMENT, RBC INSIGHT EDGE, RBC INSURANCE, RBC INVESTEASE, RBC HOMELINE PLAN, RBC PAYEDGE, RBC REWARDS, RBC TECH FOR 
NATURE, RBC VANTAGE, RBC WEALTH MANAGEMENT, RBCx, MYADVISOR, INVESTEASE, AIDEN, ADVISOR’S VIRTUAL ASSISTANT (AVA), OWNR, NOMI, NOMI INSIGHTS, 
and NOMI FIND & SAVE which are trademarks of Royal Bank of Canada used by Royal Bank of Canada and/or by its subsidiaries under license. All other trademarks 
mentioned in this report which are not the property of Royal Bank of Canada, are owned by their respective holders. 
228
Royal Bank of Canada: Annual Report 2021
Shareholder information 

